ANNOTATIONS ON Five Poetical Books OF THE Old Testament: (viz.) JOB, PSALMS,
PROVERBS, ECCLESIASTES, and CANTICLES.

By EDWARD LEIGH Master of Arts of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.



LONDON, Printed by A. M. for T. Pierpoint at the Sun; E. Brewster at the
Crane; and M. Keinton at the Fountain in Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Earl of MANCHESTER, Vicount Mandeville, Baron
of Kimbolton.
My Lord,
IT was an elegant Passage of a Reverend Mr Vines his Sermon preached at the
Funeral of the Earl of Essex.
Divine, now with God, spoken to your self, and other Lords and Gentlemen of
this Nation, in a great Assembly, That Antiquity of Race is but a Moss of time
growing upon the back of Virtue, and that Nobility is oftentimes the creature
of a Princes fancy; which when there is no intrinsecal worth to be the
supporter of it, is but Nobility by Parchment. A Heathen could say, Nobilitas
sola est atque unica Virtus, Virtue is the only true Nobility; a Christian
should say, Grace is the greatest Nobility, Acts 17. 11. Your Lordship has a
good name amongst the good Ministers and people of this Land for adhering to
the Truth.

Malice it self cannot but acknowledge (says worthy Mr Burroughes in his
Epistle Dedicatory to you before that excellent Book of the Excellency of a
Gracious Spirit) that Goodness in the strictness of it, and natural
Excellencies in the eminency of them, have a blessed conjunction in your Honor.

I would commend the second Epistle of John to our great Ladies in these
staggering days, especially the 1, 2, 4, 9, 10, and 11. verses. In times of
general contagion it will be our wisdom to have our Antidotes ready.

I have had the honor formerly to be a little known unto your Lordship, which
makes me take the boldness to make you the Patron of the first fruits of my
labors upon the Old Testament.

I was the last who dedicated a Book to that great Light of all the Reformed
Churches, my Lord of Armagh* The Subject of that Book was of Religion and
Learning, a work needful for these times, when Learning is so much decried,
and the true Religion in the power thereof so little embraced. I have since the
publication thereof received a Letter from a great Rabbi of one of our
Universities, testifying his high esteem of it, and wish it may find the like
approbation with the religious and learned, who are best able to judge of it,
and for whose sake it was principally intended* That work of mine was kindly
accepted by him, to whose Patronage I had good reason in many respects to
commend it. All the Books of Scripture should be diligently perused and studied
by all Christians, these five Books are full fraught with many precious Truths,
and if any benefit shall accrue to the Church of God by these my Labors, I
shall greatly rejoice. Thus craving your Lordships pardon for my presumption,
and wishing you and yours true felicity, I subscribe my self,

Your Lordships humble Servant EDWARD LEIGH.

TO THE Christian and Candid READER.
Reader,
I Have now by way of Essay made some Annotations, though short, upon five
Books of the Old Testament, viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, being encouraged in the publication M. John Trap in his Epistle to
his Commentary upon Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job and Psalms.
thereof by the Epistle of a Grave and Reverend Divine, who has honored me
with the Patronage of a late learned Work of his that way, though I fear my
Labors will neither answer his own expectation, nor find that intertainment
which he imagines. Job and the Canticles as they are written Dialogue-wise, so
they are mystical and obscure. The Psalms are a portion of Scripture, very
useful for all sorts of Christians to be acquainted with. Singing of Psalms
is an Ordinance of God, and a duty very profitable and comfortable to a true
Saint, being rightly performed: But as a man must pray, so must he sing with
understanding, and have his heart affected answerably to the matter; therefore
I should conceive it very requisite for any that would perform this excellent
Duty to their spiritual advantage, to make use of some good Expositor on the
Psalms, that they may competently understand the Psalm before they sing, and
so perform reasonable service. Psalm. 101. 5. Who so privily slandereth his
neighbor, the Chaldee Paraphrast has, He that speaks with a third tongue
against his neighbor: And so Psalm. 140. 11. An evil speaker, or a man of
tongue shall not be established on the earth, the Chaldee there also has, The
man that speaks with a third tongue. The slanderer is said to use a third
Lud. De Die^ Praefat. ad Xaver. Hist. Christi.
tongue, either because he hurts three at once, himself, the hearer, and him
whom he slandereth; or, because his tongue comes in the third between two, as
one writing, and another speaking, that he may hurt his name, or separate
affections; or because, he calumniating the words of two friends, abuses the
tongue of both, and mingleth his third tongue.

Proverbs is short, but very pithy and sententious.

Ecclesiastes sets forth the vanity of every Creature. I like not the way that
is used by some able Divines, as Bucer, and others, of enlarging Scriptural
Interpretation with intermixing of Common-places: I have heard (as I remember)
that Peter Martyr did therefore put forth his Commonplaces, before any
Expository Work, that he might not run out that way, when he interpreted
Scripture. If these Observations have a favorable reception, it will excite me
to a quicker dispatch of my Annotations upon the Greater and Lesser Prophets,
which I suppose will be a fair Folio, and so I may, if encouraged, proceed
after to Genesis, and all the other Books of the Old Testament, even to Job.

I have little cause to mistrust the liking of these my Labors, God having
been pleased formerly to make way so generally in the hearts of his people, for
the approbation of what I have heretofore published; I shall commend them
therefore to his blessing, and shall desire however, to submit to his
dispensation, and rest

Thy faithful Friend and well-willer Edward Leigh.

PROLEGOMENA.
ALl heavenly Divinity (which consists in a true knowledge Cum ^o^a coelest is
theologia in vera justaque Dei and nostri cognitione sit a sit, si plac^bit
majestatem Dei ex natura e us in Christo per libros istos cognoscere, habes
Proverbiorum Schelomouis partem; si ex creatione and administratione
providentiae, habes Jobu^; si ex gratioso foedere cum Ecclesia ini^o, habes
Canticum Canticorum: sin autem tibi ad cognitionem nostri, delineari cupis
vanissimam, quae a natura est animi nostri, udicio um, and actionum formam,
nihil Ecclesiaste convenientius; si officia Ethic^ aeque ad pietatem ac
humanitatem pertinentia, nihil aptius altera Proverbiorum part: si denique
omnia simul complecti desideraveris, en tibi Psalmorum (ut vulgo appellatur)
librum; thesaurum, inqui^ Ambrosius, vi^^utum omnium. Junius Praefat. ad hos
libros. Cum libri omnes ab Hebraeis in tres ordines dist^ibuti sunt, ut ai^
Hieronymus super Danielem, and in prologo Galeato, videli^e^ in Le^em, and in
co^ qui Hebraice C^etu^im per excellentiam dican^ur, id est, Scripturae
sa^ctae, Graece Agiographa, and in Prophetas, quam divisi^nem indicasse visus
Christus Dominus Luc. 24. 44. dicens opo^te^ or implean^u^ quae scripta sunt in
Lege, Prophetis and Psalmis de me. Cer e hunc librum ad tertium ordinem
A^^^graphorum reducunt cum ^^salmis and aliis Psalmorum libris. Joan De Pineda
P^aesat. ad Comment. in lib. ^ob cap. 9.
of God and our selves) is comprehended in these five Books of Scripture.

All the Books of the Old Testament are divided by the Hebrews into the Law,
Hagiographa, and Prophets. These five Books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles, are Hagiographa and Poetical.

Dr Jackson in his Comment upon the Apostles Creed, first Volume, cap. 14.
says, The Book of the Psalms, Job, and the Songs of Moses, are the only pattern
of true Poesy.

Four famous French Poets, Michael Hospitalis, Adrian Turnebus, John Auratus,
Th. Beza. Six Italians, A. Sannazius, H. Fracastorius, A. Flamminius, H. Vidas,
A. Naugerius, P. Bembus; and one Scotchman, learned G. Buchanan, have
execricised their Poetical abilities, in rendering David's Psalms in verse.

Henry Stevens before Marlorats Ecclesiastical Exposition of the Metaphorae
apud quem Poetam aut frequentiores sunt aut elegantiores, atque adeo
efficaciores majoremque emph^sin and (...) habentes: Coelum Dei Tabernaculum,
tonitrum Dei vocem, fulmina sagit^as Dei appellat. Quid quod E^stathius v ^eres
Poetas Graecos a Davide dicente, Qui d^t nivem sicut lanam illud genus lequendi
quo nivem appella^it (...) (quasi dicam aquam la^osam) mutuat^s esse asserit?
Hebraei formulam sermonis sibi vendicant, sibique propriam and peculiarem
habent, exemplum hoc esse possit, Eruntque Coeli tui, qui sunt supra caput
aerei, and terraquae est subter te, ferrea* Deuteronomy. 28. Sic autem and Levit. 26,
Dabo coelum vestrum sicut ferrn^ and terr^m vestram sicut aes. I nunc and
evolve Poetas omnes utriusque linguae, Heroicos, Tragicos, Lyricos,
Dithyrambicos, quid tale apud eos reperies? Quis unquam tam sign fican ia, tam
emphatica, tantae majestatis p^ena apud eos verba legit, sed quid mirum est ex
ore sacro profecta verba ab iis quae profani homines proferunt ^o^ge diffe^r^?
How* ^h Epist. Praefix^ ad Marlor. Exposit* Eccles. in Psalmos. Certe suam
poesin esse in sacris Scriptu^is, and ^u^^^ ^arminis met^ique me^suram cul^am
ab Hebraeis constitutum est apud omnes doctores sa^ros, qui uspiam Psalmorum
memi^e^^nt. Joan. ^^ P^noda Prae^a^. ad Comment. in Lib. Job c. 4.
Psalms has an Epistle, Omnibus Sacrae Poesios studiosis, where he says, He
being once at Rome fell into the company of some skillful Poets, which denied
that the elegant Art of Poetry could fall into that rough and horrid Hebrew
Language, and therefore they much wondered what made Antonius Flamminius to
exercise his Poetical vein in translating David's Psalms. He there excellently
vindicates the Hebrew Language from that aspersion unjustly cast upon it, and
in several passages highly extolleth the Poetry of the Psalms.

JOB.
The Book of Job is a true History, and has all the circumstances of a true
History, and is attested Ezekiel. 14. 14. and Jam. 5. 11. Vide Junium.


The Jesuit Pineda in the first Chapter of his Preface to his Commentary on
Job, propounds this Question, Whether Job be a true History or a Parable? He
determines it affirmatively, and answers the reasons urged against it, chap.
12. He affirms it to be Sacrae auctoritatis.

Leusden in his Philologus Hebraeus Dissertat. 8. Sect. 1. proves Job also to
be a true History, he says there, that his style is concise and difficult, Est
liber iste Jobi omnium sacrorum librorum difficillimus, ut qui non modo
Theologum, verumetiam Hebraeae, Chaldaicae linguae, Poetices, Dialectices,
Rhetorices, Astronomiae, Physices denique been peritum interpretem requirat.
Beza in Epist. ad Exposit. Mercer.

It is a great Question, Who was the Author of this Book? The Hebrews Quid
refert sive Mosem, ut Hebraei volunt, sive Jobum ipsum, ut vulgus opinatur,
sive alium quempiam Prophetam quod verisimile est, authorem dicas modo
(quisquis tandem ille sit) non sine divini numinis afflatu haec aurea monumenta
posteritatis memoriae commendarit? Nunquam autem dubitatum est, sed quantum
scio, concors omnium cum Hebraeorum, tum eorum qui prosana a sacris discernere
possunt est sententia, haec esse Spiritus Sancti eloquia. Stulta est de calami
pretio curiosior quaestio, ubi de no^arii ^ide nulla est ambiguitas.
Oecolampad. Praefat. ad Comment. in lib. Job.
say Moses: Pineda, and others Job himself. Oecolampadius thinks some other
Prophet was the Author of it. The Arabic speeches with which this Book
abounds, witness that it was written by a man near Arabia.

This Book is written in the judgment of some in Prose, to Chap. 3. verse. 3.
In verse thence to Chap. 42. verse. 6. And then again concludes in Prose, thence
to the end.

Pineda in the 5th Chapter of his Preface to his Commentary, shows, what was
the true Subject of this Book. Calvin Historia hic descripta docet quemadmodum
in Dei manu simus: Ejus potesta it is and juris eise constituere and disponere de
vita nostra suo arbitratu: nostrum offi cium esse, ut nos ei cum omni
humilitate ac obedientia submittamus: aequum justumque effe ut ei penitus and
vivamus and moriamur: Et quoties in nos animadvertere voluit etiamsi non
constet nobis cur istud faciat, nihilominus oportere ut eum glorifitemus,
confitentes perpe^^o ejus aequitatem and justitiam: ne cum eo litigemus,
alioqui causa certo casuri. Calvinus.
gives a good sum or short comprehension of this History. Beza in his Preface
to Calvin's Sermons on the Book of Job, says Job is written in the form of a
Dialogue, and has its denomination from Job the chief Speaker, It excels (he
says) in gravity of Questions there handled, in sublimity of mysteries there
contained, lastly in the profit of Sentences for our whole life.

It is very mysterious and obscure, Beza there commends Oecolampadius, Mercer
and Calvin, for good Commentators on it, to which Pineda also may be added.

PSALMS.
The Psalms are-mentioned principally, Luke 24. 44. because they are the sum
and flower of all other Scripture. No Book of the Old Testament is oftener cited
in the New. They contain the very Anatomy of the soul, the Characters and
representations of the thoughts, meditations, affections, and workings of it,
toward God, toward man, toward her self, throughout all the changes of her
pilgrimage in this world. There are contained in them, testimonies concerning
all the Articles of our Faith, as Piscator Praefat* ad Commentarium in librum
Psalmorum, particularly proves. There are in them admonitions also and
examples, which may be referred to all the precepts in the Decalogue, as he
there also shows.

They are alleged by Christ himself, Matthew. 22. 43, 44. And also by his
Apostles. Peter, Act. 2. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 7. And Paul, Act. 13. 33, 35. therefore
they were divinely inspired.

Austin in the 9th Book of his Confessions, c. 4. cannot sufficiently express
what ardent affections he had by reading of the Psalms: And in his tenth Book
c. 33. he writes, That he wept when he heard the Songs of the Church presently
after his Conversion.

Lorinus Praefat. in Psalmos cap. 14. says, Est probabile jam inde ab Vide
Cocceium de Potentia Scripturae c 14 p. 267.
Apostolis in usu fuisse cantum Psalmorum. And Musculus in his Epistle to the
Reader before his Commentary on the Psalms, shows how ancient and laudable the
custom of singing of Psalms in the Church is. See my Body of Divinity, l. 8. c.
3.

It is called in Hebrew Hebraei titulum huic libro fecerunt Thehillim, id est,
lauds, a part argumenti: ^o quod bona pars Psalmorum lauds Dei continet.
Graeci inscripserunt (...) significantes hoc vocabulo volumen Psalmorum
significatione nova. Nam (...) proprie instrumentum Musicum est quo psallitur.
Latini nominant librum Psalmorum. Piscat. Argum. Vol. ^salm. Ab hymnis Hebraea
denominatio facta est ob illos Psalmos, qui pauci non sunt, in quibus lauds
Dei celebrantur: quamvis magis proprie nomen id mereantur, qui Halelujah
inscrip. um habent, vel ab ista voce incipiunt. Lorini Praefat. in Psalmos. c.
9. In Psalterio inveniuntur 564. versus, in quibus omnes and singulae voces
Psalmorum inveniuntur. Psalmi sunt carmina quae olim David, aliique viri
sancti, and nunc Judaei in Synagogis public canunt. Leusden. Philol. Hebraeus
Dissert. 7.
Tehillim, which signifies Hymns or Praises, or Sepher Tehillim; by the
Septuagint (...), and the AEthiopick Translation accordingly Psalmi, by the
Vulgar Latin. Junius and others, Liber Psalmorum; By Ainsworth, The Book of
Psalms, or Hymns; So Christ intitleth it, Luke 20. 42. And so Peter. Act. 1. 20.

The three Books of Solomon follow, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. Tres
esse Salomonis libros Canonicos citra controversiam asserunt omnes and Judaei
and Christiani; Proverbia scilicet, Ecclesiastem, and Canticum Canticorum.
Jansen. Proaem. in Proverbia Salomonis. Magna est differentia inter Proverbia*
vel sententias Gentilium and inter sententias Salomonis, and sacrarum
literarum. Illae enim natura notae sunt, and multae ex eis foedae ac obscenae,
cum side and charitate pugnantes. Hae vero (nempe Salomonis ac Propheticae)
multa continent quae ratio humana videre non potest: omnesque purum Dei verbum
sunt, nec metuendum est, ne ex lectione earum asiquid labis nobis aspergatur.
Lavat. Comment. in Prove. Proverbia vel similitudines quae Graecis Parabolae
dicuntur sermones sunt, and graves sententiae ad omnem virae fidelium rationem
conducibiles, moderata obscuritate mult^m in se complectentes utilitatem, ceu
prima quaedam principia syncerae theologiae: quibus ad locos communes de fide
and moribus, ac ad totius sacrae Scripturae intelligentiam uti poterimus.
Pellicanus in Prove. Omnes gentes peculi^^ia sua habent Proverbia, quae sunt
oraculorum instar, longo enim usu earum verltas perspecta est. Lavaterus.


PROVERBS.
Many magnify the sayings of sage Heathens, Plato, Plutarch, and the
proverbial Sentences of wise Jews, Pirke Avoth, but they come far short of
Salomons Proverbs, which are full of heavenly and divine wisdom.

This Book contains the chief of those three thousand Proverbs which Solomon
spoke, 1 King. 4. 32. They are instructions of Piety and Wisdom, and the
praises of it; they exhort to it, and dehort from the impediments of it in the
nine first Chapters. All which serve as a large Preface. Then do follow
Proverbs of choice Sentences, (...), or wise Apothegmes, Salomons Ethics, all
of morality in the rest of the Book. These teach what is true, what false, what
is good, what evil, what is to be done, and what to be shunned.

ECCLESIASTES.
This is the Book of Salomons Repentance; written in his Old age, as may In
Ecclesiaste Solomon tractat quaestionem illam celebrem de summo bono, hoc est,
qua in re posita fit vera salus, and foelicitas hominis. Ostendit summum bonum
esse conjungi eum Deo and eo frui, illic refutat illorum opiniones, qui in
aliis rebus illud collocant. Lavaterus.
seem to be gathered, both out of the Title of the Book, and the closure of it
in the six last verses, and also out of the whole Body of it, being written
upon a serious view of the Passages and Practices of his life past, and the
great and manifold Experiences he made and found therein. His main Business is
a curious search after true felicity and real Contentation, That in order
thereunto all things under the Sun were but Vanity of vanities, and vexation
of spirit: and for such experimented by him; though the same improved by humane
Wisdom in him to the utmost, Chap. 2. 3. 9.

CANTICLES, or, The Song of Solomon.
It is the Song of Songs, the chiefest of his thousand and five Songs, 1 King.
Hic liber non est quidem unum Canticum quod Solomon cecinit, sed multa Cantica
sunt, in unum tamen iibrum contracta, ad unum qucque argumentum pertinentia.
Pellicanus in Cantica Canticorum. Est Epithala^ium Christi cum sua sponsa
Ecclesia. Omnia enim quae de amoribus, complexibus, osculis, forma in illo
leguntur, allegorice interpretanda sunt; de casto amore Christi erga Ecclesiam
suam, and vicissim. Lavaterus in Cantica Cantic.
4. 32. the most excellent of all others: and that for expressions, mysteries
and holiness; but most for the subject matter of it, which is sublime, divine
and evangelical.

It is a continued Allegory, full of Obscurities, somewhat the more Difficult,
because there are diverse Hebrew words here which are not found in the
Scriptures besides.

That Reverend Divine Dudley Fenner in his Preface to his Commentary of this
Book, shows, That many made doubt of the Authority of it, judging it to be but
a Love-song; but he there defends the Canonical Authority of it by solid
Reasons.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of JOB.
CHAP. I.
JOB signifies one hated, or one that had variety of enemies; Librum de utraque
sua fortuna elegantissimum praescripsit, in quo ubi ex persona sua sermon^m
exorsus est, ad usque lib^i calcem carmine hexametro dactylico cuncta complexus
est. Mirum est quam sit in sententiis gravis and creber in variis movendis
affectibus. Lil. Gy^ald. de Poe^is. l. 1. Memini me ob intelligentiam hujus
voluminis Lyddeum quendam praeceptorem, qui apud Hebraeos primus haberi
putabatur, non parvis redemisse nummis, cujus doctrina an aliquid profecerim,
nescio. Hiern in Lib. Job. Praefat. Historiam hanc suisse gestam docent
personarum, gentium and regionum nomina, liberorum Iiobi numerus, and in primis
nobilis illa restitutio and instauratio Iiobi, de qua c. 42. denique
testimonium Jechezkelis 14. 14. and Jacobi 5. 11. Tempus etsi certo d^finiri
non porest, very simile ramen est ex personarum* gentium, locorumque nominibus,
and ex aetete quae liobo 42. cap. tribuitur, eum vixisse quo tempore Israelitae
in AEgypto degebant: in primis vero ex eo quod post latam legem nemini licuit
alibi quam coram Arca vel Tabernaculo Dei sacrificare, sine mandato singulari.
Junius. Mihi quidem in crudelissimis bello^um civilium turbis atque incendiis,
maxim consolationi fuit haec hujus libri con^ectio and accura^a meditatio.
Quin and in gravissimis meis morbis, and caecitatis meae incommodis, hinc
levamen, hinc solarium petere, nec certe, frustra consuevi* Nullum enim usquam
extare puto, si unius Christi sanctissimas perpessiones exceperis, vel ad
minuendos corporis nostri cruciatus, vel ad leniendos animidolores, vehementius
aptiusque remedium praesertim si. rem ipsam, uti est, penitissime
introspexeris. M^rli^m Praefat. in Iiobu^.
God, Satan, Friends carry themselves to him as enemies. Many, both Rabbis and
Christian Writers, do think the History of Job is more ancient than Moses. The
Jews seriously affirm, that Jobs Wife was Dinah the Daughter of Jacob. Some
have avouched, that Moses himself wrote that History, as Jerome testifies.
Comment in Job Cap. 2. and 32. Hereof there is no certainty.

Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom and Gregory, with Athanasius, take him for the
same Jobab, descended from Esau who was King of Idumaea, Vide Merceri Praefat.
in Lib, Job. and Greg. Praefat. in Exposit. Lib. Job. c. 1.

He was a Christian long before Christ: Julian the Pelagian says of Job, O
virum ante Evangelia Evangelicum, and Apostolorum ante Apostolica praecepta
discipulum. Homo Gentilis (says Gregory Praefat* in Exposit. Job. c. 2.) Home
sine lege, ad medium adducitur, ut eorum qui sub Lege sunt, pravitas as
confundatur.

Verse 3. His substance also was seven thousand Sheep.] Doubtless Job had
Money though Cattle gives the denomination. See Chapter 31. v. 24. and 42. 20.
Pecunia comes a pecude, the form of Sheep and Oxen was stamped on money. Job
had Lands also suitable to such a stock.

We in our Language, call the estate of man his substance, and a rich man a
substantial man: the greater his possessions were, the greater was his loss
and patience. Numquam quippe sine dolor amittitur, nisi quod sine amore
possidetur. Greg.

Verse 5. Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning and
offered Drusius says, That he offered his burnt-offerings for his sons, none
for his daughters.
burnt offerings according to the number of them all.] This was not will
worship though not written worship: for though Job offered sacrifice before the
Law of sacrifice was written, yet not before it was given; it was given from
the beginning as all other parts of worship used from the beginning were. We
must not only seek God for our children in the lump, but child by child. Mr
Broughton renders, He offered for every one of them a burnt-offering.

It may be my sons have sinned, and cursed Fortassis verbum Barac ejusdem est
naturae cujus Graecorum (...), and precari Latinorum, quae in utramque partem
usurpantur. Vossius in Maimon Idol. c. 2. Verbum benedicendi pro mal^dicere and
blasphemare ne mireris sumptum esse. Ita enim a blasphemia and maledicendo Deo
abhorrebant, ut etsi proprium verbum esset quo hoc exprimere possint, mallent
tamen ob honorem divinum, alio verbo uti, quod in malum non sonabat. Sed ex
sensu facile erat id colligere, ut 1 Reg. 21. and infra v. 11. and 21. 9. Sic
latinis Sacrum pro execrando. Mercerus in loc.
God in their hearts. Mr Broughton renders it, It may be my children have
sinned, and little blessed God in their hearts; that is, have sinned so as to
provoke God and scandalize men in this their feasting.

Thus did Job continually.] That is, in the renewed seasons when occasioned. We
are said to do continually when seasonably. Ephesians. 6. 18.

Verse 6. Now there was a day, when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the Lord.] See Chapter 2. 1. the Angels came to receive commands
from him. See Chapter 38. 7. Vide Drusium.

Verse 7. Then Satan answered the Lord and said, From going to and fro in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it.] Full of despair, not so full of
torment as may be. See 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Verse. 8. A perfect and upright man, one that fears God and eseheweth evil.]
This is to be understood in reference to that generation. Secondly, Not only in
one particular grace, though that be true, but take it for the latitude of his
holiness and grace.

Verse. 9, 10. Does Job fear God for naught. Have thou not made a hedge about
him?] q. d. Job is but a mercenary, his fear and service of thee is but in
respect of his wealth and prosperity. Putavit inimicus propterea illum talem
virum colere Deum, Aug. in Psalm. 138.
quia illa omnia donaverat ei, and petivit ut auferrentur ab eo.

Ver. 10. Have thou not made a hedge round about him, and about his house, and
about all that he has on every side?] Heb. A hedge of Thorns, Hos. 2. 5. a hedge
ad separationem and munitionem, a translation from fields which are fenced with
hedges to drive away wild beasts. Drusius,

Verse. 11. And he will curse thee to thy face.] And then he will little bless
thee to thy face. Broughton. If he curse thee not to thy face, something is
wanting, I will confess my damnation is righteous, that God is just.

Verse. 16. The fire of God is fallen from Heaven.] Because extraordinary; an
Hebraisme, Id est, maximus ut in Ps. 26. 7. id est, ut montes excelsi Deo
solent tribuere quae magna sunt. Mercerus. Ignis luculentus, ut Cedri Dei,
Montes Dei. Deo enim tribuunt, quicquid in suo genere excellit. Drusius.
sent by the devil but by Gods permission. It may import a great and terrible
fire, as wrestlings of God, Cedars of God. See Junius.

Verse. 20. And cut his mantle.] It was the custom of the East-Country in
outward And rent his cloak. Broughton.
afflictions, Genesis 35. 34. 2 Samuel 1. 11. and 3. 31.

Verse. 21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither In domum sepulchri. Chald. Par. locus satis explicatur 1 Timothy 6. 7. id
est, in terram quo se projiciebat ipse ut praecedente versu. Junius. In
ventre^^ matris meae communis, hoc est in ^erram. Drusius. Ac si dicat. Nudum
me huc intrantem terra protulit, nudum ^^^ hinc exeuntem terra recipiet. Greg.
Exposit. Moral. in primum C. Job. l. 2. c. 10.
, to my mother the earth, Job 34. 15.

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away.] He gave freely, and has justly
taken. Magna quippe est consolatio in to quod displi^et, quod illo ordinante
erga ^os agitur cui non nisi justum placet. Greg. Exposit. Moral. in 1m c. Job.
l. 2. c. 12.

CHAP. II.
Verse 3. Have thou considered my servant Job?] Have thou set thy heart upon my
servant Numquid posuisti cor tuum ad servum meum Job? Avias Mont. Chald. Par.
Job? Broughton. 1 Samuel 4. 20. so chapter 1. v. 8.

Thou movedst me against him.] The Hebrew 1 King. 21. 25. Whom Jesabel his wife
stirred up, there is the same word.
word signifies to move a man by force of argument, all manner of supplications
and entreaties, Deuteronomy. 13. 6.

To destroy Balang is used Jon. 2. of the Whale which swallowed Jonah up at
once. See Genesis 41. 4. Exodus 7. 12. Psalm. 124. 3.
him without a cause.] Without respecting sin as a cause, there was not the
cause which the devil alleged.

Verse. 4. Skin for skin, yea and all that a man has will he give for his
life.] Abundance of skins, as grace for grace. He will give all his skins; for
their estates in Supellex a pelle, Skin after skinne] as th^se word^ in Job
would be rendered, those things that are nearest to us one after another. Pellem
pro pelle, Arias Mont. Vulg. Lat. LXX.
those times did lie in Cattle, he will give much, all his skins, though they
be never so many, to save his life.

Verse. 7. Smote Job with sore boyls.] Hebr. Vehement or scorching inflammation:
See Exodus 10. 10.
Ulcere pessimo, Vulg. Lat. Ulcere maligno, LXX. Ulcere malo, Interp. Arab.
Scabi^ p^ssima, Paraph. Chald.

Verse. 9. Then said his wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity?
Curse Dinah Ittetheh, Dinah uxor ejus, Chald. Paraph* Berec El^him, Bless God,
so the Heb. Arias Montanus, Vulgar Latin, (so the eleventh verse of the first
Chapter, and fifth of this. Satan dares not name this thing but by the
contrary.) a mere Ir^ny. Jobs answer to the messengers after the news of the
loss of all, was, Jehovah Meborek, blessed be God; his wife in her profaneness
alluding to his term, cries Berec Vemuth, bless on, bless God and die: Stand
thou in thine integrity blessing God and dying? Tremel. In innocentia tua
etiamnum perseveras post tanta mala accepta, cum eam videas tibi mala haec
omnia conciliasse. Sunt qui interrogative legunt. Sed praestat per sarcasmum
legere. Voire tu perseveres encor d' estre enti^r. Vide quid tibi dum eam ita
tueris and mordicus retines, acciderit. Mercerus.
God and die.] Jobs wife was Dinab, Jacobs daughter, say some: At de eo nihil
certi esse potest, R^vet. It is a very difficult place, Nonne vides quod Deus
est inexorabilis? notwithstanding all your prayers and patience, the judgment
still abides on you, therefore revenge thy self of God: q. d. Break out into
open blasphemy, and so provoke God to cut thee off, rather than endure this
misery.

Verse. 10. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil?] Questions in Scripture, 1. Have a great deal of policy, as that of the
devil to Eve, Genesis 3. 1. 2. A great deal of passion, Have not thou chosen the
son of Jesse to the confusion of thy fathers nakedness; so here.

That is, ^aith Drusius, as we have received good from God, so ought we also to
receive evil.

CHAP. III.
Verse 5. LEt the blackness of the day terrify it.] The thickest or darkest
darkness. Blackness Id est, tene brae densissi mae ^imrire iom R^geminatur, ut
in Prove. 27. 15. Bochartus.
is more than darkness, therefore it is used as an addition to darkness, Jude
v. 13.

Verse. 9. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark.] By twilight we are
to understand Obscurentur Stellae crepusculi ejus. Stellae majores, quae sub
finem noctis conspiciuntur; ut Ursa major and minor. Schind. Lex. Pent. Sed
malo ad totam noctem refer, ut nulla omnino in ca sit stellarum lux aut
splendour. Merc.
the beginning of the night, or the evening when the stars first appear; The
word signifies both twilights, the twilight of the evening, and the twilight
of the morning. The stars of the twilight, are those resplendent stars (so
much observed by Astronomers, and observable by the Vulgar) which shine in the
evening and the morning.

Verse. 19. The small and great are there.] Are all in the same estate without
difference. Little and great are there all one. Broughton. Ex ^quo illic lunt
tam parvi quam magni, secundum illud, Mors sceptra ligonibus ^quat and Pallida
mors, etc. Drusius.
See Prove. 22. 2.

The servant is free from his Master.] q. d. He serves not there. Drusius.

Verse. 23. Why is light given to a man whose way is hid?] There is a double
hiding of a man's way: 1. From God, Isa. 40. 27. 2. From a man's self, either in
conversation or affliction, he knows not the way out.

Cujus vita ita malis involuta est ut spes nulla salutis appareat. Drusius. ^.
Malis adeo circumclusa, ut n^sciat qua erumpat, aut quem tandem aerum^arum
finem consequuturus fit. Junius.

Verse. 25. For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me.] Job in his
prosperity forecasted thus with himself, I have now a goodly house, a liberal
estate, a numerous posterity, I may be deprived of all.

Verse. 26. I was not in safety, neither had I rest.] He speaks of his condition
before Vide Junium.
he was in trouble, when he had many children, servants, and great store of
Cattle.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 7. REmember, I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? or where
were the righteous Justus non perit sibi nec Deo: perit aliis cum ex hac vita
migrat and ^ medio tollitur, nec inter vivos amplius censetur. Nam, qui ^oritur
perit, hoc est prorsus and in totum abit. Drusius.
cut off?] As if he had said, Thou caust not produce an example of any man ever
destroyed in this fashion before, whom God did esteem a righteous man.

Verse. 8. They that plow iniquity.] Plowing is a toilsom and wasting labor;
wicked men take pains in sinful courses. Metaph^rae consiliorum, actionum and
eventorum ab agricultura sumptae. Junius. These propositions are true in
general, but they are ill applied to Job.

Verse. 18. And his Angels he charged with folly.] That is, the good Angels: He
He sees if they were left to themselves they would become us foolish as the
other Angels that fell. Novi pluri^o^ Interpre^es id de lap^is Angelis
intelligere, verum alii quoque id in genere omnibus Angelis applicant, quia sua
natura sunt mutabiles. Rivetus in Catholico Orthodoxo.
opposes them to dwellers in houses of clay: its too easy a charge for the
evil Angels. No actual but a possible folly, their confirmation is by grace,
not by nature. Mercer expounds it of the good Angels; Drusius of the evil ones.

Verse. 21. Does not their excellency which is in them go away?] That is,
whatsoever All an unregenerate man's excellencies die with him, 1 Cor. 13. 8.
does excel or is best in them; so Junius and Drusius.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. CAll now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou Vide Mercerum and Cocceium in loc. Alludere videtur ad
pictores qui frequenter ad prototypum oculos dirigunt.
turn? or look.] Not for supplication, as the Papists, but for direction and
consolation; which of all Gods Saints were in thy condition? He seems to allude
to Painters who look to one thing that they may draw another.

1. The Saints are not always meant of the dead, as the Papists say. 2. To
turn, is not to pray to; the word signifies to turn ones eyes on an object to
observe it curiously. 3. They are the words of Eliphaz, not God; if he should
speak to Job to call Sensus est, da mihi o Job (si potes) aliquem etiam ex
sanctissimis, qui si afflictione aliqua pre^^us fuerit, non fuerit propter sua
peccata afflictus, q. d. dari non potest. Aut ergo mea sententia (concludit
Eliphas) te propter tua scelera hoc modo puniri. Zanchius.
upon the Saints, they are not therefore to be called upon.
Thom. Aquin. 22. q. 83. brings no other place but this for the invocation of
Saints.

The place is meant of Saints living on earth, as the word is taken Psalm. 16.
3. and does not imply any prayer to them, but speaks of a due consideration of
their estate, whether any were like Job.

Verse. 3. I have seen the foolish taking root; but suddenly I cursed his
habitation.] That is, I abhorred the uncertainty of the wicked man's estate, and
in my mind presaged the ruin of it.

Verse. 12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty.] The word signifies to
make void, to bring to nothing, Psalm. 119. 26. Devices, it comes from a word
which signifies to think, and is commonly used for some subtle curious
thought, a plot which has much wise art in it; the same word is used, Exodus
31. 4. Eccles. 7. 9. Esth. 4 5. of the crafty Intelligit eos qui sapientes sunt
ad faciendum malum. Drusius.
, that word is used, Genesis 3. 1.

Verse. 13. And the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.] They take not
time to consult.

Verse. 14. They meet with darkness in the day time.] That is, though the thing
be Haec maledictio est, Deuteronomy. 28. 29. Quasi dicat, etiam in rebus maxim
perspicuis hallucinantur. Mereerus. i. In rebus etiam evidentissimis
caecutiant: translatae loquutiones. Junius.
plain before them for their own advantage, yet they see it not.

Verse. 19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no
evil touch Id est, in plurimis: numeri definiti pro indefinitis. Junius.
thee.] Seven is a number of perfection, when troubles come thick. Seven
referred to humane evils, imports diverse and many, Prove. 24. 16. Psalm. 34.
19. Many of the Learned say, that here by six and seven, the Spirit of God
alludeth unto the days of the Lords work in creating the world, and his
resting on the seventh day, that so must his servants labor under afflictions
all the days of their life, and shall Numerus s^ptenarius saepe ponitur pro
universo. Aug. Seven times a day will I praise thee, says David, that is, (as
elsewhere he expresses it) his praise shall ever be in my mouth.
rest from these labors in the perpetual Sabbath.

Verse. 21. Neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes.] Thou
shall be secure, when it comes on other men.

Verse. 22. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh.] Out of confidence and
security grounded upon i. Adeo ^ide persuasus esto de reconciliatione and
benevolentia Dei, ut nullum ex rebus adversis damnum metuas. Junius.
faith, Genesis 17. 17.

Verse. 23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field.] There are
three Qui dominum habet custodem, habebi^ and lapides.
several interpretations.

Some say, when they walk they may stumble, Psalm. 91. 12. but the stones shall
not hurt, but serve them, they being reconciled to God, all the creatures shall
be in league with them: So Junius.

2. Stones are for landmarks, they shall not remove their bounds.

3. When they executed punishment on a man, they would keep stones on the Vide
Cocceium.
ground that it should yield no fruit.

Verse. 26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age.] It is spoken of the
godly His graces are perfected.
man when his work is done.

Like as a shock of corn comes in his season.] A full age is compared to
ripened Corn,

1. In regard of the diversity of seasons it must go through. 2. In regard of
the costliness bestowed upon it before it come to maturity. 3. In regard of the
hopefulness of it. 4. In regard of its fitness for the barn. 5. In regard of
the certainty of its cutting down.
CHAP. VI.
Verse 13. IS not my help in me?] He had an invisible support: q. d. It is true
the Sabeans q. d. Uteunque sermones vestri me dejecturi essent erigit tamen me
fidei and veritatis qua nitor consolatio. Junius. Austin says of the Bishop of
Nolah and others, which lost all by the Goths, Perdiderunt omnia, nunquid
fidem, nunquid pietatem?
have plundered me of my Oxen and Camels, the Chaldeans of my Sheep and
servants, but I have something in me to relieve me, my grace and wisdom is not
departed.

Verse. 15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook.] His friends deceived
him Quemadmodum torrentes hiberno imbrium tempore exundant, quum non est opus
ampliore aqua, aestivo vero and siticuloso dilabuntur, and ex arescente terra,
quasi ludificantur spem hominum, quum refrigerio aquarum opus est: ita mihi usu
venit ab amicis meis. Nam secundis rebus quum uterer, videbar mihi circumfluere
illorum adjumentis: nunc vero in tanto calamitum aestu, nullum ex eis solamen
percipio, quasi exaruiss^nt omnes. Junius in loc.
like a brook which is full of water in Winter, when enough is to be had every
where else, but as a dry pit in Summer, utterly failing the passengers that
come in hope to quench their thirst thereat.

Verse. 24. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue; and cause me to understand
wherein Prove. 30. 32.
I have erred.] As if he should say, reveal to me by thy word wherein I have
offended, and I will lay my hand upon my mouth, I will not dare to reason in
the defense of it.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. IS there not an appointed time to man on earth?] viz. for his life.
Some render it, Nonne militiae dies mortali in terra? Junius. Tempus
praefinitum est homini super terram, ita malim cum Pagnino and Mercero, quam
cum vulgatae auctore, militiam verrere, atque ita etiam, chapter 14. v. 14. Gatak.
Annotat. in Anton. Vide Ama^nae Antib. Bib. l. 3.
Nonne militia homini super terram, Is there not a time appointed for warfare?
man's life is so on earth.

Are not his days also like the days of an hireling?] That is, very short, or
precisely and exactly numbered. See Isa. 16. 14. id est labores quotidiani ejus.
Junius.

Verse. 7. O remember that my life is wind.] Inconstant as the wind, a short
puff Id est, mox evanituram. Junius. Ventus transit, nec redit: sic vita
hominis. Drusius.
which none can lay faster hold on than on the wind. 2. Suddenly past away
from us: even sometimes so soon as it comes. 3. It returns not again no more
than the wind, Psalm. 78. 39.

Verse. 10. Neither shall his place know him any more.] That is, receive him. i.
Populares Videtur hoc loquendi genus a stirpibus translatum idque Davidis locus
mirifice confirmat, Psalm. 103. 16. Aut est sumptum ab aedificiis, quae ita
vastantur, ut locus ubi prius fuerant, cognosci nequeat. Drus. Observat. ^ac.
l. 3. c. 6.
ejus. Junius.

Verse. 17. What is man, or sorrowful man, that thou should magnify him?
and See Psalm. 8. 4.
that thou should set thine heart upon him?

Verse. 18. And that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every
moment?] Happy is the man, Cui Deus dignatur irasci, indignus sum quem
percutias. Hoc ad conservationem and generalem providentiam pertinet. Metaphora
a pastoribus, singulis matutinis oves suas recensentibus, nequid furto sublatum
sit, ne cui morbus acciderit, ne omnino desit. Ita enim and Deus, quoties solemn
super terram oriri facit, toties quoque lustrat numerum hominum, hoc est,
conservat eos semper. Coccei^s in loc.
In Psalm. 8. God is said to exalt man in reference to the provision he makes
for him, here in respect of the affliction he lays upon him.

It is a great mercy for God to chastise me to reform me.

Verse. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men!]
q. d. Id est, qui pro bonitate naturae tuae servas, and administrationem
salutis tibi uni vindicas. Junius.
Lord if thou will say I have sinned, I will say so to; but will thou take
advantage thereby to destroy me, thou art the preserver of men?

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 14. ANd whose trust shall be a spiders web.] A spiders house, Broughton.
Those Id est, Adeo fragilis and f^ll^x ut ill^ est. Junius. Isa. 59. 5. A
curious trifle. There are three things in a spiders web, 1. Industry. 2.
Curiosity. 3. Vanity, a little besom will sweep it all away. Id est, quasi
domus ac tela araneae fiducia ejus, est scilicet vel erit, esse deprehendetur
tandem, qua nihil levius est and infirmius, quae facile abrumpitur. Telam quam
orditur aranea ad capiendum muscas, appellat domum araneae. Eleganti rursum
similitu^ine quam infirma sit and fragilis impiorum spes ac fiducia ostendit.
Mercerus in loc.
false grounds on which he builds his eternal estate; because 1. Weak and
ready to perish; and 2. Weaved out of his own bowels, the hypocrite looks to
what is in himself only. See Isa. 59. 5, 6.

Verse. ^5. He shall lean upon his house.] The hypocrite on the object of his
hope.

Verse. 20. Neither will he help the evildoers.] Or, take them by the hand. See
Isa. 41. 13. and 42. 6. That is, those which walk in a course of evil-doing; it
notes the love of evil and continuance in it, 2 Chronicles. 10. 2. John 3. 20. Manum
pr^hendere est manum collapsis aut labascentibus p^rrigere, Tenir la main a^
bailler la main: Mercerus in loc. See Genesis 19. 16.

Verse. 22. They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame.] That is, shall
have abundance of it, and it shall be public, all shall see it as our clothes.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 4. WHo has hardened himself against him and has prospered?] How did
the Angels and Adam prosper who opposed God!

Verse. 8. And tr^^deth upon the waves of the sea.] That is, has an absolute
power Psalm. 91. 13.
over them. Christ stils the raging of the sea.

Verse. 9. And the Chambers of the South.] The Chambers of the South, because
Intellige stellas and sidera, quae sunt in altero hemispherio versus alterum
polum Antarcticum: quae a nobis qui hemispherio Septentrionali habitamus, non
conspiciuntur, ideo penetralia Austri appel^at. Mercerus in loc.
the Stars in the Antartick and Southern Pole are not under our Horizon, nor
liable to continual view.

Verse. 20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me.] Compare
what Sermo meus me condemnabit. Nam qui dicit se justum esse coram Deo, dicit
quod verum non est, ac proinde oration ejus ipsum condemnat. Drusius.
God says of Job, chapter 1. 1. with what he says of himself, There is sin in my
words.

Verse. 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul.] Though I had
attained to as great a degree of perfection as is possible in this life, I
would not know my own soul, that is, I would not take any notice of my own
righteousness, the acting of my graces will not rejoice me, if I be proud of it.

Verse. 23. He will laugh at the fall of the innocent.] That is, carries himself
as if He scorneth at the melting away of the innocent* Brought.
he slighted it, appears not presently for their deliverance.

Verse. 25, 26. Now my days are swifter than a Post: they flee away, they see
no good.

They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hastes to the
prey.

Mark the gradation here: First Job compares his days to a Post, a Post goes
on his journey very swiftly, when one horse wearieth he will take to another,
and so goes on; but yet he must rest sometimes: Therefore he goes further, and
compares them to the swiftest Ships; they are called Ships of desire, the Ship
will not be weary day nor night, yet there may come a contrary wind and make
her stay; Hab. 1. 5. Aquilae volatus in proverbio est de velo^i. Drusius.
therefore he goes higher, and he compares his days to the Eagle, which of
all fowls is the swiftest to catch her prey, and nothing can stay her until
she has obtained it: So, man's days are not weary, nothing can stay them in
their course, but they flee away, and hasten to their end.

Verse. 33. Neither is there any daies-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand
upon Inter^me and Deum* Drusius.
us both.] There was a double use of the daies-man, and his laying his hand
upon them.

1. To keep the dissenting parties asunder, lest they should fall out and
strike one another. 2. To keep them together that they might not depart from
each other.
CHAP. X.
Verse 7. THou know that I am not wicked.] He does not say, Thou know
that I am Quasi dicat, scis me sontem non esse, ut me ita debeas torquere quasi
sontem. Mercerus. Scis me insontem esse, and im^unem ab omni culpa. Drusius.
not a sinner, or, thou know that I have not sinned. There is great
difference between being a sinner and a wicked man. The best of Saints are
sinners.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 3. SHall no man make thee ashamed.] The word signifies the greatest
shame, as that Some rendet it, Shall no m^n confute thee: Qui ^te confutet and
convin^at. Mercer.
before did the greatest mocking.

Verse. 7. Can thou by searching find out God?] Thou can not; it is
impossible to find out all that is in God, as the other words show. Ephesians. 3.
18, 19.

Verse. 12. Though man be born like a wild Asses colt.] For his folly and
fierceness. Id est, etiam bruti^^imus inde ab o^tu suo. Junius. Man is wild
and unteachable, he is like a Colt, and the Colt of an Ass, and the Colt of a
wild Ass: Every word has its weight, to set forth the miserable state of a
natural man.


Verse. 17. Thou shall shine forth.] He uses an Hebrew word signifying two
contraries, Similiter loquitur Es. 58. 10 Consolatio nunquam deerit in omnibus
adversitatibus: and eae ipsae leves erunt. Cocceius.
both to shine, and to be darkened. It is to show us, that obscurity which
comes from adversity is a true and perfect light: Caussins Holy Court: quasi
dicat, etsi tenebris calamitatum obtenebratus fueris in afflictionibus and
molestiis positus, eris aurorae exorienti similis, quae magis ac magis subinde
augetur in lucem. Mercerus.

Verse. 20. Their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.] He breaths out
his last hope with his last breath: id est, Misera morte de rebus speratis
decident. Junius.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 7. ASk now the beasts and they shall teach thee, and the sowls of the
air, and they shall Exponent tibi scilicet Domini sapientiam and providentiam.
Mercerus.
tell thee.] That is, Consider seriously how they are sustained, they have not
reason to provide and shift for themselves. See Matthew. 6. 26.

Verse. 16. The deceived and the deceivers are his.] Deceivers in religious
things in judgment and practice, and in civil. Nemo exorbitat a via recta nemo
seducit alterum citra ipfius voluntatem, judicium, dispositionem, directionem.
Cocceius. Ambos suscitat and efficit, ut aliqui errent, alii vero in errorem
inducant. Mercerus in loc.


His.] Not only by creation or general possession, but he is so wise and
powerful that he can make use of both, and will bring them both to account. He
orders the persons, who shall deceive, and who be deceived.

Verse. 17. Spoiled.] Of their honor, power, wisdom.

And makes the Judges fools.] By withdrawing their wisdom, or over-matching
them.

Verse. 18. He loses the bond of Kings.] Of their authority, whereby they bind
Quasi dicat, jugum quod populo imponitur ex eorum cervicibus eximit, Dan. 2.
21. Mercerus. Dei beneficium est, quum regibus dat eam majestatem, ut ejus
respectu populi in officie and pace contineantur. Deus etiam contra efficit, ut
populi abjecto metu and reverentia regum tumultuentur and bella cieant, ut
necesse sit reges accingi and bellig^^are. Summa, Deum pacis and belli datorem
esse. Cocceius.
subjects to obedience.

And girdeth their loins with a girdle.] That is, gives them Kingly power and
authority. Mercer interprets it contrarily, Conjicit eos in vincula.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 15. THough he slay me, yet will I trust in him.] Job had nothing now to
lose but life, Egregrie convertit vulgatus, etiamsi occiderit me, in ipso
sperabo, verba constantissimae and immorae fidei. Ego magis miror B. Lutherum
hic exorbitasse. Sic enim ille, and ex eo Belgicus, ecce occidet me, and non
possum expectare: q. d. video decretum esse Deo, me interficere, atque adeo
ipse me gravissimis cruciatibus excarnificat, ut non possim expectare mortem,
velim jamjam perire. Amama Antibarb* Bibl. l. 3 Suae spei and fidei rationem
ostendit, verba sunt magnae spei and fidei, cujus vis maxim in cruce and morte
ostenditur, ideo utrunque conjunxit mortem and spem. Mercerus. Vide Junium.
perhaps (thought he) the Lord will proceed so far against me, as to take
away my life after this.

Verse. 18. Behold now, I have ordered my cause.] The word is commonly applied
to the marshalling of an Army, it signifies to order with reason.

Verse. 23. How many are mine iniquities and sins, make me to know my
transgression.] Vide Mercer.
Whatever his sins were he would have them mortified. Here are three Hebrew
words used to express sin by; one which signifies peccata per errorem
commissa, he would not let slip the least infirmity. 2. Perversitates, when one
does any thing out of a froward heart. 3. Defection and rebellion.

Verse. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me.] Heb. bitternesses, the
LXX. (...). Quod rescribis contra me amaritudines. Junius.
render it evil things, bitter plagues and sorrows; the Jews interpret it of
sin, the later clause makes for this.

And make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.] Keeps his heart upon
them: See Job 17. 11. Job calls the thoughts of his heart there the possessions
of his heart, so Arias Montanus renders the Hebrew, because whatsoever one
possesses, it is Nam luo nunc paenas earum iniquitatum, quas in pueritia
commisi.
chiefly by his thoughts.

Three things are implied, 1. An act of remembrance, he reflected on his former
life. 2. Of assent or acknowledgement, stand under the accusation of former
sins. 3. A sense and feeling of the bitterness of these sins, and Gods
displeasure Drusius. i. Paenas inde a pueritia mea iniquitate meritas. Junius.
against him for them.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 4. WHo can bring a clean thing out of an unclean.] There are three
expositions q. d. Solus Deus potest ex immundo facere mundum, condonando
peccata. Drusius. Respondent e Scholasticis Aquinas, Bonaventura and Scotus,
etsi caelum nunquam atteretur quantum ad substantiam, tamen atteretur quantum
ad efficaciam and influentiam; cessabit influentia caeli in die ultimo, quo
etiam resurgent qui dormierunt. id est, homo semel extinctus, non redibit
iterum, neque ullam habebit in hoc mundo vitae vicissitudinem, non resurget, ut
ad hanc hujus vitae conditionem redeat. Dr. Benef. De vita aeterna.
of this place. Some 1. understand it of the change of state, so it proves the
rootedness of corruption in a man's heart. 2. Others understand it of a man and
his act, if a man be unclean all is unclean. 3. Who can make a holy man to be
born of a sinner? See Psalm. 58. 3.

Verse. 12. So man lies down and rises not, till the heavens be no more.] Some
say Job speaks of the condition of man after death, according to nature, viz.
that he cannot rise again naturally: Resurrectio divinum opus est, non ipsius
naturae, Drusius. But the most simple and plain answer is, he cannot return to
live again ordinarily this kind of life that he did before: id est, Nunquam in
vitam hanc revertetur, Junius. id est, Nunquam ex illo mortis somno excitandus
nec evigilaturus, ut huic mundanae vitae restituatur. Beza in loc.

Verse. 14. If a man die, shall he live again?] With a life ejusdem generis, a
mortal life.

All the days of my appointed time, so Junius: or, all the days of my
warfare, so the best Interpreters read it, the Vulgar Latin, Calvin, Pagnine,
Vatablus, Arias Montanus: Will I wait till my change come.] See v. 5. Make it
his business to wait, that is, meditate, prepare for, and expect death. Job
calls death a change, and by way of eminency, my change, it is not an
annihilation or extinction, but a mutation.

It is 1. the last change we shall meet with, till the resurrection. 2. A
lasting, nay an everlasting change, it puts us into an eternal condition of
happiness or misery. 3. An universal change; 1. In respect of persons, all
must meet with it. 2. In respect of the whole man, body and soul, makes the
body a stinking carcass, and puts the soul into heaven or hell.
4. A different change, according to the quality of the person changed;
terrible to a sinner, comfortable to the godly.
Verse. 17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag.] As the Clark of Assizes
seals up In sacculo ligamus, quae been servata nec perdita volumus. Drus.
the inditements of men, and at the Assizes brings the bag and takes them out,
even so will God, Deuteronomy. 32. 34. He is patient to them in this life, at the day
of judgment the bag shall be opened, and the story of their lives related.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 14. WHat is man that he should be clean? and he which is born of a
woman, that he See Job 25. 4. and Prove. 20. 9.
should be righteous?] There are other Scriptures that seem to say otherwise,
Matthew. 5. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 5. These places in Job and the Proverbs, show that none
are clean of themselves, and that no heart is pure by a natural constitution.
There is 1. a legal purity, when one is strictly pure, having no sin at all,
so no mere man since the fall. 2. Evangelical purity, when sin is pardoned,
subdued, mortified, so the godly are pure.

Verse. 15. The heavens are not clean in his sight.] See chapter 25. v. 5. Some
refer it Heavens not clean.] Because of the fall of Angels, rather compared
to God. Quasi dicat, Si cum Domino conferantur and ejus summa puritate, prae eo
impuri erunt, coelos vel Angelos intellige, ut idem repetatur hujus libri more
verbis commutatis: vel corpora ipsa coelestia and coelos Ipsos a faece and
corruptione locorum inferiorum alienos and immunes. Mercerus in loc. See Dr.
Hackw. Apol. l. 2. Sect. 3 p. ^9.
to the Angels, others to the heavens themselves, which contract impurity by
reason of the sin of man, Romans 8. 20. Drusius has both, Caelicolae, Angeli,
qui in caelo aut ipsa corpora caelestia.

Verse. 16. Which drinks iniquity like water.] As the beast does water, its as
familiar i. Largiter, proverbiale copiae, and abundantiae. Drus.
to him as meat and drink. Cui tam ordinarium est and familiare peceatum, quam
cibus and potus. Junius.

Verse. 19. Unto whom alone the earth was given.] That is, especially.
Vetustissimus Orientalium mos fuit, sapientissimos imprimis gubernationi
praeficere. Fessel.


Verse. 24. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
against him, as a King ready to the battle.] That is, he shall be quite
overcome of sorrow and Trouble without, and anguish within.
grief, and shall be no more able to bear or resist the same, than to stand
against a whole Army of men.

Verse. 26. He runueth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers.] Some interpret it of the threatenings.
That is, those arguments and pretenses men have to keep off the strokes of God
and his Word.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 10. THey have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully.] A sign of
contempt and i. Me palam in os afficiunt inhumanissimis contumeliis. Junius.
despite, when one is struck upon the cheek. Mercer. Verba sumpta sunt ex more
carnificum and tortorum, Cocceius. See 2 Cor. 12. 7.

He added the last word ex abundanti, says Drusius. Nam ferire malam innuit
paenam cum ignominia conjunctam. 2 Cor. 11. 20, 21. Desumptum proverbium a more
vulgari, quo viliorum hominum maxillae a potentioribus, aut eorum imperio, ab
ignobilioribus caedi solebant, uti exempla Michae, ipsius salvatoris Christi,
and Pauli ostendunt. 1 Reg. 22. 24. Jo^. 18. 22. Act. 23. 2. 1 Cor. 4. 11.
Forsan and extensio manus Jeroboami huc p^rtinet, 1 Reg. 13. 4. Glass. Rhet.
Sac. Tract. 1. c. 21.


Verse. 20. My friends scorn me.] Are my bitterest enemies. Mercer reads it in
Sensus est, O vos socii mei qui in me rhetoricamini, qui conquisitis selectis,
and affectatis in me verbis utimini. Mercerus.
the Vocative case, O rhetores mei socii mei: and Beza, O rhetores mei sodales
mei.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. MY breath is corrupt.] He does not mean an ill favor in his breath,
but an obstruction and stopping in it. It is conceived that he had the Tissick,
a short breathing, and the consideration of this disease made him think that
the grave was ready for him.

Verse. 9. The Righteous also shall hold on his way.] The Hebrew word signifies
to hold fast, and cleave to, as well as hold on.

Verse. 11. The thoughts of my heart.] Heb. The possessions of my heart, so
called, Make me to possess the sins of my youth, that is, his thoughts dwelt
upon them.
because the heart stays upon them; What the soul possesses, it is by the
thoughts.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 14. HIs Confidence shall be rooted out of his Tabernacle.] Some expound
it of the Ut nihil in ejus domo supersit, quo possit confidere: vel, ut ibi
tuto non maneat. Mercerus. Vel maximum terrorum intellige, ut paulo ante
primogenitum mortis, vel cum aliis, diabolum. Nos intelligamus, ad terrores
gravissimos, and velut aliquem qui inter caeteros principatum teneat. Passim in
hoc libro vides verba grandia, Poetica and Tragica deligi ad res augendas and
exaggerandas. Mercer.
place of Worship, thought himself w^ll, because he was often at the place of
public worship. See Jer. 7. 3, 4. Others of the place where he dwells, e domo
ejus, e familia ejus. Drusius. See Junius.

And it shall bring him to the King of Terrors.] That is, Death; He speaks here
of hypocrites, whose heart is not upright with God, not of the godly. Such a
terror as is the chiefest and greatest among terrors.

Death, says the Philosopher, is of all terribles the most terrible.

Verse. 15. Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.] It is fit matter
for Gods vengeance, if the fire of Gods wrath but touch it, it kindles
presently and consumes all. Grotius thinks he may allude to the punishment of
the Sodomites, of which see Genesis 19. 24. Drusius says, Ignis sulphurs mixtus,
qualis erat ille qui pluit inexcidio Sodo^ae.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 16. I Called my servant.] Immediately, my self, sent not a Messenger to
him.

He answered me not.] So the Hebrew, Chald. Par. Junius, and Vulg. Latin, the
Septuagint, He obeyed me not, the Hebrew word (says Drusius) signifies both.

Verse. 23. Oh that they were printed in a Book.] The Art of Printing was not
then Ut palam and in aeternum testata ^ieret fides mea and aequitas causae
meae. Junius. Intelligit verba, quae habuit pro innocentia sua, ad justitiam
causae suae tuendam. Drusius. Antiquitas literas saxis and lateribus, aeri and
argento, cerae, plumbo atque ligno, stylo ferreo atque etiam o^^eo, insculp^as
novi^us ^^^nes, nempe ut earum perpetua extaret recordati^, nec ulla dies
memoriam earum literarum oblivion^ del^^et. Hinc Scriptores sacri loquendi
formas sumunt, ut exactam and firmam comprehensionem significent. Jer. 17. 1*
Z^c^. ^. 11, 1^. Ezech. 3. 9. Di^ter. Antiq. Bibl.
invented, he means Letters written in deep and large Characters.

Verse. 24. That they were graven with an iron*pen.] This verse is the same in
substance with the former, that is, so graven, that it might last for ever.

Verse. 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
later day upon the Earth.] There is a double expression of application, I know,
and my Redeemer.

I know, that is, I believe. See Isa. 53. 11. The word Redeemer in the Hebrew
is very emphatical, Goel, for it signifies a Kinsman near allied unto him of
his own flesh, that will restore him to life.

Stand at the later day upon the Earth.] That is, Christ shall conquer all his
enemies, Posteriorem super pulverem resurrecturum. Jun. i. e. In conflictu cum
hostibus meis, a quibus ^^e redempturus est, victoriam reportabit, metaphora a
luctatoribus vel athletis victoribus desumpta. Amam. Antib. Bibl. l. 3.

Verse. 26, 27. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall Agnosco hic liquidum argumentum pro resurrectione carnis, and
quidem hujus carnis, uti prisci loquebantur. Quid enim clarius dici posset, in
carne mea videbo Deum? Quem videbo ego ipse and oculi mei, and non alius: Verum
quidem etiam est nos in novissimo die de terra resurrecturos, and nos pellibus
nostris r^rsus circumdatum. iri, at Job^^ istis verbis haec dicere^, id vero
aio non esse verum, ac proinde hic locus vulgo pro concionibus and in
disputationibus non ea cura, qua in hac linguarum luce par erat, allegatur.
Amama. Antibarb. Bib. l. 3. Vide Di^her. Disputat. Acad. Tom. 2. p. 10^.
Disputat. Philol. Posit. 1.
I see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me.] Hierom notes upon these words,
that no man since Christ^ time did ever speak so clearly of Christ's
Resurrection, and his own, as Job does here before Christ's coming.

Verse. 28. The root of the matter is found in me.] q. d. It is with me as with
a Tree in Winter, I have cast my Leaves, my Branches are gone, and I seem to
have no life, but it is hid in the root. See 27. 5. Vide Junium.

The comfort of Gods Promises is rooted in the heart, 1 John 3. 9.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 12. THough wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide is under his
Tongue.] It Is Et ille quidem in improbitate exerce^da sibi haud secus placuerit
quam qui suavem cibum in ore servat. Beza in lo^.
an Allusion to Children that hide a sweet morsel under their tongues, left
they should let it go too soon. Nimirum illud veluti cibum ^andens. Junius.

Verse. 22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits.] Cum se
impleverit Cum p^tabi^ sibi abunde, satis superque suppetere and sufficere
omnla ad feliciter and laute vivendum necessaria, and in rerum fastigio ac
prosperitatis quodam cumulo sibi esse videbitur. Mercer. in loc. Post quam enim
satis ^uperque rapuerit, quae vel omnium avidissimo possint sufficere, tum
scelestissimis quibusque in ipsum invadentibus, in summis angustiis versabitur.
Beza. Vide Junium.
ad satietatem, concupiscet, so Grotius would have the words read. The Spirit
of God speaks according to their apprehension, they looked for a fullness of
sufficiency in the creatures.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 14. THerefore they say unto God, Depart from us.] Not that they always
say it explicitly, Non quod ill^ in talia verba se^per prorumpant quae hoc loco
ponuntur, non enim tam barbarus aut improbus qui ita fere de Deo loqui propalam
audeat: Verum Spiritus Sanctu^ eoru^ cogitationes exprimere and deregere
voluit, ut in Psalm. 36. 1. Merc. in loc. Dicunt, Ore quidam, Opere pluri^i,
Animo omnes, qui non amant Deum, vellent Deum non esse, si ipsis liceret ex
voto esse. Cocceius in loc.
many say it in their hearts, all the wicked say it in their works, an allusion
to those who importunately offer their petty wares to men walking in the
streets, and they say, Depart from us, we need not these things.

Verse. 25. And never eats with pleasure.] His meat is never comfortable unto
him.

Verse. 32. Shall remain in the Tomb.] The Hebrew word signifies both to watch,
Quia per epigraphas and epitaphia quasi vivi ac vigilantes morantur, and ad
legendum cognoscendumque quisnam ibi situs fit, invitant. Meuoch. De Repub Heb.
l. 8. c. 4. Vide plura ibid. Quod terra in sepulchro aggeratur velut in
pyramidem frugum more in areis significanter Latin ^umulum vertas a tumendo.
Mercer. in loc.
and to remain, because a watchman keeps his place, and stays by it.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 6. TAken a pledge.] The word signifies also to bind or fasten a thing
as with a cord, and the reason is, because a pledge given is an obligation, a
tie to perform the promise made. It is no sin to take a pledge when offered,
but taking it Drusius.
unjustly and rashly without cause, or not returning it before night according
to the Law, Exodus 22. 26. Deuteronomy. 24. 6, 10.

Verse. 12, 13, 14. Is not God in the height of Heaven? and behold the height of
the q^d Ideoque longissime a nobis abest. Jun.
stars, how high they are? And thou say, How does God know? Can he judge
through the dark cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not,
and he walks in the circuit of Heaven.] The words of the Atheist, he thinks
God is at too great distance, and neglects humane affairs.

Verse. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him.] Assuesce cum co. Tremel. Beza,
Arias Montanus. Acquaintance notes a frequent and accustomed converse. It
notes, 1. Knowledge of God, Exodus 6. 7. 2. Society with delight in him. 3.
Communication of secrets to him.

Verse. 26. And shall lift up thy face unto God.] This signifies cheerfulness
and delight Vultum hunc tuum qui nunc to^us concidit ad Deum ipsum intrepidus
attolles. Beza.
in his presence, Genesis 4. 5, 6. 2. Confidence before him, 2 Samuel 2. 22.

Verse. 28. Thou shall also decree a thing.] Prayer of the godly is a decree.
See The prayers of the Saints are decrees with God, because they pray for that
which God has decreed.
1 King. 17. 1. compared with Jam. 5. 17.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 12. NEither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips.] The
connection is observable, He had a constant spirit in the ways of God, because
of his love to them.

I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.] That is,
he had rather omit his usual meals (for that he means by his appointed food)
than to omit a constant course in performing these holy duties.

Verse. 13. But he is in one mind.] 1. What to do. 2. When to do it. Melius ex
Hebraeo: Ipse in ^no: id est, in proposito suo perstat. Grotius.


CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 1. WHy, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they not know
him, Versum hunc satis alioqui facilem difficilem reddit varietas
interpretationum* Quum Deo nihil sit absconditum, nihil ipsum la^eat, quae est
eausa cur homines pil, and qui rerum divinarum periti sunt, ipsum non videant
and intelligant dies e^ us? Ac si diceret, cur Deus, cui optime nota temporum
momenta, non erit ea nota piis cultoribus suis. Dies omnipotentis vocatur
usitato more loquendi, quo omnipotens aliquid facit quod pertineat vel ad
poenam improborum, vel ad praemium utilitatemque justorum. Drus. observat. Sac.
l. 13. c. 15.
nor see his days?] Drusius would turn the words thus, Quare ab Omnipotente
non sunt abscondita tempora, and cognoscentes eum non vident dies ejus? Why are
not times hidden from the Almighty, seeing they that know him do not see his
days? See Junius.

Verse. 3. They drive away the Ass of the fatherless, they take the widows Ox
for a pledge.] That is, of him whom I have taken to be a Father to, Psalm. 68.
5. yet they spare him not, they take his Ass from him, that is the beast which
serves him for the greatest use; and the widows Ox, who in Hebrew is called
Almonah from Alam mutum esse, she has no body to speak for her, and they take
her Ox from her, the most necessary beast for work, Exodus 22. 1. her only Ox,
and under pretense of justice, as if she were in debt to them.

Verse. 6. They gather the vintage of the wicked.] And leave nothing to the
poor, Deuteronomy. 24. 21. Others expound it, Serotinare vineam, thus, they gather the
grapes before they be ripe, to serve for the use of man in corn-harvest.

Verse. 17. If one know them.] The Hebrew is, If know; we make up the sense
thus, If one know them, that is, if God or man know them, and their ways, if
they be discovered in their abominable ways.

They are in the terror of the shadow of death.] The darkness which comes upon
Terrores quos adfert, aut incutit umbra mortis, hoc est, pericula, quae prope
mortem ducunt. Drus.
dying men a little before death, that is, they are ready to die with the
fright and terror of it.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 4. HOw then can man be justified with God?] The Question carries a
strong denial, Apud Deum, aut cum Deo comparatus. Drus.
it is more than barely to say, Man cannot be justified with God. Such
Questions, How a thing may be? are usually an Answer that they cannot be at all.

Or how can he be clean that is b^rn of a woman?] Here is another Question of
the Sea Chap. 5. 14
same tenor. Jobs friends beat often upon this point, vehemently suspecting
that he did overween his own condition, and thought too highly of himself,
whereas Job did not only freely and ingenuously, but with a great deal of holy
Rhetoric and Elegancy confess against himself again and again, that he neither
was, nor could be clean before God; Only he would not admit their plea against
him, that he suffered for his uncleanness, or that he was unclean, because he
suffered.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 7. ANd hangs the Earth upon nothing.] The whole frame of the Heavens
has Nam terra quasi pendere videtur in medio mundi, nullo fundamento, nisi
forte in centro suo, innixa. Drusius.
no other pillars than the Air, the Air leans on the Earth, the Earth hangs
on nothing, but the mighty and powerful word of God. It hangs like a Ball in
the Air.

Ovid thus sings, 6. Fastorum.

Terra pilae similis, nullo fulcimine nixa,
Aere subjecto tam grave pendet onus.
Verse. 14. But how little a Portion is heard of him.] He speaks of the
knowledge q. d Multo plura in omnes parts de illo dici possent, e quibus pauca
tantum auribus percepimus. Drus.
of God in his ways, much less of himself, his Nature.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 6. MY heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.] Heb. Of, from, or
concerning Conscientia mea, Ec^les 7. 23. Drus. a diebus meis. Mercer. id est,
Quamdiu vixero a diebus meis and de praeterito and futuro dicitur. Id. ib.
my days; For all a wicked man's carnal presumption, his conscience will
reproach him, thou have spent thy days thus and thus.

Verse. 8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, when God takes away his
soul?] See Perit ei omnis spes in morte. Nam quid speret mortuus, qui simulate
coluit Deum, dum viveret? Drus.
Luke 12. 20. A godly man resigns and yields up his soul into the hand of his
Redeemer.

Verse. 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon
Deus piis semper in deliciis est, eumque invocant in adversis. Qu^d certe non
faciunt impii. Igitur ego, qui hoc facio, non sum impius. Drusius.
God?]

Two things discover all hypocrisy:

1. Though he perform service, he delights not in God, in duty. 2. He does not
persevere, he will be beaten off with every trifle, he will not call upon God
when he has been heard, and when he seems not to hear.
Quovis tempore, viz. tam prospero, quam adverso. Junius. Drusius. CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 4. THe waters forgotten of the foot.] Because no foot had passed them
along time, i. e. Quas pes ullus (ut Hebraei lequuntur) non novit sive expertus
est unquam, quae pede non possunt transiri prae profunditate. Jun. Nam cum
depressae essent aquae, trans^ri poterant pede: ubi aqua creverat, and aucta
erat, torrens non erat pervius, nec vadum habebat: unde pedi, qui per eum
transire solitus erat, prorsus in oblivionem venit. Drus.
nor was any like to pass them any more.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 3. When his Candle shined upon my head.] An elegant expression, that
is, by Lucernam Dei appellat ejus savorem quo velut lucerna in omnibus quae
suscipiebat aut agebat ipsi praelucebat, ut omnia adversa and rerum
difficultates superaret. Mercer. Lucerna sua, i. favore ac benevolentia sua,
vel certe lege sua, quae lucerna est pedibus piorum, juxta illud Psalm. 119.
105. Drus.
light from God, all my actions were ordered and governed for the best.

Verse. 14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: My judgment was as a
robe, Justitiae me totum dabam, and illa mihi vicissim laudem conciliabat, and
studium illud aequi and boni, erat mihi pro regio quodammodo pallio and
diademate. Beza.
and a diadem.] The glory and pride which Kings are wont to take in their
Crowns and S^epters, and royal Vestments, is not more than the glory and honor
which he placed in doing Justice and Judgment, Psalm. 109. 16, 17. Vult dicere,
admodum ornabat me. Nam cidaris capitis est non integumentum duntaxat, sed
etiam ornamentum. Drusius.

Verse. 15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.] In stead of
both Id est, Oculorum loco, and ^ice pedum. Mercerus. Hoc est, In tenuiorum
causis non tam judicem, quam patrem agebam.
to them.

Verse. 16. I was a Father to the poor.] There is an elegant Paranomasia in the
Hebrew, Elegans Paranomasia in Ab and Ebion, ac si diceret. Quod pater est
liberis suis, idego etiam iis, qui semper avent, qui semper egent. Drus.

Eyes to the blind, Ignorantem dirigendo, Feet to the lame, Impotentem
adjuvando, a Father to the poor, Indigentem sublevando. Lyra.

Verse. 17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth.] Heb. The jawteeth, or the grinders, id est, Cum potentioribus and
sceleraris long aliter me gerebam. Martinus de Roa lib. rerum singul. vol. 1.
lib. 3. cap. 7. and 8.
Metaphora a feris, He compares a violent man to the wild beast, which tears
the prey with his teeth. So Junius and Drusius.

He means the same things by both, power abused to oppression.

Dentes are long sharp teeth, the fore-teeth, Psalm. 57. 4. Molares a molendo,
so called from grinding, the great double-teeth, the jaw-teeth, those are the
biters, these the grinders.

Verse. 18. Then I said, I shall die in my nest.] Id est, inter meos placide and
cum dignitate. Id est, Domi meae, aut etiam in nido. Id est, In lecto, quo modo
de eo dicimus, qui morte defungitur naturali, in cubili suo defunctus est, he
died in ^^^ bed. Gatakeri ^innus l. 1. c. 17. Vide Mercer. in loc.
Beza.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 8. CHildren of base men.] Heb. Sons without name, opposite to whom are
men Filii ignobili^ um. Vulg. LXX.
of name, famous.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 1. WHy should I then think upon a Maid.] By the course of the letter he
should Contemplarer scortandi causa. Nam qui hoc facit, scortatur cum ea in
cord suo. Vide Matthew. 5. 10. Drus.
have said, that he should not look on a Maid, but he says, think, because
looking usually brings thinking, and thinking worse.

Verse. 10. Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon
her.] i. Ancilla sit vilissimi ministerii. Vide Exodus: 11. 5. Isa. 47. 5.
Grotius.
That is, Be the vilest servant of others; To grind in a mill signifies
extreme misery and slavery, Isa. 42. 2.

Graeci honest and tectis verbis placeat virgo alteri, Scortum alterius sit.
Jerome. Uxor mea concumbat cum altere. Targum. i. Cum ea coeant. Exprimitur
habitus viri congredientis, apud Latin^s inclinare, incurvare. Fessel. Advers.
Sac. l. 2. c. ^8. i. Alteri sui copiam faciat, rem habeat cum alio viro. Id.
ibid. c. 15. Veteres Hebraei Molere cognominationem honestam and occultam esse
dicunt concubitus, and actus venerei, Metaphora a m^lis ducta. Sic intelligunt
etiam illud Judic. 16. 21. quod ad ipsum Palestini certatim suas uxores
adducerent suscipiendae ex eo prolis causa ob ipsius robur. Sic and Hieron.
illud Lament. 5. 13. and hoc loco. Sic Chald* coea^. Ego cum omnibus
Interpretibus and veteribus Hebraeis malo molere pro actu venereo, qui molendi
speciem quandam habet, sumere; ut sese declarat subdens, Et sub e^ incurventur
alij: Haud tamen ita intellexerim, Judic. 16. 21. and Thren. 5. 13. Mercer. in
loc.
Alienaes permolere nxores dixit. Horat. Sermon. 1. Sat. 2. Verse. 12. If I did
despise the cause of my man-servants, or of my maidservant, when they
contended with me.] His meaning is, That in the ordering of his Family he
behaved himself so equally, that he would hearken to the basest person about
his house, and if he had done or said any thing unto them, which had not been
right (as it might fall out sometimes) they might plainly tell him of it, he
would not refuse to hear them, nor fall out with them for their boldness. See
Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 4. 1.

Verse. 18. And I have guided or pitied her from my mothers womb.] Had a
disposition Hyperbola vult dicere, ab infantia. Drusius. Et ab utero matris
meae deduxi illam. Arias Montan. Et ab utero matris meae egressa est mecum.
Vulg. Lat.
to pity from my nativity.

Ateneris assuescere multum est. Verse. 21. When I saw my help in the gate] Had
such an honor and esteem Qui mihi auxilio fuisset* si eum percussissem. Hoc
videtur velle, si levavi manum contra eum, etiam cum impune hoc mihi facere
licuisser. Drus.
among them, that all men in authority would have born me out.

Verse. 26. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in
brightness.] Quod Solemn vertimus id in Ebraeo est Ur, quod Lucem and Ignem
etiam and solemn denotat, and a veteribus hoc loco, atque apud eundem alibi. c.
36. Com 32. pro Sole, ni fallor, sumitur. Vetustissimus etiam hic adorationis
rit^^ ^^eti^ur* Manum ori, capite inclinato admovebant, unde adoratio dicta.
Vide Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Os. 2. 13. Seld. Prol. ad li^. De Di^ Syris. Vide Mercer. in
loc. Notandum nomine lucis notari solemn, ut primarium and praecipuum fontem
lucis. Veteres consueverunt cum imagines colerent, quemadmodum genua flectere
Baali and corpus inclinare, and quibusvis gestibus testari amorem suum and
submissionem, ita etiam aliquando osculati imagines ipsas. Cum autem Sol and
Luna colerentur, aliaeque creaturae absentes, admovere manum ori atque osculari
manum in signum amoris. Rain. de l. Apoc. ^om. 2. Prael. 237. Quorum verborum
sententia est, se nunquam eorumimpietatem imitatum, qui Solemn aut Lunam
adorabant, manumad Sydera illa extendentes, and ad osculum referentes. Menoc.
de Rep. Heb. l. 1 c. 9. Osculari antiquissima veneratio. Servius ad AEneid.
Osculum, inquit, religionis est, suavium voluptatis. Tradit, ni fallor,
Herodotus, Orientis morem fuisse, ut aequales in occursu invicem osculum
darent, qui inferiores essent manum ejus qui dignitate praestabat,
oscularentur, qui humillimi, sese incurvarent. Voss. in Maimon. de Idol. c. 1.
Vide Mercer. in loc.
These two under several names were the great gods of the Heathens. His verbis
innuit se tanquam astra pro Diis coluisse, quod gentes alim faciebant. Drus.

Verse. 27. And my mouth has kissed my hand] As the Heathens which worshipped
the Sun, because they could not kiss it, kissed their hand. There is a kiss
of Adoration, as well as Reverence, Psalm. 2. 10. Vide Mart. de Roa. Sing. vol.
1. lib. 4. cap. 3.

The meaning is, If I saw the Sun and Moon, and moved my hand to my mouth, q.
d. Cum vidi solemn and lunam, adoravi ea manu, viz. Ori admota, atque ad osculum
relata. Drus. Observe. Sac. l. 1. c. 20. and in loc.

Idolaters used to kiss their Idols, Hos. 13. 2.

Verse. 33. If I covered my transgressions, as Adam.] Si operui sicut Adam coram
Si operui ut homo praevaricationes meas. Arias Mont. Si abscondi quasi hom^
peccatum meum. Vulg. Lat. Si celavi ut homines, peccata mea. Sir. and Ver.
Arab. Adam nomen proprium hic esse, non displicet. Novimus enim, ut Adam
conatus sit se justificare, quum a Deo accusaretur, atque ut ex suo sermon sit
condemnatus. Sed nec illud displicet, ut homines, hoc est, ut vulgus solet.
Cocceius in loc.
illo peccatum meum. Chald. Par. As man, so other Interpreters. More hominum.
Jun. As men use to do, Hos. 6. 7. Adam is mentioned, because herein we show our
selves to be of his race, Genesis 3. 10.

Verse. 37. As a Prince would I go near unto him.] Would come before God with a
holy greatness of mind, not draw near to him as a prisoner, or one afraid,
Hos. 3. 4. Fretus ^quitati causae meae, non ut affinis culpae, sed ut princeps,
securus accederem. Jun.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 6. ANswered.] Began his speech, began to speak, so in the New Testament,
Mat. 11. 25 and Mark 11. 14.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse 12. IN this.] Thy contest with God, Hoc modo, hac via. Drusius. Quasi
dicat, Etsi te alias justum agnosco and fateor, ac omnibus vitae partibus
integrum and purum, ut sigillatim ostendisti, nec tuam tibi innocentiam velim
detrahere omnibus notam and exploratam, tamen saltem in hoc justus non es, te
in hoc justificare non possum, quod ita cum Deo contendere volueris, etc.
Mercer.
Thou art not just.] The Majesty of God makes thee inexcusable. God is greater
than man.] Enos, miserable man.

God not only in Majesty and power, concerning which thou expostulatest, but
also in Truth, Righteousness, Wisdom and Mercy, infinitely exceeds men,
wherefore in this matter thou art unjust. So Junius.

Verse. 13. He gives no account of any of his matters.] He lays the
equitableness of submitting to all Gods Conditions on two things, His
Greatness, and Unaccountableness.

Verse. 15. In a dream, in a vision of the night.] He shows how God in those
times Rectissime observant. Tremel. and Jun. Earum tantum duarum fieri
mentionem, non autem verbi scripti and legis, quoniam eo tempore nulla erant
alia documenta praeter ea, quae somniis and visionibus traderentur. Jobi enim
liber antiquior est lege, quemadmodum docetur copiose a doctis, Sixto Sen^n^i,
Mercero, aliisque, ut in eo non sit necesse insistere. Rainold. de lib. Apoc.
Tom. 2. Praelect. 19.
was wont to speak to men. See Genesis 20. 6. and 31. 24. Numb. 12. 6.

Verse. 22. His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the
destroyers.] That is, Praestat generale esse ad omnia morti^ signa and
mortifera, quicquid illud sit. Mercerus.
Satan called Abaddon, Revel. 9. looks every day when the Devil will fetch him.

Verse. 23. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand to i. e. Propheta nuncians voluntatem Do^, ut Jud. 2. 1. 19. Cujus
intervent^ Deus consilium suum laborantibus explicat. Junius. An interpreter.]
A faithful Minister, say some: It is meant (say others) of Christ, called the
Angel of the Covenant, and the Angel of Gods face, he discovers his Fathers
meaning. Vide Cocceium. Uprightness.] Or righteousness, not his own, but got by
a ransom, discovers that he has an interest in Christ's righteousness, that his
ransom is accepted for him, and that the grace in him is true.
show unto him his uprightness.] It is an excellent place: It shows how God
preserves a sinner from falling, by admonitions and chastisements: how he
restores him being fallen, by sending to him a Minister, here called a
Messenger or an Angel, carries the Lords Embassage: An Interpreter, one
enabled to declare aright the doctrine of reconciliation betwixt God and man;
no ordinary man, one of a thousand; his office is to declare man his
righteousness, viz. to assure him, that whatsoever he is in himself, a foul and
loathsome sinner, yet in Christ he is justified, and through him accepted
righteous before God, Isa. 57. 19. and 50. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 18.

One of a thousand.] For the rarity and preciousness of such a one. i.
Cujusmodi nuncius and interpres fidus voluntatis Dei est rarissimus.

Verse. 24. Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.] The
word signifies a price paid to redeem a man's life or liberty. This is a full
place against the Socinians. Socinus says, God removes the curse of the Law by
a free and absolute pardon without satisfaction, the Socinians say he may
forgive us freely as well as we one another without price or satisfaction. We
maintain, that God takes not off the curse without any kind of satisfaction,
pardon is free, but founded on a satisfaction, such a pardon as a sinner may
plead it, therefore Grotius his Exposition is but flat here.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 13. WHo has given him charge over the earth? or who has disposed the
whole Quis igitur es Jobe, qui toties sis ausus Deum quasi in jus vocare, and
istorum quae pateris rationem ab ipso exposcere? Beza. Haec omnia eo pertinent,
ut doceat Deum sum potentem esse, neminemque metuere, sicut homines, qui
metu, aut gratia aliorum quandoque jus pervertunt. Drusius.
world?] None can control him. Mundum per seipsum regit qui mundum per seipsum
condidit.

Verse. 17. Shall he that hates light govern?] The Hebrew is bind up the sore.
Obligaret vulnus, Junius.

Verse. 30. That the hypocrite reign not, least the people be ensnared.] The
Hebrew word translated hypocrite, signifies a man that walks in a cloud, or
has an artificial Ne regnet quis quam hypocrita. Beza.
covering, that men may not see and observe his steps. Grotius says, it is
better read, and more coherently to that which went before, Ne regnet homo
hypocrita, let not the hypocrite reign.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse 13. Vanum clamorem eorum, qui non ex animo Deum invocant. Drufius.
Audit] Exaudit, Psa. 127. 2. Id.
SUrely God will not hear vanity.] Shave signifies three things: 1. Vanity, and
so empty prayers. 2. Mendacium, such prayers wherein ones heart answers not his
lips. 3. Temerarium, he considers not his prayers, the rule why he prays,
according to Gods will, nor the end, whether he aim at Gods glory.

Verse. 14. Yet judgment is before him.] That is, he knows rightly to time his
own mercies. See Isa. 30. 18.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse 5. HE is mighty in strength and wisdom.] Heb. strength and heart, or
strength of Robur animi proprie fortitudo dicitur. Drufius. Eleganter dictum;
quasi dicat, afflictionibus constricti ut funibus quibusdam. Mercerus. Vincula
pedum proprie compedes dicuntur, manuum vero manicae. Drufius.
heart; wisdom is that which brings things in strength to the heart, and so
makes it strong.

Verse. 8. And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction.] Bound hand and foot, that is, have some such extreme affliction
upon them, as they know not how to get out of it.

Verse. 22. Who teaches like him?] In three respects: 1. With authority. 2.
Efficacy, Vel docens aut doctor, unde More Nebuchin, Doctor perplexorum, Quis
est talis doctor ut Deus, qui omnes doctrina sua illuminat. Drufius. Quis ficut
ille, id est, ei par aut similis est doctor, qui ita homines doceat suam
potentiam and magnitudinem suorum operum ei commonstre^, siquis modo attentus
esse velit discipulus. Mercerus.
teaches the heart. 3. With that condescension.

Verse. 26. Neither can the number of his years be searched out.] q. d. It is
unsearchable. Numeri annorum ejus nulla est pervestigatio, aeternus est. Nota
autem loqui de Deo Scripturam more hominum, quia tempori Deus non subjacet.
Mercerus.
The Hebrew word signifies a curious search, so as you would search for
abstruse mysterious things.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse 7. HE seals up the hand of every man, that all men may know his work.]
Lest they In manu omnium hominum signat, ur sciant omnes filii hominum opus
suum. Chald. Par. Qui in manu omnium hominum signat, ut noverint singuli opera
sua. Vulg. Lat. In manu omni^ hominis signat, utsciat omnis homo infirmitatem
suam. LXX. Non defuere qui ex hoc loco prou^ a vulgo versus est, Chiromantiae
patrocinium quaesivere. Hoc vult Elihu, quando nives and imbres demittit ex
alto Deus, manum cujusque patrisfamilias, sub dio in ag^is laborantis,
obsignat, id est, claudit, ut non possit opus facere unde fit ut recognoscat,
per otium scilicet inquirendo, quantum singuli in agro colendo laboraverint.
Amam. Antib. Bibl. l. 3. Inepte ex his verbis Chiromantiam satagunt defendere,
qui divinatoriam illam artem ex manuum inspectione non absque faece ethnicismi
ad nos delatam probant. Si enim literaturam inspicias Ebraicam, nullum ibi
deprehendes argumentum. Dieter. Ant. Bibl. Vide Glass. Philol. Sac. Tract. 1. c.
7. and Vales* de sacra Philos. c. 32.
know it, i. Praecludit ne operetur, tanquam sigill^ imposito: metaphora.
Junius.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse 6. WHereupon are the foundations thereof sastened? or who laid the
corner Psalm. 104. 5.
stone thereof?] It is founded upon its center, and leans upon it as its basis.

Verse. 7. When the morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God
shouted In tempore quo laudant simul astra matutina, and jubilant omnes turmae
Angelorum. Chald. Par. Quando facta sunt sydera, laudaverunt me voce magna
omnes Angeli mei. LXX.
for joy.] That is, all the Angels, as Chap. 1. v. 6.

The Angels stood admiring and rejoicing that God would make such a dwelling
place for man.

Verse. 28. Has the rain a father?] Jerome, Who is the father of the rain? That
Habetne parentem alium a me scilicet pluvia, qui eam procreat and mittat.
Mercerus in loc.
is, besides the Lord, Praeter me, Junius.

Verse. 31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the
bands of See Ainsw. on Gen 1. 14. of this 31. and 32. verses. and Mr Gatak*
Vindicat. of his Annotat. on Jer. 10. 2.
Orion?] God himself, because he had to deal with an Arabian, questioned him in
his own Astrology. See chapter 9. 9.

The Stars have influence into things here below. The Pleiades open the
earth, they make herbs and flowers grow, the Spring is when they arise once,
trees begin to sprout, and the plants do wax green. Orion produces cold, the
Winter comes when that shows it self.

Verse. 41. Who provideth for the Raven his food?] Animal cibi avidissimum: Some
Psa. 147. 4. See Luke 12. 24. Tradunt qui naturalem historiam scripserunt
corvum pullos recens natos quod albescant, per aliquot dies relinquere solitum,
donec nigrescant, and e nido excludere: interim quis eos alit nisi Deus? and
sunt qui dicant muscis genitis ex pu^resactione ctercoris eorum in nido ali
eos, dum in os eorum a Domino inseruntur. Mercerus in loc. Vide Schind. Lex.
Pentag* and ^ru^ium in loc.
say they are fed by a worm, others by flies, others by dew. They cry to God
after their manner, when they are hungry.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse 19. Have thou given the Horse strength?] The sense is, thou have not
given it Eq us ^^bu^ suum accipit a Deo, non ab ullo morralium. Drusius. i. e.
Hinnitu vehemen^issimo, quia fremitus gravitate cum tonitru comparatur. Est
autem his verbis elegantissim^ descriptio gene^^si equi. Junius.
him.

Have thou clothed his neck with thunder?] With neighing: i. Tremitu aut
hinnitu, Drusius; and he says his neck, because neighing comes from the neck.

Verse. 22. He mo^keth at fear, and is not affrighted.] He contemns all things
to be feared; so Prove. 1. 26. Your fear shall come; that which you fear.

Neither turns he back upon the sword.] If he sees the sword, he does not
therefore go back nor run away.

Verse. 29. And her eyes behold afar off.] She sees her prey afar off.
Aquila ut altissime volat, ita etiam acutissime videt. Dru^ius. Pulli aquilarum
non bibunt aquam, ut aliae aves, sed absorbent, and exugunt sanguinem animalium
recens occisorum quorum corporibus etiam vescuntur. Drusius.


Verse. 30. Her young ones also suck up blood; and where the slain are, there is
she.] Our Savior says, Where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort.

CHAP. XL.
Verse 15. BEhold now Behemoth which I made with thee, he eats grass as an
Ox.] Many Jam ecce Elephantem quem feci tecum. Junius. Alii intelli gunt
speciem quandam animalium magnorum, cu usmodi Elephas est, ut postea Leviathan
cetum sive balenam, ut suam potentiam Deus observari velit, non tantum in omni
animalium genere; sed etiam specialiter in illis ingentibus animalium molibus,
quorum alia terrestra, Behemot, alia maritima Leviathan. Quo sensu nihil
facilius, nihil omnino clarius, aut toti contextui congruentius. Nam and factus
est cumhomine, id est, eodem die quo and homo; and soenum comedit, and corporis
viribus praestat: and sic omnia deinceps facili fluunt filo. Atque ea est
sententia non tantum Aben Ezra doctissimi in Hebraeis, sed etiam O^colampadii,
Pellicani, Calvini, Merceri, Munsteri, Vatabli. Chamierus Tomo secundo de
Occumen. Pontif. l. 9. c. 11.
expound this of the Elephant, created the same day with man, viz. the sixth.
Elephas, quem per belluam intelligi voluit. Drusius.

Verse. 19. He is the chief of the ways of God.] That is, his works and
creatures. Reshith signifies here not principatum temporis, but dignitatis.

Hoc est, praecip^^ and primaria Dei creatura in genere quadrupedum, aut
animalium terrestrium. Drusius. CHAP. XLI.
THe description of the Leviathan given by Job here, will not agree to the
Mirum in modum hic aestuant Interpretes ut omnia and singula de Diabolo
explicent. Vide ^yram Carthus. Gregorium and alios, and nostris interpretibus
de balaens, vel si quod est aliud portentosae magnitudinis in mari animal,
omnia interpretantibus ad literam optime fluunt omnia. Vide Jun. Piscat.
Mercer. Genev. and alios. Amam. Antibarb. Bibl. l. 3.
Whale; For

1. It is said that he cannot be caught by any skill or strength of men, and
they cannot kill him or make use of him for their advantage, v. 1. to 11. but
our experience proves the contrary in regard of the Whale, for men hunt for
them, and catch and kill them, and make use of their bones and oil. 2. Ver. 5.
and 26. His scales or strong pieces of shields are his pride, shut up together
as a close seal, one is so near to another that no air can come between them,
now the Whales have no such mighty shields or scales, and his body easily
wounded with darts or javelins, and so taken.
CHAP. XLII.
Verse 5. BUt now mine eye sees thee.] There is a twofold vision of God, 1.
Fiduciall, Animi aut mentis oculus, non corpotis. Drusius. Clari^r rerum
cognitio visio appellatur, Pineda.
1 Cor. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 3. later end. 2. Beatificall. Mat. 5. 8. The first is
called sight for three reasons.

1. Because it is a discovery of things present. 2. Things real, no^
imaginary, Heb. 11. 1. 3. Because of the clearness of it, Objectum fidei est
cui non potest subesse falsum.
Verse. 6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.] 1. For my
own That is, either he sat down in the dust testifying his repentance, or his
was a great and deep repentance, like theirs who are humbled in dust and ashes.
Vide Mercerum. Ritu prisco paenitens in pulvere and cinere sedebat. Drusius.
emptiness, in my flesh there dwells no good thing. LXX. Vili facio floceipendo.
I care not a straw for my self. 2. For my own filthiness, polluted in my own
blood.

Verse. 8. Job out of special favor is called three times Gods servant in this
verse.

Verse. 9. The Lord also accepted Job.] His person was accepted before; gave
some visible token of his acceptance of Jobs prayer. Exaudivit precantem pro
eis. Drusius.

Verse. 11. Every man also gave him a piece of money.] Et dederunt ei
unusquisque Keshita, cujus ter in sacris mentio, Genesis 33. 19. Josh. 24. 32.
Nummus fuit Agui imagine signatus, indeque Keshitah, id est, Agnus appellatus
ut a pecude pecunia vetus, sic nummus Chaldaeorum aut Arabum proprius videtur
fuisse, e circumstantiis locorum in quibus fit ejus mentio. Valuit de nostro i.
d. ob Brerew. de Nummis Jud. c. 1.
nummum unum, Arias Mont. Et dederunt ei quisque nummum unum, Junius. One Lamb,
so the LXX. Ovem unam, Vulg. Chald. Par. A piece of money with a Lamb stamped
on it. Nummum agnae imagine signatum, Drusius.

Verse. 13. He had also seven sons and three daughters.] As many as he had
before. Many collect the immortality of the soul, and salvation of Jobs
children, because they were not doubled, as the rest of his estate was.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of PSALMS.
SO our Lord himself intitleth it, Luke 20. 42. but the Hebrew title, Tehillim
signifies Hymns or Praises. Jure parva Biblia dixer ^s Psalterium in quo
omnia quae in totis Bibliis explicatius tradita sunt, mira and jucundissim^
brevitate, in elegantissimum Enchiridion coacta sunt. Luth. Praefat. in librum
Psalmorum. Odae istae Davidis dicuntur, quod is multas veteres coll^gerit,
multas ipse, psallendi sciens, addiderit, aut per homin^s idoneos addi fecerit.
Caeterum dubitari non debet, quin multa accesterint Carmina posteriorum
temporum Esdra addente. Horum a^tem Psalmorum inter se distinctio jam olim non
eodem est. Exempli causa primus Psalmus in multis exemplaribus cum secundo
cohaesit. Grotius. Quicquid Moses vel in historia tradidit, vel in lege
praecepit, and quicquid caeteri Prophe^ae vel exhortando ad virtutes, vel
futura praedicando, scriptis suis commendarunt, id to^um in Psalmis breviter,
sed perspic^e, comprehensum fuisse animadvertimus: Omnia prorsus in illo velut
in magno quodam and communi Thesauro recondita atque conferta sunt bona. Riveti
Praefa^. ad Comment. in Psalm. Proph. Ut in Gentilismo Poetae illustres varii
suavissimis carminibus magnarum rerum arcana cecinerunt, and inprimis Davidis
seculo Homerus sapientissimus Ethnicorum effloruit, ita and in Republica
sanctissima certamen fuisse summorum ingeniorum in praedicandis Dei magnalibus
negari nequit. His omnibus superior David, cujus nomen non intra angustias
Palestinae conclusum, sed long lateque in orb terrarum, Asia and Africa
cumprimis, celebre fuit, quia divino motu mysteriorum maximorum sucubratione
occupatus ^ui^. ^orsh^i Dissertat. Theol. Penta Decas. Dissertat. 2. Certi
sumus quotquot Orthodoxi sumus, Spiritum sanctum esse ut totius Scripturae, ita
and Psalmorum autorem. Per ea autem organa hic au^or Psalmos dedisse videtur,
quorum nomina in inscriptionibus leguntur. Quibus tamen nulla scriptorum nomina
praenotata sunt, hos veteres nostri crediderunt ab iis compositos, quorum
proxime nomina in praecedentium Psalmorum inscriptionibus expressa habentnr.
Buccri Enarr. in Psalm. Praefat. Id quoque veteribus convenit, ab Esdra in unum
volumen has sac^as odas collectas and digestas es^e. Id. ib.


According to the Greek it is called (...), the Psalter. Though it consist much
of the first part of, prayer, and be full of petitions, yet in Hebrew it is
called, Sepher Tehillim, the Book of Praises, from the more honorable part.

The Book of the Psalms is an Epitome of the whole Bible, and is called by
Jerome the Treasury of Learning.

First take your greatest travel with the help of some learned Interpreter, in
understanding St John's Gospel, and the Epistle to the Romans, the sum of the
New Testament: Isaiah the Prophet, and the Psalms of David, the sum of the
Old. Dr Reinolds Letter to his friend Dr Villerius, concerning the study of
Divinity.

The profit of the Psalms is great, whether we beg counsel in difficulties,
protection in dangers, consolation in troubles; or lastly, if we desire to
celebrate the praises of God, and give him due thanks.

There are 150 Psalms, which some divide into five Parts or Books, as Bucer
Enarr. in Psalm. Praefat. has observed. Rivet. Praefat. in Psalm. Prophet. and
Ainsw. in beginning of Psalm. 41.

The first, from the beginning to the 40. The second from the 40 to the 72. The
third, from the 72 to 89. The fourth, from 89 to 106. The fifth, from 106 to
150.
David was the Author of most of the Psalms, says Ainsworth; of the whole
Book of Psalms, says Dr Gouge on Heb. 5. 7.. 44.

PSALM. I.
IT is put down without any Inscription or Title, and therefore it is uncertain
by Princeps hoc carmen (...). Quin auctorem tamen ha^es idem suum cum ^lii;
p^e^sque Davidem re^em and prophetam nulli dubitamus. Ser^nertus. Hujus Psalmi
paraphrasis Psalmus 119. Here are three gradations concerning sins, Subject^,
Qualities, Actions: 1. The subjects, Ungodly, sinners scornful. 2. Qualities,
Counsel, way, seat. 3. Actions Walk, stand, sit. They rise by steps like a
ladder, one round above another. Tres hic gradus describuntur male v^ven^ium,
eorum qui incipiunt, eorum qui pe^stant, eorum qui plane jam in mala Vita
acquiescunt. Grotius. In ^^inu^ istis tota hominum conversatio consi^^it, aut
enim ambulat, aut stat, aut sedet. Kimcbius in loc. Mr. Gataker is Cinno l. 1.
c. 1. opposes the gradation, yet many both Jews and Christians, are for it.
whom it was penned, whether by David, as most like it was, or by Ezra, who is
rather thought to have gathered them together, and joined them thus in one
Volume, as now we have them. Quidam dicunt hunc Psalmum quasi praesationem esse
Spiritus sancti, and ideo titulum non habere. Hieron.

The scope of the first Psalm is to direct men unto true happiness. It begins
and ends with blessedness.

It consists of two parts, Proposition and Confirmation, Junius. Doctrine and
Use.

First, Doctrine, describing a righteous man with his happiness, and the wicked
with his misery.

The Doctrine has two heads.

I. Concerning good men, the sum of which is, a good man is happy. He and his
happiness are described:

1. Negatively, showing what he does carefully shun. 2. Affirmatively, showing
what he does embrace and follow.
1. A description of a good man from the things he does not, viz. sin; set
out in three degrees, which are,

1. He does not walk in, that is, practice the counsel of evil or ungodly men;
that is, the evil which men of corrupt natures do in their own minds like of
and advise to do, and also persuade others to do. He neither approves and
likes of sin to practice it out of that liking himself has to it, nor yet
is ruled by the ill persuasions of evil men seeking to approve such bad
courses. 2. He does not stand in the way of sinners, that is, he does not go on
in the practice of those evils which corrupt men habituating themselves in the
ways of wickedness, do with constancy and greediness follow. Evil men notes
the natural corruption, sinners the habit of evil by constant practice. 3. He
does not sit in the seat of scorners, he is not so settled in sin, as to mock,
scorn and deride admonitions, reproofs and threatenings, as the wicked which
have attained the highest degree of sinfulness are accustomed to do, neither is
he a companion with such sinful men.
2. His description from what he does, viz. all good, set out in two principal
parts. Does meditate, or shall meditate. That is, usually meditateth the whole
revealed will of God not as opposed to Gospel. Meditatio legis est, non solum
in legendis scripturis, sed etiam in his quae scripta sunt faciendis. Hieron.


1. For his affections, and particularly that of Joy, they are rectified by
Gods Word. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, that is, he places his
comfort and felicity in the Word of God, in the knowing and following of it,
and enjoying the fruit of obedience to it. 2. For his practice, he exercises
himself in that Law day and night, that is, he uses all means to conform
himself unto it constantly, by meditating, conferring, reading, hearing. Vide
Mas. Comment. in 1 c. Jos. p. 25.
2. A description of his happiness, both

1. Allegorical and figurative, under comparison of a tree, in which are three
things. 1. Planting by the rivers of water, so is he grounded and planted in
the Psalm. 92. 8. John 15. 2.
Church, the body of Christ, where are rivers of water of life flowing
continually. 2. Bringing forth fruit in season, that is, abounding with the
fruits of righteousness, for the very doing good is a part of a good man's
felicity. 3. Freedom from fading, he never dies, he loses oot the sap and
life of grace which is in him.
2. Plain and express, all that he does shall prosper, every thing shall
succeed well with him, and work for his good.
II. Concerning bad men to illustrate the former point the more, which is

1. Briefly propounded by way of opposition, not so the wicked, howsoever men
judge, yet they shall not, neither do prosper. 2. More at large discovered in
regard of their Est autem Mots minutissima palea unde nullam prorsus utilitatem
homines capiunt, sed ventus dispellit eam ocius citius suaque agitatione damnum
infert, eo quod laedendo verberat facicm and oculos hominum ultro citroque
migrantium. Kimchiu^ in loc.
1. Sinfulness and present misery, by a similitude, they are the chaff which
the wind blows up and down, that is, they are tossed to and fro by sinful
lusts and temptations, as also by the judgments and curses of Gods hand. 2.
Unhappiness future, in that 1. They shall not stand in judgment, see Rev. 6.
three last verses, where Sinners shall not stare in judicio, so Rab. Kimchi in
loc. Vide Gatakeri Cinnum and Grotium: Stare in judicio, is to be quit in
trial, to be found upright.
there is an ample description of this judgment. That is, they shall not at
the last day stand with boldness, not acquitted nor absolved when they appear
before Gods judgment seat. 2. Nor stand in the Congregation of the righteous,
that is, shall not have a place among the godly, when they shall be gathered
together and assembled unto Jesus Christ.


Secondly, The Use, v. 6. He is well pleased with their way, and they shall
have good success in what they go about. See Job 23. 10.


Verse. 6. For the Lord knows, that is, loves, the way of the righteous.]
That is, their godliness, and their practicing it, therefore they must needs
prosper.

But the way of the ungodly shall perish.] He hates the way of the wicked,
which must be understood and therefore that way, that is, they in the way shall
perish, they shall be cut off in their sinful courses.

PSALM. II.
THis Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, and the establishing of it
notwithstanding all attempts to the contrary. Some of the Ancients conceived
this Psalm to be part of the first Psalm, Vide Hieron. But it is called the
second Psalm, Act. 13. 33. it is (...), wants a title, as the first Psalm; but
though it have no Title prefixed to show the Penman of it, yet it was penned by
David, Act. 4. 25. It is of a mixed kind, in respect of the matter
Problematicall and Didascalicall and Exhortatory, in respect of the end
Consolatory.

Four things are evidently set forth in this Psalm. Vere regius est hic
Psalmus, a rege, de rege, contra reges, and ad reges, and pro piis quoque
regibus eorumque subditis conscriptus. Martinius. Quare non est quae^entis ^em
igno^am, aut elicere volentis responsienem: sed arguentis improbitatem and
temeritatem incepti, and eventum irritum suisque auctoribus perniciosum
denunciantis. Hoc innui^ vocula quare: Frustra sunt concurus regum* and
populorum adversus regnum Christi: nulla eis est tumultuandi causa, rem
insipientiae plenam aggrediuntur. Martinius. Vide Jun. lib. 1. Pa^al. 91. de
his versibus 1. 2.


1. The enemies combination against the Lord and his anointed; the Heathens,
Kings, Princes, multitudes, authority, the power of Laws and Arms. 2. Their
consultation, Counsels united. 3. The resolution they take up in the
prosecution of these counsels, set themselves firmly, purpose. 4. The
frustration of all these in the fourth verse.
Verse. 1. Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?] An
interrogation of admiration, the Prophet conceiving it a rash inconsiderable
act: they have not cause. The Heathens, the Gentiles; The People, the Jews,
Act. 4. 25. both which were enemies to this Kingdom.

Rage.] Ragasch signifies to meet tumultuously, to convene with rage, and
declares the fury of the multitude, which is carried with a blind force and
like a torrent, and does all things inconsiderately and seditiously. The Greek
word whereby it is translated, Act. 4. 25. denotes rage, pride, and
fierceness, as of horses that neigh and rush into the Battle.

Imagine, or meditate.] This word is taken in a good sense, Psalm. 1. 2.

Vain thing.] Not only vain because there was no true ground why they should
imagine or do such a thing, but because successless, they labor in vain, they
could not do it.

Verse. 2. The Kings of the earth set themselves.] Will stand up, a word taken
from them that set themselves in rank and file, as when they intend a Battle.
This word is used, Numb. 22. 31. 1 Chronicles. 11. 14.

Verse. 3. Let us break their bands asunder.] Tam Christi quam ministrorum ejus,
it signifies to break with ^ase, it is used also Judge. 16. 12,

And cast away their cords from us.] This is the same with the other in another
expression, Eandem rem bis dicit at diversis dictionibus, sic enim mos est
linguae sanctae. Kimchius in loc.

Verse. 4. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh.] Sitting notes potestatem
judiciariam. Aug. Ezekiel. 1. 26. God rules all things here below. Sedet, id est,
permanet vel potius tanquam judex qui pro tribunali sedet jus dicturus, ut
Psalm. 9. 5. Drus. Quaes. Heb. God laughs at men's sins and destruction, Prove.
1. 27. Something is done by God which holds a proportion with deriding the
courses that others take. Humanitus dictum. Junius.

Verse. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.] He rules for the
Father My King in a peculiar way. Decretum scriptum and promulgatum. Vide
Dorshei Pentadec. Dissertat. 2.
and from him. John 17. 4. Him has God the Father s^aled.

Verse. 7. I will declare the decree.] Not secret, but manifested in the word.

Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.] Declared it by his
resurrection, Act. 13. 33. Romans 1. 4. so Lorinus on 1 Pet. 1. 3. expounds it.

Verse. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance,
and the Isa. 30. 14. Solent magni Principes similibus verbis obla^a optione
suam declarare benevolentiam, Est. c. 5. v. 3. Marc. 6. v. 23. Rivetus in loc.
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.] An allusion to great
Princes, when they would show great affections to their Favorites, they bid
them ask what they will, as Ahashuerus and Herod.

Verse. 9. Thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel.] This signifies
their utter destruction, so that there is no hope of recovery, a Potters vessel
broken cannot be made up again, Jer. 9. 11. Isa. 30. 14. see Dau. 2. 44. This
Proverb also signifies facility in destroying them.

Verse. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.] Inwardly
reverence See Psa. 86. 10. and 119. 74.
and outwardly obey him. Gladness and trembling are here joined together, as
fear and joy, Matthew. 28 8.

Verse. 12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry.] The Hebrew has Kiss the Son lest he
be angry: The Vulgar Latin otherwise, Apprehend you discipline. Herein the Bar
filius, Chald. pro Be^. Sic Aben Esra and Kimchi, and Christiani omnes, quidam
tamen ex Ebraeis referunt ad radicem Barar purgavit. Osculsmini purum, id est,
qui purus est, vel pure, id est, cord puro. Hulsius notis in loc. Osculi
honor, non solum divinus, sed etiam civilis erat, eoque in potentibus ac
fortunatis hominibus colendis u^ebantur, quod Hieronymus exponit Adorate, dicam
libere non placer. Favet meae sententiae, 1 Samuel 10. 1. Drus. Observat. l. 2.
c. 16. Vide Drus. ad disficil. loca, Genes. c. 118. Et Muis in loc. Drus.
quaest. and resp. quaest. 82. and Rivetum in loc.
Hebrew, (as Bellarm l. 2. De verbo Dei* c. 2. confesses) does more perplex
the Jews and invincibly prove Christ the Messiah to be God.

Kiss him osculo amoris, honoris, subjectionis, 1 King. 9. 18. Hos. 13. 2. Job
31. 1. Adore the Son, says Jerome ad Pammach. 27. See Genesis 41. 40. 1 Samuel
10. 2.

And ye perish from the way.] The Syriack Interpreter says, From his way.
Christ is the only way to his Father.

When his wrath is kindled but a little; blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.] The very horror of the word makes David presently (as it were)
to bless himself, like a man astonished and half frighted, or he makes a kind
of sudden stop, as it were an Aposiopesis, as if he durst not have said what
followed.

PSALM. III.
THe Titles of the Psalms are Canonical Scripture, as ancient as the Psalms
Titulus Clavis, say the Fathers, the Title of the Psalm is the Key of the
Psalm, it opens the whole Psalm. Non est ulla salus isti in Deo plane. Junius
There is no help at all for him. The like addition of a letter is in many other
places, as Psalm. 44. 27. and 92. 16. and 9^. 17. and 63. 8. and 125. 3. Job 5.
16. Ainsw.
themselves.

This is called a Psalm of David, because it entreats particularly and
literally of him.

Potest hic Psalmus and ad David, and ad Christum, and per eum ad omnes sanctos
pertinere. Hieron.

Verse. 2. There is no help for him in God.] The Hebrew has a letter more than
ordinary, which letter added does add to the signification, says Kimchi.

As if he should say, There is no help for him here in this world, nor any help
for him hereafter in the world to come.

Verse. 3. A shield to me, my glory.] All my glory and defense is in him.

Verse. 7. Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God, for thou have smitten all mine
enemies upon the cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.] q. d.
In former times when I have been as hardly distressed as now, by the assaults
of many and violent enemies, thou have put them all to rebuke and shame, and
quite destroyed their strength, and delivered me, therefore now do the same for
me, yea I know thou will do the same* 1 Samuel 17. 34.

Verse. 8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord.] The Hebrew is, Salvation unto the
Lord, Salus Domini, Arias Mont. so much his, that the holy Ghost puts
nothing between it and him.

Thy blessing is upon thy people.] Is is not in the Hebrew, we supply the
sense: The blessing of God imports all good things, and the love of God with
them.

Selah.] The Hebrew word signifies Elevation, or lifting up, whether of the
Verbum Sela, LXX. interpretes. Symmachus and Theodotius diapsalma
transtulerunt. Aquila vero, semper: and puto musici cujusdam soni esse
signaculum, aut certe perpetuitatem eorum quae praedicta sunt judicari, ut
ubicunque Sela apponitur: ibi sciamus non tantum ad praesens tempus, verum ad
aeternum, vel quae sequuntur, vel quae praecesserunt pertinere. Hier. in loc.
Dictionem Selah, plerique interpretum exponunt pro in aeternum, quemadmodum and
Chaldaica versio ejus per totum Psalterium. Similiter reddidit and Jonathan
Chaldaeus in oratione Abakuk, in hac queque significatione accipi solet in
precationibus nostris. Caeterum sapiens Rabbi Aben Ez a (piae memoriae) exponit
per vere. Ego autem dico, quod non sit dictio significativa, sed tantum
judicium elevandae vocis, and deducitur a verbo Salah quod exaltare significat.
Hoc est, in co loco ubi legitur haec dictio, suit elevatio vocis Psalmi. Cujus
rei argumentum est, quod non invenitur haec dictio nisi in carmine and Psalmis.
Non enim invenies eam, nisi in illo libro and in oratione Habakuk, quae and
ipsa carmine conscripta est. Rabbi Dav Kimchi Commentarium Hebraicum In December
primos ^ salmos Davidicos cum versione Lacina e regione per Paulum Fagium.
Selah juxta Kimchium elevationem significat est vocabulum musicum, cujus usus,
cum veterum musica nobis incognita sit, ignoratur. Hulsius in loc.
mind, to mark, or of the voice to strain it, or of both. Mr Wheatly reading
the Psalms in English, never read it. Menasseh Ben Israel says, it signifies
Eternity, and that the Jews reading the Old Testament in their Synagogues, do
also mention this word when it occurres.

PSALM. IV.
Verse 3. THe Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself.] Wonderfully,
gloriously, Segreg^vit sibi pium loquitur de se David in tertia persona, id
est, segregavit me ut regem me constitueret. Hulsius.
miraculously, for communion and service.

The Lord will hear when I call unto him.] Hear with approbation, that is,
accept his desire, or hear with effect, that is, grant the thing desired.

Verse. 4. Stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own heart upon your
bed, and be still.] Here are four duties, 1. Stand in awe of God. 2. Sin not.
3. How to keep us from sin, commune with your own heart upon your bed; and be
still, in unquiet times have a quiet heart.

Verse. 6. There be many that say, who will show us any good.] The word
translated Say, signifies also think, there is verbum cordis and oris.

Who will show us any good?] It is usual with the Hebrews to express wishes by
questions, Psalm. 14. 4. and 1 Chronicles. 11. 17. Romans 7. 18.

Show us.] Cause us to see, Ostendere bonum est benefacere, Vide Toletum in
Joan. 899. When this word refers to good, it signifies to enjoy, as Eccles. 2.
1. and 3. 13. being propounded by way of interrogation, it signifies a vehement
wish, as 1 Chronicles. 11. 17. Psalm. 55. 7. Romans 7. 24.

Good.] The word signifies real or apparent good, temporal or spiritual good;
here temporal, as the following words show. Any is not in the Hebrew, Who will
show us good, as if all happiness were found in temporal goods.

Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.] As if he should say,
Let David speaks of this as of the concurrent judgment and desire of all the
Saints. It is both an hebraism, thy lightsom countenance, and a metaphor. See
Numb. 6. 26.
the most of the world seek what they will, as riches, pleasures, and so forth,
yet my desire is of thy love and favor above all. The Psalmist uses such
expressions often, Cause thy face to shine upon us, Psalm. 119. 130. It is a
metaphor from the Spring-sunne rising, the trees bud and blossom, the birds
sing, and all things flourish and rejoice thereat, or from the cheerful
countenance of men, Genesis 31. 5. All affections are displaied in the
countenance, that is, give us a cheerful sense of thy reconciliation with us.
This lifting up of his face is opposed to hiding of his face, a sign of his
anger, Isa 54. 8.

Verse. 5. Thou have put gladness in my heart.] The gladness is greater, and put
into the heart, more intimate.

More than in the time that their corn and their wine increased.] Theirs in
regard of See Isa. 9. 3. Judge. 9. 27.
possession, estimation and choice, they placed their happiness in these
earthly things.

PSALM. V.
Verse 3. IN the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and look up] Here
are two military i. e. Tempestive faciam ut audias me. Junius. Significantius
ad verba accingam, aut ordinabo me tibi, militis instar strenui, qui ad primum
quodque tubae signum, paratus ad arma incunctanter exilit. Martin. ^e Roa.
words, 1. Marshal his prayer, Order it as in battel-array, Job 33. 5. and 32.
14. 2. Would be a Spy upon a Tower to see whether he prevailed, whether he got
the day, Hab. 2. 1.

Verse. 4. For thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickednesse] He
describes God from his own nature; As if he should say, O God, thou will free
me from Saul and his wicked flatterers, because thou art such a God as have not
pleasure in wickedness. See Hab. 1. 12.

Verse. 6. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy] That is,
The Court of the house. See Nehem. 6. 11. trusting in thy mercy.

Will I worship] Bow my self, Incurvabo me. Jun.

Verse. 9. Their inward part is very wickednesse] Wickednesses, Heb. in the
abstract and plural number.

Verse. 12. Wilt bless the righteous] Benedicere in Deo est benefacere.

With favor thou will compass him as with a shield] The Hebrew word signifies
to compass about as the crown the head, Coronabis eum. Chald. Par. Arias
Montan. the LXX. and Vulg. Lat. Coronasti nos.

PSALM. VI.
Verse 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.] A Father says; he does not say, Lord rebuke me not at all, but
not in thy Psalm. 38. 2. Jer. 10. 24.
wrath; nor do not chasten me at all (For he chasteneth every son whom he
receives) but chasten me not in thy displeasure.

Verse 6. All the night I make my bed to swim, I water my couch with my tears.]
Quanquam hyperbolicae sunt loquutiones, non tamen poetice amplificat David suum
maerorem sed vere and simpliciter, quam durus acerbusque fucrit declarat. Calu.
These are excessive figurative speeches, to express the greatness of his
sorrow. In the Hebrew they are also in the future time, I shall melt, I shall
make swim, that is, I usually melt and bathe, noting the continuance of his
affliction.

Totus ecce liquesco lacrymando,
Ipsis dum gemo conscius tenebris,
Thoro prae lacrymis meis madente,
Thoro, inquam, in lacrymis meis natante. Beza.
Verse. 9. The Lord has heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my
prayer.] Sometimes God neither hears nor receives a prayer, as of the wicked:
Sometimes he hears and does not receive, Quando audit pios ad salutem, non
accipit autem ad voluntatem eorum, cum nempe non conveniat cum ipsorum salute,
as Paul when he sought to be freed from the Angel he was not freed, 2 Cor. 12.
Sometimes he both hears and receives the prayer, as here David's. Cujus and
voluntati and saluti prospexerit, and desideriis illius sanctis satisfecit.

PSALM. VII.
CUsh the Benjamite.] Cush, that is, an Ethiopian or Blackmoor, Saul so called
Hoc est, AEthiopis de Saul Cis filio explanant, quem aiunt AEthiopem ibi
nuncupati propter morum improbitatem. Drus. Prove. Class. 2, 3. Saul AEthiopem
vocat propter sanguinarios, and tetros, and crudeles meres. Hieron.
for his black and ill conditions, otherwise he was an Israilite of the Tribe
of Benjamin. Because (says R. David Kimchi in loc.) he carried himself as an
Ethiopian, as the Ethiopian does not change his skin, so Saul did not change
his hatred toward David.

Verse. 7. So shall the Congregation of the people compass thee about.] It is an
allusion See Numb. 1. 52. and Chap. 2. Allu^it David ad coronam populi quae
Regem suum in solenni conventu circundat. Calvin.
unto the manner of the peoples compassing the Mount of God, and the Tabernacle
in the wilderness.

Verse. 12. If he turn not, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, and
made it ready.] There is mention made of two sorts of weapons which in the
battles of old time did the greatest hurt to the enemy, the Sword and the Bow,
the Sword when he was at hand, the Bow when he was far off.

PSALM. VIII.
Verse 2. OUt of the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength.]
Not only Sicut fundamentum principium est aedificii ita and suctio primum est,
unde cognoscitur miseticordia Dei erga homines qua afficit eos mox atque in
mundum prodierunt. Quoniam paravit ei sanctus benedictus Deus foramen in man
illis (matris suae) angustum instar foraminis ejus, non nimium amplum, alias
enim inundaret lac absque expressione, intraretque in os infantis plus quam
necesse esset, quod non fieret sine fastidio, sic quoque si nimis angustum
estet foramen, jam difficile estot puero lac elicere, neque hoc ipsum fieri
posset absque dolor labiorum suorum, quare omnia in modo and mensura fecit
Deus. R. D. Kimchi. in loc. Ex mirabili structura mammarum ad alendos infantes
eo alimento cui in utero assueverunt, quas mammas sine ullo magistro attrahunt
infantes. Grot. in loc.
the providence of God in newborn babes, framing them in the belly, providing
nourishment for them when they are born, and making them to suck the breasts;
but also the giving of saving knowledge to some of them in their tender years,
is able to refute all Atheists, and profane despisers of the glory of the Lord.
Dickson.

Some apply it to the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles and Ministers of
the Gospel.

Strengthen their mouths in confession, Luke 21. 25. In prayers: See Revel. 11.
5. 6. The cry of a child moves the bowels of a father.

The enemy.] All employed by the Devil. The Apostle expounds it, Heb. 2. 5, 7.


And the avenger.] The Devil principally, he sins properly out of revenge to
God.

Verse. 3. The work of thy fingers.] Not the works of his hands, but of his
fingers, Quoniam coeli and summa facilitate abs te sunt creati, and valde
artificiose conditi, ut su btilia ac pretiosa opera, quae summi artifices non
corporis rebore, non manibus, sed summis digitis consiciunt, ut vel maxim
pictores ph^ygiones Etz bagnoth a Rad. Tsabang pinxit nomen habet, quod sint
potissimum pingendi instrumentum. Tarnov. in loc.
to note his singular industry, his exquisite workmanship and art, and also his
special love and care over these works.

Verse. 4. What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that
thou visitest him?] He speaks of Christ as Mediator. See Heb. 2. 5.

(...)] Not as the dayspring from on high does the earth, Luke 1. 78. but, as
if a great Prince should go into an Hospital to look on a loathsome diseased
creature.

Verse. 5. For thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have
crowned him with glory and honor.] It is spoken of Christ, as the Apostle
expounds it, Heb. 2. 6, 7. Who was a little time lower than the Angels (so it
may well be rendered) in respect of his sufferings and death. See Junius. Or he
was made a little lower than the Angels, in taking upon him our Nature; The
Angelical Nature being higher than the Humane, as considered in it self.

Verse. 6. Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands] It is
not spoken of Christ as God, so he had a natural Kingdom, but this is by
donation, Christ as Mediator.

PSALM. IX.
Verse 10. ANd they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee.] Know thy
name spiritually, experimentally, especially his Goodness, Power, Faithfulness
and Wisdom. See Isa. 30. 18.

Verse. 13. Liftest me up from the gates of death] Natural, Spiritual, and
Eternal Death.

Verse. 16. The wicked is suared in the work of his own hands, Higgaion, Selah.]
Goliath was killed with his own Sword. R. David Kimchi. Or bi^ Palms, the
wicked^ own bands, called the palms or bollows for the secret manner of
working. Psalm. 17. 4. Rem meditandam sum. Jun. Higgaion Selah est acclamatio
vel epiphonema, continens admonitionem de officio nostro circa mitabilia Dei
opera; quod scilicet singulari affectu, and summo studio debemus illa meditati*
Amos. Meditatio Saela. Paul. Fag. Salus ista nobis meditatio and confessio. R.
Dav. Kimchi.


Christ's Justice has two acclamatory Notes, Higgaion, Selah, the like is not
found in all the Scripture, as worthy both of present admiration and perpetual
Meditation.

Selah is used ninety two times in Scripture, as these joined here, signify
extraordinary praise, joy, meditation.

Verse. 20 Put them in fear, O Lord: that the Nations may know themselves to be
but men.] That is, weak, mortal, miserable, in Hebrew Enoch, given to every man
for his doleful state and mortality, Psalm. 8. 5.

PSALM. X.
Verse 1. THis Psalm is in the Greek version a continuance and part of the
former ninth; Psalmum istum non dictavit de singulari quadam re, sed ut ^it
oration, quam orare potest quivis homo constitutu^ in tribulatione propter
inimicos suos. Nar: rat autem in eo vias impii optimentis pauperem, qui non
potest seipsum ab eo eripere. R. D. Kimch. Ab hoc Psalmo usque ad 147.
discrepant Ebraei a Graecis in Psalmorum citatione. Nos Ebraeos, Pontificii
Graecos and Vulgaram Latinam, q^ae ex Graeco traducta est, sequuntur: Qui nobis
est 22. ipsis est 2^. causa differ ntiae haec est Graeci Psalmos 9. and 10. in
unum confla^unt. Hinc Psalmus nobis 1^. ipsis est 10. Ea dissensio excurri^,
usque ad P^. 147. Illum enim rursum distribuerunt in duos. Credo ut 150.
Psalmos haberent. Alias tantum 149 numerassent. Amam Antib Bib^. ^ 3.
Whereupon the account of the Psalms following, does in the Greek books, and
such as follow them, differ from the Hebrew; the 11th Psalm being reckoned for
the 10th, the 12th for the 11th, and so forward: Yet to make up the number of
150 Psalms, they divide the 147 into two. Likewise the 114th and 115th Psalms
they make one, and the 116th they part in two. Ainsw.

Verse. 1. Why stand thou afar off, O Lord?] Heb. Why will thou stand? This
form of expostulation implies an earnest prayer, Lord, stand not far off.

Why hidest thou thy self?] Heb. Why will thou hide, (viz.) thine eyes, as Isa.
1. 15.

Verse. 3. And blesses the covetous whom the Lord abhors.] He thinks him not
blessed, because he does covet, but because he has the things he longs for: Or
it may be read, and so is by Ainsworth, The covetous blesses himself, he
abhors the Lord, so in the Margent, sometimes expressly he sets his heart
against God, ever interpretatively.

Verse. 4. God is not in all his thoughts.] Or, all his thoughts are, there is
no God, Nullum esse Deum, hae sunt omnes cogitationes ejus. Jun. The Text will
bear both. He studieth Atheism, as Psalm. 14. 1.

Verse. 5. As for all his enemies he puffs at them.] The gesture of one
contemning and refusing a thing with pride, as Mal. 1. 13.

Verse. 11. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten.] Oblivio and
reminiscentia sunt rerum praeteritarum, All things are present with God.

Verse. 14. The poor commits himself to thee.] That is, his ways and soul.
The Chaldee says, in te sperabunt pauperes tui.


Verse. 17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble.] That is, of humbled
persons, and them which are in distress either of body or mind.

Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.] That is, he
prepares our hearts to put up our desires, and lays a command upon his own ear
to hear.

PSALM. XI.
Verse 1. FLee as a Bird to your Mountain.] This notes his danger, who was
hunted as a Sicut avis quae volat de monte in montem de nide in nidum. Kimchi.
Vide Cl. Gatak. Cinnum l. 2. c. 18.
Partrich on the mountains, 1 Samuel 26. 20. and his fear, as in Isa. 16. 2.

Verse. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?] That is,
Videtur David per fundamenta intelligere extrema illa media quibus violentae
Saulu persecutioni resistere conabatur. q. d. Omnia mihi subsistendi media
praeciduntur. Hulfius in loc.
Laws are nothing worth. See Psalm. 82. 5. Gr^tius.

Verse. 5. His soul hates.] That is, Gods soul does hate, see Levit. 26. 11.
When the Hebrews would express a thing highly, they say, my soul, Saw ye him,
whom my soul loves? Cant. 6. My soul rejoices in God my Savior, said the
blessed Virgin, Luke 1.

Verse. 6. Upon the wicked.] That is, the hypocrite.

He shall rain snares.] Some expound it of ensnaring the conscience.

Fire and brimstone. Such was the wrath that fell on Sodom, and the Cities by
it, Genesis 19. 24. and figureth the vengeance of eternal fire.

Verse. 7. For the righteous Lord loves righteousuess.] Loves vehemently
righteousnesses, A choice expression.
Heb. Inward and outward righteousness, all manner of righteousness in all the
actings, that is, righteous persons, the Abstract for the Concrete, and in the
plural number, to show, that he only is righteous, who has all the parts and
kinds of righteousness, so the word is in the plural, Isa. 35. 15.

His Countenance.] Heb. His faces, Every discovery of God in mercy is his Or,
Their Faces, in mystery of the holy Trinity, See Psalm 149. 2. Ainsworth.
face, they shall have all his several ways of gracious discovery, all the
ways of love and delight.

PSALM. XII.
Verse 2. THey speak vanity.] They speak injuriously, every one deceives, or
would circumvent and overreach his neighbor. See Psalm. 25. 4.

With a double heart do they speak.] Heb. An heart and a heart. Cord and animo
duplici, verbis Salustii diceres aliud clausum in pectore aliud in lingua
promptum habent. Reperitur and cum negatione, 1 Paralip. 13. 33.


Verse. 6. As silver tried in the furnace of earth.] He speaks de experiontia
viva sanctorum, i. Bona fide unanimiter. Drus Prove. Class. 2. l. 3. Id est,
Optime and saepe numerus finitus pro infinito, ut Prove. 6. 31. Jun.
every time any promise is fulfilled, there is a trial of the sincerity of Gods
intention.

Purified seven times.] That is, Completely and perfectly; compare Ps. 119.
164. with Psalm. 34. 1.

PSALM. XIII.
Verse 1. HIde thy face.] That is, Withdraw thy favor. This is contrary to the
lifting up of the light of Gods face, Psalm. 4. 7. and imports trouble and
grief, and is caused by sin, the Prophet often prays against it, Psalm. 30.
8. and 104. 29. and 88. 15. and 69. 18. and 102. 3. and 243. 7. and 27. 9.

PSALM. XIV.
Verse. 1. THe fool has said in his heart, there is no God.] It is rather an
option, than an Omnis peccans stultus. A^ Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? Haee
^hrasis hunc sensum admi^tere potest. Impius sibi he persuadere conatur, aut
sibi aliter tamen sentienti, and convicto satis impenere satagit, non esse
numen, verum hoc ipsum nequit. 2. Impius dicit in cord suo, id est, ita seeum
tacit loquutus est impius, non est Deus, vel utinam non estet Deus, Gen 23.
41. in cord dicere, nihil aliud significat, quam tacit secum contendere, and
quasi murmurando quippiam profeire. Nisi enim ea phrasis ita acciperetur, non
potuisset Esaui cogitatio, si tantuni cordis fuisset, non oris citra peculiarem
revelationem Rebeccae innotuisse. 3. Impius dicit in cord suo, non est Deus,
id est, Deus non est objectum cogitationum ejus, neque circa divina sollicitus
est, prophanis intentus; praesertim cum ita vivat, ac si non estet Deus, ac
nullo sensu, aut reverentia numinis tangeretur, Psalm. 6. 14. Paul. Voetii
Theolog. naturalis Reformata. c. 2.
opinion, Austin. He could be content there were none.

In his heart.] None dare speak it, though he dare think it.

There is none that does good.] Of these three verses, the first, the second,
the third, see Junius lib. 2. Parallel. 4. Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 59. 7. 8.

Verse. 3. They are altogether become filthy.] Or rotten and stinking. Metaphora
verbi sumitur a vinis acidis, nam recedere venuste admodum usurpatur ab Ebraeis
de vino quando in vappam resolvitur, ut Hos. 4. 18. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 2.
c. 11.


There is none that does good, no not one.] That is, Very few, naturally
considered, Non est qui faciat bonum. Jun. Id latinius diseretur non est qui
faciat been, ne quidem unus. Druf. Observe. Sac. l. 2. c. 11.

Verse. 4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people
as they eat bread?] q. d. If they knew whom they did devour, they would never
devour them.

My people] That is, The poor, they are Gods people, both because they are
within the Covenant, as also in respect of their estate and condition, because
they are poor the Lord takes protection of them.

As they eat bread.] Without fear and resistance, with delight, continually.

Verse. 7. When the Lord brings back the Captivity of his people, Jacob shall
rejoice, i. A tyrannide Satanae and servitute peccati. Junius.
and Israel shall be glad.] He means it of the spiritual Captivity (for neither
his, nor his Subjects in his time were molested with the natural, God having
subdued to him all his enemies round about) then Jacob and Israel, that is, all
Gods chosen so delivered shall rejoice and be glad.

PSALM. XV.
THe substance of the whole Psalm is a Question and an Answer.

The Question is, Who are the members of Gods Church upon earth, that shall
come to life eternal in Heaven?

Verse 1. Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle?] That is, Who shall have communion
with the Church here?

Tabernacle fitly expresses the movable estate of the Church in this world,
Exodus 26. 2. Sam. 7. 1, 6. 1 Chronicles. 17. 5.

Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?] Be received to Heaven: This notes a durable
estate. Ainsw. And Grotius interprets it of Mount Sion, Psalm. 2. 6. In Sione
regia Davidis, ubi tunc erat arca. Grot.

The Answer is made in the rest of the Psalm. And in this Answer is contained a
Description of the parties:

1. By their Properties and Marks, verse. 2. It means the integrity that is
before God in heart and spirit, Genesis 17 1. Deuteronomy. 1^. 13. ^a^th 5. ^^. This must
first ^^ in the heart, Psalm. 119. 80. i^^n in the ways Psalm. 18. 33. and 119. ^.


1. He that walks uprightly.] That is, In truth and sincerity of Religion,
which stands in the sincerity of faith, and a good conscience. 2. And works
righteousness.] He speaks of particular justice here, that whereby we give to
every man his right or due. 3. And speaks the truth in his heart.] Without
all guile or flattery.
And because we are easily deceived in general sins, in the third, fourth and
fifth verses, there are set down more evident and sensible notes of sincerity,
justice and truth.

Verse. 3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue.] That is, Speaks to his
neighbors disgrace behind his back.

Nor does evil to his Neighbor.] In any act of injustice or cruelty to his
hurt.

Nor takes up a reproach against his Neighbor.] That is, Receives and
entertains willingly any reproachful tale against him. Some expound it, Greedy
to take it up Non accepit, nemp^ in os suum, at Exodus ^0. 7. Grot.
when another reports it. The word signifies elevare, to lift up a report, one
says a little, and he says more.

Verse. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned.] He contemns wicked persons
See examples of such carriage, 2 King. 13. 14. Esth. 3. 2. Luke 23. 9.

But he honors them that fear the Lord.]

He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.] Makes conscience of his
word and promise, especially if it be confirmed by oath.

Verse. 5. He that puts not out his money to usury.] Some interpret it of
oppressive Heb. Silver, that is, Money usually made of silver.
lending: Others of taking increase for bare lending to the poor. Usury is
fitly called Biting, because it consumes the borrower and his substance.

Nor takes reward against the Innocent.] Gives testimony without bribery or
partiality.

He that does these things shall never be moved.] He that in his endeavor does
all these things shall never be cut off from the Church as an Hypocrite.

Hac quisquis vitam ratione exegerit; ille.
Ille Dei foelix aeternum monte quieseat. Beza.
PSALM. XVI.
THe whole Psalm (say some) is to be understood of Christ, as well as David,
Vide Rivetum.
as Act. 2. shows.

Verse. 2. My goodness extends not to thee.

3. But to the Saints that are in the earth; and to the excellent in whom is
all In respect of his essential glory. Merita Christi habent in se gratiam
invisceratam I^clytis. Arias Montanus. Magnificis in operibus bonis. Chald.
Paraph. Magnificis. Junius.
my delight.] It was from the Father that Christ was sent, and that his service
was accepted, as Mediator, it may be opened by Heb. 10 5. God was not profited
by all that he did.

The Excellent.] The word in the original signifies the magnificent ones, those
which have magnificent spirits, and are exceeding glorious.

Verse. 4. Their drink offerings of blood will I not offer.] The drink offerings
were Vide Gatakeri. Cinnum. l. 2. c. 10. Potabant enim gentes istae sanguinem
sacrificiorum, saepe and humanum Grotius. Vide Rivetum and Junium in loc.
an appendix to other Offerings. They signify two things, 1. The pouring out
of their souls in the service of God. 2. The satisfaction that they took
therein. Paul alludes to this, Phil. 2. 17.

Some think he means the Gentiles which poured out blood as a drink offering.

Parisiensis de legibus gives three reasons why their drink offerings were of
blood, Major Honor, Difficilior Servitus, Humilior Subjectio. Nothing so near
to the soul as the blood; Therefore it was a greater honor to the Devil, yea
the blood of their Sons and Daughters. God required but the blood of beasts.

Verse. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance.] Christ speaks this as
Mediator, thou maintainest my lot. Some refer it to the words following,
Christ's inheritance in his people: Others to the words foregoing, God is my
portion, both may be meant.

Verse. 6. The lines or cords are fallen unto me in pleasant places.] An
allusion to the division of inheritances, which was by lines, Psalm. 105. 11.
and 78. 55. 2 Samuel 8. 2.

Verse. 7. My reins also instruct me in the night season.] My most inward
thoughts Cor intelligit renes consulunt.
chasten me for my daily sins. The reins are the inmost parts of a man, Psalm.
26. 2. Psalm. 139. 3. Psalm. 51. 8.

Junius thus explains it, Spiritus ejus omni quietis tempore intimas meas
voluntates, and studia dirigit, quorum sedem renibus Scriptura tribuit. Verse.
8. I have set the Lord always before me.] As a Judge and observer in point of
reverence and dependence.

There are three things in that expression, 1. Dignitas objecti, the object he
always looked upon, God. 2. Firmitas fidei, Christ walked by faith as well as
we, though not faith in a Mediator. 3. Temporis diuturnitas, looked always on
him.

Because he is at my right hand.] Will stand by me as a second.

I shall not be moved.] Shall keep my standing in the way of grace.

Verse. 10. For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thine holy De his versibus 8, 9, 10, 11 Vide Jun. l. 1. Paral. 88. Act. 2. 25,
26, 27, 28. Net my body in the grave, nor my soul, in statu separato, from the
body. Doway notes.
one to see corruption.] Neither by way of putrefaction here, nor dissolution
hereafter.

Now Calvin and Beza sometime corrupt this Text, always pervert the sense, and
most absurdiy oppose themselves against all ancient holy Fathers concerning the
Article of Christ's descending in soul into the part of hell called Limbus
Patrum is largely noted, Genesis 37. Act. 2. and 1 Pet. 3. and Protestants here
translate grave for hell. But of this place Rivet solidly disputes in his
Comment, so does Chamier, Junius, Ames upon Bellarmines 2d Controversy. Beza
and Drusius upon the 2d of See Ainsw. Vide ^mamae Antib. Bib. l. 3.
the Acts.

Verse. 11. Thou will show me the path of life.] Christ speaks this of himself,
his glory; For he spoke before of his own Resurrection. Rivet says, It is to
be understood of experimental knowledge, when the thing it self is given and
possessed.

In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for
ever more.] Ut piensm illam ^aetitiam exprimat Propheta, u^itur plurali numero
lae^i^iarum, ut una si^ instar omnium, and in se comprehendat, veram omnem
laetandi materiam, omne laetitiarum genus, and earum copiofissimam abundant^am.
Rivet. in loc.
Pleasure is the sweetness of joy, the joys that the Saints have there, shall
be sweet and refreshing.

PSALM. XVII.
Verse 3. I Am purposed.] That is, I have designed so, Psalm. 37. 12. Hinc
ostendo cl^mas^e me quoniam exaudisti me. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 14.


Verse. 6. I have called upon thee, for thou will hear me, O God.] I do call
upon thee, because thou hear me, O strong God. So Junius.

Verse. 8. Keep me as the apple of the eye.] David to express the special care
that Id est, Studiosussime, ut homo solet pupillam oculi sui. Sic Deuteronomy. 32. 10.
Junius.
God has over his sons, says thus, thou have a special care over me, thou
guardest me many ways, as the apple of the eye is guarded with five tunicles.

Verse. 10. They are enclosed in their own fat.] That is, They are very fat, Et
desideriis suis omnibus circumfluunt, Jun.

Verse. 11. They have now compassed us in our steps] And elsewhere, They mark my
i. Observant me and meos. Junius. Declinando and speculando aucupum instar
laqueos nobis ponunt. Vide Psalm. 10. 10. Hulsius in notis.
steps. It is an allusion to hunters, who go poring upon the ground to prick
the Hare, or to find the print of the Hares claw, when the Hounds are at a
loss, and can make nothing of it by the sent.

Verse. 14. From men which are thy hand] Wicked men are so called, because of
their violence, so the scourge of God.

Men of the world] Mere worldly men, whose spirits, desires, hopes, ends are
worldly. See next words.

Which have their portion in this life,] Two things make a thing ones portion,
The Saints may have a great part in this life, but it is not their portion.
1. That which he chooses. 2. That wherein he receives satisfaction, hoc est,
Nihil cum altera vita commune habent. Jun.

Whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure] It is hid to them who it is
that fills i. Optimis rebu metonymia. Jun.
their bellies, viz. God; They know him not, neither do they acknowledge his
gifts.

Verse. 15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness] The
perfection Out of the sleep of death, death is a sleep. isa. 26. 19. i.
Resurgam e mortuis Junius. Cum tenebrae mortalitatis transierint mane a stabo
and contemplabor. Aug. Videbo te perfectissime ficuti es, and similis ero tibi
quum pa^efactus fuerit Christus glorioso adventu suo. Jun.
of the Image of God wrought in the Saints after this life. Mollerus seems to
approve of this. The Spirit of God uses but this and two other words, for the
Image of God in us. This word is used for a corporeal similitude, Exodus 20. 4.
2. Intellectual, Numb. 20. 8. so here, God shall then gloriously manifest
himself to his people.

With thy likenesse] It may be referred to awake with, or in thy Image, having
thy glory imprinted upon me, 1 Cor. 15. 49. or it may be referred to satisfy,
I shall be perfectly like thee, both of them may be taken in, as 1 John 3. 2.

PSALM. XVIII.
THe servant of the Lord] So in the Title of the 36th Psalm, so called, 1. For
The hand of Saul, the palm or flat of the hand, Heb. The fist of Saul.
his eminent holiness, a man after Gods own heart.

2. Because of his public employment, fought the Lords battles, had thirty
deliverances, and eight from Saul, his special enemy.

Verse. 2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, and
my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and
my high Tower.] q. d. There is an allsufficiency in God on which I will rely.

In this one verse David has nine several expressions, to show God to be the
full object of his faith in the times of all his distresses; As 1. He is
Jehovah. 2. He is my Rock. 3. My Fortress. 4. My Deliverer. 5. My God. 6. My
Strength. 7. My Buckler. 8. The Horn of my Salvation. 9. My high Tower.

Verse. 4. The floods of ungodly men made me afraid] It is frequent in Scripture
to Heb. Of Belial.
compare Nations and people to waters, especially in the Revelation, when
violent to floods.

Verse. 20. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness.]

Object. Psalm. 143. 2.

Answ. There is a twofold Righteousness, One of the Cause, Another of the
Person; His Cause was good, there was no such thing as they laid to his charge,
But in thy sight, no flesh living shall be justified, in respect of the
righteousness of the person.

Verse. 21. I have not wickedly departed from my God] Though I have and do sin
Non unum aliquem lapsum significat. Some sin which he more specially was in
love with, which he was most easily drawn into, and whereby he had been most
ensnared.
every day, yet is not a departure from God.

Verse. 23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity] Some conceive this sin was lying. David often dissembled, therefore
he prays Psalm. 119. Take from me the way of lying: Others think it was
uncleanness, therefore he says in the same Psalm, Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity.

Verse. 25, 26. With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, with an
upright In the three former words, the same word is used both of God and man,
but here two diverse words. The word that concerns man is used once more, Job 9.
20. Recte exponit Kimchi juxta perversitatem e us ei retribues. Similis
loquendi modus est, Levit. 26. 24. Ostendit Propheta Dei consuetudinem, quod
unicuique reddat secundum opera sua, and sicut cum benignis benign agere
selet, sic qu^que efficiat, ut impiis and perversis infoeliciter and perverse
omnia cedant, idem Hebraismus occurrit, 2 Samuel 22. 27. Hu sius.
man thou will show thy self upright.

With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward.]

The meaning is no more in general, but Gods judgment shall agree with their
manners. God will carry himself otherwise to the wicked than the godly. God
reckons up three kinds of good men, Merciful, Upright and Pure; Froward,
Crooked or Perverse is opposed to all three, 2 Samuel 22. 27. The same matter is
handled, but the letters transposed, to note some singular thing in this, how
the Lord changes himself to the subtle and crafty deceivers, and takes them in
their own craft.

Verse. 32. It is God that girdeth me with strength] That is, Raises up a
strong resolution i. Fortem me reddit. Metaphora vel a baltheo, vel ab ipsis
renibus sumpta, in quibus Scriptura quandoque vigorem ac robur collocat.
Fesselii Advers. Sac. l. 5. c. 9.
in me.

Verse. 33. He makes my feet like Proverbii forma dicitur de velocissimis: Quod
sumptum ab ejus animantis pernicitate quae tanta est, ut AEgyptii sacerdotes in
hieroglyphicis non aliter velocitatem significaverint, quam per cervum
currentem, velociores foeminae, cum pondere nullo supervacuo graventur. Drus.
Prove. Class. 2. l. 5.
Hindes feet, and sets me upon my high places] 2 Samuel 22. 24. Hab, 3. 19.

PSALM. XIX.
Verse 1. THe Heavens declare the glory of God] That is, Offer unto us fit
occasion of Lumen naturae. Quod sint hominibus veluti praecones quidam
sapientiae Dei. Rivet.
glorifying God when we see their excellency and order.

Verse. 2. Day unto day utters speech] That is, The providence and turnings
of Eructar sermonem, i. Indefinenter profundit, ut fons perennis aquas
profundit largiter; Metaphora. Junius. Vide Jun. lib. 2. Paral. 16. Romans 10,
18, 19, 20, 21. Isa. 65. 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 32. 21.
every day declare the glory of God, and show his handy work.

Verse. 4. Their line is gone out through all the world.] By which word he
shows, that the heavens being so curious a fabric, made (as it were) by line
and level, do clearly, though silently preach the skill and perfection of God.

Verse. 5. Which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber] Because his beams
Vide Junium.
are prolifical.

Verse. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect] Having spoken in the beginning of the
Lumen gratiae.
Psalm of the Heavens, and Sun; now he treats of the word of God, which is as
necessary as the Sun. Satius est ut Sol non luceat quam ut non doceat
Chrysostomus.

The whole word of God, all these titles here are used promiscuously for the
word of God.

Verse. 9. The fear of the Lord is clean] That is, The Doctrine of the fear of
God.

Verse. 10. Sweeter also than honey, and the honey-comb] He does not mean the
honeycomb barely, that is the vessel wherein the honey is kept, but the honey
that flows or drops immediately, and naturally without any art, which is the
purest honey.

Verse. 11. In keeping of them there is great reward.] And from keeping them,
Recto fecisse ^^^rces est.
not only a reward after, or for the keeping of them, but the observing of Gods
Commandments is a reward to it self.

Verse. 12. His errors.] Practical, not Doctrinal.

Cleanse thou me from secret faults.] Secret not only to other men, but
himself, even such secret sins as grew from errors, of which he said, Who can
understand his errors?

Verse. 13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins.] Two things make
Hold in by a powerful and effica^ious restraint.
a presumptuous sin:

1. When committed against knowledge. 2. When resolutely.
Some say this Psalm was penned after David's great revolt from God, he
intimates, that there is a great deal of pride and presumption in every such
revolt from the Lord.

The great transgression.] That is, The unpardonable sin, it is above
presumptuous sins.

Verse. 14. Let the words of my mouth.] The outward acts of prayer and praise.

And the meditations of my heart.] That is, Inward ejaculations.

PSALM. XX.
Verse 3. REmember all thy Offerings, and accept thy burnt Sacrifice.] Or turn
thy burnt This has respect to the Law, which appointed part of the oblation to
be burnt on the Altar to God with Oil and Incense, Levit. 2. 2. Hoc est, Te and
preces tuas gratiose accipiat. Allegorice ad sacrificiorum oblationem
alluditur, quibus ignem de Coelo quandoque misit Deus and comburendo in Cinerem
conver^it, eoque grata esse sibi declaravit. Glass. Rhet. S^c.
Offering into ashes. It is translated, the Lord accept, because God had
sometime witnessed his acceptance by sending down fire to burn the Sacrifice,
Levit. 9. 12.

Verse. 4. Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy
counsel,] That is, Fulfill not only thy desire and aim of thy prayer, but in
that very way, by that very means, which thy judgment and counsel pitched upon
in thine own thoughts See Ainsw.

Verse. 9. Save Lord, let the King hear.] So Junius, and we. The LXX have it,
Ainsworth says, by the King is meant Christ. Sentiat Rex opem a precibus
nostris. Grotius.
Lord, save the King, and hear us in the day that we call upon thee.

PSALM. XXI.
Verse 3. FOr thou preventest him with the blessing of goodness. That is, When
David never Melius in Hebraeo: circumdedisti eum beneficiis bonitatis. Grotius.
Vide illum in Psalm. 18. 6.
asked such blessings at Gods hands, even then did the Lord bestow his liberal
blessings upon him, as namely this, when David was following his Fathers sheep,
and walking in his calling, thence the Lord took him to be King over Israel.

Verse. 6. Most blessed.] Blessings, Heb. not Benedictum, but Benedictiones. See
Pones cum benedictiones. Arias Montanus. Certum est hac loquendi forma exprimi
uberem bonorum copiam affluere Regi, utmerito Divinae benevolentiae exemplar
esse possit: vel etiam ut inter precandum vulgo futurum sit ejus nomen celebre
ad exemplum. Calvin.
Calvin, Full of blessings. A good Magistrate.

PSALM. XXII.
THis Psalm is a prophecy of the Suffering, Death and Resurrection of Christ,
Argumentum Psalmi, e^si aliqua ex part and certis tantum versibus ad Davidem
accomodari potest: tamen non dubitamus proprie ad Christum per inere, de quo
David per Spiritum Dei prophetavit. Junius. Vide Hieron.
and the glorious fruit that shall follow thereupon in the seed and service
that shall be performed unto God.

It is wholly spoken in the Person of Christ, because the New Testament does
apply sundry passages of this Psalm unto Christ, as Mat. 27. 46. John 19. 23,
24. John Christus instar cervae matutino tempore horribi^^ et exagitatus in
passion^ sua fuit. Glassi^.
20. 25, 27. Heb. 2. 12.

It is called the Hind of the morning, Cantic. 2. 9 Christ is lovely as the
Heart. Swift to save his Church, as the Heart, Cantic. 2. 17. Beset with Dogs as
the Heart, verse. 16. Is at war with the Serpent, as the Heart. See Ainsw.

Verse. 2. My God, my God.] Mi Deus fortis, mi Deus fortis. Junius. Christ Cum
Christus Psalmi verba recitaret credendum est ea protulisse ut habentur in
Ebrae, ad quod accedit, quod, qui aderant irrisores, abusi sunt paranomasia
nominis Eli and Eliae, ut dice^ent Christum Eliam appellate. Rivetus in loc.
speaks this Psalm to God his Father, The Hebrew is AEli, AEli, Lammah
g^azahtani; which words our Lord uttered on the Cross, Matthew. 27. 46. (save
for the later be used the Sy^iack, Sabachtani, of the same signification) At
which the profane Jews mocked, saying, That he called for Elias, Matthew. 27.
47, 49.

In that he calls God twice his, and pours out his complaints into his bosom,
it is not an obscure Confession of Faith, says Calvin. According to faith, he
says, My God, my God: According to present feeling, Why have thou forsaken me?

Verse. 3. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel!]
That is a glorious Title which God has, Psalm. 56. 2. Tremellius with the
Vulgar renders it, Laus Israelis. Ainsworth, The praises of Israel, and so they
apply it to God. He is frequently called the praise of Israel, and Israel the
praise of God, Deuteronomy. 10. 21. Jer. 17. 14. as he is called the hope of Israel,
and the fear of Isaac, the object of their praise, because the God to whom
Israel gives praise: Others read it as we, or Inhabiting the praises of Israel.

To inhabit praise signifies two things:

1. That he always gives them matter of praise. 2. Makes them to perform the
duty of praise. Where God has his constant residence, he is said to dwell, as
in Heaven, and in the souls of his people.
Verse. 4. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver
them.] Christ helped his faith in his Agony with the experience of the great
things God had done for his people of old.

Verse. 11. For there is none to help.] Nullus prater te, Junius. He that looks
up Non est auxiliator, id est, Non tantum qui mihi sit auxilio, sed etiam qui
esse possit, qui mihi possit in tantis malis opem far praeter te unum, ut
inde inferat, tu qui nunquam deseris eos, qui omnibus rebus destituti ad te
solum opitulatorem in adversis confugiunt, ne procul discedas a me in extremo
hoc and gravi conflictu. Rive^^^.
to God for help, acknowledges that there is no help in any thing else.

Verse. 12. Many Bulls have compassed me.] Now he complains of the cruelty and
fury of his enemies: And first, He compares them to Bulls, then to Lions, and
thirdly to Dogs.

Buls] Full of might and malice, Psalm. 68. 31. Scimus ubi accensa est taurorum
ira, quam terribili impetu ferantur. Calvin.

Strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round.] That is, fat ones, that mountain
was famous for fat pastures, Deuteronomy. 32. 14.

Verse. 14. All my bones are out of joint.] Disparted, are sundred, in the
Hebrew, Et separaverunt se. Rivet.

Verse. 15. My strength is dried up like a potsherd.] Which is baked in the
fire, that Vigorem intelligit quem nobis suppeditat radicalis humor. Calvinus.
is, there is no more moisture in me than in a baked potsheard, he was almost
resolved into dust already.

Verse. 16. For Dogs have compassed me.] 1. In respect of churlishness, Mat. 7.
6. 2. Of filthiness, 2 Pet. 1. 22.

They pierced my hands and my feet.] Some of the Jews have striven with great
malice to corrupt this Text, for in stead of Caru, they pierced, they will
needs Vide Rivetum and Bit^^erum in loc. Ipsi Masorae auctores in sua marginali
nota tale quid annotant, quod luculenter evincit de Christo patiente
intelligendum esse versum. Glass. in Philol. Sac. Vide Junium.
read Caari, that is, as a Lion, but the Massorites who registered the words
and letters in the Bible, do testify, (or rather R. Jacob Chajim and Compiler
of the Masora) that in some corrected Copies it is written Caru, they pierced,
and in the Margent Caari, both put together, because they pierced Christ's hands
and feet with Lion-like cruelty; such a piercing as was like digging, or such a
piercing as a Lion makes with his claws.

The LXX. have it, They pierced my hands. John Isaac the Jew in his answer to
Lindanus, says, that he saw an old copy in his kindreds hand, in which the
Text had Caru.

Verse. 20. The sword.] A violent death, 2 Samuel 12. 10.

My darling.] That is, my soul, or my life. Anima^ unicam vocat, ut and Psalm.
35. 17. quod summo amore etiam complecteretur, sicut pater unicum filium, Genesis
22. 2. Hulsius.


From the power of the dog.] All his enemies which he called dogs before, now
he calls dog, to signify their union in evil.

Verse. 21. Save me from the Lions mouth,] Full of rage and fury. See 2 Timothy 4.
17.

Verse. 29. All they that be fat upon earth.] Not only men that have a corporal
Disch^ei Ere^z pingues terrae, per metaphoram dicuntur divites, potentes and
succulenti, ut pinguedo terrae, Genesis 27. v. 28. and 29. abundantiam frumenti
and vini significat. Rivetus in loc.
fatness, but metaphorical; the great rich men: id est, secundis rebus
fruentes, prosperantes; periphrasis, Junius.

Shall eat.] This refers either to holy things, receiving the word, or shall
enjoy their worldly good things.

PSALM. XXIII.
Verse 1. THe Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.] This verse contains a
summary collection Rivetus in loc. See Ainsw. Videtur David hanc similitudinem
libentius usurpasse, quod ipse curam pastoritiam aliquando exercuisset, and
quaecunque ad eam pertinent propria experientia nota haberet. Rivetus in loc.
of the whole Psalm. By the supply of one proposition it makes up a full
syllog^sm. He whose shepherd is the Lord cannot want, My shepherd is the Lord,
Therefore I cannot want.

The word Lord, especially in the Psalms, and with the note of propriety,
notes Christ the Mediator, Psalm. 110. 1. and 147. 5. Christ often calls himself
the good Shepherd in John, Joh. 12. and elsewhere. Two things especially commend
a shepherd, his care and his love.

My shepherd.] That is, such a one as has special care of and love to me as
his sheep, See Psalm. 77. 21. and 78. 53.

I shall not want.] Want is opposed, 1. To perfection, Perfectum est cui nihil
deest, so it implies imperfection. 2. To fruition, so it implies destitution,
desolation, so here.

Verse. 4. Of the shadow of death.] That is, the greatest dangers. That darkness
Phrasis est in Scripturis frequens, pro praesentissimo pericul^, ut Job 3. v. 5
and 12. 22. Psalm. 44 20. Alludit David ad obscuros recessus aut ferarum
cavernas: quo si quis accesserit, statim primo ingressu occurret mortis terror.
Calvinus.
which comes upon a dying man a little before he gives up the ghost. Tenebrae
desissimae quales oboriuntur jamjam morituris. Vide Job 10. v. 21. Rivetus.

Verse. 5. My cup runs over.] An allusion to the Hebrew feasts, one had his
portion of meat and cup set together. So Rivet.

Verse. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.]
Not only I shall have goodness and mercy exercised for me now and no more, but
they shall follow me. The Hebrew word signifies to persecute, to follow summo
studio and diligentia. Its the same word that is used Psalm. 34. 15.

PSALM. XXIV.
Verse 1. THe earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof.] The Apostle Paul, 1
Cor. 10. in Vide Jun. l. 2. Paral. ^8. Vide Rivetum and Grotium.
two places inculcates this speech, v. 26. and 28. with a different end, and
yet most conveniently for both, by which he shows us, how profitably out of one
and the same place of Scripture, by necessary illation, diverse instructions may
be drawn; and how dexterously it is to be done.

Verse. 2. For thou have founded it upon the seas.] viz. The earth, because the
waters Verba Davidis sic intelligi possunt, ut doceat Propheta, quisnam ab
initio creationis aquae situs fuerit, quod sc. terrae aqua injacea^, Amama
Antibarb. Bibl. lib. 3.
which naturally would stand above the high mountains, are by the Word of God
gathered together, and thrust under the earth, that the dry land might be
inhabited. See Job 28. 25.

Verse. 6. This is the generation of them that seek him.] Not only so at one age
or some time, but the generation. Dor among the Hebrews is taken, pro aetate,
seculo, and pro hominibus unius aetatis, or unius seculi. See Genesis 6. 9.

That seek thy face, O Jacob, Selah.] The paricle O is not in the Original,
and Some say, The God of Jacob should be supplied. Others say, God is pleased
to style himself by the name of Jacob, being the God of Jacob. Some say, the
children of Israel, when they were in a prosperous and strong condition were
called Israel, when in a low condition Jacob, Fear not O worm Jacob.
therefore it may be read thus, That seek the face of Jacob, in the Genetive
case, as well as in the Vocative. This is the generation of them that seek him,
even of Jacob, and then he turns to God, and seek thy face. Vide Rivetum in
loc. Of the word Selah, see also Rivet.

Verse. 7. Lift up your heads, O ye gates.] This place is made difficult (says
Rivet) by diverse interpretations: All agree in this, that it is to be
understood of the entrance of the King of glory, that is, of God; and Christian
Interpreters refer that with one consent to Christ. But in explaining (says
Rivet) those gates and heads, sunt fere rot sensus quot capita.

All the faculties of the soul. Metonymically and Metaphorically Kings,
Princes, Magistrates, they used to sit in the gates.

And be ye lift up ye everlasting doors.] The Temple door so called in
opposition Simplicissima interpretatio, ut per fictionem personae pertas Templi
jam designati jubeat attollere vertices, ut latior ingressus arcae
introducendae fieret. Ita Lyra, Piscator and alii, etiam Calvinus statuit
Davidem hic de futura Templi structura concionari Amama Antibarb. Bibl. l. 3.
Vide Rivetum and Fessel. Advers. Sac. l. 3. c. 2. Quem locum universim omnes de
ascensione Domini, post Justinum Martyrem exposuere. Montacut. Apparat. 1. page
60.
to that of the Tabernacle, which continued for a while, or because made of
Cedar. You Church men.

The Fathers, Justin Martyr, Enthimius and others, interpret it of Gods
wellcoming Christ to heaven after his ascension.

He is compared to some victorious triumphant Captain.

Verse. 9. Lift up your heads, O ye gates.] Because it is a matter of great
consequence, I repeat it again.

PSALM. XXV.
THis Psalm is composed after the order of the Hebrew letters or Alphabet, Est
and hic Psalmus Alphabeticus, ut multi alii in usum pue^orum qui scribere
di^cebant. Grotius. Remitte peccatum meum quoniam multiple^ est. Chald. Par. Et
parces iniquitati meae quoniam multa. Arias Mont. Multum est enim, Vulg. Lat.
For it is much, Ainsw. O Lord thou art a great God, and abundant in compassion:
Its fit for a great God to do great things.
which care denotes the weight and excellency of the matter in it. The same is
to be observed of some other Psalms, as the 34. and 37. and 111. and 112. and
119. and 145.

Verse. 1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.] The Chaldee adds in
prayers. That expression signifies to desire earnestly, Psalm. 24. 4.

Verse. 11. O Lord pardon mine iniquity for it is great.] So Innius and we,
others would have it read, O Lord pardon my sin though it be great, and the
Hebrew bears it. The word also translated great, sounds both magnum and multum,
such as was his sin in the matter of Uriah, many sins in one, Adultery,
murder and Treachery: q. d. The expiation of such a sin will be the work of
infinite mercy.

Verse. 13. His soul shall dwell at ease.] The soul at ease, that is the
greatest, as its trouble, and dwell at ease.

Verse. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him.] There is a
threefold Some deep thing that a man by his own wisdom and industry could never
find out.
secret of God: 1. Of doctrine or holy truths, he makes known his mind and
word to such. 2. Of providence to come, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing
that I will do? And past, he makes them to see his power, goodness. 3. The
secret of his favor, that special love he bears to them.

I think he means that great secret of his purpose to save them, which is one
of the deepest things of God that cannot be revealed by any, but by the Spirit
of God.

And he will show them his Covenant.] It should rather be rendered, And to make
known his Covenant to them, ad notificandum iis, Montanus.

PSALM. XXVI.
Verse 2. EXamine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart.] The
words here See Job 31. 6. Scimus Hebraeos Renum nomine, quod maxim in
hominibus reconditum est, notare. Calvinus.
are not the same, but all different, to note how earnest the Psalmist was to
know well his state.

Verse. 5. I have hated the Congregation of evil doers: and will not sit with
the Vide Gatakeri Cinnum. lib. 1. cap. 1.
wicked.] He shows how much he abhorres wicked persons.

Verse. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O
Lord.] He alludes to the Ceremony of the Priests washing at the brazen laver,
before they Id est, ut innocens. Lavabant manus populi illi cum se puros a
scelere testabantur, ut Deuteronomy. 21. 6. Vide and quae allata ad Matthew. 27. 24.
Grotius in loc.
ministered at the Altar, Exodus 30. 18, 20, 21. and 40. 32. to let us see that
though this Ceremony belonged only to the Priests, yet the morality belongs to
all, they must wash before they meddle with holy services. See Isa. 1. 15, 16.
1 Timothy 2. 8.

Verse. 9. Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men.] The
holy Quum Asaph Hebraeis nunc colligere, nunc perdere significet, hoc loco
positum esse interpretor pro congerere in acervum, sicut in confusa strage
fieri solet. Calvinus.
Ghost speaks of a bundle of the living; Abner prays for David that God would
bind up his soul in the bundle of life; and of a bundle of the dead, God will
gather the tares together in a bundle; therefore the godly and wicked are said
both to be gathered to their Fathers, that is, they go to men of their own rank
and condition.

PSALM. XXVII.
Verse 1. THe Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?] A
godly man is acted nec spe nec metu, from outward things.

Verse. 5. One thing have I desired of the Lord.] One principal thing: That
will I seek after: chiefly, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple.] To enjoy him in his i. e. Ad percipiendum sancta and august a illius
dona, and ad consulendum eum; quae duo sunt piorum officia in Ecclesia. Junius.
Ordinances.

Verse. 8. When thou said, Seek ye my face.] That is, by injections of holy
Suitable to that Jer. 3. 22. i. In rebus dubiis consulite and in adversis
invocate, fic Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Junius. Satis convenit inter interpretes orationem
esse defectivam. Calvinus.
thoughts, and the actual excitation of his grace. By Gods face is meant, 1.
God himself, Exodus 20. 3. before my face, that is, before me. 2. His favor,
will show them the back and not the face, Prove. 29. 26. Seek his presence and
favor.

Verse. 13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living.] The first words are not in the Hebrew, David could
not tell what to say, I had despaired, been in a hell of darkness, what you
will.

The goodness of the Lord.] That is, the good things promised by him. Heaven is
properly the land of the living, though it mean Canaan in the letter, so the
Chaldee, in the land of life eternal: i. in hac ipsa vita, ut Psalm. 116. 9.
Junius.

Verse. 14. And he shall strengthen thine heart.] Chazak signifies to lay hold
on a thing strongly, it is used, Job 2. 6. and 8. 14.

PSALM. XXVIII.
Verse 1. UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock, be not silent to me; left if
thou be silent Perinde est ac si dixisset, nullus sum si a me discesseris: nisi
tu unus succurras perii. Calvinus.
to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.] David professes that if
God when he prayed did not answer him (that is, give some comfortable assurance
that he accepted and took his prayer in good part) it would be even a death to
him.

PSALM. XXIX.
Verse 1: GIve unto the Lord (Oye mighty) Give unto the Lord glory and
strength. Verse. 2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name.] Here are
three Gives, either because such great persons are backward to give God his
due, or because God desires great persons to come in, or because God would have
such to go on if they once begin. Princes of all men should be most careful to
glorify God, and yet it is most rare to see them humble themselves before him,
for natural corruption is as strong in them as in others; their education does
breed them to high and stately thoughts of themselves, their riches and power
puffs them up, and flatterers ordinarily following them, do make them forget
themselves and God also. Therefore are they here thrice exhorted to give glory
to God. Dickson.

O ye mighty.] Or sons of the mighty, that is, ye mighty men or potentates;
Filii fartium, Jun. Filii arietum, Vulg. and LXX. Arias. Mom. Filii arietum
sunt secundom Augustinum filii spirituales Apostolorum: Quia ut arietes
lanigeri gregis, it a and Aposteli Christiani gregis duces fuere., am didicisti
Lector cur Episcoporum mitrae bicornes sunt. Amam. Antib. Bibl. l. ^.
so Psalm. 9. 7. The Chaldee refers it to the company of Angels.

Give unto the Lord glory and strength.] That is, a strength which is glorious.

Verse. 2. Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.] That is, the Temple, so
called, because the Lord appears there dispensing holineis, 1 Chronicles. 16. 29.

Verse. 3. The voice of the Lord is powerful.] David calls thunder so: It is
called simply voice, Exodus 20. 18. The people saw the voices: but when the word
Lord is added, the metaphor is made more magnificent, and is more fit to
express the force of thunder, Job 37. 2. and 41. 5. a Poetical metaphor
plainly. God is often said to thunder, to signify his presence either in
punishments or rewards, as Psalm. 18. 14. Joel 3. 16. Exodus 19. 16. and 20. 18.
Jer. 25 ^0.

Verse. 9. The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve.] Though of all
other Quod cervas potissimum nominari quidam interpretes existimant ob
dissicilem partum, non displicet. Calvinus. Id est, cervas quantumvis prae
angustia utantur difficiliore partu cogit abortire. Jun. in loc. Vide Drus.
Prove. Class. 2. l. 5.
creatures they bring forth with most trouble, Job 39. 4, 6.

PSALM. XXX.
Verse 7. LOrd by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong.] That
is, his The Prophet alludes to the mountain of Sion, says Calvin. i. e. Tu
confirmaveras regnum meum, quod ego non cogitabam demen^. Junius.
Kingdom; Who art thou, O mountain, before Zerubabel, that is, the Persian
Monarchy.

And I was troubled.] Like a withered flower that loses sap and vigor, so
Exodus 15. 15.

Verse 11. Thou have put off my sackcloth.] That is, have taken away my
mourning, Solenne fuit veteri populo, saccum in luctu induere, and quidem non
alia de causa, nisi ut reorum more, suppliciter in fordid o habitu ad veniam
impetrandam coram caelesti judice prodiret, atque etiam scimus Orientales
popusos prae aliis ad caeremonias fuisse preclives. Calvinus.
because mourners were clothed with sackcloth.

Verse. 12. My glory.] i. Lingua praeco gloriae, ut 16. 9. Junius. That is, my
tongue, so Genesis 49. 5. because it should be the trumpeter of Gods glory.

PSALM. XXXI.
Verse 1. DEliver me in thy righteousness.] That is, that faithfulness whereby
thou defendest Petit aute^ liberari in justitia Dei, eo quod Deus fidem servis
sui^ datam praestando, justum se probet. Calvinus.
thine own children according to thy promise.

Verse. 5. O Lord God of truth.] As truth notes faithfulness in promises, so it
is from him. 2. As it notes true doctrine, John 14. 6.

Verse. 15. My times are in thy hand.] He says not, my whole time or course of
i. e. Terminus and status vitae meae Junius. Perinde est ac si dixisse^,
Domine, penes te mortis ac vitae meae arbitrium est and potestas: quanquam non
temere plurali numero usum esse arbitror, sed ut casuum varietatem notaret, qua
agitatur vita hominum. Calvinus.
life, but times in the plural, to show that every point and period of ones
life depends upon God. The seasons of his comforts, and of his sorrows, all
the turnings and changes of his life from one condition to another, were cast
and ordered by the power and wisdom of God.

Verse. 19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear Bonitas hic pro effectu suo capitur. Interrogatio autem vehementia non
caret quia non simpliciter praedicat David benignum esse Deum, sed in
admirationem bonitati* quam expertus erat, rapitur. Calvinus.
thee.] David stands in admiration of the riches of goodness which God has
provided for those which fear him, as if he wanted words to express it, as
indeed he did.

A figurative speech taken from careful parents which lay up for their
children, Col. 1. 5.

Verse. 20. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of
man.] In the Temple and Tabernacle there was a most holy place, where none but
the High Priest might enter on pain of death but once a year, there one was
safe from danger. See Psalm. 83. 4.

Verse. 23. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints.] Here is an hortatory conclusion
to See Psalm. 34. 9.
the love of God in this verse, and to the confirmation of their faith and love
toward him, in the following verse.

PSALM. XXXII.
Verse 1. BLessed.] Ashrei. The Jews cannot give a clear Grammatical
understanding of this word, whether it be an Adverb or plural Nown. Vide Bucer.
in Psalm. 1. 1. Blessed is he.] Or the blessedness of that man, for the word is
a Substantive and Beatus, Chald. Par. Beati, Vulg. Lat. LXX. Beatitudines,
Arias Mont. See Mr Burgefle of Justificat. on these two first verses. Qui
levatura transgressione. Jun. Hoc in Ebraeo codice verbum e verbo est, Beatus
levatus sceleris, and est sensus, cujus levatum, hoc est, sublatum ac
condonatum scelus est. Drus. in Observat. Sac.
of the plural number; q. d. O the complete, the full, the infinite happiness
of that man whose transgression is forgiven, sin covered, and to whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity. Mr Hildersam.

Whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.] Here and v. 2. are
three expressions, as Exodus 34. 7.

1. Whose transgression is forgiven.] Heb. whose transgression as a burden is
taken off, sin is compared to a burden.

2. Whose sin is covered.] An allusion to that which is filthy, Psalm. 85. 2.
to the Israelites which were wont to go with a paddle and cover their
excrements, Deuteronomy. 23. 13, 14.

Verse. 2. Blessea is the man to whom the Lord imputes no iniquity.]

Sin is thirdly compared to a debt, as Matthew 6. Forgiveness has respect to A
metaphor from Merchants, who when they will forgive a de^^, do not put it into
the account or reckoning, and so do not impute it.
the merit of Christ, Isa. 53. 6. Covering to his righteousness, or the
adjudication of the fruit of his merit to us, not imputing to his mediation and
intercession.

The holy Ghost uses such vehement inculcating, because David had felt the
burden of sin, and to awaken the secure.

And in whose spirit is no outl^.] No wilful guile, no guile which they are
not willing to discern, which they tolerate in themselves, none but what they
resist.

Verse. 3. When I kept silence.] That is, did forbear a free, plain and full
confession of my sins to God. My bones waxed old, through my roaring all the
day long.

Verse. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid:
I It was a resolution upon debate with himself, as Psalm 39. 1. an inward word
in his heart.
said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Selah.] Then he confessed his iniquity, and said he would
confess it, that is, upon a full resolution that this was the best course, did
break through all objections and performed it; then did God pass by the
punishment of his sin, that is, give him some comfortable assurance, that he
had pardoned him.

Selah is not only a musical note, but as some think a note of observation, to
Perkins.
move us to mark the things that are set down, as being of special weight and
moment.

Verse. 8. I will guide thee with mine eye.] Mine eye shall be upon thee. Heb.
Vox Christi ad Ecclesiam. Hieron.


Verse. 10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked.] Or great, many for number,
great for weight.

Verse. 11. Be glad in the Lord.] That is, conceive an inward joy; And rejoice
ye righteous.] Testify that inward joy by outward demonstration.

And shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.] Be full of joy, which our
last translation has expressed well in that word, shout for joy, that is, extend
your joy to others.

PSALM. XXXIII.
Verse 15. HE fashioneth their hearts alike.] There is not an apprehension or
affection in our hearts, but the Lord fashioneth it.

Verse. 18. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him.] Not on all,
but on them that fear him, that is, the Lord has a special eye and regard to
them, the phrase is weighty, it carries this sense, that the Lord as it were
sits in his watchtower, spying the wants and necessities of them that fear him.

PSALM. XXXIV.
Verse 2. MY soul shall make her boast in the Lord.] See Psalm. 40. 8. and 97.
7. In Domino l^udabit se. Montanus. See 1 Cor. 1. 31. In verbo Domini
laudabitur anima mea. Chald. Par. In Domino laudabitur anima mea. Vulg. Lat.


Verse. 4. And delivered me from all my fears.] That is, not from all the things
he feared, but from the fear of them while the troubles remained.

Verse. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him.] That
is, the Angels, for he speaks of an Host.

Encampeth round about.] A similitude taken from wars, as Psalm. 27. 3. See
Psalm. 91. 11, 12.

Verse. 8. He says, Taste and see that the Lord is good.] viz. in allowing his
children so gracious attendance. There is scientia gustus, a feeling
experimental knowledge.

Blessed is the man that trusts in him.] viz. In regard of so happy
protection.

Verse. 10. The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger.] Which are strong and
active to seek their prey: That is, 1. All wicked Rulers, men of the highest
place, as the lion is the King among beasts, Ezekiel. 32. 2. Prove. 28. 15. 2. All
cruel oppressing great men, Prove. 30. 30. 3. All the subtle politicians of
the earth, Ezekiel. 38. 13. The lion lurks secretly for his prey, men of the
greatest state, deepest power and policy.

Verse. 16. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil.] Either his anger
or his knowledge, he sees, and his wrath goes forth against what he sees.

PSALM. XXXV.
Verse 13. MY prayer returned into mine own bosom.] That is, say some, though
they got Id est, Bonum quod ipsis precatus fueram, in me redundabat, mihi
contingebat. Fessel. Advers. Sac. l. 4. c. 9. See Ainsw.
no good by my prayers, yet my own soul did: Rather thus, I prayed often and
much for them, even from my heart; the returning of the prayer signifies his
frequent minding of them, and a bosom both secrecy and affectionatness in
prayer for them.

Or we may read the words thus, Let my prayer return into thy bosom: That is,
I wished no worse to them than to my self, let me receive that of God for my
portion which I have desired may be theirs.

Verse. 14. I bowed down heavily.] Heb. I bowed down black, viz. in black and
Atrat^^ incurvabam me. Arias Mont. Vestes potius sordidae quam nigrae.
mournful attire.

Verse. 15. They rejoiced, and gathered themselves together.] That is, they
gathered themselves together for joy, or to rejoice.

The abjects.] Such as all honest or civil men had cast out of their company,
associated themselves into companies.

They did tear me.] That is, my good name. See Matthew. 7. 6.

Verse. 19. Neither let them wink with the eye, that hate me without a cause.]
That Make secret signs by the winking of the eye. See Prove. 10. 10. and 6. 13.
Jun. l. 1. Paral. 81. John 15. 25.
is, let not mine enemies have any occasion to scorn and deride me, to boast
and insult over me.

PSALM. XXXVI.
Verse 1. THe transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is
no fear of God Chaldaeus dixit scelus impio etc. Itaque scelus quod animo
conceperat impius, illud vero est, quod impio suadet proximum timore Dei
vacare. Vides quem ille consultorem adhibeat, ut de alterius vita moribusque
decernat. Martinus de Roa Singul. l. 3. c. 18.
before his eyes.] That is, it offers this thought to my imagination, or
trespass says to the wicked, that is, persuades, imboldneth, hardneth him.
Ainsw.

Verse. 4. He sets himself in a way that is not good.] The same word that is
used, Psalm. 2. 2. set themselves, this notes premeditation and resolution, he
resolves to go on and continue in it. See Isa. 55. 2.

Verse. 6. Mountains of God.] That is, high, mighty or excellent mountains. The
Hebrew uses to note excellent things, by adding the name of God, as Psalm. 80.
11. and 65. 10 and 68. 16. Genesis 30. 5. Rev. 15. 2.

Verse. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house.]
Fatness notes the best and most excellent, the most excellent spiritual
blessings.

And thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.] Not only those
Absque additamento nusquam torrens in bonam partem legitur. Hicro^.
which thou art Lord of to dispose, but which thou thy self do take.

Verse. 9. For with thee is the fountain of life.] Lives, natural, spiritual
and eternal.

In thy light shall we see light.] Or enjoy light, that is, knowledge, comfort,
joy.

Verse. 10. O continue thy loving kindness to them that know thee.] The Hebrew,
draw Ainsworth reads it, extend thy mercy. Draw forth to the utmost in a long
and constant series of mercy. See Psalm. 85. 6. Eccles. 2. 3. Of the proud man,
as the Chaldee translateth it.
forth, or draw out thy loving kindness. Trahe misericordiam tuam. Montanus. A
metaphor either taken from vessels of wine, which being set abroach once, yield
many cups, or from a mother who has her breasts full of milk, draws them out
for her child, not once but often, or from a line which is extended.

Some think it is the same metaphor with that, 1 Cor. 7. 29. There is abundance
of love folded up, and but little winded off; there is an eternity to spend.

Verse. 11. Let not the foot of pride come against me.] Pride is to the soul
what the foot is to the body, it bears up the bulk.

PSALM. XXXVII.
IN this Psalm is showed how the righteous are preserved, ver. 3, 17, 23, 25,
28. and the usual objections against their safety answered.

Verse. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring
it to pass.] Thy way in reference to duty and success, and the event shall be
answerable to thy expectation.

Verse. 13. His day is coming.] That is, a day of destruction, of great
judgment and eternal misery.

Verse. 16. A little that a righteous man has is better than the riches of many
wicked.] See Prove. 15. 16. That is, a competent and mean portion, though but
very little.

Verse. 25. I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, He puts in begging, his seed begging bread, because begging of bread,
especially in the State of the Jews, was a note of utter dereliction, there was
an express Law that there sheuld be no beggar among them.
nor his seed begging bread.] Lazarus was brought to beggary, see Luke 8. 3.

Some say it is understood of extremity of poverty, so as to find no relief.

2. Others say David says not it was never so, but in his experience he never
found it so.

3. Not begging their bread forsaken, they had a peculiar providence then with
them.

PSALM. XXXVIII.
Verse 4. FOr mine iniquities are gone over mine head.] They have prevailed
against Ab aquis ducta meraphora, significat, se in peccati^ penitus demersum
esse: ac si diceret tam multae sunt ut capu^ meum transcendant, vel superent
caput meum, hoc est capillos capitis mei, ut Psalm. 40. 13. Drus. Prove. Class.
2. l. 4. In duobus modis accipi potest. Aut enim hoc dicitur ex fimilie^dine
eorum, quibus aqua caput transcendit demersis: aut exponendum, transeunt caput
meum, id est, pil^^ capitis mei, ac si diceret; numerosiores sunt capillis
meis, estque proverbiale, capillis numerosior, quo and alibi idem author usus
est. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 5. c. 20.
me.

Verse. 5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.] Sin
and the guilt and trouble of conscience that arises thence.

Verse. 10. My heart pants.] Throbbeth, beats about, through trouble and
distemperature, Drus. Went round about, Circuivit cor meum, Montanus. Calvinus.
A metaphor taken from Merchants that compass sea and land, traffic here and
there. So the heart of man is troubled (...) cor meum conturbatum est. Prop^^e
a me ^vagatur, ut Mercatores facere solent. Vide quod sequitur. Grotius in loc.
about sundry things, and the letters are doubled here to signify the great
care and trouble that David had, when he sought after these things, as the
Merchant seeks for his gain.

PSALM. XXXIX.
Verse 1. I Will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue.] One
reading this place, said he had been 38 years a learning this lesson, and had
not learned it So Crates in Hist. Eccles.
thoroughly.

Verse. 2. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace even from good.] David laid
a law upon his tongue. He uses three words in this and the former verse all to
the same purpose, as if he should say in plain English, I was silent, I was
silent, I was silent, and all this to express how he kept in his passion, that
he might not offend with his tongue.

Verse. 4. Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it
^^; that I may know how frail I am.] Not the particular end but general, that
it will be shortly, he explains himself so in the end of the verse.

Verse. 5. Behold thou have made my days as an hand breadth.] The breadth of
the That is, thou have exactly measured them out, and they are but short. A
hand breadth is the breadth of four fingers. Ainsw.
hand is taken two ways: 1. In the largest extent, for a span, or the whole
space between the top of the thumb and the little finger stretched out. 2. In
the lesser extent, for the breadth only of four fingers, which is the measure
which David takes of the days of a man. Vide Calvinum.

Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.] An affirmation is
prefixed, every man in the height and perfection of all creature comforts, in
his settled estate.

Not some man, but every man, all Adam, Heb. is not vain, but Hebel is a soon
vanishing vapor, as the breath of ones mouth. To this the Apostle has
reference, James 4. 14. Chapel on Psalm. 103.
vanity; not in some measure, but altogether; not in his childhood or decrepit
age, but in his best estate: Neither is it spoken as a thing doubtful or
probable only, but as most certain, verily.

No man by nature, or further than he is acted by the spirit of life, has any
solidity in him. See Psalm. 62 9.

Verse 11. Thou as a moth Sed primo intuitu absurda videri possit comparatio Dei
cum tinea. Quid enim affine habet vermiculo immensa Dei majestas? Respondeo
aptissime Davidem hac similitudine fuisse usum, ut sciamus quamvis non palam
fulminet e caelo Deus, non aliter tamen occulta ejus maledictione consumi
reprobos, ac tinea caeco morsu pannum vel lignum absumi^: and simul respicit ad
excellentiam, quam dicit quasi putredine corrumpi, ubi Deus infestus est,
sicuti preciosissimas quasque vestes sua tabe conficit tinea. Calvinus.
make his beauty to consume.]

Verse. 12. For I am a stranger with thee.] 1. Because not at home with God. 2.
Liable to injuries from men. 3. Know not the way I should go, Psalm. 119. 19.

And a sojournir.] A stranger is one that is not in his native Country, a
Pilgrim or sojourner, one that is traveling homeward; so some: but the
Israelites were sojourners in Egypt, when they were not traveling toward
Canaan.

PSALM. XL.
Verse 5. ANd thy thoughts which are to usward.] Of bringing sinners to glory
by Christ.

Verse. 6. Mine ears have thou opened.] An allusion to that custom among the
Aures perforabant Hebraei servis suis, Exodus: 21. 6. qui perpetuum obsequium ad
mortem usque heris suis promiserant, unde aures alicui perforare docilem and ad
nutum perpetuo obsequentem eum reddere. G^aeci habent corpus mihi adaptasti:
ubi non ipsa quidem verba sed verborum sensum exprimunt. Cui autem aures
perforabantur, habebat corpus ad perpetuum obsequium quasi adaptatum, cujus
ista perforatio externuth signum erat and sacramentum. Hulsius. Vide Rivetum in
loc.
Jews, Exodus, 21. Christ did it electively, he would not be free, though he were
released. With the Jews one eat was bored, here are ears in the plural number,
a token of that perfect desirable subjection which he, as Mediator was in to
his Father.

Verse. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of
me.] Caput libri testamenti veteris, tale sumit exordium: In principio fecit
Deus caelum and terram, id est, in Christo domino. Hoc mysterium and Joannes
Cernens sic Evangelium inchoavity Joan. 1. 1. In principio erat verbum, and
verbum erat Deus. Caput ergo libri intellige principium: quod est Christus
Jesus, qui in hoc libri capite nuntiatus est. Hieron. in loc.
He read the Law, and there he found a Kings duty, and so his part.

In capite libri.] So the Vulgar and LXX. See Heb. 10. 7. by which not only
Vide Amamae Antib. Bibl. l. 3. and Dilher. Disput. Acad. Tom. 2. p. 423.
the first Chapter of Genesis and the first verse, but the whole book of the
Law, or the Pentateuch is understood, of which Christ, John 5. 46. Or rather as
others expound it (says Rivet) of the sum of the whole Law and Prophets. The
Law is called the Book or Volume of the Covenant, Exodus 24. 7. In the Hebrew it
is In the volume of the book, so the Jews roll up the Law which they keep
written in parchment in their Synagogues; See Jer. 36. 2. Ezekiel. 2. 9. Zech. 5.
1, 2. Hence those speeches, Luke 4. 17. and 20. Hence in Latin, Volumen,
evolvere libros, in the volume of thy book, that is, thy book.

Verse. 8. I delight to do thy will; O my God, Yea thy law is within my heart.]
By Loqditur filius de voluntate Patris quam fecit quatenus missus a Patre, and
veniens in mundum; missus est autem and venit quatenus homo. Ergo lequitur de
voluntare quam fecit quatenus homo est. Haec voluntas dicitur apud Johannem
cap. 1. v. 34. Opus Dei, quo hominum salus procurata est and adimpleta quae
consistit in satisfactione pro omnium peccatis, and conciliatione cum Deo. Hanc
Christus perfecit suis actionibus and perpessionibus and operibus omnibus quae
in carne fecit. Rivetus in loc.
the Law of God he understands all his Commandments, as well common to all men,
as that singular Commandment which he had from his Father, of laying down his
life, John 10. 19.

In the midst of my bowels, the Hebrew, and Chald. Par. these note the tendrest
affections, Col. 1. 12. Phil. 1. 8. a Law of love to the Saints, John 10. 18.

Verse. 10. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart.] There is a
threefold hiding, 1. Out of envy, as here, as being unwilling that others
should partake of it, so Matthew. 23. 13. 2. Out of sloth, Matthew. 25. 25. 3. Out
of care, Matthew. 13. 44. Psalm. 119. 11.

Verse. 11. For thy loving kindness and thy truth continually preserve me.]
Loving kindness and truth are fitly joined, in the first of which that is
promised which is not owed, in the other that is performed, which is promised.
Metaphora sumpta ab urbium obsidione, cum undique cinguntur hostibus. Rivetus.


Verse. 12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me.] Christ confesses our
sins as his own. See Heb. 10. 6, 7. This whole Psalm is of Christ, this is a
very remarkable place, they were his sins (say some) by imputation and
voluntary acceptance.

PSALM. XLI.
Verse 3. Thou will make all his bed in his sickness.] Heb. turn. Either he
sends us health Quidam stratum vert^r^ ita accipiunt, quasi Deus, ut
refocillationem daret se^vo suo, culcitram ejus composuerit, ut aegrotis fieri
solet quo mollius recumbant. Alii rectius (meo judicio) versum dicunt esse
lectum, qui morbo destinatus erat, ubi reddita fuit Davidi sanitas. Calviuus.
(so some expound it) he turns the bed of sickness into a bed of health, or
turns our bed for us in our sickness; that is, refreshes us, gives us ease
when we lie upon our sick bed; it is a metaphor borrowed from those which
attend sick persons, that help to make their bed easy and soft, and turn them
that they may lie at ease.

Verse. 6. His heart gathers iniquity to it self.] The word signifies
dispersum aliquid congregare.

Verse. 9. Yea ^in^ own familiar friend.] Heb. The man of my peace; an Hebraism,
that is, my familiar friend which was at peace with me, Judas Christ's own
disciple, John 13. 18.

Has lift up his heel against me.] An expression of the highest pride and
greatest Efferre calcem, Metaphorice accipitur (meo judicio) pro contum^liose
insurgere in hominem dejectum. Ca^vi^^^. Vide Jun. l. 1. paral. 80. Johan. 13.
18. i. e. Injuria me affecit, metaphora ab equis ^alcitronibus ducta, and est
prophetia in Judam proditorem, ut vid^tur, Johan. 13. 18. Hulsius in loc.
contempt.

PSALM. XLII.
Verse 1: AS the Heart pants after the waterbrooks.] The Heart is a thirsty
creature of it Hearts i^ Autum^ are most impatient of thirst, says Aristotle.
Similitudo c^r^i summum desiderii ardorem exprimit. Calvinus.
self, but especially when it is chased. The Hin^e the female is here meant*
and in females the passions are stronger than in males.

Verse. 7. Deep calls upon deep.] Deep, that is, great afflictions, Ezekiel. 26.
19. His verbis tam malorum gravitas, quam congeries and diuturnitas exprimitur.
Calvinus. Comparatio sumpta a magno diluvio, cum apertae sunt cacaractae sive
emissaria coeli. Genesis 7. 2. and abyssus maris invocavit, sive attraxit, v^lut
alterum abyssum e nubibus. Huic diluvio suas calamitates comparat. Grotius.
Vide Uulsium in loc.
Jon. 2. 5. The depth of our misery on the depth of Gods mercy.

Verse. 8. Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness.] It is a phrase taken
from Kings and Princes, and great Commanders in the field, whose words of
command stand for Laws. It signifies effectually and powerfully to command; if
God will command loving kindness it will act.

Verse. 10. Where is thy God?] That is, thy God is no where, thou have none to
help or deliver thee.

PSALM. XLIII.
Verse. 2. FOr thou art the God of my strength.] In whom all my strength and
power is laid So he calls him the God of his mercy.
up thiue essentially, mine federally. See Col. 1. 11.

Verse. 3. ^ send out thy light and thy truth.] The Hebrew word signifies to
send an Ambassador, 2 Kings 14* 8. and to send out with authority and
commission from heaven, that it may enlighten and guide me in the way. By light
Calvin understands favor, and says, he adds truth, because he hoped for light
only from Gods promises.

Verse. 5. Why art thou disquieted within me?] The word in that conjugation
signifies, He disquieted himself.

I shall yet praise him.] In aftertimes praise him for this very dispensation,
under which my heart is now discouraged. I shall be delivered, and my mourning
shall be turned into singing.

The health of my countenance.] That is, my present help which stands before me
continually, as the shewbread was called the bread of countenance or faces,
because it stood still before God.

PSALM. XLIV.
Verse 12. THou sellest thy people for naught.] Thou have so contemned thy
people, that Ad populi contemptum dictum est: pravos enim ac mancos servos
solemus fine pretio trad^re. Euthymius.
without any gain thou have delivered them into servitude, one while to the
Moabites, another while to the Canaanites and Philistims, which histories are
in the Book of Judges. See Deuteronomy. 32. 30. Isa. 52. 3.

Verse. 19. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons.] The Hebrew
word ( Ainsworth says) is common both for land and water dragons; So Psalm.
148. 7. that is, either the desolate wilderness where the Dragons inhabit, or
into the bottom of the Sea.

PSALM. XLV.
THis Psalm (say some) is an Epithalamium, or Congratulatory Hymn made Apud
omnes in e^pretes Psalmorum, ne Ebraeis quid^m exceptis, in confesso est,
Psalmum xlv. Esse carmen Epithalamium, sive nuptiale, idque spirituale, ac
intelligendum de spirituali connubio inter Christum and Ecclesiam. Rivetus.
Vide plura ibid. and Calvinum.
at Salomons wedding, when he married Pharaohs daughter, she being a Proseli^e
to the Jewish Church, was a Type of the Gentiles.

Many expound it therefore historically: Christ's excellency is set out in this
Psalm, Solomon the type, Christ the an^itype.
the Apostle expressly applies it to him* Heb. 1. 8.

Verse. 1. My heart is enditing a good matter.] Boiling or frying, see Psalm.
119. 171. In both places there is a Metaphor (as some think) from a fountain
that A similitude taken from the Minc^^ or m^^^ offering in the Law, which was
dressed in the frying-pa^* Levi^. 7. 9. and there boiled in oil. Ainsw.
continually bubleth up water; or as others, from a full stomach, and they
translate it eructare, belching proceeds from fulness of stomach. See Rivet.

Verse. 2 Thou art fairer than the children of men] The Hebrew word Japhiaphita
De fructu labiorum Christi in Evangelio intelligen* du^ est. Glassius.
is of double form, to note out double, that is, very excellent beauty. This
fairness is not of body only, but specially of the mind in wisdom, holiness,
Heb. 7. 26. Fairer, more comely, desirable, excellent, glorious.

Grace is poured into thy lips.] See Cant. 5. 13. Christ was amiable in
speaking, he spoke gracious words abundantly, this is that which they call in
French, La grace de bien parler, or La bonne grace, See Luke 4. 22.

The Chaldee expounds it, The Spirit of prophecy is given into thy lips.

Verse. 7. Therefore God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above The holy Ghost is meant. See Luke 4. 1^. John 15. 26. 1 These. 1. 6.
thy fellows.] The oil wherewith Christ was anointed, is called the oil of
gladness, ab effectu (says Calvin) it fills the soul of his members with
spiritual gladness, and it was the oil also of holiness.

Above thy fellows.] That is, Christ's manhood was filled with the gifts and
graces of God both in measure number and degree, above all men and Angels.

The word signifies a Colleague, Companion, Consort, Partaker of the same
sufferings Christ is called Gods fellow in reference to his Divine Nature, the
Saints his fellow in reference to his humane Nature.
and privileges with Christ, as he is called Gods fellow, so the Saints in
some respect are fellows with Christ.

Verse. 10. Forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house.] That which is
Per domum Patris and populum* haud dubie corruptelas omnes intelligit.
Propheta, quas ex utero afferimus, vel quas imbibimus ^ala consuetudine.
Calvinus.
commanded to Salomons wife, is commanded to all Christians. This wife of
Solomon is the soul of every Christian, the Spouse of Christ, the true Solomon,
who by nature is daughter to Heathen Pharaoh, that is, to sin, corruption and
wrath, but being married to Christ, must forget her own kindred and Fathers
house, that is, their own nature and carnal desires, and then shall Christ our
King and spiritual husband take pleasure in us, and rejoice to do us good.

Verse. 12. And the daughter of Tire.] The inhabitants of Tire. Tire was the
rich Merchant-city.

Even the rich among the people shall entreat thy favor.] Beg that they may
enjoy of thy privileges. Omnis gloria, Heb. Abstracts speak Essences and
Excellencies. Nativa pulchritudine praedita est, ita utopus non habeat a
vestibus and gemmis commendari: quae tamen ipsi ubertim adsunt, ad fimbrias
usque. Grotius in loc.


Verse. 13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within.] A good Expositor thinks
[ within] here is not opposed to outward glory, because it presently follows in
what externals she is glorious, therefore he takes it as opposite to that
which is adventitious and painted, she has it not from others, Isa. 49 5.

Her clothing is of wrought gold.] That is, the righteousness of Christ,
shining, precious, durable, and desirable as gold.

Verse. 14. In raiment of Needle Work.] That is, the several graces of the
Spirit of God, which puts a beauty upon the soul, as the variety in Needle Work
makes it beautiful.

PSALM. XLVI.
The Title.

THis Psalm is by many styled Luthers Psalm, because Luther often said and sung
it, Pro occultis. Gods hidden ones, an experiment belongs peculiarly to them.
See V. 1. The original word Alam signifies hid, the Greek translateth it
hidden ones, or hid things. If it be not referred to themselves, it seems
rather to intend the hid counsels of God appertaining to his Church in Christ.
Ainsw.
especially in the time of any trouble.

A Song upon Alamoth.] The hidden ones of God, because the providence of God
strongly watches over these in times of war.

Verse. 1. A very present help in trouble.] These words may be considered: As

1. Verba contemplantia, words of such as see God in the mercy for which they
celebrate his praise. 2. Verba agnoscentia. 3. Verba gratulantia, they return
all the praise to God. 4. Verba fidentia, they are raised up from this
particular mercy to trust more in God. 5. Verba triumphantia. 6. Verba
exaltantia, as the words of one that exalts God.
There is some diversity in the reading of those words, Some read the words,
He So the LXX.
is a help in tribulations, that have found us vehemently.

The Hebrew words may admit of such a translation, God is a help in troubles
which Ambrose.
is found. See Numb 32. 23.

Others refer it to God and his help, some of those render it by the verb
Auxilium Moller.
invenimus abunde.

Calvin says, It is to be read in the Preterperfect tense, then it is a speech
of experience, Eccles. 7. 26.

Others render it, Ut auxilium inventum valde, auxilium praesentissimum, To it
is Tremel. We may translate it, He is found, that is, God is present at hand,
as Genesis 19. 15.
a speech of one who looks upon God as unchangeable.

1. The thing attributed to God, a help or helper. 2. The Persons to whom he is
so, to that peculiar people which have an interest in these Attributes. 3. In
the greatest trouble or straits, in the plural number troubles, many great
continued troubles. It comes from a word that signifies to straighten, bind
up, press into a narrow place, it is rendered Augustia in Latin, and by us
straight, 2 Samuel 24. 14. Lam. 3. it notes affliction, which is a straightning
to man in his way, and the extremity of it. 4. The nature of this help
described, A present help, a help greatly found, the Hebrew word in a secondary
sense signifies to be sufficient, Numb. 11. 22. a sufficient help, you need no
other.
Verse. 2. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed: and though
the By the changing of the earth, and removing of the Mo^^ts, are often meant
the alteration of States and Politics, Hag. 2. 22, 23. Jer. 51. 25. Revel. 6.
14. Ainsw. Qui fidem sua^ obliviscitur tanquam Christo dormiente turbatur. Aug.
mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.] These words are a conclusion
from the former premises, come in with an Ergo.

1. An In erence, which refers to what goes before. 2. A Supposition, suppose
this should be our condition. 3. A fiducial Resolution, we will not fear. They
that have the Lord for their refuge, help and strength in trouble, need not
fear, but we have so, therefore, upon this ground, for this cause.
Si fractus illabatur orbis.
Impavidum ferient ruinae. Horace.
Verse. 4. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of
God] It is an allusion to the river Siloe which ran softly, yet surely, a still
river that refreshes and supporteth on all occasions.

PSALM. XLVII.
Verse 5. WIth the sound of a Trumpet.] That is, most gloriously, as a
triumphing In qua duo Angeli tanquam tuba il^a ascendente clama^ ^ct. 1. (...)
Ve^ post victoriam qua vicit diabolum, sic ascendit. Unde dicitur, Psalm* 24. 7.
Hieron.
Conqueror, as the Apostle explains it, Col. 2. 15. These things are spoken
humanitus. Piscator holds, That by the Ascension or going up here, nothing else
is understood, but that God under the symbol of the Ark of the Covenant is gone
into the Temple, but the comparing of the New Testament, and the evidence of
the thing shows, that the Psalmist understands some sublimer thing in those
words, and Piscator here departs from Tremellius and Junius, whom for the most
part he diligently follows.

Verse. 7. Sing ye praises with understanding.] Zameru Maschil. Sing praises
every one that has understanding, or sing praises understandingly, or with
understanding, Mascil tredecia^ locis in Psalmis genus car^^nis notat, quod ad
erudiendum comparatum est. Quasi di^^^, Carmen didacticon. Hulsius.
or (as Maschil also signifies, as appears by the Title of diverse Psalms) Sing
a Psalm of instruction. Ainsworth renders it an instructing Psalm, and gives
this Annotation, Maschil, the Title of Psalm. 32. and many others, here used in
like sense for a Psalm to give instruction, or as in Psalm. 14. 1. for a prudent
understanding person; In this sense, Sing Psalm every one that is prudent; or,
as the Greek explaineth it, Sing prudently; The Chaldee, With good
understanding. See Muis.

Verse. 9. For the shields of the earth belong unto God.] Magistrates are
shields to Scuta ebraice dicuntur magennes a protegendo. Eadem vox significat
Principes quorum munus est protegere populum ac defendere ab omni injuria: Ergo
Aquila, ut erat verborum proprietatis observant issimus, non sensum, ut quidam
a^ii; sed verbum interpretans ad verbum, scuta dixit, ut Principes
significaret. Quia ut scuta corpus: sic illi debent protegere subditos suos.
Drus. Quaest. E^raic. l. 1. quaest. 73.
protect the people from Gods vengeance, as well as man's violence, by executing
Justice, Psalm. 89. 19. Hos. 4. 18.

Dickson expounds it thus, The hearts and power of all the Kings of the earth
are in the Lords hand, and he has the disposing of shields, armies and
ammunition, with all their Commanders and Rulers in the world.

Calvin says, That is the best sense, the world is protected and kept by God
alone.

PSALM. XLVIII.
Verse 14. FOr this God is our God for ever and ever.] Toll meum, toll Deum.
It was the top See Psalm. 50. 7.
of Christ's glory that God was his God.

PSALM. XLIX.
Verse 2. BOth low and high.] Been Ish, or Filii viri, that is, Nobles, sons
of great Tam filii mortalium, quam fil^i viri. Calvinus. Both sons of baser
man, and sons of noble man. Ainsw. Etiam filii hominis, etiam filii viri. Muis.
men, and Been Adam, or Filii hominis, the sons of men of common rank, Tam
filii hominum (ignobilium) quam filii eujuscunque nobilis.

Adam is so called of Adamah the earth, whence this Title is given to the baser
sort of people. The Greek translateth it here earth born, 1 Cor. 15. 47. See
Muis.

Ish is the name of man in respect of heat, valor, nobleness and dignity, it
means the great or noble sort of people.

Verse. 4. I will open my dark saying upon the harp.] That dark saying (as the
context shows) is the vanity of all worldly things, and the happiness of Gods
favor.

Verse. 5. When the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about.] That is, as
the Quia calcan^us corporis extremitas est, eujusque rei extremitas vocatur
Calcaneus. Et si hoc loco per iniquitatem Calcaneorum intelligat ipsam
iniquitatis mercedem, quae in vitae Calcan^o, id est, extremitate impios
circundat. Hulsius.
most judicious Interpreters, Calvin and Mollerus understand it, when wicked
men that trace me, pursuing me close at the heels, or observing my heels, Psalm.
56. 6. that is, my steppings, and seek to supplant me, do on every side beset
me.

Some think even in the hour of death, when a man's sins use to come closest
unto him, the wickedness of my actions, say some, sins contracted by my daily
walking, heels for goings, and goings for moral actions. Not only afflictions,
but the guilt of sin comes in with the sorrow. See Ainsw.

Verse. 9. That he should live for ever, and not see corruption.] David hic
loquitur de pur is hominibus (nam Christus qui fuit homo and Deus simul, non
vidit corruptionem) and de eo quod sit secundum ordinem naturae. Quod, Henoch,
Ebr. 11. 5. non viderit mortem, hoc accidit contra naturam, Deo ita volente,
qui est author naturae. Sic alibi legimus de aquis, terminum pos^isti eis, quem
non transgred^entur, cum tamen secus evenerit diluvii tempore. Drus. de
quaesit. per Epist.


Verse. 12. Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not.] Adam lodged not
Some read it, non intelle it, so the LXX, Vulg. Tremel. Grotius. Vide Rivetum.
one night in honor, for so are the words if they be properly translated. The
word is Lun, which signifies pernoctare, to lodge or stay all night. The word
is of the future tense, which yet frequently in the Hebrew bears the
signification of the past, though it have not vau conversivum. See Ainsw.

Verse. 14. Death shall feed on them.] It is intended primarily of corporal and
natural death, the Chaldee Paraphrase expounds it of the judgment of hell. See
9. and 15. verses.

The upright shall have dominion over them in the Morning.] Of the Resurrection.

Verse. 18. He blessed his soul] That is, pronounces himself in his own heart a
blessed man, to be in a blessed estate.

Verse. 20. Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like the beasts
that perish.] God regards him no more than a dog in a ditch.
Plainly showing, that his honor above the beast was his right understanding.
He means not one that is a natural fool, that has not the principle of reason
in him, but one that has not a spiritual understanding, does not exercise his
understanding, or act suitably to it, meaning, they die even as beasts, without
any sense or apprehension of a better life, or without any true care of
eternity.

Is like them, not in perishing, but in the want of true understanding, as
Nebuchadnezzar.

PSALM. L.
Verse 2. THe perfection of beauty.] Arias Montanus translates it, Universitate
decoris, Perfecta est pulchritudo ejus. Chald. Paraph. Sion vocat perfectionem
decoris honorifico nomine quia Deus Sacrarium illud elegerit, ubi nomen suum
invocaretur, and illic ejus imago in legis doctrina fulgebat. Calvinus.
the Universality of beauty, that is, which is wholly and perfectly beautiful.
See the like praise of Sion, Psalm. 48. 3. Lam. 2. 15.

Verse. 15. And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and
thou shall Deliver thee, therefore he hears. Quae praedicabas in Ecclesia, non
custodiebas in vita. Hieron.
glorify me.] He skips over the act of hearing.

Verse. 17. Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee.]
This expression is used two wuyes in Scripture:

1. When it speaks of a thing hateful and troublesome, Ezekiel. 23. 35. 2. To
forget that thing, Isa. 38. 17. God is there said to cast our sins behind
him.
Verse. 20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou slanderedst
thine own mothers son.] The backbiter is called Dophi, which the Rabbis
interpret do duo, and pios, because he speaks with a double tongue.

Verse. 21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence.] That is, I did not
break forth in wrath, thunder against thee in judgment.

Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self.] Not displeased
with the ways of sin.

Set in order.] viz. Thy faults; As the Greek explaineth it, I will set thy
sins before thy face.

Verse. 22. Now consider this.] Meaning the account that God will take with them.

Lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.] A similitude taken
from Lions, which catch and tear their prey, from whose jaw none can rescue.

Verse. 23. Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
conversation See Hos. 5. 14. Arias Montan. Ponenti vitam, To him that puts his
conversation, puts every piece of his conversation in the right order. See*
Muis in loc.
aright, will I show the salvation of God.] As if he had said, I will cause him
to see and know that he shall be saved.

PSALM. LI.
The Title.

To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came unto him
after he had gone in to Bathsheba.

The Inscription shows four things:

1. The person to whom the writing was committed, viz. The chief Musician. For
when David had appointed singers and players of Instruments for the Temple, he
did also divide them into several Companies, and over every company there was
one chief to whom the ordering of the Song and Tune did appertain, and as it
may seem also one principal overseer of all, to whose custody the Psalm was
delivered, and by whose appointment it was sung in the Temple at fit times, as
may be seen, 1 Chronicles. 25. The whole number was 288, and they were divided into
24 companies, twelve in a company. 2. The Nature of the writing, A Psalm, that
is, holy matter framed into musical numbers, and fitted to be sung upon an
Instrument or Instruments. 3. The Author or Penman of the Psalm, David, the
King of Israel, who is famous for his sweet singing, and excellent Psalms left
unto the Church. 4. The Occasion thereof; 1. Nearer, the coming to him of a
certain man, set out here by his name, Nathan, which signifies a gift, and by
his Office a Prophet, chosen of God to admonish him for his sin. Prophets
were men appointed by God in a special manner to direct the Church of God in
his truth and service. Nathan was an extraordinary Prophet, he came to David.
The Errand on which he came, and his manner of behavior in doing his Errand,
is fuilly and plainly related 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3 2. More remote, his sin in
going in to Bathsheba, in committing adultery with her, as the Hebrew phrase
modestly signifies. See 2 Samuel 11. and 12. Chapters.
Verse 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness:
According unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.]

Deal graciously with me, or be favorable to me, q. d. Whereas I by my sins
have deserved to be cast out of thy favor, and do find and feel in my self
the sense of thy displeasure, I beseech thee be pleased graciously to receive
me into thy favor, and cause me to know that thou have freely and undeservedly
loved me.

Kindness is a word of a larger signification than either grace or compassion,
and it signifies the excellent property of Gods Nature, whereby he is apt for
his own sake to do good unto his creatures, which are weak and need his
goodness, and cannot be happy without it; this is well alleged as a reason of
craving Gods favor, for therefore is he ready to accept into favor those
which have deserved his displeasure, and are no way able to merit his favor,
because the excellent sweetness and kindness of his Nature makes him ready to
show goodness unto all those creatures which depend upon him. Grace cannot be
showed but to a sinner which has offended, kindness is, and may be showed
unto those creatures which have not offended, by bestowing a good estate upon
them, and establishing them in that good estate that they cannot fall from it.

The multitude of thy tender mercies.] Bowels, that is, by a Metaphor, that
inward moving and earning of the bowels, which in a kind disposition is
stirred up by beholding the misery of another.

Here are three phrases in this and the second verse.

Blot out my rebellions.] Sins are rebellions, or acts of disobedience done by
any under government against the Authority and Rule of the Governor, sin is
a lifting up of our souls against the Authority and Power which God has over
us, by preterring our own will before his.

Blot out.] Sin is compared to a debt written in a debt-book, to make the
Debtor obnoxious to the Creditor; and remission of sins is compared to the
blotting out the debt, that it may no longer stand in force to make the Debtor
liable to an action of debt.

Verse. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin]
Tecabbeseni, David may seem to allude to Exodus 34. 6, 7. where the three words
here used for sin are. Id quod macuest vesti, illud est peccatum ipsi animae.
Muis.


The second phrase here is, Wash me thoroughly (or multiply to wash me, or play
the Fuller upon me) from mine iniquity. The Hebrew word signifies crookedness
or wrinesse; Sin is a crookedness of the soul or actions, bowing it from the
straight Rule of Gods will, wash it away, so as no stain nor blemish thereof
may remain behind to defile me; Sin is here compared to bodily filthiness,
or foulness of any kind, which disgraceth him in whom it is, and makes him
unfit to be received into any good company; and remission of sin to the
cleansing of such foulness by means of often and much washing with water, till
it become altogether pure and clean, and free from spots.

The third phrase is, Cleanse or purge me from my sin, where sin is
compared to the legal pollutions of the old Law, which did make a man unclean
and unfit to partake in the Tabernacle of any of the services of God, and
remission of sins is compared to those purgations appointed in the Law to
deliver the party from all such uncleanness, that he might approach to Gods
Ordinances.

Verse. 3. For I acknowledge my transgressions; and my sin is ever before me.]

It was an ancient custom for the accuser to stand before the accused, 1 Kings
21. 10. the Prophet alludes to this, that is, sometimes I have my eye upon the
accuser, It is verbum forense, always standing up in his face, and pleading
against him.
sometimes on the Judge, as the malefactors at their trial.

That is said to be before a man, which is just in his sight, before his eyes
or face, so that he looks still on it. He did present sin before his own
mind willingly, and took those thoughts into his mind that tended to make him
more and more see and detest it.

Verse. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight.] He He had wro^ged others as well as G^d but he now presented himself,
as it were, before God alone, and was most of all troubled and grie^ed for his
sin in regard of the dishonor done to God thereby.
had sinned against his own body by fornication, his own soul, because he lost
his peace, and brought a decay of his grace, against Uriahs wife, person,
family, the Commonwealth of Israel, his own house, the souls of all the
accessaries, the Heathen that blasphemed the name of God by this act, David
speaks comparatively, the offense was committed against God, that weighed down
all the rest, Luke 15. 18.

That thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge.] He notes not the intent and purpose of his sin, but the event of it,
and purpose of his mind in confessing of it, viz. to justify God.

Judge.] Executest punishment. He clears Gods justice by taking shame unto
himself; It is as much as if he should say, Lord, I have so sinned, that thou
may most rightly perform against me all the things which thou have threatened.

Verse. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me.] Hic versiculus totius generis humani casum exponit. Hieron. Jam non modo
peccati unius vel plurium etiam, sicuti hactenus, se rerum fatetur, sed altius
conscendit, se ab utero matris nihil aliud a^^ulisse quam peccatum, and
naturaliter se totum corruprum esse, and quasi vitiis delibu^um. Ita s^^leris
unius atrocitatem reputans in hanc usque cogitationem tractus est, quod natus
peccato, nihil in ^e habe^et sincerum vel integrum. Calvinus.
Not meaning properly his parents sin (for he was born in lawful marriage)
but his own hereditary sin, whereof he was guilty in his mothers womb.

Verse. 6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden
part thou shall make me to know wisdom.] That is, He had not only light against
sin in a common way, but a peculiar work of God upon him. Precatur ut a poenis
quas commeri^us erat Deus se liberet, sicut leprosi per hyssopum vitae social^
redd^ba^. ^^^. Levit. 14. 6. Grotius.


Verse. 7. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean.] All the Sacrifices of
expiation of sin in the old Law, were done by blood, and that blood was
sprinkled upon the people by an instrument of a certain plant, which because
the word in Hebrew is Ezob, for the nearness of the sound, and the
indifference of the matter, the Interpreters have ever used in all languages to
call the word Hyssop.

That is, Wash away my sin with the blood of thy Son, which is shadowed in the
legal sprinklings made with hyssop.

Verse. 8. Cause me to hear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.] That is, Thou shall by the hearing of the glad tidings and
gracious promise of the life work this joy in me.

Bon^s broken rejoice.] That is, the soul exceedingly grieved and sorrowful
for See Pro. 15. 30.
its sins, and so affected with the sense of them, as a living man would be
with the sense of his arm or leg, if it were broken in diverse shivers.

Verse. 9. Hide thy face from my sin: and blot out all mine iniquities.] That
is a See Isa. ^8. 17.
figurative speech taken from the custom of men, who when they are angry with
any person or thing, do inflame their wrath yet more by earnest looking upon
that thing or person. By Gods face is meant his angry displeasure which David
beseeches him to hide from his sins, that is, from him in regard of his sins,
q. d. Look not so upon my sins, as to show thy self angry against me for the
same. In the repetition, Blot out all mine iniquity, he uses the same word
that he had used in the first verse, only here adding the note of generality to
the subject of his Petition, which he understood.

Verse. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within
me.] To create signifies properly to make of nothing, and David using this word
not as if he had not already some beginnings of sanctity; but that God must
work it in him out of nothing (he had wisdom before this, and therefore
sanctity) but to encourage himself from Gods omnipotent power secretly included
in the word Create. He alludeth to the making of the world at first, intimating
that if he were as destitute of grace now, as once all things were of being,
yet God that gave being to things that were not, is able also to give grace to
him.

By the word [ heart] is figuratively meant the inward faculties of the soul,
chiefly the thoughts, motions, affections and desires. The word clean or pure
signifies that which is free from the admixture of any base stuff which may
impair its beauty and worth.

To renew is to repair or make sound again that which by age or other casualty
is decayed or perished, and this word being used after that of creating, shows
that David in prayer did gather more comfortable sense of the work of
Sanctification. For he that asks to have a thing created, finds nothing of it
in himself; he that asks to have it renewed, finds some remainder and
relics which needs some mending and addition.

By Spirit is signified the whole inward man in all the faculties of it, and
David uses both the words of heart and spirit, which in Scripture are used to
note the whole man, because he wishes an universal reformation, wherein every
part shall be amended in its kind.

The word translated right, in the Text, is Constant in the Margin; The word in
the Original notes ordinarily firm, constant and established, as 2 Samuel 7. 16,
26.

Verse. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit
from Isa 30. 22. Numb. 12. 7. Esth. 7. 8. Thy Spirit] The sense of it.
me.] Vox indignantis, Indignation is a compounded affection of shame, hatred
and anger.

That is, Deprive me not of that happy union with thee, and that assurance and
enjoyment of thy love. By the word Spirit joined with this epithete Holy, is
still meant in Scripture the Spirit of Sanctification, working holiness in the
hearts of Gods people.

Verse. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy
free Spirit.] To restore a man to any thing, is to give him that again which
once he had, but now has not.

Restore has five things in it: 1. That once he had a sense of Gods love. 2.
He remembers that he had it. 3. It was now lost. 4. He saw a way to gain it. 5.
By prayer.

Joy of thy salvation.] That is, the comfort I had in the work of thy grace,
strengthening me against sin, and assuring me of eternal happiness.

The salvation of God is that work of his grace by which he delivers his people
from every evil work and thing, and brings them safe to his heavenly kingdom,
as 2 Timothy 4. 18. The joy of Gods salvation is that comfort, delight, content,
satisfaction of heart, which the heart is filled withal, out of the assurance
of this work of grace. It is therefore as much as if David had said, Lord, time
has been that I had great comfort in the sense of the work of thy grace,
delivering me from sin, and all the enemies of my soul, and the assurance of
the continuance of this work, till it had brought me safely to the Kingdom, but
now I have long wanted this comfort, I humbly beseech thee vouchsafe to give it
me again.

Establish or uphold me with thy free Spirit.] That is, so confirm me by thy
Spirit in the ways of goodness, that I may no more run into such gross and
soul sins, as my weakness otherwise will quickly carry me into.

Free Spirit.] Free,

1. Subjectively, or in it self, giving out liberally to us. Because freely
given, acts freely, and makes us free.


2. In the effects it makes us free, Psalm. 110. 3. Where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty.

Verse. 13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways.] Both the things thou
have commanded them to do and forbear for thine authority sake, and also the
things that thou will do to them, for Gods ways signify both the ways he
would have men walk in toward him, and wherein he himself has walked, and
will walk in toward them.

Verse. 14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God.] Or, as the word
signifies, See Genesis 4. 10.
from bloods, that is, the sin of murder, wherewith it may seem his conscience
was most defiled and laden.

And my tongue shall sing loud of thy righteousness.] That is, I will
abundantly praise and magnify thee, as for all other thine excellencies, so
for thy righteousness in keeping promise, and walking justly with sinners in
forgiving their sins for which their surety has satisfied.

Verse. 15. O Lord open thou my lips.] Though the words be translated, O Lord Id
est, P^aebe mihi materiam Cantici, and gratiarum actionis ignoscendo peccato
meo. Muis.
open my lips, as a prayer, yet the Margin has it, Lord thou shall open my
lips, as if it had been Lord open, yea I know thou will open my lips.

Give me power and strength to be truly thankful.

Show forth thy praise.] Publish abroad to others thy praise, that is, such
things as make to the honor and commendation of thy great name.

Verse. 16. For thou requirest not Sacrifice, else would I give it, thou
delightest not in Burnt-offering.] First, God never required Sacrifices
comparatively, that is, in comparison of a broken heart it is nothing, it is not
to be compared with it, as Hos. 6. 6. Joel 2. 13. Secondly, God required them
abstractly, and severed from a broken heart. See Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 16. and
58. 4, 5.

Verse. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit.] It is the Plural Instar
omnium.
Number.

Sacrifices of God.] That is, most eminent, according to the usual Hebraism,
the only Sacrifice which God will accept of.

A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.] A broken heart
is opposed to a whole heart, which is insensible, unhumbled for sin, a
sensible heart, and afflicted for sin. Contrite is that which is broken to
powder, ready to receive any impression. A Miosis, that is, highly esteem, as 1
John 5. 3. Heb. 12. 5.

Verse. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.] Sion was a hill in Jerusalem where David had placed the Ark of God,
and it signifies the state of the Church in regard of things Ecclesiastical and
spiritual. Jerusalem was the chief City of the Kingdom, which David had won
out of the hands of the Jebusites, and signified the State Civil or Temporal,
and by building up the walls thereof, is meant fortifying and defending it
against all sorts of enemies; The sense is, Beftow upon us all good things
necessary for Church and Commonweal, and save us from all evil things that may
be harmfull to either of them.

Verse. 19. Then shall thou be pleased with the Sacrifices of righteousness,
with Burnt-offering, and whole Burnt-offering, then shall they offer Bullocks
upon thine Altar.

Sacrifices of righteousness.] That is, righteously offered, the true study of
righteousness with the Sacrifices.

Bullocks.] That is, all kind of beasts.

Altar.] Offered to God in the place and manner appointed.

PSALM. LII.
Verse 9. I Will praise thee for ever.] That is, he will hope in God; Hope is
the continuation of our thanksgiving, it gives God the glory of his Might,
Mercy, Wisdom. Oliva aeterni^ tatis symbolum. Vide Pierium.


Verse. 10. But I am like a green Olive Tree in the house of God.] Always fresh
and flourishing. See Psalm, 37. 35. Jer. 11. 16.

PSALM. LIII.
THis Psalm is the same in effect, and almost in words, with the 14th Psalm,
some few things changed.

PSALM. LIVE.
Verse 6. I Will freely Sacrifice unto thee.] Such Sacrifices the Law
mentions, Levit. 7. 16.

PSALM. LV.
Verse 13. BUt it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.

Verse. 14. We took sweet counsel together, and walked into the house of God in
company.] Some say The Chaldes Par. Kimchi, Muis.

See Ainsworth, Probabile est unum ex aulicis proceribus accusari, cujus sancta
cum Davide con, unctio and familiaritas vulgo nota esser. Calvimus.


Ahitophel, Calvin dislikes that; a great friend of David's that pretended much
to Religion.

Verse. 21. Yet were they drawn Swords.] It is the custom of the Scripture, to
name hard pernicious and dangerous words by a similitude, darts and arrows, as
in the Psalms, their tongue is a sharp arrow, Genesis 49. 23.

Verse. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord.] Omnia vocationis officia, says one,
Omnium See Psalm. 37. 5.
actionum eventa, another.

1. The burden of duties, in him is all our fruit found. 2. Of suffering. 3. Of
loss.
The event and success of all.

Montanus and others render it donum tuum, though the Lord has bestowed gifts
The Greek well turns it, thy care, which phrase the Apostle uses, 1 Pet. 5.
7. The Chaldee says, Cast thy hope on the Lord.
on thee to use, and for thy comfort, yet trust them with God.

Sustain thee.] Or foster and nourish thee, with food and all other necessaries.

Verse. 23. Bloody and deceitful men.] Men of bloods, that is, blondy men, as
Quise dant crudelitati and sanguinis effusioni. Sic viri divitiarum dicuntur
qui addicti sunt divitiis. De Caesaris percussoribus Suetonius, nemo sua morte
defunctus.
Psalm. 5. 7.

Shall not live out half their days.] Heb. Shall not halfen their days; that
is, not half the days which they might live for the strength of their
constitutions. See Psalm. 102. 24. Job 15. 32, 33.

Grotius interprets it, Non pervenient ad ^tatem, ad quam hominum multi
perveniu^t, and ipsi pervenire potuerant. PSALM. LVI.
Verse 8. THou tellest my wanderings.] That is, all those weary steps he took in
passing over those two great fore^ts, when he fled from Saul.

Verse. 9. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back.] David
speaks as if there were victory in the moment of his supplication.

Verse. 10. In God will I praise his Word: In the Lord will I praise his Word.]
q. d. I have cause to bless God for his Word, he doubleth it for the greater
emphasis.

I never knew what sweetness, fullness, comfort was in the promises, till I
was in distress.

Verse. 12. Thy vows are upon me.] That is, the vows which I have made to thee
are lying upon me.

Verse. 13. For thou have delivered my soul from death. Wilt not thou deliver my
feet That is, my life or person.
from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?] As if he
should say, thou have redeemed me, and effectually called, and justified, and
sanctified me in some measure, and wilt not thou keep me from falling from thy
truth into any damnable error?

PSALM. LVII.
Verse 4. MY soul is among Lions.] Called here Lebaim, hearty, stout,
courageous Lions, Ego inter immanes leones sum. Jun.
of Leb heart, courage. See 2 Samuel 17. 10. Saul and his Courtiers are here
Lions to David; and so was the Roman Emperor to Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 17. and all
wicked Rulers over the poor people, Prove. 28. 15.

PSALM. LVIII.
Verse 4. THey are like the deaf adder that stops her ear.] She stops one
ear with earth, Sc. ^iches. Sc. Pleasure. Obturationem aurium non proprie
intelligit, sed (...) designat; quod fic agat aspis, quasi contemnat carmen,
planeque ad illud obsurduerit. Sententia Psalmistae ea fuerit, tantum esse
suorum hostium furorem, ut non magis profit mitigari, quam moveatur aspis
ineantantis carmine. Vide Jer. 8. Vossius de Orig. and progress. Idol. l. 1.
part altera. c. 8, v. 17.
the other with her tail, as Austin and Cassiodorus say of Adders, that they
may not be charmed.

Verse. 10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall
wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.] This speech was taken from the
custom of those Countries, that were wont after their travels to wash their
feet with cold water 1 Timothy 5. 10.
and that did refresh them: so the blood of the wicked should be refreshment to
the righteous.

Not rejoice in the evil of their enemies, as it is their proper hurt, but as
it is the matter of Gods glory, Non de malo inimici, sed de bono Judice. Anselm.

Quia quando illi damnantur in paenis, illi laetificantur in praemiis. Hieron.
PSALM. LIX.
Verse 6. THey make a noise like a dog] Slanderers are called dogs for their
indefatigableness, insatiableness and barking.

Verse. 10. The God of my mercy shall prevent me.] See ver. 17. As if he had
said, his mercy is mine, it belongs unto me. A wicked man may say God is a
God of He not only calls him a God of mercy, but puts in his interest in it, and
employment of it, whatever mercy there is in God, it shall be laid out for me.
mercy, but only those that are in Covenant may say this.

Prevent me.] Shall be present seasonably to help me.

Verse. 14. Let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the City.] Dogs
are greedy and hungry creatures, have always an appetite, therefore course up
and down for suftenance, but for most part in vain.

PSALM. LX.
Verse 8. MOab is my wash pot.] An allusion to the manner of those Eastern
Countries, Hoc volunt dicere se imperaturos Moabitis and Idumaeis, ut servis.
Grotius. See Weemes his Christian Syu. p. 18. That is, I shall subdue them, and
trample them under my fe^t as I pass through them. Dickson. See Muis.
every night they used to wash their feet, had a vessel for that end. That is,
Moab shall serve me in the basest service I shall put them unto.

Over Edom will I cast my shoe.] Meaning thereby that he would bring the
posterity of Esau into a base and low estate of subjection unto him, as we may
see verified, 2 Samuel 8. 14. Idumaeos conculcabo, ac pessundabo. Muis.

PSALM. LXI.
Verse 7. O Prepare mercy and truth.] The word signifies to distribute or set
out mercy Prepare] or appoint, as his due and ready portion. The Hebrew is Man,
a name whereby that prepared meat was called, which God gave his people from
heaven, Psalm. 78. 24. Ainsw.
and truth, either David begs a spirit of mercy and truth, that by this means
he may be established in his Kingdom, or rather, that God would give with
himself, mercy and truth, to preserve him. See Prove. 20. 28.

PSALM. LXII.
Verse 2. I Shall not be greatly moved.] As if he should say, somewhat I may be
moved, but Subindicat fieri quidem posse ut prematur rebus adversis, quia
sciebat communibus incommodis se esse obnoxium: sed sibi persuadet casus non
fore mortiferos, quia Deus suppo^e^ manum suam. Calvinus.
much I shall not. See Psalm. 37. 24.

Verse. 9. To be laid in the balance.] Of Scripture or right reason.

They are altogether lighter than vanity.] If all men together be put in one
balance, and vanity in another, they will be lighter than vanity it self. The
word Hebel here used, denotes a vain light thing, as the breath of ones mouth
or bubble in the water.

Verse. 10. If riches increase, set not your heart on them.] The Hebrews put the
He says not, if riches increase refuse them, but, set not your heart on them.
To set the heart is to regard or care for a thing, 1 Samuel 4. 20. and 9.20. 2 Samuel 1. 3.
heart for all those things quorum seeds est in cord. 1. Your thoughts, 2
King. 5. 26. let not them ingross your thoughts and consultations. 2.
Affections, 1 Samuel 4. 20. take off your love, desire, joy, hope from the things
of this life. 3. Confidence, place not your confidence in them, be not puffed
up with pride, because you are rich.

Verse. 11. God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power belongs
unto Semel Deus in Sinai locutus est majoribus nostris: inde duo colligo long
certissima: Deum and potentissimum esse ad vindicandum injurias suas, and in
pios mire benignum; Exodus 20. 5, 6. Grotius.
God.]

The meaning is, either, that God spoke it often, or that David heard it often,
though he spoke but once, that is, thoroughly considered it. That is, (says Dr
Tailor) once by the Scriptures, and another time by the holy Ghost. A speech
like that Job. 10. 5. it is repeated for confirmation, power in the extent,
latitude of it, all power belongs to God as a property.

Verse. 12. Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy, for thou rendrest to every
man according to his work.]

The P^al^^ist uses three arguments here to urge men to rely on God. 1. He
has power. 2. Will, to enable him to do any good. 3. Mercy, to render
according to any good you do.

PSALM. LXIII.
Verse 1. EArly will I seek thee.] That is, every morning the beginning of my
work Early in the morning.
shall be to look toward thee, I will begin my duties in faithful invocating
thy help and and.

Verse. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better than life.] With all its
revenues. One may be weary of life, never of the love and favor of God, Psalm.
73. 28. In the Hebrew it is lives, put many lives together, there is more
excellency in the discovery of Gods love. Of living, viz. men, so Muis says it
may be read.

Verse. 8. My soul follows hard after thee.] This notes 1. The strength of his
Adhaesit anima mea post te Calvinus. My soul cleaved after thee. Tantundem
valet atque a feris vorati and la^ i^. 1. Calvin Fuller ^^ scrip. of Palest. l.
3. c. 2
intention, Dan. 9. 3. 2. The strength of his affection, Psalm. 119. 20. 3. The
constancy of a man's pursuit, as that phrase, fulfill after God, Numb. 14. 24.
notes the perfection of a man's obedience. See Muis.

Verse. 10. They shall be a portion for Foxes.] That is, lie unburied for Foxes
and other wild beasts to prey upon. Not ordinary Foxes which are so dainty
mouthed that they will not feed on any carcass but what they kill themselves;
rather Jackals mungrill creatures, deriving cruelty from the Wolves their
fires, and craft from the Foxes their dams, and are very ravening creatures.

PSALM. LXIV.
Verse 6. THey accomplish a diligent search.] Or, a search searched out: that
is, a curious Perfecerunt scrutinium pervestigatum. Arias Montan.
diligent search. The Greek translateth, they are consumed searching out
searches: meaning, that they spend both their time and themselves, in searching
out evils against the just.

PSALM. LXV.
Verse 1. PRaise waits for thee, O God.] Mercy is not yet come, we expect it,
whilst thou Sensus huc redit, Deum esse ita beneficum erga suos, ut quotidie
illis suppeditet novam materiam laudis. Etsi enim se in totum mundum diffundit
ejus liberalitas, peculiari tamen favore Ecclesiam suam dignatur. Calvinus.
art preparing the mercy we are preparing the praise.

Verse. 2. O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.] That is,
all sorts See Isa. 66. 23.
of men, as Genesis 6. 12. Psalm. 145 21. Act. 2. 17. For this cause he hears
prayer, that men might be encouraged to come and seek to him.

Verse. 8. The outgoing of the morning and evening to rejoice.] Outgoings of the
Ainsworth expounds it otherwise.
morning, the rising of the Stars before the Sun rise.

And evening.] That is, when the Moon rises and the Stars with her. So Muis.

Verse. 9. With the river of God full of water.] That is, the clouds
figuratively described.

Verse. 11. And thy paths drop fatness.] Gods paths are said to be there where
he Nubes ita metaphorice appellans. Calvinus. The clouds which are Gods
Chariot, Psalm. 104. 3. from which rain is dropped to cause the earth to
fructisie, Job 25. 36. and 38. 26, 27. Paibs hera are properly such tracks as
are made by Chariot wheels. Ainsw.
much manifests himself. That is, the clouds, the dust of Gods feet, Nah. 1. 3.

PSALM. LXVI.
Verse 3. SUbmit themselves unto thee.] In the Original it is mentientur tibi,
they shall lie unto See Psalm. 18. 45.
thee, and so it is translated by Arias Montanus, and Calvin, Chald. Par.
Subest haec tacita comparatio inter voluntarium cultum quem praestant fideles,
dulcedine gratiae illecti, and servilem coactamque subjectionem, ad quam
increduli vitrahuntur. Hoc enim significat mentiri, fieri supplicem non alacri
obsequio, neque libere, sed quia necessitas extorquet. Calvinus.
Vulg. Lat. noting hereby, that a forced submission unto God is seldom in
truth. See Psalm. 81. 16.

Verse. 16. Come and hear all ye that fear God.] The words are without a
copulative in the Hebrew. Venite, audite, Calvinus. Come, hearken, like that
Genesis 19. 14. it not only imports an invitation, but the affection also of him
that speaks.

Verse. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart.] If I have seen iniquity, the word
is If I had seen in my heart: To see is to behold with a corrupt affection, Job
31. 16. Thus God cannot see evil, Hab. 1. 13. Ainsw. Iniquitatem aspicere in
cord, non est esse sibi male conscium, sed intentum esse and addictum
iniquitati. Quanquam ideo di^er^e cordis meminit Propheta, ut ostenderet non
modo puras sibi esse manus, vel se coram hominibus esse innoxium, sed ut coram
Deo sibi assereret verae integritatis laudem. Calvinus. See Muis.
Raath, it notes the clearest kind of seeing, such as is with conviction, 1 Samuel 12. 17. Perceive and see, or be convinced, the later word is this here. If
I have a mind to wickedness.

PSALM. LXVII.
Verse 1. ANd cause his face to shine upon us.] Or to be light, that is,
cheerful and favorable. See Psalm. 4. 7. and 31. 17. Ubi amoris sui sensum
eordibus nostris inspirat Deus, and re ipsa declarat se propitium esse, dicitur
super nos lucore serena ejus facies: sicuti obnubilari dicitur, dum peccatis
nostris offensus, conscientias nostras terret, signaque aufert sui favoris.
Calvinus.
Non illum tristem videamus in peccatis nostris, sed gaudentem in virtutibus.
Non eum sentiamus judicem, sed patrem. Hieron. See Prove. 16. 15.

PSALM. LXVIII.
Verse 4. Extol him that rides upon the heavens by his Name Jah.] It is an
Elogy of the A precious Scripture. Est nomen Jah ut plerique volunt, contractum
ex Jehovah and ejusdem significationis utrumque deductum a verbo hajab, id est,
fuit, quod Deus and per se ^it, and rebus omnibus ut sint largiatur. Rivetus in
loc. See Muis.
great power of God, because he rides upon the clouds or heavens. See Deuteronomy. 33.
26. Isa. 19. 1. It is his proper Name, the Name of his essence; exalt him as
the first cause, the chief good and utmost end, as him who is being of beings,
and gives being to all creatures, behold this excellency in God, admire him,
and have thy heart taken up with high thoughts of him.

Verse. 9. Thou O God did send a plentiful rain.] That is, dispensations of
the A rain of libralities.
Spirit in a more open observable way. See Micah 5. 7. and Muis in loc.

Verse. 11. Great was the company of those that published it.] Great was the
company Virorum est bella gere^e. Virginum autem and mulierum, victorias cantu
celebrare. Id usitatum fuit apud Ebraeos, ut triumphanti occurrerent, and
victoriam canerent. Exodus 15. 20. Rivetus.
of the Preacheresses, the word is Feminine: See Exodus 15. 20. 1 Samuel 18. 16.
quia receptum erat vetusto more, epini^ia cani a mulieribus. Calvinus. See Muis.

Verse. 14. Though ye have lien among the pots.] Though you look like a black
scullion among the pots, fullied and full of filth.

White as the snow in Salmon] Salmon was a great grove in the mountains of
Tsalmon signifies shady or dark, so this mount was with caves and trees that
grew thereon; but with snow upon it was made lightsom. To be snow-white on
Tsalmon, i^ to have light in darkness, joy in tribulation. Ainsw. See Muis.
Sichem, Judge. 9. 49. where the snow lying there came a great light to the
places below.

Verse. 18. Thou have ascended on high.] Thou Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 8. When he
Hic de caelo agi non dubitamus, quod inter omnes creatas res altissimum est,
and a quo reliquae alt^^ dicuntur prout magis vel minus ad illud accedunt.
Rivetus. Vide Jun. l. 2. Paral. 56. A Sinai in coelum, ut solent reges judicia
exercituri, ^tribunal conscendere. Vide Mat. 27. 19. Grotius.
ascended up on high. The Psalmist is Prophetical, the Apostle Historical.

Thou have led captivity captive.] Or, thou have captivated captivity, that is,
thou have led those captive, who had captivated thy people; or, he led his
people who were miserable captives to Satan, to a blessed captivity to himself.
See Rivet. in loc.

Captivasti nos, qui captivi tenebamur a diabolo. Hieron.

Thou have received gifts for men*] Ephesians. 4. 8. it is gave gifts, because
taking is An expression taken from triumphs of Conquerours after great
Victories, it was their custom to give gifts to the people.
put for giving, 1 King. 3. 24. and 17. 10. and Christ received gifts that he
might give them, for men, Heb. in the man, that is, in the humane nature.
Accepit ut home, dat ut Deus: and quod accepit, hominibus accepit ut det.
Hieron.

Yea for the rebellious also.] That is, say some, those which formerly were so,
but now are subdued by the power of the Gospel, but God gives gifts to the
rebellious, and those that remain so.

That the Lord God might dwell among them.] That is, might have a Church Ut
ipsi habitent in Ecclesia tua, se fidelibus tuis aggregent, agnoscentes
imperium tuum. Huc referri potest Vaticinium Esaiae 11. 6. Rivetus.
among them.

Verse. 19. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us.] A gratulatory Epiphonema.
Some say, with his mercies; others, with afflictions: He speaks of the benefits
of Christ's ascension in the former verse, and therefore I suppose with Rivet,
it is rather to be interpreted, bestowing of gifts plentifully.

Verse. 20. The God of salvation.] Of salvations: He only can save and none can
save but him, Isa. 43. 11. He has all ^orts and ways of salvations, a God of
it, it is his privilege, and belongs to him as he is a God. He is not only
powerful, but skillful to save. Ideo utitur numero multitudinis and salutes
dicit, ut oftendat, quamvis innumera pericula circumstent, innumeros quoque
servandi modos Deum in promptu habere. Rivetus.

And unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.] Or the goings out from
death. Psalm. 68. 12. Id est, Domini est educere a morte, vel a morte eruere.
Significat igitur haec phrasis evasionem aut liberationem a morte. Simili
phrasi 1 Cor. 10. 13. Vide 1 Samuel 2. 6. Apoc. 1. 18. Rivetus.
That is, deliverances from death and deadly danger.

It is an allusion to one that keeps a passage or a door, that is, God has
all the ways which lead out from death in his own keeping.

Verse. 22. The hairy scalp.] That is, even the most fearful enemies, that with
Capillari incedunt nonnulli and comam nutriunt, ut horridiores videantur.
Superbiam etiam and vanitatem hac phrasi videtur redarguere voluisse. Rivetus
in loc.
their ghastly visage, deformed with long hair, would strike a terror into the
hearts of beholders.

Verse. 30. Rebuke the company of spear-men.] Or the beast of the reeds, of
which Chajah indubitato non bestiam solum sed praeter alia caetum seu
congregationem etiam significat, quod per metaphoram fieri Schindlerus docet, a
feris in unum congregatis ductum. Increpa congregationem arundinis, id est,
arundiferam, usi^ato Ebraisme Arabs qui alias in plerisque LXX. sequitur, nunc
ab iis discedit and vertit, Increpa feras quas possedit. Dieter. Antiq. Bibl.
Feras arundinis AEgyptias ideo nonnulli dici volunt, quia in arundineto omnium
nobilissimo suas sibi voluptates capiebant; and fer^s fuisse vocatos, quia
populum Dei ferarum in morem olim insectati sunt. Et haec certe a proposito non
sunt aliena, cum cettum sit AEgyptios fuisse antiquos hosts populi Dei. Sed
tamen videtur Propheta non unam aut alteram hostilem nationem notasse* sed
omnes in genere quae in populum Dei hostili sunt animo. Rivetus in loc.
spears were anciently made, and to which they are like in fashion. The Chaldee
Paraphrase interprets it of Egypt, a Country of reeds; he alludes to the
Crocodile the proper beast of that Country, which living both in land and
water, usually lies amongst the reeds. See Muis.

Verse. 34. Ascribe ye strength unto God.] Acknowledge it, attribute it to him,
give him the honor of it.

PSALM. LXIX.
Verse 4. THey that hate me without a cause, are more than the hairs of mine
head: they that 1. Hostium multitudinem. 2. Multitudinis hostilitatem. 3.
Utriusque insaniam.
would destroy me being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty.] Christ's speech,
and true of all his people.

Verse. 9. For the zeal of thine house.] Or jealousy, indignation for polluting
of Vide Jun. l. ^. Paral. 65. Rom 15. 8.
thine house, and studious care to have it conserved holy. See John 2. 15, 16,
17.

Has ^aton me up.] Devoured or consumed. See Psalm. 119. 139.

Verse. 27. Add iniquity to their iniquity.] Permissive, Do thou leave them to
themselves that they may add iniquity to their iniquity. 2. Punitive, in a way
of spiritual judgment, a measure of sin prepares for judgment, as well as a
measure of grace for glory.

Verse. 28. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living.] Or book of life,
That Haec ultima est imprecatio, and omnium maxim formidabilis, quae tamen
semper impaenitentiam and obstinatam duritiem, de qua nuper loquutus est,
sequitur. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid.
is, declare that they were never written there. See Exodus 32. 32.

PSALM. LXX.
THis Psalm is the same in substance, and almost in words, with the end of
Psalm. 40.

PSALM. LXXI.
Verse 14. ANd will yet praise thee more and more.] I will add to thy praise,
so the words Et adjiciam super omnem laudem tuam. Calvinus Perinde est ac si
diceret, Domine quia Pridem ad tua beneficia assuesactus sum, non dubito quin
nova accessio novam quoque materiam mihi datura sit celebrandae tuae gratiae.
Calvinus. See Muis.
are in the Original, as if he should say, God has had some praise in the
world already, I would fain add something for my part; I would come in with my
share, and that he might have some more praise for me.

Verse. 16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God.] That is to go forth

1. In a right apprehension of a man's interest in God by virtue of the new
Covenant, by which one has an interest in all his attributes.

2. To go forth in the former experiments that he has had of God.

Austin ( says Calvin) plus centies ad evertenda operum merita hoc testimonio
utitur. PSALM. LXXII.
Verse 1. GIve the King thy judgments. O God, and thy righteousness unto the
Kings son.] Judicium est clara and perfecta scientia quod cuique sit tribuendi;
Justitia est constans and perpetua voluntas suum cuique tribuendi. Justitiae
and Judicii nominibus formam gubernandi rite compositam intelligit. Calvinus.
Judgment is an ability to know what we ought to do, 1 King. 3. 15.
Righteousness is a willingness to do what we know.

Verse. 3. The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
righteousness.] Some understand it literally from all parts of the Land, so
Calvin: rather the supreme and inferior Magstrates.

Verse. 6. He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass.] Or as some write
it Which is very comfortable and beneficial. See Ainsw.
(for so the Original will bear it.) He shall come down like rain upon the
Fleece: having relation to Gideons Fleece. It is chiefly understood of Christ,
yet of Solomon also as a type of Christ, and indeed of every good Governor.
See 1 King. 4. 25.

Verse. 9. And his enemies shall lick the dust.] They shall fall down so low
when Like a serpent, as is expressed in Mic 7 16. noting hereby great fear and
subjection, testified by bowing down their faces to the ground, as is the
manner in the Eastern Countries. See Isa 49. 23. Ainsw.
they worship him, that their mouths shall touch the earth. Scimus Orientales
hac caeremonia fuisse usos. Calvinus.

Verse. 17. His Name shall be continued as long as the Sun.] Filiabitur nomen
ejus, Sensus est, antequam sol createtur ipse filii nomine appellatus est.
Nempe Christus ab aeterno Dei filius fuit: atque tam commode legi potest
filiabit nomen ejus, nempe pater filiabit, hoc est, filium appellabit, filii
nomine and appellatione dignabitur. ^apel. Critic. Sac. l. 3. c. 13.
Montanus. Shall be continued as the Name of the Father in the Son. The Greek
turns it, his name continues.

The sense is, That there shall always be a true Church even to the end of the
world, in which Christ gets to himself, in which he is worshipped and prais^d
Glass. Onomat. See Muis.

PSALM. LXXIII.
Verse 1. TRuly God is good to Israel.] What ever God does, though wicked men
prosper, Tametsi totum orbem moderetur Deus: Ecclesiam suam, quam tuendam
suscepit, propiore intuitu dignatur. Haec ratio est cur Propheta Israelem
nominet: atque etiam protinus hoc nomen restringat ad rectos cord, in quo est
correctionis species. Calvinus.
and the godly be much afflicted. Israel is the common name of the people of
God in the Old Testament. See Whitefoot on Genesis 47. 29.

Verse. 4. For there are no bands in their death.] Are not held long a dying,
had no lingering disease or consumption.

Verse. 23. Thou have holden me by my right hand.] That is, helped him in any
thing he did. See Isa. 45. 1.

Verse. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel.] That is, shall give me
counsel, Quoniam verba sunt futuri temporis hunc genuinum esse sensum
existimo, Domine postquam nunc tuo ductu in viam semel reductus sum, posthac
etiam regere me perges, donec tandem in gloriam tuam suscipiar. Calvinus.
(I will not take counsel of my self) and that counsel shall be my guide.

Verse. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I
desire Neque in caelo neque in terra alium praeter te quaesivi. I have sought
none in heaven or earth besides thee. Jerome. I desire nothing in heaven or
earth but thee. Calvin. Thee alone I affect in heaven and in earth. Cajetane. I
love nothing with thee. Marlorate. I esteem thee in stead of, and above all
treasures. Molterus.
besides thee?] He had communion with Christ, the glorious Angels, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob. See Heb. 12. 23, 24. The substantials of blessedness lie in
God, these are but accidentals.

He had beautiful and wise children on earth.

Verse. 26. My flesh and my heart fails.] Flesh, that is, the outward man, and
my heart, that is, the inward man, the courage.

But God is the strength of my heart.] His at last gasp.

And my portion for ever.] That is, the lot wherewith he was content. Psalm. 16.
5.


Verse. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to God.] Best, see verse. 25. 1 In
Cujus sanguine sum redemptus. Hieron.
respect of the act of prayer to have communion with God. 2. In respect of the
issue of it, all graces are exercised and increased, sins mortified, mercies
sanctified and sweetened.

PSALM. LXXIV.
Verse 9. WE see not our signs.] That is, the Ordinances. Queruntur fideles
ablata sibi esse signa gratiae: quod Deus faciem suam quodammodo absconderit.
Calvinu^. The testimony of Gods presence and favor, extraordinary or ordinary.
A^nsw.


Verse. 11. Pluck it out of thy bosom.] This denotes a performance of the work
Manum in sinum condere otiari est, Prove. 29. 24. and 26. 15. Contra manum e
sinu producere est serio and accurate aliquid agere. Fessel. Advers. Sac. l. 4.
c. 9.
without slackness. See Prove. 26. 15. Ainsw.

Verse. 13. Thou brakest the heads of the Dragons in the waters.] That is, the
Egyptians, the Noblemen of Egypt, who pursuing the Israelites were drowned in
the red sea, Exodus 14. 28. For great persons are likened to Dragons or
Whale-fishes, as Ezekiel 29. 3. Ainsw.

Regem and principes AEgyptios, as Grotius.

Verse. 14. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan, or Whale, in pieces.] That is,
Pharaoh King of Egypt.

And gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.] For their
faith, not bellies. While they were in the wilderness they remembered Gods mercy
to them at the red sea.

Verse. 19. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle Dove into the multitude of the
wicked.] The Church is so called, for as the Turtle Dove has but one mate, so
the Sea Ainsw.
Church must have God only for her love, and is exposed to prey.

PSALM. LXXV.
Verse 3. THe earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved.] Solomon
almost ruined Prioris temporis statum respicit.
all.

I bear up the pillars of it.] Not by any industry of men. Omnis potestas a
summa potestate. Aug.

Verse. 6. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor
from the Neque a desertis montibus, says the Vulgar, from the desert
mountains, which lying on both sides of Canaan, include both North and South,
as the Chaldee Paraphrase expounds it.
South.] The desert, that is, the South or North, for deserts were in both ends
of the Land of Canaan.

Verse. 8. For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup.] There is a twofold Cup,
Quo divinarum afflictionum modus diversus innuitur. Eadem metaphora Esa. 51.
17, 22. occurrit. Glass. Rhet Sac. Tract. 1. Vinum quia iram accendit,
vindictam significat, Esaia 11. 12. Jer. 25. 16. Apoc. 14. 1^ and 16. 19. and
18. 3. and 19. 15. Grotius.
1. Of blessing, salvation. 2. Of cursing, wrath, death, as here, and Psalm. 11.
6. See Hab. 2. 16. Ezekiel. 23 31, 32. Jer. 25. 28.

And the wine is red.] Wine is wrath, Job 21. 20. Red, noting fiery
indignation: Full of mixture.] Of all manner of judgments, as Rev. 14. 10. It
is said to be without mixture, of mercy.

And he pours out of the same.] viz. Unto his own people, Jer. 25. 17, 18.
keeps it not in the Cup.

But the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out.] Shall
wring out the dregs, how bitter soever they be.

Significat his figuris Propheta, non posse impios effugere quin sugendo ad
ultimam usque guttam, calicem ^bibant a Deo propinatum. Calvinus. PSALM. LXXVI.
Verse 4. THe mountains of prey.] Either those places where conquering Armies
divided Quo nomine violenta and praedatoria regna designat, sicut abinitio
scimus, quo quisque plus valebat latrocinando, fines suos magis ampliasse.
Calvinus. The Kingdoms of this world, which make prey and spoil one of another,
like wild beasts, Dan. 7. 4, 5, 6, 7. Ainsw.
the spoil after a victory obtained: or where robbers preyed upon passengers.

Verse. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee.] Which is not so meant,
as B. Smith. Quamvis initio hostium furor omnia perturbans, quasi tenebras
obducat, tandem cessurus in laudem Dei quia eventu palam fiet, quicquid
moliantur, nihil tamen posse contra Deum. Calvinus.
if the wicked in their rage should praise God, but that their rage should
yield great store of matter for God to raise his praise and glory thereby, to
make his power, providence and wisdom, to be known to men.

Verse. 12. He shall cut off the spirit of Princes.] The word is, he slippeth
off as Vindemiat, vindemiabit. Calvinus.
one should slip a cluster of Grapes from a Vine; so soon and easily is it done.

PSALM. LXXVII.
Verse 10. THe years of the right hand of the most high.] The years and times
of my life, wherein I had experience of Gods mercy and love, for so is this
phrase interpreted, Psalm. 17. 7. and 80. 17.

Verse. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters.] As he led
the Quod in Israelitas proprie competit, ad Deum transfert, cujus auspiciis and
ductu per aridum maris Rubri sinum transierunt illi. Calvinus.
people at the red sea.

PSALM. LXXVIII.
Verse 2. I Will open my mouth in a parable.] Parables are sententious
speeches, speeches Vide Jun. l. 1. Paral. 26. Matthew. 13. 35. Nomen M^shal
graves and insignes sententias Hebraeis significat, quales sunt paraemlae, vel
proverbia, and apophthegmata. Quia igitur materia ipsa, si gravis and ponderosa
est, expergefacit hominum sensus, mera a^ophthegmata proferre sibi in animo
es^e testatur author Psalmi. Calvinus. That is, in, or with parables, as the
holy Ghost expounds it, Math. 13. 34, 35. A parable or proverb is in Hebrew
Mashal, which denotes rule, superiority or excellency, because such speeches
preuail much in the minds of men, and are in esteem. In old English or Saxon,
it was called A big spell. Ainsw. on Psalm. 49. 5.
filled with weight of wisdom. To open the mouth in a parable is to have an
active intention of the Spirit, preparing and fitting the mouth to open.

Verse. 8. A stubborn and rebellious generation.] A metaphor taken from beasts
Contumaciam denotat and proterviam.
that will not be guided by their rider.

Verse. 25. Man did eat Angels food.] Bread of the Mighties, that is, of the
Panem robustissimum, ut Tremellius and Junius ^ecte transtulerunt, ad
significandam naturae Angelicae praestantiam and excellentiam* Rainold de lib.
Apoc. See Dr Willet on Exodus 16. quaest. 23. Verum quidem est, magnifice ideo
celebrari miraculum, quo magis detestabilis reddatur populi impietas: quia
long praestantius fuit Man e coelo pluere, quam si satia^i fuissent vel herbis
vel fructibus, vel alio terrae proventu. Calvinus.
Angels (as the Chaldee and Greek explaineth it) which are mighty in strength,
Psalm. 103. 20. and Manna is called their bread, either because by their
Ministry God sent it, so Austin; or because it came from heaven, the habitation
of Angels, as the Chaldee paraphraseth; or because it was excellent, so as the
Angels (if they needed any food) might eat it. See 1 Cor. 13. 1.

Verse. 27. As dust, as the sand of the sea.] Three things in the Scripture are
used proverbially to declare a great multitude, The dust of the earth, the sand
of the sea, and the stars of heaven, Genesis 13. 16. Numb. 13. 10. Genesis 22. 17.
Deuteronomy. 1. 10. Genesis 32. 13. Jer. 15. 8. Hab. 1. 9. Isa. 10. 22. and 48. 19. Hos.
1. 10.

Verse. 32. And believed not for his wondrous works.] They did believe the
History of his works, viz. that such things as are there recorded, were done,
but they did not believe the prophecy or promise which was virtually in those
works, viz. that God would do more wonders for them, till he had finished and
accomplished their deliverance.

Verse. 36. And they lied unto him with their tongues.] Saying to Moses,
whatsoever Quia oris confessio affectu carens, voluntaria non erat. Calvinus.
the Lord shall say to us, that will we do. Jerome. One cannot speak too highly
of God, but because they believed him not to be their Rock and Redeemer.

Verse. 38. And did not stir up all his wrath.] Which was in him, or which
their sin deserved.

Verse. 39. For he remembered that they were but flesh.] That is, weak, or in
opposition Loquutiones quas usurpat, fragilitatem notant, quia miserabilis est
hominum conditio. Calvinus.
to Spirit. See Psalm. 56. 5.

Verse. 41. And limited the holy one of Israel.] There is a threefold limiting
God, 1. To means. 2. To time, so they limited him. 3. To manner. Manum Dei pro
virtute per Metonymiam accipisatis notum est. Fuit autem in prima illa
liberatione populi, novo and insolito modo extenta Dei manus, quo magis
detestabilis fuit populi impietas, in quam nunc invehitur Propheta, pro nihilo
ducere, vel statim sepelire quod nulla ve^ustate obsolescere debuerat. Calvinus.


Verse. 42. They remembered not his hand.] That is, they walked not answerably to
so great a deliverance.

Verse. 49. By sending evil angels among them.] That is, say some, good Angels
Or Angels of evils. The Chald. Paraph. translate^b, Sent by the hand of them
that do evil.
so called, because of the effects, they may be instruments of temporal evils:
but the Hebrew Rang is scarce so used in Scripture, and as Tarnovius says, the
good Angels are never so called. Rather evil in themselves, the devil and evil
spirits.

Others incline to the Rabbis and others, who by evil angels understand the
evils or plagues themselves sent upon Egypt, and the rather because that
expression Vide Rivetum in Exodus 11. and Calvin. in loc. Dr. Casaub. The orig.
cause of Temp. evils.
is familiar with the Hebrews of old, Psalm. 89. 49. The Chaldee Paraphrast, And
shall not see the Angel of death, Hab. 3. 5. The Chaldee, From before him was
sent the Angel of death.

Ainsw. and Grotius say, hereby may be meant Moses and Aaron, whom the Lord
sent to denounce these plagues before they came, and by their hand brought them
on Egypt, Exodus 7. 1, 2, 19. and 18. 1, 2, 5. 16, 21. and ^ 14, 15. Rather the
ten several plagues, says Dr Clerk.

Verse. 57. They were turned aside like a deceitful bow.] When a man shoots
with a deceitful bow, though he level his arrow directly toward the mark, and
think with himself to hit it, yet the arrow goes a clean contrary way.

PSALM. LXXIX.
Verse 12. ANd render our neighbors sevenfold into their bosoms.] That is,
fully and abundantly. See Genesis 4. 2^, 23. Psalm. 12. 6. Prove. 6. 21. Matthew. 18.
22.
The third and seventh number is used by sacred and profane Writers, for any
great multitude, Levit. 4. 6, 7. and 26. 18, 21, 24, 28. Amos 1. 3, 6. Psalm.
13. 7. Job 5. 19. Prove. 9. 1. and 24. 16. So the Latins say,

Ter faelix, ter beatus.
Falices ter and amplius.
Terque quaterque beati.
Into their bosoms.] That is, largely and that it may affect and cleave unto
them, Isa. 65. 7. A speech familiar with the Hebrews, Jer. 32. 18. Luke 6. 38.

PSALM. LXXX.
Verse 4. HOw long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?] Every
word has Fumabis, Calvinus. See smoke for anger, Psalm. 74. 1. Videtur tacita
esse allusio inter sumum irae Dei, and suffitum qui Sacrificiis adhibebatur sub
lege. Calvinus.
its Emphasis: How long? a great while: Will thou be angry, The word signifies
to breath out anger and fury. Ainsworth renders it smoke. With the prayer (it
self) of thy people.

Verse. 17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand.] Christ is called
the Super populum, quem dextera, id est, Christus tuus salvavit. Hieron. Whom
thou love, honor, and powerfully helpest. See Genesis 35. 18. Ainsw.
man of Gods right hand, which implies three things, Gods love to him, Christ's
honor and defense.

PSALM. LXXXI.
Verse 3. BLow the trumpet in the new Moon.] The Lord would have them to keep
these Illi canebant tuba in Pascha, Pentecoste, and Seenopegia, Hieron. Sub
novilunio per Synecdochen alias quoque ferias designat. Quanquam autem quotidie
offerebantur Sacrificia, dies tamen Sacrificii per excellentiam nominat, quibus
se ex Legis praescripto fistebant fideles ad tabernaculum. Calvinus.
new Moons holy to him, to teach them, that it was he who ruled and governed
the world, and all the changes and vicissitudes of it, for as the Moon is
predominant over all the inferior creatures, so does Gods providence rule all
things here below.

Verse. 10. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.] As little birds open their
mouths Monet ne modice aut parce sed multa ac magna a Deo pe^amus.
and the old fills them.

Open thy mouth wide.] That is, earnestly, confidently call upon me. Our
Savior opens this sentence, John 15. 17.

And I will fill it.] That is, I will satisfy thy desire to the full.

Verse. 16. Fed them also with the finest of wheat: and with honey out of the
Rock Chrysostom Quum appareat ex sacra historia, mel in cavis rupibus passim
fuisse repertum quamdiu florebat Dei benedictio, simplex sensus est, tenorem
gratiae Dei continuum and aequabilem futurum fuisse, nisi malitia and
sceleribus populi abruptus esset. Calvinus.
should have satisfied thee.] God never caused honey to come out of the Rock,
but their appetite made it seem honey to them.

PSALM. LXXXII.
Verse 2. SElah.] Wheresoever thou read this word think there is in the same
verse some special and notable thing to be marked. As in this verse it
signifies as much in English, B. Hooper on the Command.
as though David had said, Oh how great offense is it before God to pervert at
one man's request, Justice!

Verse. 6. Ye are gods.] In office, not in nature, not participatione Divinae
essentiae, See Exodus 7. 4. and 22. 8. Vide Junium lib. 1. Paral. 77. Joh. 10.
34.
but similitudine divinae potentiae.

PSALM. LXXXIII.
Verse 3. ANd consulted against thy hidden ones.] Things that we would keep
safe we bring not ordinarily to common view.

Either those that the Lord undertook to protect, or that were to him as his
hidden Ne hostium insidiis and captionibus putemus nos esse expositos,
opportune suggerit nobis Propheta plenum consolationis and spei Epitheton,
vocans nos Dei absconditos. Calvinus.
treasure.

PSALM. LXXXIV.
Verse 4. BLessed are they that dwell in thy house.] Or, Congregation, which
attend continually Let not sin or vain thoughts dwell in you. Shows the
strength that comes in by serving God, Exo. 23. 14, 17. Si cui magis placeat
turma, sensus erit, non paucos modo venturos, sed per multas catervas. Calvinus.
upon holy services.

Verse. 7. They go from strength to strength.] From company to company, or troop
to troop, in allusion to the custom of the Jews, all the Males went up thrice a
year to Jerusalem, and they went with their flocks and in troops, those that
were forward would overtake this, and that troop.

Verse. 11. For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield: the Lord will give grace and
glory: See Rev. 21. 7.
no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.]

This contains an abridgement of the Covenant of Grace, it is the largest
promise The creature stands in need of two things, Provision and Protection:
For the first, the Lord is a Sun as full of goodness, as that is of light:
For the second, a Shield, Psalm. 18. 2. Zech. 9. 12.
we find in the whole book of God.

The good things are expressed:

1. Metaphorically, Among all inanimate creatures the Sun is the most
excellent; Among all artificial creatures, a Shield is chiefest, and was of
greatest use in those days. The Sun notes all manner of excellency and
prosperity, Isa. 60. 20. Prove. 30. 26. A Shield notes all manner of protection
whatsoever, Psalm. 3. 4. God will not only provide good things and protect, but
is these to you. 2. Literally, 1. All spiritual good things under the name of
grace. 2. All Eternal under the name of glory. 3. Temporal, no good thing will
he withhold, Them that walk uprightly. God pitcheth on this grace of sincerity
chiefly, as a badge of our being in the Covenant. 1. Because a sincere heart is
the Lords for ever, Prove. 16. 17. 2. It is the touchstone of all other graces,
and holds them all together, Ephesians. 6. 14. This is, 1, In faith, 1 Timothy 4. 5.
2. In love, 2 Cor. 8. 8. 3. Obedience, Josh. 24. 14. Sincerity is not required
from them as the cause, but in them as the subject of it, here is a promise to
uprightness, and Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. of uprightness.

PSALM. LXXXV.
Verse 8. I Will hear what the Lord God will speak: for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints.] As if he had said, Certainly it will not
be long before God gives to every soul that truly fears him, a comfortable
assurance of his favor, though he do delay it for a time, surely he will do it
ere long.

God speaks peace, when he sends or gives peace, that is, all good things, and
Pax non dicitur, nisi quando bellum non est. Hieron.
when he by secret echo returns a word of assurance to the Petitioners heart,
that he will give peace.

Verse. 10. Mercy and truth are met together: Righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.] He speaks as if there were a conflict between these
Attributes, in relation to us there may seem to be so, righteousness calls
for vengeance, mercy moves to pity, but now Christ has satisfied justice, and
accomplished truth, and so they sweetly meet in the Covenant of Grace.

PSALM. LXXXVI.
Verse 16 GIve thy strength unto thy servant.] That is, put forth almighty
power for my succor, some expound it of strength in the inward man. See Psalm.
43. 2.

PSALM. LXXXVII.
Verse 3. GLorious things are spoken of thee (rather in thee) O City of God.]
That is, Jerusalem, Hierosolyma sic dicitur tribus de causis. 1. Quoniam in ea
Deus habitabat. Nam in urbe Templum and in Temple area, seeds Dei in terra, aut
2. Valet proverbiali sermon civitas ampla, ut cedri Dei. Aut dicta eo modo,
quia Divinitas pure ibi colebatur. Drusius in Observat. Sac. lib. 6. cap. 15.
so called also Psalm. 46 5. and 48. 2. a figure of the Church and Babylon.

Verse. 4. I will make mention of Rahab.] Rahab signifies pride and insolency,
that is, Egypt, so called for its pride, Psalm. 89. 10. Babylon held the people
of God in captivity, and sorely oppressed them.

Verse. 7. As well the Singers as the players on Instruments.] He speaks of the
manner Proverbiale hoc, significans maximos minimoique in hac re esse similes.
Grotius.
of praising of God under the Law with singing and musical Instruments, 1 Chronicles. 9. 33. and 25. 1, 2.

All my springs are in thee.] That is, all my springs of truth that are
revealed to ^ontes scientiarum and bonorum.
me, all the springs of comfort that I have communicated to my soul, all the
springs of grace that I have to quicken me, they are all in thee, in the joint
society and communion with Gods people.

PSALM. LXXXVIII.
OF Heman.] One of the holiest and wisest men then living, 1 King. 4. 31. under
the heaviest trouble almost that can befall a Saint.

Verse. 5. Free among the dead like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.] My eternal state is
cast, there is no hope of mercy for me.

Free among the dead.] The word signifies to set a servant free, my name is
entered Quod inutilis esset ad omnia vitae muncra^- and quasi a mundo alienatus.
^alvinus.
among the dead.

Verse. 15. When I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted.] The word does not
properly signify the distraction of one that is mad, but of one that is in
doubt, and yet that distraction does often lead to a degree of this.

Brought to such endless doubts, that I know not what to say or do.

PSALM. LXXXIX.
Verse 4. BUild up thy Throne to all Generations.] Make it flourish and
establish it, that it ^psam Ecclesi am, i^ q^^ ceu Rex sed^bis in aeternum.
H^er, Sec Psalm. 0. 18
shall never be moved.

Verse. 7. God is greatly to be feared.] The word signifies a dreadful fear, a
fear of destruction.

Verse. 14. Mercy and Truth shall go before my face.] Mercy and truth, or
faithfulness, or words to that purpose, are six times coupled in this Psalm,
verse. 1, 2. verse. 24, 28, 33.

Go before thy face.] As pressed and ready at hand to do the creatures good.

Verse. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound.] Which have a
sweet Which gathered men unto the Tabernacle. Numb 10. 6. because it called
them to the Ordinances of God.
taste of thy grace, an allusion to the silver Trumpets which sounded at their
feasts, Congregations, when liberty was to be given to those that were in
bondage.

The sounding of the Trumpets among the Jews, was

1. At the removing of the Camp. 2. At the calling of the Assembly. 3. At the
year of Jubilee, when deliverance was proclaimed.
Verse. 19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty.] It is literally expounded
of 1 Samuel 18. 13, 14, 30.
David, but of him as a type of Christ.

Laid help.] It is understood two ways: 1. Put all assistance in his power. 2.
Have committed all assistance by way of office to his charge, not only to
deliver us from the guilt of sin, but the weaknesses which it has brought
upon us.

Verse. 22. The enemy shall not exact upon him.] The word translated exact,
signifies O^ not seaz^* as a creditor does on the debtor.
to seduce, cheat and deceive, and so is rendered Jer. 29. 8.

Nor the son of wickedness. The Hebrews tell us, it is properly the
naughtiness of some evil natured children, which bite the nipple that gives
them milk, who ^uck and bite both at once.

Verse. 37. And his Throne as the Sun before me.] That is, perpetual Ut Sol
ae^ernus ita solium, Sol enim perpetuo du^at nam sequitur verse. 38. ut Luna
stabile erit coram me. Idem aliis verbis. Aut potius ^icut splendet Sol, ita
solium ejus illustre ac perspiouum erit. Utravis ha^um melior expositio prior,
tamen ad postremum sensum Chaldaeus interpres explanat. Et solium ejus splendet
tanquam Sol coram me. Drus. Qu^st. Ebraic. l. 3. c. 11.
and glorious (as the Chaldee explaineth it, Shall shine as the Sun.) See
Psalm. 72. 5.

PSALM. XC.
AUstin doubts whether Moses made this Psalm, but Jerome says, It was Moses
that wrote the Pentateuch, because called the man of God. So Deus. 33. 1.

Aben Ezra says, In my opinion Moses our Lord or Master (as they use to style
him) composed this Psalm. Euthymius says, it belongs to the baptized taken out
Lorinn^* in 1 Pet. 1. 3.
of the water, which is the Etymology of Moses his name, Quia per baptism^^^
effi^iuntur homines D^^. Euthymius Prolog. in Psalm.

Some refer it to be made in Exodus 32. on that occasion. Ainsworth refers it to
that History, Numb. 14. See Hackw. Apol. p. 148.

This Psalm is a Tract of the shortness of life. Moses in forty years saw six
hundred thousand men swept off the stage of this world, besides women and
children, therefore he knew this well*

Verse. 1. Lord, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations.] 1.
Because Or refuge in all our travels in this terrible wilderness* Exodus 33. 14.
Deuteronomy. 8. 15. and 33. 27.
he constantly resides with his people. 2. He constantly retires thither to
^inde rest. 3. One retreats to his house for safety when danger comes, that is
his Castle; This word is refuge, God is the refuge of his people, Deuteronomy. 32. 27.
there the same word is used.

Verse. 4. For a thousand years in thy ^ight ar^ but as yesterday.] That is, a
thousand years with man in respect of the Eternity of God, are but as a day.

Verse. 10. The days of our years are threescore years and t^^.] Seventy years
is man's age, 1 Kings 1. 1. 1 Chronicles. 19. 20. Eighty years, so long Plato lived.
Sen. Epist. 51. 2 Samuel 19. 32, 35.

And if by reason of strength, they be fourscore years, yet is their strength,
labor See Hackw. Apol. p. 148. Senectus ipsa morbus.
and sorrow.] In the Original it is Rohebam superbia, the strength of creatures
is called pride, because it often inclines unto pride.

And we fly away.] That is, our souls.

Verse. 11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so
is A short life, a sure death, and a severe judgment is enough to make any
tremble. Sensus est: quis plene novit omnia severitatis tuae exempla? and si
quis nosse^, quomodo praetimore and anxietate auderet ea recensere, and verbis
exequi? Gro ius.
thy wrath.] q. d. The wrath of God surpasses knowledge, who seriously
considers what it is to offend God, those poor souls that are under the terror
of the Lord consider it.

Fear what you can, there is something in the wrath of God answerable to it,
and beyond it, according to the dreadfulnesse of thy displeasure, so is thy
wrath. We over-fear the wrath of men, but cannot have too dreadful
apprehensions of the wrath of God.

Verse. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.] To be so persuaded of, and to think of the uncertainty of our lives,
as we may seriously study and endeavor to please th^^, and provide for the
salvation of our own souls.

Verse. 14. O satisfy us early.] Or in the morning, that is, after the dark
night of afflictions. See Psalm. 15. 4. and 30. 6.

Verse. 17. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us.] Either that
which he puts upon us, and works in us, or which shines upon us in his favor;
the face is the seat of beauty, love shining in his face, is the beauty of God
upon us.

And establish thou the work of our hands upon us.] He means, Strengthen and
Isa. 26. 12. John 15. 5.
enable us to do the works thou command us to do.

Yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.] There is an emphasis in the
words, he repeats them again, to express the greatness of his desire.

PSALM. XCI.
THis Psalm seems to have been made, when the destroying Angel in the days
of King David having slain seventy thousand, did at the Lords command cease, 2 Samuel 20. 16.

Verse. 1. He that dwells in the secret place of the most High.] Dwelling
notes intimate communion, I will come unto him, and dwell with him.

Shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.] It is a Metaphor from a Bird,
when a Kite stoops at her young ones, she keeps them under her Wing.

Verse. 2. He is my refuge.] That is, I have good cause so to say.

Verse. 3. From the snare of the Fowler.] Or, Hunter, the Devil who hunts for
souls; An evil spirit employed in the pestilence. 2 Samuel 24. 16, 17.
the pestilence is here compared to a net, because it came suddenly upon the
people, as the snare upon the Bird.

And from the noisome pestilence.] Or, From the pestilence of griefs, so the
Hebrew, because it is most grievous to those that are visited with it. Some
distinguish the snare from the pestilence, as a hidden evil from a manifest
one, as if the Prophet had said, whether the Devil privily lay snares for us,
or openly oppose us, God will be ready to help us, quod mihi nou displicet,
says Calvin.

Verse. 4. His truth.] Or faithfulness in performing Dabium non est quin ad Dei
promissiones respiciat Propheta, sine quibus nemo in Dei sinum conjicere se
auderer. Calvinus.
promises.

Verse. 6. Nor the pestilence that walks in darkness.] The pestilence works
strongly and forcibly to death in the dark, it spreads secretly and closely,
as they go unseen: Some say it is more violent in the night, because the air is
thick.

Nor for the destruction that wastes at Noonday.] The word signifies a
cutting or Pestilentia meridiana dicitur quia in primis graffatur in calore
Solis intenso, nam and ^er eo attenuatur, ut magis s^ venenum diffundat; and
corpora humana magis laxantur, ut facilius venenum hauriant. Vossius de Orig.
and Progres. Idololat.
sore biting, such as makes a common slaughter.

Some say men are most apt at Noonday to receive poison, because then the
pores of the body are opened.

Verse. 11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all
thy Unumquemque fidelium alloquitur Propheta, sicut etiam Ps. 34 v. 8.
Calvinus. The good Augels are called his, not only by Croation, but by
immediate Ministry, they stand before his face, and by grace of perseverance,
they fell not from their estate, as the wicked Angels did, and are now
confirmed by Christ, that they cannot fall, Col. 1. 17.
ways.] The promise was made primarily to Christ, but is true of his members.
The holy Angels shall be as careful for the safety of Gods children in common
calamities of famine, pestilence, as the Nurse is over her tender child to
hold it in her hands, and bear it up in her arms, lest it should fall and hurt
it self, always provided, that the child of God keep himself in his ways,
that is, in obedience to Gods Commandments, in the duties of his lawful
calling. See Psalm 34. 8. and Heb. 1. 14.

Calvin urges this place against that opinion, That every one has his
peculiar Angel, and says, The heavenly host are solicitous for the safety of
every Saint, and that it is behovefull for the godly to hold this firm, that as
they are to conflict with many enemies, so they are guarded with many keepers.

Verse. 13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder: The young Lion and the
Dragon Hoc est, Loco per* culi tuto ac illaesus pervades. Sumptum ab iis qui
per deserta ac solitudines iter faciunt, in quibus venenatae and immanes
bestiae, quales hic memorantur. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 2. Significat
mortiferos casus quibus obnoxii sumus in mundo. Calvinus.
shall thou trample under feet.] Despise the most deadly dangers, it notes
Subjectionem and contemptum; that is, thou shall go safely and happily through
the most dangerous works of thy calling, and prevail against thy most violent
and mighty foes. This promise is so chiefly made to Christ our Head, as that we
have each his part in it by participation from our Head.

PSALM. XCII.
The Title.

A Psalm, or Song for the Sabbath Day.] Calvin says, he doubts not but they
Est Rabbinorum sententia test Kimchio in Praefat. Psalmorum, Psalmi hujus
autorem fuisse primum hominem Adamum, qui cum creatus esset in parasceve
Sabbathi, postridie mane hunc Psalmum dixerit. De Dieu in v. 1.
were wont to sing this Psalm on the Sabbath Day, as the Inscription shows, and
it appears from other places, that some other Psalms were properly destinated
to this use.

Verse. 5. Thy thoughts are very deep.] So deep that the line of man's
understanding is not able to fathom them. The thoughts of God are his decrees
and Quod a sensu communi abhorret, reverenter suspicere nos jubet: quia Deus ut
obsequium nostrum probet, arcana sua judicia long supra captum nostrum
attollit. Calvinus.
counsels.

Verse. 7. It is, that they may be destroyed for ever.] That is, a
demonstration, God does this that they may be destroyed for ever.

Verse. 10. I shall be anointed with fresh oil.] Shall have a fresh pouring out
of Notatu dignum est, quod proprie gratiam Dei piis omnibus communem in usum
suum accomodat. Calvinus.
the Spirit.

Verse. 12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree.] There is a double
motto of the Palm Tree, 1. Perpetuo viret, it is always green. 2. Sub pondere
crescit, the more it is laden, the deeper it is rooted, therefore the branches
carried in the hand, worn in garlands, were signs of victory, Revel. 7. 9

He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon.] The Cedar of all trees is most
durable, and shoots up highest.

Verse. 14. They shall bring forth fruit in old age.] When the outward man
Flourishing is three times mentioned, verse. 12, 13, 14.
is withered, all other things decay with age. Sola Ecclesia perpetuo viget and
viret.

PSALM. XCIII.
Verse 1. THe Lord reigneth] This upheld Luther amidst his oppositions,
Christu^ vivit and regnat.

He is clothed with Majesty.] 1. Full of Majesty, Psalm 65. 14. 2. His Majesty
Has put it on as an ornament.
is eminent and conspicuous to all the world, therefore he is said to be the
King of glory.

Clothed with strength, wherewith he has girded himself.] Girding with
strength Not only gladio, but robore cinctus.
implies two things: 1. The great strength which God has. 2. His readiness to
help his Subjects in danger. See Isa. 8. 9. Luke 12. 35.

Verse. 3. The floods have lifted up their voice.] Floods, that is, troubles,
Ps. 65. 8. Summa est, Deum in fluminum strepitu and tempestuosis maris
fluctibus virtutem exerere qua nos ad sui reverentiam commovear. Calvinus.
and 18. 5. Isa. 17. 12, 13.

Have lifted up their voice] Come with great dread.

PSALM. XCIV.
Verse 12. BLessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him
out of thy Law] Doctrina apprime utilis in ^ot^ vitae cursu, qui in continua
militia peragendus nobis est Calvinus Foelix est, qui Deo mag istro utitur.
Hieron.
The holy Ghost uses six Arguments to prove that a man is blessed who is
chastened.

1. Because he is instructed by affliction, as here. See Isa. 48. 17. 2. The
end why God lays afflictions on his people, is to give them rest from the
days of adversity, verse. 13. this is more than after adversity, because
greater afflictions are coming on them for the future, and God spiritually
supports them under trouble. 3. Until the pit be dug for the wicked, in the
same verse, while their hearts are swelling, and they fill up the measure of
their sins. 4. God will support them, verse. 14. 5. There shall be a glorious
restoration.

Verse. 15. But judgment shall return unto righteousnesse] There should be a
happy conjunction of them, by man's sin they are severed.

6. All the upright in heart shall follow it, in the same verse, after God, say
some, who is the author of this restoration, Isa. 51. 7.
Verse. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me] Confusion of thoughts
Cogitationes vocat anxias, and perplexas cur^s, quibus fuisset obrutus, nisi
Divinitus abhibita fuisset aliqua consolatio. Calvinus.
was within him, whether to stick to God, or to leave him.

My careful troubled thoughts, perplexed as the branches of a tree (for so the
word properly signifies) therefore the Greek turns it sorrows, so Psalm. 139.
43. Ainsw.

Thy comforts] Not efficiently but objectively, the consideration of what thou
art to me.

Delight my soul] Revive and keep it from sinking.

PSALM. XCV.
Verse 6. OCome, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our
maker.] Primum verbum accipiunt Hebraei pro prosternere totum corpus in tertam,
cum extensione manuum and pedum. Alterum pro inclinare caput, cum aliqua etiam
corporis inclinatione, Tertium genua inclinare usque in terram. Zanchius de
Religione and ejus partibus. Idem fere habet Junius in These. Theol. De Adorat.
Tribus verbis rem unam designat, ut scilicet filii Abrahae se t^tos Deo
addicunt. Calvinus. He expresses one thing in three words, viz. that the sons
of Abraham should give themselves wholly to God.

Verse. 11. That they should not enter into my rest] Canaan was but a type. See
Heb. 3. 11, 12. and 4. 3, 8, 9, 11.

PSALM. XCVI.
THis Psalm is a part of that Song wherewith God was celebrated, when the Ark
of his Covenant was brought with joy into David's City from Obed. Edoms house, 1 Chronicles. 16. 23. It contains a Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, and of calling
the Gentiles from Idols to serve and praise the living God.

PSALM. XCVII.
THis Psalm is of Christ and his Reign, as the seventh verse manifests.
Christ, called by Jeremy, Jer. 23 5, 6. Our righteousness.


Verse. 1. The Lord reigns.] That is, Christ, the Government of all the
creatures is committed to him, as Mediator, and all the Attributes of God are
managed by him as Mediator, therefore let the earth rejoice.

Let the multitude of Isles be glad thereof.] That is, the converted Gentiles
which See Isa. 60. 9.
live in the Isles. Compare Isa. 42. 4. with Mat. 12. 21.

Verse. 2. Clouds and darkness are round about him.] As when Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost, the power of the most High overshadowed the
Virgin. Jerome thinks he means the Cloud which covered Christ in the
transfiguration.

Clouds and darkness about God or Christ express,

1. The terriblenesse of his administrations, Psalm. 18. 11. Nahum 1. 3. Zeph.
1. 15. Proponitur in hunc finem formidabilis c^us Majestas, ut fastum and
pravam carnis confidentiam sub se prosternat ac conter^t. Calvinus.
because whirlwinds, hail and storm, which strike terror, usually come out of
the clouds. 2. His Occulta judicia. therefore when he came down on Mount Sinai,
he was covered with a Cloud, not only to signify his Majesty, but the
mysticalnesse of those administrations they were to be under, a Cloud covered
the Temple for the same reason.
Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne] That is, his
righteous Habitatio locus paratus, Heb.
judgment, or his judgment according to righteousness

Habitation] Establishment or base. See Psalm. 89. 15.

Verse. 7. Worship him all ye gods] That is, all that excel in power, eminency,
authority, The Greek says, All ye his Angels. See Psalm. 8. 6. Unto this the
Apostle seems to have reference, Heb. 1. 6. Ainsw. Grotius.
whether Magistrates here, or Angels above, Heb. 1. 6.

Quicquid habetur pro Deo, cedat and se submittat, ut emineat Deus unus.
Calvinus.

Verse. 10, Ye that love the Lord hate evil.] Hatred of evil arises from love
to God.

1. Because to will and nill the same thing is true friendship, Prove. 8. 13. 2.
Sin is the greatest enemy to God, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Romans 8. 7. 3. It will endanger
his love to them, Isa. 59* 2. 4. It is as natural to grace to hate evil, as to
love God, as love was made for God, so hatred for evil.
Hatred of sin is inferred from the love of Gods Law, Psalm. 119. 113. here
from love to him.

Our hatred of sin must be,

1. Universal, Psalm. 119. 104. 2. Implacable, Romans 7. 24.
It is discovered,

1. By a constant jealousy and watchfulness. 2. By a serious resisting the
temptation. 3. By a bitter grief after.
He preserves the souls of his Saints] It Is true of their lives, much more of
their souls, it is interpreted both ways.

Verse. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart] Vide Calvinum.
Light and joy belong unto them: But how? It is sown, that is, it is in hope
and expectation, and not always in fruition, as the Husband-mans seed will
come and bring increase with it.

PSALM. XCVIII.
Verse 1. O Sing unto the Lord a new Song.] That is, praise him, Psalm. 40. 3.
See Videtur hic Psalmus scriptus breviter, ejusdem argumenti esse, cujus majus
carmen Exodus ^ 5. Grotius. Canticum novum, est Dei filius crucifixus: quod
^unquam auditum fuerit. Nova res novum habet canticum. Hieron.
Psalm. 33. 3.

PSALM. XCIX.
THis Psalm is a Psalm of praise, stirring up the people of God to that duty by
a threefold exhortation. The first in the three first verses. The second in
the fourth and fifth, the third in the four last.

The Prophet lays down the grounds of the duty:

1. Gods universal Sovereignty over all things.

Verse. 1. The Lord reigns.] Exercises kingly Authority, which is supreme
Sovereign and absolute, having no Superior nor partner.

2. His gracious presence in his Church set out figuratively in that phrase, He
sits between the Cherubims. The Cherubims were Images of flying men, which
shadowed the Mercy-seat, or covering of the Ark with their faces toward one
another, and looking downward upon the Ark, and seem to have been types of the
holy Angels, both looking into the great Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and
the Redemption of mankind wrought by him, and also standing prepared and
addressed to yield their service unto Christ, as ministering spirits for the
good of his Church in any imploiment, and from thence did God give answers to
his people by the Ministry of the High Priest, and there did he vouchsase some
visible sign of his Divine Majesty, so that it was a testimony to Gods people
of his being graciously present with them in Christ to do all spiritual good
for them.

3. The effects of both these, viz. the trembling of all people, and shaking of
the earth. Trembling and shaking are effects of a great measure of fear,
overcoming the person in whom it is, and leaving him destitute of all power to
resist and oppose, or fly from the thing feared. The meaning seems to be,
that all men, yea, and all things shall even faint and shrink before the Lord,
as utterly unable to stand against him when he comes to fight for his Church,
and defeat their projects and practices against it.

4. Gods greatness in his Church, verse. 2. The Lord is great in Zion, and he
is high above all people.] By Zion, a part put for the whole, is meant the
whole Church, where Christ is acknowledged, and the name of God called upon in
him. God is said to be great there, because in the Church, and for the
maintenance and guidance of it, he principally declares his greatness.

High above all people] Not alone in respect of authority or right to govern,
but also in respect of strength, power and sufficiency, so that he is able to
effect his own will amongst and against them, and they cannot hinder his
designs and purpose, or effect any thing contrary to his good pleasure.

Secondly, The Prophet lays down the duty it self:

In the third verse is the matter of the Exhortation, with a reason to confirm
it also, Let them praise] Or, They shall or ought to praise; it is so an
Exhortation to a duty, that it also shows a necessity, and fore-tels the
performance of it.

Thy great and terrible Name] That is, thy self that art great and fearful.

For it holy] So it is concisely in the Original, and may be meant of the name
of God or himself, all is one; for when the name of God is said to be holy, the
meaning is, Himself is, and known so to be. The Name of God signifies his
renown and honor, and sometimes those things by which he is made known and
called, and sometimes himself so called and made known, as here.

Verse. 4. The Kings strength also loves Judgment] By it here may be meant
wisdom and understanding to moderate justice. Justice is,

1. Commutative, which stands in the right behavior of one person to another
in all things, as also toward the Governor. 2. Distributive, which is proper
to Superiors and Governors, and stands in the right ordering of their
Inferiors by punishing and rewarding them according to their works.
Thou do establish equity] To establish equity is to appoint and ordain by
his powerful authority, the doing of that which is right and equal, to ratify
it as a Have established] Or, Do establish. It notes a constant act, have
done, and wilt continue to do it.
Law, which cannot be altered or disanulled.

Thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob] Thou give to every man
Equity, the word signifies rightnesses, or straightnesses. All the directions
of Gods word, which hold forth a good conversation of life, because it is a
performing of that which Gods understanding has judged and acccounted fit and
convenient to be done.
according to his works, Psalm. 99. 14. In Jacob, in the Church.

Verse. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: For he is
holy.] Ut sit excelsus in cordibus vestris. Hieron.

To exalt is to lift on high, not in place but worth, so termed figuratively,
because it makes him eminent, the meaning is, take notice of, confess,
acknowledge, make known and set forth Gods excellency.

To worship is to bow down the head or whole body in testimony of doing honor.

The Footstool of God is his Ark, Temple or Tabernacle. A footstool is the A^,
or toward the footstool. The Tabernacle is called his Footstool, because of the
abasement of the people of God in his service. Id est, Vertite vos versus
Arcam, ut mos est Israelitis, Ps ^^8. 2. ^ Reg. 8. 44. Dan. 6. 10. Et hoc ipso
Psalmo Arca vero dicitur scabellum pedum Dei, 1 Paral. 28. 2. Infra Ps 132. 7.
comparatione coeli scilicet, cujus respectu and terra, maxim vero Judaea,
scabellum pedum Dei dicitur, Isa 66. 1. Matthew. 5. 35. Thren. 2 1. Grotius. Vide
Calvinum.
lower part of a Throne prepared for him to rest his feet upon that sits on the
Throne.

This Hebrew word here translated Footstool is six times used in the Old
Testament, and has always the word feet added to it, as 1 Chronicles. 28. 2. Psalm.
132. 7. and 110. 1. Isa. 66. 1. Lam. 2. 1. and here.

The LXX who translated the Hebrew into Greek, do herein follow the Hebrew, so
do the Penmen of the New Testament, who wrote in Greek, and that in eight
several places, as Matthew. 5. 35. and 22. 44. Mark 12. 36. Luke 20. 43. Acts 2.
35. and 7. 49. Heb. 1. 13. and 10. 13. Once the word Footstool is singly used
without the addition of the other phrase of feet, Jam. 2. 3. Doctor G^uge on
Heb. 1. 14. Sect. 154.

These signs were fitly called his footstool, there his feet as it were are
set, a littlelow expression of his greatness is here, a mean and scant
manifestation of his excellencies, but the fullness of his Majesty is seen
alone in Heaven.

For he is holy] Gods holiness is thrice repeated in this Psalm. Holiness in
God is that Excellency of his Nature, whereby he is separated to himself,
regards himself, knows himself, esteems himself, loves himself, does all for
himself.

Verse. 6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call
upon his name.] The Lord raised up holy Priests and Prophets for his people,
Moses and Aaron were Priests, Moses extraordinarily, Aaron ordinarily, Samuel a
Prophet called on his Name in behalf of his people to turn away punishment from
them. See Jer. 15. 1.

They called upon the Lord, and he answered them.] God heard them, and at their
request did forbear to plague the people.

Verse. 7. He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies,
and the Ordinance that he gave them.] This is meant not alone of those
particular times, when God spoke out of a cloudy pillar to Moses and Aaron, as
he did often, but of his giving unto the people the whole Law out of Mount
Sinai, which was full of darkness and fire to, Exodus 19. 18. and that because he
tells of their keeping the Laws after in the next clause.

Verse. 8. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest
See Psalm. 25. 14.
them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.] That is, that did
sometimes forbear to punish them, and forgavest their sins, and sometimes again
did severely punish them for their sins, or that pardoned the penitent
amongst them, but did avenge himself upon the impenitent, did punish their
inventions, or works, or deed^.

PSALM. C.
THis is a Psalm of praise, that is, a Psalm made for this purpose to be sung
to the praise of God in the Assemblies of his Saints.

Verse. 1. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord.] Shout to him out of great
gladness in respect of his goodness, and the benefits he gives us, especially
himself, or out of applause of his excellent works. The word is used to
signify the blowing of an alarm with Trumpets, Levit. 10. 5. the Prophet may
well allude to this custom of blowing with Trumpets over their Sacrifices, as
they were wont to do in their new Moons, and this they did to express the
greatness of their joy in God.

All ye Lands.] Heb. All the earth, not alone all the Land of Israel at that
time, He prophetically intimates the conversion of the Gentiles unto God by the
preaching of Christ in the world.
but all the world after Christ's coming.

Verse. 2. Serve the Lord with gladness.] That is, Do his works, submit to his
Laws, acknowledge his Sovereignty over us, and be ruled by him, and that
cheerfully.

Come before his presence with singing] The face of God here signifies his
gracious presence in his Tabernacle.

Come before.] That is, present ones self in that place', with reference to
this presence, and with observation of it. The singing of Psalms with great joy
and gladness.

Verse. 3. Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not
we our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.] Here is the
reason of the former, he to whom this service is to be performed is indeed God,
and therefore worthy to be served, and the benefits he has done for us require
no less. It is to be understood rather of the spiritual Creation, than the
bodily formation.


Made us.] Formed each of us in the womb.

Not we our And his we are: ^^ the Hebrew in the Margin reads it. Both senses
are good; and the Chaldee keeps this latter.
selves.] This work is wholly and only Gods.

We are his people, and the sheep of his pasture] Admits us to be his, and
provides us pasture as a shepherd for his sheep.

Verse. 4. Enter into his Gates with thankesgiving, and into his Courts with
praise, be thankful unto him, and bless his Name.] Gates and Courts of the
Tabernacle and Temple, he requires to give thanks, and praise him publicly
when they met together at the place appointed by God for that purpose.

Verse. 5. For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting.] Apt to procure
welfare to himself eternally and infinitely, and also to all creatures.

And his truth endures to all generations] Faithful in keeping Covenant, and
making good his promises.

PSALM. CI.
THe tenor of this Psalm shows, that David coming to his Kingdom, 1.
Reformeth his Person.

2. His Court and Family.

3. His Country.

In this Psalm David binds himself to be thankful unto God for his
advancement to the Kingdom of Israel. He binds himself to a thankful
acknowledgement of Gods goodness, and praising God for this benefit in the
first verse.

2. Rightly to behave himself in the rest of the Psalm.

Verse. 1. I will sing of mercy and judgment, unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.]
Cantare clementiam and judicium, tantundem valet ac testari solenni verborum
nuncupatione, se fore ^ustum and aequum Regem. Quum dicit, tibi I^h^v^ Psallam
Dei beneficio se agnosci^ ad tam prae^larum and honorifioum m^nus esse
destinatum quia superbae temeritaris fuisset ultro se ingerere. Calvinus.
Sing and play on the Instrument, for so the second word signifies, which is
translated sing.

The matter of this Song is Mercy and Judgment, the end of it, To thee, O
Lord, that is, to thy praise and honor, to show my gratitude to thee. Mercy is
kindness or beneficence, doing good out of favor, bestowing benefits of all
sorts; This is one part of David's Song, the great benefits which the Lord had
vouchsafed. These he resolves gladly to set forth and enlarge in his Song.
Judgment here signifies the righteous execution of punishment upon his
enemies which hated him, and sought to hinder him of the Kingdom, which God had
promised unto him.

The second part of the Psalm, shows another way of declaring his
thankfulness, viz. by behaving himself virtuously in the Kingdom, by a
faithful discharge of his duty, both in respect of his personal walking for
his own particular conversation, verse. 2, 3. and in his government both of his
Family and Court, verse 4, 5, 6, 7. and also of his whole Kingdom, verse. 8.

Verse. 2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way] That is, Would use
prudence So David is said to do, 1 Samuel 18. 14.
and discretion in considering his actions seriously, and applying his mind
with all diligence to know what is fit to be done, and to do it accordingly in
the due time and order.

In a perfect way] Order all and each of his actions obediently, and according
to the rule of Gods Law.

O, when will thou come unto me] It may be interpreted three ways of Gods
coming Vide Calvinum. Est hoc votum David^^ de ratione regnandi, quam sibi in
animo proposuerat long optimum, and cujus modum pauci implent reges, etam qui
plus Deo debent quam David, id est, Christiani. Grotius.
to him, in fulfilling his promise, and making him King, If he made this Psalm
before he was settled in his Kingdom, or of Gods coming to him by gracious help
in his Kingdom, or of Gods coming to him by death, the second interpretation
seems the best.

Ainsworth expounds it, When will thou come] viz. To assist me in the
performance hereof: Or, When thou shall come.] viz. To call me to an account of
my life.

I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.] Not only when I am abroad,
that is, in all his private carriage at home within his private walls.

Medium domus sua palatio and publicis aedibus opponit: ac si diceret intra
privates parietes. Calvinus.

A perfect heart.] A will resolved in all things to please God. To walk with a
perfect heart, is constantly to look to his heart, that it may be, and he may
show it to be perfect.

Verse. 3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eres.] To set a thing before
ones eyes, is to consider of it, how he may do it, an evil thing, or thing of
Belial, is That is, Mischievous wicked word or thing. See Psa. 41. 9.
any manner of wicked deed. The word Belial signifies without yoke or profit,
and is a name and title of the Devil himself, 2 Cor. 6. 15. Evil things are
fitly so called, because the Devil brought sin into the world, and he still
moves men to sin.

I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.] q. d. If
my heart He would not set himself wittingly and willingly to practice sin.
Adversum ab omni scelere se fore pronunciat. Calvinus.
rise not against such sins, if I should not dislike and hate them, ^ome blot
would cleave to me, but not now.

Such as turned away from the worship of the true God, and from his Laws and
Statutes.

Verse. 4. A froward heart shall depart from me.] I will not converse with them
familiarly.

I will not know a wicked person.] That is, love, favor, approve, countenance
them, Psalm. 1. 6.

Verse. 5. Who so privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off.] He
would H^^^e^^ with tongue] That traduceth, or (as the Hebrew phrase is)
betongueth. Hereupon a man of tongue is for a pra^^er or calumnia^^^, Psalm.
140. 12. A^nsw.
suffer no backbiter, nor endure to come near them, or have them about him, nor
let them pass away unchastened that were proud.

Verse. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with Hoc notatu dignum est, quia licet optimus si^ Princeps, nisi tamen
respondeant ministri, ejus innocentia vix ad subditos perveniet. Calvin^^.
me.] That is, he will diligently and carefully enquire after such, that he
might pick even the choicest of them for his service.

He says not another man's eyes, but mine eyes, he would not put all the trust
upon others, he would himself make what proof and trial he could.

Verse. 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land.] Constantly,
diligently, Hoc ideo dictum, quia mane judicia exercebantur, ut diximus ad Job
38. 13. Grotius.
seasonably and speedily. See Psalm. 73. 14.

That I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord.] Severely
punish with death, if the nature of their faults require it.

The City of the Lord.] The whole Land, Jerusalem especially.

PSALM. CII.
THe Penman of this Psalm is unknown. It was made either in the time of the
Quisquis ex Prophetis fuerit author Psalmi, certum est, eum dictasse precandi
formam pro Templi and urbis reparatione. Quod restringunt quidam ad tempus quo
impediebatur a vicinis gentibus Templi aedificatio, mihi non placet: potius
existimo ante reditum populi, quum jam instaret promistae redemptionis tempus,
compositum fuisse Psalmum. Tunc enim caeperunt Prophetae Isaiae magis erigere
piorum animos, juxta illud vaticinium Jesa 40. 1. Consilium autem Prophetae
fuit non modo animare populum ad fiduciam, sed curam and solicitudinem injicere
pro Ecclesiae salute. Calvinus.
Babylonish Captivity, or Prophetically before it, for the benefit of the
Saints in that time.

Pours out his complaint, or meditation.] Pouring forth intimates plenty of
matter and earnestness in uttering it, but withal a kind of disrespecting of
words and order.

Verse. 1. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee.] It is an
earnest asking with loudness of the desire, though not of the voice.

Come unto thee] Sig. to give heed unto it.

Verse. 2. Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble.] He notes
a desire of favor in deprecating the contrary.

Incline thine ear unto me in the day when I call, answer me speedily.]
Whenever I call, make haste. Answer me speedily.] To answer is more than to
hear, viz. returning word again to a person concerning the matter whereof he
has spoken, and to incline ones ^ar is to use great and favorable attention,
as a man which gives another leave to come so near him, that he may even lay
his ear to his mouth and hear his whisperings, if he had more secret and
important matter to speak of.

Verse. 3. For my days are consumed like smoak] Without all comfort, vainly,
and Sunt hyperbolicae loquutiones, sed quae tamen vere exprimunt quam graviter
pios animos sauciare debet Ecclesiae desolatio. Calvinus. In fumo Plant. sensu
minus commodo attamen Psalm. 37. 20. eadem phrasis occurrit, ubi omnes ita
legunt exceptis LXX, and S. Hieron, qui legunt sicut fumus, at Robert. Steph.
and Munst. scribunt per Caph sicut funus. Atque sic legerunt LXX and Hieron.
item Chald. Paraphras. quos omnes sequuntur recentiores: and sane haec lectio
long est commodior. Consumpti sunt dies mei sicut fumus, hoc est quam facile
and velociter evanescit fumus, tam facile and cito perit vita m^a, atque eo
alludere videtur Jacobus Epistola c. 4. v. 14. Capel. Critic. Sac. l. 3. c. 19.
to no purpose.

And my boxes are burnt as an hearth.] That is, all his strength was quite
dried up, so that no marrow and moisture remained.

Verse. 4. My heart is smitten and withered like grass.] This is more
emphaticall, Quae Ebraei exponunt de humore nativo, qui dolor ac maestitia
nimium quantum exsiccatur, cum humorem existimant significari vocabulo cordis.
Ego veterum sententiam contemnendam non puto, ut illud cor meum percussum est,
accipiatur, pro illo, ego percussus sum, and sit sensus, qualis herba sole
adusta: sic ego misera aerumna contabui. Sic LXX. interpretes hunc locum
convertunt, percussus sum ut herba and aruit cor meum. Drus. Observat. Sac. l.
7. c. 10.
say some, than I am smitten.

Verse. 5. My bones cleave to my skin, or flesh.] So Calvin and Ainsw. Quo
genere l^c^tionis, extremam maciem denotavit, caro pro cute hic sumitur, contra
cutis pro carne Job 18. 13. Drusius.


Verse. 6. I am like a Pelican of the wilderness.] A bird living in wild and
desolate Quia aves sunt Judaeis quoque incognitae, simpliciter tenere
sufficiat, notari hoc versu funestas aves, quae in latebrosis montibus ac
desertis habitant, quarum adeo amaenus and suavis cantus non est, ut horrorem
potius incutiat; ac si diceret, se ab hominum consuetudine remo^um similem
prope fuisse bestiae sylvestri. Calvinus.
places, Zeph 2. 14. Isa. 34. 11. Hierom writing upon these words, says, when
the Pelican beholds her young ones brought almost to death by the sting of a
Serpent, she diggeth a hole in her breast with her beak, and from thence
fetches out blood, which lighting upon, and besprinkling them, does kill the
poison of the Serpents sting, and restore them to life; but Christ was
contented to have his breast, his head, his sides, his hands and feet pierced
and opened, that he might besprinkle us with his blood, and so revive us that
were dead in sins, by the poisonous sting of the old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9.

Verse. 7. I watch, and I am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.] Was kept
Ista similitudo luctum inqui^tudinis plenum denotat. Calvinus.
sleepless and unable to take his natural rest, and that by reason of his
being comfortless and friendless, and destitute of all means of safeguarding
him from danger, as a sparrow alone upon the house top.

Verse. 8. Mine enemies reproach me all the day: and they that are mad against
me, Quidam existimant jutant positum pro conju^ant, sed ^^rare pro conjurare
est insolens Hebraeis sermo. Potius hic hoc dicit per me ^uran^, id est,
execrantur. Vide Number. 5. 21. Jesa 65. 25. vel jurant per ae^umnam ac miseriam
meam. ^rus. Observat. Sac. l. 8. c. 7.
are sworn against me.] His enemies traduced him, and bound themselves with
oaths to do him mischief.

Nish bagnu jurant in me, that is, they wish all evil to befall me, that I may
become an execration, so Numb. 5. 27. and Isa. 65. 15. a pattern of misery, so
that all men might say when they cursed, the Lord make thee like David.

Verse. 9. For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with
weeping.] That is, when I did eat and drink, I had then little joy in my food,
for I wept abundantly in the midst of my meals.

He did count himself so vile a sinner, that he was not worthy to feed upon any
better food, and that dust and ashes were too good for him. In the days of old
they were wont in times of sorrow and sadness in a Fast, to sprinkle dust and
ashes upon their heads, from whence our Ashwednesday has its name, being dies
cinerum, a day wherein men humbled themselves before the Lord in dust and
ashes; he means he did fast exceeding much.

Verse. 10. Because of thine indignation and thy wrath, for thou have lifted me
up, and cast me down.] That is, had most vehemently cast him down, as a man
which lifts up a thing first, that he may throw it down with more strength and
vehemence.

Verse. 11. And I am withered like grass.] Before he said his heart withered
like grass, that is, all his comfort and cheerfulness was dashed, now he says
himself was withered, which is something more then the withering of his heart,
it signifies that he was even ready to die and perish through extremity of
sorrow.

Verse. 12. But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance unto
all generations.] God himself is eternal, and he will give cause to those
which live in one age as well as another to remember his truth, goodness and
great works.

Verse. 13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor
her, yea the set time is come.] Gods power is noted in the word Arise, the
appointed Dan. 9. 24, 25. Jer. 29. 10.
time is come, God had limited their Captivity to seventy years, which were
ready to be expired.

Verse. 14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof.] That is, were greatly gladded to think of her repairing and
re-edifying, and pitied her dust, that is, were moved with great remorse and
compassion at the consideration of her ruins.

Verse. 15. So the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord: and all the Kings of
the earth thy glory.] That is, become true Christians, and show it, as by
performing his whole worship, so by fearing his Name, shall know the glorious
mystery of the Gospel, so as shall work them to a holy fear of that glory: Or
by the glory of God may be meant Christ here, who is made known in the Gospel,
whom Simcon calls the glory of the people of Israel.

Verse. 16. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in glory.] That
is, the Church, he shall then appear in his spiritual glory.

Verse. 17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
prayer.] Some take the word rendered destitute, to signify the heath or
wilderness, so we translate it, Jer. 17. 6. Utterly broken, so others, Jer. 51.
58. The Hebrew word signifies a poor shrub that stands alone in the wilderness,
liable to every blast, trodden by the feet of beasts, that is, when they pray
he will cast a favorable eye, and grant their requests.

Verse. 18. This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people
which His verbis significat memorabile fore hoc Dei opus, cujus laus propaganda
sit in multas aetates. Calvinus. Respexit ut misereretur. Hieron.
shall be created, shall praise the Lord] This, that is, the coming of Christ
in glory and goodness to the poor destitute soul. Shall be written, that is,
set down in a book, recorded and published by the Scriptures of the Apostles
and Evangelists, and propagated to all succeeding ages to the worlds end.

Verse. 19. For he has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary: from
heaven did the Lord behold the earth.] His high and holy place, this is taken
from Deuteronomy. 26. 15. the sons of men which inhabit the earth.

Verse. 20. To hear the groaning of the prisoner, to loose those that are
appointed to death.] Not only such who are imprisoned for well-doing, but all
those to whom sin is a prison, whether they be otherwise prisoners or not.

Those that are appointed to death] Which have deserved death for sin, and such
as are by men condemned to death for their righteousness sake, free them from
the danger of eternal death.

Verse. 21. To declare the Name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in
Jerusalem.] The Jews the inhabitants of it should magnify it.

Verse. 22. When the people are gathered together, and the Kingdoms to serve the
Lord.] That is, when the Gentiles which shall be converted shall meet together
to perform public worship unto God.

Verse. 23. He weakened my strength in the way] This present life which is as it
were a way leading to the life that is to come hereafter.

Verse. 24. I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
years are throughout all generations.] He deprecates eternal death, of which
untimely is a forerunner. q. d. I resolved to pray and beseech the Lord,
because he is my God joined to me in a faithful Covenant of grace, that he
would be pleased not to let this affliction continue so grievous upon me, as to
bring me to death untimely, even in the midst of my days, in so undue a time,
when after the course of nature I might have continued as long again in the
world.

Thy years are throughout all generations.] That is, thou live for ever, and
therefore art able to save thy people from destruction, how extreme and heavy
soever their affliction be.

Verse. 25. Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth.] That is, from
the beginning of the world before time anciently when things first begun to be
laid, making and settling it in the place and standing wherein it is, before
thou made other things, as the foundation of that great building.

And the heavens are the work of thy hands.] A thing created by thee: by hands
metaphorically are meant Gods mighty power, because they which work any thing
do it usually with their hands.

Verse. 26. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea all of them shall wax
old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed.] Heaven and earth, and so the things therein perish, that is, come to
nothing and cease to be.

Endure.] That is, continually the same for ever, without change or end. Heb.
stand, that is, be the same constantly, Heb. 1. 11.

A garment.] Which by little and little grows rotten and comes to nothing. God
shall by little and little bring the world and all things in it to end.

Verse. 27. But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.] Constant
without alteration.

Thou art he.] That is, the same that thou promisedst to be, and thy people
expected thee to be.

Verse. 28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established for ever.] Children, that is, godly sons of godly parents, qui a
fide parentum non d^sciscunt. Thou shall have a Church here in the midst of all
the changes of the world, and they also shall inherit everlastingness.

Their seed.] That is, by thy power shall be made steadfast and firm in heavenly
glory.

PSALM. CIII.
THe Penman of the Psalm is David. The matter of it thanksgiving. The duty is
propounded in the two first verses, enlarged and confirmed in the rest to the
twentieth, pressed, enforced, and concluded to the end.

Verse. 1. Bless the Lord O my soul; and all that is within me bless his holy
Name.] David summoneth all that is in him to bless God for all he has from him.
His soul, not alone his tongue: and all his inwards, that is, the powers and
faculties of his soul, not the bodily parts, liver, lights, but the mind,
affections. This notes a most fervent, earnest and vehement manner of doing
the exhortation, it being adorned with the rhetorical figures of repeating the
same word, and of speaking unto his own soul, to note the great desire which
David had to become a pattern, as of all piety, so principally of this
thanksgiving unto the Church.

His holy Name.] Or the Name of his Holiness, that is, himself as he has in
his Word showed himself to be most holy and excellent.

Verse. 2. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.] As much
as to say, by an ordinary Hebraism, Forget not any of all his benefits.

Verse 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals Healing is applied to
waters, 2 King 2. 20, 21* Made them wholesome to the land, 2 Chronicles. 7* 10. Make
it fruitful. When it respects man as the object, it is taken 1. Properly, for
healing a corporal disease, Ma^k* 1. 34. 2 Improperly, for healing from
spiritual evils, 2 Chronicles. 30. 20. Psalm. 41. 5.
all thy diseases.] He enumerates particular benefits. He means the
spiritual maladies of sin, which only God could heal. He begins with pardon
of sin, because free reconciliation is the fountain of all other blessings.

Verse. 4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction.] Frees thee from dangers of
sudden and violent death, conspired against thee by thine enemies; and withal,
from the second death, everlasting condemnation.

Who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.] To Crown is to
advance to a Kingdom by that sign of setting a Crown on the head, that being
the ensign of Kings; and also this assured him of advancement to a heavenly
Kingdom. To Crown with mercy and compassions, is out of great kindness and pity
to bestow* most excellent things.

Verse. 5. Who satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is
renewed Longum esset recensere, quae in hunc locum commenti sunt interpretes
Hebraei, Graeci and Latini: omnes enim asserunt Aquilam senectute confectam,
vel ad elementum ignis usque in altum evolare, ibique aduri, and decidere
deorsum, ac tunc vitam ejus renovari; vel in altum sese a^tollere, and in
praeruptam se projicere rupem, ad quam rostrum allidat, and cum se in fontem
immerserit, solis radiis and calore juvenescere. Croii Specim. Conject. and
Observat. in quaedam loca Orig. Iren.
like the Eagles.] Perhaps it might be more simply, and more to the letter
translated thus* Thou shall renew thy self, thy youth shall be as an Eagle. To
renew the youth is to retain the same strength and health which youth afforded
for a long season, that is, thou continuest long in health and strength as that
bird does. The Eagle casts her feathers yearly, and new grow up, whereby she
seems fresh and young, flies high, and lives long, whence the Proverb,
Aquilae senectus.

Verse. 6. The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed^.] All manner of righteousness, or most* full and complete
righteousness, all manner of judgments, or most full and exact judgment. The
oppressed are those which are wronged by strong hand; oppression is an injury
done by violence: Those to whom such violence is offered, they are oppressed.
Justice or righteousness is the giving to every man his own. Judgments
signify punishments here: David's meaning is, he executes just judgments in
behalf of wronged and oppressed men and women, by delivering them out of the
hands of the wrong doers, and punishing the wrong doers accordingly.

Verse. 7. He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of
Israel.] Exodus 18. 20. Psalm. 25. 4, 5.
Those ways which he requires us to walk in his statutes and judgments which
God prescribed to them, for they were given to Moses that he might teach the
people.

Verse. 8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in
mercy.] Mercy is that virtue by which one is ready to pity and help the
miserable and afflicted. Graciousness signifies a promptness to do good, out of
the free will of the doer, not out of any motive found in the receiver; slow to
anger, or long of wrath, as the words are in the original. To stand so
disposed, that one is ready to bear much injury, and great provocations and
indignities before he will punish.

Much, or abundant, or great in kindness. Kindness is an affection quite
contrary Erech apa^im] as you would say, one who has wide nostrils, for these
who have widest nostrils are most patient, as those who have narrow nostrils
are ^asily. Weemes.
to anger. It is a readiness to accept and requite any courtesy, passing by
the defects and weaknesses of it.

Verse. 9. He will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for* ever.]
He will neither be angry too much, nor too long, nor too often.

Verse. 11. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him.] This is the highest comparison which the world will
afford, yet not sufficient to express the greatness of Gods mercy.

Verse. 12. As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our
So as they shall never come ^eer us again ^o ^^ us hurt.
transgressions from us.] They are at such a distance that they cannot come
together. The two points of heaven, East and West, can never concur. The word
translated transgressions, properly signifies wilful acts of rebellion* God
will pardon their sins of obstinacy.

Verse. 17. And his righteousness unto childrens children.] He means those
which succeed one another from time to time* Righteousness taken here for
faithfulness in standing to his word, and keeping his promises.

Verse. 20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do his
Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his Word.] Angels are set out, 1. By
their power, they excel in strength. 2. Do his Commandments. 3. Have an eye to
the precept. 4. Desc^ibes them by their multitude, Hosts, verse. 21. they are
Ministers Psalm. 104. 4. Dan. 7. 10.
of God in that verse also. That Hebrew word being spoken of men, Isa. 61. 6.
signifies not any servant promiscuously, but only such a one as gives
attendance upon his Masters person in his presence.

Verse. 22. Bless the Lord all his works.] The Hebrew word signifies both motum
and rem motu factam, the action and the effect or work thereby produced. The
former, Psalm. 19. 1. that is, the excellency of the workmanship, whereby it was
made; the later, Psalm. 102. 25. and here.

PSALM. CIV.
HE speaks of Creation to the 10th verse. of Government to the 27th, of
Preservation to the end.

Verse. 2. Who coverest thy self with light as with a garment.] He first
commanded Alludit enim quod and Abraham Esdras monuit, ad lucem primitus
creatam, Genesis 1. 3. licet Theodoretus ad lucem illam inaccessam reserat 1 Timothy
6. 1^. and est sane phrafis (...) qua Deus luce amictus perhibetur. Gatakeri
Cinnus l. 2. c. 17.
light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6. wherewith he decked the world,
Genesis 1. 3. and dwells in the light that none can artain unto. See Dr Hackw.
Apol. p. 72, 73.

Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain.] That is, as a canopy or tent,
Cantic. 1. 5. Jerem. 49. 29. See Genesis 1. 6. Isaiah 44. 24. and 51. 13. Job
37. 18.

Verse. 5. Who laid the foundation of the earth.] Heb. He has founded the earth
upon her bases; he uses the plural number, because he speaks popularly, for
great buildings are wont to be upheld with props and bases. See Psalm. 24. 2 and
78. 69. Job 38. 4, 6.

Verse. 13. The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.] That is, the
rain Pluvia nuncupatur fructus operum Dei, id est, nubium, quemadmodum liberi
fructus uteri materni. Drusi^^.
which God only gives, Jer. 14. 22. and 10. 13. and consequently the corn and
herbs that grow after rain; compare Job 38. 26, 27, 28. Deuteronomy. 11. 14, 15.

Verse. 15. And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face
to shine, and bread which strengthens man's heart.] Which three are here
Synecdochically put for all things needful to strength, ornament and delight.
See Judge. 9. 8, 9, 12, 13.

With oil.] Wherewith they used to anoint them, Psalm. 23. 5. or more then oil,
Ut nitidam reddat faciem magis quam oleum est, aut quam oleum reddere solet.
Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 3. c. 9.
that is, wine makes the face seem more cheerful than if it were oynted.

Verse. 16. The trees of the Lord.] That is after expounded, which he planted.
Arbores Jehov^ nominat proceras and quae pulchritudine excellunt, Calvinus. Id
est arbores procerae proverbiali quodam genere sermonis nam quicquid in suo
genere excellit id sacra scripta nomine Dei appellare solent. Sic flamma
Domini, civitas magna Deo, cedri Dei, id est, altissimae, potius eae quae
proveniunt absque cultura humana: cujus generis sunt abios, pinaster,
celastrus, atque similes, quae non solum sponte proveniunt, sed ne cultum
quidem patiuntur, cultuque deteriora redduntur, ut Theophrastus scribit. Drus.
Observat. Sac. l. 3. cap. 9.
So the Chaldee expounds, Trees which the Lord created.

Verse. 26. There is that Leviathan, which thou have made to play therein.] Or,
playing Chaldaeus Paraphrastes sic interpretatur, quem creasti justis
devorandum in convivio, domus mansionum ejus, id est, mossiae, atque his verbis
voluit significare cerum Deo creatum esse ut justi and electi exhilarent se eo
comedendo in convivio seculi venturi, id est, diebus Messiae Rainold. de lib.
Apoc. praelect. 150. Rabbini seribunt Deum quinto di^ creasse pisces duos
magnitudinis pene interminatae Leviathan appellates, quorum corporum vari^tatem
cum ipse secum animo perpenderes, veritus ne omnium piscium genus tam magnis
piscibus deglutiretur, and ne ab ipsis mare universum navigiis invium
redderetur, and sic humani generis commercia penitus tollerentur, si ex ii^
prolos propagaretur, occidit femellam and ex ejus salitis carnibus salsamenta
delicatissima paravit justis and electis suis post hanc vitam comedenda,
mascula vero sibi reservavit, ut cum eo succis^vis dici horis, quotidie
luderet, juxta hanc sententiam hoc versu. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. praelect. 27.
Balaenam vel cetum pr^cipu^ celebrat quia solum hoc animal sati^ superque
formidabilem Dei virtutem ante oculos exhibet, quare and de eo tam longus sarmo
in libro Job texitur: Propheta ejus motum Jus^^ nomine designat, respectu Dei:
ac si dicer^^ balaenis datum e^^e campum illum in quo se exerceant. Calvinus.
in it, as Job 40. 15. That is, to expatiate and take his swinge.

PSALM. CV.
THe first part of this Psalm is part of that which David appointed to laud the
Lord with, when his Ark was seated in Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 22.

Verse. 1. Call upon his Name.] That is, desire him to act attributes for you
according to your necessities.

Verse. 3. Glory ye in his holy Name, let the heart of them rejoice that seek
the Lord.] That is, the heart of them shall rejoice that seek the Lord.

Verse. 4. Seek the Lord and his strength; seek his face evermore.] Since those
that His strength, that is, his Ark, from which God gave his Oracl^s, Numb. 7.
89. See Psalm. 78. 61.
seek the Lord shall have such cause to rejoice, then seek the Lord again, and
again I say, seek him.

Verse. 14. He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for their
sakes.] Reproved by restraining their power, this has special reference to
the story of Abraham, Genesis 20.

Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.] Meaning not Ex
ea lege saltem id sequitur, nefas esse illos attingere, quibus cum Patriarchis
hoc commune est, ut appellentur and sint Christi Domini, quales praeter
Christum Filium Dei and Reges temporales nulli sunt. Quid quod Pa^^iatch^ ob id
ipsum videntur dici Christi Domini, quod aliquo modo Reges erant aut Regum
instar. Bocharti Epistola ex Kimchio. Vide 1 Samuel 24. 7. and 26 9. 2 Samuel 1.
14, 16.
only Patriarchs, Kings and Prophets, but all true believers who are endued
with the gifts of the same spirit in some measure, wherewith Christ in his
manhood was filled above measure. Unctos vocat quos sibi sanctificavit in
peculium* Calvin. He calls his faithful by the name of Prophets, because
they ought to have the knowledge of his will, and be able in due time and upon
just occasion to teach the same to others, that so the Gospel of Christ may
flourish.

Verse. 18. Whose feet they hurt with fetters, he was laid in irons.] That is,
he was so laden with chains, that his flesh was eaten with them. Quod tametsi a
Mose non narratur, certum est tamen ut dear nota and vulgata loqui. Calvinus.

Verse. 24. And he increased his people greatly.] See Exodus 1. 7, 9. of 70 souls
^i^r^^. Moll^r^^.
in 220 years, the increase was 60000 men, besides women and children.

Verse. 25. He turned their heart to hate his people.] The sin was the Kings,
God only gave the occasion. 2. He also let out their thoughts that way, God
withdrew his restraint.

Verse. 33. He s^ote their Vines also, and their Fig Trees.] As in the promises
where mention is made of pleasures granted by God, the Fig Tree and Vine are
joined together, 1 King. 4. 25. 2 King. 18. 31. Isa. 36. 16. Jer. 5. 17. Joel
2. 22. Micah 4. 4. So on the contrary in the comminations they are seldom
separated, Hos. 2. 11. Hag. 2. 19.

Verse. 45. That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.] Shamar
translated here observe, imports*

1. To mind or reserve in memory, Genesis 37. 11. 2. To preserve in safety, Genesis
28. 20.
Natzar translated keep, properly signifies to keep with care and vigilance, as
The end of all Gods mercies was that he might be glorified in his peoples
obedience. See Exodus 19. 4. 3. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. ^. 40. and 6. 21, 24, 25.
ammunition is preserved from fire and false hands, when an enemy is expected,
Nah. 2. 1.

Statutes.] The Hebrew word Coch is translated, 1. A decree, Psalm 148. 6. 2. A
portion, Prove. 31. 15.

Laws.] Thorah is used for any Law or prescript, as the Law (Thorath) of the
sin-offering, the Law of the trespass offering.

PSALM. CVI.
Verse 7. BUt provoked him at the sea, even at the red sea.] Some read it,
provoked him There is the emphasis, that sea which God carried them through.
Antithesis inter nomen Dei and hominum merita vel dignitatem notanda est: quia
Deus seipsum respiciens, causam in nobis minime reperit qua ad nos servandos
flectatur. Calvinus.
in the sea when they saw that glorious work: The new Testament calls it the
red sea, Heb. 11. 29. The Hebrew is the sea suph, that is, the sea of sedges or
weeds which grew thereon.

Verse. 8. Nevertheless he saved them for his Nam^s sake] With an outward
salvation. The Name of God is that whereby he is made known unto us, his
working for his Names sake is opposed to our deservings, that it might not be
polluted, or that his glory might shine out the more, Isa. 63. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Verse. 13. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsels.] Not
the history, but so as to have their faith strengthened by them.

Counsels] may be taken

1. For direction given us. 2. For Gods determination what to do with or for
us, so rather here, waited not the time when his counsel was to be fulfilled
concerning them.
Verse. 15. But sent leanness into their soul.] That is, the Lord did not bless
their God sent a sudden plague, whereby their lives were taken away. See Psalm.
78. 30, 31
meat to their nourishment, but it proved to their destruction; so it is
commonly expounded, but both a spiritual and temporal judgment went
together. See Psalm. 36. 8. and 63. 23.

Verse. 20. Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox that
eats grass.] That is, whereas God had showed himself unto them gloriously in
the Pillar That is, their God, so Jer 2* 11. a similitude somewhat to represent
God unto them, and to bring his properties to their mind.
and Cloud, otherwise they could not be satisfied with these glorious signs of
his presence, but they must needs set up the Image of an Ox, a most
beneficial creature, whose labor did yield them, through Gods blessing, the
best means of maintenance. They did like the Heathens, Romans 1. 23.

Verse. 23. Had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach.] In the gap
which their sin had opened for God, as an enemy to enter and destroy them. A
similitude taken from War, when by a breach in the wall the enemy enters the
City: Deus apertionis. The God of Moab and Madian, to whom by Balaams counsel,
Israel joined, Numb. 25. 3. and 31. 16. Rev. 2. 14. Baal signifies a Lord,
Master, Husband, or Patron. Pehor was the name of a mountain where this god was
worship^.
so Eze. 13. 5. and 22. 30. But Moses earnest prayer stopped this breach, Ex.
32. 11, 14.

Verse. 28. They joined themselves unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the
dead.] The Fathers make him to be the beastly God Priapus. See Athanasius
Kirchers O^dipus AEgyptiacus, Tom. 1. Syntag. 4. c. 5.

Sacrifices of the dead.] Meat offerings to the Idol, a liveless, dull, dead
and inanimate thing, therefore God in opposition thereto is above thirty times
styled the living God: See Jer. 10. 5, 10. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

Verse. 30. Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment, and so the plague was
stayed.] Vajephallel, and he prayed, says one translation; and he executed
judgment, says another. The Original word bears both, to note, that Religion
does marvellously fit a man for works of justice.

Verse. 31. And that was counted unto him for righteousness.] Not to justify
him, There is justitia personae and causae, this was the later, Number. 25. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
God approved the work, and imputed it to him as an eminent service, and
rewarded him accordingly. Though he was a Priest, and not a public Magistrate,
and the thing was done without ordinary authority.

Verse. 33. Because they provoked his spirit.] Imbittered or exasperated, it
being in Hiphil, some take it transitively, that the people caused Moses to
rebel, quod mihi non displicet, says Calvin.

Verse. 37. Yea they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.] God
never See Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. 1 Cor* 10. ^0.
required this but of Abraham, and would not let him do it, they would not be
behind Abraham.

PSALM. CVII.
HEre are four instances of Gods providence in this Psalm.

1. To pilgrims or strangers, verse. 3. which he concludes with, Oh that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
children of men! v. 8. 2. To the captives and imprisoned, ver. 10. and
concludes likewise as formerly, verse. 15. 3. To such as were sick and diseased,
ver. 17, 18. and concludes so, v. 21. 4. To those that go to sea, ver. 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. and concludes so, ver. 31.
Verse. 20. He sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their
destructions.] Modus sanandi notandus est, quod scilicet Deus solo nutu vel
mandato morbes omnes mortemque ipsam procul abigat. Calvinus.
The Serpent lifted up by Moses, in it self, and by its own virtue, was a bare
sign and no remedy to cure distressed Israelites, but they were cured by their
faith in the word of Gods promise annexed unto the sign. The cure (says
Austin) came not from the Serpent, but from Gods Commandment obeyed, and his
promise believed.

Verse. 23. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great
waters.] Est eis quaedam cum discriminibus pelagi non notitia solum, sed etiam
familiaritas. Sidon. Apollin. l. 8. Epist. Non solum fluctus vasti illi
saevientis Oceani cum montibus jucundissime comparantur (quod nec omisit
Virgilius in tempestatis descriptione, Montes vol^untur aquarum) sed and ipsa
verbi Mount compositione and pronuntiatione nescio quid arduum and praeruptum,
quod pronuntiantibus speciem nitentium quandam ac laborantium ingerit. Casaub.
de lingua Saxonica, p 403.
Here in another kind the Prophet shows what great care God has of mankind,
while he brings those that suffer shipwreck into the haven, as if he should
raise them up out of the grave.

Verse. 26. They mount up to the heaven, they go down again into the depths,
their soul is melted because of trouble.]

Verse. 42. And all iniquity shall stop her mouth.] Will be forced to be silent,
the same kind of speech there is Job 5. 16. That is, all evil persons that
deny Gods providence, or blame his administration, shall have their mouths
stopped. Ainsw.


Verse. 43. Who is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall
understand A complaint how few there be that mark these things, and an inti
mation that every wise man will observe them, so Jer. 9. 12. Hos. 14. 10. Ainsw.
the loving kindness of the Lord.] The loving kindness of God may not so
clearly appear in every action, one had need to be wise to discern that.

PSALM. CVIII.
THis Psalm is composed of the 57 Psalm, from the 8 v. to the end, and of the
60 Psalm, from the 7 v. to the end.

Verse. 1. O God my heart is fixed.] Fixed as a throne. See Psalm. 57. 7. that
is, I will go to duty, I have got a heart fit for it; Heb. a heart established
and settled, there is a fixed heart in regard of Gods providence and various
dispensations, Psalm 112. 2. in reference to the word of God, so here.

Verse. 2. I my self will awake early.] In the Original it is more emphaticall,
Weemes on the Law.
Hagnira shahber, I will awaken the morning: As if David should say, the
morning never took me napping, but I wakened it still.

Verse. 9. Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe.] or, washing
pot. Ad verbum est, olla lotionis mea, ita malim, quam cum Junio, Piscatore
aliisque, meae. Washpot.] Nos vocabulum de servis mediasti^is usurpamus; quorum
ad ollas and paropsides in culina proluendas and abste^gendas opera abuti
consuevimus. Verum ad vasa potius quam servitia vates videtur alludere. Melius
itaque Ainsworthus noster reddidit, My washing pot, olla in qua loturus sum.
Nec desunt, qui ad paludes Moabiticas quae in ea regione frequentes, respectum
habitum existiment, quod and Mollerus autumat. Gatakeri Cinnus l. 2. c. 19.


PSALM. CIX.
Verse 4. BUt I give my self unto prayer.] A broken sp^ech, But I prayer, or I
was all Vaani tephilla, ego autem oration, sensus est, ego autem etiam vir
orationis, id est, orationi deditus. Mayer. de LXX. Hebdom. Dan.
prayer. So, I peace, Psalm. 120. 7.

Verse 6. And let Satan stand at his right hand.] To hinder him in action, or
let This is spoken of all his foes, as of one man, or some one special, as
Doeg enemy to David, 1 Samuel 22. 9. Judas to Christ, John 13. 2.
him in his accusation overcome him, Zach. 3. 1. An allusion to the custom of
ancient times, in which the adversary stood at the right hand of him that was
condemned, and at the left hand of him that was acquitted.

PSALM. CX.
CHrist applies the first verse of this Psalm to himself Mat. 22. 44. Mark 1^.
36. See Act. 2. 34. 1 Cor. 15. 25. Heb. 1. 13.


Rabbi Saadia Gaon upon Daniel interprets this Psalm of the Messiah.

Verse. 1. Jehovah.] That is, God the Father.

Assuredly said.] See Psalm. 36. 2.

To my Lord.] That is, to Christ.

Sit thou at my right hand until. I make thine enemies thy footstool.] Sitting
notes Sin, the devil; death it self, 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26.
reigning with continuance, 1 Cor. 15. 25. Heb. 10. 12, 13. This implies,

1. Victory, a perfect conquest over them, conquerours used to make their
enemies their footstool. Mos erat in Orient, ut victores victo pedibus sui^
^ubjicerent. Jos. 9. 24. Grotius.
2. Ignominy, the lowest subjection. Sapores King of Persia overcoming Valerian
the Emperor in battle, used his back after for a stirrup, when he got upon his
horse: so Tamberlane served Bajazet.
The footstool is a piece of State, and both raises and eases him that sits
on the Throne, so Christ's enemies raise and ease him.

Verse. 2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion.] Or Scepter.
Hoc est insigne regiae potestatis. Hieron. The Gospel.

Verse. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.] The people of
God Vide Amamae Antibarb. bibl. l. 3.
are Christ's five ways, 1. By way of gift, Psalm. 2. John 17. 6. 2. By purchase
and redemption, Gal. 3. 13. 3. By way of conquest. 4. By way of Covenant, Luk
1. 57. Servus a servando. 5. By way of communion, 1 Cor. 3. ult.

Willing.] Willingnesses, the abstract, and in the plural number, see Psalm. 68.
10. They are thus made willing, 1. An Almighty power is put ^orth in the
Ordi^ances of the Gospel. 2. A glorious discovery of holiness.
as if the holy Ghost could not speak enough how willing they are, to note
exceeding great willingness to submit to every Commandment of the Lord; or it
may signify free will offerings, voluntary oblations.

In the day of thy power.] That is, on the Sabbath day, when his people are
assembled before him, as an Army before the General: or in that day when thou
sendest forth thy Army, that is, the Apostles and other Preachers of the Gospel
into the world.

In the beauties of holiness.] In, with, or by the beauties of holiness. The
Temple, say some, Ezekiel. 7. 20. That is, thy people shall be willing when they
come In die fortitudinis five victoriae tuae] hoc est tempore universalis per
totum terrarum orbem Evangelii praedicationis, per quam Satanae regno
debellato, and devicto, ingentes populorum copiae tuo regno eaelesti and
Evangelicae veritati adduces and aggregabis in decoribus sanctitatis, hoc est,
vel in decoris locis, seu in Ecclesia, quae appellatione a veteris Ecclesiae
templo deducta Psalm. 29. 2. ita vocitatur, vel in decoris vestibus, metaphora
it idem a vestimentis sacris, quae sacerdotum propria erant, ad Christianos qui
sacerdotes spirituales a Christi constituti, 1 Pet 2. 9. Apoc. 5. 10. deducta,
ab utero aurorae, Pagninus, Arias, Jun. and alii vertunt a tempore ascensus
aurorae, Tremellius, ab utero, id est, quamprimum per spiritum tuum semine
incorrupto verbi regenerati fueru^t in Ecclesia ^^a, and revelatus fuerit in
ipsis Dei fi^ius, ut loquitur Apostolus ad Galat. 1. 16. ab aurora, id est,
diligent ssime se sistent tibi: quae diligentia fere in scriptura hac tempo^is
circumstantia notari solet, Job 8. 5. Psalm. 68 34. Prove. 7. 15. tibi ros
juventae tuae, sc. erit tum propter mirandum regenerationis hominumque
conversionis modum: ^icu^ enim roris generatio mira hominum cognitioni est, Job
38. ^8. ita mirandus quoque est regenerationis and conversionis hominum modus,
Johan. 3. 8. tum ptopter membrorum Ecclesiae multitudinem. Glassti Onomat.
to public Ordinances, glorious and beautiful. Others interpret it when God
discovers holiness in its beauty.

From the womb of the morning.] The Greeks translated divinely, From the womb
Brought Epist. to the Nobility. Se^ Ainsw. Ros juventutis tuae haud dubie
ponitur pro multitudine (...) tanta quanta est guttarum roris, i. simul etiam
notatur jucundi^as conspectus tantae multitudinis, nulla enim species oculis
majorem affert voluptatem quam roris matutini exoriente primum sole. Cameron.
before the morning star have I begotten thee.

Thou have the dew of thy youth.] The holiness and righteousness of Christ is
called the dew of the morning, not in regard of its fading nature, as ours,
Hos. 6. 4. but in regard of its multitude, because it makes dewy.

Verse. 6. He shall wound the heads over many Countries.] Satan the head of all
the ungodly, as Conquerours use to do, Genesis 3. 15. In the head of the Serpent
lies both virus and dolus.

Verse. 7. He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up
the head.] Multi interpretationem amplectuntur quae Bucero placuit, nempe
significari tantum sanguinis fundendum ut bibi possit tanquam ex rivo, id est,
ut sanguis caesorum fluat and omnia inundet; and hac phrasi bibere sanguinem
hostilem denotari plenam and perfectam victoriam. Number. 23. 28. ^ivetus.
An allusion to the brook Kedron, wherein they were wont to throw all the
carnages of the Temple.

By the way is meant the whole course of Christ's life, every man is resembled
to a traveller or wayfaring man, Psalm. 119. 1. The whole course of a godly man's
life is called a narrow way, Matthew. 7. 14. by brook a Land-flood. Waters in
Scripture ^^^bal torrens, ex pluviis natus. Christ was to suffer, and so to
enter into his glory, Matthew. 26. 39, 42.
note afflictions, miseries, Psalm. 18. 5. and 69. 1. Great miseries are called
many waters. The expression implies

1. A great measure of afflictions, therefore they are not called a Cup, but a
Brook, Psalm. 36 8. 2. A confluence of all manner of misery.
To drink of this river, is to suffer and sustain all these evils, Psalm. 60. 3.
Jer. 25. 15, 16. Matthew. 20. 22. or it may mean a short refreshing of himself,
and then a hot Luke 24. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 11. Phil. 2. 8, 9. Descriptio bellatoris
ala^ris, qui dum hosts persequitur, non quaerit diversoria aut cauponas ut
vino se refoveat, sed aqua contentus est, quam obiter and rap^im sumit ex
quovis quem repe^it non fluvio tantum, sed and torrente, Sic Christus nullum
tempus omifit quo opera Diaboli destruere possit. Grotius in loc.
pursuit of his enemies without delay, till he has got a full conquest of
them. See Judge. 7. 4, 5, 6.

Lift up the head.] An allusion to the release of Pharaohs Butler, He shall
lift up thy head, Genesis 40. 13. so Christ, as one that saw an end of his
troubles, and enjoyed a better state, Luke 21. 28.

PSALM. CXI.
Verse 2. THe works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein.] The word signifies serious and diligent enquiry. The Jews
called their School Domus inquisitionis, because there they diligently sought
after truth.

PSALM. CXII.
Verse 3. WEalth and riches shall be in his house.] That is, things sufficient
and competent, Psalm. 37. 16.

2. If by riches be understood abundance, the words must be taken with this
condition, if they be for their good, for all temporal promises must be
understood with exception.

Verse. 10. And melt away.] By degrees, so the Hebrew word signifies.

PSALM. CXIII.
Verse 6. WHo humbles himself.] The word notes a great degree of humiliation.

Verse. 7. He raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
It ^^ a Proverb, Fimo contemp^ior, of one that is most contemptible.
dunghill.] From the dust, That is, from base estate, as 1 King. 16. 2. This
speech is taken from 1 Samuel 2. 8.

The last words signify a most abject condition.

PSALM. CXIV.
Verse 2. FRom a people of strange language.] This word is here only used, and
means all Ainsw. A populo Barbaro. Chald. LXX. Vulg. AEgyptii ibi plane
innuuntur. Seld. de Syned. lib. 3. cap. 9. Vide Buxtorfii Lexicon. Talmud. in
hoc verbum.
speech that was not understood of Gods people; which he that speaks is
called of the Apostle a Barbarian, that is, a stranger, 1 Cor. 14. 11. even as
here also the Chaldee turns it.

R. Solomon and Kimchi expound it, a people speaking any other language besides
the Hebrew, such they called Lognazim, as the Greeks and Romans called all
besides themselves Barbaros.

PSALM. CXV.
Verse 1. NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for
thy mercy, Eripe nos tyrannidi hostium, non gloriae nostri nominis, sed (...)
caussa. Muis. Effice quicquid novisti nomini tuo fore honorificum, non propter
nos, sed propter naturam tum, promissionemque ^oederis. Junius.
and for thy truths sake.] It is redoubled for the greater emphasis, the
Prophet ^eacheth us to pray twice against our own praise; we are so apt to
praise our selves, so ready to glory in our prosperity, Repetitio ardorem
indicat. Muis.

Some Divines think it is repeated as a rebuke of a temptation, because they
had thick thoughts of revenge, they say, it is not a Doxology, but a prayer
when the people of God went out against Pagan adversaries, they did not desire
revenge or deliverance, but prosperity and success, that Gods mercy and truth
might be magnified.

These two Attributes are mentioned,

1. Because they are the chief part of the divine glory. 2. They yield most
consolation to the creature. 3. For the better strengthening of their
abnegation. 4. Because these are the two federal Attributes, and fit for the
Church to mention, Psalm. 25. 10. The Covenant was made in mercy, and kept in
truth, Micah 7. 20.
Verse. 4. Their Idols are silver and gold: the work of men's hands. Hoc and
tribus sequentibus versiculis graphice depingit Idolorum, in quibus Gentes
fiduciam collocabant vanitatem. Simeon de Muis.


5. They have mouths but they speak not: Eyes have they, but they see not.] The
Psalmist even as if he should set forth the vanity of babes and children about
their puppets, so does he describe the Heathen Idols, Inanitatem idolorum
deridet potius quam deseribit. Bucerus.

They cannot be beneficial to men, which have their whole existence from them.
He derides their madness who worship mute and empty Images, and adore the work
of their own fingers.

Verse. 8. They that make them, are like unto them.] That is, they have even as
Ezra and Kimhi hunc versum imprecative volunt accipi. Alii accipiunt
enuntiative, quasi diceretur, Idolorum artifices and cultores non minus sunt
stupidi, quam Idola ipsa. Simeon de Muis.
little wit and reason as they.

Verse. 16. The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lords.] Made for the
manifestation of his own glory, and the habitation of Angels.

But the earth has he given to the children of men.] q. d. The Lord has
challenged the Heavens to himself in which he lives a blessed life, he has
given this earth Bucer.
to men in which they should live and glorify him.

PSALM. CXVI.
Verse 1. I Love the Lord.] There is but one word in the Hebrew, I love, but he
shows Significatur continuus actus. Mui^.
not whom he loves; its a broken word, because as Ambros^ faith, he loved the
most desirable thing.

Verse. 7. Return unto thy rest, O my soul.] Rests in the plural number, all
manner That is, thy God, say some. Rest is taken pro tranquillo and composito
animi statu, Calv^^^. to its own wo^nted quiet sereue temper. Ress is opposed
not to diligence or labor, but fear or doubt. Ergo habuit ante requiem, quam
perdidit. Nemo enim convertitur, nisi qui pergit illuc ubi prius erat. Hiero^.
Id est, Ne ampli^^ esto perturbata, sed conquiescito in Deo propter naturam and
beneficentiam ejus. Ju^u^.
of rests, because it has attained its chief good.

Verse. 11. I said in my haste, All men are liars.] That is, when I remembered
Even the Prophets who told me I should be King, have deceived me. Vide Junium.
Verum dicit David; ^n mentitur? Si verum est, omnis homo mendax, and hoc quod
dicit, omnis homo mendax, verum est, ergo and ipse mentitur, quia and ipse homo
est, Si autem and ipse mentitur: ergo hoc quod dixit: omnis homo mendax, non
est verum. Hiero^. in loc.
not the word of God: but forgot my own duty, and was carried away with the
stream of my own affections against faith, then I failed and was foiled.

Id est, quum pracops raperer in perturbationes carnis, ut accipitur, Psalm. 31.
23. Juniu^. Verse. 16. Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant.]
Repet^tio valet ad exaggerandum. Muis. He doubleth it, and adds an
asseveration truly, q. d. Lord, I am all thine, and thou may do with me what
ever thou please.

PSALM. CXVII.
Verse 1. Gentiles.] Or, Nations; All which are exhorted to glorify God, for
obtaining Vide Ju^. l. 2. Paral. ^7. Romans 15. 9, 10.
mercy by Christ, who has received us into the glory of God, as the Apostle
shows from this Scripture, Romans 15. 7. -- 11.

PSALM. CXVIII.
Verse 6. WHat man can do unto me.] Some read it by way of Interrogation, What
Heb. 13. 6.
can man do unto me?

Verse. 12. They compassed me about like Bees.] 1. For multitude, go by troops.
Mag^o scilicet ard^^e, ^^ vehementi impetu, and summa vindictae cupiditate,
Si^^o^ de Mu^^. Tanquam ap^^, quae cum, qui c^^ offendit, conf^rti^ and denso
agmine ab omni p^rte aggrediuntur, De^^. 1. 44. and quae in vindictam etiam cum
suo damno, i^^ ex^tio ac n^ce ruunt veloci^^i^ae inf^^si^^imae. Vide Pli^^ l*
1. ^. 18. T^r^o^i^ in loc. Vide Ju^ium.
2. Malice, they sting him. 3. Very fierce, the Bees will destroy themselves to
hurt another.

Ani^ asque in vuluere p^nunt. Virg Georg. l. 4. Verse. 13. Thou have thrust
sore at me that I might fall.] Some expound it of the enemies, some of God, he
thrusts with the one hand, and relieves with the other, but the words following
oppose this interpretation. In the Hebrew it is, Thrusting, thou thrust est me
to fall; the iteration of the same verb notes a great force, and a vehement
impression of his enemies, and the great danger into which they had cast him.
It is an apostrophe (says Simeon de Muis) to some peculiar enemy, which he and
Bucer thinks to be Saul.

Verse. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made.] That is, the day of the
Resurrection. To make a day is put for sanctifying of it, 1 Samuel 12. 2* Exodus
34. 22. Deuteronomy. 5^ 15. made it otherwise then all other days.

Diverse of the Ancients bring this Scripture to prove the change of the
Sabbath Day.

Verse. 27. Bind the Sacrifice with cords.] Ai^sworth reads it, Bind ye the
feastofferings Sic ad verbum legitur in Ebraeo: Ligate festum funibus, festum
hic ponitur pro hostia quae die festo immolatut, sane quidem Jesaias idem
verbum eodem significatu usurpat, Jes. 29. 1. Drus. observat. Sac. l. 1. c. 16.
Festum seu solennitas metonymic^s usurpatur hic pro nostia, agno aut simili
pecore, cujusmodi die festo plerumque offerebatur. Sic censent Rafi, Ezra,
Kim^i. Simeon de Muis in loc.
with cords. This word is sometimes used figuratively for the Sacrifices
offered at those feasts, as Exodus 23. 18. Isa. 29. 1. and so the Chaldee
explaineth it here.

PSALM. CXIX.
THis Psalm was not penned according to the present frame of his heart, but a
See Verses 14, 15, 16, 24, 47, 72, 111, 127, 131, 143, 162. Amongst 176 verses
there are scarce four or five wherein there is not some commendation of the
Word. I admire, said Dr Olesworth (a little before he died) at David's gr eio^
heart, who so often in Scripture, (but especially in the 119. Psalm) extolleth
the worth and value of the Word of God, and yet quantillum Scripturae, how
little of the Word of God had they in that Age, the Pentateuch, the Book of
Job, and some of the Hagiographa, how much have we now thereof, since the
accession of the Prophets, but especially of the New Testament, and yet alas
the more we have of the Word of God, the less it is generally regarded. Fullers
History of the University of Cambridge.
recollection of all the several frames of his heart.

It is wholly taken up in the commendation of the word, and high expressions of
David's affection thereto, the Word was his Councellor and Comforter, he loves
it exceedingly, it is his meditation all the day, the more grace any one has,
the more he prizeth the Word.

Here in this Psalm are ten words, which are used to set out the Law or Word of
Voluit Author ista varietate appellationum co plus reverentiae and dignitatis
doctrinae divinae conciliare. Muis.
God.

1. Way, verse. 1. Whereby is meant that course which God has set before us to
walk in. 2. Law, verse. 1. Whereby the will of God is made known unto us, and we
enjoined to conform our selves thereto. 3. Testimony, verse. 2. Whereby
testimony or witness is given of that which is good or evil. Dr Gouge o^ Heb.
7. 5. Sect. 38.
4. Precepts, verse. 4. 5. Statutes, verse. 5. These do especially intend those
ceremonial Laws to which the Jews were bound. See Muis on this Psalm.
6. Commandments, verse. 6. Such as declared the power and authority of God over
us. 7. Judgments, verse. 7. By these that mutual equity, or righteous dealing
which should be betwixt man and man is taught. 8. Righteousness, or Justice,
verse. 7. By which is manifested what is due to every one. 9. Word, verse. 9.
There is also another Noun, verse. 11. which we translate Word, it is translated
Promise, Psalm. 77. 8.
Most of the sentences of this Psalm are independent.

David prays several times in this Psalm to God to quicken him, ver. 37, 88,
107, 149, 154, 156, 159.

This Psalm is divided according to the Hebrew Alphabet, every eighth verse
being under one letter.

Totus hic Psalmus est scriptus secundum ordinem literarum, ita ut ab una
litera octo versus incipiant, and rursum a sequenti octo alii compleantur.
Hieron.

Rationem hujus plaerique reddere conati sunt: sed nihil dum certi attulerunt,
neque mihi quod afferam da^um est, ^isi id vates fecerit causa vel ornatus, vel
memoriae juvandae, vel certe utriusque. Bucerus.

Hic Psalmus est tanto praestantior, quanto prolixior, vigi^ti duobus videlicet
octostichis conscriptus, ea methodo, ut primi octo versus omnes a prima
alphabeti litera (...) incipiant: it a secundum ^ctostichium a (...), tertium a
(...) incipiat, and sic deinceps: quod tantum ad memoriam juvandam videtur
factum. Simeon de Muis.

Verse. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way.] This word is used of the
beast, which was to be offered without any blemish or spot, here it is to be
taken for such as do not defile themselves in thoughts or actions against Gods
word, so it is used Deuteronomy. 8. 13.

Who walk in the Law of the Lord.] This explains the former word, such are
undefiled in the way, qui ex Legis divinae praescripto vivunt.

Walking is a progressive motion, we are to go forward, be still growing.

The Law.] The whole word of God, which is for our instruction, though
sometimes it be used more specially. To walk in it, is to make all those
instructions our paths to walk in, do nothing which it forbids, and every thing
it commands, in that manner and measure.

Walking implies also diligence and familiarity, Enoch walked with God; and
conformity of our lives with Gods word, Can two walk together except they be
agreed?

Blessed, 1. Because he walks in the light, and so will not easily stumble.
2. Peace will be to him, if we receive direction from Gods word, we shall
receive consolation also. 3. Because in this way he shall have everlasting
happiness.

Verse. 3. They also do no iniquity.] That is, they live not in the service, in
the willing and ordinary practice of any thing that is known to them to be
sin.

Verse. 4. Thou Mutatio personae per Apostrophen ad Deum. Muis. Non tepido
cord, nec dissoluto animo, sed fortiter and attente nos ^ua mandata edocet
custodi^e. Hieron.
have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.] That is, with all our
might and strength.

Verse. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes.] This is as much,
says Austin, as if David should say, I have learned of thee, O Lord my Master,
that it is necessary to keep thy Commandments, I now desire thine help, that I
may keep them, for thou give both the will and the deed.

Verse. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
Commandments] Non alia praetermittere, and alia observare est congruum: sed
omnia aequaliter custodire oportet: ne in futuro judicio confundamur. Hieron.
Shall I not blush, Heb. Though we cannot keep all, nor any one, as we ought,
yet we must have regard unto all, and that equally without respect or
difference of any. The Hebrew word signifies summa cura and voluptate a^picere,
he desires to perform duties with greatest care and delight.

Verse. 8. I will keep thy statutes, O forsake me not utterly.] As if he should
say, Et si ad tempus relinquimur, non tantum usquequaque relinquimur ut
pereamus. Hieron.
If it be thy pleasure to try me by leaving me to my self, yet, O Lord, let it
be but for a while, forsake me not overlong.

Verse. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according Verbo mundandi significare vult, ineunti aetati multas hae^cre sordes
and m^culas, quas, nisi Lex divine, nihil possit eluere. Simeon de Muis. Hae^et
mihi semper in animo tua Lex, ^e unquam ab illa declinem, and qua in re t^
offendam. Simeon de Muis.
to thy Word.] q. d. It is a hard thing for a young man to get his heart
clean^ed.

Verse. 11. Thy Word have I hid in my heart.] As a treasure that I might not
lose it, and as a rule that I might not transgress it.

Verse. 12. Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy Statutes.] See verse. 26. Not
to know more rules of duty, but the right way of answering those rules.

Verse. 15. And have respect unto thy ways.] That is, look to them, and to my
self, that I may observe them.

Verse. 18. Open thou mine eyes.] Quamdiu vi. vo peregre a Domino, 2 Cor. 5. 6.
Junius. See Luke 7. 41.
Those of my mind.

That I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law.] The Hebrew word signifies
Revela oculos meos, Sensus Aperi mihi oculos mentis ut capere possim, ^^que
as^equi quae legi tuae subsunt. Simeon de Muis.
ard^a, occulta, mirabilia, things hard, hidden, wonderful, all these things
are in the Law.

Verse. 19. I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy Commandments from me.]
When God gives thee over, either to thy own natural blindness, or suffers the
god of this world to blind thee.

Verse. 29. Remove from me the way of lying.] David does not mean the special
sin of lying, but he calls sin in general the way of lying. For,

First, The way of lying is opposed to Gods Law, and grant me thy Law
graciously.

Secondly, In the original it is Derech Shakar, as ver. 104. and 128. other
Hebrew Id est, Falsa and prava dogma^^, errores. Simeon de Muis*
words are rendered false way, and it is without question that all sin is
meant thereby.

Verse. 30. I have chosen the way of Truth: thy Judgments have I laid before
Legem tuam scilicet. Opponitur hoc priori parti praecedentis versus. Simeon de
Muis.
me.

Laid before me.] As the adequate rule by which my actions and heart should be
guided and directed.

Verse. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandments: when thou shall enlarge my
heart.]

Run the way] That is, be abundant in the work of the Lord.

If, or when, or because, it is either Conditional, or Causall, or particula
temporis.

The heart is commonly put for the whole soul, all the faculties of the inward
man; the understanding, God gave Solomon a wise and understanding heart; Will,
a willing heart; Conscience, Your heart condemn you; Memory, Mary laid up these
things in her heart; Affections, David's heart went out after Absalom; If riches
increase set not your hearts on them; Joy and sorrow, a merry heart; But the
enlargement of the heart is restrained to two faculties, the understanding, 1
King. 4. 29. and the affections, 2 Cor. 6. 11.

Verse. 33. And I shall keep it unto the end.] Greek Continually, some turn it
for Id est, Tota vita. Junius. Ec^b propri^ Calcaneum significat. Cum igitur
Calcaneus sit oxtrema pars pedis, suspicati sumus Ec^^ etiam finem significare,
and Davide^ hoc dicere, s^rvabo eam in finem, hoc est, semper, in qua sententia
me confirmavit au^or interpretationis Chaldaicae, and Graeci vertunt (...)
ve^bum Ec^b idem ver. 112* plane significat. Drus. Observe. Sac. lib. 8. cap. 20.
rewards, as after the Greek does, verse. 112.

Verse. 45. And I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts.] That is, he
found his Spirit at the greatest liberty, when he walked in Gods Statutes, 2
Cor. 3. 17. then his mind was set on the noblest objects. 2. This is to enjoy
communion with God.

Verse. 48. My hands also will I lift up unto thy Commandments which I have
loved] Lifting up hands when it is done to God, notes either praying to him, or
swearing Id est, Praecepta tua, ut rem mihi long charissimam avide tun^
complectar, and obviis velut manibus excipiam. Simeon de Muis.
by him; To the Commandments, notes, some say, obedience to perform the duties
it commands, to catch at, to take it for my own; As they say in Latin, Ego
tuas litteras obviis ulnis excipiam. Ezra takes it in this sense, Kimchi and
others say, this phrase notes to put the hands to work.

A new expression, and has not a parallel that I know of in all the Scripture.
There is an emphasis in both words. I will lift up, this implies, The
Commandments are sublime in nature in respect of the original, in the matter of
them, heavenly Oracles. My hands, as a sign or testimony of lifting up his
heart. Dr Holesworth.


And I will meditate in thy Statutes.] The Commandments of God are called
Statutes, because they are immovable, they cannot be changed, they are sure,
steadfast 2 Pet. 1. 19. Romans 4. 16.
and faithful. The Latin word signifies stability, the Hebrew visitation. God
visits for breaking of them.

Verse. 49. Remember the Word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me
to Intelligo hoc de promisso Dei verbis cum Davide per Nathan Prophetam inito,
quod scilicet non esset moriturus ob peccatum. Vide 2 Samuel 12. 13 Simeon de
Muis.
hope.] q. d Lord, thou have invited me to hope, therefore now satisfy it, he
pleads two things, the grant of a promise, and the gift of faith.

Verse. 57. Thou art my portion Pars mea Domine, valet illud portio mea Dominus,
sed pars ^helck dicitur portio maneh, quorum hoc a conviviis, illud sumptum a
partibus haereditatum, itaque pars quandoque haereditas. Drus. Misc. Cent. 2 c.
29.
, O Lord] The meaning is, Let others have their riches, honors, and other
things of that kind, but I, O Lord, so purpose, my part and portion is
(neither do I wish another) to obey thy Word.

I have said.] That is, Resolved.

Verse. 59. I thought on my ways.] In the original, I thought on my ways
advisedly, Cogitavi seu Reputavi, and diligenter quidem (nam verbum est Piel)
facultate mihi primum data, quum duas cernerem vias, unam voluptatis, seu
peccati, alteram virtutis and tuorum mandatorum, utram ingredi melius esset,
tandemque suppu^ato damno praecep^icum praemio, and contra peccati praemio cum
damno, in viam *me tuorum mandatorum dedi. Simeon de Muis.
seriously, studiously.

Verse. 60. ^ made haste, and delayed not.] Did not delay my self, it is in Re
cognita, nihil sum cunctatus, sed mox praeceptis tuis servandis incubui. Simeon
de Muis
Hithpael.

Verse. 69. The proud have forged a lie against me.] In the original it is
Taphlu Or, Composed, adjoined, so Job 13. 4. Ainsw.
gnalai sheker, Assuunt mendacium mendacio, they have sowed one lie to another.

Verse. 70. Their heart is as fat as grease, but I delight in thy Law.] Fatness
is Mark the opposition. Compare Acts 28. 27. Ephesians. 4. 18. Prosperitate illorum
cor, ceu adeps pinguefactum erat, ut ad omnia Dei plane stu* pescerent. Bucerus.
put for that which makes the creature to be refractory, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. void of
all sense, so here.

Verse. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes.] That is, Afflictions are good by event or accident, partly by Gods
overruling providence that can turn them to good, and partly by grace in the
elect who make a good use of them.

Verse. 81. But I hope in thy Word.] That is, thy promise, whereby thou have
assured me that thou will satisfy my desire.

Verse. 89. For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in heaven.] Heb. Stands fast, a
Ezra hunc versum de Dei decretis intelligit, quae firma and stabilia si^t in
Coelis. Kimhi de verbo, per quod Coelos Deus condidit, quod quidem verbum
aeternum in Coelis perstabit, siquidem Coeli, eorumque exercitus nunquam
desituri sint. Simeon de Muis.
Metaphor from a Champion, or an Army of soldiers that stand fast and keep
their ground.

Heaven and earth are opposed, things below are changed, not above in Heaven.

2. Heaven is put for the Decree of God, Isa. 34. 5. in Coelo used for firmly
and without doubt.

3. Established as a pillar, so the Hebrew.

Verse. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delights: I should then have perished in
mine affliction.] He speaks in the plural number, as it he had said, Instar
omnium, in stead of all manner of delights unto me.

Some think he alludes to 1 Samuel 30. 6. At such a pinch, in such an extremity.


Verse. 93. I will never forget thy precepts.] Remembering and not forgetting
Gods Law often mentioned in this Psalm, implies,

1. The Knowledge of Gods word, Jam. 1. 24. Jude v. 5. 2. A retaining or
keeping of what we know, 1 Cor. 11. 2. Heb. 2. 1. 3. A calling back of it to
our minds, termed remembrance, 2 Pet. 3. 1. Isa. 46. 8.
4. A special application of that I know, retain and remember, feel the fruit
of such a truth, Jam. 1. 22, 23, 24. as we say, Do you remember me? that is, do
what I desired.

Verse. 94. I am thine, save me.] Heb. I am for thee, others are for themselves.
Quippe qui totus sum in tuae Legis studio: ^gitur salvum me ^ac nunc, quum in
maximis periculis versor. Simeon de Muis.


Verse. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection.] Not in the concrete, of
perfect things, but in the abstract, of perfection, and of all perfection.

But thy Commandment is exceeding broad.] That is, exceedingly broader than any
of those perfections, I cannot see the end of it, and I know it shall never
have an end; there is a vastness of purity and spiritualnesse in the Law.

Verse. 98. Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies:
for they are ever with me.

99. I have more understanding than all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
Meditation.

100 I understand more than the Ancients: because I keep thy precepts.]

There are three steps or gradations: David says,

1. He is wiser than his enemies, it taught him how to out-wit them, though
subtle Ad verbum praecepta tua, id est, un^mquodque praeceptorum tuorum:
ideoque verbum est sing. number. Simeon de Muis. Saul and his Courtiers, A^itophel.
and malicious. 2. Then his teachers, they read it but perfunctorily. 3. Then
the Ancients, who have their own and others experiences. See Job 32. 8, 9.
Verse. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way.] That is, my
affections, from the love and delight of evil. Haec and similia; ^^ quisquam ad
externa facta, and non ad animi pii propositum, ac studium refer voluerit,
deprehendetur esse mentitus: n^si peccatum contra Uria^ commissum non fuerit
contra mandata, testimonia and judicia Dei. Vide Musc. loc. de peccat. Quaest.
3. Joan. 8. 34.


Verse. 109. My soul is continually in my hand.] That is, I go in danger of my
life. Eo quod paratus sum martyrium sustinere, propter Christum. Hieron. Id
est, quotidie in periculum vitae meae vocor, 1 Samuel 19. 5. and 28. 21. Cosaub.
in Athen. Vide Junium. Loquendi genus Hebraeum, quod summa pericula significat:
quia quod manu tenemus, facile eripi nobis potest. Sic 1 Samuel 28. 21. Job 13.
14. Grotius in loc. Alii formam loquendi in^e sumptam putant, quod quicquid in
manu est, non satis sit tutum, cum facile aufe^ri, and excidere possit. Simeon
de Muis.
See Judge. 12. 3. So the Chaldee explaineth it, My soul is in danger, as if it
were upon my hand.

Verse. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever.] Testimony is
usually As the Deeds and ^vidence of mine eternal inheritance. Hilder^ham.
put for the whole Word of God, Psalm. 19. 7. It is called the testimony of God,
because it is that by which God testifies his will to the sons of men;
sometimes it is called the counsel, will, and mind of God, the record, 1 John
5. 11. therefore those that hold forth this testimony are called the witnesses*
of God, Rev. 11. 3. and they that suffer for it, Martyrs: All Divine truths are
to be examined by this, Isa. 8. 20. Romans 3. 21. Act. 10. 43. 2 Because it is
that which shall testify against men, Rev. 20. 20.

An heritage for ever.] Et hic, and in futurum. Hieron.

Verse. 113. I hate thoughts.] So the Hebrew: He means wicked and sinful Or
vain thinkers, as the Chaldee explaineth it
thoughts, the most secret and lowest offenses, not only dislike them, but
perfectly hate them.

Verse. 116. And let me not be ashamed of my hope.] As shame arises from doing
a thing against known light, and common principles, so also from loosing or
suffering a thing against known hope, and common expectation.

Verse. 121. I have done judgment and justice.] That is, have done judgment
See Psalm. 33. 5. and Mr Caryll on Job 8. 3. of the difference of these two
words.
justly, exactly; judgment against the wicked, and justice toward the good.

Verse. 126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy
Law.] The Hebrew word signifies to abrogate, disanull, to take away the force
and strength of a thing, they live as if there were no Law.

Verse. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them.]
Christus est mirabilis, Psalm. ^9. 27. and verba ejus sunt mitabilia, and
quidem, ^. Propter Christi manifestationem Job. 5. 39. 2. Propter mysteriorum
profunditatem. 3. Propter mirandorum effectuum veritatem. Glass. Onomat.
I have high thoughts of thy testimonies, I look upon them as glorious things:
I see much of thy self in thy testimonies, and therefore does my soul keep
them: He does not say, therefore do I keep them, but my very soul is in keeping
thy testimonies. Idcirco lubens and ex animo me iis observandis totum addico.
Muis.

Verse. 130. The entrance of thy words gives light.] The first entrance into
Dictio Ebraica qua hic usus David non tam ostium designat quam aperturam sive
apertionem; Aperire est clausa recludere, hoc est, obscura illustrare Drusius.
them.

Verse. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy
Law.] Ver^ est poenitentia ^ugiter fletibus commissa diluere and abluta non
iterare. Micron. Not wrongs and persecutious against himself, but ^^^^^ and
wickedness against God did procure his great sorrow.
David's grief is set out by the quantity, and cause of it; the quantity is
expressed in that hyperbolicall phrase, Rivers of waters; an hyperbole, like
that Psalm. 6. 6. yet not false or feigned, his sorrow was very great, and
withal constant, in that it did show it self by continual and abundant
streams of tears. The cause, because they keep not thy Law: They, some refer
it to eyes, the immediate antecedent, so Simeon de Muis. Rather because men:
More particularly, Saul and his Courtiers, verse. 139. See verse. 58. To keep the
Law is to observe it diligently, retain it in their hearts, and practice it.

Verse. 137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.] So the
Omnia quae mandante te patimur, justa, recta, ac vera sunt, quia aut pro
peccatis nostris ingruunt, aut ut probari manifestemur, eveniunt. Hieron.
Emperor M^uritius confessed in the same words, when he saw his children slain
before his face, and was himself after them to be slain by Phocas.

Verse. 143. Thy Commandments are my delight.] They are to me in stead of all
delights and pleasures in the world.

Verse. 152. Concerning thy testimonies I have known of old, that thou have
founded them for ever.] God intended the [Word as an everlasting monument of
his Will.

Verse. 160. Thy Word is true from the beginning, and every one of thy righteous
Praestantissimum verbum tuum est ipsa veritas. Jun. i. Certissimum est,
fidelissimum, constantissimum. Id. ^b.
judgments endures for ever.] A great expression.

Verse. 161. Princes have persecutedme without a cause: but my heart stands in
awe of thy Word.] That is, I did incur the displeasure of the greatest men,
and they vented their dislike against me, yet I never complied with them.

Verse. 165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend
them.] Abundance of peace, inward comfort, sweetness, contentment, though not
outward peace, and nothing shall make them turn from the Commandment of God,
Matthew. 11. 6. else David was sensible of outward evils, verse. 143. and
spiritual 158.

Verse. 168. I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies.] viz. sincerely and
constantly.

Verse. 173. For I have chosen thy precepts.] viz. before all things. The word
signifies to choose upon trial and examination.

Verse. 175. Let thy judgments help me.] He speaks not of judgments executed,
but of doctrinall judgments, the doctrine of the Gospel, and promises of grace.

PSALM. CXX.
A Song of degrees.] Canticum excellentissimum, an excellent Song, Junius, as
Canticum graduum vel ascensionum. Hic est titulus hujus Psalm and Psalmorum
sequentium usque ad Psalm. 135. Quindecimisti Psalmi hoc titulo praenotantu^,
quia Judaei Captivitate Babylonica ascendentes anno primo Cyri, hos Psalmos
elegerunt, quos in itinere sive in ascensione decantarent. Vox Mahhalah sie
usurpatur, Ezra 7. 9. Foord in loc.
the Hebrew word will well bear.

Among the Jews themselves these fifteen Psalms were distinguished and
dignified by the name of Psalms of Degrees, either from ascent into the
Temple, intension of the spirit, or elevation of the voice, or for their
excellency.

Some will have these fifteen Psalms together to have the name of Songs of
Degrees, 1. From the history, because they were penned, or at least repeated
and sung by the Jews in their ascending or coming up from Babylon into their
own Country, and this conceit is the more probable, because some of the Psalms
speak expressly of their return from Captivity.

Others deduce it from the Ceremony or Rite used in the singing of them, who
say that the Priest sang these Psalms upon the stairs or steps, as they
marched up into the house of the Lord, which were fifteen steps between the
peoples Courts and the Priests, and these Psalms were sung in order, as they
went up those steps; so Grotius: See Ezekiel. 40.

A third sort from the music they say these Psalms were sung with, ascensions
or raising up the voice by degrees: as it is said, the Levites praised God with
a great voice, or a voice on high, 2 Chronicles 20. 19.

4. From the matter and special contents of them, the verses of these Psalms
being like the rounds of Jacobs ladder, on which we may ascend up to heaven, as
the Angels did upon that.

Verse. 4. With coals of junip^r Ferunt lignum hoc ignem multo tempore
conservate, ita ut si prunae ejus cinere fuerunt opertae, usque ad annum
perveniant. Drus. in ^rov. Class. 2. l. 5. Prove. 48.
.] They burn hot, last long, and give a sweet smell, so Gods judgments.

Verse. 5. In, or with the tents of Kedar.] The Chaldee turns it, Arabians,
Cedareni populus Arabiae degunt in tentoriis nec alias domus habent. Causam
nominis inde ducunt nonnulli quod color sint fusco. Alii a Cedar filio
Ismaelis dictos tradunt Cedareno^. Ut ut sit, certum tentoria eorum fusca
fuisse: ex quo simile apud Salomonem Cant 1. 5^ nec solum tentori^ fusca erant,
sed etiam ipso gens. Per tentoria Cedar meo animo significat ipsos Cedarenos,
hoc primum, deinde Cedarenos voluit intelligi, non nomen proprium, sed homines
improbos, and pravis moribus imbutos. Nigrum in metaphora idem quod pravum. Hic
^iger est, hunc tu Roman caveto. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 3.
they dwelt in tents in the wilderness as shepherds.

Verse. 7. I peace.] So the Hebrew, as if his spirit were transformed into
peace. See the like phrase, Psalm. 109. 4.

PSALM. CXXI.
Verse 1. I Lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help.] That
is, toward Tota hujus Psalmi oration militaris est. ^taque existimo hoc carmen
a Davide, aut aliquo vate scriptum in castris. Ejus autem summa est, A solo Deo
opem expectandam, qui pro suorum salute perpetuo excubet. Simeon de Muis.
Sion, or rather heaven, Heb. 9. 24. This Psalm seems to be written when he had
war with Absalom, says Grotius.

Verse. 2. My help comes from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.] A speech
Canit unde auxilium sibi expectet, nimir^m a solo and cuncti-potente Deo: quem
laudat fictorem coelorum and terrae, quo refricata potentiae ejus memoria, spem
sibi efficacius confirmet. Bucerus.
of contempt: Looks for help no other way.

Verse. 3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved.] viz. to thy ruin.

Verse. 4. Behold he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.] Non
dormitabit, ac multo minus dormiet. Bucer. Muis. He shall be so far from
sleeping, that he shall not so much as slumber. The phrase is taken from
watchmen, who stand on walls in time of war, to foresee the approach of
enemies and give warning, they may be treacherous or sleepy; The Capitol of
Rome had been taken by the Gauls, if the Geese had not been more waking than
the watchmen of the walls.

Verse. 5. The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.] That is, protection,
comfort Sententia est: umbra tus, and ad manum dextram tuam. Ad manum dextram
esse dicitur, qui alicui praesto est, paratus ad eum juvandum, si opus sit.
Drus. in Observat. Sac.
and refreshing from heat, Isa. 25. 4. and 4. 6. Number. 14. 9.

The French and we say, ready at hand.

Verse. 6. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.] The
stars Sunt qui vehementer istam interpretationem reprehendunt, luna urit per
noctem. Siquidem luna frigore nocet non urit, quod caloris verbum est. Itaque
emendabant ex Ebraeo non feriet te, quod tam ad lunam quam ad solemn pertinet;
and recte hi quidem, si nativam ac primigeniam verbi Ebraici significationem
spectemus, verum si ad sensum respicimus, plutimum non interest, hoc an illo
modo locus Davidis transferatur. Nam quia non dissimilis vis caloris and
frigoris, ideo utendi verbo utimur in frigore. Itaque poetarum nescio quis: Aut
Boreae, inquit, penetrabile frigus adurat. Dru^^^^ Observat. Sac. l. 7. c. 8.
Vide Vales. de Sac. Philos. c. 71.
have, in reference to the curse, several noxious influences, they shall
nourish and cherish the Saints, they shall have benign influences on them.

The Sun and Moon being rulers of day and night, Psalm. 136. 8, 9. imply all
other things whatsoever; but this has reference to Gods protection of Israel
in the wi^^^^ness, Exodus 13. 21. Isa. 4. 5. Ainsw.

(...) those hot regions, as the heat of the day was intolerable: so the cold
of the night was hurtful. He means God would drive away all evils, at what
time soever they came.

Verse. 8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and coming in.] That is,
prospers all thy actions at home and abroad, Numb. 27. 17. 1 King. 3. 7. 2 Chronicles. 1. 10. See D^ut. 28. 6. 2 Samuel 3. 25. Act. 1. 21. and 9. 28. Vitae
actiones Scriptura egressum and ingressum vocat. Bucerus.

Thy going out.] To war.

And coming in.] That is, returning into thine house, when the war is ended.
Muis.

PSALM. CXXII.
Verse 6. PRay for the peace of Jerusalem.] The original words have such
elegancy here, Dr Clerk.
as (I think) all the Scripture cannot parallel this verse. The words do so
excellently answer one another in matchless Paranomasie: It is in English
unexpressible, Shaalu Shel^m Jerushalaim.

PSALM. CXXIII.
Verse 2. OUr eyes are upon the Lord our God.] For direction and protection.
Verse. 4. Of those that are at ^ase.] Not taken for absence of pain, such as are
drencht with pleasure.

PSALM. CXXIV.
Verse 3. THen they had swallowed us up] or down, quick. A metaphor taken from
ravenous Gatak. ^^ Numb. 23. 21.
beasts that devour their prey so suddenly, that it seems to go quick down
their throats. Tanta tuno erat eorum rabies, ut nisi Deus adfuisset, nos quasi
ferae bestiae uno impetu vivos essent absorpturi ac dev^^aturi. Simeon de Muis.


PSALM. CXXV.
Verse 2. AS the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round
about his people, from hence forth even for ev^r.] Heb. 13. 5. As the City
Jerusalem is every where compassed with mountains, so God compasses and will
for ever compass the Church.

Verse. 3. Least the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.] Noting,
that if Ut non cogitent quid mihi prodest quod justus sum, si semper
persequantur me iniqui. Hieron.
the godly should be too much afflicted, they could not hold out, but would
turn aside to sinful courses. See Deuteronomy. 20. 18.

Verse. 5. As for such a^ turn aside unto their crooked ways.] Ainsworth
renders Suis tortuositatibus. Montanus.
it, crcokednesses; it signifies to be crooked in his way, serpentum more, as
Numb. 22. 23.

PSALM. CXXVI.
THis Psalm was penned after their return from Captivity out of Babylon. This
Psalm is divided into Halelujahs and Hosannahs, Praises and Petitions.

Verse. 1. Zion] The people of God, the Ark was there placed, and there God was
worshipped.

We were like them that dream.] That is, we, as it were, forgot what our state
and Sensus planus est, Postquam nos in patriam e Babylonia Deus reduxit,
profecto nobis videbamur somniare: tantum fuit, and tam inopinatum bonum.
Dubitamus fere de maximis gaudiis quasi quae fidem superent. Genes. 47. 26.
Simeon de Muis. Videbamur nobis prae laetitiae magnitudine, non reipsa cornere
eam foelicitatem, Act. ^2. 9. Bucerus. Like unto them that are restored to
health. Chalam signifies convaluit, revixit, Job 39. 4. Isa. 38. 16. The same
word is used of Hez. kiahs recovery Men have not their lives filled with
laughier after a bodily dream, but when after sickness they are restored to
health: so Cajetan and Sanctius interpret it. Vide Mayeri Philol. Sac. and
Gr^tium.
condition, but lately was; as a dreamer forgets how it was with him, did not
know whether it was true or no, we were so amazed with the greatness of the
deliverance.

Dreams are 1. Things unthought of. 2. Unlaboured for. 3. Of strange things,
Jacob of a ladder reaching to heaven; that a Heathen King ( Cyrus) of his own
accord, on a sudden should give them commission to return out of Babylon, Ezra
1. 1. See Luke 24. 41. Act. 12. 9.

PSALM. CXXVII.
IT is a Psalm concerning Solomon, whom David foresaw to be his successor, he
is called Jedidiah, 2 Samuel 12. 25. that is, beloved of Jah, so here. Verse. 2.
I^did his beloved or dearling, it has reference to Salomons name.

Verse. 2. For so he gives his beloved sleep.] So, how is that? that is
notwithstanding Jor] nota affirmationis and certitudinis. The Hebrew word for
sleep, Shena, is written with (...), a quiet dumb letter (otherwise then
usual) to denote the more quietness. Ainsw. Hoc est securam omnium and cunctis
bonis afflue^tem quietem, videtur Solomon seipsum ut hujus exemplum indicasse.
Ei namque nec petenti quidem. nedum anxie laboranti, Deus tanta suppeditarat,
ut nulli unquam fuerint qui potuislent foelicitate ipsi conterri. Eum quoque
Nathan vocavit Jedidiah, id est dilectum exsistentis. Proinde videtur dicti
hujus sensus esse: En sic dabit cuivis dilecto suo Deus somnum, and dormienti
cuncta affa^im suppeditabit: ut videtis mihi dilecto fuo nihil tale vel
optan^i, tam securum somnum, id est omnium re^um securissimam abundantiam
donasse. Bucerus in loc.
all the hard labor and pains they take, yet the Lord gives them sleep, and
sleep makes them forget all their former labor.

Some say it should be translated, For he rightly gives his beloved sleep, as
the same Hebrew particle is used elsewhere, Numb. 27. 7.

He means not bodily sleep, but a quieting of the soul in God: Some mystical
Divines speak of obdormiti^ animae in Deo.

PSALM. CXXVIII.
Verse 2. FOr thou shall ^at the labor of thine hands.] That is, the fruit of
thy labors, or Vives honesto labor partis, nemini supplex. Gr^tius. i. e.
Cibum labor manuum tuarum partum. Amama. This is, things got with labor
according to the Law, Genesis 3. 19. Ainsw.
thou shall take delight in the very labor it self, as Christ says, It was
his meat and drink to do his Fathers will.

Verse. 3. Thy wi^e shall be as a fruitful Vine by the ^ides of thine house.]
The Vine Innuit hon^stam matronam se conti nere and raro pr^dire in publicum.
Drus. Prove. Clas. 2. l. 2. Tenue and pr^aridum lignum habet vitis, quod ^eipsum
nequit sustentare, and dulcem tamen adeo a^ suavem profert fructum: sic ^xor
imbecille organum, ne^ fere potens absque praesidio mariti vivere, parit tamen
elegantissimos ^ilios. Buccru^.
tree brings forth liquor of the Vine, most profitable to nourish the body, and
cheer the heart.

Secondly, Fruitfulness is commended in the Vine tree, so in women. 1. Not a
wanderer abroad, as Dina^, but a house-wife. 2. In the house side, not the
house top; she is in thy side who was taken out of thy side. 3. The Vine is of
a bending and yielding nature, so she must be flexible to her husband. 4. A
Vine is an excellent shade against the schorching Sun, so should she refresh
her husband in his greatest misery.

Thy children like Olive plants round about thy table.] He mentions here the
Vine and the Olive, two of the best fruits, the one for cheering the heart, the
other for clearing the face, Psalm. 104. 15. the one for sweetness, the other
for fatness, Judge. 9. 13. Christ himself is compared to these two trees, John
15. 1. Romans 11. 24.

1. Numerous, round about. Cur liberos hominis pil similes facit plantis
olearum? An quia olea perperuo viret? An potius respexit ad naturam oleae, cui
nulla arbor inseri potest? ut significet eos legitimos, non insitivos aut
spurios* esse. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 5. Liberos recte facie similes
olivarum, non solum quia submissionis atque obedientiae symbolum est, sed etiam
quia paci^ nuncias. Marti^ns de R^a. Sing. Vol. 1. l. 4. c. 5.
2. Legitimate, one cannot graff any thing in an Olive, but the Olive. 3.
Flourishing, that is always green, Psalm. 52. 10.
That he faith, about thy table, he expresses the delight which they bring to
the Father, while many of them, and those pretty ones, stand always in his
sight.

Verse. 5. The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion.] That was Gods special
residence.

PSALM. CXXIX.
Verse 8. NEither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon
you; we bless you in the Name of the Lord.] Showing evidently, that it was a
good and Ruth 2. 4.
commendable custom of the people of God then, to crave Gods blessing on the
corn, grass or other fruits that they saw upon the earth, in these or the like
words, God bless it, or God save it.

PSALM. CXXX.
Verse 3. IF thou Lord should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand?] That
is, rectus Utique illud quis hic nullus est, says Chrysostom. Surely that
[who] is no body at all.
in curia. It is the posture of those that would boldly defend their cause.

Verse. 6. My soul waits for the Lord, more then they which watch for the
morning*] E^cubitores malutini attente diem expectant, ut a^ excubia^um labor
leventur. Repetitio autem vocum in canticis suavitatem qua^dam habet. Groti^^.
Repetitione ingen^ desiderium exprimit. Simeon de Muis.
As the wea^y Sentinel which is we^ with the dews of the night, waits for the
appearance of the morning, or as the Levites watched in the Temple when the
morning would come, that they might be taken off from their work.

Verse. 7. With him is plenteous redemption.] From all ^in^e, and all the
consequences of it.

PSALM. CXXXI.
Verse 2. AS a child that is weaned of his mother, my soul is even as a weaned
child.] See Hoc est, non secus arque infans a ^acte depulsus totus a cura
matris pendet, de nulla re prorsus soll^citus. Simeon d^ Muis. Id^m repe^i^,
quasi dicere^, animus meus apud me quie^^^t, nihil sollicitus, non secu^ atque
infans a lacte depulsus. Id. ib.
Isa. 32. That is, was careful of nothing, as a weaned child, and as he
depends on his mothers ^are, so does he commit the event to God, and wholly
depend on him.

PSALM. CXXXII.
Verse 8. ARise, O Lord, into thy rest, tho^, and the Ark of thy strength.] The
royal Go^ answers to this petition, verse. 14. See Number. 10. 35.
Prophet having settled himself in his Kingdom, according to his own desire; and
besides, having after many wanderings to and fro, at length brought back again
the Ark unto Jerusalem, makes here most zealous and devout prayers to God for
the continuance of his favor both to the Church and Commonwealth committed to
his Government.

Verse. 9. Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness.] The Priests had
linen That is, let them justly and holily administer their Priests office. See
Job 29. 4^. Hoc est, Justitiam deinceps perpetuo colant, and quasi vestem
induant, ita ut illa omnium oculis patea^. Simeon de Muis.
clothes reaching down to their feet, so Christ our Highpriest, Rev. 1. 13.
Linen signifies righteousness in the Scripture, Rev. 17. 8. To this David
alludes here. To this petition here God answers, v. 16. and to David's petition,
v. 10. God answers, v 17. to the end of the Psalm.

Verse. 11. Of the fruit of thy body.] Thy womb or belly, th^^ is, thy children^
See Homines alii fructus sunt ventris, sed non solius ventris: sed ventris and
lumborum, and renum. Ventris matrum, lumborum and renum, patrum, Christ ^^
solius ventris fructus est. Musc. Conc. 1a de Not.
2 Samuel 7. 12. This prophecy respects Christ, Act. 2. 30.

PSALM. CXXXIII.
Verse 1. BEhold how good and how pleasant it is.] How good, that is, how much
would Duo dicit bonum and jucundum. Bonum est Martyrium, sed non est jucundum:
habet enim supplicia and paenas; and semper in cruciatibus ^olo^ est, and
unique in dolor non est jucunditas. Rursum voluptas jucunda est. Hic ergo duo
posuit and quod ^ibi videbatur esse contrarium, bonum scilicet and jucundum uno
sermon conjunxi^. H^ro^. in ^oc.
come to the persons by it; by way of admiration, and how pleasant!

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit ^^i^^ dulci. Some things are good which are not
pleasant, as afflictions, repentance, selfdeniall, rendering good for evil; some
things pleasant which are not good, as sensual pleasures; some things neither
good nor pleasant, as envy, despair, impatience; some things both good and
pleasant, as the happiness in heaven.

Verse. 2, 3. He uses two comparisons answering to good and pleasant; the
second verse answering pleasant, the third answering to good.

Verse. 2. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon
the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments.] It
signifies that the spiritual oil was first of all poured upon our Head Christ,
and from thence consequently derived to all his members.

Verse. 3. As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Sicut r^^ Hermon qui descendit super montes Sion.] Sic habent
Grae^i and vulgata de verbo ad verbum ex Hebraeo, sed nullo sensu. Nimis enim
mons Hermon a monte Sion remotus erat, ut ros de ^^^ i^ alterum descendere
po^uit. Recte ergo Ki^chi supplet ^llip^in, sicut ros Hermon, and sicut r^s qui
descendit in montes Sion. Hul^ius.
Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.]
Hermon was a very fruitful hill, inter pascua celebratur.

T^er^] Where brethren dwell in unity.

Commanded] Appointed and sent effectually. See Psalm. 42. 9.

PSALM. CXXXIV.
Verse 3. THe Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Zion.] He does
not say, The ^^oice^^ merci^^ which God has to communicate, are out of Zion,
among his people joined together in a way of worship. See Psalm. 128. 5.
The Lord that made the earth, bless thee out of heaven, nor the Lord that made
heaven, bless thee out of heaven, but bless thee out of Zion, as if he would
teach us, that all blessings come as immediately and primarily from heaven, so
mediatly and secondarily from Zion, where the Temple stood.

PSALM. CXXXV.
Verse 6. WHatsoever the Lord pleased* that did he in h^aven and in earth, in
th^s^^s, and all deep places.] A holy Minister said, that Scripture did ^^^ch
content him; Such a thing pleased God, said he, why should it not please me.

PSALM. CXXXVI.
Verse 10: To him that s^^^te Egypt in their firstborn.]

Here are four particulars:

1. God has judgments for a whole Nation, Exodus 12. 30. AEgypt] Egyptians.
See Psalm. 78. 43, 51.
2. God punishes his enemies in what is nearest to them, Zech. 12. 10. 3. God
proportions his judgments to men's sins, Exodus 1. they drowned the Israelites
firstborn. 4. This judgment brake Pharaohs heart.
Verse. 11. And brought out Israel from among them] The bondage of the
Israelites was great,

1. In regard of their bodies, it is called an iron-fornace. See Exodus 3. 7, 9.
2. In regard of their souls, great Idolatry; The Egyptians worshipped almost
every thing, Vide Athan. Kirch. Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 1. Syntag. 3. c. 1, 2, 3,
5, 6, 7.
the Crocodile, River, Ox, Herbs in the garden, Rev. 11. Rome is called Egypt,
this was therefore a great deliverance.
Verse. 13. To him which divided the Red Sea into parts.] Or, Divisions. By the
Dissect ^^ fuerunt aquae in multas vias, juxta numerum tribuum, idque in medium
Arcus rotundi. Paul. F^g. Pirk. Aboth.
Jews tradition, the Red Sea was parted into twelve several parts, for every of
the twelve Tribes to go through. But Bucer and Muis mislike that Interpretation.

Verse. 14. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it.] He shows for whom
this was done, Israel, Exodus 14. 22, 29. not the Egyptians, Heb. 11. 29.

2. God gave Israel courage and faith to venture, Heb. 11.

Verse. 15. But overthrew.] Shook them off in the original, as a man would shake
Excussit Phar^^^^^] id est, Praecip^tavit. Grotim.
a worm off his garment.

Ainsworth and Grotius render it Shook off. See Exodus 14. 27.

PSALM. CXXXVII.
Verse 6. ABove my chief joy.] Heb. The head of my joy. Si non praetulero
luctum urbis Jerusalem vel summo gaudio, quod mihi contingere potest. Simeon de
Muis. Idem est atque si dixisset* omni laetitiae praetulero luctum pro
Jerusalem. Bucerus.


PSALM. CXXXVIII.
Verse 1. BEfore the gods will I sing praise unto thee.] The Kings and Princes
of the earth, Coram Diis, alii enarr^nt coram Angelis, ut Graeci, alii coram
judicibus. Sed neged E^^bim quod exponi potest, coram Deo, nonnunquam valet,
coram Arca Deus pro Area, us in i^lo * De^ venit in castra coram Angelis,
sensus est inter sanctos, sive in coetu piorum, ubi talis coetus, ibi Angeli
sunt, Itaque Apostolus praecipit faeminis in Ecclesia ut vel^to capite sint
propter Angelos. Angeli enim semper intersunt, aut verius praesunt coetibus
hominum sanctorum. Coram judicibus ita enarrat optimus inter Ebraeos author.
Camius. Sic Deorum vocabulo usus est idem David, Psalm. 28. 1. and sic Exodus 22.
9. Entres expositiones: quarum una a me est, aliae duae ab aliis etiam notatae
fuerunt. Ex his quisque eliget quam optimam esse purabit. Drus. Observat. See.
l. 9. c. 23. Vide Sim. de Mui^ and Bucerum.
as verse. 4. called gods, Psalm. 82. 1, 6. before such David used to confess
the Lord, Psalm. 119. 46.

Verse. 2. For thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name.] The Name of God
appears in his great work of Creation and Providence: His Power, Sovereignty,
Grace.


1. Because there is more of God discovered in his Word then in his works. 2.
He works greater things by his Word then by his works, converting the soul, and
comforting afflicted consciences. 3. Gives it authority over the conscience.
PSALM. CXXXIX.
Verse 3. THou compassest my paths.] That is, markest me which way soever I go.

Verse. 13. For thou have possessed my reins.] That is, my secret cogitations,
for Finxisti eos* quare penitissime cognoscere eos vales. Bucerus.
the kidneys lie in a hid and secret place of the body, Jer. 12. 2.

Verse. 14. For I am fearfully and wonderfully made.] Made, as it were, and
composed Mirificatus sum mirabilibus operibus tuis. Montanus.
altogether in wonders.

Verse. 15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.] So he calls the womb;
because Embroidered] That is, Cunningly wrought with nerves, sinews, veins, and
variety of limbs. A similitude taken from broidery work. Psalm. 45. 15.
curious workmen, when they have some choice piece in hand, perfect it in
private, and then bring it forth to light for men to gaze at.

Verse. 17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me.] Some expound it of the
Some say be speaks here of Gods providence
thoughts he had of God, he valued nothing so much as high thoughts of him. See
verse. 18.

Others interpret it of Gods thoughts of him, comparing it with Psalm. 40. 5.

Verse. 22. I hate them with perfect hatred.] I hate the wicked, that is, so
far as Vide Thom. 2da, ^dae. Qu. 34. Art. 1. and 2. August in loc. and Matthew.
5. 44
wicked, viz. their practices and actions, not their persons.

Verse 24. And lead me in the way everlasting.] That is, lead me by heavenly In
viam saeculi He means continuum vitae cur^um.
light in my whole life, the way of my age.

PSALM. CXL.
Verse 3. ADders poison, or the poison of Aspes is under their lips.] See Psalm.
14. 1, 2, 3. Romans Aspis ab aspergendo dicitur. I^idor, Etym. The Asp has his
name from his nature, which is dispersive. Pliny writes, That when a man is
bitten of an Asp, it seems at first to tickle and delight him, but ere long it
disperseth the poison throughout all the veins.
3. 15. that is, the words which come from their lips, are more hurtful than
the poison of Asps.

Verse. 11. Let not an evil speaker ^e established in the earth.] Heb. A man of
Ish ^ashon^^* Vulg. vir lingvosus. Jun. Vir maledicus.
tongue, that is, a pratler or evil speaker, that has tongue at will to use
and abuse.

Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him] The evil of sin. 2. Of
punishment. Hunt.] As a Blood hound follows the seut till it overtakes.
3. Satan.

There are four things in hunting.

1. A great deal of Industry. 2. Art. 3. Pleasure. 4. That the creature taken
may be destroyed.
PSALM. CXLI.
Verse 3. SEt a watch (O Lord) before my mouth.] Or, Ward, custody, to keep me
from Mors and vita in manibus linguae. Hieron. Sensus est, quod quemadmodum
arces muniuntur, validis portis, and praeterea vigilum custodia, sicque
defunduntur a vi hostili, ita Deus os suum valida veluti porta communiat, ne
quod verbum, quasi transfuga aliquis, inde elabatur, quo hostibus suis
prodatur. Capel. Critic. Sac. l. 4. c. 13.
speaking amiss.

Verse. 4. Let me not eat of their dainties.] Some understand it of their sins.
Others The Chaldee expounds it, of their Songs at banque^^. See. Psalm. 74. 6.
Magna est ita Del quando non nobis Irascitur, Hieron. in loc.
of their flatteries, they will flatter thee in a way of sin.

Verse. 5. Let the righteous smite me.] Or, Hammer me, the same word with that
which is spoken of Jael when she slew Sisera, Judge. 5. 26. with a deserved
censure, as if he had said, If I have done amiss, let me hear of it, yea, let
me smart for it by a faithful reproof.

It shall be an excellent oil.] As oil for my head, to anoint my head with, or
Magis amat objurgatorem sanantem, quam adulatorem ungentem caput. August.
Epist. 8.
head-oyl, most excellent oil, as Cant. 4. 14. and Ezekiel. 27. 22.

PSALM. CXLII.
Verse 4. I Looked on my right hand.] A Scripture very remarkable. See Psa. 73.
23.


The right hand is the great instrument of action, therefore assistance given
is said to come on the right hand.

PSALM. CXLIII.
Verse. 4. MY heart within me is desolate.] Laid waste or become a wilderness.
The word in Hithpael signifies to lay ones self waste, void of comfort.

Verse 6. As a thirsty Land.] As in a dry Land parcht with the heat of the Sun,
Sicut terra sine aqua sitit, and quaerit imbrem: ita and anima mea desiderat,
and sitit te Deum suum. Hieron. in loc.
there is a great want of moisture, so in our souls must be retained a sense of
the want of the graces of God, with an hearty sorrow of our want, we must feel
our selves even dried and parched with the heat of Gods wrath due unto our
sins, until the sweet waters flowing from the Sanctuary have graciously
refreshed us.

2. As a dry Land parched with drought gapeth and opens it self wide, as if
it would swallow up the Clouds, for rain: So must our hearts preserve within
them an earnest appetite, and insatiable desire after Christ and his merits.

Verse. 10. Lead me into the Land of uprightness.] Some expound it of heaven,
both the uprightness in this life and heaven.

PSALM. CXLIV.
Verse 1. WHich teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.] That is,
gave him that skill, courage and success in the war, that he got a complete
victory.

Verse. 4. Man is like to vanity.] Adam damah la hebel, Adam is like to Habel
man Adam is ^s Abel, or Abels ma^e, for to the name of the two Patriarchs there
is an alliosion in the original.
to vanity. Adam the earthly man, what possession ( Kyman) soever he gat, all
is Habel vanity. Broughton of the first ten Fathers.

Verse. 8. Their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.] Either refer it to
their oaths to God, so Glassius. When they swear to him, they used to lift up
their righthand, Revel. 10. 5. Or their Covenant with men, their manner was to
give the right hand when they made a Covenant, Ezekiel. 17. 8. men whom neither
oath to God, nor their Covenant with men would hold. Ingenium respiciens non
originem. Ut similitudo templi, id est, valde ornatae, ut amari solet a
gentilibus idolum quod praecipue colitur in templo illorum. Menoc. de Repub.
Heb. l. 4 c. 1.


Verse. 11. Deliver me from the hand of strange children.] The Jews.

Verse. 12. May be as corner stones polished after the similitude of a palace.]
Or, Temple, so the LXX.

Verse. 13. Affording all manner of store.] The Chaldee Paraphrast paraphraseth
it ab anno in annum, from one year to another. Ainsworth renders it from meat
to meat, or from sort to sort, that is, all sorts and store of victuals.

Verse. 15. Happy is that people that is in such a case: yea happy is that
people, whose God is the Lord.]

David having prayed for many temporal blessings in the behalf of his people,
from verse. 12. to this verse, at length he windeth up all indeed with this
Epiphonema or conclusion, Blessed be the people that are in such a case: but
presently comes with an Epanorthosis, or a correcting of his former speech, Yea
rather happy is that people whose God is the Lord; As if he had said, that
indeed is a thing to happiness in some kind, but nothing to this, that is but
temporal, this eternal. Sine summo bono nil bonum.


The Lord is said to be his peoples God two ways:

1. Spiritually, when he takes them into Covenant with himself. 2. Visibly,
when he takes them into Church Fellowship, so he was the God of Blessednesses,
all manner of blessedness lies in this.
Israel.
PSALM. CXLV.
Verse 9. ANd his tender mercies are over all his works.] There is no work of
his hands See Lam. 3. 22.
which receives not from him some mercy.

Verse. 10. All thy works praise thee, O Lord: and the Saints shall bless
thee.] To bless and praise differ, praise declares his excellency, bless,
that is, acknowledge his benefits.

Verse. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call
upon him in truth.] Which intimates,

1. That there is a calling upon God, and not in truth. 2. That there is no
loss of a prayer which is made in truth, for God is near.
In truth.] That is, in faith and confidence, that they shall obtain the thing
which they pray for.

PSALM. CXLVI.
Verse 2. While I live, will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises unto my
God, while I have any being.] There is no phrase more usual in the Psalms then
to sing forth praises unto God, and it is not used without a special emphasis.
For it is one thing to praise, and another to sing praises, as this verse
shows. This is to publish, to declare, to speak of abundantly, to utter the
memory of Gods great goodness, that one generation may derive praises unto
another, as the expressions are Psalm. 145. 4, 7.

Verse. 3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
is no help.]

There are two reasons why David instanceth in Princes:

1. Because all are apt to idolize men in power, Regis ad exemplum, etc. 2.
Because David himself had been miserably deceived, he trusted much in the
Courtiers of Saul and Jonathan. It is applicable to all sorts of men, therefore
it is added, Nor in the son of man.
PSALM. CXLVII.
HAllelujah.] That is, Praise ye Jah. See Psalm. 135. 1. Psalmus iste non solum
in titulo, sed and exordio Psalmi habet Halleluja. Ubi autem dicitur Laudate
Dominum in Hebraeo dicitur Halcluja. Hieron. in loc.


Verse. 1. Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for
it is pleasant, and praise is comely.] There are good things which are not
pleasant, as afflictions, Heb. 12. 11. There are pleasant things which yet are
not comely, as foolish jesting, Ephesians. 5. 4. but singing of Psalms is good,
pleasant and comely. Good in its own nature, pleasant to the hearers, and
comely to the user.

Verse. 10. He takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.] Either because the
strength of a man lies there, or his agility is manifested there.

Any indowments of a man that are not grace, as the opposition makes manifest,
See Psalm. 33. 16
verse. 11.

Verse. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him.] In their persons
Melius est unum timere, ut plures non timeas: quam plures timere, ut unum non
timeas. Hieron.
and services.

Verse. 13. For he has strengthened the bars of thy Gates.] Against enemies.
Quinque versus continui pulcherrima aliqua allusione insignes singuli, primus
istorum, v. sc. 13. Casaub. de lingua Hebraica.


Verse. 16. He gives snow like wool.] Not only because of the likeness in
color, 1. Propter albedinem, The whiteness of it, Psalm. 51. 7. Isa. 1. 16. 2.
Propter utilitatem, For the benefit and warmth of it to the earth.
but also because it warmeth the ground, and preserves the corn that is sown,
Qui dat nivem candidam sicut lanam. Chaldaeus.

PSALM. CXLVIII.
Verse 4. PRaise him ye heavens of heavens: and ye waters that be above the
heavens.] Plures Coelos dicimus Apostolus usque ad tertium Coelum raptum se
esse dicit. Hieron. Infimi Coeli, viz. Aer in quo spiramus, ut servus servorum
est infimus and abjectissimus servus. Foord. in loc.
Heavens of heavens.] That is, the highest heavens.

Ye waters that be above the heavens.] That is, the clouds praise him, as they
are the wonderful work of God, and give men matter to praise him.

Verse. ^1. Kings of the earth, and all people: Princes, and all Judges of the
earth.

12. Both young men and maidens, old men and children.] Ut omnes homines
comprehendat, tres differentias enumerat potestatis, sexus and aetatis: omnes
igitur sive principes, sive privati, sive viri, sive foeminae, sive senes, sive
adolescentes laudent nomen Domini. Bellarm. in loc. Cajet. and Carthusianus.


He invites all men of every condition, age and sex, lest any should think
himself exempt from this duty.

PSALM. CXLIX.
Verse 6. LEt the high praises of God be in their mouth.] When God puts forth
high acts of grace, he expects high praises.

Verse. 9. To execute upon them the judgment written.] In the book of God the Sea 1 Cor. 4. 6. Revel. 12. 28. Hoc est, Sumendo de iis* omnibus supplicium, de
quo scriptum est, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. Simeon de Mu^^.
Lord has declared against some enemies, as Amalek and the Antichristian party.

PSALM. CL.
Verse 2. ACcording to his excellent greatness.] So we read, but the Hebrew
and Greek according to the multitude of his greatness, and so Ainsworth.
Secundum amplitudinem maximam ejus. Tremel. Secundum multitudinem magnitudinis
ejus. Vulg. Lat.


Verse. 4. Organ.] Or, The Organon, as the Greek translateth it: The Hebrew name
Memorat Organa Musica plura quam ullo alio Psalmo: quo ipso quoque significat,
se ad pleniorem nos hic laudem Dei provocare. Bucer^s.
signifies a lovely (or delightful) instrument: It is one of the ancientest
of the world, invented by Jubal. Genesis 4. 23. and an instrument of joy, Job 21.
12. and 30. 31.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of PROVERBS.
CHAP. I.
THE Book of Proverbs is compared to a great heap of gold Videtur hic liber
esse (...) optimarum sententiarum ex plurimis qui a^te Salo^one^ fuere
scriptoribus, quales (...) multi Imperatorum Constantinop^litanorum con scribi
in suos usus fecere. Sunt autem quae hic sunt (...) omnia, pertinentia aut ad
morum, aut ad prudentiae praecepta, sic tamen ut ^aec and illa semper ad Dei
cultum respiciant: quae virtus caeteras omnes ex se parit: Neglecta multis
gentibus: Maximi autem facta ab Hebraeis sapientibus, ut in Joseph^ not^tum est
Grotius, Farabola est dictum quoddam aenigmaticum quo diversae res inter se
conferuntur. Cujusmodi sunt ill^ Salomonis. Hujusmodi Parabolis pleni sunt
libri Hebraeorum, Syrorum, Arabum, AEthiopum. Kirch. O^dip. Egypt. T^^^. 2.
p^r. 1. c. 5.
Rings, rich and orient severally, and every one shining with a distinct sense
by it self: but other Contexts of holy Writ to gold-chains, so interwoven and
enlinked together, that they must be illightned and receive mutual illustration
one from another. Bolton on Prove. 18. 14.

It is without question that Solomon was the Author of this Book, 1 King. 4. 32.

Three Books of Scripture are Salomons, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. The
Proverbs set out true wisdom; Ecclesiastes, worldly vanity; Canticles, heavenly
love.

Verse. 4. The simple.] Jerome reads it a child, Junius fools, because both
children and fools are simple.

Verse. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.] Filial fear, a fear
of reverence, Mal. 3. 16. The word signifies as well caput or principatum, the
head or top of wisdom.

Verse. 8. My Son.] Solomon repeating this Title twenty three times has it
ever in this form Fili mi, my son. One main end of writing this Book was to
instruct young ones.

Verse. 12. Let us swallow them up alive as the grave.] As wild beasts devour
their Existimem Metaphoram esse a carnibus quae crudae and integrae devorantur.
Sed si cui hoc non probetur, ei per me licet, ut ita locum Salomonis enarret:
Deglutiamus eos viventes and int^gros: Viventes, i. valentes. Dru^i^ in
Observat. Sac. Vi^^ Geierum in loc.
prey, at a morsel. Ralph Bains says, he seems to allude to the History of
Dathan and Ahiram, whom the earth opened and swallowed up quick; but Mr Tailor
dislikes this; for thieves (says he) would not willingly mention such a
judgment.

Verse. 20. Wisdom* cries without.] Heb. Wisdoms, that is, Summa Sapientia. See
Chap* 9. 1. Hebraei increatam illam Sapientiam vocant C^ocmoth in plurali
numero Sapientia, id est, unaquaeque ex sapientiis, unaquaeque sapientia.
Mercerus.
Junius. Because it is the most excellent wisdom, divine, heavenly wisdom,
which teaches us how to attain eternal life.

Cries.] The word signifies a strong cry, such a one as Soldiers use to send
forth in the beginning of a battle, or after a victory.

Verse. 22. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity.] Simple sometimes
signifies Simplicity is opposed, 1. To craft. 2. To heavenly or true wisdom, so
here.
one that is plain hearted, sincere; and simplicity, singleness and integrity
of heart; here taken in the worst sense, fools love folly, that is sin.

That is, Never strive to better your knowledge in things which may do you most
good, but suffer your selves to be abused in that which will overthrow and
shame you.

And fools hate knowledge.] Sinful fools will not be at cost and pains to get
it.

Verse. 26. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes.] Risus Dei long gravior est ira Dei, quod Deus loquitur cum risu tu
legas cum luctu. August. Gods laughter is more to be feared than his anger,
Psalm. 2. 4. He will laugh his enemies to scorn, and then break them to pieces.
God delights not in it with a will terminated in their destruction, but as an
occasion to exercise his justice.

Verse. 31. Therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices.] A metaphor taken from those which have surfeted on
sweet morsels, when they feel the griping of their bowels, they have enough of
it. From Husbandmen, says Baynes.

Mr Tailor says, there is a metaphor from meats, in the word eat; a metaphor
from trees* in the word fruit; and a metaphor from travelers, in the word way.

Verse. 32. For the turning away of the simple shall stay them.] By making them
to neglect duty, and provoke God against them.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. ANd hide my Commandments with thee.] That is, Have them always about
Hebraei referunt ad jugem praeceptorum memoriam, hoc quod dicit abscondes
tecum, vel apud te. Baynus in loc. Vide Geierum in loc.
thee, that so when ever there is any need thou may have the promises and
counsels at hand.

Verse. 3. Yea, if thou criest after knowledge.] Liftest up thy voice, Synecd.
generis, If thou pray after knowledge, or for knowledge, as it is translated in
the end of the Nil aliud est, quam miseriis continuisque votis, hanc sapientiae
illuminationem, ab omnis sapientiae font Deo, exoptare, ac continuis quasi
clamoribus accersere, 1 Reg. 3. 6. Geierus.
verse for understanding. And that is nearer to the Hebrew Text.

And liftest up thy voice.] Heb. Give, or utterest thy voice.

If thou criest.] There is the prayer.

If thou seek.] Ver. 4. there is the endeavor.

Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord.] Verse. 5. There is the
blessing.

Verse. 6. For the Lord gives wisdom.] As if he should say, it comes not out of
the mouth of the excellentest man, that thou can hear; it comes from the Lord
only, and therefore thou must seek to him for it.

Verse. 11. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee.]
Chamar is an exact observation.


Discretion imports a careful examining things in the mind before we do them,
that we may avoid evil.

Shall preserve thee.] As a Buckler keeps from wounds: or as a guard, which
Natsar signifies to keep as a watchman by wisdom, and as a guard by power,
thou shall not be overthrown by power or policy.
Princes are wont to have about them, for the safety of their persons.

The same benefit is twice inculcated.

Verse. 16. From the stranger which flattereth with her words.] Heb. Which
makes Nitzal, Est furto se eripere, To steal himself out of her hands, who
keeps him so in fetters.
her words smooth. See Psalm. 55. 21.

Verse. 17. And forgets the Covenant of her God.] That is of marriage, of
which God is the author, and whose name was or ought to have been invocated in
the match making.

The Hebrew word translated Covenant, comes from a word which signifies to
Berish. Ezekiel. 16. 60. Mal. 2. 14.
choose. It is an agreement between two choosing one another, and tying
themselves by Covenant one to another upon such terms as both parties like.

Verse. 19. None that go unto her, return again.] That is, very few, so few, Ut
Because his body rules over his soul.
quasi nulli videantur, Lavater. David repented of adultery. The strumpets
house is like the Lions den. De interitu magis aeterno quam externa morte, quam
tamen saepe sibi adulteri accersunt, loquitur. Mercerus.


Omnia te adversum spectantia vestigia, nulla retrorsum. That go unto her.] A
modest expression of a secret or foul action, frequent in Scripture, Gen 29.
23. Psalm. 51. tit.

Neither take they hold of the paths of life.] Which lead to eternal life.

CHAP. III.
Verse 5. LEan not unto thine own understanding.] A metaphor from one that
leans on a staff to support him from falling. Presume not upon thine own wit.
Trust not to it.

Verse. 11. My Son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary
of his correction.] It should not be slighted, neither should we faint under it.

Verse. 14. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver,
and the gain thereof than fine gold.

15. She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou can desire,
are not to be compared unto her.]

It is spoken of Christ, and the trading for him in the Ordinances, those ways
of worship which he has appointed.

Wisdom, that is, grace. Merchandise, that is, trading for it in Ordinances, to
The Hebrew word signifies a going about, or compassing of Sea or Land to get
wisdom, as Merchants do for gain. Impiger, etc.
know what returns and incomes you have.

Than fine gold.] The word comes from cutting in the Original, either because
gold is, as it were, cut out of the earth at first; or else because after it is
purified by the fire it is cut to make rings or coin.

Verse. 16. Length of days is in her right hand: and in her left hand riches
and honor.] Ambabus manibus sapientia hominibus bona largitur.
The Heathens reckoned upon their left hand, until they came to a hundred
years, and then they began to reckon upon their right hand, as appears by that
of Juvenal, Grotius. Long life is first promised, because it is the principal;
riches and honor but accessories. Therefore also it is said to be in the right
hand, as the principal gift she has to bestow.
Et dextra computat annos, speaking of one above a hundred years old.

Salomons meaning is, that wisdom should make them to live a long age, even to
a hundred years, so some expound it.

The Hebrew word for Honor comes from a word which signifies to be heavy or
weighty; for honor, as it rises from the weight of good qualities in men, so
it adds weight to men's persons, and makes them of greater account than others.

Verse. 18. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her.] See Chap. 15.
4. and It is an allusion (says Mercer) to the tree of life in Paradise, Genesis
2. 9. which was a sign to Adam, that he should live for ever, and that in
health, strength and comfort upon earth, if he sinned not. So wisdom restores
us to that we lost in Adam, eternal life, but in a better place in heaven.
Arbor vitae in Paradiso non a morte tantum, sed and a morbis servabat. Grotius
11. 30. Partly, because it is planted by God immediately, but chiefly because
of its perfect supply of all wants, Revel. 22. 2. speaks of wisdom, that is,
grace, meat and medicine. Life is in the Dual Number, there is a life here, and
a life in heaven.

To them that lay hold upon her.] The word signifies a fast laying hold on a
thing as ones own, and as not willing to let it go.

Verse. 27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due.] Heb. From the
masters Non equidem quod illesuo jure hoc vendicare possit, sed quod nos hoc
tanquam debitum solvere debeamus, cum sicut charitatem omnibus debemus, Romans
13. 8. sic and charitatis fructus. Cartw. in loc.
thereof. He makes the Christian neighbor who is in necessity an owner, even
one that has good right and title to our goods according to our ability.

Verse. 29. Devise not evil against thy Neighbor.] In the Hebrew it is Al
tacharosh, Noli arare mendacium, Plow not a lie, a speech borrowed from
husbandry, as the Husbandman ploweth up the ground, and searches into the
earth with his Plowshare, so does a wicked man plot mischief in his mind.

Seeing he dwells securely by thee.] Meaning that he fears none evil from
thee, seeing he has done none.

Verse. 32. For the froward is abomination to the Lord.] The Hebrew word
signifies a thing which offends the senses, from which men turn away ears,
eyes, nose; it shows Gods utter dislike of the ungodly. See Exodus 8. 26.

But his secret is with the righteous.] The secret of his love, providence,
counsel, Psalm. 25. 14. John 15. 15.

Verse. 34. Surely he scorneth the scorners.] Jerome and the Septuagint translate
it Base fellows. Vide Jun. in append. paral. 3 Jacob. 4. 6.
the proud, so do James and Peter quoting this place. See the later part of the
verse.

The original word here used, may seem to have a reference unto a speaking by
an Interpreter, and then we may conceive the word here, to set forth the
haughty See Genesis 42. 23
carriage of the proud, who scorn to speak by themselves to others, but do it
by an Interpreter, by some other body.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 3. TEnder and only beloved in the sight of my mother.] That is, I was
her best beloved See Weems his Christian Synagogue, p. 33. Ita Messiam vocari
putat. Galatinus l. 3. de Arcan. Cathol. verit. c. 22. Idque ob immensam
pietatis and clementiae suae teneritudinem. Sed de seipso Solomon loquitur;
ponit enim ille se exemplar doctrinae institutionis and obedientiae, and unicum
se vocat, hoc est, unice dilectum, nam alioqui plures fuerint filii Davidis ex
cadem matre, ut ex 1 Paral. 3. 5. apparet, Glassius.
Son, for Bathsheba had four sons, 1 Chronicles. 3. 5. This word is used of very
dear sons, as of Isaac, Genesis 22. 2, 12, 16.

Verse. 4. Let thine heart retain my words.] The words are borrowed from
Husbandmen, as Husbandmen put stays to the trees which they plant. So the
precepts of the Father stay and uphold the child.

Verse. 4. Wisdom is the principal thing.] Reshith beginning, so Tremel.

Get] Kanah signifies to get a thing as a man's own possession, so as to have a
peculiar interest in it.

Wisdom.] Wisdom in this book signifies two things: 1. Christ, Prove. 8. 2.
Grace, especially spiritual understanding. Grace is the principal thing.

The principality of grace lies in six things:

1. It makes a man conformable to God. 2. Brings one into Communion with him,
Zech. 3. 7. 3. Fits a man for the service of God, Dan. 1. 4. Isa. 6. 8. 4.
Turns all things into a blessing, Mal. 2. 2. 5. Fills the soul with all
spiritual excellencies. 6. Preserves one from all evils, Prove. 2. 11, 12.
And with all thy getting.] Heb. In all thy getting, get understanding. Vide
Geierum in loc.


Verse. 13. Take fast hold of instruction.] The word signifies to lay hold with
strength, as men that are in peril of drowning, they will lay hold so fast upon
a thing, that their hands may be sooner broken then loosed.

Verse. 14. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil
men.

15. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.]

Iteration of the same sense in variety of phrase argues the necessity of the
duty, and earnestness of the divine Penman to persuade.

Verse. 17. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence.] That is, they eat bread and drink wine gotten by wickedness and
violence.

Verse. 18. But the path of the just is as the shining light.] See Chap. 10. 29.

Verse. 19. They know not at what they stumble.] That is, they cannot imagine
how soon they shall fall. 2. They know not what it is that makes them fall.

Verse. 21. Let them not depart from thine eyes.] That is, read them
continually,

Keep them in the midst of thine heart] The heart is the center of the body,
about the midst of it, lay them up where they may be safe and ready at hand for
continual use.

Verse. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence,] With all keeping, or above all
keeping, look to that above every thing.

Heart is taken in a spiritual sense, so it signifies the understanding, will,
conscience, memory, affections, thoughts, here the will. It is a metaphor taken
from a Spring, keep the Springhead carefully, because all the water runs out
there; Not while it is in its natural condition, but the heart which is already
sanctified.

Keep.] The Hebrew word is applied to three sorts of keeping:

1. Of a prison, as that to which Joseph was committed, Keep it as a prison. 2.
Of a besieged City, so Hab. 3. As the Priests and Levites which were entrusted
with the holy things of God, looked to their charge with all diligence.
For out of it are the issues of life] All the streams of thy life flow from
this, refers to the heart.

Verse. 24. Perverse lips put far from thee] Heb. Perverse, crooked, or froward.

Verse. 25. Look straight before thee.] To duty as the means, and to the end
too, that is, Let your minds be intent on what ever you do, opposite to
expression, Metaphora ab iis sumpta videtur, qui aratrum ducentes recta illud
aspiciunt, tantum abest ut respectent. Cartw. in loc.
Prove. 17. 24.

CHAP. V.
Verse 4. BUt her end is bitter as wormwood.] The end which she brings others
to. Id est, Eorum qui eam sequuntur. Mercerus. Meretricem intelligit quae
crudelis est. Mercerus.


Sperne voluptates, nocet empta dolor voluptas. Verse. 9. And thy years unto
the cruel.] Thy young years, and better part of thy age. Aczar properly
signifies cruel, only Deuteronomy. 32. 33. it is added as an epithete to the poison of
Asps.

Verse. 11. And thou mourn at the last when thy flesh and thy body are
consumed.] He mourns when all is spent. In the Original it is Nahamta
Babharit hec^, which properly signifies to roar as the Lions do when they are
hungry, Prove. 28. 15.

Verse. 14. I was almost in all evil, in the midst of the Congregation and
Assembly] That is, sin had that power in me that when I came into the presence
of God, the society of the Saints, these kept not my corruptions under.

Verse. 19. Let her be as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love.] Note
both the metaphors Am^ta uxor cerva and caprea vocabatur, quod haec animantia
regibus olim in deliciis essent: vel quod amor cervi erga cervam, item capreae
maris erga foeminam singularis memoretur. Notatum quoque haec animalia fell
carere. Drus. Prove. Class. ^. lib. 4. Vide Mercerum, Bainum in loc. and Cartw.
in loc.
and the hyperbole, which are used to set forth the Husbands delight in his
wife. Hind and Roe are the females of an Heart and a Row-buck. It is noted of
the Heart and Row-buck, that of all other beasts they are most inamoured with
their mates. The former is termed the loving Hind, or word for word a Hind of
loves; The later a pleasant Roe, or Roe of favor, that is, exceedingly loved
and favored.

Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times.] Inebrient te, Heb. Let them make
thee drunk.

Be thou ravished with her love] Word for word, Err thou in her love, or, Thou
shall err in her love. Ravishment in carnal matters is sinful. The Scripture
allows no excess in affection, it only notes a lesser evil, rather than lose
thy self in the embraces of an harlot. Vide Capel. Critic. Sac. l. 6. c. 4.

This implies two things:

1. So far to exceed in love as to make a man to oversee some such blemishes in
his wife, as others would soon espy.

Or else secondly, to count them no blemishes, delighting in her never a whit
the less for them.

Verse. 20. And why will thou, my Son, be ravished with a strange woman, and
embrace the bosom of a stranger.] As if he had said, Sure enough, if thou do
not love thy wife, thou will look after harlots, or at least art in danger to
do it, but if thou love thy wife truly, thou art strengthened against a
stranger.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 6. GO to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise.] The
Ant Tradunt scriptores non solum interdi^, verum etiam noctu laborare formicas,
magnoque nixu per eandem semper viam, and ad eundem locum, in quo caetera
reposuerunt, pedibus illa tam v^^^a semina volutare. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. lib.
1.
though the least of creatures, is commended for her prudence and solicitude
for the time to come, and her love of pains and diligence. See Pliny 2d Book of
his Natural History, c. 3 Virgils 4th of his AEneids.

Verse. 9. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy
sleep?

10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep.

11. So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed
man.]

Solomon lively describes the sluggard, he brings him in roming himself, and
rubbing his eyes with an unwilling hand, uttering broken and sleepy sentences,
as one not half awake, How long will thou sleep? When will thou rise out of thy
sleep? As if he had said, Ho Sir, it is time to get up; what not out of your
bed yet, at this time of the day? Then mark his drousie slumbring and senseless
answer, A little sleep, a little slumbers, for the Original has the words in
the plural number, well befitting a sluggard, A little folding of the hands, a
little sleep, a little slumber, all little, though he sleep much, but yet it is
but little in his conceit.

One that travelleth.] That is, with so much speed, as it will not be long.

As an armed man.] That is, with so much strength as will not be resisted. See
Prove. 24. 33, 34. and 26 14.

Verse. 13. He speaks with his feet.] Homines impii non semper enuntiant
cogitata sua, sed aliquando gestu, nutu, oculis, manibus, aliisque signis
significant, id quod animo conceperint nutu signisque loquuntur. Rain. lib.
Apoc.


Verse. 14. He devises mischief continually] Diggeth further into the mine and
treasure of evil in his own heart.

The Hebrew word Charash signifies great labor and skill, as of Husbandmen, 1
Kings 19 19. or of Smiths, Genesis 4. 22. 1 Kings 7. 14.

Verse. 17. A lying tongue.] See verse. 19. He repeats lying twice, though under
several terms.

Verse. 22. It shall talk with thee.] The Hebrew word signifies a discourse pro
and con, which is only in the meditation of our hearts, the man makes
objections, the word answers.

Verse. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosom?] Unclean lust.

Verse. 31. He shall restore seven fold.] Jesballem Shibghnathaim, he shall pay
sevenfold; Vox Hebraea Shibgbnathaijm pro ratione loci reddi potest, vel
septuplum, septempliciter, vel septies. Amama Antibarb. Bibl. lib. 3.
the Hebrews double the Dual number, ten in the Dual number is twenty, three is
thirty, and four is forty, but when they come to seven, here they double not,
Isa. 30. 26. there it only stands for seven; so here, he shall pay
Shibghnathaim, that is, seven for one.

Verse. 35. He will not regard any ransome] That is, he will not be moved by any
gift to spare him that has dishonored his bed.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 4. SAy unto wisdom, thou art my Sister.] Be as familiar with the
wisdom of God revealed in his Word, as with thine own sister.

Verse. 14. I have peace offerings with me: this day have I paid my vows.] The
U^ oli^ Sacrificia, sic etiam nunc Sacramenta, si i^^puro sumantur cord, neque
subsequam habeant novam obedientiam, magis obsunt, quam prosunt. Notent h^c ii,
qui mox a sacra coena ad priorem redeunt luxum, similes illi sunt huic
adulterae. G^ierus.
Harl^t has diverse arguments to entice him, 1. She was no common strumpet, had
set all straight between God and her soul.

Verse. 15. Therefore came I forth to meet thee diligently, to seek thy face,
and I have found thee.] 2. She had a singular love to this young man, therefore
she came out to meet him. And, 3. She pleads the good hand o^ Gods providence,
And I have found thee, 1 Samuel 23. 7.

Diligently to seek thy face.] The original word is, To seek thy face in the
morning, and yet verse. 9. it was in the evening that she met him. To do a thing
in the morning, and to do a thing diligently are the same in Scripture, Psalm.
10* 1. 8. Early, the Hebrew is, in the morning, that is, with all diligence and
care.

Verse. 16. I have decked my bed with covering of tapestry, with carved works,
with fine linen of Egypt.

17. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, alces, and cynamon.]

4. She argues from the many allurements of corruption in these two verses. The
Bed decked and Chamber perfumed with all spices which might be incentives to
lust.

Verse. 18. Come let ut take our fill of love until the morning, let us solace
our selves with love.

19. For the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey.]

Here is another argument, verse. 18. calls it love and loves, though it were
lust. S^^ Chap. 5. 3. 4, 5.


And prevents an Objection which might arise, verses 19. and 20.

The good man is gone a long journey, and not likely to return.

Verse. 23. Till a Dart strike through his liver.] That is the seat of
concupiscence.

Splen ridere facit, cogit amare jecur. The pox is Morbus hepatarius, the
disease of the liver.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. Does not wisdom cry, understanding put forth her voice?] Mark the
proceeding of wisdom in the gradation.

First, She cries ( Bah^uts) without, that is, she cries as she comes out at
the door.

Again, She cries ( Barhhoboth) in the streets, that is, in the place where
buyers and sellers use to meet for exercising of merchandise.

Thirdly, She cries ( Berosh homijoth) in the chief place of concourse, that
is, where the chief of the people, and the common multitude resort, as 1 Samuel
14. 38. So Judge. 20. 2.

Fourthly, She cries ( Be phithe shegnerim) in the opening of the gates, that
is, in the place where the Judges and Counsel sat.

Verse. 9. They are all plain to him that understands.] That is, every one
that is godly, as by the fool in this Book the wicked is usually meant.

Verse. 10. Receive my instruction, and not silver.] That is, above silver, or
rather than silver.

Verse. 12. I wisdom dwell with prudence.] Wisdom is a knowledge of
principles, prudence a wisdom to apply them to our own comfort and use.

Verse. 13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride and arrogance, and the
evil way, and the froward mouth do I hate.] The evil of the heart or thoughts
is expressed by pride and arrogance, Scatter the proud in the imaginations of
their hearts; sin in the words, by a froward mouth, sins of practice, by
evil way.

Verse. 15. By me Kings reign.] It is spoken of Christ as Media^our. See verse.
22, 23.

Verse. 21. To inherit substance.] That is, I will cause him to inherit
something that is, or somewhat which has a being. Riches, honor, are rathor
profitable in the opinion of men than indeed.

Verse. 22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works
of Arias Montanus reads it, Dominus acquisivit me principium viae suae. Judaei,
ubi interpretatus sum verbum Hebraeum possedit me, hoc negantes dicunt eruit
me. Quibus dicendum quod hoc verbum est quandoque eruere, and est quandoque
possidere, ut and Genesis 14. 19. Si vero hic emptorem, quaeratur ab eis quod me
disputante cum illis quaesivit rusticus quidam, and eos mirabili modo confudit:
Si Deus, inquit, emit Coelum, and terram and sapientiam suam, ut vos dicitis,
quis fuit talium venditor. Raymundi Mart. Pugio adversus Jud part 3tia. Did.
1. c. 6.
old.] In is inserted, it is not in the original, See ver. 30. rather possessed
me the beginning of his way. It is spoken of Christ, not as God, so one person
possesses not another, but as Mediator, the servant is part of the masters
possession.

Verse. 23. I was set up from everlasting.] The word signifies anointed, it is
used Psalm. 2. 6. anointed as Mediator by reason of the eternal Covenant
between God and him.

Verse. 30. Then I was by him, as one brought up with him.] A Metaphor taken
Amon est paedagogus, i^ est, nutritious, Number. 11. 12. Item indutus, tectus,
velatus, Threu. 4. 5. Item honestus vel servatus, Esth. 2. 7. Raymundi Mart.
Pugio. adversus Jud. part 3tia. Did. 1. cap. 6.
from two mates and companions that are born and bred together, and sport
themselves in each others society.

And I was his delight, rejoicing always before him.] The original is Delights
in the plural number, importing, That the eternal Son was the greatest
delight of his Father, he was variety of delights unto him, the happiness of
the persons is the infinite satisfaction they take one in another.

Jermin says, the Hebrew word is like deliciae in Latin, being of the plural
number, and not having a singular.

Verse. 31. And my delights were with the sons of men.] The same word for
delight is used in both places, what delight God the Father took in his Son,
the suitable delight he takes in his Saints, he was thinking that man should be
made after Gods Image, and restored by his grace.

Verse. 32. Now therefore hearken unto me.] By harkening, these particulars are
understood:

1. A hearing with the ear. 2. A closing with the truth, with the
understanding. 3. A retaining it in the memory. 4. A subjection of the heart to
what is understood and remembered, 1 King. 12. 15. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
Verse. 36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul.] He speaks of
rejecting Christ offered in the Gospel.

CHAP. IX
THe whole Chapter is spent in several arguments, Wisdom pleads this way, and
folly, that.

Verse. 1. Wisdom.] That is, Christ.

Has builded her house,] That is, the Church.

Seven Pillars.] The firmness and beauty of the Church, called the Pillar of
Truth.

Verse. 2. Secondly, Here is the fullness of Christ in his Church.

For sustenance and refreshing.

Verse. 3. Her maidens.] That is, Ministers of the Gospel, who as Virgins should
be untoucht and undefiled by the world.

Verse. 10. The fear of the Lord is the biginning of wisdom.] Either the highest
or first point of wisdom.

Verse. 17. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.] An
allusion to a naughty servant, which makes merry when his master is asleep.

CHAP. X.
Verse 2. TReasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness
delivers from death.]

Treasures,] That is, abundance of that which is rich, so that one may lay up
for time to come, Matthew. 6.

Of wickedness.] Gotten or held by sins of commission or omission.

Profit nothing.] More is intended than said, they are very hurtful;
whatsoever good a man expects from them, he can make no certainty of it, and he
shall have So Ahab, Ge^^^i, Judas.
no true benefit by them in the conclusion.

But righteousnesse] Of affection, heart, life and conversation.

Delivers from death.] Spiritual, it is a means of our salvation, it does not
deserve deliverance from death, but it gives assurance of our deliverance from
death, Prove. 12. 28.

Verse. 4. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the
diligent makes rich.] Jad hharzitim, the hand of the diligent makes rich. (
Hhazatz) is to dig in the ground for gold in the earth, that man shall become
rich.

Doctor Jermin observes, the original word in the former part of the verse is
Caph, which signifies the bowing of the hand, because deceit is hollow, and it
is with the hollow of the hand, that the sleights of deceit are practiced. In
the later part of the verse it is Jad the whole hand, the strength of the hand,
for that it is which diligence uses, and by that it is that it makes rich.

Verse. 7. The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall
rot.] In the original it is, the memory of the just in benedictionem, shall be
for a blessing. The very remembering of them shall bring a blessing to such as
do remember them, so Jermin. Memoria justi erit celebris, so Bain. Cartwright
thus explains Psalm. 112. 6, 7.
it, Blessings so abundantly and prolixly follow the just, that mention shall
not be made of him dead, but with praise and blessing: As on the contrary the
Memoria justi c^lebris est tam viventis quam mortui, nec sine laud ejus fit
mentio. Mercerus.
wicked are not named without detestation.

The memory or the name, he does not say his house or his body shall rot,
though Judaei in mentione hominis pii adhibent illnd Zeker Tsaddik Liberacah.
Quod breviter and in epitoma scribunt ( Z. Ts. L.) Hinc nata consuetudo, certe
apparet inter Christianos, ut dicant, piae aut foe^icis memoriae: ubi sermo de
iis qui abierunt. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 1.
they must, but his memory, either it shall not be remembered at all, or be
remembered as a rotten thing.

Verse. 9. But he that perverteth his ways shall be known.] Perverteth his
ways, That is, allows himself in any ill course, though never so secretly.

Shall be known.] That is, his vile and wretched dissembling shall be detected.

Verse. 12. But love covers all sins.] 1 Pet. 4. 8.

By covering must be meant,

1. A favorable construction of all things, which in right reason may be well
construed. 2. A passing by smaller infirmities and private offenses. 3. Such a
covering as may cure also, for love is wise.
Verse. 14. Wise men lay up knowledge.] In a treasury, bring it out when they
have occasion.

Verse. 18. And he that utters a slander is a fool.] It is a note of a sinful
fool to have a bitter, railing and slandrous tongue.

We must make a difference between these two phrases, tabhe dibbath, and methi
dibbath, detulit rumorem, Genesis 37. 2. and protulit rumorem here. Detulit
rumorem, he only relates that which he knows or hears, but protulit
rumorem, who brings it out of his own corrupt heart.

Verse. 20. The heart of the wicked is little worth.] His thoughts,
imaginations, 1 Cor. 3. 20.
affections and desires.

Verse. 21. The lips of the righteous feed many.] He compares the mouth of a
righteous man to the gate of some hospitable person: so Cartwright.

Verse. 22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow
with it.] q. d. He that has wealth with Gods blessing, shall have no cause to
repent him another day, that he lived so prosperously.

Verse. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright.] It signifies
fortitudinem and munitionem, strength within, and defense without.

Verse. 32. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable.] Things pleasing
to It is spoken in a way of privilege or opposition.
God pass so often through their lips, that they are said to know what is
acceptable.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 4. RIches profit not in the day of wrath] The covetous man thinks they
will, therefore See 10. 2.
it is twice repeated, Ezekiel. 7. 19. Zeph 1. 8.

Verse. 13. As the talebearer reveals secrets.] See chapter 18. 8. and 20. 19.
and 26. 28. See Lev. 19. 16
Several times Solomon inveighs sharply against backbiting calumniators.

He compares busybodies here, and Levit. 19. and such as delight to deal in
other men's matters, to petty Chapmen and Pedlers, which carry wares about,
selling in one place, and buying in another.

Verse. 15. He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it.] Heb. Shall be
sore Vide Cartw. in loc.
broken or bruised, the word is used of Christ, Isa. 63. 10. He condemns
rashness in Suretiship.


Verse. 21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished.]
Though Id est, quantumvis conspirent inter se homines scelesti and contra bonos
conspirent aliis sibi per mutua faedera adjunctis ad validius firmandas parts
suas; adhuc tamen innoxii non erunt nec impuniti, divina numinis ultione prava
consilia confaederatorum evertente and disturbante. Meno^^. De Repub. Heb. l. 6
c. 17.
ungodly men have many friends, and such as be mighty; though they join all
their forces together to defend one another, or all of them one, yet they shall
not prevail.

Verse. 22. As a jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is a fair woman which is
without Mulier a quo sapor recessit, insipida, vel quae recessit a ^apore, id
est, a sapientia. Duplex metaphota. Prior est in verbo recedendi, quae sumpta*
(videtur certe) a vinis acidis: altera in voce mentis, quae Ebraice in hoc loco
Tagnam dicitur, quod est proprie gustus, sapor; ut enim gustu cibos: ita mente
res discernimus, gustare est pro intelligere, ut gustate quam bonus sit
Dominus, and Prove. 31. 15. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 7. c. 3.
discretion.] Without savor, reason is that in governing things, which a
pleasing savor is in meats.

It does not adorn but misbecome them.

Verse. 24. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty.] Because one has the
blessing of God upon his liberality, the other the curse of God upon his
parsimony.

Verse. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat.] Not liberal hand, but
liberal soul, Isa. 58. 11.
it is accepted according to what he would do.

Verse. 30. He that wins souls is wise.] He that wins souls, (using all
art and cunning and industry to catch souls, as fowlers do to take birds, as
the Hebrew word imports) he is wise.

Verse. 31. Behold the righteous shall be recompensed on the earth: much more
the wicked and sinner.] That is, a righteous man shall be corrected, though he
sin a 1 Pet. 4. 18.
sin of infirmity, how then shall the wicked be punished, who sin with
presumption and delight.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 4: A Virtuous woman.] Which is painful and faithful in her calling.

Is a Crown to her husband.] Not a Ring, that is the ornament of meaner Hoc
est, summo honor, and laetitia virum afficit. Baynus eo docet non tantum illam
virum cohonestare; sed omnium ornamentorum summam and maxim pretiosam esse.
Cartw. Vide Geierum in loc.
persons, but a Crown which is the ornament of Kings.

Verse. 12. The root of the righteous yields fruit.] The root usually yields
not fruit, but the branches, or not formally but virtually; the root, that is,
his spirit, his soul.

Verse. 13. The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips.] That is, not
only by which he takes others, but by which he is taken himself to his own
ruin and destruction.

Verse. 16. But a prudent man covers shame.] He restrains his anger, which if
it should presently break forth, would be a reproach unto him.

Verse. 27. The slothful man rests not that which he took in hunting.] Some
interpret it, he enjoys not what he has; rather thus, if he has any thing
to spend, it is not of his own getting.

It is a proverbiall kind of speech, signifying that they shall not enjoy that
which they get by craft and falsehood.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 2. A Man shall get good by the fruit of his mouth.] That is, Gods
blessing, and the good will of good men, by speaking to others of that which is
good.

Verse. 3. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: but he that opens his
lips shall Per linguam tanquam per ostium, ad animum ingreditur malum. Bain^^.
have destruction.] He intimates a similitude of a City besieged; to open the
gates betrayeth the safety of it; all watch and ward is about the gate. So the
tongue is the gate or door of the soul, by which it goes out in converse and
communication, to keep it open or loose guarded, lets in an enemy, which
proves the death of the soul.

This Proverb is like that Prove. 10. 19. but that the order is inverted.

But he that opens his lips.] Or strideth too wide to lewd speaking, for so
the Verbum Pasak notante R. Nathane in Concorddesignat apertionem vel
dilatationem, and non nisi semel adhuc reperitur in sacris Ezech. 16. 25. de
meretricia pedum divaricatione erga quem vis praetereuntem. Intelligenda proin
hic erit apertio non qualiscunque sed quae est temeraris, qua quicquid in
buccam venit, evomitur, non curato, number inde Deo ignominia, proximo scandalum
vel damnum, propriae ve conscientiae labes emergat. Geierus in loc. Vide Cartw
in loc.
word signifies, as a harlot prostitutes her self, or spreads her body to
filthy companions.

Verse. 7. There is that makes himself rich.] That is, full of peace and joy
from assurance of his salvation, and Gods favor to him.

Yet has nothing.] Not one jot of true peace and favor at all with God. Vide
Cartw. in loc.


There is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches.] Persuades himself
to be in a most wretched estate, and is highly in Gods favor, and has great
store of saving grace. Wheresoever strife grows, there is pride, at least in
one of the parties contending, if not on both sides.


Verse. 10. Only by pride comes contention.] There is a threefold contention:
1. With men, which arises from pride. 2. With God. 3. With the Word of God:
these two contentions arise also from pride, James 4. 6.

Verse. 12. Is a tree of life.] Chajim, a tree of lives Heb. all sorts of lives,
or the accomplishment of the promise does as it were put one into Paradise
again, as one expounds it.

Verse. 13. Who so despises the Word, shall be destroyed, but he that fears
the commandment, Verbum deesse arbitror Dei, plane autem and perfect id dici
existimato, qui contemni^ verbum Dei in antithesi subjicit, qui veretur
praeceptum praemio afficietur, satis clare judicans inter haec duo vocabula aut
nullum aut exiguum discrimen esse. Sic alibi, secundum verbum regis, id est,
jussum, mandatum, praeceptum. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 13. c. 20.
shall be rewarded.] In the words word and commandment, there is a Synecdoche
generis for the Word and Commandment of God, for that is here understood, as
the words show.

Very. 24. He that spares his rod; hates his son: but he that loves him
chasteneth him betimes] Which withholdeth due correction from his child, when
it is needful.

Hates.] That is, loves him with such a fond love, as is rather worthy to be
called hatred, and does indeed bring forth as bad fruits as hatred would bring
forth.

But he that loves him.] With a wise, discreet, good love.

Chasteneth him betimes.] That is, before his corruptions are grown too strong:
Assidue singulis matutinis temporibus Rabbi Salom and Ezra. To keep him from
evil the whole day afterward.
Betimes, which here seems to be an adverb, in the Hebrew is a verb, and
signifies to rise timely in the morning, and diligently seek; it signifies as
well the due care which good parents have for the nurturing of their children,
as their providence to do it in good season.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 4. WHere no Oxen are the crib is clean: but much increase is by the
strength of the Minus dicit, plus intelligit: non solum praesepe vacuum est,
sed etiam horreum. Antiquis boum opera in aratione maxim laudata suit, quod
iis uterentur multo commodius, minoreque impendio quam equis. Drns. Prove.
Class. 1. l. 2.
Ox.] See 13. 23.

Verse. 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way.] A worthy Divine
said, he desired this place might never be out of his mind. That knowledge
which any man has, that is truly wise.

Way.] What concerns him in his particular relations, course, condition.

His way.] Labors not to understand the ways of other men, but his own ways,
the whole course of a man's life, Psalm. 119. 1.

Understand.] That is, to know how to order his whole course by rule.

But the folly of fools is deceit.] Fools study novelties and deceive
themselves.

Verse. 10. The heart knows his own bitterness; and a stranger does not
intermeddle Quot hosts tot extranei.
with his joy.] Godly men have troubles and joys which the wicked know not of.

Verse. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth
is heaviness.] Sardonium sc. quendam risum insinuat, qualis herba Sardoa
vescentibus, qui ^ra rictu diducit, ut dum mortem oppe^unt, ridentium facie
intereant. Solinus Polyhist. c. 10. Gatakeri Cinnus l. 2. c. 13.


Verse. 14. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a
good man shall be satisfied from himself.] Aversus or reversus cord. There is
a double backslider in heart.

1. In their apprehensions, Gal. 4. 15. 2. In their affections, Rev. 2. 5.
Filled with his own ways.] Shall have enough of them.

And a good man.] Such a one whose heart is turned to God, and who keeps up
his apprehensions and affections toward him.

Shall be satisfied from himself.] As united to God, it is set in opposition to
the former. The Hebrew word notes a full, complete and perfect satisfaction,
Psalm. 17. ult. Satisfied usque ad nauseam, even to surfeit, it is used Isa. 1.
11.

From himself.] From that which is within himself; self, not in opposition to,
Deus nobis intimior intimo nostro.
but in union with God.

Verse. 15. The simple believes every word.] The simple opposed to prudent;
believes every ill word or thing; that is, rashly gives credit and hearkens to
every deceiver, else if the thing be good, they of all men are most hard of
belief.

Verse. 16. A wise man fears and departs from evil.] That is, the godly man's
fear restrains him from sin.

But the fool rages and is confident.] That is, the profane man makes no
doubt of his salvation at all.

Verse. 17. He that is soon angry deals foolishly.] See v. 29. and chapter 12. 16.
Brevis irarum. Voculae Aph and narium and irae significationem trib^erunt
Ebraei. Nasus enim est irae index. Haec figura sermonis valde frequens occurrit
in literatura profana: and ab ea origin est, quod uti frontem pudoris, risus
lienem; sic and irae and affinium ei motuum sedem esse nares veteres
statuerunt. Zieterici Antiq. Conviu.


Verse. 22. But mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good.] Mercy in the
promises, and truth in the performances of Gods favor, and graces to the man's
soul.

Verse. 24. The Crown of the wise is his riches: but the foolishness of fools is
Summa hujus Proverbii est, divitias perinde esse, ut quis illis utitur. Cartw.
folly.] That is, here is the godly man's glory above all other men in the
world, that he is able to make a holy use of his riches, and so to employ them
that his grace shall be exercised therein. But the foolishness of fools, viz.
rich fools, no fool to the rich fool.

Verse. 29. But he that is hasty of spirit exalts folly.] Heb. short of
spirit, or of a short spirit, that is, of a short apprehension. 2. Too quick in
answering, gives a short answer, exalts folly.] Does openly commit it, as
though he would lift it up that all men might see it. See chapter 12. 26.


CHAP. XV.
Verse 2. THe tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright.] That is, the wise
person speaks in such sort, as that his speech shows forth grace. Heb. the
healing of the tongue, as it were a healing tongue, to show what the tongues of
all ought to be. Rainold. de lib. Apoc.


Verse. 4. A wholesome tongue is a tree of life.] He often uses this
similitude, Prove. 3. 18. See Rev. 22. 2. it brought forth not only fruits, but
leaves also for healing of the Nations.

Verse. 11. Hell and destruction are before the Lord.] Some think the latter is
exegeticall Destruction is put as an adjunct or Epithete of ^ell.
of the former. Some Utraque significatio textui and fidei analogiae congruit.
Gerh. loc. commun.
by Sheol understand the grave, by Abaddon hell. What is become of men's souls
in hell, and what is become of the dust of men buried a thousand years ago.

How much more the hearts of the children of men!] It is an argument from the
greater to the less, knows things that are more remote and dark, than the heart
is; plain to him as that which is set before a man, Job 26. 6.

Verse. 15. But he that is of a merry heart has a continual feast.] Tob leb, a
good Quasi dicat, versatur quasi in continuo convivio. Drus. Prove. Class. 2.
lib. 1.
heart, or a good conscience; so the Genevah better translates it, spiritually
merry. James 5. 13. Is any in a good mind? Mercer thinks it to be understood
more generally, of a man free from trouble or anxiety of mind.

Verse. 17. Better is a dinner of herbs, where love is, than a stalled Ox, and
hatred therewith] That is, say some, a little with the love and favor of God;
rather, if there be love in the family.

Verse. 19. The way of the slothful man is an hedge of thorns.] That is, those
things Summa est; pigro omnia dura and aspera, etiam quae in se sunt facillima.
Cartw. Quod est aggressurus, tam difficile and molestum ei videtur, quam fi
undiquaque esset obseprum vepribus. Mercerus. Vide Prove. 26. 12.
which are easy in themselves, are hard to him.

Verse. 20. But a foolish son despises his mother.] Many children will in
show, at Merceru^. Mire ac nove exponit, stultus provectae aetatis. Expono
filius stultus; quod testimonio locorum duorum, in queis ita usurpatur
vocabulum homo, alibi ( viz quaest. Hebr. 1. confirmo) tamen miremur qua phrasi
dixerit stultus homo, dixis^et enim potius homo stul^us, sed in Ebraeo est
stultus Adam, id Latin verti potest stultus hominum. Drus. Observat. Sac.
least, be obedient to their Father, which yet are duobedient sometimes to
their mothers, because they perceive weaknesses in them, and because they are
unable to punish them for their contempt.

Verse. 21. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom.] That is, even
sin and wickedness is a matter of mirth and delight to the wicked man.

Verse. 23. A man has joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due
season, Auguste nimis locus refertur vel ad voluptatem, quam quis ex been
dicendo capit, quasi in sua quisque dicendi scientia, aut dictorum lepore and
acumine, aut soelici etiam consiliornm eventu glorietur. Hebraice enim sic
legitur, Laecitia est viro in responsione oris sui: id est, cum respondent
omnia ori suo; cum exauditur os suum; and quae vult aut postulat, illi pro
voluntate and ex sententia succedunt. Utrum autem sibi expediant, non multum
laborat, and sermo opportunus est optimus, hoc est, at nihil homini, aut
conducibilius aut gloriosius accidere potest, quam si illi, non quae velit,
eveniant, sed quae vel ad tempora, vel ad necessitatem, vel ad vitae
constitutionem conducere magis possunt; tametsi non aeque quaesita aut optata.
Martinus de Roa Sing. S. Script. part 2da l. 2. c. 5.
how good is it!] The sum is, there is always this fruit of a pure speech,
that it rejoices the speaker, and often is very beneficial to others.

Verse. 30. And a good report makes the bones sat.] That is, so comfort,
rejoices and strengthens a man, as good fare which makes him fat and
wellliking.

Verse. 31. The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise.]
One Id est, quae ad vitam ducit. Mercerus.
would think he should rather have said, the promise of life, reproof also
tends to life.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. THe preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is
from the Lord.] Loquitur pet concessionem, and juxta hominum opinionem: non
quod alioqui dicat, ut nonnulli putant, in potestate hominis esse cor suum
praeparare. Nam and cordis and linguae praeparatio ac moderatio seu gubernatio
a Domino est. Mercerus. Hominis est praeparare cor: secundum potentiam
passivam; sed penes Deum est responsio linguae secundum potentiam activam.
Zanch. 10. 4. lib. 1. de Lib. Arbit. q. 2. these. 2.
If ever you will have your tongue agree with your hearts, and your hearts with
that which is good, go to God.

Verse. 2. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: but the Lord
weighs the Se^ chapter 21. 2.
spirits.]

1. He speaks of man indefinitely, of man as man, therefore of every man. 2.
Not only some, but all his ways seem right in his own eyes. 3. The ground of
this mistake, men ponder not their ways.
The Lord weighs the spirits.] Such as a man's spirit is, such is the man. See
Prove. 10. 20.

Verse. 6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged.] Salomons meaning is, that by
Gods goodness, and not ours, iniquity is pardoned.

2. If by mercy be meant man's mercy, then we are to understand it thus, that
mercy and truth are evident signs unto us, that our sins are forgiven, and not
the working causes of remission, as the Papists say.

Verse. 23. And adds learning to his lips.] That is, so speaks, as that
others are made wise thereby.

Verse. 27. An ungodly man diggeth up evil.] There is no evil above ground,
therefore he uses all enquiry.

Verse. 31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.] That is, when an old man is found to be a just and righteous
man, then he truly deserves reverence.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 3. THe fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; but the Lord
tries the hearts.] Goldsmiths have their vessels, wherein they prove and try
the gold Sensus est, ut fornax argentum and Catinus aurum: sic Deus corda and
mentes hominum probat. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 1.
and silver from dross and corruption; but the Lord alone searches the hearts
and knows them, and none but he by grace can purify them.

Verse. 5. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his maker.] That is, contemns
the wi^e dispensation of God, who would have the poor inter mingled with the
rich. See Prove. 14. 31.

Verse. 8. A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that has it.] A
stone in his eye, or a stone glittering before his eye: Much regarded by him on
whom it is bestowed.

Verse. 9. But he that repeateth a matter, separateth very friends.] By rubbing
up the memory of it when it is gone and past, does separate a Prince, that is,
makes even the greatest friends to fall out.

Verse. 12. Let a Bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in
his It is Salomons common phrase to call anger folly.
folly.] Cross a man in a way of sinning, when lust is up and bears sway in
him, and he is as outrageous as a Bear, and She* bear, and robbed of her
whelps, 2 Samuel 7. 8. Hos. 3. 8.

Bears were well known in that Country, 2 King. 2. 24. 1 Samuel 17. 34.

Verse. 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom,
seeing he has Why is this price, Heb.
no heart to it.] He knows not that he has it, or what it is worth: We use to
discover fools by telling of money.

Some expound it of every talent, wealth, honor, authority, opportunity, one
shows himself a wise man by valuing aright the price he has in his hands, and
by his will to it.

Verse. 17. A friend loves at all times.] That is, as a friend: loves, or
ought to love.

And a brother is born for adversity.] A brother, whether natural, civil, or
spiritual.

Verse. 21. And the father of a fool has no joy.] The meaning is, he has much
sorrow, To accept persons in judgment is not good, that is, it is extremely
evil.
yea the denial of all joy affirms more then the feeling of much sorrow, for
it speaks all sorrow. See chapter 10. 1.

Verse. 22. A merry heart does good like a medicine] That never does good but to
a sore, so that under the cross. See 18. 14.

But a broken spirit dries the bones.] Because it eats up the spirits which
should nourish and moisten them. See chapter 13 13.

Verse. 25 A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that
bare him.] See Pro. 16. 25
Not only because disappointed in their expectation, received not that comfort
from him they looked for, but it revives their own guilt in want of care of
their education.

Verse. 27. And a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.] Or a cool
spirit, Metaphora ab aquis frigidis, quae prae bullientibus placidae and
quietae sunt. Cartw. A metaphor from waters, the more quiet the more cool.
Motus generate calorem. Esse frigido spiritu opponitur iracundiae, nam in ira
calet and exa^descit sanguls. Galli hominem minime iracundum qui sedato and
moderato est animo vocant un homme froid, contra iracundum and animo servido
and praecipiti, un homme chaud and bouillant. Capel. Critic. Sac. l. 3. c. 12.
so the word signifies.

Verse. 28. Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise.] So
excellent a thing it is to keep silence in time and place, that even a silly
person holding his tongue, is taken for a discreet man.

He does not say, he is wise, but he is counted so, because he does not
discover his want of wisdom.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 4. THe words of a man's mouth are as deep waters.] That is, of an
excellent man's, as the word imports: A wise prudent man speaks oracles.

Verse. 8. The words of the talebearer are as wounds.] At once wounding both
him of whom he speaks, and him to whom he speaks.

And they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.] They give a deadly
stroke.

Verse. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs into
it, and is safe.] That is, God in Christ made known to us, 2 Cor. 46. Luke 1.
69. Heb. 2. 10. A tower is a place of safety.

Name.] Sometimes God himself, usually his attributes by which he has
discovered himself in Scripture.

Strong.] Able to defend, shelter and preserve.

The righteous runs to it.] Those which are justified and sanctified in
Christ.

And is safe.] Exalted. Heb. so safe, that being exalted above the fear of
evil, he overlooketh danger with a neglect of it.

Verse. 13. He that answers a matter before he has heard it.] That is, before
he has heard it out with diligent attention, so as rightly to understand it.

Verse. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, but a wounded
spirit, who can bear?]

The spirit of a man.] Of every man, for so both Grammar and Logic bears
here.

Will sustain.] With patience, strength, comfort, constancy.

His infirmities.] His present burden (which ever seems sorest) whatever it be.

Some interpret it thus, the conscience being whole, unwounded, will bear him
up against the troubles of his body.

But a wounded spirit who can bear?] A spirit which God has struck, viz. with
his displeasure, terror.

The word signifies, a smitten* contrite or broken spirit, a metaphor from
bodily afflictions by stripe^, contusions, bruises or wounds, every light touch
hurts the troubled part.

Who can bear it?] That is, none can; if the question be affirmative, the
answer is negative.

Verse 21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue.] In manu linguae, Heb.
in the hand of the tongue.

Verse. 22. Who so finds a wife, that is, a good wife; finds a good thing,
and Simpliciter, quasi mala quae sit, uxor dici non mereatur. Drus. Prove.
Class. 2. l. 1.
obtains favor of the Lord.]

Verse. 23. The poor uses entreaties.] Speaks humbly, earnestly, out of a deep
sense of his own necessity.

Verse. 24. There is a friend that sticks closer than a brother.] That is, the
Christian Est metaphora petita a rebus glutine quodam, aut bitumine, aliove
tenacissimo vinculo conjunctis. Cariw. in loc. Vide Geierum in loc.
friend, he sticks closer than the mere natural brother.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 2. ALso, that the soul be without knowledge it is not good.] Some read
the words, See Ephesians. 4. 18.
Without knowledge the mind is not good; and the original favors that: Good,
that is, not what it should be, it cannot do the thing to which it was
appointed.

Verse. 3. The foolishness of a man perverteth his way; and his heart fretteth
against the Lord.] It is a man's own folly that makes him miscarry in any thing,
yet then he is discontented with the Lord. The word signifies sinful sorrow,
fretting and discontent.

Verse. 12. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion.] Of a young Lion, Heb.
See chapter 20. 2. and 28. 15. Leo in* rugitu suo terrorem incutit caeteris
animantibus. Nam terror leonis primum in oculis, deinde in rugitu: quo
terribilis adeo est, ut dixerit propheta Amos, leo rugit, quis non timeat? Leo
rugiens usurpatur in Epistolis Petri Apostoli de diabolo, qui dicitur tanquam
leo rugiens, circuire, quaerens quem devoret. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 5.
who is more courageous. As the Lion terrifies the other beasts when he roars:
so the anger of a King is very vehement and hurtful.

Verse. 13. And the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.] That will
waste the hardest stone in the world.

Verse. 15. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep.] Tardemah, the same word
that is used of Adam, when a rib was taken out of him. See Isa. 29. 10.

Verse. 21. There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the counsel of
the Lord, that shall stand.] The Hebrew signifies cogitationem ingeniosam, an
invention carried on with great skill, Eccles. 7. 29. Exodus 31. 4. Esth. 4. 5.
subtle machinations, politic devices.

Many.] The Hebrew signifies many and great, Genesis 25. 23. great variety and
depth of plots.

In a man's heart.] Cor sumitur pro intimis cogitationibus, Psalm. 64. 6.

Man.] Ish, an excellent man, and skillful in some faculty, 1 Samuel 17. 34. and
16. 18. Exodus 4. 18.

The counsel of the Lord.] That is taken two ways: Voluntas propositi,
voluntas praecepti.


1. For Gods secret purpose and decree, Mic. 4. 12. Ephesians. 3. 11. 2. His will
revealed, Act. 20. 27. both are here meant.
Stand.] Abide, as Psalm. 1. 5. Isa. 40. 8. compared with 1 Pet. 1. 25.
Con^^lium Jehovae ^urge^. ^artw.


2. Rise, Psalm. 68. 1. Isa. 49. 8. Dan. 9. 12. his counsel shall rise over all
their plots.

Verse. 22. The desire of a man is his kindness.] That is, to do good in works
of liberality.

A poor man is better than a liar.] That has nothing to give, has yet a
giving affection.

Is better than a liar.] That is, better than a rich man, who before he was
rich would brag much what he would do if he were rich, and yet being rich, is
poorer in liberality than ever he was.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 5. Counsel in the heart of a man is a deep river; but a man of
understanding will draw it out.] That is, crafty counsel.

But a man of understanding.] Of spiritual understanding out of the Word of A
man of desires.
God.

So wise as if he were nothing but understanding. Draw it out.] By questions
and examinations.

Verse. 7. The just man walks in his integrity.] It is that Conjugation in the
Hithpael.
Hebrew which signifies he set himself going; walking is a voluntary motion, a
godly man has an internal principle.

Verse. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin.]

Objection, Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart.

Answer, A man absolutely considered in himself is all impure, but relatively
considered in Christ he is pure. 2. No man is pure in respect of the presence
of corruption, but the godly are in respect of the efficacy and rule of it.

Verse. 11. Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and
whether it be right.] That is, you may read and guess in a child how his
course is likely to prove afterward.

Verse. 15. There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge
are a precious jewel.] As if he had said, the greatest heap of gold and
precious stones is not to be compared with gracious words.

Verse. 16. Take his raiment that is surety for a stranger.] That is, if a man
be so silly and rash to be surety for one he knows not, never spare such a one,
let him abide the smart of it.

Verse. 25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy; and after
Est Metaphora ab avibus, aut feris animantibus quae laqueis ex inescatione
capiuntur. Scopus est homines a sacrilegio absterrere. Cartw.
vows to make enquiry.] Sir Henry Spelman in his book De non temerandis
Ecclesiis observes that a snare has three properties, 1. To catch suddenly. 2.
To hold surely. 3. To destroy certainly.

After vows to make enquiry.] viz. Colorable reasons to evade the vow.

Verse. 27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord.] That is, the
conscience enlightened by the Word, as it is expounded, Prove. 18. 14. Lucerna
Domini, quia id habet* in se divini, ut latentes sensus suos perscrutetur.
Proprium enim hoc Dei est, Jer. 17. 20. Drus. in quaest. Heb.


God sets up a light in the conscience, whereby men look upon the most secret
workings of the soul.

Searching the inward parts of the belly.] That is, the deep things of grace
and sin.

Verse. 30. The blewness of a wound cleanses away evil.] Both parts of the
verse See Junius and Cartwright, and also the several translations of the
great Bible.
refer to the same thing, and only note the benefit of correction.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 1. THe Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water,
he turns it Notant Hebraei non de communiore illa providentia, quae ad omnes
homines pertinet, hic agi: sed de specialiore illa, qua regum and bonorum and
malorum cogitata ita dirigit, ut eis utatur ad eos quos sibi proposuit eventus.
Grotius Pu^o sensum esse, quam facile aqua in rivos deducitur, t^m facile est
Deo cor regis flectere quo vult. Facillime autem aqua deducitur nisi agger aut
aliquid hujusmodi obstiterat. Nam non resistit deductioni est enim corpus
natura fluidum. Quamobrem alveo parato sponte and per se fluit. Indicat ergo
facilitatem operationis divinae in cor regis. Caeterum vox Ebraea Palgei non
^^m alvers denotat quam divo^tia sive divergia, vel ut vetus interpres habet,
divisiones, nam Peleg dividere. Divergia autem sunt, ubi aqua in diversas
parts vergit. Quid autem facilius quam in divergiis aquam in quam velis partem
deduce^e. Deinde ut aqua non vergit in hanc vel illam partem sine divina
providentia: sic regis cor non inclinatur huc aut iliuc casu, sed hoc accidit
divinitus, Deus enim illud inclinat quo libet. Drus. de quaesitis per Epist.
Epist. 40.
whither soever he will.] It is a similitude taken from an husbandman, which
draws the water as he pleases through his ground.

Verse. 2. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes; but the Lord pondereth
the hearts.] See 10. 2.

Verse. 4. And the plowing of the wicked is sin.] That is, their endeavors,
their labors and strength of their spirits is especially for the furtherance
of sin.

Verse. 6. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and
fro of them that seek death.] Tongue of falsehood or deceit, as Junius.

By any fair colorable pretexts, shifts which a man cannot carry so handsomely
that he will not seem to offend, even this wealth is called first vanity, a
thing of naught, which shall not be able to profit him that has it, it shall
be void of use and fruit unto him: and not alone vanity, merely unprofitable
and good for nothing, but vanity tossed to and fro, vanity mixed with
uncertainty, such wealth cannot be durable; like a Ball betwixt two players at
Tenice, which is not suffered to abide still in any place.

Of them which seek death.] He means, of them which though they do not conceive
so much, yet shall as certainly procure eternal death unto themselves, as if
they did of purpose seek after it, with a desire and intention to procure it to
themselves.

Verse. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more when he
brings it with a wicked mind.] Not only abominable, but abomination in the
abstract. The word shows the highest disdain, therefore Idols are called
abominations.

With a wicked mind.] That is, with a base end. His mind is always evil in
its constitution, but not in regard of its actual intent.

Verse 29. A wicked man hardens his face.] An allusion to a traveller that is
resolved on his journey, sets his face toward the wind and weather, and goes
on.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 2. THe rich and poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them all]
That is, they meet in this, that they have but one maker.

Verse. 3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself.] The danger that
is Gnarum, id est, ^^tutus dupliciter capitur. Primo, in malam partem pro vafro
doloso and fraudulento. Secundo, in bonam, pro prudente, cauto and
circumspect^. Innocens quoque oppositus callido, Hebr. pit^i, id est simplex,
dupliciter capitur: Primo, in bonam partem pro sincero candido recto, mali and
doli expert. Secundo, in malam partem pro inexperto, rudi, insipiente. Cornel*
^ Lap. in loc.
coming, the extent and latitude of it, that he be not overtaken with it
unawares. There is a metaphor in the Hebrew word, drawn from the naked, which
turn themselves here and there.

Verse. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will
not depart from it.] Hhanoch lanagnar gual pi, instr^^ vel intra pu^rum ad ^s,
teach the child, even as we feed children with such meat as they are able to
Vide Jun. Sat. 14.
digest.

In his way.] That is, according to his capacity.

And when he is old, he will not depart from it.] He will be the better for it
while he lives.

That of Horace is known*

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabi^t odorem, Testa di^: Verse. 9. He that has
a bountiful eye shall be blessed.] The LXX. read it, He that See Prove. 23. 6.
has compassion on the poor, in the Original and Paraphrase it is, He that
has a Profecto in oculis animus habitat. Pll^. l. 11. Matthew. ^0. 15.
good eye; and again, an envious and malignant is said to have an evil eye.
From the eye are discovered effectual signs of goodness, mercy, clemency,
anger, hatred, sorrow, joy, and such like affections. From this reason in
nature did our Savior derive that his saying in the Parable, Is thine eye evil
because I am good?

Verse. 12. The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge.] The eyes of the Lord
signify his peculiar presence and providence, the eyes of the Lord are upon
the righteous.

Knowledge.] The abstract for the concrete, as Job 5. 16. Psalm. 12. 2. Romans 11.
17. men of knowledge.

Verse. 13. The slothful man says, there is a Lion in the way, I shall be
slain in the Scopus. est vanos and saepe absurdos pigrorum ad laborem
declinandum pretextus ad majorem detestationem prop^nere. Cartw.
streets.] No sluggard neglects any duty but he has a pretense. 2. The
pretense which he has shall be enough to him to shift off a duty. Lions are in
their dens in the day time, Psalm. 104 22* 21.

Verse. 18. For it is a pleasant thing, if thou keep them within the^; they
shall withal be fitted in thy lips.] As if he had said, when thou have been a
learner, and have Fitted to thy lips] Thou shall delight to speak of it, and
shall speak of it becomingly. See Prove. 26. 7.
gained a stock of knowledge, they shall be fitted to thy lips, that is, thy
lips shall bring forth, shape and form those notions of truth into profitable
and savoury discourses.

Within thee.] In thy belly, that is, take place in thy heart, because written
there, as the Law was written in the midst of Christ's bowels.

Verse. 20. Have not I written to thee excellent things in connsels and
knowledge?] Vocem Shalishim per [tripliciter] exponit Hieron. ut and Tharg.
tribus vicibus, sed analogia vocis hujus ostend it ita esse vertendum: Nonne
scripsi tibi magna, in consiliis and scientia: vel eodem sensu, nonne scripsi
tibi verba, ducum five Principum, hoc est p^aestantissima documenta, in
confiliis and scientiis, hoc est quae tum in consiliis dandis tibi prodesse,
tum scientem ^e and prudentem efficere possunt. Est enim Shalishim plurale a
Shalish quod magnum, Ducem, Principem, proprie tertium a Rege denotat, and per
metaphoram ad quaevis excellentium dignitatis graduum constituta differtur.
Glassii Phiol l. 2. par. 1. Tract. 1. Hoc loco abutuntur Pontificii, ut
triplicem illum Scripturarum sensum stabiliant. Fateor ex Ebraeis quoque
nonnullos, Ebtaeum Shalishim explicare terna vel triplicia, sed illi aliter
explicuere. R. Sal. haec accipit, tanquam a Deo dicta, and interpretatur de
lege, prophe^is and hagiographis, alii qui haec in persona Salomonis dicta
censent, putant respici ad tres libros Proverbia, Koheleth, and Canticum. Alii
ad triplicem hominum statum, incipientium, proficientium and perfectorum
respici existimant. Alii triplicia i. saepius iterata Pagn. perfecta. Vox
Ebraea pluralis numeri est a sing. Shalish and proprie tertium a principum
Republica vel militia significat* ut mishuel secundum. Postea extenditur ad
virum principem, eximium, and in alto dignitatis gradu constitutum. Hinc alii
reddunt verba magnifica, alii verba principalia, id est, principibus digna vel
convenientia, Junius verba ducum, hoc est, praestantissima. Confer. Prove. 8. 6.
Amama Antib. Bibl. l. 3.


Verse. 22. Rob not the poor because he is poor.] These words are capable of a
double construction: That is, let not his poverty and inability to withstand
thee, encourage thee the rather to rob him: which construction agrees well
with the reason given in the next verse* or thus, let the consideration of his
poverty keep thee off from meddling with him.

Neither oppress the afflicted in the gate.] That is, either by bringing him
before the Judge, or by wronging him thy self being Judge: Judges sat in the
Gate.

Verse. 27. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from
under thee.] No Law requires that a man should lie in the streets to let
another lie in his bed.

Verse. 29. See thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before
Kings, he shall not stand before mean me^.] Liphne hhashim, coram obscuris,
that is, before the mean and baser sort, who were clothed in soyled black.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 2. ANd put thy knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.]
Or in thy throat: That is, be very careful and circumspect in taking thy food,
bridle thine appetite, take heed thou do not exceed measure.

Verse. 5. Will thou set thine eyes?] That is, thine affections. Heb. involare
facies, Est metaphora ab avium volatu ad oculorum aspectum propter summam
celeritatem translata; oculos] est alia metaphora sensibus corporeis ad animum
traducta: aut metonym. effecti, quia quod unimus desiderat, in id oculi
defiguntur. Cartw.
Will thou cause thine eyes to fly? the inward disposition of the heart shows
it self much by the eyes, therefore the Scripture speaks of the delight and
desire of the eyes, and says, thine eyes shall not pity, it implies,
aviditatem, celeritatem, 1 Samuel 15. 19. the whole intention of the Spirit.

Upon that which is not.] That thing which thou apprehendest it to be, that
which has no reality or stability.

For riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
heaven.] See Job 9. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. 49. Non abibant, inquit, ^ed avolabant and
avolabunt, non simpliciter sed ut aquila, hoc est, quam citissime, nam
ostenduntur verius quam possidentur, and dum placent, transeunt. Drus. Prove.
Class. 2. l. 4. Hoc est, pernicissime, nam aquila mira pernicitate volat,
Caelum versus aut ad escam, Prove. 23. 4. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 4.
Not like a tame house bird, which a man may follow and catch again, nor like a
Hauk that will show where she is by her bells, and be called again with a lure,
but like an Eagle, which mounts aloft past sight, and is carried away with so
much haste, that nothing can recall her.

Verse. 7. Eat and drink says he to thee, but his heart is not with thee.] That
is, he courts thee, but loves thee not.

Verse. 17. But be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long.] He does not
say, Do thou fear the Lord all the day long, but be thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long, under the power and authority of it; as to be in the
flesh, in malice, in drink.

Verse. 23. Buy the truth, and sell it not.] It is expressed both affirmatively
and negatively. See chapter 21. 26. and 22. 29.


Buy it.] That is, use all means which possibly ye can for attaining and
possessing of it.

This advice concerns two sorts of men,

1. Such as have it not, they must labor to get it. 2. Such as have it they
must hold it fast.
Verse. 26. My son, give me thine heart.] Not lend me thy ear, or afford me
thy tongue.

Verse. 27. For an where is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit.]
There Exitium significat inevitabile, in quod incidunt qui cum scortis habent
consuetudinem. Merc^rus in loc.
is no getting out of a deep ditch if the mouth be narrow.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 4. ANd by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all preci^us and
pleasant riches.] Some expound it of the hidden parts of the soul, prosperity
is intailed to piety.

Verse. 13, 14. My son, eat thou honey, because it is good, and the honeycomb,
which is sweet unto thy taste.] As honey is pleasant in the taste, so the
knowledge of spiritual things.

Verse. 16. For a just man falls seven times and rises up again: but the
wicked shall fall into mischief.] The common addition, and which is frequent in
the ancient Fathers, of seven times a day, is more than is found in the
Original.

That is, often into trouble, Psalm. 34. 19. so Junius in notis Tarnov. Exercit.
Bibl. Drusius, Mercer, Piscator, Deodate, the Genevah, and others.

But the wicked falls and never rises again.

Verse. 20. The candle of the wicked shall be put out.] The life of the wicked
is Est allegotia a lucernis extinctis ad res prosperas eversas translata.
Cartw. in loc.
compared to a candle, because it is maintained by base stinking matter, and
will go out in snuff.

Verse. 21. Them that are given to change.] viz. Leges and statum regni. Pagn.

Verse. 25. But to them that rebuke him shall be delight.] That is, much comfort
q. d. Percipient ipsi post hoc suum laudabiliter praestitum officium peculiarem
tum intus in conscientia amaenitatem tum foris honestam aliorum de se
sententiam ac favorem, ut amaritudo quaedam subfuerit periculosae correptionis
medelae. Geicrus in loc.
and matter of rejoicing, so as they shall not need to repent what they have
done.

And a good blessing shall come upon them.] That is, either a blessing of good
men, who will bless, praise and commend them, or a blessing of good things, and
that from the Lord, who will reward them for this conscionable performance of
their duty.

Verse. 26. Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer.] Ingenuous
Osculum apud Judaeos duplex erat, unum charitatis staternae (de quo Apost. Romans
16. 16.) alterum honoris, Psalm. 2. 12. Cartw.
spirits prize a right answer.

Verse. 32. I looked upon it, and received instruction.] Looking upon is more
than seeing, the intention of seeing.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 11. WOrds fitly spoken.] Heb. words upon their wheels, that is, with a
due concurrence and observation of all circumstances, of time, place, person,
and the like, which are as the wheels upon which our words and speeches should
run.

Is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.] That is, graceful and comely.

Verse. 12. As an earing of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise
reprover upon an obedient ear.] q. d. No jewel can so much adorn and beautify
a Christian as this can do, as when he can receive and submit himself to the
word of reproof wisely given.

Verse. 14. Who so boasts himself of a false gift, is like clouds and wind,
without rain.] That is, speaking of great things he will do for his neighbor,
but fails in the accomplishment.

Clouds.] Seem to offer and promise rain, but the wind takes them away, and
frustrates men's expectation.

Verse. 17. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house: least he be weary of
thee, Fac pretiosum pedem in domo amici tui. Sciendum pretiosum ibi dici pro
rarum. Nam quia cara omnia rara sunt* juxta proverbium, ideo Ebraei permutant
pretiosum cum raro and Sermo Domini pretiosus erat in Israele. Drus. Observat.
3.
and so hate thee.] The Arabians say, Visit seldom, and thou shall increase
love.

Verse. 18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a maul,
and a sword, and a sharp arrow.] Bernard says that there are three parties
smitten with one and the self same tongue, viz. the Judge, the party that hired
him, and he against whom he comes, Judici est mal^eus, that is, he does
astonish the Judge as if he had a blow given him on the head, that he knows
not how to determine or judge the matter.

2. To him that hired him he is a sword to fight for him and his cause, but
withal a sword to kill his soul.

3. To him against whom he witnesses he is an arrow, and the wound that he
makes sticks in him, either in his goods, life, or good name.

Verse. 20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
upon Variae hujus loci expositiones reperiuntur and sane dictio magrad^h totam
variat sententiam, si relicta significatione Ebraea ex Chaldaica illam
interpreteris, quod bona facit In^e^pretum part. Verbum enim gnadah Eb^aeis
sig. orna^e Chaldaeis autem and Syris transire, uti passim hoc sensu occurrit
in Daniele c. 4. 2^. c. 6. 8. c. 7. 14. Chaldaeus ergo Paraphrastes and Aben
Esra in Comment. hujus loci sensum ^emovendi habere volunt, quos and Munsterus
sequitur, ut talis inde hujus paraemiae sen^us emergat. Quemadmodum inep^e
facit, qui vestem in die frigoris remover, aut qui acetum infundit ni^ro, ita
non minus in^p^e facit, qui cordi malo, hoc est p^^verso incredulo* ad
pertinaci canit cantica, hoc est, qui incredu os ac pertinaces homines blandis
monitionibus flectere, ac in viam revocare conatur. Tremel^ius Ebreae adhaere^
significa^ioni a^que ita reddit, ut qui imponit sibi vestem (Hebr. qui ornat se
vest) tempore frigoris: ut sit sen^us docen^e Junio in notis. Tristitiam
dissolvit cantus, ut vestes discutinnt frigus and ace^um* dissolvit nitrum.
Musi^ae enim harmoniae hunc esse usum docet exemplum Saulis, 1 Samuel 16. 24. 2
Reg. 3. 15. Maycrus in Phil^l. Sac.
nitre: so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart.]

Verse. 21. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be
thirsty, give him water to drink.] That is, he which hates thee, not he whom
thou hate, for thou must hate none.

Understand all things necessary in time of his need if occasion be offered.

Verse 22. For thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall
reward th^e.] Double his fault, make him pliable to your purpose, as metals
heated.

Heap Gods wrath, Tremel. Chrysostom. Theoph.

Provoke him to love, Beza, Aug. Jerome* Calv. Vatabl.

Pererius, Aquinas, Cajetane, have both.

Head.] Mind, Aquinas: Judgment, Origin.

Verse. 23. The North wind drives away rain; so does an angry countenance a
backbiting tongue.] The North wind, the sharpest of the winds purges the air
and drives away the clouds, which else would quickly dissolve themselves into
showers and storms.

Verse. 26. A righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring.] That is, basely submitting or creeping poorly
to a wicked man.

Is as a troubled fountain.] He has mudded the purity of his own soul with
worldly respects and carnal interests.

Verse. 27. It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own
glory, is not glory.] Honey is put for the choicest contentment, if one eat a
little he finds sweetness, but if much, he will be saded with it.

In the Original, The searching out of glory is glory. Chekar is sometimes
rendered searching, sometimes the end; the utmost end of glory is glory, you
cannot have too much of it, it will be glory at the last.

Verse. 28. He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a City that is
broken down, and without wals] It can keep out no body, so he can keep in no
lusts. 2. All that are without may come in freely, all temptations may assault
him. 3. There is no watch.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 4. ANswer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto
him.] That is, Ubi si respondeas, ei similis futurus sis. Ne responde stulto.
Responde stulto, ubi si taceas ipsi sapiens videbitur Rafi, Aben Esra, Rabbog.
not in such pride, passion, or reviling fashion as the fool objects.

Verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto
him.] That is, fully to the point, that he might not grow wise in his own
conceit.

Verse. 6. And drinks damage.] That is, he shall have damage enough, a full
draught of it.

Verse. 7. The legs of the lame are not equal; so is a parable in the mouth of
fools.] As a lame person is uncomely in his going, so a grave and holy sentence
seems in the mouth of fools, his words and ways agree not.

Verse. 8. As he that binds a stone in a sling; so is he that gives honor to
a fool.] Vide Dilheri Disput. Acad. Tom. 2. p. 426.
The sum of this is, that it is absurd to honor a wicked man.

Verse. 9. As a thorn goes up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in
the mouth of fools.] A thorn was their instrument in sowing clothes, he wounds
himself with it: compare 1 Cor. 15. 23. and 7. 29. A* parable, a wise saying,
when a fool bath the managing of it, wounds himself with it, he perverts the
most innocent principles.

Verse 12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a
fool than of him.] In a natural fool there is but one hinderance to wisdom,
viz. simple ignorance: In the conceited fool there are two hindrances,
prejudice and obstinacy.

Verse. 17. He that passes by, and medleth with strife belonging not to him, is
like one Hebraicum est proverbium idem significans, quod auribus lupum tenet.
Drusius.
that takes a dog by the ears.]

Verse. 23. Burning lips, and a wicked heart, are like a potsheard covered with
silver dross.] words carrying a show of great love, as if they did even flame
with love.

And a wicked heart.] That is, bent upon mischief.

Like a potsheard covered with silver dross.] That is, good for nothing, base,
vile, contemptible, whatever glorious show they may make for a little time.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 1. FOr thou know not what a day may bring forth] It is a metaphor
taken from a Romanum proverbium notum est, n^scis quid serus vesper vehat.
Mercerus.
womb, when a woman is in travel, Who can tell what she will bring forth till
she be delivered? so when the womb of the morning is in travel, who can tell
what a day it may bring forth? happy or dismal.

Verse. 3. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty: but a fools wrath is heavier
than them both.] An angry man is compared to those things which are more
tedious and hurtful to a man, than if one should cast stones at him, or lay
heavy burdens of sand or like matter upon him, even then altogether
insufferable and insupportable.

Verse. 4. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous.] In that it does make a man
cruel and outrageous in his attempts.

But who can stand before envy?] That is, no man can; the interrogation is See
Pro. 14. 30.
more emphaticall.

Verse. 8. As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth
from his place.] That is, God has set every man in a place and calling; he
that goes out of that like a bird, falls into the snare of the fowler, or the
talons of the birds of prey.

Verse. 15. A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentious woman
are alike.] See 19. 13. when it is foul without and it droppeth within. See
Mercer.

Verse. 16. Whosoever hides her, hides the wind, and the ointment of his
right Hoc est, idem facit ac si odoratissimum unguentum manu occultare vellet,
quod odore suo ultro se prodit, quantumvis eo renitente. Capel. Crit. Sac. l.
5. c. 6.
hand which bewraieth it self.] A proverbiall speech for fruitless endeavor in
hiding a thing; the wind the more you hide it, the more noise it makes, and
ointment in your hand, the more you hide it, the more it smells.

Verse. 17. Iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend.]

When you what one iron upon another, the edge grows keen; thus a man
sharpeneth 1 Samuel 23. 16, 17.
the countenance of his friend. The word translated countenance, signifies also
anger or passion, because anger quickly appears in the countenance, hence some
render the Proverb, As iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the anger of
his friend.

Verse. 19. As in water face answers to face; so the heart of man to man.] The
Ut videat quis alterius cor in suo tanquam speculo.
face in water renders the self same shape, color, lineaments, proportion; so
the heart. Every man may in another man's heart see the complete image,
deformities, uncleanness of his own.

Verse. 21. As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a man
to his praise.] They show what pure metal or dross there is; so praise and
honor will show what is in man.

Verse. 22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him.] Not a natural, but a conceited fool: that is,
let him be afflicted, till he be almost destroyed.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 1. BUt the righteous are bold as a Lion.] As a young Lion, Leunculus;
Arias Montanus, which is more bold than the other.

Verse. 2. For the transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof: but
by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged.]
That Vide Mercerum.
is, in a way of variation, one after another. He means not only of a wise
Prince, but this, As wicked men corrupt their Princes, so grave and good
Counselors, prudent men about him, are great means to prolong the
tranquillity of a Land.

Verse. 13. Who so confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.] That is, he
which in the very act of confessing forsakes.

Verse. 14. Happy is the man that fears always.] That is, to sin, Romans 11.
20. 1 Cor. 10. 12.

Verse. 20. But he that makes have to be rich shall not be innocent.] That is,
it falls out so: See 1 Timothy 6. 4.

Verse. 23. Finds more favor than he that flattereth with the tongue.] Even
with that man.

Verse. 24. Who so robs his father or his mother, and says, it is a
transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.] That is, will easily
join with men-robbers to spoil others of their goods also.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 1. HE that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, In the Hebrew it is, a man of reproofs which hardens his neck, shall
suddenly be broken without health. Obdurans cervicem] Metaphora ducta a bobus
aut aliis animantibus quae jugum cervicibus impositum detrectant. Mercerm.
and that without remedy.] A terrible Scripture, and to be applied with much
caution. We know not how often, nor how long it will be before the date of
patience be expired.

Bains applies it to the Jews.

Verse. 5. A man that flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his feet.]
As a Fowler lies in wait to bring the bird into the net, and hold him in it,
implying that flattery is the devils invisible net, by which he catches and
holds men fast in the snare. See Isa. 3. 12.

Verse. 6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare.] Or, In the
transgression of man there is an evil snare. Malus laqueus, Montanus. He is
ensnared himself by his own sin, and by his means insnares others, Prove. 22.
25.

Verse. 15. But a child left to himself brings his mother to shame.] Yea and
his Matrem potius dicit quam patrem, etsi and hunc dedecoret and dehonestet:
quod opportunior sit matter injuriae and contemptui filii. Mercerus.
father too, though, the mother be here only named, because she usually is most
to blame in this kind.

Verse. 18. Where there is no vision the people perish.] Vision, for so
Prophecy was wont to be anciently called, and a Prophet a Seer. Is naked,
exposed to Gods Nudatur populus. Trem^l.
wrath, and their own perdition.

Verse. 25. The fear of man brings a snare.] That is, inordinate fear, so
Mercer: The Philosopher says, that fear is the betrayer of the soul Pejor est
malo, timor ipse ma^^. Sen. Trag.
and that four ways:

1. As it hinders a man in a good way. 2. As it carries a man to an evil way.
3. As it stirs up other men to try conclusions upon him. 4. As it provokes
God against him, Jer. 1. 17.
Verse. 26. Many seek the Rulers favor* but every man's judgment comes from
The favor of a King may well be called his face, it is seen in the serenity of
the countenance.
the Lord.] Or face.

From the Lord.] Bowing and bending the Rulers heart which way it pleases him,
Prove. 21. 1.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 1. Even unto Ithiel and Ucal.] Ithiel, God with me; as Immanuel, God
with us: Deus mecum. Deus no^iscum.
and Ucal, from Jacal Potent.

Verse. 2. Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding
of a man.] Binath Adam, the understanding of Adam; not perfect knowledge of By
reason of brutish passions that are in me. Ver. 3. says he has not the
knowledge of the holy.
the rule of duty, as he had; yet Agur was a Prophet eminently instructed by
God in a more immediate way of revelation: See 1 Cor. 13. 9.

Here are two things,

1. All men are brutish. 2. Godly men are more sensible of their bruitishness
than any others.
Verse. 4. Who has ascended into heaven, or descended.] Some interpret it by
that vision which Jacob had, Joh. 1. ult. Angels ascend and descend for our
service yet God uses them.

Verse. 6. Add not thou unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found
a liar.] A man that adds a lie to the word.

Verse. 8. Remove far from vanity and lies, give me neither poverty nor
riches, feed me with food convenient for me.] Poverty has been the decay of
many: but riches of a far greater number.

Food convenient.] Or as the words signify, bread of his statute, allowance,
or Lechem Chukki, nourish me with bread of fi^ measure for me; that very phrase
the holy Spirit translateth (...), by a new framed word. Broughton on the Lords
prayer. Tribuc victui meo necessaria, Vu^g. Lat. Int. Tremellius translateth
it, Demensum meum, mine allowance.
ordinance, which God in his counsel had appointed and ordained for him, so
much as was fit for him, and this fitness must be measured partly and
principally by natural necessity, partly and secondarily by the use of ours.

Verse. 10. Accuse not a servant unto his Master.] That is, causlesly and
maliciously.

Verse. 12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes.] Dor, a
successive generation; it implies tales nunquam defuturos, optimi esse volunt
quia pessimi non sunt.

Verse. 14. There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords.] Heb. acheles* ab
achal. Comedere, apposite hoc vocabulum adhibet, cum de dentibus comestionis
instrumentis verba faciat. Menochius.


Verse. 17. The Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles
shall eat Co^vi erga pullos suos sunt crudeles, and cadaverum oculos omnium
primos solent invadere and effodere, atque ita crudelis erga parents, punitur
per crudeles erga pullos, and per aquilas pios erga pullos* Schind. in Lex.
it.] A phrase which sets forth the end of a notorious malefactor, that is
hanged in the air till the Ravens pick out his eyes, Genesis 40. 19.

Verse. 19. The way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent upon a rock,
the way of a Ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a Man with the Maid.]

The way of an Eagle in the air.] Not to be seen after once flown away.

The way of a Serpent upon a rock.] Gliding away without leaving any impression
of her body behind, and afterward creeping into some hole of the earth.

The way of a Ship in the midst of the sea.] Swiftly carried away with the
winds: And the way of a Man with a Maid.] That is, a close and chaft Virgin
kept from See ^inchon of the Sabbath, part. 1. chapter 5.
the access of strangers. As hard as it is for an unworthy man to get a modest
Virgin, kept close in her parents house (which is made as difficult as to get a
flying Eagle) so hard it is to discover a whore.

Some say of an adulteress, that is as hard to find out as any of the four.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 4. IT is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor
for Princes, Non defuerunt qui his verbis, regibus vini usum interdictum
existimarent; Ebr. non convenit regibus bibere vinum, hic la^giorem and quae
hilaritatis terminos excedit, potationem notat. Amam. Antibarb. Bibl. l. 3.
strong drink.] That is, immoderately, must not be given to it.

Verse. 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to those
that be of heavy hearts.] Wine was not for the Judge, but for the condemned
person.

The Jews upon this place of Scripture do ground a custom which they used, of
giving a kind of strong drink or wine unto such as were to suffer death,
whereby stupifying the senses, they diminished the pains which they were to
endure. See Mark 15. 23. Carmen encomiasticon ordine literarum alphabeti
conscriptum, qualia reperiuntur pleraque in Scriptura, ad juvandam memoriam, ut
Psalmus 119. Psalm. 145. and aliquot alii, Lamentationes Jeremiae. Mercerus.


Verse. 10. Who can find a virtuous woman?] That imports not inveniendi
impossibilitatem, sed difficultatem.

Verse. 15. And a portion to her maidens.] That is, the portion of work; so
Mercer and others.

Verse. 18. Her candle goes not out by night.] That is a tropicall speech, and
somewhat Hinc fit ut ne nocte quidem tota, extinguatur ejus lucerna, dum
assidue operi invigilat: quod hyperbolice dicit de bona noctis part, quam
operi potius and labori quam somno impendat. Mercerus.
hyperbolicall, the word night is put for a part thereof. The phrase only
implies vigilance, showing that she is late down and early up: If not putting
out her candle by night, should imply a sitting up all night long, How could it
be said, that she rises up?

Verse. 21. She is not afraid of snow for her household: for all her household are
clothed with scarlet.] That is, for the coldest season in winter.

Clothed with double garments, that is, with such clothing as is fit for cold
weather. The Hebrew word is often used for scarlet, but according to the proper
notation of it, it signifies things doubled, which is most pertinent to this
place; therefore though it be so translated, yet the Kings Translatours have
noted the other in the Margin.

Verse. 26. And in her tongue is the Law of kindness] Or, bountifulness, as the
Hebrew Lex benignitatis. Tremel. Lex clementiae, lex, id est, ratio and
doctrina. Semper in ore habet, quo pacto beneficentiam in alios exerceat, and
quibus rationibus officia charitatis aliis praestabit, meritis omnes devinciet,
obsequiis demerebitur. Mercerus.
word imports.

Whereby she does as it were command kindness from others. See Col. 4. 6.

Verse. 27. She looks well to the ways of her household.] The word signifies
to stand as a watchman in a watchtower, who looks carefully on every side,
and observes and gives notice to the City of all approaching enemies, that
none may surprise the same at unawares.

Verse. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that fears
the Id est, muli^ris gratia fallax est, and pulchritudo vana: quae autem timet
Dominum, ea laudabitur. Picherellus.
Lord, she shall be praised.]

Verse. 31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her
in Id est, propalam in locis frequenti^^imis, in frequenti^^imo hominum caetu
qui in portis esse solebat, ubi judicia exercebantur. Mercerus.
the gates.] That is, let them be there spoken of to her commendation; let all
men give her due praise; even also publicly for her public virtues.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of ECCLESIASTES, OR THE PREACHER.
CHAP. I.
COheleth a Preacher or reconciled Penitent, this being his penitential
Koheleth Ecclesiastes liber Salomonis in quo collectae sunt omnes selentiae and
sapientiae, vel ipse Solomon: ut form a foeminina referatur ad sapientiam, quae
ipso Salomone erat, and ad quam audiendam homines congregabantur. Schind. in
Lex P^nt. Koheleth concionatrix, ho^ est, elegans and pulcher concionator:
solent enim foeminae in quoque genere esse pulchriores. Ribera. Quod suam ad
Ecclesiam aggregationem proponit, tanquam ornamentum quo huic operi gratiam and
existimationem concili^t, argumento est quanti aestimandi and quo honor
prosequendi, qui ex Ecclesia ob pervicaciam in sc^lere pereg^inantes, rursus ^d
Ecclesiae s^cietatem colliguntur: tantum abest ut eorum in vita anteact^
prolapsiones illi^ exprobrari debent. Quo de vide Luc. 15. per totum caput.
Cartw. in l^^. Vide plura ibid.
Sermon or writing delivered to the Church or Assembly of faithful Jews. Mr
Pemble.

Some question this signification of a reconciled Penitent.

Of gathering the best things, viz. Wisdom, Solomon is called Coheleth. The
Septuagint made a new term of their own, Ecclesiastes, or wise Doctor.
Broughton.

The subject of this Book is in the beginning of it set forth to be the vanity
of the creature in reference to the satisfaction of the souls of men.

God set up two great Lights in Salomons heart, one showing the excellency of
Christ, in the Canticles; the other, the vanity of the creature, as in
Ecclesiastes.

Solomon had three advantages above others to know the vanity of the creature:

1. In regard of his wisdom, 1 King. 4. 29, 30. 2. Riches, 1 Kings 10. per tot.
Sec v. 23. 3. In that he gave himself to make trial and experience of the
creature.
Verse. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is
vanity.] Five times vanity. The Hebrews not havi^g comparatives or
superlatives, are forced to express those degrees by gemination or composition,
so they say the Song of Songs. Sicut in Cantico Canticorum inter omnia carmina,
excellens carmen ostenditur: ita in vanitate vanitatum, vanitatis magnitudo
monstratur. Hieron* in loc. Hac tam efficaci loqu^^di formula toties repetita
oration, cui confirmandae (prae^er alias veteris and Novl Testamenti hinc ^^de
aspersas rations) totus liber destinatus est, idque ^^m selecto^ Scriba ad eam
rem a^dhibito, non obscure ^ndicat, quam altas vanissimarum harum retum a^no^
in nobis ^adices egi^: ut non nisi magna vi, and veluti instructa argumentorum
acie illem nobis eripi and evelli patiamur. Cartw. in loc.


1. Vanity, not vain only, but vanity it self, in the abstract. 2. Excessive
vanity, Vanity of vanities, Hebraism, superlative, by doubling he signifies
most vain, sc. imperfect, uncertain, transitory, void of content, full of
grief. 3. An heap of vanities, Vanity of vanities, an Hebraism, and imports
most great vanity. 4. A universal proposition, All is vanity.
Verse. 3. What profit has a man in all his labor which he takes under the
Sun?]

Or, Fruit* Heb. Ends in nothing.

Labour] Actions, councels, projects.

Under the Sun] In the whole world.

Verse. 4. One generation passes away, and another generation comes: but the
earth A generation is the number of men, which at any time are living together
upon the earth, according at the derivation of the Hebrew word Dor does give us
to understand, and so long as any of them are alive, so long does the
generation continue. Dr Jermin.
abides for ever.] One age passes away, Heb. As waves.

Earth abideth] Till the end of all things, as flowers and graffe withers, yet
the earth abides; Earth the stage of all actions, the womb that gives and
receives all, man baser than the earth.

Solomon shows man's mortality by three similitudes:

1. Of the Sun,

Verse* 5* The Sun also arises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the
place where he arose.] The Sun rises and never stands till it set, so man
creeps up to his noon fullness of age, and then declines till he set.

Hasteth] The Hebrew signifies anhelare, pants to its place, like one out of
The French A^ane, labors hard to ward his place, as one that blows
laboring.
breath, so man makes post haste to his grave*

2. The Wind,

Verse. 6. The wind goes toward the South, and turns about to the North; it
whirleth about continually, and the wind returns again according to his
circuits.] The wind on a March day is very strong and boisterous, and calm at
night.

Heb. It whirleth it*] That is, most certainly and speedily.

3. The Rivers,

Verse. 7. Thither they return again.] So man comes from the earth, and goes
toward the earth.

Verse. 8. All things are full of labor.] All creatures and actions.

Labor.] Orig. Wearisomnesse in getting or enjoying.

The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.] All
pleasant objects give the eye no content; Music gives not the ear content,
Etiam ipsa vol^ptas labor.

Verse. 9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be.] That is, things
shall be as they were.

Verse. 10. Is there any thing, whereof it may be said, See, this is new?] It
has been already of old time, which was before us. Nec tamen ignore multa
multis videri nova, ipsis nimitum, at non reipsa nova: Utp^te quae jam olim
extiterint, ipsis autem fuerint i^ comperta. Beza.


Verse. 14. All is vanity and vexation of spirit.]*

All things are vain,

1. From their emptiness, and consequently unsatisfaction. 2. In regard of
their mutability. 3. Because they may be lost.
Secondly, Vexation of spirit: Because

1. There is a mixture of evil in the best of these contents. They vex ^^
actually.
2, In all of them some unsuitablenesse of spirit. 3. In regard of the danger
of sin from them.
Verse. 15. That which is crooked cannot be made straight.] The knowledge of all
men in the world is not able to rectify one crooked lust. Sap^entia hae^ retum
naturalium depravatos hominum mores non emendat tantum, sed neque viam and
rationem monstrat, qua instituantur. Cartw.


That which is wanting cannot be numbered.] There are many defects and errors
in this knowledge.

Verse. 18. For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow.] Solomon places not grief in wisdom, nor sorrow in
knowledge it self, but in the way of attaining wisdom and knowledge, or in the
exercise of it.

CHAP. II.
Verse 2. I Said of laughter, It is mad.] That is, so far forth as it has
not the fear and reverence of the name of God to restrain it. Risui tribuit
quod ei qui risui indulge^ erat tribuendum; quasi dicat: intellexi eum qui ad
risum inclinat, inssnire. Mercer^^.


And of mirth, what does it?] That is, what good does sensual joy? Carnalis
pu^a, atque e rebu^ hujus seculi hausta. Geierus. Laetitiam alloquens tertia
u^itur persona contemptus causa, ut cum praesenti alicui dicimus, Que faict
cestuy cy? per contemptum and fastidium, Quid hic sibi vult? Quid tandem beni
and commodi secum affert ^ae^itia? Mercerus in loc. Nullam autem immodicae
voluptatis utilitatem esse t^m indubie affirm at, ac si extra controversiam
esse^. Quo ^efertur quod per interrogationem hoc proponit, omnes vel
peritissimos voluptatis artifices ^^^vocans, si quid quod contra faciat,
offerre possint. Cartw. in loc.


Verse. 9. Also my wisdom remained with me.] Because Solomon was to take not
only a sensual but a critical delight in the creatures. Few men in the
enjoyment of so many pleasures depart not from the study of wisdom.

Verse. 10. I withheld not my heart from any joy.] That is, any thing which
might Non ab om^^ gaudio idiotismo Ebraico sic effertur negatio universalis,
hoc sensu; a nullo provsus ga^dio. Geierus.
be matter of joy to me; The same metaphor that is used Revel. 18. 17. lived
deliciously, a metaphor from a beast that is let go without a yoke or bridle.

Verse. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head.] Is judicious and advised in all
Tropus est Scripturae usitatus, signifificat circumspectum esse sapientem, nam
eum videnti and oculato homini compa^at, sicu^ luci sapientiam comparar^t.
Mercerus.
his ways.

But the fool walks in darkness:] He makes not use of his knowledge to
guide and direct his ways. See Jer. 4. 22.

Verse. 24. There is nothing better for a man] viz. In respect of natural
benefits. In Hebraeo sensus hic esse videtur. Nullum est homini bonum, nisi ut
comedat and exhibeat animae suae ea quae delectant, labor suo comparata.
Grotius:


Quo mihi fortunam, si non conceditur uti! CHAP. III.
Verse 1. TO every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
the heaven.] A Dr Jermin thinks the words may rather^ be transposed, To every
thing there is a time and a^ season to every purpose under heaven.
set time (so the Hebrew word is used, Nehem. 10. 34. and 13. 31. Esth. 9. 26,
31.) Even a time not for every purpose; For, what purpose can any man have at
such a time to be born, or at such a time to die? but as the Greek well renders
it, (...), For every thing under heaven, the Hebrew word is used in the 17th
verse of this Chapter and in 8. 6. Mr Gatakers Vindication of his Annotat. on
Jer. 10. 2. Vide Gatakeri Cinnum. lib. 2. cap. 6.


Verse. 4. And a time to dance.] This place speaks not of dancing properly, but
of Intempestive ex hoc loco philosophantur qui choreas ducere and saltationes
tueri cupiunt. Car^w. in loc. Vide plura ibid.
hearty rejoicing, signified by dancing. He speaks not of such things as we
ought to do, or may do by the commandment or permission of God, but such things
as fall out and come to pass by the providence and decree of God. Elton on the
fourth Commandment.


Verse. 5. A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.] Liberis
danda Inter quae tempora illud unum est, cum mulieros sanguinis foedum
profluvium patiuntur. Menochius de Republ. Heb.
opera, and rursum continentiae, so Jerome. 1 Cor. 7. 5. See Cartwright.

Verse. 7. A time to keep silence; and a time to speak] Every thing is
beautiful in Pythagoricos reor; quorum disciplina; est tacere per
quinquennium; and postea cruditos; hinc originem sui ^axisse decre^l. Omnes
arts absque doctore non discimus: sola haec tam vilis and facilis est, ut non
indigeat praeceptore. Hieron. in loc.
his season.

There are seven special seasons of speaking:

First, When by speaking we may bring glory to God, and do good to our
Brethren. Secondly, When we have an opportunity to vindicate the honor and
truth of God. Thirdly, When we may relieve the credit of a wronged Brother.
Fourthly, When we may instruct or direct those that are ignorant: Fifthly, When
we may comfort and support those that are weak. Sixthly, When we may resolve
and settle those that are in doubt. Seventhly, When we may duly reprove and
convince.
And seven of silence:

First, Till we have a Call. Secondly, Till we be rightly informed about the
state of the Question to which we must speak. Thirdly, Till we have a suitable
preparation. Fourthly, When what we speak is like to be a snare unto our
selves, Amos 5. 10, 12, 13. Fifthly, When our passions or corruptions are up.
Sixthly, When men are not capable of what we speak, 1 Samuel 25. 36. 7. When we
may grieve in speaking.
Verse. 19. For that which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts, even one
thing Solomon more concionatoris loquutus est, neque ex sua sed insipientium
persona id dixit. Aquinas, and Alii.
befalls them: as the one dies, so dies the other.]

Verse. 21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of
the beast that goes downward to the earth.]

Some say these words are spoken in the person of wicked men, but the better
answer is, that Solomon speaks by consideration of the outward events which do
befall one as well as another.

Who can collect from ought he sees in the world, that the spirit of a man goes
upward, and the spirit of a beast downward?

2. Who does acknowledge and consider it so as to look after eternal supplies?

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. ANd behold the tears of such as were oppressed.] It is in Hebrew
Lacryma, a In Ebraeo utitur singulari lacryma, quae tamen collective accipitur
pro magna lacrymarum copia, sicut etiam Psalm. 5. 7. Ita and Cicero singulari
alicubi utitur hocce sensu; Cito urescit lacryma in malis alienis. Geierus.
tear. It may be either to show, that there should be so much compassion toward
the afflicted, as one single tear, or the first tear that they shed should win
relief; or (as one observes) to show the neglect of pity in those that have
suffered the oppressed to wait and weep so long to crave help, yet still
delayed, as they could weep no more, had only one tear left.

Verse. 2. Wherefore I praised the dead, which are already dead.] The word
signifies Encomiis celebrare, to sing out praises and pronounce them happy; It
is spoken of godly men, their state of death is better than their own estate,
or the estate of other righteous men alive.

Verse. 5. The fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh.] The
sluggard Qua formula loquendi, apti^^^me desidiosi inertiam and socordiam
describit. Manus enim instrumentum est, quo occupationum omne genus aggredimur
and per^icimus, unde etiam saepe actionum omne genus opera manuum appellatur.
Quamobrem illis complicatis, and otio veluti vinculis constrictis, nihil
aggredi aut tractare conceditur: Contra assiduitas in opere, Prove. 31. 17, 19.
indicatur extensione and admonitione manus ad opus. Cartw. in loc.
will not work.

Eats his own flesh.] Is cruel to himself, starves himself, or through sloth
he is brought into such want, that if he will eat, he must eat his own flesh.

Verse. 8. Yea there is no end of his labor.] No natural nor moral end.

Verse. 13. Better is a poor and a wise child, than an old and foolish King,
who will no more be admonished.] The more folly, the more obstinacy, and the
more obstinacy, the more impatience of admonition.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. KEep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready
to hear, then to give the Sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they
do evil.] As though he should have said, All our prayers and other services we
do to God in his house, are but the Sacrifice of fools, till we have first (by
hearing) been instructed how to do them according to Gods will.

It is as much as to say, Come not into Gods house illotis pedibus. Here is an
allusion Mede in loc.
in particular to the rite of discalceation used by the Jews and other Nations
of the East at their coming into sacred places, as Exodus 3. 5. Josh. 5.

Keep thy foot.] That is, the whole man; A fool, a wicked man never considers
God before whom he comes, and that he looks after inward purity.

The Sacrifice of fools.] A Sacrifice which proceeds from a judgment not
rightly informed by rule.

Verse. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter
any thing before God.] q. d. You must not rush on public duties without
private preparation, because God is a holy God.

Verse. 3. For a dream comes through the multitude of business.] How comes
this in? The wanderings of a man's spirit, and the incoherence of man's thoughts
in duties are here resembled by the holy Ghost to dreams.

Verse. 4. For he has no pleasure in fools.] He takes no pleasure in the
prayers or Stulti plano sunt, qui vovent quod vel non persolvunt, vel tardius
justo hoc faciunt. Cartw.
other services that fools and ignorant sots do offer to him.

Verse. 6. Neither say thou before the Angel.] That is, the Priest before whom
Ne dicas Liphue Hammalach, id est, coram Angelo ipso. LXX vertunt (...) in
conspectu Dei; and recte, cum immediate sequatur, ut quid irascatur Deus
propter vocem tuam, nempe temere in ejus conspectu prolatam. Rivetus.
the sin of rash vows was to be confessed, Levit. 4. 5. before Christ, the
Angel of the Covenant who sees through diverse and futile excuses, and punishes
them. Cartwright.

Verse. 8. For he that is higher than the highest regards, and there be higher
than they.] Higher than the highest, that is, the Angels.

Higher than they.] viz. Of them that are upon the earth, Nebuchadnezzar and
other high oppressors, and can break them.

Verse. 10. He that coveteth silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor
that loves abundance, with increase.] Cannot be satisfied with it, the more he
has, the more Semper avarus eget.
he desires.

This is also vanity.] Riches are vain, verse. 10. to the end.

2. Full of cares.

3. Unable to help us in distress.

4. We must leave them.

5. They are full of vexation.

Verse. 17. All his days also he eats in darkness, and he had much sorrow
and wrath with his sickness.] Darkness, i. e. Sine laetitia and honor, by
light in Scripture is meant joy and honor, the inheritance of the Saints in
light.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 9. THen the wandering of the desire.] Heb. The walking of the soul; The
heart has its outgoings, it goes forth to the objects on which it is set,
Ezekiel. 33. 31.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. A Good Name is better than precious ointment.] That is, says Junius,
Amplissimis Per unguentum cui famam praeponit, Synecdoche partis, designat omne
genus opum, quia in illis primum locum obtinet, Isa. 3. 9. Vide Prove. 21. 1.
Famam hoc loco illam intelligo, quae rebus praeclare gestis in bello aut in
pace parata est, and ex quibus ad rem publicam commodum aliquod redundavit.
Cartw. in loc. Pulchra inter Schem nomen, and Schemen oleum paranomasia.
Geierus eadem allusio, Cant. 1. 3. Grotius.
and gratiofissimis bonis corporcis. Ointments are here named, because in those
Eastern parts they were laid up among the most precious things, even in the
Kings treasury, Isa. 39. 2.

Verse. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house
of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his
heart.] The original word for feasting signifies a drinking-feast most
properly, and there the infection of sin is most dangerous, that is, will lay
it] ought to do it, so Mal. 1. A son honors his father.

Verse. 4. But the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.]

His heart.] His whole affections and desires, the whole man may be there, but
Etiam tum cum tempus and locus illum ad luctum invitant. Cartw
not his heart.

Verse. 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a
fool: Haud secus enim quam spinae sub cacabo ardentes magnum quidem flammae
crepitum, sed mox desiturum edunt: Ita stultorum effusus and immoderatus ille
risus subito concidens evanescit. Beza. Vide Cartw.
This also is vanity.] Which make a fair blaze, and a great noise for the time,
but all is done almost as soon as kindled, it deceives them when they most
lean unto it.

Verse. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance, and by it there is profit to
them that see the Sun.]

Wisdom.] That is, Grace, it is good to the man, but not so good to others
without an inheritance; Grace makes an advantage by an inheritance.

That is, by the union of wisdom, and an inheritance together, either those
that possess the riches have a profit of them, or else to them that see the
Sun, that is, to all sorts of men.

Verse. 14. God also has set the one against the other, to the end that man
should find nothing after him.] God goes in an untrodden path, no man can say,
this he will do next.

Verse. 16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over wise: why
should Hanc nimiam justitiam a suo effectu describit: Nempe, ex nimia
opinione propriae sapientiae. Cartw.
thou destroy thy self?] We must temper zeal with knowledge, so that we may not
hazard conscience, nor endanger our selves. He speaks either of an opinionative
righteousness, be not righteous in thy own conceit, or rather of any
indiscreet zeal, that is, press not justice too far, nor urge it too
extremely in all cases.

Solomon never says so himself, but he brings thee in speaking, Tush, be not
Mr Perkins.
thou righteous overmuch, why should thou destroy thy self? As the Prophet
Isaiah, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

Solomon (say some) brings in the Atheist here so speaking, and they make the
Mr Fenner.
next verse, Be not wicked overmuch, to be Salomons answer, if he speak it
himself, it must be meant of superstitious and ungrounded righteousness.

Verse. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins
not.] That is, who in doing good sins not.

That is, which does good so purely and perfectly, as that he does not sin
therein. For to the perfecting of a good work many things must concur, want
of any whereof is a sin. In this sense Luther did truly hold, that Just us in
omni opere bono B. Downam of Justificat. l. 4. c. ^. Justificatos per Christum
infusa per Christum gratia non esse perfect justos, sed subinde a via
mandatorum Dei deflectere, docetur tum hoc, tum multis aliis Scripturae
testimoniis, 1 Reg. 8. 40. Psalm. 143. 12. 1 Joan. 1. 8. Cartw. in loc. Vide
plura ibid.
peccat, not that the work in respect of its kind, or per se is evil, but per
accid^ns, because in the good work there happens a defect.

Verse. 28. Not one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all
those have I not found.] One wise or good man.

In all Salomons observation he never knew above one man of a thousand, and
many conceive it was himself, that ever repented of this beastly sin of
sensuality; Id est, in mill mulieribus, quas mihi ad^civi, nullam inveni
sincere probam. Grotius.
but for a woman, to repent of that base sin was a thing unknown in all
Salomons sad experience.

Verse. 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright, but
they have sought out many inventions.] Jashar signifies rectus and approbatus,
right and approved right, according to the resemblance of Gods holiness, and
while so approved of him.

Many inventions.] The word signifies curious artificial inventions, but most
Quaerunt in varietate creaturarum quod amiserunt in unitate Creatoris. Aug. Vox
Jashar non tantum rectum, sed justum bonum ac purum quoque significat, ideoque
nunc vertitur per vocem (...) a LXX. Interpretibus ut hic and Psalm. 92. 16.
nunc per vocem (...), ut Number. 23. 10. and (...), Deuteronomy. 12. 28. and (...), Job
33 3. Unde hac etiam voce Dei justitia describitur Psalm. 92. 16, and Sanctorum
a Deo regenitorum, Number. 33. 10. Quocirca Ecclesiastes sub Epi^heto Jashar quod
Adamo tribuit virtutes illas complectitur, quae in primo nostro parente ad
Imaginem Dei creato reluxerunt, and a Deo in regenitis per novam creationem
instaurari dicuntur, Ephesians. 4. 23. Col. 3. 9. Cujus nonnulla quoque vestigia in
ipsis irreginitis ex discrimine justi and inusti, turpis and honesti conspici
possunt, test Apostolo Romans 2. 14, 15. Censura in Confess. Remonst. c. 5. Vide
Mercerum in loc.
strong reasonings wrought with a great deal of skill.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 2. I Counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of
the oath of God.] Whereby it may be collected, that at that time also Subjects
were wont to be sworn to allegiance and obedience unto their Princes.

This may be as a reason, so a qualification of our obedience, Salvo Juramento
Dii, so far as it may stand with the fealty we owe unto God.

Verse. 5. Who so keeps the Commandment, shall feel ^o evil thing: and a wise
man's heart discerns both time and judgement*] Shall know no evil, so the
Hebrew, we The Hebrew word Jodang signifies a careful knowledge.
translate it, He shall feel no evil, that is, he shall not have an
experimental knowledge of evil.

Both time and judgment.] Time a fit season in which every action is to be
done.

Judgment.] The due manner and measure of performing every action.

Verse. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
theref^re the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.]

The Hebrew is, Their heart is full to do evil.

There is an emphasis in the words.

1. The heart.] He does not say only they practice sin. 2. Sons of men] All
sorts of sinners. 3. Set in them.] The bent of the Spirit is that way. 4. The
resolute purpose of wickedness, fully. 5. Evil in general.
Verse. 12. Yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God,
which fear See Prove. 5. 21. Qui a malo abstinent, and quod bonum est
persequuntur, quod Deum inspectorem habent: Cartw.
before him.] The last explains the other, a righteous man's fear of God is
ingenuous in consideration of the glory and excellency of the Lord.

CHAP. IX.
IN this ninth Chapter Solomon shows the vanity of the creature in regard of
the promiscuous event, or like dispensation of all things in this life,

Verse. 1. No man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before them. See
Job 9. 21.

2. At death, verse. 3. They all go down to the dead, the righteous as well as
the wicked, Heb. 9 27.

3. After death, All things fall alike to all.

4. Particulars in their knowledge, verse. 5. The dead know not any thing; It is
spoken de cognitione humana, all acquired knowledge shall cease, all parts,
gifts and knowledge of arts and sciences cease then, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

2. In respect of their same and memory, their name among men perishes.

3. Their affections cease in reference to the things of this life, verse. 6.
Psalm. 146. 4.

4. In regard of their outward estate and enjoyments.

Verse. 1. No man knows either love, or hatred, by all that is before them.]
That is, as Junius expounds it, the thing he either loves or hates by reason of
the sicklenesse of his affections.

Solomon says not, No man can simply know the love or hatred of God to him;
but in a compound sense, that no man can know it by the outward events of this
life, yet it may be known by the testimony of Gods Spirit renewing us, as
Catharinus himself a Papist expounds it.

The Hebrew word for word according to the Septuagint translated by Jerome is
Etiam amorem etiam odium nescit homo, omnia ad facies eorum: supple hominum.
Hoc vult de quavis re quae homini oc* currit, nescit homo an ea proveniat ex
amore Dei in se, an ex odio. Grotius.
thus, Love also hatred, a man knows not all in the face of them. With least
imitation we translate the words thus, A man knows not love or hatred, that
is, what is love or hatred, by all that is before them, and then the meaning is
plain, by outward things, the things that are before our faces, man knows not
whether he be loved or hated of God, whereof the reason follows, All things
come alike to all.

Verse. 2. All things come alike to all.] That is* all outward things. Cuivis
potest accidete, quod cuiquam potest.


There is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked.] The good and bad
thief on the Cross, both died the same death.

He that swears.] Profanely.

That fears an oath.] Fears to swear rashly, and after he has sworn
righteously is afraid not to perform it.

Verse. 7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart.] S^lomon infers this from what he had said before, that is, Delight thy
self in the good things God has given thee, thy bread which God has given
thee, as a fruit of thine own labor.

For God now accepts thy works.] They are not only pleasing to God, as the
works of all the creatures are, but Ordine supernaturali, because they come
from a supernatural principle, and are directed to a supernatural end.

Verse. 8. Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
ointment.] Sapiens auditorem suum invitat ad hihilaritatem, i e Internae
laetitiae conservandae, documentum praebendo allegoria candidarum vestium
velatum, quasi dicat, ita ad hi^aritatem composito sis animo ut merito, quasi
festum diem agens candida vest indutus effe possis, candi^arum vestium usus in
^ebus laetis adhibebatur. Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 4.
See 7th and 9th verses, that is, Rejoice, they wore white in festivals and
triumphs.

Always.] The Original is, In omni tempore opportuno, in every fit time.

Verse. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might.]
Whatsoever is in thy power, Genesis 24. 10. Job 12. What thy condition and
opportunities call for, and thou art able to do.

Might.] The Hebrew signifies 1. all a man's natural strength, Humidum natural,
Psalm. 22. 12. Isa. 49. 4. Lay out all the strength of nature God has given
thee.

2. All acquired abilities, outward and inward, riches, honor, gifts.

Verse. 11. Nor yet riches to men of understanding.] Non est emolumentum Domino
linguae: sic habet Hebraicus contextus. Dominus autem linguae Hebraica phrasi
dicitur, qui peritus est verborum quemadmodum Dominus somniorum, Genesis 41. 15.
dicitur Joseph. Rainold de lib. Apoc.


Time and Chance happens to them all.] Solomon speaks out of the opinion of
Epicures, and in their language, who thought things were wheeled about by a
blind Fortune, rather than by an oculate Providence.

So called (says one) Quia illa ordinatio ab homine non cognoscitur.

By Chance he means the secret working of Gods providence, carrying things
strangely beyond men's expectation.

Verse. 12. So are the sons of men snared in an evil time.] That is, at such
time when they may receive utter destruction.

CHAP. X.
Verse 3. YEa also when he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom
fails him, and he Tractat de occurrentibus. Cajet.
says to every one that he is a fool.] Because his knowledge does not guide
his way, he says to every one, he is a fool.

When he comes to practice, he declares himself to be a fool.

Verse. 6. Folly is set in great dignity.]

When the Hebrews would express a thing to the height, they set it forth in
the Voce stultitiae hominem designat long stul^issimum, and ipsa veluti
stultitia stultitiorem. Cartw.
abstract, that is, Very foolish men. I am against thee, O pride, says God to
Nebuc hadnezzar.

And the rich sit in low place.] That is, those which are excellently
qualified, Qui virtute and prudentia abunde instructi sunt.

Verse. 7. I have seen servants upon horses.] That is, advanced above their
place and degree.

And Princes walking as servants.] That is, dejected below their place and
degree.

Verse. 8. Who so breaks a hedge.] That is, the ancient Laws established.

Verse 16. W^e to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child; and thy Princes eat
in the Morning.] That is, when they are given to sensual delights, at such
times as should rather be given to public business.

Verse. 17. Blessedart thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles.] That
is, according to the Hebrew phrase, truly Noble, endued with piety, virtue, Id
est, Phrasi Hebraica clarissimus, qui moribus and educatione ingenuus est and
nobilis. Cartw.
wisdom.

Verse. 18. Through idleness Per manuum humilitatem.
of the hands the house droppeth through.] Junius, Demissione manuum nostri.
Vulg. Infirmitate manuum, through the hanging down of the hands, after the
guise of sluggards, whose hands are in their pocket, or hang dangling by their
sides. A. Ezra mavult intelligere paupertatem, sed malo remissionem and
mollitiem, ut LXX (...), quia piger manus deptimere solet, non attollere,
excitare and operi admovere. Mercerus ad loc.


The Hebrew being a word of the Dual Number, may well be translated Pigritia
duplici, by a double slothfulness, as Buxtorf renders it.

Verse. 19. Money answers all things.] Not that money is every thing, but
supplies what ever one can want in the creature.

Verse. 20. Curse not, no not in thy thoughts, and curse not the rich in thy
Bedchamber; for a Bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter.]

The Bedchamber is the securest place, and a thought is the most secret act.
Summa est, cogitatione unt sermon execrantis principem suum, crimen ad debitam
poenam detegetur. Cartw.


A Bird of the air shall carry the voice.]

This implies,

1. That it shall be revealed by some unexpected means, as little suspected for
the doing of such a thing as a Bird is. 2. That the matter shall be revealed by
some speedy means. Vide Junium.

And that which has wings shall tell the matter.] Heb. That which is master of
wing shall carry it abroad. That is, God will work a miracle to reveal it,
rather than it shall be concealed.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. CAst thy bread upon the waters: for thou shall find it after many
days.]

Every word of this sentence is emphatical.

Cast.] That is, give with a good heart, willingly, readily and freely.

Cast.] As men do seed, not drop.

Thy Bread.] That is, Seed of which bread is made, like sowing thy seed on
morish Vide Tremel. Super transeuntes aquas. Vulg.
grounds, or sowing in the Sea.

Bread.] A Synecdoche of the special. By bread he means all kind of
sustenance and maintenance, meat, drink, apparel, lodging, money, Matthew. 25.
35. Thy Bread.] Got by divine providence, therefore thou must give thine own.

Upon the waters.] That is, the truly poor. Jerome. which are as common as
waters. Id est, Ubi nulia spes sit recipiondi, Luc. 14. 12, 13, 14. Grotius.


For thou shall find it.] A reason to enforce this duty, thy benefit shall not
be fruitless, though it seem to be cast into the Sea and utterly lost.

After many days.] Though not here, in heaven.

Verse. 2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth.]

He sets down the extent of our liberality, showing to how many we must give.

Give a part unto seven, and also to eight.] A Synecdoche of the special, a
finite number being put for an infinite, seven or eight poor.

For thou know not what evil shall be on the earth.] That is, how long thou
shall enjoy thy goods, and what need thou or thine may come to.

Verse. 4. He that observes the wind shall not sow; and he that regards the
clouds, shall not reap*] An allusion to the Husbandmen, which disputing about
the season Avatis, ne dent, quilibet praetextus sufficit. Grotius.
lose the opportunity, so those that will argue against giving from the times.

Verse. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes.] Implying, that that is the temper of that age,

Gaudet equis ^anibusque custode remoto. Verse. 10. For Childhood and youth are
vanity.] In the abstract, all kind of vanity, of thoughts, speeches, carriage,
company.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. REmember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.

Remember.] Not barely think on God, remember to love, fear, reverence Verba
notitiae connotant affectum,
him, as remember the Sabbath Day to prepare for it.

It is,

1. To set the mind on work of the excellencies of God, Psalm. 104. 34. 2. To
recollect our selves and return to him as the fountain of our salvation, Psalm.
22. 27. Hos. 2. 17. 3. It implies a reverent fear of him, Prove. 23. 17. Psalm.
16. 7. 4. To retain a thankful sense of his mercy, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Psalm. 106.
21. 5. To serve and obey him, Deuteronomy. 8. 11. 6. When we always consider what may
please or displease him, Col. 1. 10.
Thy Creators.] Heb. as Isa. 54. 5. he speaks of God either by way of honor,
or alludes to the Trinity.

In the days of thy youth.] In the beauty, vigor and strength of youth, we
have a sensible feeling of Gods creating bounty.

While the evil days come not.] i. e. Of old age.

When thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.] That is, no sensitive
pleasure. An allegorical description of Old Age.


Verse. 2. While the Sun, or the light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the Clouds return after the rain.] That is, all the abilities of
the mind be decayed.

The Clouds return after the rain.] As in winter, that is, though one evil
follows upon another.

Verse. 3. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble.] The hands
and arms prove crazy.

And the strong men.] The thighs and legs, Shall bow themselves.

And the grinders.] Teeth Cease. Dentes molares.


And those that look out of the windows.] The eyes, Be darkened.

Verse. 4. And the doors shall be shut in the streets.] That is, none shall have
delight in their company.

And he shall rise up at the voice of the Bird.] Take little rest.

And all the daughters of music shall be brought low.] See 2 Samuel 19. 35.
Domus aeternitatis, The Vulgar Latin, Our everlasting home, it is not so, the
English is better.


Verse. 5. Because man goes to his long home.] See Job 30. 23. and Isa. 26. 4.
it is a lasting house.

Verse. 6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed.] Some interpret it of the marrow,
others of the sinews.

Or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain.] The
liver is the fountain of blood, the heart of spirits, these lose their drawing
and distributing power.

Verse. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it.] To be rewarded or disposed of by him.

Verse. 11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
masters of Hac comparatione non obscure afininum, seu bovinum nostrum ad opera
bona ingenium innuit: qui nisi stimulo impulsi and coacti, segnescimus, and
tanquam sub gravi onere succumbimus. Cartw. in loc.
Assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.] The Arguments which the Lord
uses to fasten duties on the soul, and quicken us up to them.

There is a double power in the word of God preached:

1. Quickening to stir us to duty, goads. 2. Strengthening, nails.
Verse. 13. Fear God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of
man] Quae vero in hac tota concione audivistis, huc tendunt in summa,
paucissimis istis verbis comprehensa, Deum reverete, and observandis ipsius
mandatis sedulo incumbe. Beza.
q. d. If we could keep the Commandments without this, this is not the thing.

The duty of every man, or the whole duty of man.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Book of CANTICLES, OR THE SONG of SOLOMON.
CHAP. I.
CAnticles, or Song of Songs.] That is, the most excellent De Cantico isto
Salomonis probe norum est Judaeorum scitum, quo minori natis annis triginta
(quae aetas est sacerdotalis ministerii initium) hujus lectione est
inderdictum, ne quae mystice hic dicuntur, ex affectuum intemperie in
deteriorem partem raperentur. Praefat. ad Brightmanni Comment. in Cantica
Cantic.
Song. Titulus praestantiam ostendit and authorem. Brightm.

Solomon made a thousand Songs and five, 1 King. 4. 32. of all which this was
most excellent; yea, and of all the Songs in the Scripture. Non est enim
strepitus oris, sed jubilus cordis: non sonus labiorum, sed motus gaudiorum:
voluntatum non vocum consonantia. Bern. Sermon. 1. super Cantica.

Some make this Book wholly a Mystery; some a History; Brightman a Prophecy.

Christ is the woer, the Church, or a true Christian soul the Virgin or Spouse.

Est nuptiale carmen exprimens custos jucundosque complexus animorum, morum
concordiam. Bern.

Our Savior calls his Church, as his Spouse, so his Sister at the least five
times in the Canticles, to note the greatness of his love to her. The Church is
called Fair fifteen times in this Book.

Verse. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.] Whereby the Church
desires Exoptat Ecclesia verbis sui Sponsi erudiri. Desiderat Sponsa haec
oscula, quae certissima sunt pignora amoris Sponsi: nec quicquam cum hoc amore
conferendum est. Ideo praefert illum Vino, quod primas obtinet inter ea quae
jucundissime sapiunt. Brightm.
to have Christ manifested in the flesh, and to have the loving and comfortable
doctrines of his Gospel applied unto her conscience.

Foelix osculum, ac stupenda dignatione mirabile! in quo non ^s ori imprimitur,
sed Deus homini unitur. Bern. super Cantica, Sermon. 12.

Verse. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an
ointment poured forth.] There is no great savor of precious ointment, when
shut up in a box: It alludes to his Name, Messiah and Christ is anointed. Est
proculdubio inter oleum and nomen sponsi similitudo, nec ociose Spiritus
sanctus alterutrum comparavit. Bernardus super Cantica, Sermon. 15.

Oleum plane, quod dum supernatat cunctis, quibus immiscetur liquoribus,
liquido illud designat nomen, quod est super omne nomen. Id. ib. Sermon. 16.

By ointments the gifts of the Spirit are signified; the smell of these gifts
is that fruit and sweetness which is found by the communication of them. Those
that are pure in heart and conversation, Rev. 14. 4. and 5. 10, 13.


Therefore do the Virgins love thee.] Heb. Therefore do the righteousnesses
love thee; the Saints and all the righteous are termed Righteousnesses in the
abstract.

Verse. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee.] The Church desires to be drawn,

1. Propter infirmitatem. John 6. 44. A Lapide.
2. Propter tarditatem. 3. Propter renitentiam.
We will run.] Draw me in the singular number, and we will run, that is,
Trahe quodammodo invitam, ut facias voluntariam. Trahe torpentem ut reddas
currentem. Erit quando non indigebo tractore. Bern. super Cantica Sermon. 22.
those which I shall draw with me: Ego and sociae meae. A^sted.

Running notes,

1. Readiness of affection. 2. Speed. 3. Constancy.

1. Diligentiam. 2. Festinationem.
The King has brought me into his chambers.] The bedchamber is the most
retired They are called Privy* chambers, and secret places, opposed to the
house top, 2 King. 6. 12. Luke 12. 3. Matthew. 6. 6.
place, Judge. 15. 1. the nearest communion with Christ, Matthew. 11. 25.

Chambers are places of secrecy, intimacy, safety, glory and majesty.

Be glad and rejoice.] Be glad inwardly, and rejoice outwardly.

We will remember thy love more than wine.] Heb. Loves, All those several
loves Verba sensus significant affectum and effectum, as the fourth
Commandment, and Eccles. 12. 1. Id est, potius quam lautitias quasvis, and
opipara splendidaque convivia. Mercerus.
wherewith thou have loved us. Numerus pluralis excellentiam and magnitudinem
rei denotat, Genesis 19. 11. Psalm. 68. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Wine is put for one of
the most necessary supports of life, Hab. 3. 18. 2. For one of the most
cheering and reviving comforts, Eccles. 10, 19. Prove. 31. 6, 7. He prefers the
love of Christ before the most necessary and cheering comforts.

The upright love thee.] Or they love thee in uprightness; that is, with a
strong and vehement love which is without dissimulation or guile.

Verse. 5. I am black but comely (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the tents of
Kedar, Nigra quidem in se ob reliquias peccati and afflictiones quibus eam
exercet Deus, formosa tamen ob dilectionem sponsi eam acceptantis and purgantis
ab omni macula, sed sensim and de die in ^iem. Rivetus in Cathol. Orthod
Allusit Scriptor divinus vel maxim ad gratiosam venustatem Orientalium; ut
divini amoris mysteria ob oculos poneret. Est autem nigredo, oculorum
praesertim in delitiis etiam nunc populis orientalibus: qui etiam colly^io,
quod ex lapide quodam Persico conficitur, palpebras amabili nigredine solent
inficere. Dieterici Antiq. Bibl.
as the curtains of Solomon.] Black: By reason of her infirmities and
imperfections, as well as of her afflictions and persecutions. Bern.

But comely.] The Hebrew Navah signifies comely, beautiful, amiable, and to
be desired. Comely in Christ, though black in her self.

As the tents of Kedar.] See Psalm. 120. 5.

Verse. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest; where thou
make thy flock to rest at noon.] This signifies unfeigned and fervent love.
See chapter 3. v. 2, 3, 4.

Noon.] In the heat of persecution. See Isa. 16. 3.

Noon has two things in it; Light, that is, prosperity; Heat, that is,
adversity.

For why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy
companions.] The Operiens, Montanus. Delitescens, Beza. Verbum istud ( gnatah)
plurimum usurpatur in luctu, Levit. 13. 45. and Mic. 3. 7. Igitur sensus est,
cur essem tanquam mulier luctu and maerore meipsam conficiens, dum nefandam
Israelitarum idololatriam videam. Brighim. ad loc. Vide Mercerum.
Hebrew word signifies to hide or lie hid. See Robotham.

This place was much urged by the Donatists of old, and by some of late, it is
clear against them; if Christ feed amongst us, be present with us, we are not
to turn aside.

Verse. 8. O thou fairest among women.] Heb. fair, beautiful among women:
Speciosa propter fidem and charitatem erga me.

Women are usually fairer than men; the Spouse of Christ is fairer than all
women.

Verse. 12. While the King sits at his round table, my spikenard sends
forth the In corona sua, id est, in frequentia hominum undique cingentium,
quomodo usurpatur vox a Latinis. Brightm. in loc. Inter delicias Judaeae fuit
mos ille peculiaris, ut discumbentes unguentis perfunderentu.: quod and Mariam
in novo Testamento Christo recumbenti fecisse videmus; mysticus sensus erit
interim dum praesens Ecclesiae suae adest Christus verbo suo pascens eam, bonum
odorem fidei suae and virtutum ac bonorum operum reddidisse. Mercerus in loc.
smell thereof.] That is, whilst Christ had communion with me, my graces were
exercised and drawn out, even then whilst I had fellowship with him. I will
come in and sup with him: Eating and drinking was anciently a sign of intimate
fellowship.

Verse. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me; he shall lie all night
betwixt Hic tria significantur, scientiae suavitas per myrrham; doctrinae
administratio per ubera, and utriusque tranquilla and diuturna usura per
pernoctationem. Quae omnis commemoratio Jehosaphati tempora respicit, qui
praeter illam curam castae sinceraeque conservandae religionis quam a Patre
accepit, insignis etiam fuit docendi studio, missis Praefectis and Levitis cum
libro legis, ut omnes civitates Jehudae and Benjaminis obirent, populumque Dei
voluntatem docerent. 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. Brightmannus in loc.
my breasts.] The Hebrews expound it optatively, Quis det ut pernoctet inter
ubera mea.

Christ is a bundle, for sufficiency: of myrrh, for sweetness: lies in the
breast, that is, the heart.

Night.] In disgraces, persecutions.

All night.] That is, constantly.

A bundle for variety and unity; Christ is full of all excellent graces, and
they are in him by reason of the union of the Godhead with the manhood.

Verse. 14. A cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of Engedi.] This may note
unto Erat Engaddi locus juxta mare mortuum vicinus u^bi Jericho, ubi and palmae
plurimae atque optimae. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 15. c ^.
us the sweetness of Christ's redemption, and the fruits of his death, whereby
he became as a cluster of redemption unto his people; for as a cluster
consists of many berries compact toget^^^ into one bunch, so the redemption
of Christ has all mercy, grace, and love compacted together.

Verse. 15. Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair, thou have Doves
eyes.] Ecce admirantis vox est, reliquum laudis. Bernardus super Cantica, Sermon.
45. The Song of Songs. Geminatio praedicat insignem pulchritudinem, praesertim
apud Hebraeos, quibus pro superlativis familiare est. Brightm.
The doubling of the words expresses the superlative degree, by a usual
Hebraism.

Doves Sic Cant. 5. 13. Quidam accipiunt de vehementer pulcris and gratiosis.
Meo judicio oculi columbini dicuntur casti ac simplices, minimeque mali aut
invidi. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 3. Vide Mercerum and Brightm.
eyes.] See chapter 4. 1. These Doves eyes wherewith the Spouse is beautified, do
set forth the simplicity, sincerity, humility, meekness, but especially the
spiritual chastity of the Church, whose eyes are unto Christ alone, looking
unto him for life and salvation, Matthew. 10. 16. Phil. 3. 7, 10.

Verse. 16. Also our bed is green.] Here children are begotten to Christ.
Green.] 1. Because of the flourishing of it, it flourishes with peace. 2.
Because of the fruitfulness of it. Quasi dicat: Non est infoecundus, liberos
multos procreamus. Mercerus.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys.] The Rose is
the Queen of Dicitur Christus Rosa and Lilium, 1. Propter veram humanitatem. 2.
Propter officii amabilitatem. Glassius. Sharon est ager subjectus Libano in
regione Bashanis, 1 Chronicles. 5. 16. and 27. 29. Praefixum habet He Ha^^dia, quasi
nomen appellativum esset, non proprium, sic etiam Isa. 33. 9. and 35. 2.
Brighim. ad loc.
flowers, most excellent for sweetness and beauty. Sharon is a most fruitful
Land, and decked with such flowers, 2 Chronicles. 5. 16. 1 Chronicles. 27. 29. The Lilly
is next in nobility unto the Rose. Pliny Not. Hist. l. 25. chapter 5.

Verse. 2. As the lilly among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.] As
the Non mediocris titulus profecto virtutis, inter pravos vivere bonum, and
inter malignantes innocentiae retinere candorem, and morum lenitatem: magis
autem si his qui oderunt pacem, pacificum and amicum ipsis te exhibeas
inimicis. Bern. super Cantic. Sermon. 48.
lilly excels thorns, so the Church all other assemblies.

A lilly is first and beautiful, therefore amongst Royal Arms.

2. White, an emblem of innocence.

3. Gives a sweet smell, Cant. 4. 11. so the godly.

Wicked are thorns,

1. Because unprofitable, when they grow and after. 2. Hurtful, Prove. 26. 9.
3. Their end is to be burned.
Among thorns, because, 1. Excellent in comparison of them; the righteous is
more excellent than his neighbor.

2. Annoyed by them.

The daughters.] Not Virgins, as chapter 1. 2.

Verse. 3. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among
the sons; I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste.] Comfortable for shade, and pleasant for fruit. Some think
malum an apple, comes from malum evil, because sin came first into the world by
eating of an apple. Others think it comes from malo, I more will or desire,
because it is pleasing to nature. Robotham in lo.


Merito sicut malus, quae instar fructiferae arboris and umbram refrigerii
habet, and fert fructum optimum. Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 48.

Christ is a believers comfortable shadow: Thre^ things scorch the soul, Gods
wrath, Heb. 12. 29. Satan's malice, his temptations are called fiery darts,
Ephesians. 6. and the worlds rage. Christ is a shadow against Gods wrath, God was
well pleased in him with us, Satan's malice, and the worlds persecution, Joh.
16. 33.

In those Countries where the Sun was directly over their heads, it annoyed
them much. See Psalm. 91. 1. Cant. 5. 14. Hos. 8. 15.

Verse. 4. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his bann^r over me was
love.] Heb. House of wine, not so fitly termed Banqueting house, which Solomon
expresses by another name, Eccles. 7. 2. The comforts of the holy Ghost, and
the privileges of the Gospel.

A Banner is a martial term, and has a threefold use in war. See Isa. 49.
22. In Hebiaeo, Vexillum ejus super me est dilectio: quasi dicat, milito sub
ejus vexillo, cui inscriptum est, amor. Grotius.


1. For gathering men together under their Colors, Isa. 11. 16. 2. For
defense, Exodus 17. 15. 3. As a testimony of victory and triumph, Psalm. 20. 6.
Christ gathers them together, protects them, and they hold forth Trophies of
Triumph.

Verse. 5. For I am sick of love.] Have earnest desires, languish with desire to
Cholah signifies sickness to weakness. Cum praesto est quod amatur viget amor,
languet cum abest. Bern. super Cantica Sermon. 51.
enjoy the comforts of my beloved.

Verse. 8. Behold he comes, leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the
hills.] 1. Will make haste.
Behold is a word of attention and admiration. See chapter 1. 15.

Conquers all mountains of opposition and trampleth the hills under his feet,
when 2. Comes out of the way.
he comes to deliver his people. 3. Nothing shall hinder him, will leap over
mountains.


A similitude taken from the Roes and Hearts (whereto Christ is likened in v.
9.) which are swift in running, and skip upon mounts, hills and rocks, Isa. 35.
6.

Verse. 9. He stands behind our wall.] Of sin.

Showing himself through the lattess.] Or grates of Ordinances.

Verse. 12. The time of singing is come.] The time of cutting is come. The same
Tempus cantus. Arias Montanus. Tempus putationis advenit. Pagn. Vulg. Lat.
word in the Hebrew signifies both to sing and cut, implying that flowers are
cut, even as soon as they appear.

Verse. 14. O my Dove thou art in the clefts of the rock.] The wounds of Christ
in The Dove is mournful, sociable, harmless, chaste, fearful. Jer. 48. 28.
which the Church hides and shelters her self; so some of the Ancients
understand these words. See Matthew. 16. 28.

A metaphor from Doves which make their nests in rocks for fear of pursuit of
birds of prey.

Verse. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines.] False
Prophets Certum est in Palestina vulpes esse plurimas, Judic. 15. 4. Psalm. 62.
11. Neh. 4. 3. Thren. 5. 18. Vulpes vincis noxiae sunt maxim, quia foveas
excavantes denudant vitium radices, quae propterea exarescunt; deinde quia
palmites abrodunt and folia diripiunt. Tertio quia corticem morsu scandunt and
noxio ac halitu vitoso inficiunt and quasi amburunt. Quarto botros jam maturos
avide abliguriunt. Credibile est habuifse Hebraeos non vulgarem in vulpibus
capiendis dexteritatem, ubi enim damni avertendi necessitas u^get, and
incumbit, acuitur industria, and multi ad venandum excitantur. Menochius De
Republ. Heb. l. 7. c. 8. Intellige juberi doctoribus and verbi ministris, ut
haereticis occurratur, and iis qui sub nomine Ecclesiae insidiantur illi, ut
^os repellant and ab Ecclesia segregent, praesertim nascentes, ubi majus
periculum imminet; parvas autem vulpes appellat, quod illae infestiores esse
vineis soleant, and animosiores in damno inferendo. Mercerus in loc.
and teachers are so called, Ezekiel. 13. 4.

1. For craft and subtilty. 2. In respect of their crooked and perverse ways,
Psalm. 125. 5.
CHAP. III.
Verse 1. BY night on my bed.] By private duty, Isa. 26. 9. Lectus est Templum,
ut antea, Lectus noster est virens. Cap. 1. 16. Eadem tamen vo^ hic non
adhibetur, sed ejus Synonima. Brighim.
Nights.] Not one but many, that is, says Brightman, in the true worship much
obscured.

Verse. 2. I will rise now, and go about the City in the streets, and in the
broad ways I will seek him.] That is, in public Ordinances.

Verse. 6. Like pillars of smoke.] In allusion to the myrrh and frankincense in
the Leviticall worship which went up in a cloud.

Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense.] That is, the Church, perfumed with the
sweet graces of the Spirit.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 2. THy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which came
up from washing: whereof every one bears twins, and none is barren among them.]
The Ministers, qui dentium funguntur munere, Brightm. by preparing nourishment
for the rest of the body; for their holiness, for their parity, even, and
fruitful.

Verse. 3. Thy speech is comely.] Gracious, Col. 4. 6. Quid si consu^^o
sapientissimus Solomon vocis affinitate abusus ad utramque and solitudinem and
sermonem, ut non tantum sermonem notaret, sed etiam talem a quo plurimi non
minus abhorrent, quam a deserto and solitudine ingratissima? Brightman. in loc.


Verse. 6. The mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.] By
frankincense is meant a burning fervency of affection, by myrrh mortification
and dying to sin.

Verse. 7. Thou art all fair my love.] But by the beauty of Christ, Ezekiel. 46.
14. Non quin fiat dico, sed manner non potest. August. de Ver. and Falls.
poenir. c. 8. To. 4. Duravit haec perfectio in Ecclesia per primos trecentos
annos, licet finem versus inquinatior esse caepit, tolerabilis tamen mansit hoc
omni spatio, nec parva mutatio insignem aliqu^m notam deformitatis inussit.
Brightm. in loc.
There is no spot in thee.] No fault, no blameworthy thing; called in Hebrew
Mum, and in Greek Momos. See Rev. 14. 1, 5.

Verse. 11. And the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.] Full of
fragrant flowers, gummes, spices, and so perfuming the air thereabout in the
spring. The graces of God which deck and adorn their souls, are like the smell
of Lebanon, as delightful to God and good men, as those smells are to the
senses.

Verse. 12. A garden enclosed is my sister my spouse: a spring shut up, and a
fountain sealed.] Which is not only in respect of defense, that none can
destroy and spoil her, but that others cannot come at her, they cannot drink
and smell the sweetness that is in her.

Verse. 13. Thy plants are an orchard of Pomegranates with pleasant fruits,
Camphire, with Spikenard.] Christ is compared to all the fragrant smells and
aromatique gummes.

Verse. 16. Awake O north wind, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that
Vento doctrinam significari tritum est in scripturis, Ephesians. 4. 14. Apoc. 7. 1.
Aquilonem autem and Austrum historia manifestum reddit esse doctrinam ex illis
plagis spirantem. Brightm in loc. Speaks it in reference to the graces of the
Spirit in his own soul, which he was not able to quicken. See Chap. 5. 1.
Spices, that is, prayers, the sweet odours of the Saints, we wish the holy
Ghost to work upon us, that our prayers may flow forth.
the spices thereof may flow out, let my beloved come into his garden, and eat
his pleasant fruits.] The Spirit of God is compared to the north and south
wind, in respect of its different ways of administration, the one is
cherishing, the other nipping, yet the spices flow forth either way; prosperity
and adversity do a godly man good.

The garden is the Church of God, which desires Christ to comfort her, and
pour out the graces of his Spirit on her, the fruits of his own Spirit.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. I Have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with
my milk.] The word and doctrine of Christ is likened to honey and the honey*
comb, to wine and milk, Psalm. 19. 11. and 119. 103. Isa. 55. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
God delights in the services of the Saints.

Verse. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh.] We use to say of children that their
heart Or, I sleeping, as it is in the Hebrew. Waketh, or watches waking, that
is, is lively and active still.
is asleep, even when their eyes are awake; contrariwise it is said of the
children of God, that their eyes are asleep when their heart is awake.

It is the voice of my beloved that knocks.] We knock at Christ's door when we
call for mercy; he knocks at our door when he calls for duty, Rev. 3. 19, 20.

Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove.] The nearest affinity is Spouse, and
the nearest consanguinity Sister.

The Hebrew word signifies to knock or beat vehemently.

Verse. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet,
how Sponsa dissicilem se praebet in admittendo sponso. Alsted.
shall I defile them?] She answered her beloved as a lazy sluggard newly
awakened out of his sleep and loath to arise out of his bed, and the effect of
her answer is this, I am now at ease and quiet, and by opening my heart unto
thee, by receiving thee to rule and govern in it, by harkening and yielding
unto thee in every thing, I shall put my self to a great deal of trouble and
labor that I am now eased of.

Verse. 7. The watchmen.] Magistrates, Ministers. Duo sunt genera custodum: Alii
circum eunt per civitatem, quibus esse cura debetne quid tu^betur inter cives,
alii excubias agunt in moenibus ut paratum sit praesidium adversus externum
hostem. Illud muneris obeunt Ecclesiasticus, hoc civilis Magistratus. Brightm.
in loc.


Verse. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.] Or,
Vexilla^^s] id est, vexillo insignitus, ornatus, aut munitus prae december
millibus. q. d. Insignis and conspicuus inter quamplurimos. Alii vexillum
gerens, cui subsunt december millia, id est, quamplurimi. Hieron. electus ex
millibus. Pag^in. in These. LXX. (...), seu electus. Trem. Vexillarius est e
myriade, hoc est, prae omnibus, nativo su^co and calore tempe^a^issimo ac
conveniente instructus est. Alii proprie accipiunt, vexillatus ex december
millibus, id est, vexillo insignitus december millium, sub signis habens december
mil^ia, Dan. 7. 10. Glassii Onomat.
Having the banner of ten thousand.

Here we have a description of Christ from verse. 10. to the end of the 16.

White and ruddy.] White in the glory of his Deity, ruddy in his assumed
humanity.

That is, of admirable and perfect beauty: The mixture of these two colors
makes a good complexion. White in the purity of his conversation, ruddy in the
hue of his passion. White in his life, and ruddy in his death. These are tokens
of the strongest health.

The chiefest among ten thousand.] The Spouse uses a metaphor taken from the
war, as also puts a number certain for uncertain, to express the
commendations of her beloved. The banner or ensign is a warlike instrument, and
commonly the bearer thereof one of the chiefest, tallest, and mightiest men.

The scope of the Church is not to set forth the members of Christ's humane
body, but the glorious excellencies and spiritual perfection of Christ as the
Redeemer and Savior of the Church, according to the manner of lovers, who are
taken with the beauty of their spouses in all their members.

The Spouse sets forth Christ as the perfection of beauty, begins first with
his Head.

Verse. 11. His head is as the most fine, or solid, gold.] There are two things
in gold: 1. Splendor. 2. Durableness.

That is, his government; describes the honor, glory and duration of Christ's
Kingdom, Psalm. 21. 3. See Dan 7. 27.

His locks are bushy, and black as a Raven.] Which in nature is a note of heat
and strength, this se^s forth his power in his administrations.

Verse. 12. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed
with Ratio similitudinis quantum m^^^ videtur, in eo latet, quod columbae
petentes aquas oculos in eas conjic^ant. and inclina^o capite pi^^ssant, nec
resupinant collum. Quasi Christus prae studio contemplandae sponsae inclinaret
caput ut eam propius and accuratius intucretur, qu^madmodum columbae cervicem
flectunt, and pronis oculis feruntur in la^icem quando sitim exp^ere cupiunt.
Brightm. in loc.
milk, and fitly set.] This notes the watchfulness of his providence. This
expression notes four things:

1. His tenderness, he takes care of his, Deuteronomy. 11. 12. Every look of his is
full of compassion. 2. His purity, Doves eyes, and by the rivers of water. 3.
His discerning, he looks speedily and thoroughly, Rev. 1. 14. and 2. 23. John 2.
24, 25. He is the eternal wisdom of the Father. 4. His beauty and glory.
Verse. 13. His cheeks are as a bed of spices.] There is a sweet savor in the
graces of Christ.

His lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.] This is to be referred
unto the holy, heavenly, sweet and gracious doctrine of Christ.

Verse. 14. His hands are as gold rings, set with the beryll.] Those are
instruments of action. Set with beryll.] That shows the glory of all his
actions.

His belly is as bright Ivory, overlaid with Saphires.] This notes the wisdom
and compassion of Christ.

Verse. 15. His legs are as pillars of Marble.] He is stayed in his goings.

His countenance as Lebanon.] Whether in ways of mercy, affliction, or
ordinances. There is a most delightful prospect with high hills, humble vales,
sweet rivers, shady groves.


Verse. 16. Yea, he is altogether lovely.] Altogether desirablenesses, all he is
desires, Totus ipse desideria Ve callo ma^hmad^^: Id est, nihil est in eo, quod
non sit desideratissimum. Totus totus quantus est, summis studiis and votis est
expetendus. Brightm.
or all of him is desires.

(...), LXX. He is lovely in his person, authority and wisdom, in the whole
course of his life, in his death, resurrection, ascension, in the whole work of
his mediation, in the dispensation of his Spirit and graces to his Church, in
the administration of wrath and vengeance to his enemies, in all his Ordinances.

This is my beloved.] That is, he is such an one. q. d. Quando ^^nc exploratum
habetis quanta sit Dilecti mei praestantia, cogitate vobiscum non ineptisse me,
nec quicquam indignum modesta foe^^ na commis^^^e vehementi illa mea and illius
quae^endi, and vestri adjurandi contentione, sed omne meum studium intra
dignita^em ejus esse. Brightm.


CHAP. VI.
Verse 8. THere are threescore Queens.] Those that are truly converted to
Christ. Reginae sunt potentes and florentes Ecclesiae, quae reliquis puritate
antecellunt. Inferiori gradu sunt Concubinae. Puellae. sunt infimo loco, quasi
servae and ancillae. Brightm.


And fourscore Concubines.] Which come to Christ for lusts sake, yet bear some
fruit.

And Virgins without number.] The Queens attendants, yet bear no fruit.

Verse. 10. Who is she that comes forth as the morning?] The Church.

They were not ignorant, or in doubt who she was, but by this manner of speech
is noted her excellency. See Psalm. 24. 8.

Fair as the Moon.] This referres to inherent righteousness; the Moon is a
glorious body, it is enlightened in a great measure by reflection from another,
and has many spots, subject to waxing and waning.

Clear as the Sun.] This referres to righteousness imputed; the Sun has no
part not enlightened.

Terrible as an Army with Banners.] To the enemies with whom she is to fight
Majestatem quandam terrificam prae se ferens ad repellendum adversarios.
Mercerus.
under the Banner of Christ's Gospel and love.

Verse. 12. My soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadib.] The speech of the
Church, a willing or Princely people, the Lord came in with such sweet
persuasion.

Verse. 13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return.] So called of her peace
and perfection with God in Christ. Quater dicit revertere, propter quadruplicem
superbiam, cordis, oris, operis, habitus. Bern. 117. Sermon. 3. Perspicuum est
hoc toto capite agi de ultima vocatione Judaeorum, quorum foelicitas sempiterna
esset, nunquam iterum interrumpenda* v. 2. Brightm.


It is repeated four times to show the vehemence of their desire of her
conversion, and the necessity of the thing, as Psalm. 47. 6.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. HOw beautiful are thy feet with shoes?] In thy calling; when a man
has his Hereby is meant her obedient walking in the faith and Gospel of
Christ. Ainsw.
shoes on, he is fit for business. See Brightman.

Verse. 2. Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wants not liquor: thy belly
is like an heap of wheat set about with lillies.] Some say the navell and belly
are both hidden parts, and therefore set forth the two mysteries or Sacraments
of the Church, Mr Cotton.
Baptism and the Lords Supper. The navell serving for the nourishment of the
infant in the womb (say they) resembles Baptism, nourishing infants in the
Church.

Wants not liquor.] 1. Of the blood of Christ to justify us from sin. 2.
Of the Spirit of Christ to sanctify and cleanse us from sin.

The belly.] viz. the Lords Supper: Like an heap of wheat.] For store of
excellent, sweet and fine nourishment.

Set about with lillies.] Because only the faithful pure Christians shall be
admitted to partake in that Sacrament: so some: But this Interpretation is
somewhat strained.

Verse. 3. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.] That is,
Sunt duo Testamenta, inter quae ita convenit ut inter gemellos, and lacte
doctrinae caelestis abunde sibi commissum gregem alunt. Mercerus.
equal.

Verse. 4. Thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshb^n.] Because moistened with her
Sereni non turbidi. Grotius. Aptissime comparantur oculi piscinis, non tam
propter claritatem, quae refert limpitudinem aquae, quam ob ingentem vim
lacrymarum scaturientium ex vera resipiscentia, quibus restitutus ille populus
totus redandabit. Brightm.
tears for sins, or because of her clear and perspicuous vision and
apprehension of heavenly mysteries.

By the gate of Bathrabbim.] The daughter of many, Bath is daughter, Rabbim q.
Filiam multorum, quod eo frequens populus conflueret: Uti moris erat ad portas
convenire, ubi judicia exercebantur. Mercerus ad loc. In porta filiae
multitudinis. Vulg. Ad portam frequentissimam nostri. Junius. Vide Brightm.
many; many should repair to the Spouse.

Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon.] Compared to it for whiteness,
uniformity, and proportionable largeness thereof.

Verse. 5. The King is held in the galleries.] There is a twofold gallery.

1. Upper, heaven, where a Christian shall walk with God. 2. Lower, the
Ordinances.
Verse. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights.] That is,
thou Singula verba habent emphas^n; Interrogandi formulae admirationem: eadem
repetita non vulgarem sed admodum vehementem and singularem. Abstractum purum
putum amorem ostendit, infectum contagione nullius fastidii. Deliciae postremo
cumulo adjiciunt, si quid possit amplius accide^e. Brightm.
art so beautiful and fair, both in every part of thee, and in the whole; that
I know not what words to use, to express the same, neither indeed can it be
sufficiently declared.

Verse. 8. I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof.] The Palm has a long naked bark, it carries all its leaves and fruit
to the top, this notes the religious ascent of the soul in spiritual exercises.

The Hebrew Sansinuim here translated boughs or branches, properly signifies
the highest branches in the tree, and is not used in any place of Scripture but
in this, because the Palm tree (as Pliny says, l. 13. c. 4.) has not boughs
on the sides like other trees, but does only at the top send forth such long
boughs, and there also the fruit it self grows. Ainsw.

See Brightman.

Verse. 9. That goes down sweetly] Straightly, or according to righteousness.
Vadeni rectissime. It. Vinum ad rectitudines, quando color and odore eo se
prodit esse ingenio, ut quisque generosum agnoscat and rectum fatearur, ut
vulgo vernacule dicere solent, this is right, quando nacti sunt quod arridet.
Brightm. ad loc.
See Prove. 23. 31.

Verse. 10. And his desire is toward me.] Or, because his desire is toward me:
That is, he loves me most entirely; but the woman's desire toward the man
implies both love and subjection, Genesis 3. 10.

Verse. 12. Let us see if the Vine flourish.] The Church of God is compared to
the Vine, 1. For its excellency. 2. Spreading nature. 3. Fruitfulness.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 5. WHo is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved?] It E^ summa familiaritas indieatur, qua solent amantes in sinus
Amasiorum se projicere. Brightm. Graeci utrumque expresserunt deliciis affluens
and innixa socio suo ut verbum Hebraicum utrumque complectatur. Mercerus.
notes her weakness, yet sets forth her love.

Verse. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love
is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are
coals of fire, which The manner of old times (says Pierius) was to bear the
image of the person they loved in their seals.
have a more vehement flame.] That is, let me be most dear to thee, Hag. 2.
ult. an allusion to the arm of the High Priest, who bare the names of the
children of Israel on his breast plate and shoulders, Exodus 28. 21, 29. Let me
be dear to thee and presented to thy Father.

The flagrancy of her love is set forth by most fit similitudes.

That she says, It is as strong as death, by that she shows that she cannot
resist its dominion.

The grave is also cruel and inexorable, yea insatiable, and so is jealousy.

A most vehement flame.] Heb. a flame of God, such a flame as speaks it to be
the jealousy of God.

Verse. 7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.]
That is, grievous persecutions and torments cannot extinguish the same.

If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly
be contemned.] Heb. Contemning they would contemn it.

Verse. 8. We have a little sister and she has no breasts, what shall we do for
our The Jews desired the conversion of the Gentiles.
sister in the day when she shall be spoken for.] It is the speech of the Jews
in behalf of the Gentiles.

Sister.] That is, the Gentiles.

Has no breasts.] That is, no Ministers, no settled Ordinances, Isa. 66. 9.

What shall we do when she shall be spoken for?] That is, when God calls them,
Bernard. When the fame of her conversion shall come abroad, what furtherance
shall we yield to increase, settle, stablish her in the truth? Ainsw.

Verse. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if
she be a Si murus sit aedificandus illi. Tremel.
door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.] The wall of Magistracy, the
door of Ministry: Others say, a wall to be built to her for her defense, a door
for entrance.

Verse. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard at Baalhamon.] It signifies here a most
fruitful Verisimile est locum a feracitate nomen invenisse. Baalhamon enim est
dominus multitudinis, quasi locus iste feracitate non minus reliquis
antecelleret, quam herus servo dignitate. Brightm. in loc.
soil; the word signifies* The Lord of a multitude, a place so plenteous that
it brings forth multitudes of Vines. In the Great Bible of diverse Languages
some of the Translatours make it a proper name, others not.

Verse. 12. My Vineyard which is mine.] As if God found a kind of relish and
sweetness in this word mine, otherwise my Vineyard would have served; that is,
the subject of my care and providence.

Verse. 14. Be thou like to a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of
Spices.] See chapter 4. v. 5. Elegantissimum in partibus Orientis Capr^olae genus
constans pilis ^enuissimis and ^itidissimis, membris apt and figurate inter se
dispositis, unde quicquid velint commendare Arabes Capreolam dicant, eo quod
haec in deliciis esse soleat, ut virginibus nostris canes Melitaei. Dieterici
Antiq. Bibl.
The Spouse would have Christ to be speedy in coming toward her, she uses
therefore this double similitude. See Psalm. 18. 23.

Heaven is called a mountain of Spices, for the height and pleasures which are
there.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for, and to be sold by
Thomas Peirpoint at the Sun, Edward Brewster at the Crane, and Matthew Keinton
at the Fountain in St Paul's Churchyard.
PAreus his Comment on the Revelation.

A Modest Vindication of the Doctrine of Conditions in the Covenant of Grace:
By John Graill.

Elementa optic. 8o.

The wonderful History, Case and Cure of Mrs Drake (who was under the power of
Satan ten years) by the extraordinary pains, prayers and fasting of B. Usher,
Dr Preston, Mr Hooker, Mr Dod.

Clavis Apocalyptica, in which the great mysteries in the Revelation of St
John, and the Prophet Daniel are opened.

The great danger of rejecting Christ, with the point of Baptism handled: By
Jonas Dell.

True Christianity: By R. Baxter.

Paterculus his Roman History translated.

Malv^zzi his Paradoxes.

An Exercitation concerning the nature of Forgiveness of sin: By Tho. Hotchkins.

The Scriptures sufficiency to determine all matters of faith, made good
against the Papist: By W. Twisse D. D.

A plain and easy Calculation of the Name, Mark and number of the Name of the
Beast: By Nath Stephens.

Ethica Cic^roniana.

Dr Williams Right way to the best Religion: In Folio.

Dr Jermin on the Proverbs: In Fol.

Mr St^ck on Malachy: In Fol.

Mr Elton on the 7, 8, 9. of the Romans: In Fol.

Mr Hildersam on the 4th of John: In Fol.

A Collection of several Sermons preached before the Parliament, by sundry
eminent Ministers of the City of London, and others: In 4o.

Mr B^nthams Christians conflict: In 4o.

Mr Elton on the Commandments, and Lords prayer. 4o.

Mr N^gus his Treatise of Faith: In 4o.

Mr Udall on the Lamentations: In 4o.

Mr Whatleys N. Birth: In 4o.

M. Dod on the Commandments. 4o.

M. Daniel Cawdreys Inconsistency of the Independent way: In 4o.

M. Calvin on Jeremy. 4o.

M. Randall on the Church: In 4o.

-- On the Romans: In 4o.

M. Stalham against Universal Redempt.

M. Whitakers Sermons: In 4o.

M. Calamy's Sermons.

M. Abbot against the Brownists.

M. Angiers Helps to better hearts for better times.

M. Yarrows Comforts for afflicted consciences.

M. Baines Christian Letters.

-- His Directions to a Godly life.

The Marrow of Alchimy: In two parts.

The English Presbyterian and Independent Reconciled.

M. Sheppeards Cases.

The Complete Politician, or Policy put in practice.

A Learned Commentary upon the whole Book of the Revelation of St John: By that
famous and Learned Divine David Pareus.

The Co* Pembroke Arcadia! By S. Philip Sidney Kn. with his Li^e: A Table of
the principal heads.

The Prophet Isaiah Crucifix being an Exposition upon the 53 Chapter of the
Prophecy of Isaiah: By Tho. Calvert Minister of the Gospel in the City of York.

Astronomia Brittanica: By Jo. Newton, M. A.

The whole Treatise of the Cases of Conscience: By M. William Perkins.

Miscellanea Theologica: By H Church.

A brief Exposition of the Lords prayer: By Tho. Hooker.

A Defense of the Christian Sabbath: By Twiss D. D.

A practical Exposition on both the Epistles of Peter: By William Am's D D.

Horometria, or the Complete Diallist: by Tho. Stirrup Philom.

A Description of the universal Quadrat: By Tho. Stirrup Philom.

Universal Dialling: By G S. Philom.

The Work of M. Nich. Lockier M. A. 8o.

Natural Philosophy Reformed: By I. A. Commenius. 8o.

Artificial plain Scale, or the Carpenters new Rule: By Tho. Stirrup Philom. 8o.

The Return of mercies, or the Saints Advantage by Losses: By Jo. Goodwin. 12o.

God a good Master and Protector to his people: By Jo. Goodwin. 12o.

Purchasers pattern, in two parts: By Hen. Phillips Philomat. 12o.


