THE DUTY OF SUBMISSION TO Divine Providence, In all its Dispensations.

Described and Recommended from the Example and Argument of JOB.

By SAMVEL MASTERS. B. D.

James 6. 10, 11. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name
of the Lord, for an example of suffering Affliction, and of Patience. Behold we
account them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have
seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender Mercy.

London, Printed for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane,
1689.

IMPRIMATUR,

GUIL. NEEDHAM.
July 23. 1689.
TO THE Right Honorable the LADY LETITIA ISABELLA Countess Dowager of RADNOR.
MADAM,
THe late smarting Afflictions which I have felt in my Person and Family, have
made me very quick of Sense in resenting Yours; and have engaged my Mind on
such Meditations, as may render me capable of speaking a Word in Season to You.

I dare not be so unjust to your Sorrows, as to dissemble or extenuate your
Loss: All who knew the Lady Essex, found it necessary to admire her for the
Beauty of her Person, the Quickness of her Parts, and the most obliging
Sweetness of her Conversation; but chiefly for her Religious Accomplishments,
her unaffected Virtues, and her frequent Exercises of Devotion, both in public
and private. But I need not tell your Ladyship how good she was, who took so
much delight in making and seeing her such; and I dare not gratify my self any
farther in displaying her excellent Character, lest I should thereby solicit
those Tears, which your Religious Wisdom endeavors to suppress. I would rather
observe to you those good things wherewith the Divine Wisdom has attempered
your Affliction, that the Sweetness of the One, may allay the Bitterness of the
Other.

The Person You bewail is indeed gone from You, but to her Heavenly Father; She
died in the Youth of her Age, but not before She was capable of a Life of
Glory; She left the World when it began to temp her with a New Scene of
Enjoyments; but She left its Vanities, and Troubles too, and has gained by the
exchange much purer and more lasting Joys.

You have lost One Blessing, but Others continue still, which deserve your
Esteem and Love, and which may support and consolate the Remainder of your
Life, You have lost a Child, but Your Heavenly Father is immortal and
unchangeable, who will continue to dwell with you here by his Holy Spirit, till
he take you up to dwell with him Above; of which he has given you a Pledge in
advancing a part of you already thither.

Let not then the evil Things You have met with, so far ingross Your Thoughts
and Affections as to rob God of the Honor, and Your self of the Comfort, of
all those good Things he has provided and prepared for You.

And to assist You herein, I humbly offer the ensuing Discourse, to perfect You
in that Art, wherein You are already so well improved, of receiving dutifully
whatever good or evil is dispensed to You by the Hand of Providence.

That You may continue long among us to recommend the Power and Beauty of
Religion by Your Illustrious Example: And may at last exchange Your Earthly
Honor for a far brighter Glory in Heaven, is the Hearty Prayer of,

MADAM, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant and Chaplain, SAMUEL MASTERS.

JOB 2.10. -- What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive Evil?


THese Words relate to a Passage in the History of Job, concerning which
History it may be useful to premise a few Things, to recommend it to our
serious Attention, and to predispose our Minds, by some proper Anticipations,
to consider more easily and profitably this Argument of the Text.

There have been some Christians of late, and some Jews of old, who thought
this History of Job to be a Poetic Fiction, and not a real History, because so
extraordinary in its Matter, and so artificial in its Composure; and because
they observe that it was usual in those Times to teach and exemplify the
Institutions of Morality and Religion by such Fictitious Parables. But when we
consider how positively this History does describe and assert the Person of
Job, and the several Circumstances of his Condition; also that the Holy Ghost
makes mention of Job, Ezekiel. 14.14.
as a Person in great Favor with God, and joins him with Noah and Daniel, of
whose Reality there can be no doubt; and that St. James recommends Job for an
imitable Pattern of Patience, Jam. 5.10, 11.
which cannot but suppose the Reality and Truth of his History: These
Considerations will be sufficient to induce us to concur with the more general
Testimony both of Jews and Christians, that this History, however wonderful, is
yet real, that there was indeed a Man so great and good as Job, that his Trial
was no less, and his Patience as great as this Book describes and asserts.

And as this History is real, so it may be probably presumed to be the most
ancient now extant in the World; for tho it be placed next before the Book of
Psalms, because composed like them in Metrical Numbers, yet it is probable that
this. Book was written by Moses, the most ancient Writer, and before any of
those Five Books which are placed first in our Bibles.

For there are good Reasons upon which learned Men conjecture that Job lived in
the time of the Patriarchs, being a Nephew of Abraham, descended from Esau; and
that Moses met with this History of him while he sojourned in the Land of
Midian, where he translated it out of the Arabian into the Hebrew Language; and
composed the Discourses between Job and his three Friends in that Meter in
which we now read them; and that when he returned to his Brethren in Egypt, he
presented this Book to them, to teach them Patience under their Afflictions
from Job's Example, and to confirm their Faith and Hope in the Divine. Mercy,
from the Deliverance and Reward which God wrought for him: of which an ancient
Author, under the Name of Origin, is so certain, that he recites a Speech made
by Moses to the People of Israel, when he published this excellent Book among
them.

But this History is not more considerable for its Antiquity than for its
Usefulness, which acquaints us with several important Truths, that we could not
know but by Revelation, and which are not declared so expressly in any other
part of the Holy Scriptures, as in this Book; and also sets before us an
eminent Pattern of Patience, to instruct and support us under the many Troubles
to which we are here always obnoxious.

For first in perusing this History we meet with such considerable Truths as
these.

1. That God takes a particular and kind notice of all his Faithful Servants,
and reflects on them with Complacency, and is ready to bear an honorable
Testimony of their Innocence; for thus he speaks, and even boasts of his
Servant Job to Satan, Chap. 1. v. 8.
Have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth,
a perfect and an upright Man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? Which is
a great Encouragement to a good Man, that tho the Devil accuse him, his Friends
reproach him, and the World condemn him, yet God that searches the Heart does
approve and commend him.

2. We are informed also from this History, how Satan dares to accuse, even to
God himself, his most Faithful Servants, if not of outward Scandal, yet of
inward Hypocrisy; for thus the Lying Spirit drew up a Charge against Job: Chapter
1, v. 9, etc.
Does Job fear God for naught? Have not thou made a Hedge about him, and about
his House, and about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work
of his Hands, and his Substance is increased in the Land: But put forth thy
Hand, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy Face. And when
this Pretense was refuted, he again suggests, That if God would put out his
Hand, Chap. 2. v. 5.
and touch his Bone and Flesh, he would curse God to his Face.

Whence we may learn how Satan is called the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev.
12.10.
who accuses them before God Day and Night; and how great a Privilege the
Gospel has discovered to us, that we have the Son of God to be our Advocate,
to justify us in the Court of Heaven, against the malicious Allegations of this
Adversary. This also may render an easy account of the perverse Malice of
Wicked Men, who take great Pleasure in reproaching the Faithful Servants of
God, if not of any apparent Wickedness, yet of some latent suspected Hypocrisy,
Joh. 8.44.
for they being of their Father the Devil, his Lusts they will do; who is a
Liar, and the Father of Lies.

3. We may hence also discover that those Calamities which befall Mankind, are
chiefly wrought by the Agency of the Devil, who is described in the Scripture,
as the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Destroyer, a Murderer from the
beginning, the great Tempter and Tormenter of Men, the chief Author of all
Evil, either of Sin or of Misery: who sometimes tempts Men to mischieve
themselves, sometimes to mischieve others; and who can use Fire, or Water,
Clouds, or Wind, or other Creatures to be the Means and Instruments of our
Ruin.

Thus Job feared lest he might have Tempted his Children to abuse themselves at
their Feast. Thus he stirred up the Sabeans and Caldeans to rob Job, and
procured a Fire from Heaven to consume his Cattle and Servants, and a strong
Wind from the Wilderness to overturn the House, in which his Children were
Feasting; and those ill Humors in Job's Body which broke out in Boils from
Head to Foot.

Which Discovery may be of use to guard us with the strictest Caution, and
strongest Indignation against that Tempter, who is so great an Enemy; and may
also help us to conceive how some extraordinary Calamities, which sometimes
surprise us, are produced, tho no other natural causes of them do appear.

4. We may further learn from this History that the Devil and his Legions, with
all their Malice and Power, are able to effect no Mischief against us, but then
only, and fo far as God gives them permission: For we find that the Devil could
not hurt Job, tho eager in his Malice against him, till God said to him, Behold
all that he has is in thy Power: And at first he could not hurt his Person,
because God restrained him by a Prohibition, Chap. 1. ver. 12.
only upon himself put not forth thy Hand. And when the Devil sought to have
his Commission enlarged, God gave him Power over Job's Body, saying Behold he
is in thy Hand, Chap. 2. ver. 6.
yet then also restrained him with this Exception, But save his Life.

And this is matter of great Comfort and Encouragement to us, that we are not
abandoned to the powerful Malice of the Devil, that tho he goes about as a
roaring Lion seeking to devour, yet he cannot go beyond the Tedder of his
Chain; that an Almighty Wisdom and Goodness watches over us in a continual
Providence, and that God will be faithful to us in not suffering us to be
tempted beyond what we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and will with every Temptation make a way for us to escape, that we may be
able to bear it.

5. We are also informed from hence, that God does sometimes permit the Devil
to afflict his Servants, not out of Wrath against them, but only to approve and
exercise their Graces, for the Advancement of his own Glory and of their
Praise, and for the increase of their Graces here, and of their Rewards
hereafter.

This is evident from the Character God gives of Job, and the Favor and
Delight he expresses toward him, both before and after his Sufferings; The
Lord said unto Satan, Chapter 2, v. 3.
Have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth,
a perfect and an upright Man, one that fears God, and escheweth Evil? and
still he holds fast his Integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to
destroy him without a cause.

This may support and encourage us under any Sufferings, when our Consciences
can attest our Integrity as Jobs did; and teach us to suffer cheerfully for
God's sake, when we do not suffer for our own. This may also restrain us from
making any reproachful Reflections upon the Afflictions of God's Servants, as
Job's Friends did on his, because God may permit them for other wise and good
Ends, beside that of Punishment.

2. This History does not only teach us such useful Lessons, but also exhibits
to us a very eminent pattern of Meekness and Patience, very needful to Instruct
and Encourage us in the difficult Duty of bearing, as we ought, those
Calamities and Afflictions, which are our common Portion in this World.

Whilst we dwell in this lower World, depraved with the Malignity of Sin, and
Blasted with the Curse of God's Displeasure, we cannot but expect to meet with
a great variety of Crosses and Disappointments, Miseries, and Calamities,
insomuch that Suffering is become at least one half of our Duty, and Patience
is a Grace of as perpetual and common use as any other whatsoever.

And this part of our Duty is so irksome to Flesh and Blood, that we need the
most Forcible Helps and Supports to contain us in the performance of it. Now
nothing does more sensibly encourage us under Sufferings, then proper and
eminent Examples, which at once Demonstrate to us, that our Afflictions are
Tolerable, because we see them Born by others, and also excite in us a generous
Emulation to acquit our selves as well as our fellow Servants, who have been in
a like or worse Condition.

But among all the Patterns of Patience, there is none comparable with this of
Job (excepting that of our Savior who was more than a Man) whom God seems to
have exercised with such extraordinary Trials, and to have recorded his History
in the Holy Scriptures purposely for our Imitation and Encouragement.

And that its great usefulness herein may more appear, let us a little display
and view over this illustrious Example. Behold here a perfect and upright man
undergoing the heaviest Calamities, falling from the height of prosperity into
the lowest depth of Misery, surpised by his Calamities on a sudden, which came
upon him altogether, without Intermission, and were of so extraordinary a
Nature as, at once, to deprive him of all his Comforts, and plunge him into the
lowest State of Wretchedness: For, all his great Estate, which according to
those Times and Countries, consisted of Servants and Cattle, was in one day
consumed by Sabeans and Caldeans, and a Fire from Heaven.

And as soon as he knew himself to be reduced to perfect Poverty, he is told
also that he is become Childless, and that his Children perished together, by
an unusual Death, under the Ruins of the House in which they were Feasting, Nor
was he only stripped naked of all his outward comforts, but the Calamity seizes
on his Person too, and spreads over him a most Noisome and Painful disease. And
that the good Man might have nothing to support him under all this Misery, but
God and his own Conscience, his Wife, who should have been his Helper, became
his Tempter, and his Friends did but Aggravate his sorrows with harsh Censures
and unjust Reproaches. What Estate on this side of Death can we conceive more
Calamitous than this?

Let us now reflect on this Worthy wretched Man, and behold his Behavior, and
admire his invincible Patience. When Job had heard that he was de-Priv'd of all
his Estate and his Children too, he indeed Rent his Mantle, and shaved his
Head, and fell down on the Ground, as o ne that was not stupidly insensible of
such extraordinary Events; but withal he worshipped toward Heaven, and expres'd
his Resentments in this Pious Devout acknowledgment. Naked came I out of my
Mothers Womb, Chap. 1. v. 21, 22.
and Naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away;
blessed be the Name of the Lord. And the Holy Ghost makes this Reflection on
his behavior in the next Verse, In all this Job sinned not, neither charged
God foolishly. When afterward his Body was afterward his Body was afflected
with the anguish and stench of unusual Boils, he contentedly sat him down among
the Ashes, and relieved himself, as well as he could with the broken Potsherds
that lay about him.

And when his Wife could no longer suppress her Passions, or lengthen out her
Patience, but in a transport of Fury called on him to curse God and Die; He
replies, more angry with Her then with his Condition, Thou speak as one of
the foolish Women speaks; and that he might Convince as well as Rebuke her,
he suggests to her consideration this reasonable Argument, What? shall we
receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? And here the
Holy Ghost has thought fit to bear his Testimony a second Time that, in all
this Job sinned not with his Lips.

This is a pattern that we cannot enough admire, but let us also labor to
imitate it; And that we may attain to such an excellent frame of Spirit, let us
study well this short Argument wherewith Job governed his own Heart, and
endeavored to restrain the impatience of his Wife, What? shall we receive Good
at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil?

The Argument is proposed in the form of a Question, and accented with an
unusual earnestness, that it might enter the Mind with a greater Force, and
produce in it a more speedy and through Conviction.

We may resolve the Argument into these two parts.

I. An Antecedent supposed, That we receive our Good from the Hand of God. II.
A Consequent thereupon inferred, That we ought to receive any Evil from the
same Hand.
The plain Sense and Design of the Argument is this, That as we receive all our
Blessings from God's bountiful Hand; so we should be ready to accept any
Afflictions from his correcting Hand.

In discoursing on this Argument, I design to do these three Things.

First, To explicate its Sense, that we may fully understand those things which
are expressed or implied in it.

Secondly, To discover the Force of the Argument, that we may be convinced by
it.

Thirdly, To apply it, for directing and containing us in the Discharge of so
necessary a Duty.

First, I begin to explain the Argument, That we may understand those Things
which are expressed or implied in it: And this may be sufficiently done by
inquiring into these three Things.

1. What is that Good and Evil which are mentioned in the Argument? 2. What
that Hand is by which this Good and Evil is dispensed? 3. How we should receive
both Good and Evil from that Hand.
1. Let us consider what that Good and Evil is which is expressed in the
Argument? It is plain enough from the Context, that Job did design by Good and
Evil, nothing else but those Temporal Blessings and Calamities, of both which
he had so great a share, as this History describes. And tho most Men are quick
enough of Sense in the things of this World, to distinguish between Good and
Evil; so that they need not be told that Riches and Honors, Health and
Long-Life are good Things, and that Poverty and Disgrace, Sickness and Death
are evil Things; Yet they are perchance very few who understand the Nature or
Degree of that Goodness or Evil which are ascribed to the things of this World,
and therefore it may be needful to teach them this piece of Sacred Philosophy:
That Man being compounded of such different parts as a Spirit and a Body, he
has consequently very different Interests, such as are Spiritual, and such as
are Carnal, and that those excel these, as much as a Spirit does excel a Body:
from whence we should infer, that those things are Good or Evil to a Man in the
highest sense, which can promote or destroy the noblest Interests of his
Spiritual part, and those things are Good or Evil but of an inferior Kind or in
a lower Degree, which concern the welfare only of the Body.

Now the things of this lower World about us, do not in their Natures import
any Good or Evil to that Soul which is the chief part of the Man; for a Man may
abound in Riches, and yet be destitute of true Wisdom; he may cover a deformed
Mind with a beautiful Body: or the more the outward Man decays, the inward Man
may be renewed. Yea these Temporal things are indifferent of themselves to
become either Good or Evil to us, according as they are blessed by God, and
improved by us: for Riches, Honors, and Pleasures may prove very evil Things,
if they debauch our Minds with Vanity and Pride; and Poverty, Disgrace, and
Sickness, which we make the instances of Adversity, may become very good Things
to us, if they render our Minds more Sober and Teachable, and our Hearts more
Meek and Submissive.

Wherefore the Stoics, who in Matters of Morality came nearest to the
Institutions of our Holy Religion, were Unanimous and confident in this Maxim,
that there was no Good or Evil but only Virtue and Vice. So Tacitus describes
Helvidius Priscus, Doctores sapientiae secutus est, qui sola bona quae honesta;
mala tantum quae turpia, potentiam nobilitatem, caeteraque extra animum neque
bonis neque malis annumerant. Tacit. Hist. lib. 4.
That he followed those Masters of Wisdom who taught that those Things only
were Good which were Honest, and only those things Evil which were dishonest,
but Power, Honor, and other such things which affected the outward Man, they
accounted not to be either Good or Evil. And tho we Acknowledge that they went
too far in this Assertion, and that According to the style of the Holy
Scriptures we are allowed to call Temporal things Good or Evil, and there be
this plain Reason for it, because these things respect the Interests of the
Body which is a part of the Man, tho the ignoblest part in the Composition; yet
after all we must assert that these outward things are not Good or Evil in an
Absolute sense with respect to the whole Man, or in the highest Sense with
respect o his more valuable Interests; and that in the strictest Sense those
things only deserve to be accounted good or evil to a Man, which can affect the
Spiritual interests of his Soul.

These notions will be very useful to us for Proportioning our Estimations and
Affections toward the things of this World; for allowing them to be in some
degree Good or Evil, we shall be disposed to thank God for Temporal Blessings,
and to humble our Selves under his Temporal Corrections; but knowing withal
that there are other things which relate to our Spiritual Interests, which do
comparatively far exceed them in their Goodness or Evil, we shall be induced to
regard these with our highest Estimations, and our strongest Affections.

2. We are next to consider what that Hand is, which dispenses to us both our
Good and Evil things; the Text asserts it to be the Hand of God, which can
import nothing else but the Power and Instuence of his continual Providence,
whereby he sustains the Beings he has given us, and disposes of all Events
and Circumstances about us, so that nothing does or can befall us, without, or
contrary to the Council of his Will. This hand of providence deals out to every
Man that proportion of Good or Evil, which the divine Wisdom thinks fit to
assign to him, so that nothing happens to us by a blind Fortune, or an
unaccountable Fate, but by the Conduct of that good God, who is the great
Creator and Sovereign of the whole World.

If therefore there be any Creatures about us which are Good or Hurtful to us,
it was the Hand that made them, which put those Qualities into them. If any
Good accrue to us through our own Skill and Industry, or by the Care and Favor of
our Friends, we must acknowledge that We, or our Friends, are but Instruments in
the Hand of God, for conveying such Blessings to us: Or if we suffer through our
own Default, or the Injury of other Men, we are to account of our selves or our
Enemies, as Rods in his Hand, whereby he inflicts such Punishments upon us.

Thus the pious King of Israel acknowledged to God: All that is in Heaven or in
Earth is thine; 1 Chronicles. 19.11, 12.
thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted above all; both Riches and
Honor come of thee, in thy Hand is Power and Might, and in thine Hand it is to
make great, and to give Strength unto all. So on the other Hand the Prophet
demands, Shall there be Evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6.
and with respect to both kind of Events, God himself declares, I form the
Light, Isa. 45.7.
and create Darknesss; I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all these
things. And the Hand of God does thus concern it self not only in the greatest
and most important Events, but also in those which may seem most slight and
inconsiderable to us: for our Savior assures us that God numbers our very
Hairs, Luke 12.6, 7.
and that a Sparrow cannot fall to the Ground without his Knowledge.

A right Apprehension, and firm Persuasion of our entire Dependence on the Hand
of Divine Providence, in managing and ordering our Conditions in this World,
would have a very great influence on our Religious Devotion; for who would not
be careful to please him who has the dispensing of all Blessings and Curses?
to whom shall we direct our Prayers for what we want, or our Thanksgivings for
what we enjoy, but to that bountiful Hand which is the Fountain of all our
Blessings? Or what can make us more Meek and Patient under Correction, than the
sight of that Almighty Hand which holds the Rod and lays on the Stroke?

3. We are in the last place to consider how we should receive both Good and
Evil from the Hand of God. Job has used but one word with respect to both sort
of Events, and that word, Debemus accipere sive excipere cum affectu, lubentia
reverentia and acquiescentia; id enim (...) signisicat, nempe (...) acipere
quod ad Donum sua natura refertur. Cocceius in locum.
does properly denote such an Acceptance as that wherewith we entertain a Gift
from a Superior, with a cheerful Reverence, and a graceful acquiescence. Now
tho the design of the Argument would require only to explain how we ought to
receive our evil Things from God's correcting Hand, yet inasmuch as we are
equally concerned in the Duty of receiving Good as of receiving Evil; I think
it will be worth our while, to Study out the right Art of doing both; in order
to which I shall take both parts of this Duty under a distinct Consideration.

1. The right manner in which we should receive our good Things from the Hand
of God, does consist chiefly in this threefold disposition of Mind, viz. that
we receive God's blessings with a contented, thankful, and an honest Mind.

(1.) We should receive our good Things from God with a contented Mind, i.e.
with a Mind that can contain it self within those Enjoyments which God thinks
fit to allow; so as to be well pleased with his Blessings of whatever Kind, in
whatever Degree, by whatever Means, or at whatever Time conferred upon us; not
to despise our Blessings, or to be despise our Blessings, or to be dissatisfied
with them because they are not of such a sort, or not so much, or do not come
in such a way, or so soon as we would have them, and that we do not look askew
on them with an evil Eye, or receive them awkardly with an unwilling, Hand.

And to promote so good a Disposition of Mind, we should consider that God is
the absolute Lord of all his Blessings, and may do with his own as he pleases;
that his Hand is guided by an unerring Wisdom, so as to dispense them in an
exact Proportion to every Man's Capacities and Necessities; that he is not
stinted by any Penury of Blessings, or Envy of our Happiness; that he could and
would give more or sooner if he saw it fit for us; that therefore it becomes us
to contain our Desires within the same Bounds, which his Wisdom has prescribed
to his own Bounty, to accept of our Share which the great Master of the Family
of the World has allotted to us among the rest; lest by any dissatisfaction we
reflect on God, as if he erred in giving too little, or on our Selves in
desiring too much.

If them God thinks fit to give us only Necessaries, let us stop our Desires
there, and not hanker after Superfluities; if God gives us Health and Strength,
let us be contented if we are not also Rich; let us be pleased and satisfied
with the Children he gives us, the Friends he raises up for us, the Station he
assigns to us, and the Competency he provides for us. And if he think fit to
send us any good Things through our unw Industry, or the Charity of others, let us
not be disconteneed, tho we must labor or be beholden for them: and if our
Blessings come not so soon as we desired, yet let it satisfy us that they come
in that Season which Infinite Wisdom thought most fit. Let us learn with St.
Paul, How to want, Phil 4.11.
and how to abound, and in all estates to be contented; and practice that Duty
which he prescribes to all Christians, Let your Coversation be without
Covetousness, Heb. 13.5.
and be content with such Things as ye have.

(2.) We should receive good Things from God's Hand with a Thankful Mind, i. e.
with a Mind disposed to acknowledge with grateful Affections God's great Bounty
toward us, and the Returns we owe to him for it.

To this end, we should keep on our Minds such Apprehensions of God, and our
Selves, and of the Blessings we receive, as will promote and cherish in us the
most grateful Resentments. We should take care that we do not injuriously deny,
or carelessly overlook our great Benefactor, lest we withhold his Praises, or
ascribe them to a wrong hand. We should consider how high a Privilege it is,
that the great God of Heaven will condescend to take care of us in a continual
Providence. We should consider also how unworthy we are of the Blessings we
enjoy; or rather how much we deserve the severest Punishments. We should also
rate the Blessings we receive with a just value and esteem; none should sem
small to us which come from so great a God, to such worthless Persons; we
should also consider how innumerable they are; how constantly and continually
they flow into our Bosoms; and how seasonable, useful and delightful they prove
to us.

And such Considerations as these should not only start up at the Receipt of
some new Blessing, but should dwell in our Minds, to affect them always with a
grateful Sense of the immense Goodness and plenteous Bounty of our great
Benefactor.

If God's Blessings find us thus disposed, they cannot fail of a most
affectionate Entertainment; for the Thoughts which acknowledge and admire the
Riches of Divine Goodness, will easily inflame the Heart with a strong Love to
God, as to the best of Patrons, the kindest Friend, and most indulgent Parent;
they will melt us into sorrow for the inexcusable ingratitude of affronting and
grieving so good a God in time past, and excite in us the most earnest
Resolutions of an entire Devotion to him for the time to come.

And out of the abundance of the Heart thus disposed, our Mouths will speak
forth his Praise, and our own Thankfulness. We shall not forbear to boast of
God and his Favor toward us, to declare his Goodness, and to bless his Name
both in our private and public Devotion.

And these Cords of Love which engage our Hearts will easily contain us in our
Duty to so good a Lord, and oblige us to be diligent, faithful and cheerful in
his Service, and make us very zealous for his Glory. Every Blessing received by
such a grateful Mind will fall like Rain on good Ground, and bring forth much
Fruit to the praise of him that sent it.

With such Returns of Praise and Thankfulness we should always correspond with
our great Benefactor, sending up to Heaven our Tributes of Gratitude, in some
proportion to the Blessings God sends down to us; which is not more our Duty
than it is our Interest; for as our God does infinitely excel us in Goodness,
so he regards more kindly the unprofitable Returns we make to him, than we do
all the invaluable Blessings he bestows on us, and will not fail to exceed our
Gratitude with his Bounty.

After this manner have good Men disposed themselves for receiving the
Blessings of Heaven; among whom we need no better Pattern than the Royal
Psalmist, whose devotional Addresses consist chiefly of returns of Praise and
Thanks, who had fixed his Heart, and turned his Lyre purposely to this Duty,
and resolved to continue in it as long as he had a being; who also often
invites all other Men, yea all the Creatures of God, to join in Consort with
him, as sharers with him in the Blessings of Divine Bounty.

(3.) We should receive our good Things from the Hand of God with an honest
Mind, i. e. which a Mind honestly disposed to acquire God's Blessings in his
own Way, and to employ them only to that End for which he designed them.

If we project to obtain any Blessings by indirect Courses and unlawful Means,
we shall not receive, but rather snatch them out of the Hand of Providence; for
he defrauds or robs God of his Blessings, who procures them by Injustice,
Violence, or Deceit; and if God suffer him to succeed therein, he must at last
expect a Mixture of Sorrow with them; as Jacob's Blessing was embittered which
he fraudulently wrested from his deluded Father.

We shall also greatly abuse God, if we Use his Blessings to any other purpose
than he intended. How loud an Impiety must it needs be to make our Holy God a
Caterer for our Lusts, by making his Blessings a Provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof? To employ the Riches he bestows, to entertain our
Luxury; the Honor he confers, to feed our Pride; the Power he intrusts us
with, to revenge ourselves, or oppress our Neighbor; or the Health and
Strength he preserves to us, to sin against him more presumptuously? What
blacker Ingratitude and Injustice can we be Guilty of, then to fight against
God with his own Weapons; to serve the Devil with the Blessings of Heaven; and
to make those things to become Evil, which God sent for Good?

If we do thus, we not only forfeit God's Blessings, but even necessitate him
to take them from us, in his own Vindication; as he threatened Israel by the
Propher Hosea, Hos. 2.8, 9.
She did not know that I gave her Corn and Wine and Oil, and multiplied her
Silver and Gold which they prepaturn for Baal; therefore will I return to take
away my Corn in the Time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and will
recover my Wool, and my Flax, given to cover her Nakedness.

Whenever we receive a Blessing, we should consider that he is the Lord who
gave it, and we are his Servants or Stewards that receive it; that therefore we
cannot honestly put it to any other Use than our Lord has Appointed or
Allowed; and must expect to be one Day called to an Account of the Blessings we
have received; and if we have not put them to a good Use, or perverted them to
a bad one; we shall be condemned as Wicked or Slothful Servants; Matthew. 25.
as our Savior has Taught us in his Parable of the Talents.

If then God in his bounty bestows Riches on us, let us receive them with an
honest Resolution to abound Proportionably in good Works; If he advance us to
Honor, let us become thereby more illustrious Patterns of Piety to the World;
If he confer Power and Authority upon us, let us use it to maintain his Cause,
protect his Servants, and suppress the Enemies of his Religion; If he bless us
with a long Life, and a convinued Health, let us be more Abundant and unwearied
in his Service; let us receive every Blessing with no other design, than to
employ it in the Service and to the Honor of him that sent it.

And as God intends to engage us more closely to himself by all the Obligations
he lays upon us; so upon the receipt of every Blessing, especially of such as
are most remarkable, we should solemnly and heartily devote our Selves to God,
as Jacob did in that pious Vow. If God will be with me, Genesis 28.20, 21.
and will keep me in the way that I go, and will give me Bread to eat, and
Raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Father's House in Peace, than
shall the Lord be my God.

II. Let us pass on to consider how we ought to receive our evil Things from
God's correcting Hand. The design of the Argument is not that we should barely
partake of these evil Things, for that is not in our Power to prevent; but that
we should receive or accept them in a right Manner; and the Art of doing so,
does consist chiefly in this threefold Disposition of Mind, viz. that we
receive any evil Things from God's correcting Hand, with Meekness and Humility;
with Patience and Long-Suffering; and with a Cheerful and well-pleased Mind.

First, We should receive any evil Things from the Hand of God with Meekness
and Humility, i. e. with a Spirit so lowly and Submissive, as to yield quietly
and easily to the Corrections God inflicts, without recoiling in angry
Passions, or reflecting in discontented Murmurs, or returning any sort of
Revenges against God, or the Instruments he uses in correcting us.

Meekness and Humility are those passive Graces, which render our Spirits soft
and gentle, yielding and impressive, and thereby susceptive of Corrections; but
the stroke that falls on a hard Heart, rebounds in the Face of him that
strikes, and a proud Heart will rise up against the weight of Affliction, like
a Spring against the Hand that depresseth it.

The Man whose passions are not broken and tamed by Discipline, must be nailed
to the Cross which he is to suffer, but he will never submit to take it up and
bear it; he will kick and roar under his Corrections, and often accuse and
blaspheme the Author of his Troubles. The murmuring Israelites ^hen distressed
in the the Wilderness spoke against God, Psalm. 78.19
says the Psalmist. Such the Prophet describes, Isa. 3.21.
who when hungry would fret themselves, and curse their King and their God. Of
such we read in the Apocaylipse, Rev. 16.9, 11.
who would blaspheme the God of Heaven, that had Power over their Plagues,
because of their pains and sores.

But the Servants of God who had other Spirits, could receive their evil Things
after another Manner. When old Eli heard the heaviest Doom from God, he meekly
entertain d it, saying, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what seems him good. When David was flying before his rebellious
Son, whom God, according to his Denuntiation, had raised up against him, he
humbly submitted, saying, Behold, here I am, 2 Samuel 15.26.
let him do to me as seems good unto him. The evil Things which our blessed
Savior received, and the Meekness and Humility wherewith he received them,
transcend all other Patterns. He endured the contradiction of Sinners, the most
and worst that ever was, with such Meekness, that when he was reviled, 1 Pet.
2.23
he reviled not again; when he Suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. When he was to receive from his
Fathers hand that cup of Fury, at the apprehension of which the human nature
staggered; tho he deprecated it, if possible, to be avoided; yet, if not, he
humbly submitted to it, Mat. 26.39.
saying, Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

With a like meekness and lowliness of Spirit should we be always disposed, to
receive easily, to resent mildly, to suffer quietly any strokes of Correction
from the Hand of God. We should consider the Greatness and Authority of him
that strikes, with whom we may not, we cannot contend; and we should reflect
impartially upon our own Guilt, which has made us justly obnoxious to greater
Evils than this World can produce.

We should thus reason which our selves; Will it become us to be provoked by a
Punishment, who have much more provoked God by our Sin? Shall we think much of
the smart of his Rod, who have so often grieved his holy Spirit? Dare we in one
Thought or Passion to oppose that Almighty Justice, which we cannot conquer,
but may farther irritate by our rebellious Opposition?

When therefore we receive any Cross or Loss, or any other sort of Affliction
from the Hand of God, we should immediately look within, give a charge to our
Hearts, set a guard on our Passions, and a watch before the door of our Mouth,
that we fall into no Disorders or Indecencies; either, with David, we should be
dumb, Psalm. 39.9.
and not open our Mouths, because it is God's doing: or, with Job, take care
that we do not sin with our Lips by charging God foolishly.

And let me add, That we should take care to suppress all proud or angry
Passions against the Instruments that God uses in correcting us, because they
will ultimately strike at God himself. When we curse our Stars, or fret against
the cross Events that befall us, we reflect upon that Providence by which all
things are managed; If we malign and pursue the Enemy that has done us a
Mischief, we wound God through his Side, who thought fit to order and permit that
we should be Corrected by such an Instrument; However therefore the Affliction
comes, let us humbly and meekly submit, without contending or quarrelling with
God or Man, or with the World about us.

So David when most malicilously and reproachfully Cursed by Shimei, governed
his Spirit, saying, So let him curse, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11.
because the Lord bath said unto him, Curse David; let him alone, let him
curse, for the Lord has bidden him; it may he that the Lord will look upon
mine Affliction, and requite me Good for his Cursing me this Day. With such
meekness could this humble King receive so great a Provocation, from one of his
Subjects, out of reverence to Almighty God who was the supreme Author of his
Sufferings.

Secondly, We should receive our evil Things from the Hand of God with a
proportionable Patience and long-Suffering, i. e. with such a passive fortitude
or firmness of Spirit, as will not sink under the Burden, or faint under the
Anguish, or grow weary under the continuance of our Sufferings.

As soon as the Affliction seizes us, we should immediately apply our Care to
put our selves into a posture of Bearing it; we should recollect our Spirits,
and summon up all our spiritual Forces; we should fortify our Minds with the
strongest Arguments, and fix our Hearts with the firmest Resolutions, and so
buckle to the Burden we are to bear, and put out our strength in assoiling the
Difficulties which encounter us.

We should watch over our Spirits with a prudent Jealousy; and with a generous
Indignation suppress any base Thoughts or mutinous Passions, that may enfeeble
and dishearten us, or tempt us to seek a Redress by any unlawful Means.

And we must beware of limiting our Spirits with any fond Conceits, that we can
bear but so much, or so long; and think of providing no less Patience than what
may be equal to the Evils we are to bear. If God call us to bear a heavy Cross,
we must receive it with a proportionable strength of Patience; if he visit us
with a long Sickness, we must endure it with a no less long-Suffering? if he
try us with the loss of a dear Child or Friend that is never to be retrieved,
we must provide a Patience that will be as endless and perpetual.

We should consider, that God sends us such Evils, not only to punish us, but
also to exercise and try us; which therefore we should receive as becomes good
Soldiers and Servants, approving our ability and readiness to sustain them for
his Honor, and our own Commendation.

We should encourage and confirm our Patience, by placing before our Eyes the
brave Examples of our Fellow Servants, who have approved their Fortitude in as
great Trials as those with which we are exercised; and by calling to mind those
Divine Promises, which assure us infallibly of a sufficient Assistance here,
and a golrious Crown in Heaven.

We should with our evil Things, receive also those Admonitions and
Exhortations, those Directions and Encouragements which God has given us in
his Holy Word, to enable us to bear them, viz. Luke 21.19. Jam. 1.4.
That in Patience we possess our Souls; that Patience should have its perfect
work, That, Prove. 3.11.
we despise not the chastning of the Lord, neither be weary of his Correction;
Prove. 24.10.
that if we faint in the day of our Adversity, our Strength is small: For as it
is a sign of a weak Body, to be disordered by every ill Accident; so it is no
less of a weak Mind, to droop or fret under the Afflictions which befall us.

This History presents us with great Instances both of Prowess in Job, and of
Weakness in his Wife; for he bore up with a strength and length of Patience,
that the Devil could not overcome, with all the Loads of Misery he heaped upon
him; but she, tho she suffered less, yet being of a weaker and shorter Spirit,
was soon overcome; and to that degree of Impatience, that she advised her
Husband to seek Ease, tho in Death it self; and by cursing God, to provoke him
to put an end to a miserable, Life.

Thirdly, We should, receive any evil Things from the Hand of God with a
cheerful and well-pleased Mind; so as to approve of God's dealing with us, to
justify and bless him while he is correcting us; to consent to, and accept
kindly his fatherly Chastisements; and to keep up a hopeful confidence in his
Mercy, amidst our greatest Distresses.

The former requisites were chiefly Negative, which only restrained us from
resisting or fainting under God's correcting Hand; but this is positive, and
imports somewhat higher and greater, even a voluntary and cheerful Concurrence
with God in the Corrections he infflicts.

We should like dutiful Children reverence the Crowns of our Father's
Displeasure, acknowledge his just Authority and our own Demerit; and render
Thanks to him for his Paternal Care and Discipline over us, who in very
faithfulness afflicts us. We should not only, not reject and nauseate the evil
Things which God despenseth, but receive them kindly and thankfully as the most
useful Physic prescribed by the wisest and best Physician.

We should be so far from flying out, or snarling against the Instruments of
our Correction, as even to Kiss the Rod, to bless them that Curse us, and to
Pray for them that Despitefully use us. Our evil Things should not be forced
upon us, but received by us with a willing Hand; we should not only endure the
Temptation, but overcome it; not only bear it patiently, but cheerfully rejoice
under it. Thus St Paul prays for the Colossians that they might be strengthened
with all might according to the glorious Power of God, unto all Patience, Col.
1.11.
and long-Suffering, and that even with Joyfulness.

And in such a manner have God's Servants been able to receive the worst
Dispensations from him; Heb. 10.34. 2 Cor. 6.10.
they took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, they were as grieved, yet
always rejoicing. Thus particularly did David receive the many evil Things with
which he was Exercised, still Acknowledging that God was Righteous in all his
ways, that all his Paths are Mercy and Truth to them that fear God; that in
very faithfulness God afflicted him; and that it was Good for him that he was
Afflicted.

Thus also did Job worship the God who permitted him to be so severely treated,
and justified, and blessed the Author or his Sufferings, saying, The Lord gave,
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

And however strange and difficult this Rule may seem, yet it is not more than
the wiser Heathens had learned. There is nothing that befalls me, says Seneca,
Senec. Ep. 96.75.
that I would receive with a sad look or a lawring Countenance: every Thing
should please Men that pleases God. I always, says. Epictetus, will that
which comes to pass; Epictet. l. 4.6. Ta
for I account that better which God wills, than what I will for my self; I
adhere to him as his Servant and Disciple, I pursue, I desire, I entirety will
with him, And the Royal Philosopher describes a good Man to be one that will
with all his Heart embrace any Events that Providence dispenses to him.
Antonin. l. 3. sect. 4.


The Christian has much more reason to receive kindly and cheerfully any
Events, which he believes are dispensed to him by the wisest and kindest care
of his Heavenly Father: He is assured from the Word of God, that an Almighty
Spirit shall help his Infirmities; and the Divine Blessing shall make all
things work together for good to him. Romans 8.26.28.
He is told, Job 5.17.
that the Man is happy whom God corrects, Prove. 3.12.
and that whom the Lord loves he chastneth, even as a Father the Son in whom
he delights. Jam. 1.12.
That the Man is blessed that endures Temptation: for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of Life.

How well may this satisfy and please the Christian, that he is happy in God's
account, when he seems most wretched in the Eye of the World? How cheerfully
may he receive those evil Things, which are the Pledges and Tokens of God's
Fatherly Care and Favor toward him; which he knows are sent not to hurt, but
cure him, to promote his Spiritual Life here, and his Eternal Life hereafter.

Let us therefore aspire to this excellent frame of Spirit, that we may be able
to accept our evil Things as well as good, with a grateful Satisfaction. That
we may be able to welcome Poverty, Sickness, or Death it self, as coming from
so good a Hand, and tending to so good an End.

Secondly, Having now attained to a competent understanding of those things,
which the Argument imports; let us proceed to consider its Force and Weight,
that we may be convinced and persuaded by it.

It was wisely designed by Job, to recommend to us those evil Things to which
we are naturally averse, by those good Things which attract us with Delight;
that our receiving of the latter, may more easily induce us to accept the
former. The Consequence of one to the other may be sufficiently evinced and
confirmed by several Reasons: of which I shall mention these Four:

1. That Supreme Authority of God over us, which is plainly manifested by the
good Things we receive from him, should oblige us to receive dutifully any evil
Things, which he thinks fit to dispense to us.

What other account can we give of the care of God's continual Providence over
us, but that He is the Parent of those Beings he so indulgently cherishes, and
the Master of that Family, for the Members of which he so bountifully provides;
and that consequently we are his Children and Servants, by whom we were made
and are maintained? Psalm. 100.3
Know ye, says the Psalmist, that the Lord he is God, because he made us, and
not we our selves; and we are his People, because the Sheep of his Pasture.

This Relation we stand in to God gives him a supreme and absolute Authority
over us, whereby we are obliged to receive whatever he dispenses to us, and to
submit our selves not only to be fed and maintained, but also to be disciplined
and employed by him.

As therefore the Blessings we enjoy, are Proofs of God's Authority, and Badges
of our Dependence on him; so they should be forcible Arguments, for submitting
us readily to his Discipline and Disposal.

We expect no less from our own Children and Servants, than that they
acknowledge our Authority, as well in correcting as maintaining them; and indeed
we seem to collude with God, or overreach him, when we share in his Blessings
as part of his Family, and yet deny his Authority, when he thinks fit to
correct us; for in Equity, if God has no right to send us evil Things, we have
no right to his good Things; and if we receive these, we oblige our selves
thereby to accept the other also.

With this Argument from Authority, the Servants of God have usually contained
and quieted their Minds, under the sharpest Afflictions. 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, says old Eli, let him do what seems him good. Psalm. 39.9.
I was dumb, says David, and opened not my Mouth, because thou did it. Job
blessed the Name of that Lord, who had not more right to give than to take
away; and contented himself with this Consideration, which the Septuagint have
added to the Text, Job 1.21.
(...), as it seemed good to the Lord, so it came to pass.

2. If we receive all our good Things from God, we are obliged in Gratitude to
him, to receive any evil Things he may require us to suffer for his sake.

If our Gratitude bear any proportion to the Bounty of God, we shall be as
ready to receive any evil Things from him, as he is to bestow good Things upon
us; and be very willing to accomplish his Will, and glorify his Name by our
Suffering, who at first made and does still maintain us for his Honor and
Service.

He is a very ill-natured Servant, who can endure no Hazards or Hardships for a
good Master; he is not worthy the name of a Soldier, who will only receive his
Pay, but declines all the Difficulties and Dangers of his Warfare. We should
think him a very disingenuous Friend, who, after many considerable Kindnesses
done for him, refuses to bear with us in any thing that is cross to his
Humor, or to undergo any trouble in doing for us some necessary office of
Friendship. How then can we deal so perversely and frowardly with God, as to
receive daily so many good Things from him, and yet to murmur against him and
his Providence, upon every cross Event he dispenses to us!

And our Ingratitude herein is so much the worse, as the good Things he bestows
on us, are always more and greater than the evil Things he inflicts; for there
is no Man wants so many Blessings are he enjoys, or can in this World meet with
a Cross that is not out-weigh'd by some other Blessing he possesses; at best
Life is more considerable than any Temporal Blessing we want, or any Calamity
we suffer, for otherwise it could not be supported. Why then should a living
Man complain? Lam. 3.39.
says the Prophet. How basely ungrateful are we, if we cannot suffer a little
from him, from whom we have received so much?

3. If we receive good Things from God which we no way Deserve, it is very
reasonable that we should receive evil Things which are justly Due to us.

The blessings we enjoy are the free-gift of God which we can never merit or
exact from him; but the Punishments we meet with, are the Fruit of our own
Doings, or the just wages of our Sin. How absurd then must it be for us to
expect only good Things of which we are most unworthy; and to refuse or quarrel
at those evil Things, which we have justly deserved and procured to our Selves.

Shall a Profligat Criminal who has forfeited his Life, expect only the
Caresses of his Prince's Favor, and think much of enduring the confinement and
hardships of a Prison? If God denied us all his Blessings; and allotted only
evil Things to our share, we could not charge him with any Injustice, or have
any just exception against his Providence; but when our merciful God dispenses
to us a mixture of both, it would be a most unreasonable piece of Fondness, to
accept only the good Things which he frankly gives, and to refuse the
Punishments which he justly inflicts; or to quarrel at him for not giving us
those good Things which he owes us not, or for sending us those evil Things
which are of right due to us. Thus the Prophet Jeremiah expostulates in his
Lamentation; Why does a living Man complain, Lam. 3.39.
a Man for the Punishment of his Sin? He has more than his due by being a
living Man, and not more in bearing the Punishment of his Sin.

4. If our evil Things come out of the same kind Hand which dispenses our good
Things, we have reason to think well of them, and to receive them with a
contented cheerful Mind.

That our God is very kind and merciful, appears from the many good Things we
daily receive from him; and if he also afflicts us, yet we may rejoice in this,
that we are in good Hands; that we are under the Discipline of one that does
not afflict willingly, or take pleasure in grieving the children of Men; that
he will not correct us immoderately but in Judgment; that his merciful Hand
will support us, while the Hand of his Justice chastises us; and that he sends
us evil Things, only to make us more capable of receiving the good Things he
has prepared for us.

If then all the Blessings we have received, can be but enough to assure us of
the Goodness and Faithfulness of God, we shall never murmur or despond, but
rather hope and rejoice in his Mercy, under the worst Dispensations.

What is good should never be unwelcome to us, and nothing but what is good can
come from our good God; for tho we distinguish and call things Good or Evil,
yet they are all good as they come from him, and may be improved by us. God who
is not led by Passion, says, St. Chrysostom, (...), Chrysostom. (...). Tunc
maxim est optimus cum tibi non bonus. Tirtul in Marc. 2.2.
whether he bless or correct, he is equally Good; Yea he is then best, says
Turtullian, when we think him best. Good. Whatever therefore is dispensed to us
by the Hand of God, we ought to approve and embrace as Good; as Hezekiah did
that heavy Doom brought by the Prophet, saying, Good is the Word of the Lord
which thou have spoken. 2 Kings 20.19.


Thirdly, I come in the last place to make some useful Application of the
precedent Discourse, which may serve to exhort us to yield to this reasonable
Argument of the Text; by resigning and submitting our selves entirely to the
conduct of Divine Providence, for whatever good or evil Things shall fall to
our Lot.

That we may more easily learn this general Duty, we may conveniently divide it
into these two particular Lessons.

1. That by an entire resignation of our selves to God's disposal, we allow him
to choose and order for us the Good or Evil which shall befall us; he being the
Lord who has the right of disposing both.

2. That we contentedly and cheerfully acquiesce in his choice; when he has
made, and declared it to us in the course of his Providence, receiving either
Good or Evil from his Hand, as he has thought most fit for us.

1. Let us be exhorted to resign up our selves entirely to God's disposal, to
choose and allot for us whatever good or evil Things, he shall think fittest
for us.

Almighty God has an unquestionable right to dispose of us, and he will
certainly make use of it whether we allow it or not; but it will best become
us, and be most pleasing to God, that we should by our own Act deliberately and
voluntarily resign up our selves to his Conduct, and constute him the disposer
of us, and of all our Concernments, whereby we may make a great virtue of
Necessity, discharge a necessary Duty, and give much Honor to God.

This self- Resignation imports many pious Acts of the Mind, our Acknowledgment
and approbation of God's right and Authority, of his Wisdom and Faithfulness in
disposing of us; our choice of him for our Guide; our consent to his Conduct;
yea our Hearty desire and humble Prayer to him, that he would condescend to
manage and order our Condition for us; and it will by consequence restrain us
from intermedling in that Affair we have entirely committed to his Management,
by any anxious Cares, or eager Desires, or vain Curiosity of our own about it;
so that we shall employ our care only in doing what God has made our Duty,
leaving it wholly to the great Master of that Family to which we belong, to
provide for us and dispose of us, as he shall think fit.

This we are taught in those Scriptures which require us to commit our selves,
Psalm. 31.5.
and our ways unto the Lord; Psalm. 37.5. Psalm. 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 37.3,
5, 7. Philip. 4.6.
to cast our Burdens and our Cares upon him, to trust in him, to rest on him;
to be careful for nothing, but in all things by Prayer and Supplication with
Thanksgivings to make our requests known to God.

Thus David when he fled out of Jerusalem, resigned up himself most submisively
to God's disposal, saying to Zadok, Carry back the Ark of God into the City: 2 Samuel 15, 25, 26.
if I shall find favor in the Eye, of the Lord, he will bring me again, and
show me both it and his Habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in
thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems Good to him. And our
Blessed Savior, in a more extraordinary Case, suppressed his own desires, and
submitted himself entirely to his Fathers disposal, saying, Mat. 26.39.
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

Yea, we find this Duty excellently taught by a Heathen who thus advises; Dare
to look up to God and bespeak him after this Manner: Epicter. l. 2. c. 16.
Use me for the future as thou please, for I am of the same Mind with thee, I
refuse nothing that seems Good to thee; cloth me as thou will, appoint me what
Station thou think fit, whether Public or Private; to abide at home, or go
into Bannishment; to be Poor or Rich, I will not only comply my self, but will
justify thy Providence by Apologies to the World.

Into such a submissive Frame, should we bring our Spirits, that we may leave
off to carve and choose for our selves, and be well content to be at God's
allowance and disposal, and always ready to receive from his Hand whatever good
Things he thinks to be Food conventient for us, or whatever evil Things he
thinks to be needful Physic for us.

2. Let us be exhorted also to acquiesce contentedly and cheerfully in whatever
Choice God makes for us, when he declares it to us in the course of his
Providence, whether it be of good or evil Things, or of whatever kind or degree
they are.

We should shamefully affront God and contradict our selves, if after we have
solemnly chosen, and consented to his Conduct, and by our Prayers besought him
to take the care and charge of us, we should allow our selves to censure his
Providence, to dislike his Management, and refuse our Lot; whereby we reflect
on God's Wisdom or Goodness, or Power or Faithfulness, as if he could not, or
would not do so well for us as we expected; or else discover our selves to be
very weak and vain, froward and inconstant, like Children, never long of a
Mind, difficult to be pleased, whom God himself is not able to satisfy.

We justly condemn the perverse Spirit of the Israelites, who after they had
put themselves under God's Conduct, and promised to be very obsequious to it in
their passage from Egypt to Canaan, yet murmured against him upon the slightest
Occasions; disliked his Provision, tho he cater'd for them by Miracles, and
chose rather to return back to their House of Bondage, than to continue under
the care and safeguard of his Providence. And St. Jude, Jude 16.
reproves such in his Time who were (...), Murmurers, who complained of the Lot
which Providence had drawn for them.

We should be very cautious of dealing humourously or frowardly with the great
God of Heaven, that we do not tempt or limit him, provoke and grieve him, as he
sometimes complained of the People of Israel, lest he should cast us out of his
Presence, and refuse to take any farther care of us; for how helpless and
forlorn, how wretched and miserable must we needs be, if God should abandon us
to our own Impotence and Folly.

When therefore our wise and good God declares to us in the course of his
Providence, that he has appointed such a state or condition of Life for us in
general, or has allotted such good or evil Events to befall us in particular;
we should forthwith, without disputing or contending, accommodate and conform
our Will to his, accept thankfully the Blessings he sends, or bear patiently
the Corrections he inflicts, being satisfied with this, that it is God's
appointment, who has right to dispose of us, and who knows better than we,
what things are fit for us; that we have often in our Prayers resigned up our
selves to his disposal; and that it is a high Privilege that he will vouchsafe
to take care of us; that his Promise is a sufficient Security, on which we may
rely, even when we cannot comprehend the design or reason of his dealing with
us.

In such a manner did pious David conform himself to the Will of God, when
declared to him in the course of his Providence. When his Child was sick he
besought the Lord for it, and fasted, and lay all night upon the Earth; but
when the Child was dead, he arose, washed, anointed, changed his Apparel, and
came into the house of the Lord and worshipped. And he gives this accountn of
his Behavior, 2 Samuel 12.22.23.
While the Child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell
whether God will be gracious unto me, that the Child may live? But now he is
dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me. While the Child was sick he recommended him to
God by Prayer, and when God had disposed of him as he thought fit, David
acquiesc'd.

Abraham the Father of the Faithful, was no less obsequious to the Will of God,
who without disputing the divine Command, left his Native Country, and followed
Providence, tho he knew not whither; and offered up his only Son a Sacrifice to
God, as soon as he was demanded, without any discontented Murmurs.

And our Blessed Savior when dissuaded by St. Peter from submitting to the
Sufferings which God had appointed for him, he rejected the fond advice with
Indignation, saying, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.23.
thou art an offense to me, for thou savourest not the things of God, but those
that be of Men. And when the same Apostle would have rescued him by violence
from those Sufferings, our Lord forbad him, saying, The cup which my Father
has given me, John 18.11.
shall I not drink it?

To all which I cannot but add those excellent Sayings of an honest Heathen. In
all Affairs this should be our wish, Epictet. c. 77, 78, 79.
Lead me O God, according to thy Decree, whither thou will, and I will follow
cheerfully; and yet if I should be so wicked as to refuse to follow, yet follow
I must of necessity. He that can accommodate himself to the necessity of Events
is a wise Man, and understands the things of God. If then God will have it so,
so be it.

Such then is the Duty we are exhorted to that we would choose no more than
this only, that God would choose all things for us; and that we approve and
accept of whatever choice he makes for us.

To enforce this Exhortation, I will subjoin a few Considerations, which may
incline our Hearts to such a submissive compliance, with the conduct of Divine
Providence.

1. It is our necessary Duty to do so, and the contrary practice will involve
us in a great deal of Guilt.

We may beconvinced of this, not only from those express Precepts which
frequently occur in the Holy Scriptures, but also from a self-evident Law
inscribed upon our Natures. For inasmuch as we are Creatures, we are by Nature
dependant both on the will and power of God from whom we received our Beings;
and are consequently obliged to render him both active and passive Obedience,
and do become as guilty in rebelling against his will, by not suffering what he
inflicts, as by not doing what he commands.

If we attempt to dispose of our selves, or of the Circumstances of our
Condition, we usurp upon God's Prerogative, we invade the Scepter of his
Government, and become guilty of High Treason against the Majesty of Heaven.
For we thereby confront his Will with ours, we take upon us to dispose of his
Creatures, to dispense his Blessings, to withstand his Corrections; which is in
short to depose him from the Government, and to assume it to our selves.

2. It is our great Privilege that we need not do more, than quietly commend
and commit our selves to the care of Divine Providence.

It would indeed be very ill for us, if God should leave us, like Orphans, to
our own care and disposal, and should make our carking Sollicitudes, and
toilsome Labors as necessary as we think them to be; How madly should we order
our selves? How miserable should we soon make our selves? We understand not our
own Wants or Capacities, or the fitness and usefulness of the things about us;
we should be ready to choose any Evil that appears speciously, or to reject any
Good that is not attended with fair and easy Circumstances; so foolish and
humor some are the wisest Men, that if God left Events to their management,
they would but disturb and destroy themselves, and the World about them.

Is it not therefore much better that we may sit still, and not disquiet or
mischief our selves with our unwise Cares, and rash Projects; and that the
infinitely Good, the only Wise, and Almighty God, who is the Master of the
great Family in which we live, our Father, and Guardian, will vouchsafe to take
care of us, and order all things about us for our good? Why will we toil and
cark for our selves, when we need not? What can we desire better than to be
under the conduct of infinite Wisdom, and at the disposal of infinite Goodness?

3. It is in vain for us to attempt to do more, for after all our projecting,
wishing and striving, tho with never so great Earnestness, it is not in our
Power to attain the good Things which God denies, or to refuse the evil Things
which God appoints.

God has fitted our Nature with faculties for doing so much as he intended to
make our Duty, and therein we should assiduously employ our selves; but as he
never designed to trouble us with governing the World, so he has capacitated
us with no Powers for so vast an Undertaking, but has reserved it to himself,
who has most Right, and is best able to perform it.

We may as well make an attempt at God's work of Creation, as of Providence,
for both greatly transcend our Skill and Power; or try if we can alter the
frame of our Natures, as well as change the circumstances of our Condition;
but, as our Savior says, we cannot make one Hair White or Black, Mat. 5.36.
so neither can we of our selves make our Condition better or worse than God
has appointed.

If our Experience has not long since convinced us of this, let us make an
Experiment of our Power, in changing the Weather, in preventing Sickness and
Death; and if we cannot command these ordinary Events, why should we think of
ordering others! or rather why should we not leave off the folly of attempting
what is impossible for us to perform.

4. There is great Peace, Pleasure, and Satisfaction in the performance of this
Duty.

He that has heartily resigned up himself to God's conduct and disposal, is
become a happy Man, and leads the most easy, safe and delightful course of
Life; for he has unloaded his Mind of all his burdensome Cares, and dismaying
Fears; he takes no thought what he shall eat, or drink, or wherewithal he shall
be clothed, much less does he distract himself with future Wants or distant
Dangers, because his heavenly Father takes Care of him: He can wake, or sleep
securely, and attend on his Duties without distraction; he can enjoy his
Blessings with the greatest Cheerfulness, and bear his Afflictons with the
greatest Ease, and be at all times well pleased, and fully satisfied, because
the wisest and best of Beings has undertaken to manage and order all Things
for him.

And he that can contentedly acquiesce in the Dispensations of Providence, is
free from the uneasy passions of Grief and Shame; he is never disappointed,
never discontented; he never envies the good Things which are dispensed to
another, or frets at the evil Things which are allotted to him: He never
murmurs at God, or quarrels with Men, or disquiets himself however the World
moves about him; for all things come to pass as he would have them, because he
would have them come to pass as God appoints them.

How very sweet and pleasant must such a state of Life needs be, wherein is
fulfilled that saying of the Prophet, Thou will keep him in perfect Peace whose
Mind is stayed on thee, Isa. 26.3.
because he trusts in thee?

5. Great Benefit and Advantage will accrue to us by a sincere and constant
discharge of this Duty.

By resigning up our selves to God's conduct, we effectually engage the care
and favor of his Providence over us; for it will not consist with his Honor
or his Promise to suffer any who repose their trust in him to be ashamed.

And how great an advantage must it needs be, to have the Wisdom of God to
contrive for us, his Goodness to supply us, and his Power to protect us? Is it
not a much greater privilege than if we were received under the Patronage of
the greatest, wisest or best Man in the World? for what can we want, if fed
from the Hand of divine Bounty? what Evil can hurt us, if sheltered under the
Almighty wings?

By submitting to God's Conduct we shall escape many Sins and Dangers, which
they usually fall into who would be at their own disposal; Yea hereby our evil
Things will be turned into Good, for we shall receive a Blessing with them,
which will sanctify and sweeten them to us.

And if we continue always to implore and rely on God's Conduct; he will never
leave or forsake us, till he has brought us past all our Fears and Dangers, up
to that Heaven where we shall receive good Things only, and shall be able to
thank, and praise God for those evil Things wherewith he disciplined us for our
profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness here, Heb. 12.10.
and of his Glory hereafter.

This Argument may be farther improved by considering more particularly some of
the chief Advantages, which will accrue to us by submitting our selves to the
conduct and disposal of God's Providence.

1. In following this Divine Conduct, we shall always walk in ways that are
right and lawful, and thereby escape those sinful Courses, which defile our
Souls; wound our Consciences, and inthral us in manifold Miseries; when we walk
in the Light of our own Eyes, and after the Lusts of our own Hearts, we run our
selves into many dangerous Errors. So the Apostle observes (...). They that
will be rich [and follow their own will therein] fall into Temptation, and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction
and Perdition. For the Love of Money is the root of all Evil; which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows.

But if we follow this Heavenly Guide, he will never mislead us into any
crooked ways, not betray us into any Temptations, which may prove too strong
for us. This David mentions as a considerable Advantage of having God for his
Shepherd over him. He restores my Soul, he leads me in the paths of
Righteousness for his Namesake. Psalm. 23.3.
And elsewhere the Psalmist observes it to be the Privilege of him that relies
on God's Conduct, that, The Law of God is in his Heart, Psalm. 73.31.
none of his steps shall slide. We find also the Royal Preacher largely
insisting on this Argument! The Lord gives Wisdom; Prove. 2.6, etc.
and out of his Mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding. He lays up sound
Wisdom for the Righteous; he is a Buckler to them that walk uprightly. He
keeps the paths of Judgment, and preserves the way of his Saints. Then shall
thou understand Righteousness and Judgment, and Equity; yea, every good path.
Discretion shall preserve thee, Understanding shall keep thee: To deliver thee
from the way of the evil Man, from the Man that speaks froward Things, who
leave the paths of Uprightness, to walk in the ways of Darkness. And in the
next Chapter he exprefly asserts this to be the Privilege of those who
acknowledge God for their Guide, and follow his Conduct. Trust in the Lord with
all thine Heart, Prove. 3.5, 6.
and lean not unto thine own Understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and
he shall direct thy paths. He cannot but be in the right way who has God to
direct him; and no wise or good Man, but will highly value so great a Privilege.

2. If we follow the Conduct of God's Providence, our way will be smoth and
plain, not encumbered with such perplexities, or obstructed with such
impediments as they meet with who are led by the ignis fatuus of their own
uncertain Understandings.

We sometimes complain of Difficulties in our Affairs which our skill cannot
extricate, we cark in our thoughts, are dubious and fluctuating in our
Resolutions, and after many fruitless Attempts and toilsome Endeavors, are
forced to let go the fond Project, and sit down in a hopeless despair: But if
we were under the Conduct of Divine Wisdom; if we would stay till God open a
way to us by the course of his Providence, and follow his conduct in using
those means and opportunities he provides; we should find favorable
Circumstances about us conspiring to facilitate our designs, the course of
God's Providence would suggest to us prudent Thoughts, and the Events that
happen to us would concur with our Endeavors; whereby our Affairs would
proceed easily and steadily; and tho God may sometimes permit some rubs or
delays for our spiritual exercise and improvement, yet he will not suffer us to
be puzzled with any inextricable Difficulties, or to be defeated in any
extraordinary Disappointments;

Thus some interpret that Aphorism of the Wiseman, Commit thy ways unto the
Lord, Prove. 16.3.
and thy thoughts shall be established; that by committing our Affairs to the
Conduct of God's Providence; our thoughts shall be established in prudent and
steady Resolutions; and be supported in an honest design against all Obstacles
and Difficulties.

3. If we are under God's Conduct we shall be under his Safeguard too, and our
way will be always safe and secure. He that has no better Guide then himself,
is like the Blind leading the Blind, which, according to the Jewish Proverb,
falls into a ditch; and indeed most of the Mischiefs and Troubles we meet with
proceed from our own ill conduct of our selves. But if God be our Guide, his
Hand that leads us, will also support us, his Prisence that conducts us will
also protect us; He will give his Angels charge over us to keep us in all our
ways, into which his Providence leads us. Psalm. 37.23, 24.
The steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and none of his steps shall
slide; Tho he fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his Hand.

Thus we read that Israel traveled with safety in an uncouth Wilderness amidst
all their Enemies, while they obsequiously followed the sign of God's Presence
conducting them; but when they would go on their own Heads against Amalek, they
were easily vanquished. We likewise find that Abraham who resigned up himself
to God's Conduct, met with no considerable Troubles in the whole ocurse of his
Life; But Jacob who followed rather the Conduct of his subtle Mother, then the
Guidance of God, in procuring his Blessing, procured thereby many Crosses and
Troubles, which followed him all his days.

4. If God be our Guide, we shall not fail of Success; for he that can do
whatever pleases him in Heaven and Earth, will prosper the work of our Hands;
He will certainly lead us to that Good which is most convenient for us, if not
to that particular Good which we, by mistake, designed. Delight thy self in the
Lord, Psalm. 37.4, 5.
and he shall give thee the desire of thine Heart. Commit thy way unto the
Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. As God conducted the
Children of Israel safe through the Wilderness, and at last brought them to the
Land of Promise: So will he conduct those who Trust in him, amidst all the
changes and chances of this mortal Life, and at last put them in possession of
that Heavenly Canaan, toward which every good Man is tending in all the
passages of his Life. He will guide them by his Counsel while they are on the
way, and at last receive them to himself in Glory.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. ^^* l. 20. f. then r. when. l. 21. dele the. P. 75. l. 7. r. glorious. P.
78. l. 3. for Crown. r. frowns. P. 90. l. 11. f. hist. r. lest. P. 95. l. 14.
f. best.r. lest.


