MASTER Edmund Calamies LEADING CASE.

Behold how he seeks a quarrel against me?

SPICANTE DEO printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXIII.

Mr. EDMUND CALAMIE'S LEADING CASE.
Lord Mayor's Officer with a Warrant.
FOrasmuch as I have received a Certificate from and under the Hand and Seal of
the right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, That Mr.
Edmund Calamy late Curate of the Parish Church of St. Mary Aldermanbury, in the
said City of London being (according as is provided and enacted by the late Act
of Parliament made for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, etc.) by reason of
his Inconformity disabled to Preach or Read any Lecture or Sermon in any Church
or Chapel within his MAJESTY'S Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and continuing and remaining still so disabled, did
since the Feast of St. Bartholomew last past, upon two several days, viz. on
Tuesday the twenty sixth day of August last past, and upon Sunday the twenty
eighth day of December, 1662. in the said Church of St. Mary Aldermanbury,
presume, and take upon himself (without any lawful approbation and license
thereunto) to Preach or Read, and did Preach or Read two several Sermons or
Lectures publicly before the Congregation, then, and there in the said Church
assembled, contrary to, and in contempt of Authority of the said Act of
Parliament: These are therefore (as I am required by the said Act) in His
MAJESTY'S Name to will and command you to receive into your Custody within the
Gaol of Newgate, the Body of the said Edmund Calamy brought unto you herewith,
and him there detein for the offense aforesaid, for the Term of three Months
from the day of the date hereof, without Bayl or Mainprise, according to the
tenor and effect of the Act of Parliament aforesaid. And this shall be your
Warrant therein, Dated this fifth day of January, 1662.

Church Members. FAr be this from you, good Sir, spare your self, and retire
until this Calamity be overpast. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers,
Is. 26. 20.
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
until the indignation be overpast. Mr. Calamy, What mean you to weep, and to
break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound Act. 21. 13
only, but to dye for the Lord Jesus.


Brethren. Now you will not be persuaded, we must cease, and say, The will of
the Lord be Acts 21. 14.
done.


Calamy. The Lord Jesus did not hide himself when he was to be taken for me,
but said, Here I am: I will not hide my self now I am to be taken for him, but
will say, Here I am: only I shall entreat some of your Company, to my Lord
Mayor, to whom you may give an account of that days proceeding.


Brethren. With all our hearts: --


Lord Mayor. As I would upon other occasions have been glad, so really I am now
sorry to see you Mr. Calamy: equally sorry I am, that I must inflict such a
punishment (as I am obliged by the Act) upon a Person of your Years and
Profession; and that such a Person should deserve it: In charity I could not
think your Conscience could have allowed you at any time, so open an affront to
the most Solemn Establishment of Authority: I reason I could not think your
prudence could have allowed it at this time, when His Majesty was so full of
gracious thoughts toward you, and all sober men of your way.


Calamy. In prudence I should not at this time have displeased his Majesty: In
Conscience I cannot at any time displease God.


Lord Mayor. I hope His Majesty's Government is so just, so moderate, so
agreeable to the great Principles of Religion and Reason, upon which mankind
join in a Society, or Christians in a Church; that there is no discreet and
knowing Person put upon the sad Dilemma of either provoking God, or opposing
the Authority ordained of God.


Calamy. Necessity is laid upon us, yea, woe unto us if we preach not the
Gospel. That you 1 Cor. 9. 16
may have a reason of that which was done by me, and so may not think I did it
unwarrantably, I offer your Consideration what has been much upon my spirit,
from the 5. of the Acts, As the Apostles taught the People, the Priests, the
Sadduces, the Captain of the Temple, came upon them, being grieved that they
taught the People: And they laid hands on them, and laid them in hold against
the next day: Howbeit, many of them which heard the Word believed, and the
number of the men was about five thousand. And when they had called them before
them, they a ked them by what Power, or in what Name have you done this? Then
Peter filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them: Ye Rulers of the People, and
Elders of Israel, if we be examined this day of the good deed that we Acts 14.
have done; be it known unto you all, we have done it it in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ. And when they saw the boldness of Peter and John they
marvelled, and they took knowledge of them. But when they had commanded them to
go aside out of the Council, they conferred among themselves, saying, What
shall we do to these men; for that indeed notable things have been done by
them, is manifest to all them that: dwell at Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it
But that it spread no further among the People, let us straightly threaten them
that they speak henceforth to no man in this Name. And they called them, and
commanded them, That they should not speak at all in the Name of Jesus. But
Peter and John answered and said unto them: Whether it be right in the sight of
God, to hearken unto God more than unto you, judge ye; for we cannot but speak
the things which we have seen and heard: So when they had further threatened
them, they let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of
the People.


L. B. L. If it were not our business rather to manifest our obedience to the
Act of Uniformity in performing duty, then to dispute your disobedience in
neglecting yours, we could easily show you how many ways you have wrested this
Scripture, as the unlearned and unstable wrest them, to their own damnation:
and how wide your case is from theirs.

For 1. They were silenced by no Law; you are silenced by a Law: they could say
with St. Paul, Acts 25. 8. for themselves, and answer, That neither against the
Law of the Jews, nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar, have we offended
at all. You must confess, That against the Law of the Nation, against the
Church, and against Caesar, in many things have you offended all.

2. They were forbid to preach in the Name of Jesus. You are only forbid to
Rebel in the Name of Jesus: They were restrained from publishing the Truth: You
are restrained only from publishing Errors.

3. There the whole Ministry was to be silenced: Here you only, and a few
others, are suspended: So that now Christ is preached, and you may rejoice.

4. They were suspended by the prevailing power of oppressions: You are
silenced by the reasonable power of your own Representatives in Parliament.
Jews silenced them without a Law; you by a Law, which the men you have chosen
have made, have silenced your selves.

5. A necessity which lay upon them, who were called of God, to reveal the
Gospel which was hid from Ages; does not ly upon you, who many of you, are not
so much as called by man to preach that Word, which for many years, God be
thanked, has dwelt richly among us.

6. They loved not their life unto the death, that they might preach the
Gospel; you love your opinion so well, that you will rather not preach the
Gospel then hear it: they would not be silenced to save their lives, you
silence your selves to save your repute and esteem.


Mr. Calamy. O add not reproach unto affliction. O Sir, we would not have left
our callings and stations for fear of death, we must now leave them for fear of
that which is worse then death: we would willingly die rather then not serve
the Lord in our calling: we must rather not serve the Lord in our calling then
sin.


An honest man. Really I am afraid that while you think you avoid sin by
refusing Ceremonies which are indifferent, you committed sin in neglecting your
calling, which was necessary.


Mr. Calamy. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: what is but
indifferent in your apprehension, was sinful in mine, and every man must give
an account of himself.


B. S. It is not what you think of the thing imposed can secure your
conscience, but what they are: that which is good remains good, and that which
is evil, evil: and that in the very same degree of good and evil as it was
before, neither better nor worse, any man's particular judgment or opinion
thereof notwithstanding.


Mr. Calamy. That's true indeed, yet what is good or indifferent in it self, If
I am persuaded it is evil, it is evil unto me: to him that esteems any thing
to be unlawful to him it is unlawful, Romans 4. 14.


B. S. To him that thinks a thing unlawful, and is at liberty, whether he
does it or no, to him it is unlawful: but to him that thinks a thing
unlawful, but yet is enjoined by lawful authority to do, to him if he has
not a clear rule to the contrary, it is lawful: Whatsoever is commanded us by
those whom God has set over us either in Church, Commonwealth, or Family,
which is not evidently contrary to the Law and will of God, ought to be
receivved and obeyed no otherwise, then as if God himself had commanded it;
because God himself has commanded us to obey the Higher Powers, and to submit
our selves to their Ordinances, Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 23.


Mr. Calamy. I hope I must not go against my Conscience within me, to comply
mith my Superiors above me.


B. S. What a strange thing is this! that when the blessed Apostle commanded
you to obey for conscience sake, you should disobey, and that for conscience
sake too: Your Governors charge you upon your Conscience to be obedient, and
you pretend your conscience to be free from that subjection: It is a sad thing
that you have brought your selves and other poor souls to such a strait between
two sins, and you can by no means possible avoid both, as long as you persist
in this way; for if you do the things commanded, you go against the persuasion
of your own conscience, and that is a great sin; and if you do them not, you
disobey lawful Authority, and that is a sin too.


Mr. Calamy. Truly neither fancy, faction, nor humor makes me not to comply,
but merely for fear of offending God: And if after the best means used to
satisfy my self; as prayer to God, discourse, study, I was not able to
apprehend the lawfullnesse of what was required; if it be my unhappiness to be
in an error, surely men will have no reason to be angry with me in this world,
and I hope God will pardon me in the next.


Mr. Sprin. When I was called upon either to conform to the Laws for
Uniformity, or to leave my Ministry, I asked of my self two things, Whether I
would rather suffer death then use the things imposed in Church professing the
foundation, and urging them as things indifferent, not pressing them as binding
conscience in themselves, or as needful to salvation? And whether the
execution of my Ministry (which was pressed upon my conscience with a woe, if I
neglected it) should be as dear to me as my life.


P. S. Good God, to see to what pass small errors have brought us! how
difference of apprehension has brought forth difference of judgment, and
difference of judgment has brought forth difference of practice, and
disagreement of affection. The difference of practice has moved Authority to
silence and suppress refusers of Conformity. The disagreement in affection does
move you who are deprived, to speak and act against persons in Authority;
whereby in the event the course of the Gospel is interrupted, and of Popery
enlarged; the friends of Sion are grieved, the enemies rejoice; the enemy of
Mankind is gratified, and the Lord is displeased; the Church is rent with
schism, the Truth scandalized by dissension; the Ministers undone by loss of
living, and the unity of brethren living in the same house, professing the same
faith and rejoicing in the same hope, is pulled in pieces, and this like to
continue God knows how long.


Mr. Calamy. It is sad that Magistrates should enjoin such things as should
cause such divisions as cause great thoughts of heart.


B. S. It is sad indeed that Subjects cannot submit to such things as are
enjoined for peace, order, and decency.


L. M. I wonder you should not consider how dangerous it should be to affront
the most solemn injunction of the whole Nation, a Law so universally desired,
so deliberately resolved on, so seriously pressed, as the greatest security of
Church or State.


Mr. Calamy. I was several times persecuted for owning his Majestyes Authority
and Interest, I did not think I should live to be imprisoned for opposing it.


Sr. T. E. The more favor his Majesty had for you for former service, the more
sorry he is that you have forfeited it by your present indiscretion. His
Majesty thought that Mr. Calamy would not have done so, of any man in England.


Mr. Calamy. Really I did not do it upon mine own head, but upon the request of
diverse honorable and worthy persons who were otherwise like to be disappointed
of a morning Sermon.


Sr. R. B. It is generally reported, and upon the extraordinary concourse of
people to your Church, as generally believed that it was designed before hand;
several Citizens inviting one another to your Church to hear you preach.


Mr. Calamy. It might be a design upon me, it was no design by me: this is not
the first time we have been trapanned.


T. F. There are few that know you that can allow you so much indiscretion as
to yield to the private importunities of a few Gentlemen, against the public
authority of a whole Parliament.


Mr. Calamy. I may say (with reverence to the Lord Jesus, of whom it is
written) that I had compassion of the multitude, who were as sheep without a
shepherd.


E. W. You must have taught the people better by your silence, then by your
Sermon: your obedience had been better then sacrifice: the misguided throng had
been better taught by your cheerful submission to authority, then by your
indiscreet discourse against it. When you had been importuned to preach, you
should have said, I pray you go home and learn what that means, Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them who are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, for so is
the will of God; that with well doing we may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, as free: and using your liberty as a cloak of licentiousness, 1.
Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake, To: 13: 5:


Mr. Calamy. I hope an offense of this nature may be passed by, being so
innocent in the design of it, so harmless in the consequence of it.


VV. F. How harmless it is in the design of it, be it between you and your God
and soul: how dangerous it is in the consequence of it, any man may guess that
considers what encouragement it may give your party, if you are not punished;
and what offense it may give them if you are. If you are winked at, what say
others, are we not winked at too, without respect of persons. If you are
punished, then they say, we are persecuted. It is sad that you are become such
an occasion of offense between the King and his good people.


Mr. Calamy. I hope I am not so unhappy.


T. M. You were looked upon as the fittest man to break the Ice, being a man so
much esteemed for your own worth, and so much interessed in honorable friends
and acquaintance. For as formerly Cartwright was encouraged by the E. of
Lecester, Travers was entertained by the L. Treasurer Cecill, Walsingham was
owned by Secretary Walsingham; so you stir up your honorable women, and look
for the favor of many excellent personages.


M. Calamy. I hope his Majesty's gracious Declaration may excuse me.


F. H. When my Lord of London acquainted his Majesty with what you had done,
his Majesty said, I am sure he has no encouragement to it from my
declaration: His Majesty never intended any favor of this nature to you: and
I fear this passage will obabstruct that favor he intended.


Mr. Calamy. So far I hope may this passage be from prejudicing his Sacred
Majesty against us, that it may rather incline him to favor us: considering
the necessity he hereby may perceive of our service, and the reasonableness of
his indulgence.


M. O. Flatter not your self with these vain thoughts; his Majesty may pity
you, but he does not want you. God has sent his word, and great are the
company of Preachers.


Mr. Calamy. Let not the rigor of one Session restrain those whom the
indulgence of another may release:


N. P. It is a question whether the same Parliament may repeal the act that
made it: whether those things that have been overruled, may be debated by the
same House.


Mr. Calamy. I hope that what a Popish Priest may do without check, a
Protestant Minister may do without imprisonment.


R. B. Neither the one nor the other may be endured to seduce the people, and
with fair words to deceive the hearts of the simple, if any man teach any other
doctrine, and consent not to wholesome words, etc.


Mr. Calamy. I hope his Majesty will use his interest with the Parliament.


A. C. You of all men should not expect it, who complained of his late
Majesty's protecting Delinquents against his Parliament.


A Brother. It is an unheard of course that the Church should be governed by
Civil Laws, and Ministers punished by Law-men.


An honest man. Since the reformation, by your leave and the Papists, we have
owned his Majesty under Christ, Defender of our Faith, and Lawmakers of our
Church: the Church directs, the State establishes.


Good women. Alas, that they should use the good man so unworthily and hardly.


A. B. When Mr. Calamy and Mr. Love, etc. were under restraint, and word was
sent to the Army in Scotl. concerning it, Harrison and others said, If godly
men transgress the Law, they should be punished by the Law.


Good w. Alas, what harm has the good man done?


R. L. In short be abused the Kings Authority, he has broken the settled Law,
he has vilified the power of Parliam. he has disturbed the public peace, he
stands to the principles of the Rebellion, and provokes another.


Good w. I wonder what he preached?


A. B. He preached that glory was departing from our Isr.


Good w. These courses will bring us to another war.


A. B. Not so we hope, What, will you endanger the public peace rather then be
restrained? will you not scruple at Rebellion, who scruple at a few ceremonies?
what would you do if you had power in your own hands, that are so bold without
it? shall the minor part impose upon the major? shall a novel fancy bear down
an Apostolical institution? shall a private opinion contest with a public Law.


G. w. Alas that our teachers are removed into corners.


A. B. Our dangers begin at the Pulpit, without the aid of seditions Sermons, I
do believe the strife had never come to blood: he was a wise man that said, The
single imprisonment of Crofton has quieted that party more then all the
multiplied and transcendent favors of his Majesty.


Good w. These are sad times.


A. B. Say not that the former times were better then these, for thou do not
enquire wisely concerning this thing: when you guided the times others
complained; now others guide the times, you complain; when shall we be quiet, I
think it is our best way to rest where we are


Good w. Good man, he has discharged his conscience.


A. B. He has it may be discharged his conscience, and my L. M. must discharge
his; he who in order to the making of good Christians, makes bad subjects, has
a zeal indeed, but it is seditious; a Religion, but it is Rebellion:


G. w Now you suffer for righteousness sake, happy is he.


A. B. Yea, but what glory have you, if when ye are buffeted for your faults
you take it patiently. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or
as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matter.


Mr. Calamy. May I but be respited until to morrow:


L. M. Yes, with all my heart upon your, and your friends word.


Sr. I. B. Remember how you prayed, preached, and what you did June 6. 1641.
and what was done Ian. 6. 1644. and I pray speak not with Argyle as you go home.


Jeremiah 37. 38. Calamy. 1 This man seeks not the welfare of this people,
but their hurt. 1 This man envieth the establishment of this Nation, and seeks
its hurt. 2 Thou fallest away to the Caldeans. 2 Thou fallest away to the
separation at Hemsted: 3 Its false, I fall not to the Caldeans. 3 It is false,
I kept no Conventicle at Hemsted. 4 Jeremiah said, what have I done against
thee or against thy servants that I should be put in prison. 4 Mr. Calamy said,
what have I done worthy of imprisonment? 5 Let my supplication I pray thee, be
accepted before thee O King. 5 Let my petition be received by your most
excellent Majesty. 6 Then took they Jeremiah and sent him to the dungeon. 6
Then took they M. Calamy and sent him to Newgate 7 When Ebedmelech the
Ethiopian, the chamberlain of the Kings house heard that they put Jeremiah in
the dungeon, he spoke to the King, saying, my Lord the King, these men have
done evil in all they have done to Jeremiah the Prophet whom they have cast
into the dungeon, etc. 7 Now when L. Chapter heard that Mr. Calamy was in prison,
he went to the King, and said, may it please your Majesty, it is pity that
reverend Mr. Calamy should be sent to Newgate.

Paena ad unum, terror ad omnes.
FINIS.

