XCIX. CANONS, OR, RULES; Learnedly describing an excellent Method for
Practitioners in PHYSIC.

Written By Dr. J. MACALLO, Physician in Ordinary, First to Rodolphus, late
Emperor of Germany, and after his death, Physician in like manner to K. James.

Seipsum interimit qui Praecepta Medici observare n^gat. S. Aug. LONDON,
Printed by J. Grismond. 1659.

The Epistle to the READER.
AMongst the riches of Fortune, and blessings of Nature, there is none more
acceptable and advantageous to mankind, then the fruition of Health; let
abundance of Wealth, hosts of Armies, libraries of Counselors, obedience of
Subjects, be all put into the balance, and though each of them be a great and
heavenly endowment, yet without Health to enjoy them, they will prove light, and
the most mighty of Princes will be found a troublesome creature to himself.

It is one of the chief Punishments and miseries incident to humane condition,
to be so variable in Health, as oft-times to be well and sick in a minute, even
when himself knows no cause or reason for his so being; therefore both Sexes do
(in what measure they can) study Health, and deliberate upon Meats, and Drinks,
and Habitations, and Exercises, the accomplishment whereof is their daily
Meditation; to whose furtherance and help, Almighty God (intending the
preservation of Man, his Noblest creature) has ordained the Physician.

Nor is Man always to rest upon his own judgment in the election of his Food,
or pleasing his Appetite, seeing the infirmities of Age do often summon the
excesses of Youth, and find them the chief Authors of an early Death: avoid not
therefore the Physician in Health, says the Wiseman, but rather bless God who
has let you fall into his learned and skillful Hands, and not into a sudden
Grave.

This Compendium is digested into an excellent Method, the division into
Canons, not unworthily imitating that Prince of Physicians, Hypocrates, in his
learned Aphorisms; the Author also was famous in his time, who having spent
many years in the most famous Universities, and Courts of Princes, for
information of his Judgment and Experience, in the fullness of his knowledge
returned to his Native Sovereign King James, whom he knew best able to censure
and esteem men of Learning.

For the more ease and profit of the Reader or Student, he has drawn the 99.
Canons herein contained under three Discourses. In the first 20. he declares
the Knowledge of the Disease, together with the Antecedents, Symptoms, and
Causes. In the second consisting of 30 Canons, is fore-shewed the Issues of the
Infirmity. In the last 49. he delivers the Method for Cure, all learnedly and
exactly set forth.

The Scottish Dialect, wherein he wrote these Rules, being neither acceptable
to the English Reader, nor in many words intelligible, has cost some pains to
present him in current English Language; his terms of Art also (though they be
Ornaments to the Subject) being derived from Greek and Latin roots, do carry
their respective interpretations, together with each word or phrase of Art,
insomuch as those who can only read may reap profit, according to their talent
of Ingenuity, and become hereby enabled to do neighbourly offices. The
Publisher desires only to change prayers with, and for all such as are willing
to value and enjoy a Gift of this common Complacency and Compassion.

Your Servant, W. S.

CANONS OF PHYSIC.
PART I.
CANON I.
THe Methodick practizing in Physic has, First, a knowledge of the Disease:
next, foretells the event of it: and last, goes about to cure the same. For
that part of Physic which is called Therapentick or Contemplative, follows
still the Diagnostick or knowing, and the Prognostic or foreknowing parts: For
whosoever will use perfect able remedies, must first remark the things present,
next forewarn the future, because it is necessary to understand the present
estate of the disease, to the end the proper remedies may be applied; then to
foresee that which is to come, for the more bold attempting the Cure, if there
be hope of health, else to foretell the danger if there be fear of death, but
totally to abstain from the enterprise upon inevitable fear of death; for he
ought never to engage the cure of desperate diseases, much less promise health,
but least of all to take the business in hand after a due praemonition of the
danger in it.

Canon 2.
Now to come to the perfect knowledge of the disease, he must first search the
place, then the kind, and afterward the cause. If the place be manifest of it
self, it rests to find out the Espece or kind of the disease, and then the
Cause.

Canon 3.
The Place is known by the Action hurt or hindered, by the sort and seat of the
pain, by the Excrements and Accidents or proper Symptoms. Although all these
signs do not at all times appear all together, yet some of them fail not to
show themselves.

Canon 4.
The Action offended shows the part from whence it proceeds to be indisposed;
for a function Animal, Vital or Natural, being troubled, declares some of
those parts to be affected. So the hurt or stistemper of the Reason,
Imagination or Memory shows the Brain to be sick; the loss of sense and
motion manifests the Nerves, or else their origin to be grieved; difficulty of
breathing declares the Lungs, or some instrument of the respiration to be
intercepted; the Pulse commoved tells the heart to be troubled; the stop of the
descent of the meat shows the stomach to be hurt; the digestion hindered, when
the body is not nourished, the Livor is distempered.

The Espece or sort of sickness points forth also the place to a pain with a
pulsation, and is from the nerve hurt or offended; which punction from the
Membrane distended, with convulsion, is from the drawing of the Nerves or
Tendons with violence and dolor, which tension shows the repletion of the veins
out of measure; when it is profound it declares the Membrane or thin skin
covering the bone, called Periostium, to be disseated; when soft and gentle
without great pain, it is in the flesh; when heavy and blunt, it points forth
some of the Entrails to be grieved.

The situation of the pain makes known the seat of the disease also. So if it
be in the right Hypocondre, or under the short ribbs on the right side, it
declares the Livor to be hurt; if under the left side, the Spleen: For
wheresoever is the pain, there is the sickness: wherefore he must not omit to
enquire of the sick person, on which side he lies with greatest ease; for, if
it be without, he lies best on the whole side; but if within, best on the sore
side.

That which issues forth of the body indicates likewise the part affected. So
if by Cough, there is thrown forth any part of a Gristle, there is no doubt but
the Lungs are to be cured; if in the water there be found any piece of flesh,
it betokens the Kidneys to be hurt; if in the draught there be found any piece
of skin, it signifies the Guts to be ulcerate. The stomach is known to be hurt,
when the chyle or meat does issue forth at the wound; and if the foecal matter
come forth, it shows the Guts to be wounded; so the water issuing shows the
Bladder to be wounded; and when the Plura or thin skin which covers the ribs
within is pierced, then the wind does blow forth at the hole.

Moreover the form of issuing forth is remarkable, for the better understanding
of the part that is troubled. So the blood that proceeds out of the Arteries,
because of the abundance of spirits, does issue with force in a leaping manner;
but if flowing and deadly from the vein: also if any piece of the parts
troubled do come forth alone, it signifies the place or seat to be near by; but
if it be mixed with the Excrements, it declares it to be higher and further
removed.

The Accidents point also at the place. So the Pearl declares the Eye to be
molested, the swelling of the right Groin shows the Livor, and that of the
left, the Spleen to be disordered.

The Symptoms or Accidents following the sickness manifest the place, so
Raving or Ravery designs the brain to be distempered; the Cheeks very red
show the Lungs to be inflamed; the loss of appetite speaks the indisposition
of the stomach; and the Excrement issuing like to the washing of raw flesh,
declares the debelity of the Livor.

Canon 5.
Thus having found out the part that is troubled, the next is to search whether
it be by Idiopathy, that is from the first proper passion; or by Sympathy, that
is from a natural passion assisting the other, because it is requisite, first
to help the part that is troubled by its own proper desert; so Idiopathy, is a
proper indisposition of the part, as is the Pearl of the eye; Sympathy is an
indisposition which befalls any part by the fault of another; and that either
because of the defluxion of an humor falling from one part to another, or by
reason of the defect of the natural faculty required for the action of that
part; sometimes it falls out that a part of a long trouble by a Sympathy, in
the end turns to be troubled by an Idiopathy; Idiopathy is either primative or
consecutive, it is therefore expedient to observe whether the disease be
privative, that is, first, or consecutive, that is, when it does flow from
another.

An Idiopathy is discerned from a Sympathy, when the sore or grief is alone
continually without intermission, and receives neither increase nor
diminution, by the augmentation or declination of any disease, that is in any
other part, but remains still in one state and condition, the Remedies applied
serving for the good of the same, by these signs the indisposition is
Idiopathetick; but when it follows another disease, and grows according to
the growth of the same, and also is mitigate by the same Remedies, and when the
Remedies applied to it self do not help, it is then by Sympathy; so the pain of
the head arising from the stomach, is distinguished from the dolor that comes
of the proper fault of the brain, in that it succeeds to a beltching and
desire to Vomit, to an evil smell or taste in the mouth, with a falling away or
Li^^chamy, that is, a swouning; and when it grows with an indisposition of the
stomach, not receiving help from the topics applied to the head.

Canon 6.
Having found out the part of the body offended, the next inquisition must be
of the indisposition.

The indisposition that hinders the Action is called Morbus or sickness, that
which follows is termed Symptom, and that which engenders is named Cause,
so all the indisposition against nature, is either Morbus, Symptoma, or Causa.

The Symptom is known of it self without other signs, because it is objected
still to some of the senses, but the disease and the Causes are for the most
part removed from the senses; but they are known by the Symptoms, which are
the signs, namely by the Actions hurt, by the Excrements and by the Accidents
of the body.

Canon 7.
Malady or Sickness is an indisposition against nature, that hurts immediately
the Action of the part affected: whenever then the Action is found to be
hindered or hurt, then it is a disease.

Sickness or Malady is triple, Similare; Isntrumental and common, the first
hurts the Action of the part Similary, the second troubles the use of the
organick, the third hinders both; wherefore if the Action of the part, insomuch
as it is Similary be hurt, the disease shall be Similare; if it be so far as an
Instrument, it shall be isntrumental; and if they both fall together it shall
be common.

The action of the part Similare, is hindered by a simple intemperature, as
heat, cold, moistness and drowth; or by one composed, as hot and dry, hot and
humid, cold and dry, cold and humid, and that either with or without matter,
the use of the Organ is perverted by the fault of the greatness, number,
situation, but oftenest by confirmation and obstruction, both the one and the
other is troubled by the breach or solution of continuity in the parts, as by
Phlegmon, or Inflammation, Scirrh or hard swelling, or by any other tumor
contrary to nature, as also by Ulcer, Wound, Fracture or Luxation; so
Intemperature is a sickness Similare, obstruction a disease Organick, and
solution of the Continuity is a sickness common.

The diversity of Especes or Kinds, are known by the variety of the Actions
hindered; so the continual desire of sleep, signifies an indisposition cold
and moist of the brain; a continual watching shows a hot and dry Pulse;
frequent, quick and unequal, a Fever: likewise the kind of the pain points
forth the disease, as a dolor inflamative; a hot distemper, a dolor
stupefactive, a cold distemper.

The Excrement serves also to find out the Kind of the sickness, as sand in the
water shows gravel; the meat sent forth below without change, declares a
Lientery or imperfect digestion, as also the Accidents of the body: So the
color green shows an opilation or stopping in the Liver, brown color an
obstruction in the Spleen, a black Tongue, a burning or Fever, the nails
crooked, a Consumption Prisie or Cough of the Lungs, the Cheeks red, a
Peripneumonie or inflammation of the Lungs; amongst these Accidents, such as are
proper and inseparable, are holden for the most certain; because they have a
great demonstrative faculty.

Canon 8.
The nature and situation of the place, serves much to the knowledge of the
kind of the sickness, for every part has its own proper sickness; so the eyes
only are subject to a Pearl, the Kidneys and Bladder to the Stone, the Guts
to Worms and not the Stomach; the heart can never suffer an Ulcer profound, nor
the Lung any dolor.

Canon 9.
For the better taking the disease, let diligent consideration be had to the
things antecedent, such as are the Nature, the Habitude, the Age, the Country,
the Season, the disposition of the Arire, the form of Life with the diseased;
and the sickness wherewith he uses to be molested, for one is soonest
overtaken with a disease wherewith their nature has greatest familiarity; so
hot diseases are most frequently incident to hot, bilious or choleric people,
and cold sicknesses, to cold lumpish natures, and that as well to those who are
such by Nature, Habitude and Age, as to those who are so by reason of the
Region, the season and the constitution of the Air; and albeit that all sorts
of sickness may befall to all sorts of Persons, of all Ages, in all Places and
Times; yet they fall most frequently on the Temperament, Age, Place and time,
with the which they have some affinity; an Epidemick or universal sickness, is
known incontinently by the running of it among the people, seizing on many at
one time: All hereditary diseases, as the Epilepsy, or Falling Sickness, the
Gravel, the Gout, are suspected to be incident to Persons descended from
Parents afflicted with such infirmities. Moreover the kind of the disease, is
often found by using such things as hurt or help it, for the hot intemperature
does increase by the use of hot things; but is mitigated by the use of cooling
things, the cold intemperature is contrary.

Canon 10.
After the acquired knowledge of the disease, search next for the Cause of it;
which is either externe, or interne, inward or outward. The interne is twofold,
antecedent or conjoined. First then seek out the Cause conjoined, because it
immediately produces a disease; it is therefore needful to search, whether it
be wind or any other superabounding humor, as Blood, Choler, Melancholy, or
Phlegm; or any other thing contrary to nature, as Stone, lump of blood,
worms, or any other sort of Excrement, the color and nature of the Place, the
kind of the dolor, and the sort of the Excrement; these with the predominant
humor in the body will serve for Marks.

Canon 11.
For when the part inflamed is red, it is full of Blood; when yellow full of
Choler; that which is cold and white is replenished with Phlegm; when
blackish with melancholy, for the color of the skin does commonly point forth
the humor that is within; diverse parts are appointed for the engendring of
diverse humors excrementitious, as the Liver for breeding of yellow Choler, the
Spleen of black Choler, the Stomach, the Lungs, the Brain of Phlegm, the
Kidneys and Bladder, of Gravel and the Stone, the Guts of Worms.

The pain pricks sore when it is caused of choler, and more moderate when it
proceeds of blood; blunt when it comes of Melancholy, Phlegm or Wind, except
when they make great distention through their abundance.

If that which issues forth by the Excrement, be a portion of that which is
continued within, it shows either by the substance or color what it is, we
shall speak hereafter of the predominant humor.

Canon 12.
After the knowledge of the Cause conjoined, it follows to know whether it be
alone, or if it be fostered and furnished by any other Cause antecedent; that
which gathers is by way of congestion through the fault of the part offended,
and is reputed to be alone, but when all the body or any part of it does
exonerate it self, on the member affected of any superabounding humor which
overburdeneth, there is th^n the Cause antecedent, which does accompany the
conjoined; so there be two sorts of Causes interne, to which Remedies must be
used.

Canon 13.
The Cause antecedent of the sickness is double, the one is named Plethor or
Plenitude, the other is named Cacochymie or evil digestion. Plethor is a
repletion of all the humors equally augmented, or of blood only. Cacochymie
is a repletion of Choler, Melancholy or Phlegm, the signs both of the one and
the other, are taken both from the causes antecedent which do gather the
humors, that is to say, from the temperature of the whole body and of the
principal parts, from the age, season, constitution of the Air, from the
Region, Manner of living, and of the evacuation ordinarily suppressed: As also
from the accidents that befall all the qualities of the body; such as be the
color, the habitude, the functions animal, vital and natural, as from the
sleep, dreams, pulse, concoction, excrements of the diseases ensuing, and of
the things that hurt or profit.

Canon 14.
There be two sorts of Plenitude, the one called Plenitudo ad vires, in which
the blood, though it be not excessive neither in quantity nor quality, does
nevertheless overcharge the weak forces of Nature: The other is Plenitudo ad
vasa, the which in quantity surpasses the natural limits or bounds; and this
either light or gentle, that is, when it fills only the cavity of the vein,
not far exceeding mediocrity; or it is excessive, when it extends so that it
almost rends the veins through the fullness of it by too great abundance; and
although it be very excessive, yet it may be, so that Nature be not choked by
it, for commonly the force grows with the blood: but if it fall out that the
forces are abated, then it is Plenitudo super vires.

When then in a Plethor the body is no way, by a too great weight, lazy or
heavy, and the force or strength remains still in one state, it is only a
Plenitudo ad vasa; but when the body becomes heavy, lazy and doiled, the sleep
troubled and profound, seeming to carry, as it were, something whilst he
sleeps, it is then Plenitudo super vires.

Canon 15.
The causes that engender blood in abundance are signs antecedent of a
Plenitude, as the Complexion temperate of all the whole body, but chiefly of
the Livor and the Heart, or else moderately hot and humid.

The Age growing is another, for children and young folk have much blood,
because they are not far from their principes or beginning of their natural
generation.

The Spring also is a cause, for in it the Blood abounds, for then the cold
cease and the waters descend.

Also good fare, a pleasant passed life, without care, with moderate exercise
and sleep. The natural evacuation of Blood suppressed, or the artificial for
long time intermitted.

The Accidents which show the domination of Blood in the body, are the signs
consequent of Blood, such be the color of the face and all the body, red by
the ordinary custom or mixed of red and white; the swelling of the Veins
equally appearing through all; a manifest bending of the Vessels, being full of
Blood by measure, a laziness or weariness coming of it self without any labor,
under the which the joints, by reason of their weight, with great difficulty do
move themselves; for it is when the great Veins over-full of blood, do
exonerate themselves into the little, and they again into the Muscles, that
they are thus filled and bended.

The Habitude of the body fleshy, because it does proceed of abundance of
blood, yea the Mediocre fleshy accompanied with a heat benign and vaporous;
this is a sign of a nature temperate which ingenders abundance of blood: The
fashions and carriage merry, joviall, peaceable and gentle, are good signs,
because they are marks of a body well-disposed: The heaviness of the head
proceeding from the abundance of vapors, ascending upwards increases blood;
so does the sleep profound and pleasant, with dreams of things pleasant; the
pulse also strong, great and full, for in it the veins are so full, that they
do infuse a part in the neighbour-Arteries, by an Anastomasie or transfusion of
the blood through the veins, which being filled, causes such a pulse, and
that not only in the Wrists, but also in the Temples, the Fingers, and over
all the body.

The respiration or breathing more difficile and frequent, chiefly after
exercise, is another sign of increase of blood, because the Muscles of the
breast are made lazy through the abundance of blood. Hence it is that the
respiration is made more frequent by reason of the use, but shortened, because
the capacity interior of the breast is made more strict.

The promptitude of rendering blood by the Stools, the Emrods, the monthly
Courses, the Water, the Nose, and the Spittle; And finally by a continual
sweating, during the time of the disease, are tokens of much plenitude.

Canon 16.
Cacochimy, or evil digestion, is threefold, Choleric, Melancolick and
Phlegmatic; the Causes that gather abundance of Choler are signs preceding
the same, and such are, 1. The Complexion hot and dry, for commonly there
engenders much Choler in men of a hot and dry Complexion, by reason of the
conformity of this humor with that temperament. 2. The manly age which is
between twenty five, and thirty five; for in that age Choler does abound,
because the natural heat is much more dry and active then before, in which
also a great part of inbred moisture or sap is consumed. 3. The Summer, for the
Choler is more abundant then, by reason of the circumsisting Air, which makes
the blood more hot and dry. 4. The Climate hot and dry, the precedent diet of
the same qualities. 5. Great exercise, Travel, Anger, Care, Watching, Fasting
and Abstinence, do all gather Choler. 6. The suppression of the ordinary
evacuation of Choler by Vomit, by the Stool, by Urine, and by Sweat.

The consequent marks of abounding Choler are 1. The whole color of the body
pale, yellow, or blackish, drawing near to that of the Jaundies or brown; for
when the temperament is excessive in heat, the Choler is black. 2. The state of
the body dry, lean and small, for such proportions are commonly Choleric; as
also such as be hairy, with the hair red, for that is the Excrement of Choler,
but more the black, for black hair is when the exhalation, burnt by the force
of the heat, is changed into black, but the red is when it is not so burnt. 3.
The greatness of the veins extended by the heat, for they who have great
veins are of Complexion hot, but such as have strait and narrow veins are of
cold constitution, for it is heat that does enlarge. 4. The heat sharp and
biting to the touch. 5. Promptitude to courage, and a disposition to anger and
revenge. 6. The sense lively, light and sudden. 7. The spirit subtle and of
great invention, for the subtilty and industry of the judgment comes of the
humor Bilous or Choleric. 8. The sleep little and light accompanied with
inquietudes, great watching, testifying the great dryness of the brain, or
from abundance of an humor bilious or Choleric with them. 9. Dreams of War,
Fire and things furious. 10. The pulse vehement, hasty and hardy. 11.
Bitterness of the mouth, loss of Appetite, great Thirst, venting of Choler
upward and downward, with the belly often constipate or bound. 12. The Urine
yellow, biting, inflamed, and with little grounds. 13. The diseases choleric
frequent, as Fevers fierce and ardent, Raving, Jaundies, Herps or Ring-wormes,
Erisiple or S. Anthonies fire, Pustules, Cholericks dispersed through the whole
body.

Canon 17.
The Melancholic distemper is known, First, by the causes productive of
Melancholy, such are, 1. The temperature cold and dry, with a debility in the
Spleen; or hot from the beginning, but becoming cold by change; for if any hot
and dry before, by an adus^ion of the blood shall engender much black Choler,
he becomes cold and dry, and in the end Melancholy. 2. The declining Age, which
is between thirty five and forty five, for melancholy does abound in that age,
because it succeeding to the youth, which is the most Choleric of all, it
receives the Choler burnt. 3. The Harvest, for in it also melancholy abounds,
because succeeding from the Summer, it receives the burnt Choler from it. 4.
Gross food and viscous increase melancholy, as brown-Bread, Hogs-flesh, Beef,
Hares-flesh, Harts-flesh, and chiefly any of these salted, thick, black-Wine,
Beer and old Cheese. 5. The life sad, occupied in great affairs, in
contemplation, Studying without Recreation or exercise of the body, for by it
the natural heat diminishes, and the humors become gross and thick. 6. The
suppression of melancholy which used to be by the Emrods, monthly Courses,
Seeges, Scabs or by Medicine.

As also by the signs of melancholy predominant in the body, such are, 1. The
color brown or blackish of the Face or all the body, the skin full of Scabs,
Hardness, Swelling and pain of the Spleen, the habitude of the body dry and
lean, the visage sad and heavy, Fear, Silence, Solitariness, Urine,
Imagination, Conceits, for the constancy of the spirit comes of an humor
melancholic. 2. The mind slow to wrath, but being, incensed hard to be
appeased. 3. The sleep troubled with horrible Dreams, as with sights of evil
Spirits, Tortures of Death, Sepulchers and other things fearful. 4. The pulse
light, slow and hard. 5. The appetite depraved, sometimes disordered by reason
of a sower matter adhering to the orifice of the Stomach. 6. The water clear
and white, where there is no melancholy mixed, but thick and black, where there
is melancholy mixed with it. 7. Where the diseases melancholy are frequently
arriving.

Canon 18.
The knowledge of Pituitous or phlegmatic distemper, is taken from the causes
antecedent procreating it, and the signs assequent following it: The antecedent
are, 1. The Complexion of the body cold and humid; the old age, which is from
Forty nine to the term of Life, for in that age, by reason of the weakness of
the natural heat, much phlegm is engendered. 2. The Winter, because that season
(as Hipocrates reports) replenisheth the body with phlegm, both by the length
of nights, as also by reason of the abundance of rain, for in the rainy season,
the watery air which does environ the body, gathers quantities of pituitous
humors and watery superfluities. 3. The great uses of humid and moist meat,
the frequent drinking of water, and any kind of excess either in meat or drink.
4. Idleness or want of exercise, with a sedentary or sitting life, long sleep,
and especially after meat.

The assequent or following marks of phlegm are, 1. The color of the face and
all the body somewhat whitish, grayish or livid, being withal swelled, the
whole body grown and fat; for fat folk are commonly cold and phlegmatic,
grease being engendered by the coldness of the habitude of the body, the veins
and Arteries being little and strait, as coming of little blood and few
spirits. 3. The skin white and soft without hair, because the complexion cold
and humid is no ways hairy, the hair is white because it is created of phlegm.
4. All the senses of the body heavy and lazy, the spirit stupid, the sleep
profound, the pulse small and soft. 5. Slow digestion, of belching, with a
sower taste, a desire to vomit, the water whitish, crude, and sometime troubled
with a thick ground. 6. Pituitous and phlegmatic diseases frequently
occurring, or old Cattarhs and the like.

Canon 19.
The antecedent Causes declaring a windy Cacochymie or Digestion are, 1. The
stomach cold and humid, with a debility of natural heat, proceeding of a simple
intemperature, or with humors indigested. 2. The Spleen swelled and bound up
with melancholy, hindering, by a Sympathy, the digestion of the stomach, 3.
Meats windy, as raw Fruits, Beans, Pease, Chestnuts and the like, overmuch
drink, too much boiled meat, Drunkenness and Gluttony. 4. Lack of Exercise,
great sleep, the Age, the Country, season of the Year, Cold does cause
abundance of Ventosities. 5. When wind is gathered in the body by reason of the
former causes, there is found a distention of the Venticle, of the Colic,
Gout, chiefly on the left side with a noise. 6. The wandering discenting pains
running here and there through the whole body. 7. There is wind heard to issue
at all occasions both upward and downward, from whence comes some ease; there
is also often to be observed a singing in the ear. 8. The Chollick, with other
diseases arising of wind, do often trouble.

Canon 20.
The external causes of sickness, called by the Greeks Procatarticks or
primitive causes, ought diligently to be searched, for they lead us to the
knowledge of the cause intern; as of the disease, for air, meat and drink to
warm, watching, great and violent motion, anger and the suppression of the
Excrements, these engender hot humors and hot diseases: On the contrary, cold
food with a cooling air, sleep, idleness, fear, and all evacuation and
immoderate causes beget cold humors and cold diseases. Dry diseases commonly
accompany hot causes, and humid diseases arise from cold causes, for hot do
ordinarily bring with them drowth, and cold produces humidity, because it is
the parent of crudities.

To find out therefore exactly the cause and effect of a Malady which is hid,
it is needful, by a diligent inquisition and interrogation of all things, which
commonly are not natural causes, to learn of the sick, if he has exposed
himself to any intemperate or impure air, if he has committed any excess in
meat or drink, in watching or laboring, or if he has been too fierce in
Venery; if the spirit have not been troubled by passions, or if some ordinary
evacuation be not suppressed, as the monthly courses to women, and the flux of
Emrods to men: and so much the rather, because he ought to enquire carefully of
the things past, because ignorance of the causes is not without great danger;
for if a fever should happen upon a long watching, fasting, or too much Venery,
then without consideration of the cause of the disease, should they presently
draw blood and purge, they should hazard the life of the Patient, seeing the
disease came from evacuation; but on the contrary, he ought rather to repair
the spirits by Analecticks or Restoratives, and to augment the disease by
drawing blood and Catharticks or Purgos.

PART. II. To foresee the issue of the Disease.
CANON I.
THe fundamental Laws of Prognostics or Foreknowledge, are taken from the
things Natural, not Natural, and contrary to to Nature. As of the Spring, for
the sickness may be foreseen and foretold to be salutiferous or mortal, short
or long, by the spirits, by the constitution of the body, by the age of the
Patient, by the season, by the form of life, by the cause, by the Espece or
kind, and by the siege of the evil, with the symptoms which are remarkable in
the change or diminution of the actions, the excrements, and in the quality of
the body.

Canon 2.
If the body be strong to obtain the victory over the disease, without doubt
the sick shall escape, if not he shall die, for none die so long as their
spirit remains, but so soon as the spirits begin to yield to the burden of the
sickness, then follows death. Now to foretell the day of death good observation
must be made, how far the sickness surpasses the spirits, and well to mark the
most violent access; for it is observable, that when the sickness does
transcend the spirits, so as they can no longer resist, death must necessarily
follow; but if it appear otherwise, death shall not so soon approach. So that
the original of Prognostics does consist in conferring the spirits with the
sickness; for if Nature be strong enough to overcome the sickness, then the
Patient shall escape; but if she be so weak that she cannot obtain the victory,
death then of necessity must follow; and the Physician must wait on the one or
the other sooner or later, according as the spirits are stronger or weaker;
hence it appears that all other signs, salutiferous or mortal, are no otherwise
foresigns of life or death, but as they point forth the strength or weakness of
Nature in the combat with the sickness.

Canon 3.
It is a great help to health to be of a moderate constitution of body, that
is, neither too fat nor too lean, for such a body has great strength to resist
any disease which does present it self; but where this moderation is not, a
gross body is in a worse case than a lean, for they who are fat die sooner than
such as are otherwise, because the veins and arteries of grown fat people are
narrow and strait, and have but little blood and spirit; so that the age
concurring upon a light occasion, the natural heat is choked or extinguished;
but such as are of a lean and thin constitution, because they have the veins
and arteries larger, and therefore contain more blood and spirits within them,
do not so soon incur the danger of death: yet so it is, that they are sooner
troubled by external causes, and that for want of flesh and fat: so then the
gross are more obnoxious to intern infirmities, and the lean to extern.

Canon 4.
Youth has great strength to withstand a disease, because he has store of
natural heat, requisite to the concoction and excretion of the evil humors:
contrarily, old age is not able to resist, because of the defect of strength,
not having much natural heat; hence it is that sickness stays longer upon old
people than young, because they abound in cold humors, the digestion whereof
cannot be but in a long space, by reason of the weakness of their natural heat,
yea, the greatest part of sickness that does arrive to old people, conveys them
to their graves.

Canon 5.
The Spring is very wholesome and no ways mortal when it keeps temperature, but
in Harvest diseases are very strong and deadly for the most part; First,
because cold and dry are diametrically opposite to life, which consists in
heat and moisture, for those humors hinder the generation of blood, whereof the
body is made and nourished. Secondly, because it receives from the Summer
proceedings from the body languishing and weary. Thirdly, because it
suppresseth within the body the superfluous humors, melted by the heat of the
Summer, which come forth to the skin, to the end they may go forth. Fourthly,
because about the twelfth hour it opens the pores of the body by the heat,
and incontinently after becoming cold, it arises within the body as an enemy
to extinguish, by its malign quality, the natural heat already feeble and
languishing; moreover it gathers store of crudities within the body, which do
choke the natural heat, and that especially by the use of fruits which it
produces. The Summer hastens sicknesses, but the Winter does retard them,
because in the Summer, the pores being open, the evil humors of the body being
melted by the heat of the air, are suddenly dissipated; but in winter, they
being closed by the cold, are retained within.

Canon 6.
Amongst constitutions of the Seasons the dry is most wholesome, and not deadly,
as the rainy, for it gathers no Excrements, and better resists to putrefaction.
The humid, on the contrary, causes many superfluities, from whence are the
generation of diseases. When the seasons are constant, keeping the temperature
ordinary, so that all things do naturally fall out in them, the diseases are
likewise constant, and easy to be understood: but when the season is
inconstant, so are the sicknesses variable, and hard to be understood, for the
Crisis or conflict is accompanied with dangerous Symptoms, where they suddenly
cause death, or else leave a matter to a new sickness.

Canon 7.
When the sick proves a good second to the Physician fighting against the
sickness, it is then easy to obtain the victory; now when he believes the
Physician, and puts his Ordnances in practice, he serves him for a second, and
declares himself an enemy to the disease. On the contrary, if acquitting the
Physician he takes part with the disease, by accomplishing that which himself
desires, he hazards his life two ways, one in leaving the Physician alone in
the combat; the other, in serving as a second to the sickness, which was before
alone; for it is certain that two are stronger than one.

Canon 8.
The greatness of the sickness follows the greatness of the cause; for as a
light cause produces a light evil, so a great cause renders a great effect.
Hence a vehement cause, contrary to Nature, is a most certain Indice of a great
and dangerous sickness.

Canon 9.
Choler does ever cause quick diseases, which determine and end within a few
days, because it is easily resolved by its subtility. But Melancholy is the
most viscous of all the humors, and makes longest accesses, because it is dry,
cold and thick, being the life of the blood. Next to Melancholy is Phlegm in
difficulty of digestion and expulsion, by reason of its viscosity.

Canon 10.
The diseases which have some resemblance with the nature, bodily constitution,
and age of the Patient, are less dangerous than those that have no conformity:
for all sicknesses, hot, cold, dry or moist, being conform to the complexion,
age, and bodily constitution of the sick, as also to the season, has so much
less danger as it is less removed from the natural constitution, and so may
more easily return, as proceeding from a lighter and slighter cause: as on the
contrary, the disease which has no affinity neither with the temper, likeness,
nor age of the Patient, or with the season, is much more dangerous than the
former, being further removed from the natural complexion, and therefore worse
to cure, as proceeding from a greater and stronger cause; so that of two
burning Fevers, equal in grandeur, that which falls out in Summer to a young
man, lean of body and hot of temper, shall not be so dangerous, as that which
falls out in Winter to an old man, of a fat body and cold complexion.

Canon 11.
Meek and gentle relenting diseases are commonly long, but the sharp, fiery and
fierce are ended within fourteen days, and the extreme hot in seven days.

There can be no certain prediction made of hot sharp diseases, either for
health or death, for because they are quickly ended they become suddenly great,
so that both for the greatness of the disease, with the sudden change which
befalls in the Crise or conflict, as also because the humor is often
transported from one place to another, the issue is uncertain: wherefore whilst
the humor is in its motion, it is best to suspend judgment, for it is not
certain whether it will rush on a noble or ignoble part, within or without, by
passages convenient or inconvenient; and though the humor were stayed in one
place, yet the Physician ought not resolutely to affirm that the sick shall
escape, but with this provision, That no new change befall, and that he follow
the advice, and keep the regiment prescribed.

When a woman with child is overtaken by any fiery hot disease, she is in
danger of her life, for a hot fiery Fever requires a strict diet, which she
cannot admit, lest the child being robbed of the food, she be delivered before
her time: and again, if sometimes to save the child the mother should often
eat, the Fever thereby increasing, the mother shall be precipitate in manifest
hazard of her life: and if it be any other strong sickness without Fever, as
Epilepsie, Apoplexy or Convulsion, she shall never be able to support the
vehemency of it.

Canon 12.
To foresee the event of the disease, diligence must be used in considering the
part that is offended, whether it be noble or ignoble, public or private; for
the condition, dignity and necessity of the part that suffers, are of great
importance for the pronouncing of the sentence to the profit or prejudice of
the Patient.

Canon 13.
In all diseases the constancy of the reason not troubled, together with the
bounty of the Appetite, still ready for whatsoever shall be offered unto it, it
is a good sign, and the contrary is an evil sign. The setledness of the Reason
and sharpness of the appetite are numbered amongst the good marks, because the
former bears witness of the temperate disposition of the brain, the ties and
ligaments of the brains, of the marrow of the back, of the Midriff, and of all
the nervous parts; and the later shows the integrity of the Stomach and Livor.

On the contrary, the alienation and troubling of the Reason, and the loss of
Appetite, are evil signs, because the one betokens the animal parts to be
affected, the other the natural.

All they that are troubled with pain or dolor in any part of the body
whatsoever, and are not sensible of it, have the reason troubled, because the
apprehension does not in any measure perceive the evil.

Canon 14.
It is good to sleep in the night to make reparation of the spirits animal, and
a digestion of the humors, by the means of the heat that enter; within the
center of the body, and to watch in the day for clearing of the same spirits,
to give motion to the humors, and to make expulsion of the Excrements; but it
is a very pernicious sign not to sleep night nor day, for continual watching
comes either of dolor, pain and torment suffered, or of the dryness of the
brain, which, in the end will cause an alienation of the mind.

Sleep likewise surpassing the bounds of mediocrity, is in like manner evil,
because it is a mark of extreme coldness in the brain, which causes a Lethargy
or Obliviousness, if it be mixed with humidity, or else a Catalepsy, which is a
kind of the Falling Sickness, if it be acompanied with dryness. When in a
sickness sleep is noisome and hurts, there is danger of death; for if the sleep
does hurt in that time that it has been accustomed to help much, as in the
declination of any sickness, it is not without cause that it foretells death,
and that because the heat, retired within the body in the time of the sleep,
does by this means increase; and being not able, either by reason of its
weakness, or the maliciousness of the humors, to overcome the causes of the
disease, it shows that Nature (no way strengthened or comforted by this means,
but rather hurt) is ready to sink under the burden, the disease being stronger.

Canon 15.
The Pulse is the faithful messenger of the heart, bringing certain news of
death or life. The Pulse great and strong is a token of strength, on which is
builded the hope of the healths recovery; but the Pulse little, weak and
languishing, shows the weakness of the vital faculty, from whence is the fear
of death. The inequality of the Pulse is also evil; when it continues an
intermission in young men it is most dangerous, for it threatens present
death; if it be not from an obstruction and oppression of the Arteries, it is
less dangerous in children, and least of all in old men.

Canon 16.
The respiration free without stop or let is very wholesome in all sharp and
quick diseases, because it denotes the temperature of the breast, and of the
parts therein contained. So also the respiration remaining whole, declares the
natural heat yet to be strong to fight valiantly against the disease: On the
contrary, the difficulty of breathing shows the indisposition of the vital
parts, and the suffocation of the spirits.

For the respiration frequent and great, is a sign of some inflammation of the
parts within the breast, but the great and seldom breathings do foreshow a
future alienation of the spirit, as the respiration little and rare betokens
death, because it bears witness of the extinction of the natural heat, which is
clearly perceived by the coldness of the breath issuing at the nostrils and the
mouth.

Canon 17.
It is a good sign to have constantly a whole heart, for they who fall often
into Lipothamy or swounings, without a manifest cause, do die in the end
suddenly, because of the debility of the vital faculty.

Canon 18.
The coction of the humor appearing in the Excrement of the Patient, signifies
the Crisis or conflict to be speedily in assurance of health; but the crudity
denotes, that either there shall be no Crisis, or that the Patient is mightily
troubled, or that the disease shall be longer, or that afterward it shall
return, or finally, that death shall follow upon it. For as when the coction is
made, Nature is victorious over the causes of the disease, so the contraty
comes to pass when she is overcome by them: for instance, the foecal matter
being soft, equal and yellow, not having any evil smell, is judged to be good
because it is well digested; in like manner the water being of a middle
consistence, of color somewhat yellow, having grounds white, united and equal,
is reputed to be singular good, because it bears witness that the vicious
humors are digested, and consequently that Nature has gotten the victory over
them. On the contrary, the digestion liquid and watery, white and pale, is
reputed evil because it is crude and raw; so also the Urine watery and small,
white and exceedingly shining, is not good, because it is raw and without
digestion.

Canon 19.
When the Excrements of the sick are not very different from the Excrements of
the whole, it shows the disease to be light; but if there be a very great
difference, the disease must be apprehended to be deadly; for the Excrements
differing show Nature to be overcome by the greatness of the disease.

Therefore the foecal matter black, livid, green and stinking, are mortal,
because they are wholly alienated from the natural constitution; and the water
that is black, and thick, and troubled, like that of Oxen, is most evil,
because extremely removed from the natural.

The same mixed in color foreshews a long disease, for they denote diverse
indispositions caused of diverse humors, and therefore it is necessary that
Nature employ her self a long time to the concoction, having so many Enemies to
combat.

The Urine, in which grease is seen to swim like spiders webs, is evil,
because it declares a melting of the body by an extraordinary heat.

Canon 20.
Sweats are good in all sharp and fiery diseases, when they fall on critical
days, and they cause the Fever wholly to cease. They are good also when they
make the disease more easy to the Patient, provided they be universal; but the
sweats which bring no ease, nor serve to any use, as also those that are cold,
and appear only about the head, face and neck, are most evil; for in a hot,
fiery and quick Fever they prognostic death, and in a gentle Fever they show
the longness of the disease. A cold sweat, running without ceasing and in great
abundance, is a mark of a long disease, because it comes by reason of a great
quantity of gross and cold matter, which cannot easily be dissipated or tamed
by the natural heat. A hot sweat, on the other side, shows a short disease,
which being caused of a subtle matter, will in a short space be dissolved.

Canon 21.
If the visage of the sick be like to the countenance of whole persons, it is a
very excellent sign, chiefly if it look like it self being whole. On the
contrary, it is a very evil sign when it is different from the natural, and
when it is hideous to behold, as it is when the nose is sharp, the eyes hollow,
the temples abated, the ears cold and drawn in, the lap of the ear turned, the
skin of the face hard, extended and dry, the color of the face pale or black,
livid or lead-coloured; for if this deformity do not proceed of a manifest
cause, as of lack of sleep, or of meat, or by reason of a Flux of the belly,
without doubt it presageth death to be near, for this great extenuation is made
by the malignity of the disease.

Canon 22.
Where a change is perceived through the whole body, so that it is now cold,
then hot, sometimes of one color, then of another, it foretells a long
disease; for the indispositions diversely mixed are still longer than those that
are of a fast form or fashion, for Nature cannot tame or overcome more at once.
Now the changing of qualities and humors demonstrate the disease to be caused
of diverse humors, in the coction whereof Nature has need to employ much time,
for according to the variety of the humors within, there appears a variety of
colors without.

Canon 23.
It is a good sign to have the Hypoconders, that is, the space under the short
ribs on either side, soft, equal and without dolor, but very evil to have them
hard, bended, unequal and painful; for as the former shows the good temperature
of the Epigasticks or skins covering the Muscles, of the Mesentery, the Livor,
the Spleen and the Stomach; so the later declares an intemperature, that is, an
inflammation, a skirrh or wind to be in those parts.

In all diseases it is good that the parts above the Navel, and the inferior
part of the belly be gross, fat and in good case; for the Hypoconders gross and
fleshy are marks of strength, but the small and extenuate are evil both as
signs and as causes, for as much as they are signs of the debility of the parts
extenuate, and causes that the digestion is not well elaborate in the stomach,
nor the sanguification in the Livor, for the grosness or fatness of the
Epigastre or lower parts of the belly do augment the natural heat, by the parts
within, being warmed they better digest the meat, and so make better blood.

Canon 24.
As to the consideration of the things that fall out in the body, every good
sign is not an assurance that the sick shall escape; neither on the other side,
though evil signs appear, are they to be taken for warrants that he shall die,
for a good sign may be over-weighed by an Evil being great; and on the contrary
an evil sign may be overcome, a good being stronger.

Canon 25.
The disease quits the sick either wholly at once, by way of Crise, or by
little and little, by way of Resolution; Crise is a sudden change of the
Disease into Health, or else into Death, which is then, when Nature separates
the vicious humors from the good in order to expel them; of it there be two
sorts, one is by Excretion, and the other is by Absesse; that comes by a flux
of Blood, or Sweat, or by a flux of the Belly or Vomit, or flux of the Urine.

Canon 26.
The good Crise arrives on the 7, 14, or on the 20 day, wherefore these days
are called Critical, the future Crise was foreseen by the signs of digestion
appearing on the 4, 11, and the 17 day; hence these days are called by the
Greeks (...), that is, Indicatives, Contemplatives, for according to the
doctrine of Hypocrates the 4 day is the indicative of the 7. the 8 is the
beginning of the next month, the 11 is also remarkable, because it is the 4 of
the second week, and the 17 is also to be observed, because it is the 4 after
the 14, and the 7 from the 11.

Canon 27.
When the Crise is to be on the 7 day, there is to be perceived on the 4 day
preceding a red cloud in the water, and other signs correspondent, for because
the 4 day points out the 7, if there appear any sign of concoction that day, it
forewarns the Crise to be on the 7 day; where then there appears a cloud in the
water, not only red but white, and yet rather a white Hypostasis or ground
united and equal: if it so happen that the motion of the sickness be sudden,
it is a presage of the future Crise.

When the Crise draws near, the night preceding is very troublesome, but that
which follows is ordinarily more easy to be endured; for whilst Nature is
making a separation between the good and evil humors which disagree, in this
exercise of nature, the disease is much troubled; but so it is that this great
work appears the night before the Crise, because the sleep is interrupted, but
the night which follows the Crise being perfect, the humors are much more at
their own ease, because nature is disburthened of superfluous humors.

Canon 28.
The universal signs by which one discovers the espece or kind of the Crise to
come, are taken from the kind of the Disease from the part that is diseased,
and from the nature of the Patient, for hot and quick diseases are ordinarily
judged by excretion, but the cold and long by Absesse. If there be an
inflammation in the gibbous or rising part of the Livor, then must be expected
a Crise by a flux of Blood, at the right Nostrill, or by a flux of Urine; if
the inflammation be in the hollow part of it, then expect the Crise by a flux of
the Belly, or by Vomit, or by Sweat. The inflammations of the Brain and of all
the Head, are commonly judged by an Hemorragie or bleeding at the Nose, but
that of the Stomach and Mesentery are judged by Vomit or Flux downward.

Moreover a flux of Blood falls oftenest to young men choleric, overtaken with
a hot Fever, and a flux of the Belly to old men phlegmatic, there the common,
and now here the proper Prognostics of every Crise.

Redness of the Face and extreme dolor of the Head and Neck, a beating of the
Arteries in the Temples, the distention of the Hypochonders with difficulty of
breathing, a dimnesse and watering of the Eyes, singing of the Ears, and
itching of the Nostrils, prognostics the Crise to be a flux of Blood by the
Nose.

A heat and heaviness of the Loins, with a pain and extension of the
Hypogastre foreshews a Crise to be by a flux menstruall.

A suppression of the Water with a pricking and shivering through the whole
Body, with the Pulse soft and watery, and the exterior parts of the body hot
and vaporous, betokens that it will be a Sweat.

Belching Ventosities, or Winds, a bending of the Belly, and pain of the
Kidneys, by a flux of the Belly, loss of Appetite, or loathing of Meat, with a
throwing of the Heart, soreness of the Head, giddiness, great spitting,
bitterness in the Mouth, and a trembling of the under-Lip, these are
prognostics that a future Crise will be by Vomit.

When the signs of Concoction have gone before, and when the motions of a Crise
have been perceived, then it may be expected by a flux of Urine; if there do
not appear any mark of a Crise by a flux of Blood, nor by Sweat, flux of the
belly, or Vomit, and especially when the Patient feels a heaviness in the
Hypogastre, and heat about the end of the privy Member, having also made his
water thick and gross during his Disease, or if he be aged and sick in the
winter, it foretells it the rather.

A heaviness and pain of the Head, with profound sleeping and deafness,
succeeding immediately to a difficulty of breathing, suddenly arriving without
any manifest cause to one sick with a long Disease, do intimate an Absesse to
be behind the ear.

But if there be no sign of a Paritude, and that the sick has had his urine of
a long time clear and indigested, and when he finds a heaviness, a pain, a
bending, or tension, a heat in the Hypochondres, he must then expect an Absesse
in the lower parts; if any part of the body has been hurt before, there shall
the Aposteme or Absesse be; an Absesse falls out most frequently in winter, and
after an imperfect Crise.

Canon 29.
Moreover, a good Crise ought to be signified before in the day of indication,
and should fall out in a critical day with a manifest Excretion, or notable
Absesse, without dangerous accidents; it ought also to be perfect; a perfect
Crise is that which evacuates all the vicious matter, and an imperfect Crise is
that which evacuates but some part of it; the former is sure, but the latter is
not to be trusted, for the evil humors remaining after a Crise, are wont to
make one recidive or relapsing; moreover a Crise is judged to be good by reason
of the convenable quality and reasonable quantity with the former agreeable,
and the time oportime.

A Crise is known to be perfect and assured, by the re-establishing of the
Functions Natural, Vital, and Animal, by the coction of the Excrements, or by
the quality or form of the Body, reduced and made conform to the natural.

Canon 30.
There is no trusting to any ease or allegations which happen without cause,
nor fear evil Symptoms arising against Reason, for the most part of those are
inconstant, and do not last any long time; for when any vehement Disease
cease of it self without any evacuation either by Sweat, Vomit, Flux downward
or upward by Hemorrage, or without any sign of concoction, that ease is not to
be taken for granted, neither must it be believed, seeing it does threaten that
something of greater evil will follow thereon; neither need affrightment be
upon the evils which befall without, or rather contrary to Reason, as
difficulty of Breathing, Ravery, Shivering, Reduplication of the Fever, seeing
they are not constant, nor of long continuance, and so far they are from
signifying any thing that is evil that on the contrary they often presage a
good Crise, which shall arrive to the great ease of the Patient.

PART III. The right Method of curing the Disease.
CANON I.
WHosoever will exactly keep the Method of right proceeding in the Cure, ought
to begin at the first Indications, then to come to those that follow,
afterward to the next, and never to leave off till he shall come to the end
pretended. Indication is here to be taken for that which serves to teach the
way in the cure of the Disease, to attain to Health.

Canon 2.
The Forces, Strength, or Spirits ought before all things to be preserved and
encouraged in those who are diseased; After the indication of the Forces
follows the consideration of the Indisposition which is proposed to be cured;
the Force or Spirit intends always the Conservation, and the Indisposition its
Ablation: now as the Forces are kept and conserved by the like, so the
Indisposition is taken away by the contrary.

Canon 3.
In all diseases where the efficient cause is yet present, the cure must begin
at the same, for it is impossible to cure any Disease perfectly while the cause
that ingenders it does continue; so the Maladies never cease till the evil
humors ingendring them be banished; which evil humors do lurk within the body.

Canon 4.
After the taking away of the Cause, the judgment is to be directed to the
Disease engendered of that Cause, keeping for a general rule first the ablation
or removing of the Cause efficient, and next of the Malady.

Canon 5.
The cure of the Symptom is first intended, but always that of the Malady which
causes the Symptom, yet when the Symptom menaceth with Death, or greater or
suddener danger then the Disease it self, the cure of it may be first attempted.

Canon 6.
Whilst the Disease is growing, the growth of it must be hindered, and that
part taken away that is already engendered; the generation of that which is to
come is hindered by taking away the Cause antecedent, and the Malady already
engendered is banished by taking away the cause conjoined.

Canon 7.
In all Diseases caused or Fluxion, that is first to be stopped which is
flowing, and next that which is already flowed is to be drawn forth; therefore
the cure of a Phlegmon or fluxion of Blood, a Catarrh, or defluxion of Rheum,
and of all other Diseases which are caused by a Fluxion, look all to two ends;
the one is, that the humor which is running be stayed, the other, that that of
it which is already in the part be evacuated.

Canon 8.
In all Diseases complicate, where one cannot be cured without the other, there
must be respect had to Order; now Method or Order ever requires the cure of
the first which hinders the cure of the other, as if a Phlegmon be accompanied
with an Ulcer, the first is first to be taken away, and then the other is to be
cicatriced.

Canon 9.
When two Indications are directly opposite one to the other, the one is not to
be so regarded as that the other be neglected, but rather having as good care
of this as of that, a mixture must be contrived as equal as may be: As for
example, if one be troubled by two so contrary Diseases, that one desires a
hot, the other a cold remedy, in this case the remedy used must be temperate,
to the end it do no harm to one or the other Disease, but be rather there
helpful to both; so when the Stomach is cold, and the Liver over-hot, things
temperate mixed of hot and cold ingredients are most convenient and agreeable,
or else an alternative use sometimes of the one and sometimes of the other:
hence it is that when a Plegmon is in its growth, there mixed Repercussives
with Digestives.

Canon 10.
When a Repugnancy is observed to be amongst the Indications, after mature
consideration had of the decay of the Spirits, as also upon the Indication of
the cause of the Disease, it is best to follow that which is most important,
withal by no means neglecting the other.

Canon 11.
That maxim is most necessary to be followed which commands first to cure the
most important danger; (for the Indisposition that is the first and principal
cause of precipitating the Disease in any danger ought first to be helped)
wherefore excessive watching, cruel pain, all evacuations out of measure,
chiefly of Blood, the suppression of superfluities and other the like
symptoms, which weaken the Spirits and augment the Disease in sort that some
danger do suddenly appear, does often constrain the Physician to delay the cure
of the Sickness, and to deal with those symptoms.

Canon 12.
The general method of curing Diseases is accomplished by the convenient
quantity and quality of the remedies, with the manner and time of using them.

Canon. 13.
It is requisite that all the Remedies be contrary in quality to the Disease,
for contra contrariis curantur: for if all that which is immoderate be contrary
to nature, and that which is moderate be agreeable to nature, of necessity it
will follow, that that which is out of measure must be brought to measure by
its contrary degree of measure: hence it is that all Diseases ingendered of
Repletion are cured by Evacuation, and those that proceed of Evacuation are
cured by Repletion, and so likewise of others.

Canon 14.
The temper of the body diseased with the Disease it self, shows the measure of
the contrariety, forasmuch as it is not enough to apply cold Remedies to a hot
Disease, if it be not done with a measure reasonable, for being not equal in
measure, it is to be feared that some portion of the Disease will remain, or
else being excessive the contrary Diseases will be occasioned to encounter; it
is therefore most requisite to know the nature of the body that is to be
concerned, that so understanding how far the disease exceeds mediocrity, the
proportion of the frigidative or cooling Remedy may exactly be measured;
therefore the quantity of every Remedy ought to be measured according to the
complexion of the Patient, and greatness of his sickness.

Canon 15.
The contrary Remedies must be put in use by little and little, now and then
making intermission, for it is dangerous to evacuate all at once, or else to
fill, to hear, or cool, or to change the body suddenly in any other manner; for
all that which is excessive is an enemy to nature, but that which is done by
degrees is without danger, whereby it will become surer to make moderate use of
contrary remedies, then to use them excessively and suddenly, because Nature
does not suffer sudden changes without hazard.

Canon 16.
When Diseases are in the beginning, then move that which seems good to be
moved, but when they are in their vigor it is better to let them alone in
rest, for it is more expedient to use remedies in the beginning then in the
height of the Disease, for two reasons; one because the accidents are weaker at
the entering and at the end then in the height; the other because Nature wholly
employed at that time about the concoction and excretion of the noisome humor,
ought not to be diverted or hindered by any remedy; for seeing the digestion is
then, it is better in the beginning to evacuate a part of the vicious humor,
that Nature may the more easily overcome the rest; but when the Malady is in
its vigor, Nature busied already about the concoction, it is no proper time to
use evacuation.

Canon 17.
If the espece or kind of the Sickness be so obscure that it cannot be taken up
at the first, there needs no have in using remedies, rather suffer Nature to
work it out her self; for being helped by a good diet, in the end she will drive
the sickness forth where she pleases to manifest it, for a remedy uncertain
and doubtful cannot be ordained without prejudice; if perhaps there be
necessity to use any, let it, at the least, be light, to the end that if it be
not profitable, it may not yet be hurtful.

Canon 18.
A simple Cure is sufficient for a simple Disease, but when it is compounded
with another, then it requires a composed Remedy.

Canon 19.
For the accomplishing of the Cure, it is not enough that the Physician do his
duty, but that both the Patient and such as attend do theirs also, that there
be nothing wanting of that which is required; for it is requisite that the
diseased strive to fight with the disease by means of the Medicine, and so to
obey the Physician, and not to give license to his own desires; he ought also
to have people about fitting for his service, being well lodged, and furnished
with commodities needful, and not have them to seek.

Canon 20.
The Physician, who does all things according to reason, ought not to change
his end proposed in his method proposed from the beginning, though all things
succeed not according to expectation; for it is but small wisdom lightly to
acquit that which one seemed expedient, though the success have failed; for as
the mark of a drop of water falling on a stone does not appear sensible, but
after a long space it falls; even so it is in raw and indigested diseases,
which receive no coction but with difficulty; unto which, when Reason has
found that which is convenient according to all Indications considered one
after another, one must not leave off the course intended, although there has
no manifest utility been found from it, if so it be that some other accident do
not happen which does constrain to acquit the first purpose, for there is no
reason to use the remedies which indicatious did lead unto.

Canon 21.
There be three sorts of Remedies by which all indispositions are cured that be
curable, that is to say, by Diet, by Chyrurgy or mutual Operation, and by
Pharmacy or Medicines, outward and inward: it is requisite that the diet be
repugnant to the Sickness and familiar to Nature, for wholesome food is that
which is contrary to that which is contrary to nature, and like to that which
is according to nature; so hot meats are convenient for cold diseases, moist
and humid meats for the dry, and drying food for the weak and moist; wherefore
it is expedient to prescribe a strict diet to fat and fleshy people, for such
diet dries.

Canon 22.
Meat and drink more pleasant to the taste, but less profitable is to be
preferred before that which is more profitable and pleasant, for meats are to
be permitted which are not best, not only to gratify the sick, but also for
his further good, because the stomach embraces the meat more strictly, and
keeps better that which is taken willingly, and with great contentment digests
it better; on the contrary, it rejects and disdains such foods as are
disagreeable to the taste, because they move a desire of vomiting, or cause some
fluctuating or inflation in the stomach, therefore the Patient must be humoured
in such things as are indifferent, and not very hurtful.

Canon 23.
In the ordaining of the Diet there must be care had of former customs, for
things of a long time accustomed, although worse, do commonly hurt less then
those which are not in custom.

Canon 24.
When the disease is in its vigor, it is then necessary to use a very slender
diet, as well for the greatness of the Symptoms, as for the coction of the
humors, for nature must not be hindered in the coction of the humors by the
coction of the meat.

Canon 25.
When the Disease is violent and quick, it immediately causes extreme pain and
dolor, wherefore a most sharp and weak diet is then most requisite, because
such a disease is in the vigor the first days, as the grievous Symptoms
which do incontinently accompany from the beginning do bear witness; for a
sharp sickness is that which attains to its height in the first four days or
little after.

Canon 26.
So soon as the sickness by its violence does show that it is drawing near the
height, then a strict diet must be enjoined; but when the height is long in
continuing, as it falls out in long diseases, then a larger diet would be used
till the approaching to the height, or a little before, and then it must be
restrained; strict and small diets are dangerous in long diseases, because they
abate the spirits which ought to be preserved in their integtity, to the end
they may resist the height of the disease.

Canon 27.
When the body is not clear, the more it is nourished the more it is hurt, for
seeing that the body full of vicious humors has more need of evacuation then
nutrition, it appears that they should not be too much nourished, because these
evil humors gathered a long time in the body do spoil the food newly received,
so that thereby the Chacochymie or evil digestion is augmented to the double,
which falls out chiefly when the stomach is foul; for even as mixing clear
water with muddy, it becomes all muddy and troubled, so the meat, although
pure and clear of it self, yet taken by a great quantity into a foul body,
becomes wholly corrupt.

Canon 28.
A larger diet must be granted to children then to old folks, and a mediocre to
those of a middle age, because old men endure hunger easily, and next to them
such as are entering into the declining age, young men worse, and worst of all
boys, for such as are growing have much of the natural heat, and therefore
have much need of nourishment, otherwise the body would consume, but there is
little heat in old bodies, therefore they need not much nourishment, for too
much would choke them.

Canon 29.
The great Cavities in the body, in Winter and in the Spring are naturally
hotter then at any other time, and the sleep longer, wherefore in these the
diet may be larger (by the Cavities the stomach is understood, the whole belly
containing the guts and the rest of the natural parts which are appointed for
digestion.) If any one desire to know why the natural heat is augmented in
Winter, Aristotle attributes the cause to the circumsisting air which is then
colder, by which means it drives the natural heat inward, whereas in Summer it
extends itself ordinarily through the whole body; toward the heat which is
without, as familiar to it. Hence it is that in the Summer the substance is
dissipated and exhales, but in the Winter it is holden in and keeps there, and
therefore all the coction is the better made.

Canon 30.
As to the form and manner of diet, one should eat less in the Somer, and in
the Harvest, and more often, but in the Winter and Spring more seldom, but
more abundantly, because in the Somer and the Harvest one does hardly digest
meat, but in Winter very easily, and in the Spring moderately well.

Canon 31.
Such bodies as have been extenuated by long sickness must be nourished gently,
and repaired by little and little; and those bodies that have been suddenly
brought down must be speedily restored.

Canon 32.
When the sickness gives intermission and leisure, then it is time to give meat
to the Patient, but during the access and increase of the disease he must
abstain, for meat is then hurtful, because it withdraws nature from the
digestion of the humor to the concoction of the nouriture, and because by it
the disease is augmented.

Canon 33.
Amongst the operations of Chyrurgery, Phlebotomy, or drawing of blood, keeps
the first rank, because it is the common remedy of diseases which proceed of
plenitude or fullness, for by it an evacuation is made of the humors equally,
that course being for such infirmities the most exquisite of all other.

Canon 34.
Phlebotomy is not only a remedy evacuative, but also revulsive and
derivative, for it is profitable to turn the course of the Flux to the opposite
part, or desire to turn it aside to the neighbor part.

Canon 35.
In hot Fevers blood must be drawn, even to the fainting of the spirits and
heart, if strength will bear it; which course must be used in great
inflammations and extreme pains; for if blood be drawn in hot Fevers till the
heart faint, the whole body is immediately cooled, and the vehement heat
extinguished; after which there follows a flux of the belly, and a Sweat; by
this means some are wholly cured of a Fever, and others receive great ease;
when the vehemence of that sickness is past, this sort of bleeding is likewise
good in great inflammations, both for the former reasons, and because it stops
the flux causing the inflammation, as also it hinders the growth of the
Phlegmon, by which likewise it appeaseth the great dolours caused by the heat
of the Fever, and of its inflammations; wherefore there is not found a remedy
more sovereign for insupportable dolours then this of Phlebotomy or bleeding.

Canon 36.
If the sickness do require it, much blood must be drawn, always provided the
spirits do permit it; but if they fail, then take it by little and little, and
at diverse times, for all extreme evacuations are dangerous, and chiefly
bleeding all at once.

Canon 37.
They to whom purging and bleeding are profitable, ought to be purged and bled
in the Spring, for that season is most proper to make evacuation by Phlebotomy
or Pharmacy, because at that time there is no extraordinary heat to weaken the
body by exhalation, nor great cold to make it stiff by congealing the humors
in it, nor yet unequal to disturb the spirits, but rather a moderate temper.

Canon 38.
There is great cause of deliberation to be had in opening a veyn upon a woman
with child, because a woman with child being let blood may thereby be brought
to be delivered before her time, if the child be great, because thereby the
child is robbed of its food, and shall famish in the womb of the mother, which
will cause it to break the bounds and seek elsewhere for nourishment, and all
before the maturity of time, except the mother abound in blood; for then the
fear is so needless, as in case that administration be not used, both the
mother and the child are in danger, as has been observed upon some of the most
eminent Ladies in the Court of France, where this course has been preferred to
prevent the child from be choked with the too great abundance of blood.

Canon 39.
Purgative Medicines ought to be ordained to Cacochymick Diseases, that is to
say, to purge Choler in choleric people, Phlegmon in phlegmaticks, and so of
the rest, for the cure of a Chacochymy or evil digestion is made by a
Purgation, which is particularly appropriate to the humor that abounds, and
amongst the alterative Potions, cold are ordained for the hot, and hot for the
cold distempers, dry for the humid, and humid for the dry, for the cold and
moist would be made hot and dry.

Canon 40.
Strong Potions may be given to strong Diseases, and gentle Medicines to the
more mild, for extreme remedies are requisite in extremities; so the Roman
Orator endeavoring to show how a courageous man should enterprise hazards,
says, That in the presenting himself to dangers he must imitate the customs
of Physicians, who do handle gently such as are but slightly troubled, but in
greater diseases are constrained to make use of remedies more dangerous and
doubtful.

Canon 41.
Such humors as require expulsion must be expelled by the ways most proper,
whereunto Nature inclines, and they must be diverted, if they make not their
course by the way they ought; the Physician therefore ought carefully to
observe the motion of Nature, and the inclination of the humor abounding, for
if it intend to any place fitting then to help it, otherwise to divert and draw
it into the right course; so if phlegmatic and melancholic humors take their
course downward, and nature have assayed already to subdue the fever by
retract, the Physician ought to prescribe a Clister, or some other proper
remedy to stir up nature; and if a choleric humor bend upward, and nature
strive to expel it at the mouth; a Vomit is expedient to be prescribed to draw
the humor thither where Nature chiefly aims; he that does otherwise shall
change the order and course of Nature, he shall over-strain the spirits, and put
the Patient in hazard.

Canon 42.
In very sharp sicknesses purging is necessary the very same day, if the humor
be moved, for it is not good to drive over time then, as says Hypocrates, for
fear that the evil growing, the spirits become weaker, and the wandering humors
seize on some noble part; if therefore in most sharp and violent diseases
Nature appear to be touched with a great and ardent desire to discharge her
self of superfluous humors, purging must be immediately made; and because
Desire does not often overtake Nature, to disburthen her self of vicious
humors in the beginning of such diseases, good advice must be taken to purge
purgations in time of such sicknesses.

Canon 43.
Before the body be purged, it must be prepared, and the humors must be made
fluxile, otherwise the purgation will not be without great pain and difficulty,
grinding of the belly, inquietude, fainting, debility of the pulse, and
dissolution of the spirits; wherefore to make the body fluxile, all the
passages of it are to be opened, and the gross humors within are to be made
liquid.

Canon 44.
The humors must be digested and prepared, and ought not to be purged, raw and
unprepared, and not in the beginning of any disease, except they be moved, and
have no fixed place; for as Nature is by no means moved to the evacuating of
any humor, except she have first prepared the matter; so the Physician ought
to purge the matter that is digested, not that which is indigested, because
indigested humors are slow to be moved, by reason of their viscosity and
grosness; insomuch as they stop the passages that go from the extremities of
the body to the belly, from which the Medicine does draw them, and so they come
to move troublesome Symptoms by not going forth.

Canon 45.
Women with child may be purged, if the matter be moved between the 4 and 7
month, but sooner or later is to be feared, for the infant is fastened to the
body of the mother, after the same manner that fruits are fastened to trees;
Fruits newly budded have stalks so tender, that being beaten by any violent
wind they fall easily to the ground, but with time being more firmly fixed,
they fall not so easily until they be come to their maturity, and then they
fall of themselves without violence; even so fares it with women after their
conception, if they fall into any slippery part, or move by any means either
the spirit or the body, the new conception will easily fall forth; so also
fares it with them when the children are great, but in the middle term of the
time they go with child, they cleave faster to the body, and are not so subject
to be expelled, or to miscarry; wherefore women with child may in their middle
time suffer stronger motions without hurting their fruit, and therefore may in
that time be better purged.

Canon 46.
When the Crise is, or when it has already been, and the humors are finally
expelled, then nothing ought to be moved, nothing changed, neither by Physic
nor any other thing that may irritate or stir Nature, but rather suffer Nature
to work it out her self; for seeing the Crise is a work of Nature, and not of
the Physician, when she is about it, or has already absolved it, the Physician
ought to move nothing, but rather suffer her for fear of troubling her action,
about which she being wholly employed, it is her business.

But if the Crise have been imperfect, it is the duty of the Physician to purge
that which rests of the vicious humors, fearing lest by process of time,
putrefying within the body, they renew the sickness.

Canon 47.
During the Canicular days, laxative Medicines are not good, for all strong
purgations are hardly supported at that time, for these reasons; First, because
all purgative Medicines being naturally hot, do inflame the body already warmed
by the heat of the air; secondly, because they dissipate the spirits already
weakened by the vehemence of the heat; thirdly, because the action of a purging
Medicine, and that of the environing air are contrary, that drawing from
without inward, and this from within outward.

Canon 48.
The lower part of the body or Epigastre being far extenuate, cannot suffer
purgations by the stool without danger.

Canon 49.
When a Defluxion is on any part that is troubled, it must be repelled;
wherefore Repercussives that have virtue to bind, are proper in the beginning of
any Defluxion, for two respects; one because they so fortify the part, that it
receives not the superfluities that abound so quickly; the other because they
press forth the most subtle portion of that which is already placed there.

FINIS.

