SMALL OFFERS Toward the Service of the Tabernacle in the Wilderness. Four
Discourses, accommodated unto the Designs of PRACTICAL GODLINESS. The First,
Concerning the Methods wherein men ought to Engage both Themselves and their
Houses in the Service of God. The Second, Concerning the Right and Best ways
of Redeeming TIME in the World. The Third, Concerning the Carriage which we
should have under TRIALS used by God upon us. The Fourth, Concerning the END
which in our Desires of Life, we should propound unto ourselves.


Preached partly at Boston, partly at Charlston. By COTTON MATHER, Pastor of a
Church in Boston.

Published by a Gentleman lately Restored from threatening Sickness; as an
humble ESSAY to serve the Interest of Religion, in Gratitude unto GOD for his
Recovery.

Printed by R. Pierce. Sold by Ios. Brunning at his shop near the Exchange in
Boston. MDCLXXXIX.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. Line 7. for Possession, r. Profession. p. 43. line. 3. after to, add
Pray. p. 76. l. 7. blott out a. p. 112. l. 2. for and r. an p. 125. for ^hms r.
Thus.

To my Ever-honoured Father-in-Law, JOHN PHILIPS Esquire
Sir
YOu cannot but Rememember, and I should not have this Occasion of Telling you
so, if you did not well Remember, That many months are not passed since You
encountered a Dangerous Fever; by which the Vital Ty between what must Return to
God that gave it, and what must Return into the Earth as it has been there, was
very near burned asunder in you; But God had then mercy on You, and not on You
only, but on me also, lest I should have had sorrow upon sorrow. It was a
darker Time in your House, than (through Grace) with your Soul, when we beheld
You lying under what looked like an Arrest laid on you by the cold Hand of
Death, and saying, I shall go the gates of the Grave, I am deprived of the
Residue of my years. But the Blessing which if you study to be a Blessing you
can never want, was then your privilege; even, To be much prayed for; and
behold, the Effect of those our Applications to the God of your Life! On that
very day when your faithful and worthy Pastor the Reverend Charles Morton, with
your pious Neighbors were together praying for You, we had our Answer, and You
are yet alive. The living, the living, they shall praise God; and You have a
blessed Opportunity, I hope not without some Inclination to be doing so. It Was
from such an Inclination, that your Vows did accompany our Prayers, and your
Sickness expired in Resolutions, To endeavor the doing of something for the
Service of the Churches here, and this particularly, By the Publication of some
little Book, accommodated unto the Designs of Practical Godliness in the
Persons and Houses of this professing people. It Is pity indeed that ever any
special Trouble, or any special Mercy should befall us, without producing some
special service to the Name of our God, upon whose Orders and Errands every
such Dispensation comes. Accordingly, you have commanded me to give you certain
Discourses, which You thought agreeable to your serious purposes; and These are
They. Unto You first I ought to make the Dedication of them; because it is by
your Desire and Expense that they are to pass under any further Dedication;
they are now therefore no longer Mine but Yours, and to be Enti^uled, The
Writing of a W^ll-willer to Religion, after he had been sick, and was Recovered
of his Sickness. These Composures are singled out from other Effects of my
Daily Studies, not because of any singular Excellency adorning of them; for
they are but the first, rude, untranscribed Notes of Sermons uttered in my
ordinary Course of Preaching more than once or twice commonly in a Week; and
strangers abroad in the world may without the least wrong to me, believe, That
New England is a Country wherein there are every week in the year delivered
more than Two Hundred Sermons, to be preferred unto the Best of These. But
these are by You pitched upon, because they are most Expressive of the
Resolutions, and Exercises and Experiences, which your self would choose to
recommend unto the Children of your People; and tho they may amount to no
better than Goat's hair and Ramsskins, it was thought they might be accepted
among, Small offers to the Service of the Taberacle. There was once a great
King, to whose Triumphs while many others made their more noble Offerings, a
poor man in some Transport of Affection, having nothing else, took up his
palm-full of water from the street, and offering of That, Received from the
generous Conqueror a Gracious Recompance. Even such a King is our God! Sr. You
have chosen to fetch a Thank-Offering for Him, from such a Kennel, such a
Puddle (alas, it is no better!) as the Head and Heart of the greatest Sinner in
all the Rising Generation. But I can only say, It Is as welcome from me to You,
as I believe, it is from You to Him that made us Both. It is indeed a piece of
Self-Denial that your Commands have obliged me unto; for whatever others may
think of Appearing in Print, my own Opinion of it is, that unless a man be
extremely unacquainted both with himself, and with the world, he will be rather
Afraid or Ashamed of it, than Taken with it; Let him that wants Humbling become
an Author, and he shall have it, if mean Thoughts have not made him utterly
Insensible. Nothing but a Respect unto the Interest of God and of Truth, and a
Resolve to go cheerfully through much Contempt, Obloquy, Detrectation, can make
any considerate Person to Salute mankind in the Quality of a Writer. But Since
it is my Duty to be (like holy Bradford) always doing Good, with Tongue, or
Pen, or Purse, I should account it my Honor if my Pen may be employed for any
Advancement of Practical Godliness, though it Cost me never so many Temptations,
as it must cost me not a few.

Accept then, Dear Sir, the Little Book which You have called for; I may more
fairly speak it than he of old unto his Father, I have done according as thou
badest me; arise, I pray thee, Sit, and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me. The Blessing which once Caleb gave to a Son-in-law as I do not Want,
I need not Ask; But the Blessing which I am now Craving is, That of your
Prayers on my Behalf, to the EterEternal Father, for such Gifts, and Graces,
and Improvements, as it is His Work alone to bestow upon us; and especially that
I may be preserved from the Sins and Snares which Ministers in their younger
years are most endangered by; of which I have long thought PRIDE (the natural
Effect of Self-Ignorance and Small Experience) to be the principal. The Prayers
of one so Related, have an Authoritative Blessing in them; and that I may
further earn them, I take the liberty to mention my own Supplications unto the
God of Heaven for Yourself. May the Almighty God Long preserve your Life, and
give your Hoary Head to be found in the way of Righteousness. May You have
before you the Exemple of that Nehemiah who was, A man come to seek the welfare
of the Children of Israel; of that Cornelius, who was, A Devout man, that
jeared God with all his House, and prayed to God always; of that Treasurer,
who made the Bible his perpetual Companion, and Believed with all his Heart:
and as You have Opportunity, Do Good unto all men. May the Death (I dare not
say, the Loss) of your Ten Children, the last of which going from you made a
Tenth Wave in your Trials, only promote your Union and Communion with Him who
is Better than Ten sons; and may you enjoy in the House of God, a Place and a
Name better than that of sons and daughters. May all the Storms besides those
which the Adventures of your younger years upon the Atlantic Ocean, made you
betimes acquainte withal, in an unstable and a tempestuous World, prove so many
fresh and fair Gales, to be friend your late but sure Arrival unto the Rest
which remains for the people of God; Wherein the Anchor of your Hope, is
already Cast, and where to You are with the more-than-half Furled Sails of Time
hastening apace, after him that said, I desire to loose Anchor and be with
Christ, which is by far the best of all. It Is by these Prayers that I would
approve my self,

Sir, Your Dutiful Son and very humble Servant, COTTON MATHER.

THE GOOD MAN'S RESOLUTION.
Josh. 24. 15. But as for ME and MY HOUSE we will serve the Lord.
SECT. I.
NEVER was there in this world a People more obliged or encouraged unto the
Service of the Great God, than we the New-English Israel are. The God of Heaven
is Our God, and it becomes us to Fear Him; our Fathers God, and how much ought
we to worship Him? To serve God was the very Errand which we were brought into
this Wilderness upon; and has hitherto been both our Glo-Glory and our Defense.
That we now grow so dull and cold in this, we may write an Ichabod upon all our
enjoyments, and therein see our Chariots and our Horsemen gone. To Revive the
Decayed Service of God among us, would be to reduce us into that Favor and
Friendship of him who was The Hope of our Fathers, which would make us happy
enough to refute all the Lies of our Enemies. Thus would God the Lord speak
peace unto us. Thus would Salvation be nigh to us, and Glory dwell in our Land.

SECT. II.
TO do some, and gain more Service for our God, the Text now before us is to be
Discoursed on.

These words are among the last words of Ioshuah, the servant of the Lord; they
are a Dev^ut and a Divine sentence uttered by the renouned Joshua in a Speech
to The Parliament of Israel. The Dying Words of all Great and Good men, have
usually been esteemed Remarkable by the Survivers; and those books which
contain Apo^^thegmata morientium have been reckoned perhaps among the most
useful in the world. Tho the Dying Songs of Swans have not been such things as
the Vulgar* Error has reputed them; yet the Dying Words of Saints have afforded
a fit Moral for the Fable. The speech of a Dying Saint has as deep a favor of
Heaven, as the Breath of a dying man has of Earth. But m^thinks, the Dying
Words of a Joshua should be peculiar Oracles; peruse them, and you will find
them so. He had been first, the Lord-General of Isreal's Army; and was now the
Lord Protector of Isreal's Commonwealth. In this Capacity, a few months before
he died, he issued our orders for a Convention of States, to meet at Sh^chem, a
place about forty miles from his own Abode. The Senate, the Judges, and the
Officers, and all the Representa^tives of the people being assembled, before
the Tabernacle, which on this extraordinary occasion was removed hither, this
famous Prince endeavors to settle and confirm them in the Service of the
living God. It is likely he seared a secret Retaining of Idolatry among many,
while he was yet alive; but it is certain, he foresaw an open Defection to
Id^^atry hastening upon them, when he should be dead and gone. Wherefore, he
lays in against it, by a most powerful and pathetic Speech, which has in it,

First, An History of Memorable Providence wherein they had experienced the
matchless kindness of God unto them.

Secondly, An Inference from this History; which is expressed in two things.

First, A Counsil. He concludes, Now therefore fear the Lord and serve Him.
Therefore! Wherefore? Why, inasmuch as you find the Lord so bountif^l, that you
cannot possibly A^mend your selves if you leave Him, or excuse your selves if
you grieve Him. Therefore are you to fear Him, serve Him. Every Mercy of God
has a Therefore, in it; it calls for Gratitude and Obedience. When God has
been merciful to us, even common Ingenuity, end much more, holy Ingenuity will
put us upon that Enquiry, What shall I render to the Lord? Behold an Answer in
this, Therefore! We are Therefore to fear the Lord and serve him; we are
Therefore to put away all our Idols, all our Follies for ever more.

Secondly, A Copy. He gives them a Precedent, an Exemple, to induce them
hereunto. The Pattern of a considerable person, has no inconsiderable Influence
upon the Observers of it. Such an one does good or ill, even like a Briareus,
with an Hundred Hands. An Hundred, and an Hundred more will do like Him. If he
be wickked, he does according to the Language of Solomon, Speak with his Feet.
If he be Godly, he is, according to the Character of John, a Voice, Such an One
most effectually bespeaks all about him, as Gideon did once, Do what you see me
to do.

Thus Joshua enforces his farewell Exhortation here; says he, Be it known to
you, that I and my house will serve the Lord; I was once your Leader, pray let
me be so still. As I leadd you into the Canaan of the Lord, let me have so much
credit with you, as also to lead you unto the Service of the Lord. Be assured,
I shall be a Witness against you another day, if you do not now receive me as a
Copy for you.

You have here Joshua's Resolution; and it was founded upon such moral Reasons,
that we may take it as Written for the Admonition of us all. Wherefore this is
the Doctrine, which I would demand your Attention to.

DOCT.
Every man should engage both HIMSELF and HIS HOUSE in the Service of the
Almighty GOD.

SECT. III.
WE have diverse Propositions now before us, to discourse upon. The First of
them is this.

PROP. I.
The whole Duty of man, is contained in the true Service of God. Both in the
First Covenant, and in the New Covenant which God has made with man, there is a
Duty which man must pay to God. In the First Covenant this Duty was to be paid
in a way of meritorious Obedience; in the New Covenant, this Duty is to be paid
in a way of ingenuous Gratitude. But the Service of God, this ever comprizes
all our Duty in it. It is the same that the Wise man refers unto, in Eccl. 12.
13. Fear God and keep His commandmens; for this is the whole duty of man. There
are diverse comprehensive and synonymous Terms, by which our Duty to God is
expressed in the Scripture of Truth. Our Duty is called A Serving of God, as it
refers to the Acts of our lives in which; but its also called A Fearing of God,
and A Loving of God, as it refers to the Frames of our hearts, with which we
are to do it. It is called, A Knowing of God, as it refers to the principle of
it; it is likewise a Living to Him, and Walking with Him, on the same accounts
that it is a Serving of Him.

The Service of God notes two things, which are to accompany our whole Duty to
him.

It notes, first, the Homage therein done to our God. The Service of God is His
Worship, H^s natural Worship, and His appointed Worship. Hence the Septuagint
so translate our Text, I and my house will worship the Lord. We serve God, when
we render to him his Natural Worship. So it is intimated in Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Fear
the Lord thy God, walk in His ways, love him, and serve the Lord thy God with
all thy Heart. When we hope in God, when we call on God, when we cleave to God,
then we serve Him. And we serve God when we render to Him his appointed
Worship. This was intended in Exodus 8. 1. Let my people go, that they may serve
me. We serve Him when we observe the Ordinances of God, when we adore him
according to the Rules of His Word in His House, and wait upon him in the use
of his blessed and sacred Institutions.

It, Secondly, notes the Honor therein brought to our God. Service is
performed to God, when Glory is procured for Him. His Essential Glory we can by
no means advance, we may His declarative: and therein we serve the Lord. It Is a
passage in Isa. 43. 10. Ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant.
Our Testimonies to God's Excellencies are the things by which we serve Him. We
serve God, when we acknowledge Him as our Best Good, and our last End, and our
Omnipresent Judge. We serve him when we think and speak well of him our selves,
and obtain many others to do so too. A Witness for God is a Service to him.

SECT. IV.
THis being thus explained, I pass on to a Second Proposition.

PROP. II.
Every man should engage HIMSELF in the Service of the Almighty God.

The purpose and study of every man should be this, I will serve the Lord. We
should all be able truly to say of God, as in Act. 27. 23. His I am, and Him I
serve. A Servant of God, this was the Title, not of Joshua alone, but of other
Worthies too; when Abraham is mentioned, it is, Abraham the Servant of the
Lord. When Moses is mentioned, it is, Moses the Servant of the Lord. When God
speaks of Job, he says, Job my Servant. Thus was Jonah, thus was Eli^jah, thus
was Zerubbabel also styled. And it is a style which We too should be ambitious
of. If we would not be miserable for ever, we must be the mystical, the
Spiritual seed of Israel; but such are so saluted in 1 Chronicles. 16. 13. O ye seed
of Israel his Servant. As our Fathers Friend, so our Fathers Lord, we must not
forsake. We must all be the Servants of God, as our Father before us was. And
this especially for the three ensuing causes.

REASON I.
We are to serve God, because God has Mad^ us. The Argument with which Paul
persuaded Philem^n to receive a Runaway Servant of his own, was that in Phil.
1. 19. Thou owe unto me even thine own self. By that Argument should each one
of us be persuaded to become a Dutiful Servant of the Lord, We owe unto him
even our own selves. Man! (...) most fit thing that thy Maker should be thy
Master.

There are two Questions which I hope every Child within these Walls can give
some right Answer to. The Answer to them will render it unquestionable, That
you and I are to Serve God for ever.

One Question is, By whom were you made?

We have an Answer to this, in Psalm. ^00. 3. Know ye, that the Lord, he is God,
and it is He that has made us, and not we our selves. Thus* (...) the Psalmist
once argue, O come, let us worship before the Lord our maker. Why? If he be our
Maker, He is to be the Object of our Service. And this the rather, because of
another Question, which is, For What were you made? We have an Answer to this
in Isa. 43. 21. This people have I formed for my Self, they shall show forth my
praise. When we praise God, we serve God. Why, This is the very business which
we were sent into the world upon. We had never appeared in the Rank of Actual
Beings if God had not propounded some Service to be done unto Himself, by
creatures of our shape and mould. We are Created by God and Endowed by him.
What could it be for, but this? That God may have some service from us. It Is
said in Act 17. 28. In him we live and move and have our being. Most absurd
shall we be, if it be not for Him too.

REASON. II.
We are to serve God, because Christ has Bought us. Indeed, the Arminian
universal Redemption we reject with a just abhorrence. The Satisfaction of our
Lord Redeemer, was not Intended by Him, for the Redemption of all mankind; nor
was it Intended any further than his Intercession is, which reaches only to the
Elect of God. The Virtue and Success of our Lords death depends not wholly on
something to be done by men which God is not the Doer of* otherwise, men would
themselves be the Principals in procuring their own Salvation. But one scope of
our Lord's Death was even to purchase for us, that Grace, that Faith, that
Free Will, which may qualify us to enjoy the Virtue and Success of it.
Certainly Peter was more beholden unto the Merit of Christ for his Redemption,
than Judas was for his. Yet the Purchase of Christ wonderfully binds us all to
the Service of God.

For First, the Redemption of Christ has made our Serving of God, a possible
thing. Had it not been for this, poor fallen undone man had never been in a
Capacity to serve the Lord. We had never heard this Call from heaven, O Repent,
Return, Reform! this voice from on high, O set your selves now to the serving
of that God, whom you have been sinning against; it had never sounded in our
Ears, if the Lord Jesus had not made Himself a Sacrifice. We must have
continued the Slaves of the devil for ever, if the Stings of the Dragon had not
fastened on the Lord. The Lord Jesus has bought us all into such a Condition,
that the Proffers and the Tenders of the Gospel might be made unto us. We are
told of some in 2. Pet. 2. 1. Who Deny the Lord that bought them. Ovile
Sacrilege and Impiety! That we might all have the privilege of (...)
Invitation to the Service of God, this has cost no less than the Heart-bloud of
Christ; and what a monstrous villainy were it for us now to despise the
Invitation? Again,

The Redemption of Christ has made our Serving of God, a Reasonable thing. We
are all among the Redeemed, either in Reality, or at least in Possession, all
the Chosen and Called of God, are most really interested in the Sacrifice of
the Lord Jesus; and therefore, for them to decline the Service of God, were as
unequal as it is unlikely. But every one of us is at least professedly
interested in it. Man, art thou willing to quit all claim unto the Death and
Blood of the Lord Jesus? O No, not for ten thousand worlds. Every one says, I
hope I am Redeemed! Well then, The Service of God is that which we must count
our selves Redeemed unto. What says the Appostle, in 1. Cor. 6. 20 Ye are not
your own, for ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God. We that have
been the Captives of the mighty and the prey of the terrible, apprehend our
selves to be set at Liberty from their horrible Tyrannies, by the Suffering of
Christ; What less than the Service of God, are we thereby obliged unto? In a
word, We are the Bought servants of God; and woe to us if our Behaviors be not
agreeab* to our Obligations.

REASON III.
The Lords daily Mercy to us, requires our hearty Service to Him. It is noted
of the rudest among the Gentiles, in Lu^. 22. 25. Their Benefactors exercise a
Lordship over them. Never, Never had we any Benefactor like to our God, who
daily loads us with his Benefits. Unthankful wretches are we, if we shake off
the Lordship of such a Lord. It was an Address once made to a Governor in Act.
24. 2. By thee we enjoy great quietness* and very worthy deeds are done unto us
by thy providence. It were a disloyal, an unworthy thing, not to serve such a
Governor. Truly, From God we enjoy great quietness; by the Providence of God,
we are delivered from a Thousand perils every day: and we are surrounded with
ten thousand Comforts Every day; by the Providence of God we are directed,
protected, sustained and supplied, every day. This calls for the Service of God
at our hands. It Is said, in Romans 12. 1. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies
of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice unto Him. What a
persuasive piece of Oratory is that! I beseech you by the Mercies of God. He
that urges you to the Service of God may thus plead with you, I beseech you,
Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that God may not have one Servant in the world
the less for you. I beseech you, Breth^^^* that when the Goodness, and mercy of
God is following of you, you do not turn your backs on the Service of God. To
pursue, this Argument; I beseech you Brethren, Whose Light is it, whereby you
are every day revived? It is God's Whose Air is it, whereby you are every day
refreshed? It is God's. Whose Fire is it that warms you? Whose Meat is it that
feeds you? Whose Raiment is it that covers you? All is God's. O then, Serve
Him. These are the Cords of a man, with which we are bound to the Service of
our Lord. This is the Poesy which God has inscribed in the Ring of every
mercy, O learn to serve the Giver of this! It was a sad Complaint which the
Lord made in Isa. 1. 2. I have nourished them, and brought them up, yet have
they rebelled against me. Alas, what a YET is there? Our God has been as a
Father to us; and yet shall not we Serve Him as our Master? He Relieves us, He
Supports us, He Bestows on us the mercies of Children, and shall not we yet
return so so much as the Respects of Servants unto Him? The Heavens will hear
and be amazed, the Earth will give ^ar and be astonished, at a thing so much
exceeding Brutality it self, as this.

SECT. V.
BUt we are not to be Alone in the Service of God Man is a sociable Creature;
and as he does need, so he must help Humane Society, in this Grand concern.
Wherefore we have a Third Proposition yet to be reflected on.

PROP. III.
Every man should engage HIS HOUSE also in the Service of the Almighty God. We
are all related unto some House or other. Sometimes a Nation is called by that
name. So it is said in Exek. 3. 1. Speak to the House of Israel. And thus, every
man should labor to promote the Service of God in the Nation which he belongs
unto. All that can be properly done by him for his Nation, in his Station to
set up and bring in the Service of God, so much every man is to do, if ever he
would give a good Account of his Talents, in the Day of God's appearing. But
most usually, a Family is called by this Name; and so it is in the Text now
before us. It Is a Metonymie; the House is put for them who dwell in the house.
Those who cohabit in the same house are to endeavor that the same God may be
served by all under the Roof. And this is incumbent especially on the Superiors
in the House. All that are About us, but chiefly all that are Under us, are by
us to be drawn or driven to the Service of God. The Master of the Family is to
see unto it, that every one under his Charge become the Servant of the Lord.
And this because of such things as these.

REASON. I.
We should engage our Houses to the Service of God, out of Respect to God
Himself. To the Householder it may well be said, For God^s sake look after thy
House; For God's sake, Let there be God^ Service (...) To speak particularly,

First, The Commandment of God calls for it. We have this Commandment often
repeated unto us, That we should be careful about the Instruction and
Conversion of them that we are charged with. It Is a Commandment inc^lcated in
the Old Testament. We have in Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. The words which I command thee,
thou shall diligently teach them unto thy Children. We have it again, in Psalm.
78. 67. He commanded our fathers, that they should make known unto their
Children, that these might set their hope in God, and keep his Commandments. We
have it once more in Deuteronomy. 4. 9, 10. Gather the people, that they may learn to
fear me, and that they may teach their Children. It Is a Commandment not
unmentioned in the New Testament also. We find in Ephesians. 6. 4. Ye Fathers, bring
up your Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Behold, How many
solemn Charges are laid upon us to do our part, that God may be served by all
that are under our Inspection. God does Command us, to command them, thereabout.

Secondly* The Interest of God calls for it. Our Lord said unto a Peter, in
Ioh. 21. 15. Love thou me? -- Then Feed my Lambs. The like may be said unto a
Master, If thou do love God, then bring thy lambs to serve Him. To propagate
Religion is to magnify and glorify the Lord. It is said in Prove. 14. 28. In the
multitude of people is the Kings honor: as it is said of an earthly, so may it
be said of the Heavenly King. Now if we cause our Houses to serve God in
Conjunction with our selves, hereby we propagate Religion; yea, to many
generations. I remember, Solomon assigns this as one Cause, why he did well
educate his own Children; it was because his father had so dealt with him; Says
he in Prove. 4. begin. Hear ye children the instruction of a father; for I was
my father's son, and he taught me. Let us fix our children in the Service of
God, and they will afterward do do so by theirs. Thus the Lord will always
have A seed to serve him, which Will be accounted for a generation. Our
Children, did I say? yea, our Servants too, may in like manner carry on a
Succession of Service to the Lord. It was the Commendation of Solomon, in 1.
King. 10. 8. Happy are these thy servants, which hear thy wisdom. Now many
ages after, we find the posterity of them Servants, retaining a savor of
Devotion and Affection to the House of God.

REASON II.
We should engage our Houses to the Service of God, out of Respect to our
Houses too. It Is said A righteous man regards the life of his beast. How much
more will a righteous man regard the state of his House? We have two things
also to be particularized here.

First, our Houses are miserable through us, if they do not serve God. It is
hinted as a most extraordinary misery upon any person, in Prove. 5. 35. He shall
die without instruction. Fearful and woeful will be the case of those in our
Houses, whom our Instruction shall not endear the Service of God unto. Our
Houses are starving, while our God is not serving in them. The Prophet said in
Lam. 2. 11. Mine eyes do fail with tears, because the children swoon in the
streets of the city; they say to their mothers, where is the corn? O doleful
spectacle! But while our Children are strangers to God, there is a worse Famine
in our Houses,; we suffer their Souls to pine and perish without the Bread of
life. Yea, our Houses are Burning while our God is not Serving in them. What a
terrible desolation was that on Sodom! in allusion to which, it is said of a
wicked man, in Job. 18. 15. Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
Why, there is a dreadful storm of ardent Brimstone, ready to fall upon those
Houses, where the Children are not bringing up for God; the Wrath of God, like
an horrible Tempest of burning Brimstone is impending over them. What shall I
say more? Our poor Children are enslaved unto Satan, until they come to be
serving of God. If a Devil had a Bodily Possession of our Children, how
impatient should we be to see them delivered? We should cry out like the Woman
of Canaan, in Matthew. 15. 22. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, my child is grievously
vexed with a devil. But know, the Devil has a spiritual Possession of our
Children, till they come to serve the Lord; the evil spirit, he takes them, he
tears them, and they foam and pine, and are thrown into the water, and into the
fire. O pity them; if we are not more stupid than the Ostrich, pity we our
forlorn Houses, and let not the Service of God be wanting thro^ any fault of
ours.

Secondly* We are Accountable for our Houses, if they do not serve God. As the
Daughter of Pharaoh said unto the Mother of Moses, in Exodus 2. 9. Take this
child and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. Thus does the Lord
say unto us; Take these children, take these young ones, and bring them up to
serve me I will reward thee for it. The Apostle says, of Ministers, They watch
for souls, as they that must give an account; so it may be said of all
Housekeepers, They must give an account of the souls that belong unto their
Families. It Was confessed by the Prophet in the Parable, 1. King. 20 39. Behold
a man turned aside, and brought a man to me, and said, Keep this man; if by any
means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his. This, This is a thing
certainly to come to pass in the dreadful Day of God. Man, Thy life shall be
for his life, who did not serve God, because thou did not teach him, and Thy
soul shall be for his soul, who is lost for ever, because thou did not look
after him. Jacob could say to his Uncle about his Lambs, That which was torn of
Beast, of my hands did thou require it. Behold, thou have Lambs in thy Fold,
Little ones in thy House; God will strain for it, -- if wild beasts, and Lusts
carry any of them away from the Service of God through any neglect of thine,
thou shall smart for it in the fiery prison of God's terrible Indignation.
Wherefore, as Paul says, O keep, so I say, O Save, that which is committed
unto thy trust.

SECT VI.
IT is now Time that we make a due Application of these Faithful Sayings* And
there is a double Exhortation which I have to manage.

The First Exhortation, is,

Let us all Resolve to engage OUR SELVES in the Service of God.

To Quicken you to it;

Consider seriously, Who your Fellow Servants are, when once you serve the
Almighty God. O come in, and serve God, for shame; lest in the whole world, you
have none but Devils to bear you company: And will you be of their side, of
their sort? Rebellion truly is as the sin of Witchcraft, for this piece of
Madness in it. All other Beings make a Surrender of themselves unto the Service
of God; and it is said of the^ in Psalm. 119. 91. All are thy Servants. O do not
you stand out. Hearken, ye immortal souls; You have the call of Christians to
entice you into this happy Service. All the Eminent Believers of the
By-past-Ages, the men, of whom the world was not worthy, all these do with one
voice, and a loud one, urge this upon you; Come and serve our God, as we have
done before you. Even James himself, the Kinsman of the Lord is ambitious
rather of this Denomination The Servant of the Lord. And puissant Emperors
before now, have gladly espoused, such a Title as that, The Vassals of the
Lord. More than this, you have the Call of Angels to incite you thereunto.
Those bright Morning stars ask this of you, Will you come and move in our
Sphaere? They all are the servants of the Lord, and they do his pleasure. At
his Beck they clap their silver wings, and they do his Commandments. An Angel
said once to John the Apostle, I am thy Fellow Servants. That Angel is yet
alive; and he makes the motion to every one of us, Will thou be my
Fellow Servants before the Lord? Yea, the SON of GOD Himself gives you this
Call. Of Him says our God, in Isa; 42. 1. Behold my Servant! Shall God say
thus of Christ? and shall. He not say it of thee? O do not scorn to be the
Servant of that GOD, who has for a Servant, Him whom all the Third Heaven is
with endless Raptures adoring of.

Consider, yet again, What your Service is, while you serve the Almighty God.
No Service was ever so delightsome as this? it is, All peace, and perfect peace.
No Service was ever fo profitable; it brings in those things, The gain whereof
is better than fine Gold; you shall be sure to experiment the Truth of that
Maxim, God is a Rewarder. No Service was ever so Honorable. It prefers us to
be Favorites of a greater Monarch than he that had an hundred and seven and
Twenty Provinces under him. A Service do we count it? No, it is a Freedom. We are
Lords, when we are The Lord's; Then, as he said, sumus Domini, is true, not
only in Genitivo singulari, but in Nominativo plurali. It is a Freedom, Yea,
it is a Kingdom. It gives us to sing, Lord, Thou have made us Kings and Priests.
It has been well said, Deo servire est regnare. We have Crowns on our heads,
all the while we are in the Service of God; but how massy, how weighty will
they be grown when our Pay-day comes! Every Servant of God may now say, as in
2. Tim. 4. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. But Then,
Then, we shall ascend those glittering and glorious Thrones, which Eye has not
seen; on them we shall be ever with the Lord.

Consider, finally, (and let me warn you faithfully). If you do not Resolve to
serve God, it had been good for you, that you never had been born. All that
forsake the Service of God, are employed in another Service, which every soul
may tremble at the Description of; it is a Service to those hellish Tigres in
Ephesians. 22. The course of this world, the prince of the power of the air, and the
lust of the flesh. You cast off the Service of One; but you incurr a Bondage to
three: let Horror sieze thee, O man, and let thy ears tingle, at the
intimations of it. The World, the Flesh, and the Devil are thy Lords, if God
have not Service from thee. All the Galleys in the Mediterranean Sea, cannot
show a more dismal Vassalage! And what will the Issue of that Service be?
Truly, The Wages -- is Death. God will not save you, if you do not serve Him.
You that now grind for the Phili^^ines of Hell every day, must one day be
requited with only Coals and Wounds, for all your fatal Dr^dgeries; and though
you then roar, Lord, pity me! He will reply with a furious Rebuke, Depart, I
know you not.

Let me then address you in the Words of Joshua; Choose now, whom you will
Serve. Come, speak up; come to some Resolution. Say, Will you serve the cursed
and cruel Enemies of your Souls? or will you serve the GOD Whom it is good for
you to draw near unto? O make this Return, Lord, we come unto thee, for thou
art the Lord our God.

SECT. VII.
YOu have been told Why; now here How, you are to become, The Servants of God.
There are diverse Counsils to be given hereabout.

The First COUNSIL.
Renounce and Forsake the Service of those Idols which you have heretofore been
enslaved unto. We must, as Joshua here assures us, we must put away other gods,
if we we would serve the Lord. Our Lord has admonished us, in Matthew. 6. 24. Ye
cannot ^erve God and Mammon. Even so, Ye cannot serve God and Satan. And again,
Ye cannot serve God and Sin. The Holy God may say of you as of them, long
since, Ye have served strange gods. But, O do you now say to Him, as they in
Isal. 21. 13. O Lord, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us; but
we will no^* be for Thee alone. Become weary of your Captivity under those
Taskmasters which have hither to been torturing your souls. There are two
sorts of Tyrants that every unregenerate man is a Servant unto; his Tempers,
and his Tempters. Let the Tempers within us, no more cause us to toil, and run,
and sweat, for the gratifying of them. Let the Tempters without us, no more
hurry us too and fro that their Humors may be pleased. Souls, I give you no
bad counsil, when I propound this; and I do propound it, O, Run away from your
old masters. Come away poor souls, come away from the land of your Captivity.
Look upon the grim face of the Patroons under which you groan; say to them all,
Farewell, you malicious, you bloody, you for did Masters, Farewell; We hope you
shall never have any of our Service more. O look upon the Calamities of your
Service under your invisible Adversaries, and say, It Is enough! Say, The time
past may suffice! Thus, Take ye the Wings of a Dove, and flee away.

The Second Counsil.
Bind your selves unto the Service of God by a Covenant never to be Forgotten.
It was the good Counsil of Hez^k^ah, in 2. Chron. 30. 8. Yield yourselves unto
the Lord. In the Hebrew Original it is, Give the Hand unto the Lord. The giving
of the Hand was a Rite in the making of a Covenant Men and Brethren, Look
Zion^ards, I beseech you; and say now, I will join my self to the Lord in a
perpetual COVENANT. Think on the Service which God is to have of you, and be
able then to declare, as in Psalm. 119. 110. I have sworn it, and I will perform
it. Make a solemn Covenant, that you will be the Lord's. Yea, a Written, a
Formal, a subscribed Covenant for it, has by some been advised and practiced.
Written and Formal Indentures are made between man and man; Why should not
there be so between God and man? when a Service is to be Entered into.
Especially, since it is said, in ^sai, 44. 5. A man shall subscribe with his hand
unto the Lord?

In a Sacred Covenant say,

I Renounce all the Vanities and Idols of this World.

I Engage that I will cleave unto the Lord Jehovah, as my Best Good, and my
Last End; promising to live upon Him, and unto Him, hoping are long to live
with Him for ever.

I Engage, That I will cleave unto the Lord Jesus, as my Prophet, and my
Priest, and my King; Promising to acknowledge Him as the Author of all my
Salvation.

I Engage, That I will ever study what is my Duty in these things; and wherein
I find my self to fall short, I will ever count it my Grief, my Shame, and for
pardon betake my self to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

All this I Engage, humbly imploring the Grace of the Mediator to be sufficient
for me.

It would hurt no Godly man, to set his Name with Hand and Heart to such an
Instrument; afterward frequently Reflecting on it, frequently Renewing of it.
However, let every man this Day, make this Confession, in Psalm. 116. 16. O
Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant.

The Third Rule.
And now demean your selves in all things as the Servants of God ought to do.

There is a Four-sold Concernment that will now lie upon you.

First. Be studious to know what Service God calls for. Ly at His Feet, and
say as Paul of old, Lord, What would thou have me to do? or like Samuel
once, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. Be daily Reading of the Word, be
daily Thinking on the Word: upon every opportunity say, I will hear what God
the Lord will say. To all, add That, as your daily Petition unto God; in Psalm.
119. 115. I am thy servant, O Lord; give me understandeng that I may know thy
testimonies.

Secondly, Be ready to Do what Service God calls for. Never object, never
cavil against any of Gods Commands; never dispute any thing that He requires;
but own, It Is all holy, and just, and Good. Be not more undutiful unto God,
than the servants of the Centurion were to him, If He say, Go, then go; if He
say Come, then come; if He say, Do this, then do it, without any Grumbling at
it. Say not, I will not, although there be Hard Sayings pressed upon thee. Albeit God
may enjoin this, Pluck out thy right eye, cut off thy right hand; and albeit
the Injunction of God may be; Take up thy Cross; yet Comply, yet, Conform,
without any Reluctancies; and say with him in Psalm. 119. 128. O Lord, I esteem
all thy precepts concerning all things, to be right.

Thirdly. Be greatly Contriving how to be most serviceable unto God. Ponder
well, What you are, What you have, What you can; and Ponder how all may be
improved in the Service of the Lord. Thus be Zealous of good Works. Never be
satisfied unless you can say, I am at work for God. Let even your Eating, your
I ^^ding, your Visiting, be done as a Service for the Lord; and let your Time,
your Strength, your Estates, all the Powers of your Spirits, and all the
Members of your bodies, be ingeniously la^^ out in that Service. Often ask your
own souls, What is there that I may do for God? Even court, and hunt Advantages
to be serviceable; Say like the Prophet, in Isa 6. 8. Say Lord, if (...) have
any Service to be done; here I (...) me.

Fourthly. Be sweetly Contented with all the Allowances of the Lord. John
Bapi^st gave this Counsel to the servants in the Roman Ga^^sons, Luc. 3. 14. Be
content with your Wages. The Servants in God's Household, have the same Counsel,
in Heb 13 5 Be content (...) as you have. Tho you should have but ^hort
Commons, and straw lodgings in the world; tho you should be without many Flesh
^^leasing Curiosities and Conveniences, let this quiet you, I am a Servant.
Don't complain of the Lord, as the slothful and wicked servant once, He is
(...) hard Master. Let your Wills be molded and melted into His; and
cheerfully leave Him to judge, What may be Food convenient for you. Count that
you have enough, when God says, you shall have no more; and always have a
good Opinion of Gods Disposals. Learn Paul's Lesson, In whatever state to be
content. It is not for Beggars, nor Servants to be Choosers.

This, This it is to be a Servant of the Lord. Blessed is the servant, whom his
Lord, when he comes shall find so doing.

SECT. VIII.
BUt This is not all that we have to do. We have Houses too that we ought to be
concerned for. Wherefore,

The Second Exhortation, is

Let us also study to Engage OUR HOUSES in the Service of God.

It is the property of every Good man to desire Company in the Service of the
Lord. O that we might have the Company of all that belong to our Houses in it!
But

What shall we do?

In short, Would we truly say with Joshua, My House shall serve the Lord? We
must then Do like Jesus. Jesus the blessed Namesake, and Antitype of Ioshuah,
has a Threefold Offfice; that of a Priest, a Prophet, and a King. In His
lesser Family of Disciples once, in His greater Family of Believers always, we
find Him so. Every Householder should be all of this in his own Family Each man
pretends to he a King in his own house; he should there be a Priest, and a
Prophet too. There are Three great Cares lying upon us in our Families; there
is Family -Prayer, and Family -Instruction, and Family -Government. It Is by the
Discharge of these three things, that we engage our Houses to serve the Lord.

Family Prayer.
SECT. IX.
FIrst, then. Let Family Prayer be maintained in our Houses, that they may
serve the Lord. My Neighbors, I have told you often, and I now tell you
weeping, That it will be a sad thing, if so much as one Prayerless-Family be
found among you all. The owners of that House will never be able to stand or
live in the fiery day of of God's pleading with him. You have been Warned and
Warned full many a time, that if your Houses be not Warmed with your Prayers,
the fierce Wrath of God abides on them; and I hope, none of you will venture
to meet me at the Bar of the Lord Jesus, with the fearful heavy guilt of this
Omission upon your souls. The very Turks themselves at this day uphold a
Family Worship among themselves; God forbid that any styled Christians here
should be worse than they.

SECT. X.
THe Method in which I shall treat with you here about, shallbe,

I. To offer some Directions about Family Prayer.

The First Rule.
Let all Persons that should attend Family Prayer, count themselves concernd to
Pray without ^easing. Every Master of an House, is to carry on the Pr^yer in
it. That man is not fit to have a^ H^use, that cannot make a Prayer. But if the
Ma^ter be absent? Then the Mistress is to see ^till that Prayer be not wanting.
It seems affi^med of E^ther, a Woman, in Cap. 4. 16. That she Prayed with her
Maidens. There should not be one Prayer the less in a Family, because (...) is
become the Ruler there: No, the L^sses of a Family, should increase the Prayers
of it. And let the Master of a Ship, remember, That the Sailers are his Family.
He should pray with them aboard, every day while they are at Sea together. You
that see the Wonders of God together, should together sing the Praises of God,
and together beg the Mercies of God. Methinks, the poor Seamen, should be the
best (...) in the world. With what face can you pray in a Storm, if you do not
also pray in a C^lm? Now Master, it is your Work, it is part of your Order* from
your great Own^r to see that this ^e done (...) all Mariners call upon their
Master, as thos^ Mar^ners did upon the Passinger in, (...) 1* 6 Ar^^e, (...)
God, that we perish (...)* Let the Master of (...) School also* Remember, That
the Scholars are his Family; He should pray with them, and bless them in the
Name of the Highest. God provides Angels. and will not you afford Prayers for
the safety of those little ones? We read of some in Mark. 10. 13. who brought
young children unto the Lord Jesus Christ: The Children that are brought to
you, by Parents or Guardians, these are by you to be brought unto the Lord
Jesus, that He would lay His Blessing and saving hands upon them. Yea, the
Captain of a Trained Band, is to esteem the Soldiers as his Family. That good
Captain Cornelius, could s^y, in Act. 10. 30. I prayed in my House. As for
those that will not pray in the Field, it is to be questioned, whether they will
Fight there. Trainings without Prayings are like to degenerate into mere
Debaucheries. The Prayeres^ Captain gives a very dangerous and desperate Word
of Command when he says, Follow your Leader. Briefly, All Superiors generally
have a Family in the Kind of their Superiority, which they are to attend
Prayers withal.

The Second Rule.
Let all the Matters that would hinder Family Prayer be put far from our
Taberna^les. There are diverse Impediments of our family-Prayers, ^hi^h ^e are
to be Cautioned against. As now, Let not family- Iarrs hinder family-Prayers*
The Apos^^^ ^aith to them that are in ^ C^njogal Re^lation, that they should be
meek, tender, lov^ng; for this cause in 1. Pet. 3. 7. That your Prayers be not
hindered. if Peace be gone from a family, then Prayer is gone. How can Scolding,
and it may be Striking too, agree with Praying* in which we are to lift up pure
^ands, without wrath? Again, Let not family- Scabs hinder family-Prayers.
Bad-Members in a family, often cause that there are no Prayers in it. Many men
will not pray, because others will scoff and flout. But let your Houses have no
such In-mates, no such Ishmaels in them. It is recorded of Elisha, in 2 King.
4. 33. he would not have a servant with him, which he could not pray withal. If
any profane, graceless, Despisers of Prayer, would impose themselves upon us,
let us then say to them, Depart ye workers of iniquity. for I will call upon
the Lord. Once more,

Let not Family-Prayers be hindered by unsuitable Times. The earlier we dispatch
them, the easier. We should not ordinarily let Business royl us in the Morning,
nor ^ro^siness drown us in the Evening, before Family Prayer be over. As To
every purpose, ^ thus to every Prayer there is a time and judgment; and a wise
man's heart will discern it.

The Third Rule.
Be frequent enough, and yet very serious in your family- Prayers. Very
shameful is their neglect, who have Prayers in their Families but once a day.
The Apostle says in Col. 4. 2. Masters* continue in prayer; he speaks with a
manifest Allusion to the daily Offering under the Law of old; which was both
morning and evening. We should have Morning-Prayers, and Evening-Prayers,
correspondent unto the daily Sacrifice. And hence, because the Sacrifice was
doubled on the Sabbath, I have known some pious people, pray four times every
Lord's Day with their Families. Be sure, Twice a day is ordinarily the seldomest
and slenderest Repetition that our Family-prayers are to have.

O but we should therein stir up our selves to take hold on God. When you keel
before the Lord, you should not be rash, hasty, sudden in it; you should not be
sleig^ty in this great Exercise of of Religion. Before we pray, we should
think, Think seriously, To WHOM am I to pray? and For What am I to Pray? and
How soon may I dye, and my praying seasons all be over? And before we pray, we
should Read. Read seriously something of the Things which are commanded you of
God. The Scriptures are to accompany our prayers. It Is said* They are to dwell
with us. The Bible is to be one of the House, When we betake our selves to our
P^ayers, we should not let the Bible say, I should have been as one of the
Family; pray, why was not I called in?

The Fourth Rule.
Let not your Family-prayers be your only prayers* Understand, that Se^ret
Prayers, ^s ^^ll as private Prayers, are to be performed by ^s all. For this,
the word of our Lord is very positive, in Matthew. 6. 6. When thou prayest, enter
into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is
in secret. It Is a great fondness and folly in any of us, if private prayer cause
us to lay aside secret prayer. No, There is Closet-Prayer as well as
Parlour-Prayer which we ought to labor in. I would say, as our Lord in another
case, One you ought to do; and not leave the other undone. We have special
Trans^^iss^^ns to be confessed in our prayers; these are (...) to be confessed.
To divulge a secret (...), is to add a further sin, Our secret sins, do call
for our secre^ Prayers. We have special Temp^^^^s to be bewailed in our
prayers; and these (...) sec^etly to be bewailed. Our Desires are sometimes to
be too secret for our Neighbors. Our secret Griefs and our secret Fears call
for our secret Prayers. And as one of the Ancients elegantly expresses it,
Invisible prayers are to be often made to an invisible God. Secret prayer is
one good sign of a gracious heart. Let the Lord often see you like Nathanael at
secret prayer under the (...), and He will say, Behold an Israelite i^deed!
Would you get Internal Blessings? then pray in secret. Solomon got his Widom,
his Virtue, by secret prayer. Peter by secret prayer in (...) car^ied with
Tran^es and Raptures into the other world. Would you get External Blessings?
Then pray in secret. H^^nah with secre^ prayer asked one Son, and had six.
Jacob had all his House preserved by secret prayer. Yea, Would you be General
Blessings? Pray then in ^^c^et. Moses by secret prayer diverted wrath and
plagues from all the Congregation. That infamous Apostate Julian, was killed by
the secret prayer of a good man, at that hour very far distant from him* What
shall I say? No Supe sedeas, no Diversion should ever be given to your secret
prayers.

Moreover, besides your Prayers with all the Family, you may do well sometimes
to Re^^r^ unto prayers with this or that particular person in it. Some do so
translate that passage in Gen* 25. 21. Isaac entrea^ed the Lord with his wife.
It were but a discreet and a decent practice, for married persons to (...)
likewise. Thus, holy P^rents, have often taken their Children, one by one
alone; and there prayed and wept, and poured out their souls, over the poor
lambs in secret places before the Lord. Thus are we to do, Thus to pray.

SECT. XI.
BUt the Sluggard will pretend, A Lion in the way. Wherefore I pass on,

II. To Remove some Obje^ctions against Family Prayer.

A Threefold want is plead^d by many, to ^^^cuse their Prayerless Conversation
with; a Want of Time, a Want of Confidence, and a Want of Utterance.

The First Excuse.
One man does so Excuse himself. I want Time for Family Prayer; especially in a
Morning, I cannot spare the Time.

This is a most horrrid and wicked Excuse. Thou Madman, From Whom have thou all
thy Time? All thy Time is given by God, and shall None of thy Time be given to
God? What, No Time to pray with thy Family? God ^uowes thou can find time to
eat with thy family, time to sleep with thy family, perhaps, time to smoke with
thy family; and no Time to pray with ^em? Once more,

What is it that does engross thy Time, and put by thy Prayer? It Is the World,
the World! And is that such a Portion indeed, as to bespeak thy Contempt of an
Eternal GOD, and of an immortal Soul, in the pursuance of it. Thou shall
quickly take an everlasting Farewell of all this World; This World will not
stand thee in any stead ere long, when thy Soul, thy Soul shall ^e trembling on
thy cold lips, just ready (as the Atheist said) to ^ake a great leap in the
Dark. Yea, That very Day, wherein thou go abroad without thy Family Prayers,
may prove the very Day, wherein an Angry God may say* This day shall thy soul
be required of thee. And what a phrensy is this? To be extreme busy and earnest
about the trifles of this world, while a precious never-dying soul is
unprovided for? I wish that all Prayerless Houses, had this Admonition engraved
on their walls, What is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? Could you see it engraved on those walls, with an Hand writing,
like what Belshazzer saw of old it would no doubt amaze and startle you. Look
into these leaves, and see i^* with a sharp Style engraven here! Besides.
Family Prayers are no real prejudice to Saecular Affairs. They should not be
Long, Tedious, Burdensome; and they will hinder no Journey, no concern; all will
prosper the better for them. In short, God will find an Eternity to Damn the
man that cannot find a Time to Pray.

The Second Excuse.
Another man does so excuse himself, I wa^^ Confidence for Family prayer; I
would pray, but I am Ashamed.

This Excuse is little beter. To be ashamed of Prayer is to be ashamed of
Christ: And it is the plain Word of our Lord JESUS in* Marc 8. 38. Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed. O direful
Doom! Will not such a smart Thunder clap, cause ^hee and the Famil^ to fall
down upon their knees? Never be ash^m^d of Pray^r but be asham^d of sin; it is a
(...) to live without prayer. If you have any Scoffers in your Houses, whom it is
not fi^ you should pray before, then do as Abraham did; even, ^urn ^em out of
the doors. Better Turn them out, than Turn Go^ out. They that use not
Family Prayer, say to the Almighty, Depart from us.

The Third Excu^e.
But the Excuse of some is, I want Utterance for Family Prayer. I would pray,
but I am not gifted for it. I cannot pray. To this I answer, we often say, I
cannot, when I will not, is the Bottom of it. Suppose, a sevcre p^nal^y were by
the Magistrate laid upon every prayerless Family. Daniel, because he would pray
with his Family was thrown to the Lions for it. Suppose a lighter punishm^nt
far away were to be inflicted on all them who do not pray in their Family;
Suppose a God, or a Fine were inflicted on you for it: Would you then continue
Prayerless? Behold, the great God has by the Statute Laws of Heaven, ordained
that a Prayerless Family sahll have all manner of Calamities inflicted on it;
The Lions, the Devils of the pit below, shall devour the unhappy Master of such
a Family. And will not this make you pray? Besides, When you find that you Want
things, then you don't wan^ Words; the poor man does not want words; when he is
to Ask Alms. O sit down and look upon the the Wants and Woes of your poo^
Family, you cannot then but have something to say for them. And what tho you
cannot pray Quaintly? Yet you may pray Gracio^sly, and pray Acceptably. Florid*
Elegant Orations in your Prayers, God expects not; a few humble; penitent,
brokenhearted Groans, are of more account with Him* Tho you Chatter like a
Crane or a Swallows, (...) once Hezekiah did yet the success may be wonderful
and glorious. What shall I say? Moses was unwilling to do what God bade, on
this very Score in Exodus 4. 10. I am not Eloquent ^ But the reply of God was,
Go, and I will teech thee what thou shall say. O that you would make a Trial of
it. Friend, By'nd by Call thy Family together; Tell them, That you must not let
them remain prayerless any longer, lest the Wrath of God break out upon them.
So Fall down before the Lord among them all, and pray as well as God shall
enable thee: go, I am verily persuaded, God will teach thee what thou shall
say, I am sure, thou will never have cause to Repent of the Attempt.

SECT. XII.
YOu have not so much as a shadow of Reason to render, why you should not pray
with your Families; Let me now a little repre^^^^ why you should; for I am

III. To propound some Incentives unto Family Prayer.

And there are cheef^y Two Considerations which I have to set before you.

Consider, First, the Direful and grievous Curses which prayerless Families are
exposed unto. Such Families, they are the very Suburbs of H^^^ it self. A
Prison, A Dungeon, is to be chosen before a Living in them. There is a Words*
a^ awful Word, which a Prophet of God ha^ written in a certain place;
Methinks, that Word (...) like a Thunderbolt of Death upon the Families, in
which God is not prayed unto (...) it is Written in ler. 10. 25. O Lord -- pour
out ^hy fury on the beathe^, which know thee not; on the Families which call
not on thy name. Strikes it no^ cold unto the heart of the Reader? Man* These
are the Treful and the direful words of the Lord Tesus Christ himself: He
counts thy Prayerless Family no better than a Pagan Family. And now, he speaks
not as an Advocate for thy poor Family; He says not, Lord, vouchs^se thy*
^itty, and thy pardon to that Family; But He says, Lord, pour out thy fury
upon that family* because it calls not on thy Name. Alas, have yo^ no more
Kindness for your Families, than to lay them open to the Fury of a great and a
terrible GOD? cruel people, that you are. We read in Zech. 5. begin. about a
Flying Roll, Twenty Cubits long, Ten Cubits broad, entering into these and those
Houses, to consume them. I am to tell you, That Prayerless Houses are to feel
the force of this Flying Roll. An huge Roll of Curses belongs to that House in
which Prayer is not upheld. The Curse of God is the Sauce in every Dish, the
Curse of God is the Cover to every Bed, in that lamentable Family. Houses
molested with Devils, are not more miserable than Houses destitute of Prayers.
I have seen it in an house, where the Devils have had Possession of a Child,
that when Family Prayer began, the Devils would make hideous Roarings and
Noises in the Room, as being under a Vexation thereat, which was intolerable to
them. Truly, The Devils have no Disturbance in Houses where Family-prayers is
not maintained; prayerless houses are haunted houses, and the Fiends of
Darkness reign, and ramp, there without Contro^l. Indeed, Prayerless Families,
are not only the Cages, but also the Causes of all Impiety. They bring an
Irresistible Deluge of Disorder upon all the Town and Land; and cause all the
Country to swarm with the workers of iniquity who call not upon the Lord. And
as the prayerless Householder is now cursed by God, so he will one day be
cursed by all his House; he brings curses on them, and they will spend curses
on him, in the Day of Vengeance. In the everburning lake, they will curse the
day that ever they saw thy prayerless house, and, That House brought me to this
Hell! This, this will be their Cry world without End.

Consider, next, the mavelous Blessings which belong to all Praying Families.
It was noted about the Family of Obed-Edom,in 1. Sam 6. 11. The Lord blessed
Obed-Edom and his househould, while the Ark of the Lord was there. So shall it
be noted about the Family of a praying Householder; The Lord will bless that
man and his Household, while that Prayer to the Lord is there. Family-prayers,
are conjoined prayers, and united prayers; thus they become very successful
prayers. What Encouragement is there given to them, in that promise, Matthew. 18.
19. If two of you shall agree on earth, touching any thing that they shall ask,
it shall be done for them. O let your Families Agree in the Asking of grace, in
the Asking of glory, in the Asking of every good thing; Prayer in Confort, will
obtain it all. When Cornelius was at his Family Prayer, what a signal favor
did the Almighty God show unto him? Some while since, a whole Town in
Switzerland was very suddenly destroyed by an Earthquake, all except one piece
of an house, in which a good man happned then to be at Prayer with his Family.
It Is impossible to tell, O how great is the goodness which God has laid up for
Houses that seek unto Him! But besides all the other comforts of a praying
Householder, he has This peculiar to him, He teaches all his Family to. A
praying Parent will have praying children. David prayed in his Family, and his
Son Solomon proved a praying young man. A praying Master will have praying
Servants. Abraham prayed in his Family, and his Man Eliezer became a very
praying person. Thus, O man, all thy young people, will be filling every corner
of thy house with Prayers for thy Felicity.

O consider of these things; and such let the Impression of them upon you be;
That you may by Prayers with your Families Engage your Houses to serve the Lord.

SECT. XIII.
THere are two Things more, by the Discharge of which, we Engage our Hoxses to
serve the Lord; and those Two are in a manner One

Family-Instruction; and Family-Government.

I link these together, because of their near Dependence and Agreement in their
Exercise. This therefore is the Address now to be made unto us,

Let Family-Instruction and so Family-Government be maintained in our Houses,
that they may serve the Lord.

Let there be no un^aught and unrul'd Families among us; but let us be careful
about the Education of such as belong to our Families. I beseech you, let there
be a difference between English Houses and Indian Wigwams in the midst of us,
and let not English Parents be as indulgent and negligent as they report the
Indians are. And give me leave to say, You that are Mothers have a special
Advantage to instill the Fear of God into the souls of them that sit upon your
knees. It Is said in Prove. 1. 8. My son, forsake not the law of thy Mother.
Solomon was well instructed by his Mother, and it proved his eternal Benefit.
It Is not for Nothing, that in the Sacred Records, when men have proved good or
bad, it is noted, Their Mothers were such and such. You that are Mothers may
insi^uate Religion into your Children earlier and easier than their Fathers can.

SECT. XIV.
I shall Repeat the Method, which we were in before; and under
Family-Instruction take in that Family-Government which you are to be studious
of. I am

I. To offer some Directions about Family-Instruction.

The Directions to be given hereabout, may ^e referred unto two Heads.

First, The Matter of Family Instruction.

The Family-Instruction, with which we urge our houses to the Service of God,
are to have (...) less than Four things composing of it.

First, There are Holy Lessons, with which we are to Instruct our Families. We
are to make them hear, and make them learn those Lessons, which may give to the
young ones Knowledge and Discretion. Teach them the Scriptures of Truth. It Was
said to Timothy, in Cap. 3. 15. From a Child thou have known the Holy
Scriptures; No doubt, his Godly Mother and Grandmother were the cause of his
doing so. We should procure that our Young ones may read the holy Scriptures,
and mind the holy Scriptures, and know the holy Scriptures, even from a Child.
Let them have by heart, here and there a Verse, or a Paragraph; Especially in
the Psalms and in the Proverbs: if you would have them good, teach them the
Psalms of David; if you would have them wise, teach them the Proverbs of
Solomon. And Scripture^ Stories are to be told unto them, as soon as ever they
enquire after new things and strange.

But while we do thus, we are also to teach them the Doctrines of God.
Inculcate upon them the Principles of Religion, as often as you do the Knife on
the Stone in the Whe^ting of it. It Was said unto the Lord Jesus, in Matthew. 22.
16. Master, Thou ^e^chest the way of God in Truth. Every M^ster should render
his young ones able to say that unto himself, Master, Thou teach the Truth
of God. Especially, We should be sure that they be not ignorant of any Saving
Truths. Tell them, What they are come to by the First Adam, and what they may
come to by the Second Adam. Tell them what Covenant man was once, and What
Covenant man is now to be saved by. Yea, let none of the Things to be believed,
none of the Things to be practiced, none of the Things to be prayed for* be
left unmentioned in your Instructions. All the Lessons of the Creed, the
Commandments, and the Lords Prayer are to be laid before them. And we are to be
particularly faithful to them, in the present Truths; the laboring Truths, the
witnessed Truths of the Times, we should see ou^ young ones well informed in.
Give them at this day to be sensible, who is the Supreme Head, and King of the
Church, and what Orders He has appointed to be observed there.

Secondly. There are ferious Questions with which we are to Instruct our
Families. And there are peculiarly Two Things which we are to question our
young ones about.

Some Questions we are to put unto them, First, Which Concern their Souls.

And here, yet further to particularize, We are to try them with Questions
about their Understanding. Our Lord Jesus asked his Disciples, in Matthew. 13.
51. Have ye understood all these things? Thus are we to ask our young people,
Do you understand the great Mystery of Godliness^ O keep up the great Ordinance
of Catechizing in your houses. Before your little Folks have left off living
upon Milk, let them be so well versed in their Milk for Babes, that they may
readily answer any Question there. The Echoes of this Exercise, are a most
refreshing Melody in the ears of God himself. Ask we our young ones, What they
think of God, and of Christ, and of Themselves; and let them be able to refound
the Words of Truth.

We are to search them also with Questions about their Experience. As our Lord
asked His Family, in Joh. 16. 31. Do ye now believe? So should we ask our young
people, Have you Experieneed a work of Regeneration in your souls? Ask them,
Have you ever yet carried a laboring and heavy-laden soul unto the Lord Jesus
Christ? It was the Advice of Wisdom, Know the state of thy Flocks. Thus, we
should endeavor to Know the state of the Souls which we are to be concerned
for; to know whether they are in a Natural, or a Renewed state.

Once more, We are to help them with Questions about their Temptations. It was
a Question once given to some, in Luc. 24. 38. Why do Thoughts arise in your
hearts? Even so we should Enquire of our young people, What Thoughts are you
most troubled with? Enquire, what Fears, enquire what Snares they are most
endangered by. Be always jealous, lest as the serpent beguiled Eve, so their
minds be corrupted. Moreover Some Questions we are to put upon them, Secondly,
which concern their Lives. It was once an Interrogatory which some were put
unto, in Luc. 23. 17. What manner of communications have ye? Thus we are to
Examine our young people about the Words and the Works, that fill their Lives.
There are especially three things which they should be Examined about; their
Prayer, their Time, and their Company; Ask them, whether they live without
Prayer or no? Whether in Prayer they secretly and sincerely pour out their
souls before the Lord? Ask them, How they spend their Time? How much Idle Time,
and how much useful Time, they allow unto themselves? And ask them, What their
Company is? Whom they sit withal? Whether vain Persons and Fools, or the Saints
which are the excellent, and all those that fear God? Our Question will prove
their Safeguard, if it be well administered.

Thirdly, There are faithful Reproofs with which we are to Instruct our
Families. It Is said in Prove. 6. 33. The Reproofs of Instruction are the way of
life. When we give Instruction, we shall have occasion to give Reproof, too
often with it. There is no Family that has not Miscarriages that are to be
reproved in it. Young people too commonly are wild people; and without some
Castigations they will rarely be kept in order. To some of them smart Wor^s, to
others of them smart Blows, will be too often due. It Is said in Prove. 13. 24.
He that spares his Rod hates his s^n; but he that loves him, chastens him
betimes. Frowns are due to all, and Rods to some Transgressors in the Family.
But there are two Negative and two Positive Rules to be minded in Reproving of
them.

The Negative Rules are these two.

First, Reprove not Furiously. It is said in Iam. 1. 20. The wrath of man,
works not the righteousness of God. Remember, Nothing will be so well done in
a passion, but what may be done better out of it. If you are to chide, yet
chide not in a Fury. Do not call vile Names; much more, do not swear, do not
curse, do not Rage with a Tongue set on fire of hell. If you are to smi^e, yet
smite not in a Fury. Bloody, wounding, outrageous Buffettings are to be
avoided; lest there be cause to say of you, Cursed is their Anger for it is
fierce, and their Wrath for it is cruel.

Secondly Reprove not for ever. It Is said in Ps. 103. 9. God will not always
chide, neither will He keep his anger for ever. To be always finding faults,
is the way never to be curing them. A perpetual Warngling is a continual
Dropping, which there is no enduring of; it prejudices the minds of them that
feel it, against all that shall be said unto them.

The Positive Rules are these Two.

First Reprove Reasonably. Let there be just Cause for it. When you reprove, it
must be for a true cause. As it was said of our Savior in Isai. 11. 3. He
shall not reprove after the hearing of His ears. Thus, we may not go by mere
Hearsay, when we reprove those that are under us. And it must be for a great
Cause. It Is said of the Spirit in Io^. 16. 8. He will reprove the world for SIN.
The sinful thing, the thing for which the wrath of God comes, the thing which
the soul of the Lord hates, this we are to reprove. We must not throw away
Reproofs upon Nothing, or upon Every thing.

Secondly, Reprove Scripturally. It Is said in 2. Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is
profitable for Reproof. A Reproof with a Scripture comes with a more than
ordinary Majesty and Authority. When we Reprove those that are under us, First,
make them read a Text which does Condemn what we would rebuke, and then set it
home with a very warm lively vigorous Application.

Fourthly, There are solemn Charges with which we are to Instruct our Families.
It was the Character which the Lord gives of Abraham, in Genesis 18. 19. I know
him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord. O that this might be said of every Householder
here; I know him, that he will take all of his house, one by one, and Charge
every one of them to keep the way of the Lord! What says the Apostle, in i^
These 2. 11. We charged every one of you, as a father his children. We should
call aside our young people, and lay upon them, the Charge of David, in 1.
Chron. 28. 9. My son, know thou the God of thy Father, and Serve Him with a
perfect Heart and a willing mind; for the Lord searches all Hearts* if thou
seek Him, He will be found of thee, if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off
for ever.

Charge them; and this especially about four Things. Lay upon them that Charge
of God in 1. Joh. 3. 23. This is His Commandment, that you believe on the Name
of his Son. Charge them to accept of Christ Jesus, as their Prince and their
Savior; Charge them to repair unto Christ Jesus for Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. Lay also upon them that Charge of God, in Mat.
6. 6. Enter into thy Closet and pray to thy Father in secret. Charge them to
Retire for their Devotions every day; Charge them to let not a day pass them,
without Crying to God for His Mercy, and Pardon, and Salvation. Once more, Lay
upon them that Charge of God, in Prove. 1. 10. My son, if Sinners entice thee,
consent thou not, Charge them, that they be not the Companions of Fools; Charge
them that they do not associate themselves into an Intimacy and a Familiarity
with any but such as may be sober, discreet, blameless persons. Finally, Lay
upon them that Charge of God in Hag. 1. 5. Thus says the Lord of hosts,
Consider your ways. Charge them, that they Consider what their present
Condition is, and what their future Condition is like to be; Charge them, that
they consider of their past Behaviors, and of the Death, and Judgment, and
Eternity which is yet before them. A young man has become a real Convert by
being obliged unto Consideration for one Quarter of an Hour in a Day. Wish for
them, say to them, Oh that they were wise, that they would Consider! In a word,
Let your Charge on them, be that, which Holy Bolton gave to his Children, when
he dyed, I charge you, that at the Day of Judgment, none of you dare to meet
me in an Unregenerate estate.

Secondly. The Manner of Family-Instruction.

It Is to be performed in such a Manner, as may best Attain the Ends of it.
Particularly.

First, We are to Instruct our Families very Seasonably. We are told in Matthew,
24. 45. The Ruler over the Household is to give them their meat in due Season.
There lies much in the Time we take for the Work. We should indeed have our
Frequent Times, to do it: We should speak what may be for the Instruction of
our Families, every day, and often in a day; and on various occasions be
dropping our savoury Admonitions. Even when we sit at the Table, we should
rarely Rise without feeding the Minds, as well as the Mouths of our
Attendents. Much more at the H^urs of Prayer, we should do something that may
make them more acquainted with Divine Objects then they were before. But we
should likewise have our Stated Times to do it. Especially Sacred Time will be
very properly a Stated Time for it. On the Days of the Lord, we should
instruct our Houses in the Things of the Lord; that were infinitely better than
to be Sleeping or Talking at an idle rate, as then too many do.

But about the Stated Time for Family-Instruction, there is a double Discretion
to be used. It is to be dispatched in a Quiet Time, in a Time when there is no
Disturbance by Passions within, or Noises without. It is said in Eccles. 9. 16.
The words of wise men are heard in quiet: and no wise man will speak when there
is not Quietness enough to allow an Audience for him. And it is to dispensed in
a Lively, Time, in a Time when Spirits are stirring, and Affections are
vigorous. It Is said in Romans 12. 11. Be ^ervent in spirit, serving the Lord;
thus, this piece of Service for the Lord, is to be done, when there is a
Fervency of Disposition thereunto.

Secondly, We are to Instruct our Families very pertinently. Accommodate our
Instructions to their Conditions.

Are there any Unconverted persons in our Families? Let them be Suitably
Instructed. Say to them as in Psalm. 34. 11. Hearken to me and I will Teach you
the Fear of the Lord. Let them be warned of the Dangers which do threaten their
miserable souls; and let them be stirred to the Duties that may lay them at the
Pool, in the way of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Are there any Converted persons in our Families? Let them too be suitably
Instructed. We read in Joh. 8. 31. Jesus said unto the Jews which believed on
Him, continue in my word. Let them be quickened to continue in their Faith, and
Love and Zeal. Let them have Weapons ^o furnish them against all their
Difficulties, and Cordials to Revive them under all their Discouragements.

Are there any Unfruitful Souls, in our Families? Instruct them suitably, by
setting before them what is the Doom of the Barren Free, and of the Barren
Ground; even, to be cut down, and burnt up for ever. And say, O glorify your
heavenly Father by bringing forth much fruit.

Are there any Backsliding Souls, in our Families? Instruct them suitably, by
setting before them the Displeasure of God at such as drawback, and His extreme
Wrath on them whose Goodness is as the Morning cloud and the early dew; and
say, Remember whence thou art fallen, repent, and do thy first works. Thus are
we to suit the the case of those whom we give Instruction to.

Thirdly. We are to Instruct our Families very Diligently. It Is a thing that we
are to labor in. It Was enjoind in Deuteronomy 6. 7. The words which I command thee,
thou shall teach them Diligently unto thy Children. It calls for our Hearts and
our Pains. When we set about it, we should think with our selves, We know not
how short our Opportunities may be; we know not whether we shall ever speak
more to those whom we now direct our selves unto. In this as well as in other
such Cases, we should hear the voice of our own Uncertainty and Mortality; it is
that in Eccles. 9. 10. Do with thy might what thy hand finds to do, for there
is no work, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou art going. It Is the Work of the
Lord, about which we are, when we are, Instructing our Families, it is not to be
done slothfully; we find in Ier. 28. 10. cursed is the man, who does it so; it is
to be done heartily; we find in 2. Chron. 31. 21. that is the way to prosper in
it. O let us be as Diligent in Instructing of our young people, as the
Emissaries of Hell are in Seducing of them.

Fourthly, We are to Instruct our Families by Exemple. Be Exemplary; and follow
the Directory of that geat man, who said in Psalm. 101. 10. I will walk within
my house with a perfect heart. Let our Walk, as well as our Talk, show the
young people with us how they are to walk and to please God; and let us be able
to call upon them, Do you follow me, as I follow Christ. Let us give such
Expressions of Love to God and his Truths and His Ways, that our Families may
come after us in the like. Let them discern how to seek the Face of God, and
how to bear the Hand of God, and how to prize the Word of God, by seeing how We
do it our selves. When Elisha would get for himself a double Portion of the
spirit in Elijah, he said in 2. King 2. 10. If thou see me, it shall be so unto
thee. O that the Sight of us, that the Sight of our Piety, and Gravity might
Instruct our Houses, and help them to a double Portion of those Graces and
Virtues which are the Fruits of the Spirit. We should study an Instructive
Conversation; and we should never permit a Cham, a young Cham in our families,
to see us overcome with Drink, Disguised with Vice, or naked with Folly; but In
all things we should show our selves a Pattern of good works.

Fifthly. We are to Instruct our Families with Authority. As the Minister is to
imitate the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom it is said in Mat. 7. 29. He taught as one
having Authority. So should the Householder do. And hence we are to keep up our
Authority in our families; not permitting the child to be have himself proudly
against the Ancient. It is required in Lev. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every one his
Mother and his Father, the Mother is here put before the Father, because
commonly she first loses her Authority: but neither Mother nor Father should
suffer themselves to be trampled upon. It Is an intolerable thing, for a saucy,
impudent, unmannerly child to reply, I wont, when a Parent bids him do this or
that. You sin grievously, if you do not curb and break the Wills of them that
you are to bring up in the nurture of the Lord; and if you don't make 'em
tremble to break any of your commands. Wherefore let there be that Wisdom, that
Meekness, that Reservedness, and Seriousness in our Deportments, with which we
may Rule well our own house, and have our Children in Subjection with all
g^^vity. This is that Family-Instruction and Family -Government by which we
must bring our Houses to serve the Lord.

SECT. XV.
ONe might Rationally imagine, that no Exception could be taken at such a
profitable and necessary thing as Family Instruction is. Yet this also has
Exceptions made against it; and therefore I am endeavoring

II. To Remove some Objections against Family Instruction.

Diverse things are by many pleaded, wherefore they take no care to have their
Families par^akers of Instruction in Righteousness.

The First Exception.
One person will for this Plea Exempt himself. The Inferiors in my Family are
very Dull: It Is an hard thing to beat into them, any sense of Eternal
Concernments.

On this Pretense it is, that poor Negro's especially are kept Strangers to the
way of Life: they are kept only as Ho^ses or Oxen, to do our Drudgeries; but
their Souls, which are as white and good as those of other Nations, their Souls
are not looked after, but are Destroyed for lack of Knowledge. This is a
desperate Wickedness. But are they dull? Then instruct them the rather; That is
the Way to sharpen them. It Is said in Psalm. 119. 130. The Entrance of thy word
gives Understanding to the Simple. Be they never so simple, you may increase
their Wit by God's Word. And are they truly Dull? Then be not you so too; Let
your Labor be equal to their Dullness. We are told in Eccl. 10. 10. If the Iron
be blunt, then a man must put to the more Strength. You must be at the Trouble
to stoop unto their Capacities. Be you as plain, be you as breef in your
Instructions, as they are dull in their Intellectuals. And be frequent, be
patient in them; give Line upon line, and Precept upon precept, here a little
and there a little. Even Gutta cavat lapidem -- a Stone will receive the mark
of the Drop that shall often fall upon it.

The Second Exception.
Another person will for this Cause Exempt himself.

The Inferiors in my Family are very Young. It Is too soon to begin with them; we
shall only make them take the Name of God in vain by teaching them to talk like
Parrots of Religion, before they can conceive better of it.

To this I answer, No, You cannot begin with them Too soon. `Twas said in Isai.
28. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge? Them that are weaned from the milk and
drawn from the breasts. They are no sooner weaned but they are to be taught;
and God may give them righter and riper Conceptions of things, than you are
well aware. What says the Wise man, Trai^ up a Child in the way he should go.
Let the first liquor that is put into them be sweet and good; and they will
keep the tang of it all their days. Quo semel est imbuta recens --

Are they Young? Yet the Devil has been with them already. It Is said in Psalm.
58. 3. They go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies. They no sooner
step than they stray, they no sooner lisp than they ly. Satan gets them to be
proud, prosane reviling and revengeful as young as they are. And I pray, Why
should not you be aforehand with him? And this the rather, since the Lord
Jesus calls for them. He says in Marc. 10. 13. Suffer little children to
come unto me. For know, It Is not an Affront, but an Honor unto the Name of God,
for such young ones to Learn the truth as it is in Jesus. It was very pleasing
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, when in Matthew. 21. 15. The Children cried Hosannah
to Him. If your Children do not cry Hosanna, they will call wicked Names, they
will curse and lie, and take the Name of God in vain; and which is best? Judge
ye. Besides we have the Call of God, in Psalm. 148. 12. Ye Children, praise the
Lord.

The Third Exception.
A Third person will urge this against it.

I want Abilities to manage this work, my Parts and Gifts are too mean to go
through it.

To this I answer; God will Accept you, tho^ you do it meanly. The Prophet made
this Apology for himself, in Jer. 1. 6. Ah! Lord God, I cannot speak. But God
answered, Say not so. Tho you have but one Talent, yet let it not ly by. Though
you have only Goats hair, or Badgers skins, yet employ them for the use of the
Tabernacle. The Apostle tells the Hebrews, You need one to teach you the first
principles of the O^^cles of God; yet unto them he said, Exhort one another.

Moreover, God will Assist you to do it better. It Was affi^med to him in Joshua
1. 9. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good Courage, for the Lord
thy God is with thee. Thus be it affirmed here; God has commanded thee, Do it
as courageously and as comfortably as thou can: His Presence will continually
cause thee to grow in thy Accomplishments To him that has shall be given. Keep
watering the Olive-plants about thy Table. He that waters shall be watered
also himself.

The Fourth Exception.
A Fourth person perhaps will not blush to say, I want Opportunity to attend
this Work, my Employment will not suffer me.

But let no man argue so Man have thou Time to Feed thy Family and no time to
Teach them? The poorest among you all should say, as in Psa. 119. 92. The Law
of thy mouth is better to me, than thousands of Gold and silver. It Is better to
lay up for thy Family the Riches of God's Law, than Thousands of pounds.
Nothing, nothing should put by their Instruction in the way of peace If you do
not want an Heart, you will not want a Time for the Instruction of your
Families. No man could have more business lying on his hands than David had who
had the Affayrs of a mighty Kingdom to distract him; yet of him could his own
Son say as in Prove. 4. 4. He taught me.

The Fifth Exception.
It Is possible a fifth person may have uncomfortable cause to plead,

I have those in my Family that will not be Instructed; I cannot Order them so
far as to make them submit unto it.

In this unhappy Case, What shall be done but this? We are to pray for these
Creatures, that their Hearts may be tam^d and bow^d by Him, that has them in
His Hand. We are also to watch when some Affliction or some Amazement is come
upon them: then God opens their ear to Discipline; then the Wild Asses are in
the Month where you may find them. We may likewise call in the help of some
grave, pious, holy Minister, who may come to them with the spirit and power of
Elias, To turn the hearts of the Children to their Fathers.

Finally. If your Children refuse to be Instructed, What says the Wise man, A
Rod for the fools back. If your Servants refuse to be Instructed, What says
the Good man, He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house.

SECT. XVI.
BEfore I have done, I must Endeavor

III. To propound some Incentives unto Family-Instruction.

Wherefore

Consider, first, the Needfulness of it.

Christians, Instruct your Families, for I may say, This is the Will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you. And as Gods Will, so their State calls for it. O
look upon the Ignorance of your Families. May it not be said of them as in
Psalm. 14. 2. The Lord looked on the Children -- to see if there were any that
did understand; they are all gone aside. Instruct them; lest they be destroyed
for lack of knowledge. Look upon the Corruption of your Families. May it not be
said of them, as in Eccles. 5. 3. The hearts of the Children is full of Evil.
Instruct them, lest they be the Children of Belial, to consume your eyes and
grieve your hearts.

In a Word, Instruct your Families or else the Blood of their Souls will be
required at your hands. It was complained of old, in Jer. 2. 34. In thy skirts
is found the blood of the souls of poor innocents. What a dreadful word is
that! and what a dreadful thing will it be, for your poor Families to follow
you in the ever-burning Lake below; shrieking and roaring, If you had done your
Duty to us, it is like we had never arrived here!

Consider, Secondly the Usefulness of it.

Instruct your Families and it will issue in their Good. They shall be brought
home to God. As he said in Psalm 51. 13. I will teach them, and they shall be
converted unto thee. You may see converted Children, and converted Servants,
filling of your Families. They may bless the name of God for ever, that ever
they knew your House, or saw your Face; because you have promoted in them that
Knowledge which is Life Eternal.

Instruct your Families; and it will issue in your Joy. They shall afford you
that ^ight, of which the Apostle said, I have no greater Joy. It Is said in Prove.
10. 1. A wise Son makes a glad Father. It Is a taught son that proves a wise son.
What a joyful thing will it be, for you to see all your Children and Servants,
calling you their spiritual Father, here! But what a much-more joyful thing
will it be for you to meet them all at the Right Hand of our Lord in the day of
His Appearing!

O Consider of these Things; and go away determined, [I hope you are now
determined] Thus I and my House will serve the Lord.

TIME DISCERNED.
ECCLES. VIII. 5. A wise man's heart discerns TIME
THe Famous Writer of these Words was that Royal Preacher, Solomon. After much
Experience of the World, and after much Repentance for that Experience, he drew
up a Treatise De summo bono, concerning the chief Good of man. The penitent and
inspired Monarch, having arrived unto the Top of this world, pitties the poor
men whom he sees toiling and sweating to get up the rocky hill after him, and
expecting to find Happiness there* and with a loud voice he gives this warning
to them, Sirs, You will be all mistaken, you will meet with nothing but Vanity
and Vexation here.

The Context here contains the Reflections of this wise prince on the
Countenance which he had given to public and open Idolatry in Israel, and the
compliance which they that should have advised the contrary yielded thereunto.
Men seek out many inventions to excuse themselves from bearing an humble but a
faithful Testimony against any sinful thing which their Superiors may invite
them to. One of these Inventions is mentioned in the fourth verse of this
Chapter; it is drawn from the Uncontrollable Power of them that sometimes
enjoin a sinful thing. To this Excuse we have a twofold Answer in the fifth
verse. We have two things in it. First, the Good of Religion. It Is sai^, Whosoever
keeps the commandment shall feel no evil thing. q. d. Be true to Gods
Commandments and thy own Conscience, let who will be offended at it; the
wonderful providence of the Almighty will in the mean time be concerned for thy
Safety and Security. A man gets no real Hurt by doing of his Duty. Secondly,
the Need of Discretion. It Is said A wise man's heart discerns both Time and
Judgment. q. d. In the doing of this, and every other Duty, two things are to
be much regarded. Mind the Season of the duty, and mind the Manner of the duty:
much harm will thereby be prevented in discharging of it. It Is the former of
these two Regardables that I would now insist upon. Behold a general Rule
applied unto a particular Case: the Case is, the Rebuking and Refusing of Sin;
but the Rule is, A wise man alwai^s will discern his time to do what he has to
do. To Discern the Time, -- it must needs also signify to Improve the Time.
Wherefore the Doctrine is, A wise man will discern and improve his Time, to do
what is incumbent on him.


Our Propositions are to be such as these.

Prop. I.
The Blessed God affords to men in this World a Time to discharge the Duties
incumbent on them. There are two things incumbent on us; to Do good, and to Get
good. The good we are to do, is to Honor God; and the good we are to get, is
to Enjoy God. Those two things comprise all our Duties; and they make up the
Errand which we come into the World upon. Now, while we are in this world, God
allows us a Time for this work; we have time not only in the larger sense of
it, but also in the stricter sense of it; We have time not only in Duration,
but also in Opportunity. There is not any Duty enjoined upon us, but there is
a Season for it allowed unto us. It Is an Observation about the things that shall
be, in Eccles. 3. 1. To every thing there is a Season, and a Time to every
purpose. Thus it may be said about the things that should be, There is no Duty,
but God has provided us a Time and a Season for it. We have some golden spots
of Time, whereof we may say, This is the Time for such a duty; and again, This
is the Time for another duty.

First, We have a Time to do Good while we are here in the world. We have a
time to exercise every Virtue, to use all that Piety and Charity, all that
Holiness and Righteousness, which the Lord requires of us. The Good which we
are to do is expressed in Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good,
to do justly, ^and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. We meet with
many Times to do those Good things before we dye. We have now our ^^me to
acquaint our selves with God, in all the methods of Devotion; our Time to
acknowledge God in all the ways of New Obedience We have also our Time to
advantage our Neighbors; our Time to promote the internal and eternal
Salvation, and the external Prosperity of them that are about us.

Secondly, We have likewise a Time to Get Good while we are in the world. We
have a Time to obtain all that Favor, and all that Fellowship with God which
our Mighty Redeemer is the Author of. The Good which we are to get, is
comprised in Isai. 55. 3. The sure Mercies of David. We have our Times to
secure all those Good things. Every man of us may say, I have a Time to get my
Sin pardoned; he may say, I have a Time to get my Soul renewed; he may say, I
have a Time to get all the Promises of the New Covenant fulfilled unto my soul
for evermore.

Prop. II.
It is no small part of Wisdom for men to discern and improve the Time which
God affords unto them. When the Gales of Opportunity blow in the Sails of
Time, every man should see and watch his own Opportunity. To Discern the Time,
is to mind the time, and to use the time, for the performance of our Duty. Now
it is a wise man that will so discern the Time. Sapience or Wisdom is a Virtue of
the Understanding, whereby a man perceives the Dependence of things; the
Co^nexion of things, and the Consequence of things being understood, therein
Wisdom is discovered. To discern the time is an instance of this. It Is Wisdom
for a man to lay his Time and his Work together. It Is Wisdom for a man to
foresee what will be the Issue of such a Work at such a Time. But besides the
Nature of Wisdom evidently appearing in this thing, we have a two fold further
witness to the Wisdom of it.

First, The Testimony of Scripture there about, shows, that it is Wisdom for
men to discern and improve their time. What the all- wise, the only- wise GOD
calls Wisdom, is unquestionably to be esteemed so. The Redeeming of Time is
great Wisdom in the Language and the Account of God. It Was said in Ephesians. 5. 16.
Walk as wise, Redeeming the time -- Much of the same Date and Tenor, was the
Epistle to the Colossians. In that Epistle also we have the like passage, in
Cap. 4. 5. Walk in Wisdom, Redeeming the time. It Is probable the Apostle therein
has a special Reference to Persecutions, which good men were then exposed unto.
To Redeem the Time, was a proverbial Phrase of old, signifying, To Keep out of
trouble as long as one can. Thus the Chaldean-Soothsayers were told in their
distress, Dan. 2. 8. I know that ye would gain the time. This was the Counsil
of the Apostle, By a prudent, holy, careful, and inoffensive Carriage toward
them that would interrupt you in the worship of Jesus Christ, gain Time what
you can for the quiet practice of it. Well, If it be Wisdom to gain time for
the Service of God, surely, it is Wisdom to spend time in the Service of God. It
was the singular Character and Commendation of the Issacharites, in 1. Chron.
12. 32. They had Understanding in the times, to know what Israel ought to do.
It Is an understanding man, who does so know his Time, as to do his Work. Of a
Time-losing man, the Scripture says, He is a Fool. It says in Prove. 18. 16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a Fool?

Secondly, The Prevention of Sorrow thereby, shows, That it is Wisdom for men
to discern and improve their Time. It is great Wisdom to prevent great Sorrow.
Now nothing in the world fills the heart of man more with Anguish and Anger,
than the Missing of Time. When a man has missed his Time for his Work, it
causes an unspeakable Regret within him. We read of some professors, who
missed their (...) to Entertain Christ Jesus and His Mercy: with what a
mavelous Agony did they cry out, in Matthew. 25. 11. Lord, Lord, open to us!
Well might they be called Foolish, who thus cam^ too late. The horror of it
being once only Represented by some profane people, who acted the Foolish
Virgins in a Play, at a City in Germany, it even killed a Prince that was a
Spectator of it. It Is impossible to utter the Confusion which the slipping of
time does put the souls of men into. When Esau had missed his Time to procure a
Blessing for himself, how did he resent it? We are told in Genesis 27. 34. He
cried with a great and exceeding bitter Cry. Alas, how should it be otherwise?
The slipping of Time is an Ill, and an exceeding bitter thing. There are but
two sorts of men; both of them find the Loss of time, to prove at some time or
other, a sad, an evil, a troublesome thing unto them, It Is thus esqecially when
their time is come to Die, when their time is to be no more. As for Good men,
the Loss of time usually strowes Thorns on their Beds when they come to die. It
grieves the best man to think, My Time, my Time, I have not so laid it out for
God as I should have done. He was a painful and a pious Minister of the Gospel,
who yet breathed out this among his last, Groans, O the Loss of Time! it (...)
on my spirit now. As for Bad men, the Loss of Time flash^ Hell fire into their
spirits when they come to Die. It causes terrible wounds* and pains in the
departing soul of a Sinner to think I had, once a Time to Believe, a Time to
Repent, a Time to lay up for Eternity, but now my Time is gone for ever. The
sh^^ek of a poor man going out of the world sometimes has been, A would of
Weal^h for an inch of Time. (...), it is Wisdom to prevent such things as these.

The Use of these things remains.

USE.
Let us all he hence advised to Discern and Improve Time, which we have to
discharge our D^tyes in. The most of us, it is to be (...), may discern Judgment;
we know (...) our Duty is, and How it is to be dispatched. (...) us also
discern Time: Suffer we not our time to run from us, while we neglect the great
Ends which we, have it for. O let not the Lord have cause to complain of us as
in Jer. 8. 7. The Birds in the Heaven know their appointed times, but my people
do not know.

That we may Discern time, and improve time, such Directions as these may well
be followed.

Direction I.
Let us Discern our Time* and not Mis-spend our Time. Avoid those Time-wasting
things, Which would serve us about our Time, as the Highway men did the poor
Traveller in Luc. 10. 30. in his way to Jericho. We are all Traveling in the
the way to Eternity; there are these and those Robbers in the way that would
plunder us of our time: shun them, fly them. Count Mis-spenc^ of Time one of
the most wicked and woeful follies in the world.

Let us discern three things in all Time, and permit no Time to be devoured by
two things which we may be under Temptation to.

The things which we are to discern in all Time are these,

First, let us discern the Worth of all Time. Let not an hour pass without this
opinion of it, This hour is too good to be lost. If we prise the Jewel we shall
not lose it. It is for our shame that even an Heathen made that complaint,
Q^uem mibi dabis qui diem est^met? Where will you find a man that esteems his
Time as he ought to do?

Ponder well what a vast price our Lord paid for our Time. We had forfeited all
our Tune into the hands of infinite revenging Justice; the just wrath of God
would have taken away ^ime and Life from us long ago, if our Lord Jesus had not
laid down such a price as that in 1. Pe^. 1. 18. Ye were redeemed, not with
silver and gold, but (...) the precious blood of Jesus Christ. O don't throw
away any of that which cost so dea^.

And ponder well what a vast price the dying and the damned set on their Time.
We may say of it as Job of another thing, in Cap. 28. 22. Destruction and
death, say, we have heard the fame thereof with our ears. Even so, Destruction
and Death set an high rate upon it. Ask men when Destruction and Death is near
to seizing upon 'em, How much would you give now for a little of the time that
is gone? They will reply, O, whole mountains of gold for one hour of it! Judge
now as you will judge then.

Secondly, Let us Discern the Irrevokableness of our Time. When our time is
once gone, it remains Irrevokable, and Irrecoverable for evermore. We may say
of every Time that is past, as in Psalm. 49. 8. It is precious and it cease
forever. The Wish of Hezekiah could once bring back the shadow of the Sun, but
never could any man procure a Return of his Time. Sometimes the doleful Cries
of distressed ones have been, Call Time again! call Time again! But alas, Time
will not come back for Calling. Oh how should this make us to takeheed that we
don't abuse any part of our Time, I shall never have this time again! When once
our Time has taken wing, what is said of Love* in Cant. 8. 7. that may be said
of Time, If a man would give all the substance of his house for it, it would
utterly be contemned, When once Time is gone, it is gone.

Thirdly, let us Discern our Accountableness for all our Time. God maintains us
and supplies us with Time continually. He keeps a Sun to measure it. The time
will come when He will reckon with us about all our Time. It Is said in Ecc. 11.
9. O young man walk in the ways of thy heart; but know thou that for all these
things, God will bring thee into judgment. In like sort, let me say, Come,
squander away thy Time, even contrive to get the dead commodity off thy hands;
but know thou that in the day, when God shall judge the world, all this Time of
thine must be accounted for. It was the Law of old, in Exodus 21. 18. If one man
smite another, so that he keep his bed, and yet walk abroad again, he shall pay
for his healing and the Loss of his Time: Truly so, if we impenitently lose any
of the Time which God has given us, He will make us pay for it, in the day of
his pleac^ng with us. It Is said in Matthew. 12. 36. Men shall give an account of
every idle wo^d. Much more in that day shall men give an account of every idle
Hour. The God that has numbered our Hairs, has also numbered our Hou^es* It
will be a fearful thing, if at last He say unto us, Thou wicked and slothful
servant, thy life has been made up of idle hours.

These things are we to discern in all Time. For the sake hereof, let us now
permit no Time to be misplaced in such things as these.

First, Let us mispend no Time in vanity, of them that live in vain pleasures
it is said in 1 Timothy 5. 6. they are Dead while they live. They discrn no Time,
and enjoy none. Too much Time is not to be laid out in Eating and Drinking. To
affect Long Meals, or to tarry long at the Wine, does not become a Christian.
Thy Soul is a little too noble a thing sure to be made the Cook of thy Body.
Moreover, Too much Time is not to be laid out in Attiring and Adorning. It made
an holy man among the Ancients to weep, when in a morning he ^aw a person
longer in Dressing, than himself had been in praying. Thy Carcass that is to
feed the Worms ere long should not put by thy cares about thy Spirit, which
must be in Weal or Woe for ever. Once more, Too much Time is not to be laid out
in Sporting and Gaming. There are some lawful Recrea^ions, of which we should
be shy, lest they steal away our Heart and our Time. That blessed Martyr, John
Hus, just before he dyed, in a Letter thus bewaild himself, O beg of God to
pardon me for the Time I have lost at such a Play, that yet in it self was very
innocent. But there are some unlawful Recreations also, in which multitudes
play away their Time. The plays which depend upon a pure Lot are such. The
moral Heathen Zealously reproached them. And severe Statutes were made against
them when the Roman Empire became a Christian. Men always loose at them, those
things which are better than any that they win, their Time, if not their Soul.

Secondly, Let us mispend no Time in Idleness. It was an ill world where the
Apostle could say, as in 2. These 3. 11. There are some that walk disorderly,
working not at all. Every man should be able to make a good Answer to the
Question which Pharaoh put unto Ioseph's Brethren, I pray, What is your
Occupation? A big part of our Time should be laid out on our particular
Callings. A Calling is an Ordinance of God; Adam in Paradise had a Labor
imposed on him. Be diligent in some one or other. No man so fully and foully
falls into the possession of the Devil, as the idle man. The Ants, the Bees,
and all the Creatures exclame against him. Idleness, ti^ thundered against in
Ezekiel. 16. 49. as one of the Sins that brought Hell out of Heaven upon Sodom
long ago; it will carry from Earth to Hell the souls of them that in it snore
away their lives.

When men do'nt misspend their Time, then do they discern it.

Direction, II.
Let us Discern our Time, and Attend every Duty in the proper Time.

There is a twofold Prudence which the Wise man's heart is to be no stranger
to.

The First Prudence is,

Let no Duty be done out of its Time. We are told in Eccles 3. 11. God has
made every thing beautiful in the Time of it. There is a Nick of Time that we
are to take for all we do. Not Snow but Fruit is beautiful in the Summer. It Is
not beautiful for the Duty of Prayer, to be done at a sleepy time, or at a busy
time. It Is not beautiful for the Duty of Reproof to be done at a time when it
can do no good at all. Set not upon this or that Duty at a time when God calls
to another Duty. It Is said in Eccles. 8. 6. To every purpose there is a Time and
Judgment. We may render all our Duties like Apples of gold in pictures of
silver, by well timing of them.

The Second Prudence is,

Let no Time pass away without its Duty: Let none of our times be unaccompanied
with the Duties which belong unto them. As now, there are Duties that belong to
a time of Prosperity, and Duties which belong to a Time of Adversity.

It Is said in Eccles. 7. 14. In the day of Prosperity be joyful, but in the day
of Adversity Consider. In a time of Prosperity: now is a time for men to
Remember their Creator before the evil days come; Now is a time for men to set
their heart and their soul to seek the Lord who has given them rest on every
side. In a time of Adversity, now is a time for men to bring sin to
remembrance; now is a time for men to meet the Lord in all the ways of
Repentance and Obedience. This is to Discern the Time. But there are especially
three sorts of times which we are to fill with the Duties of those Times.

First. Let the Duties of Worshipping times, be done in those times. We have
our times every day wherein the Lord says, seek my Face. Now let the Echo of
our souls be that in Psalm. 27. 8. Thy Face, Lord, we will seek. We have every
day our times for private Prayer, our times for secret Prayer, our times for
Reading of, and Thinking on the Word of God. Let those things be faithfully
done in those Times.

Especially, Remember the Sabbath Day. Let Sabbath-time be sanctified time. On
this day, ly all the day long at the pool of Mercy; Mercy, Mercy, and Salvation
for an immortal soul is this day to be traded for. It Is a Time that the great
God is very Jealous about. He does wonderfully curse the Souls, and blast the
Houses, and ruin the Countries where this Holy Time is not acknowledged. He
will terribly break the rest of those whom His Rest shall not be regarded by.

Secondly, Let the Duties of Visiting Times be done in those Times. It Is too
commonly seen that Amici temporis Fures; our Friends are our Thieves; they
Steal our time, b^^^ause we don't use our time, when then they are with us. It Is
observable, in Col. 4. 6. as soon as the Apostle had said, Redeem the time* he
adds, Let your speech be always with Grace. That, that indeed is a rare way to
Redeem the time. Let us ordinarily study to do some good, whatever Company we
come into. It was observed of that excellent Vrsin by his renowned Friend, I
(...) was in his company, but I went away (Doctior ^ut Melior) the wiser or the
better from him. Abhor, O abhor the useless visits that are quite contrary to
all such designs. Mourn if you have been in any Company without being
profitable thereunto.

Thirdly, Let the Duties of Intervening times be done in those times. We have
large Fragments of time, that are the Intervals of our businesses; about these
Fragments of time, I would say as our Lord said about the Fragments of Bread,
in Joh. 6. 12. Gather up those Fragments that nothing be lost. How many
thousands of happy thoughts might we have as we are sitting in the House, or
walking in the Street, otherwise wholly unimployed? The very Filings of Gold
and of Time are not to be cast away. To discern our time, is to adapt our time.

Direction. III.
Let us discern our Time, and make none but Good B^^gains about the time. The
Scripture once and again tells us, as in Ephesians. 5. 16. that we are to Buy up the
time, or buy out the time. This is to discern the Time! We must be at some
Cost, and at some Charge for it, if we would not be ill-husbands of our time:
We must pay down either Money or Monyes-worth for it; we must fore go and under
go many things for it. Many things must we give up, that our time so may be
well-imployed. The case is ordinarily so, that either we must resign many
Pleasures, many Profits, many Honors, or else we must part with our time. Now
rather give up all Delights, than suffer precious time to be pyrated away. All
the things of time, are sometimes Expense little enough for time. Yea, many
things must we give back, that so we may not misemploy our time. The Devil and
our Lusts have been trucking for our time. The Devil, that hellish Hucster,
would engross all our Time for his own. He deals with us as the Europeans dealt
at first with the silly Indians, who le^^ go their ^old, and Silver, and
Diamonds for glass-Beads and tinsil-Toyes. The Answer that our Lust makes to
the Tempter is, Let me have the pleasures of sin for a season, and every season
of my time shall be thine. O but we should be content to give back all that
Satan has proffered us for our time; let it be never-so-much that we might have
had for the misuse of time, begrutch it not. 'Twas the Speech of Austin, Perde
aliquid ut Deo vaces If you would have Time for God, or any Good, you must part
with something for it.

In a Word, Let us labor now to Regain the Time that we have been cheated of.
The cheef way to do that, is, By a double Diligence for the time to come. Make
up the time we have made an ill market of, by an extraordinary Industry and
Activity in the time yet before us. The Israelites in their Journey to Canaan
made more way the last year or two, than they had done in almost forty years
before. All the many Sermons in the Book of Deuteronomy seem preached by Moses
in the last month or two before he died. O sit down and think well, How shall I
lay out my time for the best Advantage? Let that be said of us when we dye, Diu
vixit, licet non diu fuit. He lived long in a little time.

To Purchase our time, is to discern our time.

Direction. IV.
Let us Discern our time, and let us Improve the Present time, to make our
peace with the Eternal God.

Alas, All the sinful and woeful time of our Unregeneracy is Lost time. One that
was converted but about seven years before he dyed, ordered that Epitaph to be
inscribed on his Grave, Here ^^es an Aged man who died but seven years old.
Thou do not live till thou do repent, till thou do believe.

Be sure, there is no Duty so much incumbent on us, as that of Turning from Sin
to God in Christ. Well, the great God has stated the present time for the
doing of it. It Is the Warning, the solemn warning of the Holy God unto us, 2.
Cor. 6. 2. Behold, Now is the Accepted time, Now is the Day of Salvation. Let
those that are not yet born-again, discern this their time. O ye souls in
peril, What is it that ye resol^e upon? Your time is to Day, to Day, if you
will hear the voice of God. Let me say about this Time, as Boaz about that Land
in Ruth, 4. 4. If you will redeem it, redeem it. O Delay not; Dally not, Trifle
not about this grand Concern; Do not say as the unhappy Felix did, I Will mind it
at a more convenient season. No, No, Discern it, that the most conv^nient
season is just NOW. O that all unconverted men would consider the Danger the
Madness of their Procrastinations. It Is said in Eccles. 9. 12. Man knows not
his time. Man, discern thy time as a flying time, and an uncertain time. A
Jewish Rabbi gave that Co^nsel to a Scholar of his, Besure you repent at least
a day before you die. Truly, it is a fearful thing for a man when he comes to dye,
not to be able to say, It Is at least a day since that I made my peace with God.
Well, who of us can say, that this day is not our last day? We cannot be sure
that we repent a day before we die, unless we repent this very day. Suppose you
were to suffer an horrible Death in case you had not finished some notable
Undertaking before night. O how would every stroke of the Clock strike to your
very hearts within you! Behold O Sinner, be amazed, stand Astonished, and take
the present time to get out of thy present state. It Is possible thou may be a
dead man before to morrow, it is possible this night thy soul may be required.
Horrid will thy condition be, if this happen before thy peace be made with GOD.
There are Graves in the Burying-Place shorter than the youngest of us all. Thou
may Conclude with saying as David to Jonathan, As the Lord lives, there is
but a step between me and death. Wherefore, let me Conclude with saying as
Michal to David, O save thy self to night, for to morrow thou may be slain.
Let no man Repent too late, but let every man Discern the time. It Is the sigh of
our GOD over us, O that they understood! that they would Consider their Latter
END!

The TRIED CHRISTIAN. A Discourse delivered, upon Recovery from SICKNESS
JOB. XXIII. 10. When He has Tried me, I shall come forth as GOLD.
THere was a Man in the Land of Arabia, whose name was Job; and that man was
perfect and upright. The Church of GOD is enriched with an excellent History,
in an elegant Poesy, relating the great Prosperity, the sad Adversity, and
strange Recovery of that perfect and upright man. It Is probable, that he was an
Edomite, and the very Iobab whom Esau was Great-Grandfather unto; but this I am
sure of, He was an Israelite indeed! From a Rich and Fair estate, He suddenly
became, As poor as Job; and while he was in this poor Condition, his noble
Friends gave him their friendly Visits and Respects. Many admirable Dialogues
now passed between them; wherein they endeavored to Accuse and Convince him of
some remarkable Iniquity, as the Cause of his Calamity; and he labored to
vindicate himself; to assert his own Integrity and Sincerity.

In our Context here, the good man is expressing his Willingness and Readiness
to appear before the Judgment Seat of God; and in our Text, he declares what
he expects would be the Result of his Trials by the Lord. He comforts himself
by those two Considerations. First, that God's Knowledge did reach him. He
says, God knows the way that is in me; q. d. Tho I cannot see God, yet God
can see me; and the most inward Purposes or Appetites of my mind, are not
concealed from Him. And Next, that God's Trial would clear him. This is the
Article that lies before us to be Explained and Improved; and the Doctrine,
which may guide our Discourse upon it, is,

That Good men come forth as GOLD, under and after the Trials of the Almighty
God.

It is by the ensuing Propositions that we may arrive to right thoughts about
the Truth before us.

Proposition. I.
There is a various Trial which the God of Heaven causes to pass upon His
people. No Christian can be without his Trials. But there are especialy two
sorts of Trials which ou^ God will subject us all unto. First,

There are the Trials of Divine Examinations, Which will be critical upon us.
It Is said in Psalm. 11. 4, 5. The Lords eyes behold, and His ey-lids try the
children of men; the Lord sounds (as the French Translation has it) both the
righteous and the wicked. Every man in the world falls under the Notice, and
so, under the Trial of the omniscient God. The all-seeing Eyes of God, as it
were, Examine us, and His Ey-lids knit themselves for a Scrutiny into our
Hearts and lives. The blessed God will pass a Judgment, after a Trial upon us;
whether we truly love Him and seek Him, or no. We are told in Psalm. 7. 9. The
righteous God tries the Hearts and the Reins; an Assertion, an Expression, it
may be, more than seven times repeted in the Word of God! The Examination and
Observation of God, extends it self to the most interior parts of men; the
motions of their very Hearts and Reins come under His exactest Cognizance.
Every man may so far say after that godly man, in Psalm. 17. 3. Lord, thou have
proved my heart, thou have visited me, thiu have tried me. To use a Similitude
made Legitimate and Canonical by the Apostle himself, in Heb. 4. 13. The
Sacrificeing Knife of old, never did penetrate so far into the Bowels of the
Creatures it was employed upon; it never laid them so ^aked and open, before
the standers-by; as the examining Eye of God makes a discovery of what is in
our Souls and our ways.

Secondly, There are the Trials of Divine Dispensations which we must have
Experience of* God's Providence are our Probations; by them we are tried what
we are. The things which befall us in the world, fetch out of us, those things
which manifest what metal we are made of. Particularly, it is said in 2. Cor. 6.
3, 7. We are Approved by things on the Right hand and on the Left.

First, The Merciful Dispensations of God, are Trials of us: these are Trials
on the Right hand. It is a sacred Proverb, in Prove. 27. 21. As the Fining-pot
for silver, and the Furnace for Gold, so is a man to his praise; or so the
mouth which praises any one, is to try him. As when a man is praised by his
Neighbor, so when a man is Blessed of his Maker, he is then tried unto the
utmost. Honors from below, do Indicare virum; they soon Try and show the man
that is perfumed therewith; and the same is done by Merc^es from above. Therein
the Lord brings us, as He did the Soldiers of Gideon, to a River of Plenty,
and He says, as in Judge. 7. 4. Now I will try them there. The Favors of God,
as it were, put us into a Crucible, in a Furnace, where it soon becomes
apparent, whether we fear him or no. They are so many Trials, Whether we will
hear God speaking to us in our prosperity; or whether when we wax fat, we shall
kick against the Lord.

Secondly, The Afflictive Dispensations of God, are likewise Trials of us. And
these are Trials on the Left hand. So much is intimated in 1. Pet. 1. 6, 7. Ye
are in heaviness through many Temptations, that the trial of your faith, being
much more precious than that of gold which perishes, though it be tried with
fire, may be found unto praise. All Afflictions are Tentations; by them we are
tried whether we have the Grace of God in us or no. It Is Faith, but not Faith
alone, which our Troubles here are the Trials of. A Sickbed is a Furnace, a
Reproach is a Furnace, a Loss, or a Goal is a Furnace, in which it is tried
whether we have the spirits, not of Bastards, but of Children in us. Hence we
read of A great Trial of Affliction. Afflicted persons may make that Confession
in Ps. 66. 10, 11, Thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us as silver is
tried; thou have laid Affliction upon our loins. Hereby we are Tried whether we
will despise the Chastning of the Lord, or whether we will faint when rebuked
of Him.

Proposition II.
Upon the Trials of God, good men come forth as gold.

There is that in Gold, which good men may be compared unto. We read in Deuteronomy.
1. 1. about the mountains of Dizahab: that is, the Golden mountains; because
Gold was probably dug from thence. The Churches of God in the world, are such
Mountains of gold. Every true Believer is a rich lump of Gold before the Lord.
Of such persons it is said in Lam. 4. 2. They are the precious sons of Zion,
comparable to fine gold. There are diverse properties in Gold, which a good man
will have a blessed Resemblance of. I should offer you not Gold, but Hay and
stubble if I should read you here a Lecture of Metallogy, or discourse to you
all that I could Philosophize about this King of Metals. Let me only touch on a
few common Reflections, As now,

Gold is a pure metal. Hence we read near some scores of times in the sacred
Scripture, about pure Gold. It will not readily admit a Mixture* or an Alloy
with more imperfect Metals; unless with Silver: Especially the Dust-gold of
Guinea, Gold whereof Job says, it is Dust of gold: wonderful is the Purity
thereof! Thus a good man is a pure man; He is one of those that are called in
Matthew. 5. 8. The pure in heart: He is pure in his Ends, pure in his principles,
pure in his practices, pure from the dross of Lust: and he is not so much
Nominally as really, A Puritan.

Again* Gold is a Ductil Metal. It Is marvellously extensible when beaten into
Leaves; twere incredible to tell how far one Grain of Gold may be extended and
continued. So dense and compacted, and united, are the parts of it, that an
Ounce of it may be beaten (I suppose) into a Thousand Leaves. Thus a good Man
can be Drawn forth into large Expressions of goodness and virtue. It was said
by such an one in Psalm. 11. 3. My goodness Extends. He extends his Piety, his
Charity, he extends his lnfluence far and near; and he is a Diffusive good.

Once more, Gold is a Beautiful metal. It Is called, Aurum, for that very cause;
ab Aura, i. e. a Splendore. It Is a shining and glittering thing; and hence
things that are very splendid, are said to be covered with ^ellow Gold. For
this reason, an Hook of it once caught (...) by the Lust of the Eye. Thus, a
good man has a transcendent Beauty in him. To such an one, it was said in Cant.
6. 4. Thou art Beautiful. There is a Luster on the Face, and a Luster in the
Walk of such a man; he has even the Splendour of A light in the world.

Furthermore, Gold is a Durable Metal. Though the Bible affirms that it is
Corruptible, and ^^^kerable, and Perishing, yet there is a mighty Strength to
be ascribed unto it. It will endure the hottest Fire with small or no
Dimin^^^on* and Aquafortis it self will not eat into it. ^^ch an Enduring
thing is a good man. His Character is that in Matthew. 24. 13. He shall endure to
the end. No Fire, no Water, no Vexation shall consume his Devotion. He is the
Overcomer, whom neither the Flattery nor the Fury, neither the Frowning nor the
Fawning of any Tempter can dissolve the Religion of.

Moreover, Gold is a Ponderous Metal. Even Lead it self in its weight, is to
Gold as far short as Sixty is of an Hundred; if I mistake it not. Such is the
Quality, such the Gravity of a good man. A godly man is a Weighty man. It Is said
in Prove. 12. 26. A righteous man is more excellent than his neighbor. One such
man will weigh down multitudes and myriads of other men. His being a pondering
man, it soon makes him become ponderous man. His unconverted Neighborhood may
own of him, Thou art worth ten thousand of us.

Finally Gold is a precious Metal. Its precious for the Use which it is of in
Nature. Rich Cordials and Medicines are to be extracted from it. Its precious
also for the Price which it is of in Esteem; the Auri sacra fames, the unhallowed
Appetite which men crave it with, prefers it above all common things. It Is in
Scripture Phrase a precious thing indeed, of which it might be said, It is more
precious than gold. But of a good man might such a thing be spoken: it may be
said of such a man, as in Isa. 13. 12. The man is more precious than fine gold;
even than the golden wedge of Ophir; [i. e. Peru, as some with much pretense of
Reason do conjecture it] A gracious man, is a precious man; all Beholders ought
to put a value upon him; he is even, precious in the eyes of the Lord.

Thus like to Gold will good men come forth, under and after the Trials of the
Lord; which comprehends these two Conclusions in it.

Conclusion. I.
A good man is found good by the Examinations of God. When God comes to try a
good man, He finds the heart of the man to be right before Him. The good man
may say with him in ^. Chron. 29. 17. O my God, I know that thou triest the
heart, and have pleasure in uprightness; as for me, in the uprightness of my
heart have I offered. Indeed our God uses not an Extremity of Justice and
Rigor in our Trial; He would find a world of Iniquity in us, if He did; and He
would utterly consume us. The Lord said in Isa. 48. 10. Behold, I have refined
thee, but not like silver. No, the Refiner of gold or silver will not allow the
the least measure of Dross therein. But our merciful. G^d overlooks many grains
of Corruption many grains of Defilement and of Debasement in us; for we all
have our Grains. However upon the Trial of a good man, the good God pronounces
this of him, This is a d^^r Son and a pleas^nt ch^ld, I will surely have mercy
on hi^; He pronounces this, I find good metal in the soul of the ^an, and he
shall be mine in the day when I make up my Jewels. The Devil, the Satan, who is
the Accuser of the Brethren, he may load a good man with Calumnies not a few;
that evil spirit will accuse a good man as guilty of Hypocrisy in the power of
it; but the Holy God brings it unto a Trial, and then He pronounces as in Job.
2. 3. I have tried him; and he is my servant, a perfect and an upright man; One
that fears God and escheweth evil; and still he holds fast his integrity.

Conclusion. II.
A good man is made better by the Dispensations of God. It is to him that there
is granted the Fulfillment of that promise in Romans 8. 28. All things shall work
together for good. As for the merciful Dispensations of God, these do incline
as well as oblige a good man to all manner of Obedience; they cause him to
think, What shall I render to the Lord? they cause him to say, I will fear the
Lord and His goodness, I will never sin against so good a God as He. Thus we
are told in Romans 2. 4. The goodness of God leads to repentance. It even melts
and breaks the heart of a good man, so that he cannot find in his heart after
such deliverances again to break his commandments. As for the Afflictive
Dispensations of God, these also cause a good man more than ever to Abound in
the works of the Lord; they put him upon more Thinking on his ways, and upon
turning his feet more unto the testmonies of God. It was said in Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy statutes.
A good man gets this good thereby; his Wisdom and his Virtue is thereby
augmented; and he Learns Obedience by the things which he suffers.

USE.
There is a twofold Exhortation which I must now bespeak your earnest Heed
unto.

I. Let us approve our selves as Gold under the Examinations of the Blessed
God. There are who take notice that the Original in Job. 37. 22. is, Gold
comes out of the North. God grant that the best Gold may here be found in our
North! that you the inhabitants of the North may for your Virtues be as Gold
before the Lord. Yea, that North-Boston may be like Havilah, and it may be
said, The gold of that land is good; or, there are Extraordinary golden and
precious Christians there.

It Is a Threefold Counsel which you may therefore be advised with.

Counsil. I.
Believe, and Expect the Trials of the eternal God.

Believe that God now does Understand what you are. It was an Article in that
famous Prophets Creed, in Jer. 12. 3. Thou, O Lord know me, thou have seen
me, and tried my heart toward thee. O that every one of us were enough
sensible of that awful solemn Truth! It Is a common thing to say, God knows my
heart; but who does enough lay that thing to heart? Who reckons any more upon
it than the false Gehazi did? It was an Orthodox persuasion in Psalm. 139. 3, 2.
O Lord thou have searched me and known me; thou understandest my thought afar
off. It Is very certain, that every one of our thoughts are known to the infinite
God, even afar off, long enough before they come into our minds. But, O Lord,
who has believed our Report? Men and Brethren, do you believe it, and apprehend
it, and reallize it. Believe it, that God is all Eye, and that He needs not a
Glass Window in your breasts for the Exploration of you. Believe it, that the
eyes of the Lord run to and fro, through the whole earth; and that he will not
by a Mistake drop a Blessing wrong as blind Isaac did of old. Yea, let it be a
frequent Meditation with you, All that I am, and all that I think, is well
known unto the Lord.

And Expect that God will one day Discover what you are. There is a Day of
Discovery that shall shine upon us all; and, Behold the Day comes that shall
burn as an Oven, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble in it.

Expect that the great God will have a Snare in this world, for your Detection.
Ever now and then there happen some Discriminating Things, That they which are
approved might be made manifest. God will have His Times and His Ways,
possibly to uncase our hearts before all our Neighbors. It was said of that
blessed man in 2. Chron. 32. 31. God left him (in one thing) to try him, that
he might know all that was in his heart. You may look for some Temptation
before you dye, which will make the Inclinations of your souls notorious to the
world; especially, If your Hearts be not right with God. It is a Simile used by
one of the Ancients, for it; You shall have an Ape dressed in the Attire of a
Man, for a while imitating the Look, and shape, and Gesture of a man: but if a
Nutt, or an Apple be thrown before him, he soon shows what he is. Thou
Hypocrite, the Lord will have something to throw before thee, which Object will
decoy thee into a natural suitable Expression of thy self; and as our Lord
speaks, in Rev. 2. 23. All the Churches shall know, that I am He that searches
the Heart.

Expect also, that the great God will have a Bar for your Detection in another
world. It Is confessed by all Christians, as in 2. Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ. O that we could every one of us now
seriously place our selves before the Judgment seat of God! Remember, O
immortal souls, that you must all very shortly appear before a Judge who has
Eyes like a flame of fire; and you must then be exposed in the full view of
Heaven and Earth. Remember that you shall then have no Vizard, no Disguise to
cover you, but all men and Angels must hear truly what you are. It was the
warning in Eccl. 11. 9. -- know thou, that God will bring thee to Judgment.
Even so Know thou, that thou can not avoid the day when God shall bring every
work into Judgment, with every secret thing. Know thou, that when the dead,
small and great stand before God, then thou shall stand among 'em! Know thou,
that though thou should then shriek, O Rocks, hide me, or O Mountains-defend
me, the the Rocks and the Mountains would be deaf unto that lamentable cry.
Holy Ierom could say, Wherever I am, or whatever I do, Methinks I hear the
Alarums of the last Trumpet, Arise ye dead and come to Judgment. O that you
would often Reflect upon the Day, when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ.

Counsil. 2.
Cry mightily to God, that He would give you the Gold which will endure all
Trials whatsoever. Our Lord says unto us in Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy
of me Gold tried in the fire. That Gold is Grace; let us buy that is, let us
beg it of Him. Let us make that our servent and our frequent Prayer, in Psalm.
119. 80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I may not be ashamed! Be
careful and prayerful, that you may be New Creatures and have the Root of the
matter in your souls: Be careful and prayerful, That you may have Oil in your
vessels: Be careful and prayerful, That you may have in you, the well of water
which springs up into everlasting life. Let your prayers be restless, till you
find that you are indeed Born again, indeed Converted, indeed Sanctified. As
for the Grace of God, my son, seek it as silver; for indeed, the Gain of it is
better than fine gold.

Counsel, 3.
Often bring your selves to the Trials of a Self-Examination. It Is the Charge of
God, in 2. Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith; prove
your own selves. Your souls are as Vessels, then Pierce them to see what they
have. Your souls are as Metals, then Touch them to see what they are* Such are
the Allusions of the Holy Spirit there. Know thy self, was a golden Rule of
Old, and it will make a golden Saint when we make much use of that Rule, Try
thy self. We are to use the Word of God as a Glass in which we are to behold
our selves; and we are often to compare our selves with what is therein
required of us. When we are in a Meditation, as we should every day be upon
some Truths of God, we should then examine ourselves, Whether we are molded
according thereunto. And when we are under a Visitation, as we sometimes are,
by the Rods of God, we should then Examine our selves, as they that of Old
said, Let us now search and try our ways. Especially when we are approaching to
the Table of the Lord, Self-Examination is not then to be omitted. So has the
Apostle urged, in 1. Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup. It Is a fearful Impiety and Presumption,
for a man to sit down at the Holy Supper without enquiring, Have I a Wedding
garment on, or no? Yea it is convenient for a man every Evening, before he sleeps
to examine himself and ask, If I die this night, is my immortal spirit safe? O
tremble exceedingly least your doom should be that in Jer. 2. 37. The Lord has
rejected thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them. Therefore be much
in Examining your selves.

Examine Whether you have true REPENTANCE.

Wherefore Try whether you are at so much pains for no Outward and Earthly
thing, as you are for the mortification of every lust.

And Try whether Afflictions themselves are welcome to you, when you see you
sins thereby embittered and subdued.

Examine Whether you have true FAITH.

Wherefore Try whether your Souls are extremely affected with the blessed
Fullness and Glory which is in the Lord Jesus Christ. And Try whether your
hearts most affectionately close with the Gospel-way of Salvation by Jesus
Christ, so as cheerfully to venture the Lives of your souls upon it.

Examine, Whether you have true LOVE.

Wherefore Try, whether any thing that has a Tendency to promote the Honor of
God, be readily embraced by you, as a thing more desirable than all the Riches
in the world.

And Try whether you count no Service too much to be done for the People of the
Saints of the Most High. Put the Question to your selves, and let the Preface
of your Answer be that Request in Psalm 139. 23. Search me O God, and try me,
and help me to know my self.

To be much in such Self-Examination is the way to be a Golden Christian, and
indeed, none but such an one will have a Value for the Exercise.

II. Let us also approve ourselves, as gold, under the Dispensations of the
Blessed GOD.

Particularly,

First. Let them that are in Prosperity behave themselves well under the Trials
of the Lord. It may be that you are come to have store of Gold; O that you may
Be like what you Have! It Is possible that you have been in much Distress and
Sorrow: But God has brought you forth, as it is said He brought Israel out of
Egypt, in Ps* 105. 37. He brought them forth with Gold.

Consider, That God is now Trying of your Faithfulness. No doubt, you have
sometimes promised the God of Heaven, That if you might have such a measure of
Health and Strength, or, That if you might have such a Degree of Estate and
Honor you would glorify God with a wonderful Activity. Well, says our God,
I Will try. God is trying whether you will be true to those Professions and
Engagements, which you made before He so smiled upon you. God is trying whether
you will not Confirm that Observation, in Jer. 17. 9. The Heart is deceitful
above all things and desperately wicked.

Consider moreover, That God is now trying of your Thankfulness. A very
terrible Wrath is denounced against them in Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Who serve not God for
the abundance of all things. God gives you an Abundance of all things, and it
is to try whether you will serve Him, and praise Him for it. God is Trying
whether you will now often say, Bless the LORD, O my soul, and all that is
within me! God is Trying whether you will now think, What shall I render to the
LORD for all His benefits? Let us be as Gold by affording now a good Experiment.

Secondly, Let them that are in Adversity, likewise behave themselves as under
the Trials of the Lord. We may most or all of us, Lament, I am the man that
has seen Affliction; there is a Variety of Calamity which we are tried withal.
God forbid that we should procure to our selves the Brand set upon that wicked
man of old, In the time of his Distress did he trespass yet more against the
LORD. Never was there in this world a more doleful sight than that of a Thief
on a Cross, yet Neglecting and Affronting the Son of God. We that have been
lately under Affliction, (particularly, under that Affliction of Sickness) have
as it were lain among the pots; God has as it were laid us by among the meanest
Lumps of clay; but O that we may now come sorth Doves, having Wings covered
with Silver, and Feathers with yellow Gold! O that we may come forth of our
Trials more gracious, more Savoury, more Heavenly, than ever we were in our
lives before; that the Iron-Age of Grief may issue in a Golden-Age of Grace,
unto us; that our Adversity may procure more grace to to us, than ever the
Prosperity of Solomon did gold to him. It Is to be desired, that the
Transmutation of Metals may be Exemplified in us; and that the most exquisite
Vitrioli^ powder may not be so powerful, to make Natural gold, as the Dust of
Affliction may be to make Spiritual gold of our souls. Look to it, Lest our
Character be that, Reprchate Silver, which is rejected by the Lord.

The First DESIRE.
Let us come forth more out-of-Love with Gold which perishes. Our GOD has
taught us that no gold will deliver from Death and Hell; and that no gold can
be carried away with, us at our Departure hence. Our God has told us, That
though we should have never so much gold about us, we may in a moment be taken
away from all. Wherefore Let us become Indifferent unto gold, and all the
Delights of this miserable World. Look, Look upon thy most golden Comforts, and
imagine thou hear that Voice of GOD, in Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? When one of the Martyrs had money proffer`d unto
him, he Refused it, saying, The Coin is not current, in the Country to which I
am going. O despise all gold but what will be Current there.

The Second Desire.
Let us come forth more Admiring of, more Affected with such things as are
better than gold. The Fear of God is one of those things, Whereof it is said it
Job, 28. 16. It cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir. Let it be then our
prime and cheef Study, to be daily acting of it; yea, Since we have lately seen
Time loudly calling on us to Redeem it, Let a Respect to God now ennoble all
the Actions of our Lives. The Word of God is another of those things, Whereof
it is said, in Psalm. 19. 10. It is more to be desired than much fine Gold.

Let us then set an unspeakable Value thereupon; Yea, since we have lately seen
an End of all Perfection elsewhere; Let the Bible of God be now more than ever
the Companion of your Solitary Hours.

Finally, The SON of GOD, is the Pearl of great price, which no Gold is to be
equaliz'd unto. We read of a Brazen-Serpent [or more truly a Coper-Serpent]
marvellously useful to Israel of old, O let us now Esteem the Antitype of that
Brazen or Coper Shadow, before the Richest Gold. The holy God has newly sent me
back from the Sides of Eternity to tell you, That One CHRIST is worth ten
Worlds. It Is a thing whereof you have been heretofore advised with frequent,
solemn, lively Warnings, from the Eternal God: As Joshua could say, in Cap. 24.
27. Behold, this stone shall be a Witness, for it has heard all the words of
the Lord. So may I say, Let this Pulpit, and these Walls and Seats and Pillars
Remember, if you have forgotten, That you have been often told, All the gold in
the world is not worth one Christ. And behold, I repeat unto you one Warning
more. Let this House be a Witness, and be you witnesses of it O ye Angels that
are invisible here; That it has been earnestly affirmed in our Hearing, A
Christ is better than a Thousand Worlds, and they that sl^ight Him, will be
miserable for infinitely more than ten Thousand Ages.

LIFE DESIRED. Upon the Death of a Relation.
Psalm. CXIX. 175. Let my Soul live, and it shall praise thee, and let thy
Judgments help me.
SWeeter Words than these could not come from the Sweet Singer of Israel
himself. The Hundred and Nineteenth, is the longest, and yet, if the Comparison
be not odious, the sweetest, of all the Psalms; and perhaps the Psalm, like the
Grace wherewith it was Composed, has a growing Sweetness, toward the
Conclusion of it. The one and twentieth Octonary in this excellent Psalm, is a
Bundle of Heavenly Affections; this two and twentieth Octonary is an Heap of
Holy Petitions. There are especially Six Petitions in this last part of the
Psalm. The fourth and fifth of them are in the words now before us. He begs,
First, for his Life, then for God's Help. The Life petition`d for, may be
understood as Twofold: it is called, The life of the Soul; both Natural Life,
and Spiritual Life may be intended in that Expression. But chiefly the former.
Let my soul live; it is q. d. Let my Self live. It Is an usual Hebraism. In that
signification it was the Choice of Sampson, Let me die, in the Hebrew it is, Let
my Soul die with the Philistines. The Help petitioned for, has Two Things
declared concerning it. We have the For-What of this Help; this is, That he
might attend the Business for which he desired to live; namely, To praise God.
And we also have the From-Whence, of this Help; this is, From the Judgments of
God. Thy Judgments* this is one of the Ten various Phrases used here, to
signify, the Ways and Means whereby God, reveals Himself unto the world.

In short, the Doctrine before us, is, That

While we pray to live, we should account the Praises of God to be the Cheef
End of our Life, in which the Judgments of God are to be sought and used as our
Help.

The Propositions which may shape this Truth unto our minds are these.

Prop. I.
The Praise of God is to be accounted the cheef end of our Life on Earth. If
our Souls do live in our Bodies, if we enjoy that Life which is an Union
between Soul and Body, this is to be the End of it; That we may praise the God
of our lives. It was the pious Expectation of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 118. 17. I
shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord. This is to be the
Resolution of every man. Can we say, I do not die but live? We should add, I
will then declare the Praises of the Lord. The first Question that the Thoughts
of men should be employed upon is, What is the Cheef End of Man? The true and
Just answer To that Question is, The Cheef End of man is to glorify God. Well,
put the Question so, What is the Cheef End of Life? The Answer to that Question
too will be the same; It is to glorify God.

To praise God, What is that? To praise God, is to Render and Procure, a due
Acknowlement of His Excellencies. Indeed all the Duties of Religion are
Contained in this Comprehensive thing. When we own, when we serve, when we
Adore the Great God in any or all the ways of His Worship, Then we praise Him;
and we further praise Him, when we provoke others to join with us in doing so.
This, This Praise of the LORD is the End of our Life in the World.

This is the End of our Being. We are told that We have our Being in God. Of
all things whatever this is then most Reasonable, that We should have our Being
for God; and our Being for Him, is not expressed without our praising of Him.
The blessed God looks from on high upon mankind, and says, as in Isa. 43. 21.
This people have I formed for my self, they should show forth my Praise. Now
that which is the End of our Being, is the End of our Living too. Two things
are to be affirmed of it,

First, The Law of God does Appoint this as as the End of our Lives. Unto every
man living, this is the Voice of God, I spare thy life, that so thou may live
my praise. It is said in Romans 14. 7. If we live, we are to live unto the Lord.
What the Apostle says of Eating and Drinking, may much more be said of Living;
as in 1. Cor. 10. 30. It must be unto the Glory of God. God gives our Lives,
God keeps our Lives, and this is His reveled, His Preceptive Will concerning
our Lives; Man, I suffer thy life, yea, I support thy life, that I may be
praised, loved, admired by thee as long as thou live. It was an heavy dismal
Charge against Belshazzer, in Dan. 5. 23. God in whose Hand thy breath is, thou
have not glorified. The Almighty God gives us notice of this, Thy Breath is in
my hand; at the same time He also requires this of us, Let thy life be to my
pr^ise. That man makes a sacrilegious Incroachment and Invasion upon Gods
Right, who makes not God^s Praise, the End of his living upon God`s Earth.

There is therefore, Secondly this to be added thereunto.

The Heart of man should Embrace this as the End of our lives. It becomes every
man to say, I live that God who is worthy to be praised, may have the praises
of my Obedience to Him. It was the godly purpose of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 147.
2. While I live I will praise the Lord. And a kin to this is the Right Thought,
which every man should entertain, I do live, that I may praise the Lord. Hence
this is one of the principal Pleas which the Saints have used in their
Sup^lications for their Lives. Good Hezekiah prayed in his Distress, Lord, let
me live. And what was his Argument? It was that in Isa. 38. 17. 18. The Grave
cannot praise thee; the living, the living, he shall praise thee. The heart of
man should readily close with such an End for the life of man. Satan says,
Thou live only to Enjoy the delights of the Flesh in the world; thou live
only to seek, to get, and to taste the saecular pleasures provided for thee. The
soul of man should rise with unspeakable Indignation at this wild proposal. On
the other side, our God says, The Business of thy life is to magnify Me, to
make my Praise glorious. Here now, Here the Soul of every man should fall in,
and Reply, This is all my Salvation, and all my Desire.

But this leads to

PROP. II.
Prayers for life are then, and only then rightly qualified, when they have
Respect unto the Praises of God.

To clear this matter, there are these things to be conceived.

One Conclusion is, That the Living on Earth have many peculiar Opportunities
to be Praising of God. Indeed, Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for
they too are always praising of Him. But yet they rest from some Praises, when
they rest from their Labors here. The departed Saints are continually
shouting, H^llelujah, Hallelujah, before the Throne of God. The Saints, they
are joyful in glory; and the High Praises of God are perpetually Proceeding
from those blessed Souls. But Christians in this world have their peculiar
Opportunities, to be Glorifying of Him that made them. This did the Psalmist
speak in Ps 88. 11. Shall the dead praise thee? To instance in some particulars:

The Living here may be praising of God by the Discharge of many Relations,
which the dead Saints are strangers unto. We may now praise God as Parents, as
Masters, as Officers in the the Church or Commonwealth. All those Capacities
will die with us, when we shall go hence and be-no more.

Again, The Living here may be Praising of God, by Bearing many a Witness to
the Truths and Ways of the Lord Jesus Christ. We may now bestow many Rebukes
upon the Errors and the Evils of a sinful World. We may part with and esteem,
an Estate, with our Ease, and our Life it self, out of Respect unto the Name of
God. But our Testimonies expire with our Lives.

Once more, The Living may be Praising of God by Advancing His Kingdom here
below. In this Life we may be instrumental to Convince and Convert Unregenerate
Sinners, to build up the Church of the Lord Jesus, and to Do good among the
ignorant by an Exemplary Conversation. But this is to be done only below the
stars.

Furthermore, There are Graces proper to this Life which God is praised by the
Exercising of. The Tears of Sorrow for Sin will be dry`d up, when we come to
the State in which all Sorrow shall flee away. Charity in Giving and Forgiving
to them that need it, -- there is no occasion for that Charity among them that
are above; they are all perfect and happy there. Patience under Trials belongs
to our present Condition only; there are no Afflictions to trouble us, when our
few days full of trouble are passed away. In a Word. Our Spiritual Warfare is
to be attended only in this Valley of the Shadow of Death. We cannot fight the
Battles of the Lord, and therein we cannot show the praises of the Lord, when
we are arrived at the End of our Faith the Salvation of our Souls. Our Fight is
done, our Crown is come when we have been Faithful to the Death.

A Second Conclusion is, That Opportunities for the Praising of God are the
things for which we should desire to be living on Earth. There is a Threefold
Desire of Life which the Living have. There is a Natural Desire of Life. This
is common both to good men and bad men. Nature it self startles at the Approach
of Death; Innocent Nature shivers and recoyls, when this King of Terrors is
ready to lay his cold l^y hand upon us. This was Ioab's Desire: that valiant
Soldier, The Lord-General of Israel himself, in 1. King. 2. 28. being in cold
blood under Apprehensions of Death, fled unto the Horns of the Altar, as a
Sanctuary to save his Life. There is also a Sensual Desire of Life. This is
that which Bad men are under the power of. Many are loath to dye because they
would not leave the Pleasures and Profits and Honors which did surround them
here. They are like the Miser who on his Deathbed, hugged his Baggs of Gold,
and cried out, Must I leave you? Must I leave you? Their Love of their Life,
comes from their love of their Flesh. This was the Rich Fools Desire, in Luc
12. 20. He wished for many Years, that he might eat and drink, and be merry
here.

There is likewise a gracious Desire of Life. And this is that which good men
are affected with: They desire to live, because they desire to praise. They
would live, because they would honor God in those matters and those manners
for which their Lives do afford them blessed Opportunities and Advantages. Now
this gracious Desire of of Life is a Regular Desire. A Desire of Life for the
Praise of God, is the only Desire of Life, that will have praise of God. This
was David's Desire when he was visited with Sickness, when he was weak, and his
Bones were pained, then said he in Psalm. 6. 5. O save me, for in Death there is
no Remembrance of thee, in the Grave who shall give thee thanks? Such Desires
are the only right and chaste Desires. It is not fit for a Christian to say, I
desire to live, because I am afraid to die. Much less is it fit for him to say,
I desire my life in the world, that I may turn and wind still the Affairs of
the World. But This is that which Leg^timates the Desire of Life: As every
thing is to be i^^roved for God, so every thing should be desired for God. And
thus Life it self. We are daily Praying, as he in Psalm. 102. 24. O my God, take
me not away in the midst of my days. Well, Our God enquires of us, Why art
thou unwilling to be taken away in the midst of thy days? We should have this
to be our true Account of it, Because, O Lord, I am loath to be taken away in
the midst of my Praise.

PROP. III.
The Judgments of God are to be sought and used by us as our Help in those
Praises of God which are the End of our life.

There are blessed Helps, which God has provided for us, by which we may be
both Assisted in and Excited to, the work of our lives.

Behold a double Help, both employed in the Judgments of God. And he that shall
consult other passages in this Hundred-and-nineteenth Psalm, will find both
under this Notion insisted on. The Scriptures of Truth, and the Troubles of
Life.

First, The Word of God is to be sought as the Help, of our Praising Him. The
Prophet of old could say as in Mich. 6. 8. The Lord has showed thee, O man,
the thing that good is. Thus, the Lord has showed us how to be praising of
Him, by living to Him. But Where has he showed it? Truly in the sacred Bible.
The Bible is the Directory given to us. Every Child is well taught to say, The
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the Rule which God has given to
instruct us how we are to glorify Him. To order a Life in a dark world, is as
hard as to manage a Ship in a dark night, we are in the Dark about the
Practices which our lives are to be employed in. What shall we then do that we
may leave no part of our due Homage to God unperformed? The Apostle speaks
fully to this Case in 2. Pet. 1. 18. We have a sure word of Prophecy, whereto
ye do well to take heed, as to a light shining in a dark place. There, There it
is: our Bible is our Pole Star: keep an eye to That and we shall shape a course
Right. All the Directions, all the Promises, all the Threatenings of God, will
be so many Helps, of our Obedience. If any man ask, How do the Scriptures of
God help men in the Praises of God? Know, The Scriptures themselves give an
Answer thereunto, in Psalm. 19. 7, 8. The law of the Lord converts the soul, the
testimonies of the Lord make wise the simple; the statutes of the Lord rejoice
the heart; the commandments of the Lord enlighten the eyes. That Conversion,
that Instruction, that Joy and that Ligh^ which the Word of God affords unto
us, will be no little Help in the Praise of God.

Secondly, The Rod of God is to be used as the Help of our Praising Him. The
Lord sends many Afflictions upon us. An H^man, is afflicted in his mind: a Job
is Afflicted in his Estate; a Gaius is afflicted in his Body, a Paul in his
Credit, and a David in his Children, they live ill and they die worse before
him. What is the Use we are now to make of these things? Truly our Afflictions
are to be the Help of our Devotions. It is the Call of God in Mic 6. 9. Hear
the Rod. As we should hear the Voice of the Rod, so we should use the Help of
the Rod. By our Afflictions we should be helped unto more Seriousness, more
Watchfulness, more Fruitfulness. Now those things are to the Praise of the
glory of the grace of God. Our Afflictions are the purgings and the prunings
bestowed by our God upon us. What are they for? but, That we may bring forth
more Fruit: and we are told in Ioh. 15. 8. Herein is my father glorified, if ye
bring forth much fruit. Observe it: a Learning the Statutes of God, is a
Rendering of Praises to God; those two things are one. Now see what the Psalmist
says, in Psalm 119. 97. It Is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may
learn thy Statutes. This then is incumbent on us under every Affliction; Our
study should be, What Advantage, what Engagement to be more holy, is now put
into my hands! Every Afflicted man should ask, How may the Sorrows of my life
promote the praises of my God?

But for the Use of these things.
USE. I.
Some Evil Desires are hence Rebuked and Condemned. Especially two sorts of
Desires.

First, Impatient Desires of Death, are to be Reproved.

Something is to be said by way of Concession; and something by way of
Correction about such Desires.

First by way of Concession, I would say; There are some Desires of Death
well-becoming a Child of God. Such were the Desires of Paul, in Phil. 1. 22. I
desire to be d^ssolved and be with Christ. When we think of the day, in which
we shall go to the the Spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant; When we think of the day in which the Lord will
deliver us from the hand of all our enemies, and from the hand of SIN; O the
thoughts of it should fill our Souls with Raptures of Joy! they should cause
our hearts to leap and spring within us. In is an allowable thing to be almost
angry with Time, to call upon slow Time, and say, Fly apaces Fly away, O Time;
Come, O Eternity, come and fetch me into the presence of the Lord. The Visions
of the Lord Jesus may cause us to say humbly with aged, faithful Simeon, Lord,
let thy servant depart in peace. The Chariots of Death, sent by the Lord Jesus
to fetch us unto Himself should be as welcome to us, as the Wagons of Joseph
were to Jacob of old. It should cause us to Rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory, when we think of the unspeakable joy and the full glory which we
are going unto. There are holy longings and lookings of Soul, with which we may
cry out, Why, why are His Churiots so long i'coming? Why tarry the Wheels
thereof?

But yet,

Secondly, By way of Correction.

If these Desires are with Impatience, much more if they are through Impatience,
they become sinful before the Lord. The embittered spirits of Christians, have
been sometimes too prone unto such Desires. It was an inordinate passion in
Moses, when a froward people under his charge provoked him to say, in Numb. 17.
14. Kill me, I pray thee out of hand. Had God granted his Desire, he had lost
Thirty years of eminent Service in the World. It was an irregular passion in
Elias, when the persecutions of wicked men so tired him, as to make him say, in
1. King. 19. 4. O Lord, take away my life. It has been an Observation, that
Many good and, great men sit under Elias's Juniper tree. As culpable was the
Passion of Jonah, when the Withering of a Guord had that Effect upon him in
Cap. 4. 8. He wished to die. The like pang of Impatience, did that Pattern of
Patience, Job, fall into be spoke as if he could hardly for bear laying violent
hands upon himself. Even so far do the distempered, unbridled Wishes of many
run. Their Desire of Death is a sort of Revenge on God; they would as it were
deprive God of the glory which He might have of them. Compose these desires, O
ye raging Souls; compose these Desires. Allay this Fever, this phrensy. Its not
only an irreligious but an unnatural passion which you are carried away withal.
You desire to dye* Well, are you sure that the Death which you desire now, will
not prove a Death which you shall Deplore throughout eternal Ages. It is said
of the Believer in Psalm. 91. 19. With long life will I satisfy him, and show
him my Salvation. It is a very disordered heart that will be dissatisfied with
so great a mercy.

Secondly, Unsanctified Desires of Life are to be Reproved also. Of these
Desires there are Three Sorts to be Reprehended.

There are, first. Carnal Desires of Life to be blamed. Some desire to live,
and wherefore is it? It is because they desire to eat and drink and be merry.
They cannot part with such Relations and Possessions as are here to be enjoyed.
The Comforts of Life are the things that cause their Desires of Life. One once
beholding his fine Accommodations made this Reflection thereupon, Haec faciunt
invitos mori*, these are the things that make us unwilling to die. Unmortified
Corruptions are the causes of these desires. Remember what the Lord has said
in Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother, or Son or DAUGHTER more than
me, is not worthy of me. Thus may the Lord well say to the Subject of these
Desires, If you had rather be with your friends on earth, than with your Father
in Heaven, you are not worthy to be with me at all. And this by the way is to
be said of them that desire the life of their Friends as well as of them
selves. It is for the Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ that the dead Children
which you lament, are dead; or else they had not dyed at all. Now sais the Lord
Jesus, If thou love those CHILDREN, those Relations more than me, and had
rather have them with thy self, to my Prejudice, than to have them with me, to
thy own Bereavement, thou art not worthy to have them with me at all.

Secondly. There are Careful Desires of Life to be likewise blamed. Many desire
to live only upon this account, Some Child, or some Charge they are concerned
for. They have this or that Child which they cannot believe will be well
provided for, when they are dead; or they suspect what will become of such or
such a Charge. There is indeed a Desire of Life on such a Score, which is not
always very severely to be found fault withal. But oftentimes there is too
much Distrust in such a desire. Why cannot we venture our Families and the
Concernments thereof, in the Hands of the faithful God? The Lord has said in
Jer. 49. 11. Leave thy fatherless Children, I will preserve them alive. And he
still says, I will be a better Father, and a better Friend unto them, than
thou thy self can be.

Thirdly. There are Fearful Desires of Life which are blameworthy too. When
Death comes with that message, Set thy Soul in order, for thou shall die and not
live, many persons are so terrified as to be even at their wits ends. O how
they groan. I cannot die! Indeed Sinners that have not been born twice, may well
tremble to die once; no body can blame them; there is a Second Death, ready to
sieze upon the forlorn souls that are not Regenerate. But such as have been
truly turned to God in Christ, should not entertain Death with such
Reluctancies. Can you not uprightly say, That if you were sure to be freed from
Sin, you could be content to be struck by Death? O then, be cheerfully willing
to Die. Thy soul will no sooner pass into Eternity but it shall experience that
thing in Romans 6. 7. He that is dead is freed from Sin. It is often pretended by
men, I would live because, I would be more holy before I die. It Is well; but
there is not seldom a Deceit in the Pretense; often something else is in the
Bottom; A Rebellion against the Will of God. Would thou really and earnestly
be holy? Be willing then to die as well as to live. Death is the way to Holiness
in the Perfection of it. In short: Good was the Temper of that sick person who
being asked, Which do you desire, to live, or to die? answered, I refer it to
God; and when it was again said, But suppose God should refer it to you?
replied, I would then refer it to him again.

USE. II.
Let us all be now Exhorted, that the Praise of Ged, may be duly accounted by
us, as the End of our Life, in our Prayers for it. Let us not shoot beside our
Mark, or live beside our End. Let us pray that we may live, and let us live
that we may praise. It is the most lamentable plight in the world, that a man
should spend his Life in Sinning against God, rather than in Praising of Him.
But alas, This is the case of Multitudes, Multitudes among us. How few of us
[Consider of in seriously] How sew of you that are now before the Lord, ever
seriously thought with your selves, What is the Errand that I am come into the
world upon? Have thou not lived above a Score of years in the world, and never
yet seriously thought, What is it that God sent me hither for? Every man here,
I suppose, desires to live; let your Prayers express those Desires; and say
after the Psalmist, Ps. 32. 8. My Prayer is to the God of my life. But more
than so, Let those Desires be for the sake of your Praises; and say after the
Psalmist again, in Ps. 119. 17. Deal bountifully with thy Servant that I may
live and keep thy Word.

Three things are you to be advised unto; yea Four things are to be
impo^tunately pressed upon you.

First, Mark and Prize your Opportunities to be Pr^^^ing of God. Every man has
his Opport^nities. Some have an Instrument of a Thousand Strings; but the
meanest of us all has an Instrument of Ten strings, for our God to be praised
with. Let every man often enquire, What are my Opportunities to glorify God?
And let every man always conclude, My Opportunities are my Treasures.

Secondly. Let the Word of God Direct you in His Praises. Be often Consulting
of that: Peace will be on al^, and Praise will be from all, that walk according
to this Rule. A Bible, -- Christians, let That be your Counselor on all
Occasions. The Psalmist could say in Ps. 119. 164. Seven times a day will I
praise thee O Lord; because of thy Righteous Judgments.

Thirdly. Let the Rod of God provoke you to His Praises. If you cannot Bless
God for your Afflictions, which yet, I think, is a thing attainable;
nevertheless, I Am sure you should praise God in your Afflictions. Let God gain
some Glory, and we shall gain some Good, by all our Sufferings. Take the
counsil in Isa. 34. 15. Glorify the Lord in the Fires.

To Enforce these Three Things;

Consider that Thing which is intimated in the Text. The Lives of your Souls are
enwrapped in the praises of God. Says the Psalmist, Let my soul live, and it
shall praise thee. So I may say, Let thy Soul praise, and it shall live. A
praising Soul, is a Thriving Soul. In this consists Life Eternal it self, The
Life of thy Soul in the Third Heaven, will be the praise of thy God for
evermore. Praise God for thy Life; it is a mercy well worth praise. Praise God
by thy life; so thou will begin Heaven upon Earth.

But there is a Fourth Counsil which more immediately concerns that part of the
Congregation which are of my own Age, and have therefore a more peculiar
interest in my Loves and Cares.

It Is to Young People here, that I take leave to say,

Fourthly, Begin You now Betimes to live unto the Praise of the everliving God.
My Brethren, you have not yet begun to live at all, if you have not begun to
praise the Lord. You are Dead in Trespasses and Sins; you are stark dead in the
rotten, hideous, loathsome Graves of your Unregeneracy, if you have not yet
begun to order your Conversation aright, and to ponder, How may I so offer
praise as to Glorify God? But is not this the deplorable Condition of many,
many Young people here? Conscience do thine Office! Is not the Hour yet to
come, is not the Day yet to dawn, when that young person (whom thou art the
Officer of God unto) did by an hearty Covenant bind himself unto the Serving
and the Praising of the Lord?

But what mean you, O ye inconsiderate Youths, to delay the Remembering of your
Creator so? In the Language of the young Prophet, whom God sent unto the Jews
of old, let me say, thus says the Lord, Consider your ways.

Consider the Uncertainty of your Life which you have to be praising of God
withal. As young as you are, you may die before the most aged person here. It
has been truly noted, That The old man has Death before his face, but the
young man has Death behind his back. The stroke of Death may sooner lay you in
the Dust, than some whose Heads old Time has snow'd upon. O look, and see, and
let thy heart shake at the Apprehension of it. Thy Death stands, just behin^
thee there with an Horrible Pole-Ax ready lifted up, saying as the Prince of
old, Shall I smite them? shall I smite them? If the great God utter the word,
Smite, smite, thou art gone beyond all Recovery. The Blessed God has newly
caused me to look into the Coffins of two very near and sweet Relations,
neither of which had ever seen Twenty Winters in the World; and with a strong
hand He then said unto me, Go, Go tell the young people of Boston, and
Charlestown, that this is that which they are all expos`d unto. Behold I am now
come in Bitterness and in the heat of my spirit, I am come to Warn you of it,
That You may die before you are aware of such a dismal Change at hand. O do not
procrastinate the praises and the Virtues which the God of Heaven Expects from
you; put not off until, Tomorrow; For it is the admonition to be now set before
you, in Prove. 2. 7. B^ast not thy self of Tomorrow, for thou know not what a
day may bring forth.

But Consider also, the Dreadfulness, of a Death, ensuing upon a Life not spent
in the praising of God. O this Dying! it is a solemn thing, it is, A thing by it
self: What follows it? But that in Heb. 9. 27. After Death Judgment. That
Judgment will be Eternal; and if it come upon thee before thy turning and
living unto God, it will be very Terrible.

Hearken to this awful Truth and Voice of the Almighty God, and let thy heart
quiver as under the loudest claps of Thunder at it; If thou Die before thy peace
be made with God, and thy praise be given to Him, it is impossible thou should
escape the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; Small Chip^ as well as great Logs are
horribly burn^^^ (...) there must thou too undergo most exquisite Anguishes,
for infinitely more than as many Millions of Ages, as the Huge Ocean has Drops
of Water in it.

O Consider, these Terrors of the Lord, and immediately set upon His Praises.

Now that you would come to these Resolutions, before you go from the present
Exercise! Entreat me not to leave you, or to turn from following after you; but
give me leave to press upon you at least this one Consideration more.

Consider seriously, How exceeding Acceptable it will be to the great God, for
such Young persons as you, to set upon praising of Him! Your Praises, they are
very much desired by the Lord, and not a little delightful to Him. He declares
My soul desires the first ripe Fruit; and He seemed to express as it were some
Have, for the First Fruits under the Law of Old. The Lord in a sort longs to
see you serving of Him with the First Fruits of your Age, and of your Praise.
He says as in Cant. 2. 14. Let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice. The
Voice of your Praises makes a matchless melody in the ears of the God that has
called for them. The very Chatterings of our infants are pleasant unto us; the
Praises and the Devotions of young persons are so unto Our Father which is in
Heaven; and he asks for them with ungainsayable Importunities. 'Twas said
unto a young man in 1. Chron. 28. 9. If thou seek the Lord, He will be found of
thee, Even so. If thou (that art a young person) praise the Lord he will be
pleased with thee. One that owns an Orchard full of many fruitful Trees, will
take a most particular and affectionate Notice of a young Tree beginning to
have some little Fruit upon it: Our Father is such an Husband man. Young John's,
are they that prove the Disciples whom Jesus loves. Young Iosiahs will have
special Comforts in this, and special Honors in another world* And, ye Hearts
of Adamant, are you not yet overcome to resolve, I will now praise and serve
the great God! O let not your Answer be, I am almost persuaded; but become
Altogether so. As it was said of him, Behold he prays! thus let it be said of
you, Behold he praises! How, How can you be deaf Adders before the Charms of
these Considerations?

Lord visit the hitherto-unperswaded young people here; O make it the Day of
thy power with them; and keep these things in the Imagination of the thoughts
of their hearts for Evermore.

FINIS.

