Mr. MASTERS's SERMON PREACHED before the LORD MAYOR, JANVARY 26. 1689/90.

PILKINGTON MAYOR.

Martis xviiio. die Martii 1689/90. Annoque Regni Regis and Regine Willielmi
and Mariae, Angliae, etc. Secundo.

THIS Court does desire Mr. Masters to Print his Sermon Preached at
Guild-hall-Chappel, the 26th of January last, before the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

THE Christian Temper OF MODERATION, Described and Recommended, in a SERMON
Before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. IN GVILD-HALL-Chappel, ON The
first Sunday in Hillary Term, Jan. 26. 1689/90.

By Samuel Masters, B. D. Preacher to the Hospital and Precinct of Bridewell.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane.
MDCXC.

To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON, LORD MAYOR of London.
MY LORD,
IT was with no great confidence that I appeared before such an Awful Assembly
of the Reverend Judges and the Chief Magistrates of this City; nor is it
without some uneasy reluctance, that I now expose this Discourse to so public
a View; but having received Your Lordship's Order, I find it necessary to
comply, lest I should seem to dispute your Judgment, or contest your Authority.
It was the Subject, I know, that recommended the Discourse; and the favorable
acceptance it met with, is an argument of the Excellent Temper of those who
approved it; and how happy may we not think our selves, when they who Interpret
and Administer our Laws, are such Friends to Moderation? I have not designed in
this Discourse to plead the Cause of any Party, or to determine any of the
Cases of Difference which are among us; but to recommend that Moderation which
all Parties want, and which would be the shortest and surest Expedient for
composing all our Differences. I must expect that they who have not this good
Temper, will be angry with Me, as they are with one another; but whatever they
may object, I am conscious of no other Design in this Discourse, but to promote
Religion, and the Public Good of the Church and Nation, to which I am related.
May Your Lordship continue, by Your good Conduct and Example, to increase and
encourage this Moderation among us; and if this Discourse can contribute any
thing thereto, it will much rejoice,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Faithful and most Humble Servant, Samuel Masters.

THE CHISTIAN TEMPER OF Moderation, etc.
PHILIP IV. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men; The Lord is at hand.


IN this, and the Neighboring Verses, the Apostle lays down some brief Rules,
which seem to be prescribed for a Remedy against chose Troubles that then
infested the Church at Philippi. In the Verse preceding the Text, he exhorts
them to rejoice in the Lord always, from whom their Faith might derive such
copious Arguments of joy, as would be sufficient to support them under the
sharpest Persecutions. And that they might be able to rejoice in themselves
too, by conversing peaceably and comfortably one with another, he directs, in
the Text, to the mutual practice of Moderation. And as to the Troubles
ordinarily incident from the World about them, he advises in the next Verse,
Be careful for nothing; but in all things by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgivings, let your requests be made known to God. And upon the observance
of these three Rules, he assures them in the next words, That the peace of God
which passes all understanding, should keep their hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus.

My design at present is, to consider the Apostle's advice for preventing or
removing those troubles which too often arise among Men, by their unnecessary
and over-eager contentions among themselves; of which troubles, we of this
Church and Nation have had such long and sad experience, that we may be
thought, by this time, to desire, as much as we need, the Remedy. The Rule
which the Apostle has prescribed in this case, is, Let your moderation be
known unto all men; and because the observance of this Rule is both necessary
and difficult, he has enforced it with a weighty Argument, The Lord is at
Hand. My business therefore will be to explain the Rule prescribed; To urge the
Argument annexed; And to make a seasonable Application of the whole.

1. I begin to explain the Rule prescribed in these Words, Let your Moderation
be known unto all Men. (...). Let that moderate or temperate frame of Spirit,
which belongs to you as Christians, be seen in your Behavior toward all with
whom you Converse: Or let it appear in your Conversation so conspicuous and
exemplary, that all Men, may see and acknowledge it, and be thereby induced to
love you and the Religion you profess. That we may clearly understand the whole
importance of this precept, it will be convenient to consider distinctly these
three things: 1. The Nature of this Moderation, or wherein it consists. 2. It Is
Subject Matter, or the Cases wherein it should be known or manifested. 3. Its
Object, or the Persons toward whom it should be used and practiced.


1. Let us enquire into the Nature of this Moderation, that we may find out
wherein it properly consists. The English word Moderation occurs no where in
our Bibles, but only in this Text: the Greek word, (...), or, (...), are
oftener used, and are rendered by other Words, by our Translators in other
Texts, as they are by other Translators in this Text, such as Gentleness,
Meekness, Clemency, Patience, Equity, Condescension, etc. From which variety of
Translations, we may reasonably presume, that this Moderation is not one single
Grace, but rather some Frame or Temper that arises out of a Complexion of many
particular Graces; and that the general Design of its nature, is to fit Men for
conversing together in Society, to which end those social Virtues properly
serve, of which this excellent Temper is compounded.

Our English word Moderation, may properly denote such Government of our
Spirits, or Behavior toward others, as can contain us within due Bounds, or
restrain us from flying out into such Extremes, as would break asunder that
Bond of Peace, which should hold together the Members of the same Society. The
Greek word, (...), is derived from a Verb that signifies to give way, or give
place; to comply or condescend: And the Primitive use of the Word in the
Schools, or at the Bar, whence it seems to be taken, imports that Equity, which
is sometimes described by Learned Men, to be the Condescension or Benignity of
the Law, whereby it yields and complies in some emergent Cases, with which the
rigor of its Letter would unequally comport.

According to these Observations, we may be able to fix the proper Notion of
this comprehensive Grace, or Duty of Moderation. It is such an excellent frame
or temper of spirit, whereby we are able to make all favorable Concessions and
Condescentions one to another, as far as God has left us at liberty to do so,
for the Peace and Welfare of the Society to which we are related. That this
description may be better understood, I will take it in pieces, and briefly
Paraphrase on the several parts of it.

1. This Moderation considered, as a Grace or inward Habit, is that frame or
temper of Spirit, which results from all those particular Virtues which
moderate and contains our Passions, in our Converses and Dealings one with
another: It is such a Government of our Spirits, as can conduct our desultory
Passions with Prudence, check their transports with Modesty, submit their Pride
with Humility; as can soften them with Meekness, sweeten them with Kindness,
strengthen them with Patience, and restrain them with Forbearance; so that our
Passions shall at no time render us averse to any of our relative Duties, or
prone to quarrel and contend with others, or difficult to be appeased and
reconciled, whatever Discouragements or Provocations we may meet with. Such a
Temper should be in all Christians, who are so earnestly exhorted to put on
bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, Gol. 3.12, 13.
meekness, long-suffering, forbearing, and forgiving one another, if any man
has a quarrel against any. I could not forbear adding the Epithet of excellent
to such a frame and temper of Spirit, which is so eminent a Perfection of our
Nature, whereby we are removed farthest from the ferity of Bruits, into the
nearest resemblance of God himself.

2. This Moderation considered as a Duty, consists fists in a practice suitable
to such an excellent Temper, in conceding and condescending one to another,
when necessary to preserve, or restore Peace and Amity among those who are
related together in the same Society. So great is the general Ignorance and
Weakness of mankind, that it is not possible for us to converse together in
Society, without justling and disturbing one another, except we can sometimes
give way, and condescend one to another: And herein consists our Duty of
Moderation, so to govern our behavior, as for Peace-sake to yield and submit
sometimes, although we think our selves to be in the right; and to comply
sometimes with our Brethren, who are not able to discern that they are in the
wrong; not by running into the same mistake, but by bearing with them, and
condescending to them, till they can be recovered out of it. So much we are
taught in those Divine Precepts, 5 Ephesians. 21. 1 Pet. 5.5
which require us to submit our selves one to another in the fear of God: To be
subject one to another, and clothed with Humility: And no less did St. Paul
practice, who himself tells us, Tho I be free from all men, 1 Cor. 9.19
yet have I made my self servant unto all: And as he afterward adds, he became
all things to all men, in such a compliant Condescension.

3. To prevent any mistake, I add, That this Moderation will dispose us to
condescend and comply with others only in such cases, and so far as God has
left us at liberty to do so. For if any cases of difference arise about the
necessary Articles of our Faith, which God has plainly revealed; or about the
substantial Parts of our Religious Worship, or the Moral Duties of a Holy Life,
which God has indispensably required; such cases are not to be compromis'd by
the Condescentions of Compliances of Moderation; we have here no Right to
yield, no Place to give; we are commanded to contend earnestly for these
things, and to prefer them to Peace, or Life it self; in these cases Zeal is
lawful and commendable; and a Compliance with men, would be the basest
Treachery to our Lord in Heaven; and therefore Moses laid aside his meekness,
when he contended with the people of Israel against their Idolatry; and so did
our Apostle this moderation, when he sharply rebuked St. Peter to his face, for
subverting the Faith of the Gentiles, by his Judaizing Compliances.

But there are many other cases of difference, that may happen among us, which
the Wisdom of God has not thought fit to determine by any necessary
injunction, wherein he has left us at liberty to yield and comply one with
another; and where we may, we ought to do it; this seeming to be the chief
reason for which our great Lord has left such cases undetermined, that we
might never want a sufficient occasion for exercising and approving this
excellent grace of Moderation.

4. The End for which this Moderation serves, and should be practiced by us, is
the Peace and Welfare of the Society to which we are related. To this end,
Moderation is necessary to ward off or heal up those wounds in the Body, which
would be made and widened by the angry Quarrels of its Members; and to cherish
that Peace on which the public Safety and Prosperity do chiefly depend. And
from this end we may infer both the Reason and the Measure of our duty. We
ought to deny our selves in complying with others, when necessary for the
Public Good, because the interest of the whose should be always preferred to
the private interest of any part; and as we need not thus yield and condescend
to others when there is no such end to be served by it; so we ought to do it in
such cases, and so far as is necessary to maintain the Peace and Welfare of the
Society to which we belong.

This excellent Temper of Spirit, will indeed serve to many other good
purposes, but the name of Moderation belongs to it chiefly, as it respects the
Public Good; and tho we may sometimes commendably comply with others, either
out of Prudence, respecting our own private Interests; or out of Charity,
respecting the private Interests of others; yet we do it properly from this
Principle of Moderation, when we respect the Public good; and I may add, as a
just consequence from thence, that whatever Compliances we make with others,
which are inconsistent with the Commonweal, they are not to be called
Moderation, but Faction and Conspiracy.

2. Having discovered wherein, the general nature of this Moderation consists,
let us descend to those particular cases wherein it should be known or
manifested in our constant exercise and exemplary practice of it. These are all
such case of difference, as may happen in our Civil or Sacred Societies; which
God has thought fit to leave undetermined, which tho numerous and various, may
be reduced to these Four Heads, of Opinion, Practice, Interest, and Censure.

1. We should use this Moderation in asserting our own Opinions, or in opposing
the Opinions of others. They who are of this excellent Temper, will be too
modest to admire themselves, or impose on others; they will not disturb the
World with an unnecessary Paradox, nor urge their Opinions with an Importunity
that exceeds their Importance; nor require an Entertainment for them, beyond
the Evidence with which they can recommend them, whereby much of the noise and
fury of our Contentions would be prevented. And if this Christian Temper did
moderate in our Disputations, we should defend our Opinions with soft words,
and calm passions; we should not delight in contradicting others, or be
impatient of being contradicted our selves; we should seek Truth more than
Victory, and study rather to compose than maintain the Controversy. Such,
says St. Paul, should the Servant of the Lord be (...), not a contentious, but
a moderate man, 1 Timothy 3.3. 2 Timothy 2.25.
one who will with meekness instruct his Opponent.

We should also manifest our Moderation, in bearing a due respect to the
Persons and Judgments of those who dissent from us, interpreting their Opinions
heartily, and weighing their Arguments impartially, as more ready to agree than
differ with them; and if at last, the Truth should appear to be on our side,
this Moderation should impose silence on us, if the fury of the Controversy be
like to do more mischief, than the defense of the controverted Point will be
able to compensate. With such Moderation we should be able to frame our
Opinions with more Truth, and to maintain them with move Peace; 4 Ephesians. 15.
or in the Apostle's Phrase, to speak the truth in love.

2. This Moderation should influence our Actions and Behavior, to render us as
agreeable and conformable, as may be, to those with whom we converse. Although in
private we may conduct our Actions according to our own prudence or pleasure;
yet when we appear abroad, we should bend our humor into a compliance with all
the innocent Usages and Customs of the world about us; not affecting any
needless singularity, or unnecessary Names or Badges of Distinction; nor
indulging our selves in the perverse frowardness of walking contrary to others.

They who have attained to this excellent Temper, will suffer their Christan
Liberty to be restrained by the just Laws of their Superiors, or will restrain
it themselves in a charitable compliance with their weaker Brethren. Such a
Moderation would beget such good Humors, or good Manners among Christians,
thereby they might converse together, without provoking one another, or
disturbing the Society in which they live. So our Blessed Savior lived in the
World, complying with all the innocent Customs of the Jewish Nation, and with
all the lawful Rituals of the Jewish Church. So lived St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.32,
33.
and so he has taught us, Give none offense neither to the Jew nor to the
Gentile, nor to the Church of God; even as I please all men in all things, not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.

3. We should practice this Moderation in pursuing or vindicating our
Interests, whence the most and sharpest Contentions do usually arise. We should
not only restrain our self-love from running out into the vicious excesses of
Covetousness and Ambition; but also remit it to such a degree, as to be able to
abate in our just pretenses, to brook disappointments, and to make our own
Interests sometimes to bend and give way, that the Interests of others may have
also room to advance. He that can govern his Spirit with Moderation, he will
not seek his own things only, 2 Phil. 4. 15 Romans 1.2.
but also the things of others; he will even in his Religious Concernments, not
please himself, but please his neighbor for his good to Edification; and much
more will he do so in his secular Interests, which are of less value. He will
not exact Tittles and Punctilio's, or strain his Right to a summum jus, but
will rather condescend not only to accept, but to offer any tolerable terms of
Accommodation, to preserve Peace, as Abraham did to Lot, when their Herdsmen
quarreled about their Pastures. 13 Genesis 8, 9.


When also we are provoked by Wrongs and unjust Reproaches, this Moderation
should restrain and qualify our Spirits, that we may be able to interpret the
injury heartily, to resent it meekly, to bear it patiently, to forgive it
easily, and to requite it only with Prayers and Blessings, till we overcome
evil with good; as our Holy Religion has taught us for preserving that Peace
it so earnestly recommends.

4. This Moderation should appear also in the Censures we pass on our selves or
others; suppressing that Self-conceit which usually begins the Quarrel, and
that Contempt of others which usually attends it. We are too apt to flatter our
selves, or our Party, with the best Names, and the fairest Encomiums, and to
misrepresent others, especially when Emulation and Strife have tinctured our
eye with too much Choler, and put them at too great a distance from us; and
therefore do greatly need this Moderation to govern our Spirits, that we may
neither Abuse our selves, nor our Brethren with an unrighteous Judgment.

We should Balance our overfond thoughts of our selves, with an impartial
discovery of our shameful Defects, and numerous Faults, which will soon be
enough to weigh down the Merits which are so apt to exalt us: And we should
allow to others the privilege of every Plea that may be made in their excuse,
from Ignorance or Weakness, from the Prepossessions of Education, from personal
Prejudices, or invincible Temptations, or from the want of necessary means for
their Conviction; and should be ready to cover their Faults with the fairest
glosses their Actions will bear, and to commend what they do well, with all the
advantages that a sincere Charity can suggest. When we are come to such a
Temper, then may the Apostle's rule obtain among us, Philip. 2.3.
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem others better than himself.

3. We are to consider, in the last place, the Object, or Persons toward whom
this Moderation should be exercised; it should be known, says the Text, to all
Men, i. e. this Moderation respects all Men universally in the Habit, and every
Man particularly with whom we converse in the actual exercise, and especially,
those to whom we are related in the public Society, either of Church or State.

They shamefully elude this Precept, who expect such Moderation from others,
but will not practice it themselves; or who will use it only toward their own
Party, who consent with them, and consequently need no Condescension from them;
whereas it chiefly respects such as are at difference with us for containing us
together within the Bond of Peace.

All Men are concerned in this Duty of Moderation, either as their Duty which
they ought to practice, or as their Privilledge, with which they are to be
treated by others. Every Man, who is the Member of a Society, ought to be
endued with this excellent Temper of Moderation, without which no Man can
discharge those Offices he ownes to the Society, or receive those Benefits he
expects from it; for this is to a political Body, what joints and sinews are to
the natural Body, whereby the Members bend and comply to a mutual defense and
support of the whole; and he who wants it, is like a Limb of Wood or Stone,
useless and burdensome. No Person can be above the practice of this Duty, nor
any one fall beneath this Privilege; without this no Counsels can be well
advised, or any Affairs rightly administered, or any Order or Peace preserved.

With this Moderation, Superiors should treat their Inferiors, framing their
Laws with Clemency, and Administering them with Equity, whereby they become in
St. Peter's Phrase, (...), 1 Pet. 2.18.
which we render, Good and Gentle. With the same Moderation, should Inferiors
submit to those that are over them, not only to the Good and Gentle, but also
to the froward, interpreting their Actions heartily, obeying their Commands
cheerfully, and submitting meekly to their Impositions, even to the Prejudice
of their private Interests, when requisite to the Public Good. With such
Moderation also Equals should meet together on their level, without
interfering, or quarrelling one with another, Speaking evil of no man, Titus
3.2.
being not brawlers or contentious, but (...), gentle, showing meekness unto
all men. In a word, this Moderation is so necessary to all Persons, and in all
Conditions and Offices of Life, that some have thought fit to render the
Original Word in the Text, by the general Name of Humanity. This may suffice
for explaining the Precept, enjoined in the former part of the Verse.

2. I proceed to consider the Argument annexed for enforcing the practice of
the foregoing Rule, in those Words, (...), The Lord is at hand. The words are
few, but weighty, either of them is a Topic pregnant with very cogent Motives,
whether we consider the Lord, who is at hand, or the nearness of that Lord to
us.

1. If we consider that Lord who is at hand, several Arguments will arise from
thence to oblige us to the practice of this Moderation.

1. He is the Lord, who has an absolute Authority over us, who expressly
commands this Duty. We acknowledge him to be such a Lord, and we cannot but have
observed how frequently and earnestly his Laws recommend to us Meekness and
Humility, Long-suffering and mutual Forbearance, Unity and Peace, which make up
this comprehensive Grace or Duty of Moderation. These are the chief Parts or
Properties of that holy Religion he has instituted; for so St. James describes
that Wisdom which is from above, it is pure, peaceable, (...) gentle, James
3.17.
and easy to be entreated.

Who then upon Earth has Power to forbid that Moderation, which the Lord from
Heaven has prescribed? How meanly or unkindly soever we may think of one
another, yet shall we dare to despise the Lord or think lightly of one of his
Precepts? Although this Duty may be very irksome to our carnal Heats, yet this
must supersede all our Cavilations and Reluctancies, that he, who is the Lord,
commands it.

2. He is the Lord of our Fellow Servants, who has indulged them the Privilege
to be treated with such Moderation, and therefore we may not deny it to them.
If we account our selves the Children or Servants of that great Family, of
which he is the Lord, we cannot but allow him the Right to make what Orders he
thinks fit among us, and that it is our Duty to practice that Behavior one
toward another, which he has appointed; to yield to every one those
Concessions and Privileges which he has granted them; to pay that respect,
and show that favor to our Brethren, which he has allowed them, if not for
their sake, yet for the Lords sake, who made the Allowance.

We read what care our Lord has taken of those, who through meanness,
weakness, or rudeness of knowledge, seem to be least in his heavenly Kingdom.
Matt. 9.6, etc.
He tells us, That it is his Fathers pleasure, that not one of them should
perish; that he himself came to save them; that their Angels always behold the
face of his Father; that therefore no man should despise or offend them; and if
any did, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
he were drowned in the depth of the Sea: And with a like Argument St. Paul
presses this Duty of Moderation, Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not; and let not him that eats not, Romans 14.3, 4.
judge him that eats; for God has received him: Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or falls; yea, he shall
be helped up, for God is able to make him stand.

3. He, who is the Lord of us all, does himself treat all of us with such
Moderation, whose Example should direct and engage us into a like practice one
toward another. Although he be the high and holy One, yet he condescends to
accommorate himself, his Laws, and his Providence, to our Capacity and
Condition. He humbles his Glorious Majesty in such rude Representations, as we
are capable of apprehending; he was content to renew his Law to us by
Revelation, after we had defaced the Original, which was at first impressed on
our Nature; and he continues to teach us with line upon line, and precept upon
precept, as our dull Capacities can receive it. He is not strict to mark what
we do amiss; he is slow to anger, and rich in mercy; he does not afflict
willingly; he pitieth while he corrects; he meets his penitent prodigals more
than half way; forgives them easily, and most affectionately embraces them.

How eminent an Example of this Moderation was our Blessed Savior, while he
lived in the World, amidst the Contradictions, Blasphemies, and Persecutions of
the worst of Men, whom yet he persisted to pity and instruct, and for whom he
prayed and died!

How ill would it go with us, if our Lord should not use such Moderation toward
us! But then, how unaccountably strange must it seem, that the great Lord of
Heaven should condescend and concede so much to us, and we think it too much to
do so to one another! that he should be Lowly and Meek, Long-suffering, and
easy to be entreated toward us; and we be Proud, Churlish, Inexorable and
Revengeful, one against another! And therefore the Scriptures do so often
recommend such Duties to us from the obliging Pattern of Almighty God, and our
Blessed Savior.

2. If we lay the Emphasis on the other word, and consider how nigh our Lord is
to us; that will supply us with three Arguments more, according to the
threefold Interpretation of the Phrase, The Lord is at Hand.

1. The Lord is at hand in his Omnipresence and Omniscience, beholding and
observing our temper and behavior one toward another. So near is our Lord to
us, that he knows our Thoughts, even before our minds are conscious of them;
there is not a Word in our Tongue, but before we utter it, he knows it
altogether; and there are none of our Ways or Actions in any distance of place,
or under any coverts of Privacy or Darkness, which are hid from his All-seeing
Eye, Psalm 139.
as the Psalmist elegantly describes his Omnipresence.

Our Lord is thus at hand, as the great Master of the Family in which we live,
observing curiously how his Orders are kept, taking strict notice how all his
Servants behave themselves both toward him, and one toward another. Thus he
walked amidst the seven Golden Chandlesticks, observing whatever was Laudable
or Culpable in the Churches of Asia. He was so nigh to Saul when breathing out
Rage and Fury against his Disciples, 9 Acts. 4.
that he himself felt the Wounds of his Persecution. And St. Peter tells us,
that a meek and quiet Spirit in the private Society of a Family, and much more
in the public society of his Church, is taken notice of by God, 1 Pet. 3.4.
and is in his sight of great Price. How careful then should we be of
practicing this Moderation in our Actions, yea in our words, yea in our very
thoughts, one toward another, seeing our Lord, who so strictly commands it, is
so near at hand to observe our carriage!

2. The Lord is at hand in the course of his Providence, disposing of us, and
of all Events and Circumstances about us, which should highly engage us to the
practice of this Moderation. That Lord who surrounds us with his continual
Providence, makes us the opportunites we meet with for exercising this
Moderation to others, which if we should refuse, how soon can he, with the turn
of his hand, put us into a condition to need a like Moderation to be used
toward us? And how justly may we expect it, if we should so highly provoke
him? If we are willing to comply with his Precept, he is at hand to assist us
with his Grace, in the performance of so difficult a duty, and to reward us for
it with the Blessings of his Providence; but if we refuse to practice this
Moderation toward our fellow servants, we have no reason to expect any better
treatment from them, or from our Lord himself.

They who consider the inconstant Revolutions to which humane Affairs are
subject, will think it prudent to grant such conditions to others, which they
may sometime ask for themselves; and they who believe God's Providence, and
what he has so often declared, that he resists the proud, and avengeth the
cause of the oppressed, will think it necessary to approve themselves to him in
the practice of that Moderation he so expressly requires.

3. The Lord is at band to call us to an account of our behavior both toward
him, and one toward another; and it therefore highly concerns us to be found of
him in good temper, and in good order; which Argument is thus expressed by St.
James, James 9.
Grudg not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold the Judge
stands at the door. Tho the Solemn Day of the General Judgment may be at a
great distance, yet we have reason to expect a much shorter time for the
private Audit of particular Persons, and of particular Churches and States,
which have their own Fates and Periods within the greater Revolution of the
World. And our Lord is never nearer to enter into Judgment with us, than when
we live most disorderly and uncharitably among our selves; for he has
declared, that if any of his servants shall say in his heart, 12 Mat. 45, 46.
My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to beat the menservants and
maidens, and to eat and drink, and be drunken; the Lord of that servant shall
come in a day that he looked not for him, and at an hour that he is not aware,
and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with unbelievers.

And when out Lord enters into Judgment with us, a great part of our account
will consist of our demeanor and carriage toward our fellow servants, not only
how justly and honestly, but also how humbly, meekly, and charitably, we have
behaved our selves in our Converses and Dealings one with another. And we are
plainly foretold what Sentence we must expect; that he who will not forgive his
fellow servants a few pence, shall never be discharged by his Lord from the many
Talents he is himself indebted; 18 Mat. 23, etc
that he shall have judgment without mercy, 2 James. 13.
that showed no mercy: That to them that are contentious, God will render
indignation and wrath, 2 Romans 8, 9.
tribulation and anguish; i. e. That the righteous Judge will not use that
Moderation toward them, which they refused at his command to practice toward
others. If then we find our selves not much persuaded to this Duty for our
Lord's sake, or for our Brethren's sake, yet let us do it for our own sake,
that our great Judge may use such Moderation toward us, in not being strict to
mark what we have done amiss, or severe in punishing us according to our
deserts.

3. I have now explained the Precept, and urged the Argument of the Text; it
remains, that we make a seasonable Application of both to our serves.

1. In our first Reflections, we cannot forbear to condemn and bewail the
scarcity and defect of this Moderation among us. It is too notorious to be
dissembled, how many of all Parties want this blessed Temper, who being
strangers to this Moderation, have become Enemies against it, and to such a
degree, as even to hate its very Name, and to blacken it with the worst of
Names, and to treat those most unkindly, who would set any Lessons or Patterns
of this Moderation before them. And what may add wonder to our Lamentation,
they pretend in all this, a Zeal for the Public Interests of Church and State,
as if our case were so odd and peculiar, that that Moderation which is the best
Preservative of all other Societies, would be the greatest bane of ours; or
that Divisions and Contentions would prove as great Blessings to us, as they
are mischiess to others.

(...). Plutarch. inter (...).
Plutarch wonders what Solon meant by making a Law, That it should be a
Reproach to any man to be a Neuter in a time of public Dissentions; because as
he argues, he left never a Wise man to arbitrate amidst the litigant Parties,
or ever a sober Citizen for the rest to reform by. And among his other
Political Precepts, he advises, That a Magistrate should above all things take
care to cherish Peace and Concord, (...). Ibid.
and to suppress all dissentions and quarrels in the Commonwealth, and he
instructs them to use this Argument to those that are at variance, That they
who can forgive and comply with others, do excel them in Wisdom, and Greatness
of Spirit, as much as they do in Moderation and Good Nature.

But when we consider what painful Convulsions this bitter zeal has for a long
time produced among us, and to what eminent dangers it lately exposed us, that
its fervor does not yet remit, but rather increase; renders our case so sad
and strange, that we cannot account for it, without recurring to a superior
Cause, and acknowledging that an Evil Spirit from the Lord is gone out among
us, as a Tempter to seduce us, and a Tormentor to punish us; and we have great
reason to bewail that ill Temper we are in, both as a heinous Sin, and as a
dreadful Judgment.

2. Suffer me in the Conclusion to Exhort and Persuade you to this Moderation,
with an earnestness that its Nature deserves, and our Necessities require. Let
me beseech you by the Authority of Almighty God, that requires it; by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, who was so eminent a Pattern of it; by the
Honor and Safety of that pure Religion we profess; by the Settlement and
Prosperity of the Church and Nation to which we are related; by all the
Interests that are dear to us in this World, and the Rewards of the next, that
your Moderation be known unto all men.

Let Meekness and Humility, Patience and Forbearance, Brotherly-kindness and
Charity, exalt our spirits into this excellent Temper, which would soon
compromise all our Differences, and restore that peace, which would sweeten and
secure all our Enjoyments. Let us lay aside all reproachful Names of
Distinction; let us no longer upbraid one another with any past Miscarriages;
or return the Injuries we have received, in any Unchristian Revenges; let us
readiy forgive those who Disclaim their former Errors; and with Meekness
instruct those, who cannot yet extricate themselves from them: Let us
condescend and comply one with another, as far as we can with a good
Conscience, to recover that Unity and Amity we have lost; and let us mark
those, who would cause Divisions among us, to avoid them. Let us contend no
longer, except in a kind Emulation, who shall approve themselves the wiser Men,
and better Christians, in being most forward and earnest, in seeding and making
Peace.

Let us not be discouraged or affrighted out of this Moderation, by the ill
Arts of those who are not so good themselves, nor can endure to see so much
good, as would be hereby wrought among us. Let us industriously encourage and
promote this Moderation among all with whom we Converse; and highly honor
those, in whom it most eminently appears, as the truest Friends of our Church
and Nation, who take the best course to advance and secure the Public
Interests of both.

It has pleased God, by a most merciful Revolution of his Providence, to place
us under a Government that excels in Moderation; that abhors the policy of
weakening us by Divisions, that it may advance it self into an exorbitant Power;
that earnestly invites us to peace, and designs for us a happy and lasting
Settlement. Let not us with a perverse Frowardness oppose the kindest offers of
God, and our Prince, but wisely embrace the opportunity is made us, and
thankfully accept the Blessings are cast into our Bosoms. Then may we live as
Christians, and love as Brethren; then may Peace be within our Walls, and
Prosperity within our Borders; then Mercy and Truth may meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other.

And when we are sufficiently impyov'd in this Divine Temper of Moderation, we
may be capable of Admission into the blessed Society of Saints and Angels
above, where are no Sects or Parties, no Quarrels or Contentions; but where we
shall enjoy the most delightful Entertainments of Love and Peace to all
Eternity.

FINIS.

