THE SPIRITUAL HOUSE In its Foundation, Materials, Officers, and Discipline
DESCRIBED. The Nomothetical and Coercive Power of the KING, in Ecclesiastical
Affairs ASSERTED. The Episcopal Office and Dignity, Together with the Liturgy
of the Church of England VINDICATED.

In some Sermons Preached at St. Clement Danes, and St. Gregory's near St.
Paul's London.

By Geo. Masterson.

Has the Lord as great delight in Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to
hearken, then the fat of Rams,

1 Samuel 15.22. And they answered Josua, saying, All that thou command us we
will do, according as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken
unto thee,

Josh. 1.16, 17. (...), Incerti Ap. Stobaeum.

Printed for Philemon Stephens, the younger, living at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

To the great Exemplar of PIETY and VIRTUE, Frances, Duchess of Sommerset Her
Grace.
THe Gentile Superstition, (Madam) inscribed not the Names or their Deities
upon the greatest Donaries which they made them, with a Devotion comparable to
that, with which I lay this Little Thing at Your Grace's Feet.

The Compilement of this Structure is not in a Lofty and Noble Corinthian form,
with any Rich or Curious Embrodery of Words; but the whole is cemented together
in the plain Tuscan. I could have given it a Franker Light, had I not known
that Devotion (for which this Spiritual House was built) requires collected,
rather then diffused Spirits.

I dare not assume the Vanity, to think that it is (as the Italians use to
speak of a well built Structure) Fabrica ben raccolta. But if Your Grace (who
are so excellent a Judge) be pleased to afford it Your Approbation, for its
usefulness or seasonableness, I shall rejoice in my Endeavor: If otherwise,
the hand that erected, shall be first upon it, to pull it in pieces, and
condemn it to rubbage and ruin.

But since (Madam) the simple Dedication of an Altar, (though the Materials of
it are but Turf or Brick, and the Hand that erected it, unacquainted with Art)
has ever secured it against all, but Sacrilegious Hands; I am ready to
overcome my Reason into a Belief, that this (otherwise inconsiderable) Piece,
pleading the Cause of His most Sacred Majesty's Nomotheticall and Coercive
Power in Matters of Religion, the Prelacy of my Lords, the Reverend Bishops (as
Governors sent by him) and of the Pious (though despised) Liturgy of our
Church (which three are fairly seated, and ruling in Your Graces Soul) it shall
live under the shadow of Your great Name.

Thus (Madam) not without deep acknowledgement of Your Graces undeserved
Favors to my most unworthy Self, I take the boldness to assure you, that the
remaining Thoughts and Actions of my Life, shall zealously aim at the Honor of
being,

My most honored Lady, Your Graces most devoted Servant, Geo. Masterson.
December. the 20th. 1660.
1 Epistle of Peter, 2 Chap. 4 and 5 verse. To whom coming as unto a living
stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of God, and precious,

Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ.


THE first thoughts that the Sons of Men entertain of coming (or drawing nigh)
to God, are formed in them, by the mediation of his goodness; that is, his
profitablenesse or serviceablenesse to them, without this, all the beauty that
is in the divine nature would never affect the heart of one of the lapsed Sons
of Adam, for, though there be infinite charms in the face of God, to attract
the souls of all rational Creatures that have eyes to behold the amiablenesse
that is in his face; yet the power and justice of God are more potent to deter
the creature, conscious to it self of its own unworthiness and guilt from
coming to, or looking toward him.

The Son of God himself, though he be the brightness of his Fathers glory, and
the express image of his Person ((...) the character of his subsistence) would
never lead one heart captive, were he not (...) beneficient and gracious, as
well as (...) anointed; so the Spouse, Cantic. 1.3. Because of the savor of
thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the
Virgins love thee; and our Apostle (in my Text) mentions not their coming unto
God, but upon the hypothesis (or supposition) of their having tasted that the
Lord is gracious, verse. 3. (...) his goodness is the cords of a Man with which
he draws us, and we run after him; without a precedent taste of that, we should
never come to him; But if ye have tasted, it necessarily and immediately
follows, To whom coming as unto a living stone, etc.

In which words, you have an allusion to, or comparison between the Christian
Church, and the Temple under the Law, (of which that was a type or figure) and
this allusion stands in four things; the foundation, superstructure,
priesthood, and sacrifices.

1 You have here in answer to the foundation of the Temple, a stone; specified,
and illustrated by a peculiar Epithet [a living stone] and described further
by two things (for preventing that scandal (or offense) that might be taken at
it; because disallowed by men.) that men might not stumble at, or dash their
foot against this, it is true (says our Apostle) this stone was disallowed
indeed of men; but first it was chosen of God; though it were reprobated by
them, it was elected by him; non temere assumptus. And,

2 It is precious too: 1 Coram Deo, precious in the sight of God. 2 Apud
fideles, precious in the eyes of all believers, who prefer this stone to all
pearls and diamonds before the treasures of silver and gold.

Secondly, You have here in allusion to the Temple, the superstructure upon
this foundation [ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house.]

3 The Priesthood, dignified with the honorable title of (...) an holy
priesthood.

4. The sacrifices. 1 distinguished from those of the Law (...) spiritual, the
sacrifices under the Law were carnal; but these are spiritual sacrifiees. 2 The
means how they become acceptable to God; namely by Jesus Christ.

The 1. Allusion is the foundation. [A stone] and here 5. th: 1. that Christ is
a stone. 2. How he is a stone. 3. How it fared with him (or what entertainment
he found) he was disallowed. 4. By whom. And 5tly, their sin in disallowing
him, in three respects. 1. Because a living stone. 2. Because chosen of God.
And 3dly because precious.

1. Christ is a stone; thus the holy Prophets Isaiah, Daniel, and Zachary
prophesied of him; Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold I lay in Sion for
a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation, Isay. 28.16.

Thou saw til that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image,
Dan. 2.34. Behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua: upon one stone
shall be seven eyes, behold I will engrave the graving thereof says the Lord
of Hosts, Zach. 3.9.

Thus the holy Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul term him. This is the stone
which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of the
corner, Acts 4.11. And did all drink of the same spiritual drink (for they
drank of that spiritual rock that followed them) and that rock was Christ. 1
Cor. 10.4. He was a stone in his birth; Daniels stone, cut out of the mountain
without hands; that is, made of a woman without a man. A stone in his passion:
Zacharye's stone, graven and cut full of eyes. A stone in his resurrection;
Isaiah's stone, laid in Sion for a foundation. A stone, of which the rock in
the wilderness was a type. now as that rock when it was smote by Moses, sent
forth streams of water for quenching the Israelites thirst. So he, smitten in
his passion, sends forth baptismal water, to wash us from our uncleanness, and
eucharistical blood, to be our drink, to nourish us up unto eternal life. Thus
Saint John tells you that our two Sacraments flowed from the side of our
Savior, when the Soldier peirced it with a spear. But one of the Soldiers
with a spear peirced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water,
Joh. 19.34. Thus Christ as a stone (or rock) sending forth streams, bespeaks
the Jews. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood, and cried
saying, if any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. John. 7.37. Thus he
says likewise of the streams of his grace. Whosoever drinks of the water
that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him,
shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life. Joh. 4.14.
Thus he is a stone, a stone sending forth streams of living water.

2 How is Christ a stone; He is a stone, (that is, metaphorically, or in an
allegory as a stone) in a threefold respect.

1 In respect of his humane nature; he was hewn out of the same rock, dig'd
out of the same quarry, as the rest of the Sons of men are; he was a stone of
the old rock Adam, he was dig'd out of Abraham's quarry, made of a woman; he
took part of the same flesh and blood that the other children do; he was like
unto us in all things sin only excepted; he was of the same rock with us, only
without any, the least flaw. 2 In respect of his passion; Nothing is more
subject to contempt to be trod upon, to be spurned out of the way then a stone;
The Kingly Prophet (speaking in the Person of Christ) says, I am a worm and no
man, Psalm. 22.6. He might have said lapis ac non vir, a stone and no man; a
contemptible stone in his passion, rather then a man; never were any sufferings
like his sufferings, never any sorrows like his sorrows; and yet behold, never
was any Person in the midst of his sorrows and sufferings, so patient, so still,
so stone like; He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his
mouth. Isaiah. 53.7. 3 In respect of his strength and solidity; The chief
virtue and propertity of a stone is, that it is firm and sure; Hence it is,
that men place it in the foundation, and venture the fabric upon it. Christ is
a stone in this respect especially; ye may trust him, ye may confidently build
upon him, ye may safely venture all your temporal and eternal concernments upon
this foundation; he is the true rock, upon which whosoever builds his house
shall stand, though the rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow
and beat upon it. It is the strength, stability and solidity of Christ
especially, that gives him the denomination of a stone here; as in the verse
immediately following the Text; Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture,
behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, etc. And he that believes on him
shall not be confounded. 1 Pet. 2.6.
As the gates of Hell cannot prevail against the Church, because it is founded
upon a Rock, Math. 16.18. no more shall the gates of Hell prevail against the
particular soul, that is regularly built upon this stone, this solid and sure
foundation; and thus you have an account of the second thing, how Christ is a
stone: come we now to see what entertainment he finds, how it fared with him,
which is the third thing propounded.

3. The entertainment of this stone. The Text tells you he was dissallowed, the
English expression (in our translation) is too modest. It is in the language
that the Apostle wrote (...) reprobatus (Beza) reprobaverunt (Trem.) it was not
a bare simple dissallowing but a down right reprobating of him, and this they
did two ways.

1. In their words; when they styled him a deceiver: That deceiver, with an
emphasis, Sir we remember (say the Chief Priests and Pharisees unto Pilat) that,
that deceiver said. etc. Mat. 27.63. (...) as if he had been the greatest
Impostor, the veriest cheat, that ever was in the World. A man gluttonous and a
wine bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners, Mat. 11.19. A Samaritan and one
that had a Devil, Joh. 8.48. Beelzebub the God of flies or prince of Devils,
Mat. 12.24. did they not reprobate him when they said we will not have this man
to rule over us? Luke 19.14. if this may be construed but a dissallowing of
him, that (I am sure) was an avowd reprobation, when they put the highest
indignity upon him, in preferring Barrabbas before him, John 18. ult. 2. They
reprobated him by their works, you have seen the generation among whom our Lord
Christ lived, with whom he couvers'd in the days of his flesh, laying him
aside as a contemptible, refuse stone, to which they would not afford any room
or place in the building: you may behold them now actually reprobating him, in
their scourging of him, crowning him with thorns, nayling him to the Cross,
and piercing his side. He was not only a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief (as the Prophet Isay c. 53. verse. 3.) but (as the same Prophet verse. 5.)
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: had
he been a castaway, a person reprobated of God, they could not have treated
him worse then they did, when he thirsted, thyy gave him Vinegar to drink: they
powered upon him the utmost that spite and malice could invent when the very
pangs of death were upon him, they inflicted upon him a shameful, painful,
cursed death, they crucified him, and they crucified him between two thieves,
as the greatest and chiefest malefactor.
The Apostle says of him (in a pathetical admiration of his humiliation) that
he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross: it may be truly said of those with whom he conversed reprobaverunt ad
mortem mortem autem crucis they rejected him to death, the death of reprobates,
the death that has a curse annexed to it, the death of the Cross, they
prosecuted him in their rage and fury, till they brought him lapis ad lapidem,
into a grave of stone, and then rolled a stone upon him, and so left him
dissallowed (or reprobated) with a witness.

But if he were a stone; that is incapable of disgrace, utterly unacquainted
with sorrow, it is neither sensible of what is spoke, nor of what is done to
it, the tongue that casts it aside with reproach, the hand that cuts and hews
it, does it not affect it any thing at all.

It is true, a stone indeed is insensible, but Christ was a living stone a
stone endud with life and sense, a person very tender and sensible of the
wounds they gave him with their tongues, the reproaches, taunts, and scofs,
they cast upon him, and of those likewise of their hands, he was sensible of
the furrows which they made upon his back, the whips, the thorns, the nails
and spear, he was sensible of them all, he endured all patiently as a stone,
but he felt it sensibly as a living stone. witness two things.

1. His passionate prayer, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me,
the cup of his passion, it was the cup of red wine, the cup of his Fathers
displeasure: and this prayer he repeats no less then three times, Mat. 26.44.
2, The apprehension he had of his ensuing sufferings, which was so great that
it cast him into that agony, in which he sweat drops of blood, Luke 22.44.
whereby he made good this compellation of a stone, which use to give or sweat
against rain or storms. he could not but be sensible of the Tempest when it
fell upon him, who thus swet in the sense of it before it came. and thus you
see (the third thing) what entertainment he found, he was dissallowed or
reprobated.
But by whom was he thus dealt with? That is the,

4. Saint Peter says (in the Text) (...) (of men) of mean men it may be, the
multitude who know not the worth or value of a stone. Nay, but they were the
builders, they who should know what stone is fit for every place: so our Lord
Christ, Did you never read in the Scriptures, the stone which the builders
rejected, the same is become the head of the corner? Mat. 21.42. and so Saint
Peter, This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, Acts 4.11.
and the builders generally, universally; have any of the rulers or of the
Pharisees believed on him, John 7.48. He among them who thought so well of
himself as a chief master builder, that he despised the rest as persons who
knew nothing, Caiaphas, was positively, and absolutely for the reprobating of
him. One of them named Caiaphas being the highpriest that same year, said unto
them, ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient for us, that
one man (meaning Christ) should die for the people, John 11.49, 50. Now lay
these together, and you have a sad account of the lot that befell Christ, he
was refused, (or dissallowed) refused by the builders, by the chief of them,
yea he was not only dissallowed, that is, not afforded to be the head, but he
was reprobated, not allowed any room in the building; to be refused is not so
much, it may be more honor (as the Tryers may prove) to be rejected, then
approved by them; but to be refused of builders, who are presumed to be
skillful, and by the chief of them, this is much indeed.

Again, to be dissallowed, not admitted to the chief place, this is not so
much, for there are other places in the building in which he might have been
set with some reputation, but to be wholly and absolutely reprobated, not
allowed any place but to be cast out among the rubbish, this is hardly to be
under gone, and yet this was the lot of Christ, he was dissallowed not by
mensimply, but by the builders, the supposedly wisest men. and that leads me to
the

5. Particular, the aggration of their sin in dissallowing him.

1. Because he was a living stone, who has life in himself, even as the
Father has life in himself. As the Father has life in himself, so has he
given to the Son to bave life in himself, John 5.26. a living stone, who gives
life to all others, all kinds of life, temporal, spiritual, eternal, the
life of nature, grace and glory. In him was life, John 1.4. not in the
Scocinians sense, Quia Christus primus vitam aeternam and caelestem
annunciavit, and revelavit, (Smalcius.) because he first preached eternal
life. or life per meto nimiam pro vitae aeternae clarissimo nuntio
(Schlichtingius.) the most eminent Preacher of life; but the meaning of the
Text in him was life is originally radically as in the head or heart, from
whence it is communicated to all the members; so that the rejecting,
disallowing, or refusing of this living stone, is (being interpreted) the
refusing of life it self, the choosing of death rather then life. 2. Because
he was chosen of God, the reprobating of that which God has elected, is an
high aggravation of sin: because hereby the foolishness of man exalts it self
against the wisdom of the only wise God. Had Christ been a stone accidentally
or by chance assumed by men, had he been propounded for the advancement or
carrying on of some politic design, he might have been disallowed without any
eminent hazard: but when God in infinite wisdom, and upon mature deliberation
has made choice of him, as the only proper foundation of man's happiness, he
cannot be reprobated by any, without adding many cubits to the stature of their
transgression. 3. Because he is precious, that is truly and properly precious,
cujus exiguum alterius magnum exaequat, a little of which compensats a great
deal in other matters, Christ is the pearl of price which the wise Merchantman
sels all that he has to purchase, Christ is so precious that Saint Paul
accounted his greatest privileges, his choicest services yea and all things
but loss and dung in comparison of him Phil. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. to reject therefore
a thing or person so precious as Christ is, is an exceeding high aggravation of
their sin, he was a living stone, chosen of God and precious and yet disallowed
of men.
Lay Christ then (to improve this first general in a few words) the foundation
of your happiness, as he was designed by the God of Heaven; the Apostle tells
you in the 1. to the Corinth. 3. chap. and 11 verse. Other foundation can no man
lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. This is the rock upon which the
wise builder erects his fabric; all others are but sandy foundations; the
House that is built upon them, the expectation that men raise from them, must
fall in the day of the rain or tempest. As for instance.

1 They who build upon the bare name of Christianity. There is a vast
difference between nominals and reals; names will never pass in the account of
Heaven for things. The Church of Sardis had a fair name [a name that she
lived] but this did not advantage her any thing, because [she was dead] Apoc.
3.1. 2 They who build upon the shoulders of their religious progenitors, the
Grandmother Lois, and the Mother Evnice. It is an happiness too great for
Parents to entail their graces together with their estates upon their children;
all the holiness they derive to them, is a faederal holiness only; a leprous
Father begets a leprous child; the Father takes a potion, and is healed of his
leprosy, but if the child use not that remedy, he dies in his uncleanness; if
you reflect upon the children of many holy men in Scripture, you may behold
Adams Cain, Abraham's Ismael, Isaacks Esau, David's Amnon and Absalom, Aarons
Nadab and Abihu, Elies Hophni and Phineas: too many children are like Manasses;
Hoc uno patris spectaculum
Quod ejus imaginem reddidi ex contrario.
(Eman. Thesaur. 3 They who expect the end without the means; who build upon
their predestination. There is a predestination to works as well as to life.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. 4 They who rely
upon poor, weak, languishing intentions, that never ripen into action; the Poet
derides those whose intentions were always blossoming, but never brought forth
any ripe fruit, cras te victorum, etc. good intentions fortifyed, with pious
resolutions do fairly introduce one into the paths of virtue, but the best
intentions without action will never bring him to his journeys end. The Jews
(I believe) intended as they said, when they desired the Prophet to pray for
them, and (say they) according to all that the Lord our God shall say, so
declare unto us, and we will do it, Jeremiah 42.20. and yet he tells them they
dissembled in their hearts, when they sent him unto the Lord; because (says
he) I have declared it to you, but ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord,
nor any thing for which he has sent me unto you, verse. 21. good intentions are
like the Angel that went before Toby to Rages; but the non execuion of them, is
like the dog that followed after him. 5 They who build upon their civil
honesty, or negative goodness; they do no man wrong; they are not this or
that; the Scribes and Pharisees, were (without controversy) unblameable in their
conversation toward men; and it is not to be questioned but that the Pharise
spoke truth, who said God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of
all that I possess, Luke 18.11, 12. and yet our Lord Christ says, except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat 5.20. 6 They who build upon
their religious performances, their own righteousness; Christ became a stone
of offense to the Jews, when they would be saved by the works of the Law. Romans
9.31, 32. and Saint Paul says, Christ is become of none effect unto you,
whosoever of you, are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from grace. Galat.
5.4.
We may safely say of all these, as Christ did to his Disciples (when they
showed him the fabric of the material Temple) there shall not be left one
stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. Mark. 13.2.

2 Take heed of disalowing or rejecting Christ. Beza (upon the T.) says etiam
nos hodie vita and moribus reprobamus. Men may, and do at this day reject
Christ by their vicious lives, and evil manners; they reject or reprobate him
in general who are disobedient to the word. A stone of stumbling and a rock of
offense, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient. 1 Pet. 2.8.
they more particularly, who refuse, neglect or despise his ordinances; the
rejecting of them, is the rejecting of Christ in his wisdom and faithfulness.

Every man that lives in a known sin, prefers Barabbas before him.

It is this, and this only, that renders it a thing perfectly reasonable that
the sufferings of sinners should be eternal, in the place of torment, because
by rejecting Christ, they contemn that immortal and eternal life, which God
puts into their hands, and upon which they might lay hold, by embracing and
entertaining him. Is there any thing more rational and equal then this, that
when God sets life and death before men, immortal life by entertaining Christ,
and eternal death by rejecting him, they who choose death, should have their
portion or part in it? Take heed least while you acknowledge (as you cannot but
do) the reasonableness of this, you do not (as the Jews did) condemn your
selves in a their d Person. Mat. 21.41. and so I pass from this to the second
general.

2 The superstructure or fabric, that is built upon this foundation. ye also
as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, verse. 5. In which there are
three things considerable; the materials, edifice, and the manner how it
becomes such.

1 The materials are 1. in general [ye] 2. more particularly [lively stones] If
you would know,

1 Who these [ye] are, you must have recourse to the beginning of this Epistle;
in the first and second verses of the first chapter, they are described by two
names, strangers and elect.

1 Strangers: advenis, inquilinis; in solos Judaeos competit. It appertains to
the Jews only (says Master Calvin upon the place) who are here called
strangers, not as the believers are afterward, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11. because heaven is their
Country, and they are here from home; but because they were cast out from that
Land (the Land of Canaan) which was peculierly theirs; and were now dispersed
and scattered through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, etc. Or,

Advenis, strangers; i. e. ijs qui ex gentilismo in rem publicam populi Dei
transierant. (Gualt.) who were transplanted from gentilisme into the Society of
Gods people. I undertake not to umpire between Calvin and Gualter whether they
were Jews or Gentiles; but take that which they both agree in, the [ye] here,
the materials of this spiritual house to be Christians; that is, persons made
proselites to the faith and profession of Christ, whether from the tents of
Judaisme or gentilisme, it matters not. the [ye] are Christians, they the
materials of this spiritual house; but not all we hope (will some say) for the
Apostle styles them.

2 Elect. whence they infer, that none ought to be accounted members of the
Church, (the materials of this spiritual house) but the elect only.

The elect in their sense, are (I acknowledge) the sole Members of the invisible
Church, but all that profess the name of Christ, may, and ought to be reputed
members of the visible Church. This Saint Paul has put wholly out of
controversy by telling us, that in a great house, there are, not only vessels
of gold and of silver, but also of wood, and of earth: and some to honor, and
some to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20.

And for the elect (in Saint Peter's Text) the great Patrons of absolute and
irrespective election, understand them either of general election to
Christianity: electis i. e. defaece hominum segregatis, ad meliorem quandam
sortem. (Aret.) elect. that is separated from the dregs and vap of mankind, to
a better lot and portion in Christianity.

Or (at most) elect in the judgment of charity, so Calvin, Gods election being
a secret laid up in his own bosom, which cannot be known but by the singular
and especial revelation of the holy ghost quaeri potest unde hoc compertum
habuerit. It may be demanded how the Apostle knew that these Persons were
elect? and his answer is, we may not anxiously enquire concerning the election
of our Brethren, but make our judgment of it from their vocation, ut pro
electis habeantur, quicunque per fidem, in ecclesiam sunt coaptati: that they
should be deemed elect who are joined unto the Church by faith: est enim hoc
charitatis, non fidei judicium; the utmost judgment that we can make in this
case being of charity only, and not assurance: and he sums up his resolution in
these words, quatenus ergo prae se ferebant se Dei spiritu regenitos, in
electis Dei ipsos numerat. For as much therefore as they profes'd themselves
regenerate by the holy ghost, he reckons them among the elect. This second
title then elect does not (even in the judgment of these men) oppose or gainsay
our interpretation of [ye] by Christians, all that profess the faith of
Christ. And thus you see in general who are the materials of this house [ye]
Christians.

2 More particulerly lively (or living stones) (...) Christians are here called
living stones (waving some other respects) by way of antithesis (or opposition)
especially, to those inanimate (or dead) stones, that were the materials of the
Jewish Temple. Living stones, i. e. such as have a principle of life and motion
in themselves. And they are therefore said in the preceding verse to come unto
the foundation. (to whom coming.)

The stones in the material Temple were not active (they did not offer
themselves, or come unto the foundation.) but merely passive, they were brought
and laid upon it; but here the stones are active, and come; and accordingly
the Apostle bespeaks them as living stones (...) not only aedificati (as Beza)
whom our translation follows) built; but aedifice mini (as Tremel. and the
Margin in our Bibles,) be ye bvilt; which clearly implies not a little activity
in Christians, in building up themselves.

No doctrine has ever shed a more malignant influence upon religion, or cast
the Professors of it, into so deep a sleep, as that which with an open face and
directly, or by consequence and with a glance of its eye, ascribes the whole
work of our salvation so to God, as to deny man any activity in the conduct or
promoting of it. For, they who are excited with the greatest earnestness to
build up themselves, are yet too prone to lie still in the dust, but when men
persuade themselves, (or are taught by others to believe) that they cannot
contribute any thing toward the building up of themselves, they must
unavoidably remain riveted to, or rooted in the earth, without any endeavor of
coming to the foundation, making any application of themselves to Christ. As
Suetonius observes of Tiberius, religionum negligentiorem fuisse, guippe
persuasionis plenum cuncta fato agi; he was the more careless in the things of
religion, because he was full of this persuasion, that all things are guided by
fate; to prevent this the Apostle tells Christians, that they are living stones;
in which expression as the privileges of Christians are couched, so their duty
is employed; for as living stones you have a principle of reason and
understanding to judge of the foundation, whether it be a rock or sand; as
living stones you are endued with wills, to make choice of the rock or sands, as
your foundation, to come, or not to come to, to build, or not to build upon the
living stone, Christ. And thus you have an account of the 1. particular the
materials of this house [ye] and ye as living stones. the next thing to be
considered, is,

The aedifice, a spiritual house.

An House. Thus the Church is frequently styled in Scripture: that thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the
Church of the living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. and Heb. 3.5, 6. and Mases verily was
faithful in all his house as a Servant, but Christ as a Son over his own
house, whose house are we, etc. the Church is caled an house, either
metonymically, as the house is put for the family that inhabit it. as Genesis 7.1.
and the Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all thy house into the Ark. And now
(said Jacob, Gen 30.30.) when shall I provide for mine own house also? or an
house by way of allusion principally to the Temple, or unto any other house.

2. A spiritual house. That is, metaphorically, and allusively, to all intents
and purposes in spiritual things, that which an house is in temporal. The
estate of Christians (as they are in Society) is set forth to us in Scripture,
in diverse and sundry terms; sometimes of a flock, ye are his flock frequently
in the Psalms; sometimes of husbandry, ye are Gods husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9.
sometimes of a building, ye are Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9. and so in the Text,
a spiritual house.

In this spiritual house (without offering violence to the allegory) there are
(as in every well built material house) 3. things especially requisite; symetry,
decor, and distribution.

1 Symetry, This in a material building is the convenience or proportion that
runs between the parts and the whole; and this reconciles those seemingly
opposite things, uniformity and variety.

Uniformity is so necessary (if not to the being, yet) to the well or comely
being of any house, that without this, it is but a confused heap; yet it is
not to be imagined that the most uniform building should not admit of variety;
for, Art must be acknowledged in its highest pefection, when it may be reduced
to some natural principle. (the most judicious Artists being but the mimiques
of nature.)

Now the natural fabric of Man's body is (according to the saying of
Protagoras) (...) the prototype of all exact symetry; no structure can be
(possibly) more uniform then our bodies, in the whole figuration of them, each
side agreeing with the other, both in the number, the quality, and in the
measure of the parts: and yet there is great variety and diversity; for, some
are round as the arms, other flat as the hands; some prominent, and some more
retired; thus in the spiritual house (the Church) though there be great
variety: some learned, other unlearned; some rich, other poor, some noble and
honorable, other mean and vile; some strong men, other babes in Christ; some
Fathers, other children.

Or as, though in an house there be a celler, pantry, kitchen, and other rooms
of meaner office, as well as a parlour, bedchamber, and closet: and great
variety between these in respect of form, height and latitude; yet because
there is a convenience and proportion running between the parts and the whole;
this satisfies for the diversity, and reconciles it (by the force of
proportion) to that regularity or symetry that ought to be in the building, So
in the spiritual house (the Church) though the members be various, yet they may
be correspondent, if the convenience or proportion (in which symetry consists)
be held: and it must necessarily be with that Church, in which this symetry is
found, as they say of the material Church of Santa Giustina in Padova (though
the materials be but ordinary stone, without any garnishment of sculpture) yet
it ravisheth the beholders eye, by a secret harmony in the proportion.

2 Decor. This (in a material house) consists in the keeping of a due respect
between the habitation and the Inhabitant. It was the saying of a great Artist
( Palladius) that no fabric is to be regulated by any certain dimensions, but
by the dignity only of the Master. The Gentiles having respect to this were
profusely liberal in adorning their Temples (witness that of Ceres Eleusina at
Ephesus) upon persuasion that their Gods dwelt in them: and the God of heaven
(though he do not dwell in Temples made with hands as Saint Paul tells the Men
of Athens, Acts 17.24.) yet (because the Temple at Jerusalem was dedicated to
his worship, and appropriated to him) he complains (by the Prophet Haggai) for
want of this decor, the not keeping a due respect between the habitation and
himself the Inhabitant. Is it time for you, oh ye, to dwell in your cealed
houses, and this house lie wast? Hag. 1.4. In the spiritual house, (the Church)
in which God has said he will dwell for ever, the decor is holiness: the
Inhabitant is holy, and therefore the habitation should be so.

It is true of the spiritual house, that David speaks of the material Temple,
Holiness becomes thine honse oh Lord for ever, Psalm. 93. and upon the account
of his own holiness, God requires this due respect. It is written be ye holy,
for I am holy. 1 Pet. 1.16. and Saint Paul urges it likewise upon the same
account. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you? if any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy:
for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.

3 Distribution. The designing of all the rooms to their several and respective
offices. In the spiritual house likewise, there must be such a distribution.
Thus the Apostle, and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers. Ephesians. 4.11. and more expressly, 1
Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. for as (in material buildings) some stones do
well within doors, that would not serve without, to bear out weather: and
others do better without then they would do within: so some Christians are
more for use, and less for ornament; others more for ornament and less for
use: as therefore God (in his wisdom) has designed and appointed men, so
they ought to keep their station, to continue in that calling or place which ye
Mr. Builder has distributed to them: and thus you have an account of the 2d.
thing; the superstructure a spiritual house.

3 The manner how Christians become such an house: and that is, by being built
up or building up themselves: so (if this Text do not bear it) Saint Jude
says expressly But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith,
verse. 20. for (though it be strange, yet) it is true, we are both stones, and
builders: to be built, and to build up our selves. Stones, in respect of them
whom God has set over us, to square and frame us; and builders in respect of
our selves first, and then of those who are committed to us, either by the
obligation of ditty or charity; every one being to build up those that are
committed to his charge, into an house for God to dwell in.

In respect of our selves we are to build God an Oratory; in respect of our
particular Families, we are to build him a Chapel: and if we have a larger
circuit (if we be set in public place) we are to build him a Church.

This expression of being built up (or building up our selves) implies 2.
things.

1 To what end, or upon what terms or conditions we ought to come unto Christ;
nempe ut in ipso fundemut (Calvin) that we may be built up on him; to whom
coming, etc. ye are built up, etc. though Christ the living stone, be a most
sure and tried foundation, a rock, and a rock of ages, yet he will bear no
more, then God has designed him as a foundation to bear.

It is a maxim of (the great Architect) Vitruvius, fundationes fodiantur si
queant inveniri ad solidum and in solido, let the foundation be laid if it may
be upon a solid rock: by which words, he commends to us (says a learned
English Commentator) not only a diligent, but even a jealous examination, what
the foundation will bear.

Though there be no other foundation but Christ, and though this foundation be
infinitely sufficient to beat the utmost weight that can regularly be laid on
it; yet this foundation would sink under the burden of the least known sin,
unrepented of. They therefore that come to him, (i. e.) who expect salvation by
him) upon any other terms or condition, then being built up by obedience and
conformity to him, by increasing in virtue and good works, instead of founding,
do but confound their own happiness.

2dly. This expression of building up our selves (or being built up) implies
that union on in affection, that should be between those who are members of the
same Church. An house built up, though the materials before the building
(timber, stones, mortar and the rest) were diverse and sundry, yet are all so
united that they become one. So in the spiritual house, though every particular
Christian be an house (or Temple) for the holy Ghost to dwell in, yet by being
built up all are united into one Basilicon, or Princely fabric.

An Italian Architect ( Leon Batista Alberti) is so curious in the point of
union in a material fabric, that he wishes that all the timber should be cut
out of the same forest, and all the stones dig'd out of the same quarry. This
might not (probably) conduce more to the union of the house, then if the timber
and stones were cut and dig'd out of diverse forests, and quarryes. But (sure I
am) it conduces not a little to the union of the spiritual house, that the
timber and stones be cut and hewn out of the same forest and pit. For, when
one says I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, and a third I am of
Cephas, this genders to envy, strife and division, as the Apostle, l Cor. 3.3,
4.

There are two things that tend much to the preservation of this union.

1. A Spirit of Contentation, with that estate and condition in which God has
placed every Member of the Church. For, as it tends to Schism in the natural
body, if the foot shall envy the hand, or the ear the eye, or any of the
members the head. If the foot shall say, why should I bear the burden of the
whole, and not be supported as well as the head is? or the hand say, why should
I be employed as the instrument of action, and not partake with the eye, in its
more honorable and easy employment of speculation? So in the spiritual body,
if one member emulate or envy another, the Subject the Prince, the Presbyter
the Bishop, it must necessarily cause a cleft or schism in the building, which
may ruin the whole. For, as in material buildings, all openings are weaknings;
and therefore skilful builders advise that doors and windows be as few in
number, and as moderate in dimension as may be. A spirit of contentation
therefore is of a primary necessity to the preservation of union. 2. A Mutual
Communication of particular faculties for the good of the whole. For, as the
foot in the natural body cannot refuse to walk, the hand to work, or the eye to
see, without the apparent prejudice of the whole. No more can any member in the
spiritual fabric, withhold his particular ability from the rest, without their
detriment, and suffering loss by it. As when the members in the fable
conspired to withhold nourishment from the belly, they conspired but their own
ruin in weakening it. And as they observe in Architecture, it is a notorious
soloecism to weaken that part, which must strengthen all the rest. But when
every member communicates its particular faculty (the feet walk, the hands
work, the eyes see, the ear hears, the tongue speaks) this tends to the union
of the whole, with the advantage of welfare to the particular members. And thus
I have considered the Christian Church as a spiritual house. Whence this
inference naturally may be drawn, viz.
There is a Master of this house, by whom the family ought to be ruled and
Governed.

It was an equitable and natural law, that King Ahasuerus made (upon his Queen
Vashti's disobedience) That every man should bear Rule in his own house, Hester
i. ult. It is much more reasonable, that God (the Master of this Spiritual
House) should bear Rule in it. Our very being in Gods house, does necessarily
oblige us to Subjection and Obedience to him. When the Holy Ghost says, such
or such persons were in such, or such an house, he intends subjection by it,
Numb. 30.3. ult. Thus when the Israelites are said to be in Pharoahs house, the
meaning is, they were subject to him. Did I plainly appear unto the house of
thy Father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaohs house? 1 Samuel 2.27. Let us
therefore give up our selves conscionably and sincerely to the Government of
our great Lord and Master.

In things fundamental and essential to be believed and practiced, we are to
receive our direction from his lips only, as he spoke by the mouths or pens of
those holy men, Prophets, and Apostles, who were inspired by the Holy Ghost:
Thus the Apostle expressly, Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have Preached unto you, let him he
accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man Preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9.
where you have the Divine inviolable authority of the holy Scripture asserted;
and a very dreadful sentence thundered against any person (of what rank or
quality soever) that shall presume to innovate, or introduce any Doctrine
contrary to the Doctrine of those holy Men, who spoke as they were inspired by
the Holy Ghost.

Though we, i. e. Paul himself, and the Brethren that were with him, (in whose
name he salutes the Churches of Galatia, ver. 2.) or though we, i. e. (as
Vincent. Lirinens.) etiamsi Petrus, etiamsi Andreas, etiamsi Joannes, etiamsi
omnis Apostolorum chorus Evangelizet vobis praeterquam quod Evangelizavimus
Anathema, sit (l. 1. c. 12. praescript. advers. profan. haeresium novitates)
Though Peter, Andrew, John, though the whole company of the Apostles, should
Preach to you any other Gospel, then that which we have preached, let him be
Anathema. Tremenda districtio, a dreadful sentence (says he) yet parum est,
this is but little in respect of that which follows, Though an Angel from
Heaven should Preach any other Gospel unto you, let him be accursed. Audite
populi, tribus, linguae, viri, mulieres, pueri, senes, tota gens Christianorum
Sancta ( as Damas. Orat. 2. de imagine.) give ear, O ye people, tribes and
tongues, men, women, children, all the holy company that is called Christians
in all the world, Licet Angelus, licet Rex Evangelizet vobis praeter id quod
accepi^^is, aures occludite. Though a King or Angel Preach any other Gospel to
you, then that ye have received, you are to stop your ears, and be as deaf unto
his Doctrine.

But here you must take heed of wresting, or misunderstanding the Apostles
(...) ( praeter id, or praeterquam quod, then that which we have preached) for,
this does not confine the dispensers of the word, to a strict observation of
those expressions and syllables only in their Administration, which the
Apostles used: they may (notwithstanding this commination) use expressions of
their own, (or borrow them from other professions) in explicating,
illustrating, or confirming the Truths of the Scripture. But the Apostles
[(...)] is either to be interpreted contra (contrary to) as it is frequently
used. (...) (in Aristot.) praeter, i. e. contra naturam and (...) praeter, i.e.
contra legem (beside, that is, contrary to nature. And beside the Law, that is
contrary to it. Thus the preposition praeter is used likewise by Terence (in
Andria) praeter civium morem atque legem, beside, (that is contrary to) the Law
and Custom of Citizens. So St. August. explicates this Text. Non ait plusquam
accepistis, sed praeterquam quod accepistis ( Tract. 99. in Joan. he says not
more than you received, but other then, or beside that which you have received:
for (says the Father) had he said, more then you received, he had prejudiced
himself, who desired earnestly to see the faces of his Thessalonians, That he
might perfect that, which was lacking in their faith, 1 These. 3.10.

Or (...) (other then that which you have received) quicquid Evangelio quasi ad
salutem necessarium additur (Parae.) whatsoever is added to the Gospel, as
necessary to salvation. I said therefore we are to receive our direction from
the Lips of God only in things Essential and Fundamental.

A fundamental (in general) is that upon which other things are built.
Fundamentalls in Religion, are those primitive truths, without the knowledge of
which we can neither believe aright, nor yield that obedience which we owe to
God. In these (I say) we are to dedepend upon God only for direction, to hear
no voice but his, for (as they observe in Architecture) the yielding of a stone
in the lower part of a Fabric, but an hairs breadth, will make a cleft of more
then half a foot aloft. So important are fundamental errors.

A small error in the beginning, and foundation of all things, proves in the
procedure, and end of them a great mischief. And therefore God appointed the
Foundation of the Tabernacle to be of massy pieces of silver; intimating
thereby the solidity and purity of the Truth, whereupon the Church is founded:
And a Rabby of our own observes, that every man in Israel, from twenty years
old and upward, was to give half a shekel toward these foundation-pieces;
whereas to other things they were not bound to a set sum, but every man to
give as his heart moved him, which might teach them, that to the Fundamentalls
of Religion they were all bound, but in other things, each one according to the
gift given him; gold, or silver, or purple, or scarlet, or fine linen, or
goats hair, ( Lightfoot on Exodus 30.) So that thus you see in things
fundamental and essential, we are to receive directions from the great Master
of the house, God only. But

In things circumstantial (even in Religion, and the Worship of God) it is the
masters pleasure, that we should receive directions in them, from his stewards.

The High Steward in this house (under God) is the King (or Higher Powers)
entrusted by God with a legislative, and coercive (or constraining) power.

By the Higher Powers I intend the person, not the office. And that by no less
authority then St. Paul's, who calls ((...)) the Higher Powers, Romans 13.1. at
the 3d. verse ((...)) Rulers.

Now this higher, (or highest Power) is a single person, or company of men,
entrusted with Sovereign Power over the people, he, (or they) being subject
only to the Empire or power of God himself. I say a single person, or company
of men: For though that which commands in chief, or in whom the highest Power
is invested, must necessarily be one: yet it is not of necessity, that it be
one in or by nature, but it suffices, if it be one by institution, so that the
highest Power, is not appropriated to Kings, or absolute Monarchs only; but in
a rightly constituted Aristocracy or Commonwealth, the Optimates, Senate,
Estates, (or by what other Title they are Dignified) are the highest Power: And
they, or He, (the King) is only subject to the Empire of God himself. For, he
is not, cannot (in any propriety of speech) be called the highest Power, but
because there is not among men, any higher Power. Super Imperatorem (says
Optatus contra Parmenianum l. 3.) Non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit
Imperatorem. There is none superior to the Emperor, but God only who made the
Emperor. And so Tertullian (ad Scap.) Colimus Imperatorem sic, quomodo and
nobis licet, and ipsi e^ pedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo
minorem. We so reverence the Emperor, as it is meet for him, and lawful for
us, as a man second unto God, and inferior to God only. You may perceive by
this what I mean by the Higher Power; but since the good providence of God has
cast; us under (the best of Governments) Monarchy, I shall speak in the ensuing
discourse concerning the single person, the King only. And

1. He is entrusted by God, with Authority and Power, not only in Civil
matters, and affairs of State; but in Ecclesiastical matters, the Affairs of
Religion in the Church. There are 3. Arguments that evince this.

1. St. Paul tells you, Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God to thee for good.
((...)) indefinitely, universally. And explicating himself afterward more
distinctly, he tells us that Kings (and persons in eminent, or the highest
place (...)) were instituted and appointed of God to this end and purpose, that
we should lead a quiet and peaceable life under them, not only in all honesty,
but in all piety, 1 Timothy 2.2. The happiness of a City, Country, or Kingdom,
consists in this, ut Dei sit amans, and amata Deo, That it love, and be beloved
of God. Vt illum sibi Regem, se illius populum agnoscat. (August. de Civit. Dei
l. 5. c. 14.) That it be in subjection to God, whom it has over it for its
King. And the Father-pronounceth Kings happy, Si suam potestatem ad Dei cultum
maxim dilatandum, Majestati ejus famulam faciant. If by promoting his worship
as far as they can, they subject their power to the Majesty of God.

Thus the Emperors Theodosius and Honorius (Epist. ad Marcellinum) tell him,
that they designed not any thing in all their Labor of War, and Counsels of
Peace, Nisi ut verum Dei cultum, orbis nostri plebs devota custodiat; That the
people devoted to their service, might follow the right worship of God.

Theodosius likewise (in Ep. ad Cyrillum) Caesarei est muneris, ut non solum
pacifice, sed pie etiam subditi vivant, The Emperor must take care that his
Subjects live under him, not only peaceably, but piously. Thus Isidor Pelusiota
propounds the same end to the Prince as to the Priest. (...). The Salvation of
their Subjects; to which that of Ammianus Marcellinus agrees fully, Nihil aliud
est imperium (ut sapientes definiunt) nisi cura salutis alienae. ( l. 39.)
Empire is nothing else (in the judgment of wise men) but the care of the
Welfare and Salvation of others. Since then this is the end which Kings are to
propound unto themselves, that their Subjects may live under them, not only
honestly, but godly; it necessarily follows, that they must be entrusted with
Authority and Power in Ecclesiastical matters. For, the end being admitted, we
must admit those things without which the end cannot be attained. And
accordingly we find God laying his command upon Kings in Scripture. When the
King sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, he shall write him a Copy of this
Law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests and the Levites, and it
shall be with him, and he shall read therein, all the days of his life, that
he may learn to fear the Lord his God, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. and Psalm. 2.10, 11. Be
wise now therefore Oye Kings; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling If you will admit St. Augustine to comment upon this Text, he will
tell you how Kings, as Kings, serve God. Si in suo regno bona jubeant, mala
prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae
pertinent ad divinam religionem. (contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 51.) when they
command those things to be done which are good, and prohibit evil actions, not
only in things appertaining to humane society, but in things appertaining to
Religion. And yet more fully and expressly, Quomodo ergo Reges Domino serviunt
in timore, nisi ea quae contra jussa Domini fiunt, religiosa severitate
prohibendo atque pleciendo? (Ep. ad Bonifac.) How do Kings serve the Lord in
fear, but by a severe prohibition, and punishment of those things which are
contrary to the Command of God? Aliter enim servit, qua homo est, aliter, qua
Rexest, etc. For he serves the Lord after a different manner as he is a King,
from that in which he serves him as a Man. He serves him as a Man by living
faithfully, as a King by enacting Good and Wholesome Laws, for the promoting of
Virtue and Piety, and punishment of Vice. So King Hezekias served the Lord, by
destroying the Idol-Temples and Groves. So Josias served him likewise. So the
King of Nineveh served him, in proclaming a Fast to be universally observed for
appeasing the divine displeasure. Kings serve God as Kings, when they do that
in order to the service of God, which unless they were Kings they could not do.
And herein is that promise of God to his Church; That Kings should be her
Nursing Fathers, and their Queens her Nursing Mothers, made good, Isa. 49.23.

2dly. That Kings are entrusted with the affairs of Religion appears further,
because St. Paul tells us, the King is the Minister of God, to execute wrath
upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4. as the good in the former Argument; So the
evil in this, being indefinitely expressed, and having the force of an
universal, it must comprehend all evil, even in Ecclesiastical, as well as
Civil things. Thus the wisest of Kings (Solomon) tells us, A King that sits
on the Throne of Judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes, Prove. 20.8.
Thus the people of Israel, engage themselves to Joshua (the chief Magistrate)
according as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto
thee. Josh. 1.17. Thus the Fathers argue from those words of St. Paul, Romans
13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher Powers. If every soul, then
Ecclesiastical persons as well as others. (...) (Theophil.) though he be a
Priest, or an Apostle; and so St. Chrysostom. though an Evangelist, though an
Apostle, though a Prophet, every one ought to be subject. And Bernard (treading
in their steps) si omnis, and vestra, quis vos excipit ab universitate? Ep. ad
Archiepisc.) if every soul ought to be subject, then yours; for who has
excepted you from the universal, every soul?

Neither will Reason admit that any person should be exempted. For, he who
would be exempted, would either not be subject to any humane power at all, or
to some other power besides the Supreme. He who would not be subject to any,
does thereby unavoidably introduce a manifest confusion, of which God is not
the Author, 1 Cor. 14.33.

He who would be subject to some other power besides the Supreme, does as
necessarily introduce two Superior powers, which is a thing unnatural, and
inconsistent. Ea enim est summi conditio, ut nihil aliud adaequet, nedum
superet (Tertul.) Such is the condition of the Supreme power, that it cannot
admit a Superior or Equal. By this Argument the primitive Fathers overthrew
the Gentiles Polytheisme: Because, That which is highest can be but one.

And as in man, there is one will, which commands the motions, and actions of
every member; so in the Church, there can be but one which must command. Which
will be made evident by reflecting upon the effects of Empire or Government
which are obligation to duty, and compulsion to perform. If therefore there
should be more Superior powers then one, their commands might be contrary one
to another; and so the subject lest without a possibility of yielding obedience
to the one, without incurring the displeasure of the other.

And if any man shall say that the actions being diverse (namely Civil,
Military, and Ecclesiastical) the chief power may be divided also into sundry
persons. It would follow from hence, that the same person, at the same time,
might be commanded by one to go unto the Market, by another to the Camp, by a
third to Church; and so put under an impossibility of obeying either. Whence
all Nations have (by the light of nature) rejected plurality in Government.
(...) (Homer) and omnis potestas impatiens consortis. The Throne can no more
brook a Rival then the marriage Bed. This our Lord Christ has put beyond
dispute, when he tells us, No man can serve two Masters, Mat 6.24.

3dly. Not to multiply Arguments in proof of that, which would stand in need of
little, had not that factious proud Spirit which possessed Donatus, entered into
some Men, occasioning them to say (as he did in Optatus l. 3.) Quid Imperatori
cum ecclesia? What has the King to do with the Church.

The Third (and last) Argument shall be drawn from the joint Suffrage and
Testimony of all Nations, not only Christian, but Heathen, bearing witness to
the Power and Authority of Kings in Ecclesiastical affairs; (whereby it
appears to be no other then the dictate of Right Reason, which is common to
the humane intellectual Nature. Aristotle (Polit. 7.8.) says, (...), The care
of Princes ought to be first of all for the Things of Religion.

The Twelve Tables (the Fountain of the Roman Law) contain in them many Things
concerning Religion.

Jus triplex, tabulae quod ter sanxere quadratae,
Sacrum, privatum, and populi commune quod usquam est.
(Anson.) You have in these a taste of the Heathens Judgment concerning this.
(And one need not drink up the Sea to know whether it be Salt, or not.)

For the Ancient Primitive Christians, that of Socrates (the Historian) may
stand for many. Ex quo Imperatores facti sunt Christiani, res Ecclesiae ab.
ipsis dependisse. The affairs of Religion depended upon the Emperors, ever
since they became Christian. Which Optatus confirms, when he says, Non enim
respublica est in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in republica, i. e. in Romano Imperio.
(l. 3.) For the Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the Church in the
Commonwealth, that is, in the Roman Empire. Constantine (in an ancient
inscription) is styled, Religionis and Fidei Auctor. The Increaser of Faith and
Religion. And Basilius the Emperor speaking of the Church as a Ship, Ejus sibi
gvbernacula ait a Deo concredita. Says that God has committed the Sterage (or
Government) of it, to him.

And there is an Ancient Epistle of Elutherius Bishop of Rome, in which he
styles the King of England, (vicarium Dei in regno suo, agens de negotio
Religionis.) Gods vicar for the management of the business of Religion in his
Kingdom, and the first Moguntine Council, calls Charles the Great (Vere
Religionis Rectorem) the Rector of the True Religion; and as they of old, so
the Reformed Churches of late, were of the same persuasion in this particular.
As it appears by their respective confessions.

( Magistratum est, non modo de civili politia esse sollicitos, verum etiam
dare operam, ut Sacrum Ministerium conservetur, Christique Regnum propagetur;
denique horum est efficere, ut Sacrum Evangelii verbum undique praedicetur: ut
singuli purae Deum colere, and venerari ex praescripto verbi ipsius libere
possint. Belgica.) It is the Magistrates Duty, not only to be careful for the
Civil Polity, but to endeavor likewise that the Sacred Ministry be Preserved,
and the Kingdom of Christ Propagated. It is his duty (finally) to see that the
Holy Gospel be every where Preached, and that all persons may purely and freely
worship, and serve God, according to his word. And so the latter Helvetian
Confession. (Teneat ipse Magistratus in manibus verbum Dei, and ne huic
contrarium doceatur procuret, bonis legibus ad verbum Dei compositis, moderetur
populum sibi a Deo concreditum.) Let the Magistrate take into his hands the
World of God, and take care nothing be taught contrary to it: And let him
Govern the people committed to him of God, by good and wholesome Laws,
according to the word of God.

And the Confession of Basil (waving some others) Quilibet Christianus
Magistratus, omnes vires eo diriget, ut apud fidei suae commissos, nomen Dei
sanctificetur, regnum ipsius propagetur, ipsiusque voluntati cum seria
extirpatione scelerum vivatur. Hoc officium gentili Magisiratui injunctum fuit,
quanto magis Christiano Magistratui commendatum esse debeat, ut vero Dei
vicario?) It ought to be the Serious Endeavor of every Christian Magistrate,
that the name of God be Hallowed, and his Kingdom Propogated among those who
are committed to his Trust: and that they live, denying all ungodliness
according to his Will. This was a Duty incumbent on the Heathen Magistrate; how
much more ought it to be commended to the Christian Magistrate, as the True
Vicar of Christ?

Or Church of England deems those worthy of Excommunication, who deny unto our
Kings, the same Power and Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, that the Pious
Kings of the Hebrews Exercised in the Church of the Jews, (Canon the 2d.)

And here we must necessarily enquire how far the Authority of the King Extends
in matters of Religion: whether we are to obey him in every thing he commands
without exception, or but in some things only.

We do not believe the Authority of the King Extends so far, as Bellarmine
stretches the Popes, when he says, Si papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes
malas. (de Romans pont. l. 4. c. 5.) If the Pope should err in commanding Vice,
and forbidding Virtue, the Church is obliged to believe, that Vice is good, and
Virtue is evil.

We extend not the power of the King, as certain Religious Persons, (who left
it as a Rule to their confidents at Padova, 1606.) did the Popes authority. Si
quod occulis nostris album apparet, nigrum ille esse definierit, debemus itidem
quod nigrum sit pronuntiare. If that which in our eye is white be defined by
the Pope to be black, we ought also to say that it is black. But this we say,
our obedience is required to all his commands that are not repugnant to the law
of nature, or contrary to the Express Word of God. If he command any thing
forbidden by the Law of Nature, or by any Positive Law of God (that is now
obliging to Christians) or if he forbid any thing Commanded of God, we are not
to yield obedience. For as in nature, inferior causes depending in point of
activity upon Superior, have no power of acting contrary to the efficacy of
the Superior: So in morality, as St. August. Si aliud Imperator, aliud jubeat
Deus, quid judicatur? major pote^tas Deus, da veniam O Imperator. ( de verb.
Dom: Sec: Mat: Sermon: 6:) Where the Emperors, and Gods Commands are one contrary
to the other, what Judgment shall I make? the power of God is Supreme, the
Emperor therefore must be supplicated to pardon me.

If the King Command any thing that God forbids, or forbid any thing that God
Commands, in both these cases, we must then fortify our selves with the saying
of St: Peter, and the other Apostles, We ought to obey God rather then men,
Acts 5: 29: And God having by nature prohibited the killing of an Innocent
person, the Hebrew Midwives are commended for not obeying the Kings
commandment concerning the killing of the male children: But the Midwives
feared God (says the Text) and did not as the King of Egypt commanded them,
Exodus: 1: 17.

Whatever a commandment of God makes necessary, no humane authority can render
not necessary or obliging, and therefore it is usually said that the Gospel,
Ministry, and Sacraments, are not subject to any humane Authority; that is, in
point of changing or altering that in them, which is of Divine Institution.
For, what God has Determined Affirmatively, or Negatively, man cannot
determine the contrary. But in things not determined by God, as Time, Place,
and manner of performing actions commanded by God, the King by his Authority
may determine these. Though the King cannot Prohibit an Holy, Harmless,
rightly constituted Ministry, the Preaching of the Word, or Administering the
Sacrament, according to the form of Divine Institution: yet he may require them
to preach at such times, and in such places only; he may prescribe them the
habit in which they shall Officiate, by Virtue of that Apostolical Precept:
Let all things be done Decently, and in Order, 1 Cor. 14. ult. This Rule is so
equitable, that all men will yield their assent, That all things in the Worship
of God ought to be done Decently, and in Order. But what is Decent, and
Orderly, is not so soon agreed. For that (says one) which you call Decent, is,
(in my Opinion) the most unseemly thing in the world. And that is most
disorderly (in my Judgment) which you account Regularly performed, and in
Order. There must therefore be some proper Judge agreed upon to Determine what
is Decent, and in Order: Do you then Judge in your selves, (laying only your
Prejudice and Passion aside) whether a Noble Man, or Master of a Great Family,
leaving this general Rule for the Government of his house, that all things in
it be done Decently and in Order, does he not intend and expect that his
Steward should Determine what is so? For either the Steward, or the rest of the
Servants must determine it. If the Servants, confusion and ataxy, instead of
Decency and Order, must inavoidable flow in upon them. For one will say this is
decent, and another the contrary is decent. It is more decent says one to put
off our shoes then our hats, in Respect and Reverence to our Lord, it is more
orderly to sit then to stand in his presence. This must necessarily beget
Parties and Sidings, that Animosity, Strife, and Contention, and by consequence
the ruin of the Family. For why (will one servant in the Family, or one party,
say) should not I, or we, judge of decency as well as you, or your party? So
that you cannot but see that there is a necessity that the Steward should
Determine. And is it not thus in the Spiritual house? If every Congregation, or
Pastor, be left free to judge of what is Decent and in Order, things as
unreasonable as the putting off the shoes, and sitting in the Masters presence
will be practiced by the most: Because the most are not the wisest. And they
affect generally like Cattle fallen into a River, to Swim against the Stream.

In things therefore of this nature (namely such as are not determined by the
great Master, God) you owe obedience to the Stewards determination, especially
since whatsoever is not forbidden by God, has in that very respect, the force
of a permission at least. Because, Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. Now there is no Law against such or such indifferent
things and therefore he who conforms, sins not. But there is a Law which
requires Every Soul to be subject to the Higher Powers, Romans 13.1. He therefore
that conforms not, sins. You ought therefore to be subject to the Higher Power
in matters of Religion for Conscience Sake. But if any man will not be subject
for Conscience Sake, he must be subject upon another account, for God has
entrusted the Supreme Magistrate with a Coercive Power. Which is the 2d. thing
propounded to be made good.

In pursuance of this 2. thing,

1. There ought to be some Coercive Power in Ecclesiastical Things, or Matters
of Religion. For, without this every man would be left free, to speak or do
what him lift. To introduce any false or blasphemous Opinion, to disturb the
Peace of the Church, by enormous Practices. May not one deny the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures? Another the Divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ? A third reject, despise and trample under foot the Priestly Office, and
all the Ordinances of the Gospel? And (for practice) might not men (with the
evil Servant in the Gospel) eat and drink with the drunken, and smite their
fellow Servants with the Fist of Violence? Oppressing and Persecuting all that
are not of their Opinion, though their Opinion be not at any agreement, or
consistency with the truth. If there be not a Coercive Power stated somewhere,
who or what shall hinder these, and innumerable other inconveniences and
mischiefs?

Every Fanatic Spirit, if there were no coercive power, might take license by
reviving old Heresies, or broaching worse new invented Opinions, to ruffle the
Church, and reduce it to an Heap or Chaos of Confusion. Without a coercive
power somewhere stated, all Reins of Government, must necessarily be let loose,
and an effectual door set open for Atheism, Heresy, Sedition and Blasphemy to
enter in. But this is a thing so contrary, not only to the peace, but even to
the essence of all societies, that none but the absolute Sons of Belial, ( i.
e. without a Yoke) can plead for it. I pass therefore from that (as a thing
assented unto by all that pretend to Reason,) That there must be a Coercive
Power? and come unto the 2d. thing the subject of this Power, or Person in whom
it is. And that is the King.

2. Him has God entrusted with coercive Power in Matters of Religion.

Spiritual Power, (or Power in the Church) is divided generally into Ordinis,
and Jurisdictionis. That of Order is referred to the preaching or the Word,
Administration of Sacraments, Absolution, Confirmation, and all such Actions,
as a person regularly ordained performs by Virtue of his Orders.

That of Jurisdiction is double, Internal, and External.

1. Internal. Where the Spiritual guides, they who have the conduct of the
Souls of men, by Instruction, Persuasion, Ghostly Council, and such like; so
convince the inward Consciences of Men, that they become wholly obedient to
their directions. As Saint Peter by his Sermon wrought upon the Consciences of
those Jews, Who were pricked in their Heart, and said, Men, and Brethren what
shall we do? Acts 2.37.

2. External. Where the Person in whom the Power is ( in foro exteriori, as
they speak) compells the Christians obedience. The King is not entrusted with
the first and 2d. of these. He has no Power of Order, nor Jurisdiction over
the Inner Man, but in things that are for the outward Polity of the Church (as
that God may be truly served, such as transgress the received lawful
constitutions of the Church punished) with this Power the King is entrusted.

Again, the Actions of Men, are either Internal or External.

Internal Actions abstractedly, and simply considereed in themselves, do not
fall under any humane Authority or Power whatsoever. Errat si quis putet
servitutem in totum hominem descendere; pars enim melior excepta est. Corpora
obnoxia sunt, and adscripta Dominis, men's sui juris est. (Sen. de Benef. l. 3.)
It is an Error in any man to think that Servitude descends upon the whole man,
for the better part, is always excepted: Our bodies indeed are Obnoxnious to
Servitude, and the pleasure of those who are Lords over us, but our minds are
free, and at their own dispose.

And it is a known saying in the Law, Cogitationis paenam nemo patitur: No man
suffers any thing for his bare thoughts. For, All Empire (or Power) necessarily
supposes such matter, as is capable of coming under the knowledge of him that
commands, but the internal Actions of Men Simply and Abstractedly considered,
do not come under the knowledge of any Humane Power, and therefore they fall
not under their Authority. No power can impose upon any person that he shall
think thus, and not otherwise, concerning any Article of Faith, because he
cannot know whether a man thinks so or otherwise. As Lactantius (l. 5. c. 13.)
Quis mihi imponat necessitatem vel credendi quod nolim, vel quod velim non
credendi? Who can compel me to believe what I will not, or not to believe what
I list? For, Religio imperari non potest. Religion cannot be compelled (as
Cassidor. l. 3. Ep. 27.) and Fides suadenda, non imperanda el. (Bern. Sermon. 66.
in Cant.) you may allure, you cannot compel any man to believe.

But, besides these Internal, there are External actions, the words, and works
of men: and these fall under Humane Authority, and Power; thus the Emperors,
Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, speak concerning a man, that is an
Heretic, Sibi tantummodo nocitura sentiat, aeliis obfutura non pandat. If he
will think evil things, he shall surmise them to himself only: he shall not
publish them to the hurt of others And it was with respect to this, that
Constantine styled himself ((...)) a Bishop in those things, that are without.
Though therefore the Prince cannot compel men to believe this, or that, yet he
may compel them, not to make Profession of any other Faith, then that which he
allows, or approves. Thus the King of Nineveh enjoined his Subjects Sackcloth,
Fasting, Prayer, and turning from the Violence in their hands ( Jonah 3.8.) and
indeed there is nothing, in which the Supreme power consists more, then in
determining the Public Exercise of Religion. All, that discourse of Politics,
make this Praecipuum inter Majestatis jura, a Principal Jewel of the Crown: to
this every man's Reason subscribes. For, if it be demanded, why in the land of
our Nativity (this Kingdom) the Roman Religion flourished in the days of Queen
Mary, and the Evangelical (or Reformed) in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth? The
Proximate cause of it must be acknowledged the will, and pleasure of the
respective Queens. Or, if it be asked, why one way of Worship is used by the
French, and Spaniard, and another by the Dane, and Swed? you cannot answer any
thing, but the will of those, that Rule over them.

If it be objected against this, that such a Power in the Prince would render
the State of Religion unstable, and mutable: Religion being subject to be
changed, as often as the Prince should change his mind. It must be acknowleged
true: but,

First, The Danger is as great in other things, and respects; the Work always
answering the Artificer: and qualis Rex, talis lex; such as the King is, such
are his Laws. But no person may have his right denied him, for fear least he
should abuse it: for no man whatsoever should (upon this account) have his
right in any thing; because it is possible for him to abuse it.

Secondly, Supposing the right possible to be transferred from the Supreme
Magistrate, to some other, the danger and inconvenience would be no less. For,
upon whomsoever it be transferred, they, who must Manage this Power, are men,
and so fallible, and subject to mutability. Our only hope, and comfort in this
case, is in the Divine Providence: the minds of all men being in the power of
God to confirm them in the truth, or to suffer them to turn from the truth to a
ly; but the hearts of Kings more especially, according to that of Solomon, The
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of water ( Prove. 21.1.)
God can, and does, carry on his own work, both by good, and evil Kings, well
knowing, that a Tempest is sometimes more necessary, and profitable for his
Church, then a Calm. If he, that rules, be a Pious Prince, conversant in the
Scripture, frequent in Prayer, alover of the Church, one, that enclines his ear
to the Counsels of those, who are truly Pious, and Learned, the Truth prospers
and prevails mightily under Him; but, if He be a Person of a perverse spirit,
and corrupt judgment, He proves an heavy scourge to those, that are in
subjection under Him; Et legibus malis probantur boni, and legibus bonis
emendantur mali, ( August. advers. Crescentium, l. 3. c. 51.) Evil Laws are for
the probation of Good men, as good Laws for the emendation of Evil men. The
Jewish Church saw frequent mutations in their Worship: Hezekiah abolished the
Idol-Worship of hs Father Ahaz, his Grandchild Manasseh restored it again,
and Josiah, his Grand-childs, abolished in a second time: and yet the Right of
their Kings was never disputed. For, It was never lawful for the People to
assume unto themselves the Public Exercise of Religion by force: but, if they
cannot conscionably conform to it, they may Pray, and Weep, and Fly: other
weapons Christianity allows them not. Thus the Prophet Elijah fled from Ahab,
and thus our Lord Christ indulgeth (if he does not Counsel) his Apostles,
saying, When they persecute you in this City, flee ye into another, Matt.
10.23. Thus St. Cyprian, and Athanasius, delivered themselves by flight, in the
time of Persecution; and the Christians, who lived under the rage and fury of
Julian, knew nothing but the water, that distilled from their own eyes, to
quench the fire of that Persecution. Aliud contra Persecutorem non erat
remedium: ultra nefas procedere. ( Nazian. Orat. in Julianum.) They knew no
other remedy against their persecutors: to proceed any further was villainy.
Coactus, repugnare non novi, d^lere potero, flere potero, gemere potero; aliter
nec debeo, nec possum resistere. (Ambr.) I know not how to resist, being
constrained: I can weep, and grieve, and mourn; otherwise I neither can, nor
ought to resist. And this they did, not (as some have vainly dreamed) because
they were destitute of Power to make resistance: For, (as Tertullian, in his
Apology, says of them) Vrbes, Insulas, etc. Palatium, Senatum, Forum
impleverant; the Cities, Islands, Castles, Garrisons, Judgment-Seats, Palace,
and Senate were full of them, and yet (as he) Nulli Albiniani, nulli Nigriani,
nulli Cassiani, there were no Traitors, or Rebels, much less Kingkillers among
them.

Eusebius Pius (the Bishop of Samosatia) being banished by the command of
Valens the Emperor, the people would have held him in his Episcopal See by
force: but he, having learned the Apostle's lesson, Romans 13.1. taught them
also, what Reverence, and Respect, was due to the Emperor's commands; and
telling them, that he would not (if he could) secure himself by a multitude,
compassing him about (Nec ego me vallabo, inquit, circumfusione populorum) he
thereby suppressed an imminent sedition. These (and many more Examples at hand)
do abundantly evidence what deep impression the words of Christ to Peter made
upon the spirits of Christians heretofore. The words of Christ are, Put up
again thy sword into its place: for all they, that take the sword, shall perish
with the sword; Matt. 26.52. Arripit autem, qui non a Deo accipit: dedit autem
Deus soli summae potestati, aliis, non nisi per illam. (Grot.) He takes the
sword, (namely with an hand of violence) who does not receive it from God: for
God has given it only to the Supreme Power, and to others by him. Thus then
you see the determining of the Public exercise of Religion is invested in the
Supreme Power. And it is no less the Prince's Duty, to abolish, or punish all
false Worship, or Religion. Thus Nebuchadnezzar (in Babylon) being convinced of
the Divinity of the God of Israel, made a capital Law against the blasphemers
of his Name. Therefore I make a Decree, that every People, Nation, and
Language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, etc. shall
be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill. ( Dan. 3.29.)
Darius (of the Medes, and Persians) Enacted a Royal Law to the same import. I
make a Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kimgdom, men tremble, and fear,
before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God. ( Dan. 6.26.) In Athens
they had a Law against ((...)) Irreligion: upon which three famous Philosophers
( Socrates, Theodorus, and Protagoras) suffered. Socrates, (as Laertius reports
in his Life) was accused (...)) of Irreligion, and the Action Commenced against
him in these words, ((...).) Socrates is a transgressor, in not esteeming those
for Gods, whom the City esteems such; but brings in other new Gods of his own.
And all this was done only by virtue of the Supreme Power residing in them.
For, though every Master of a Family be obliged to remove Idols, and every
thing of false Worship, out of his own Private Family: yet the King (or persons
delegated by him) may only do it in the Public.

There is a Text indeed in Deuteronomy, that seems to countenance private
persons, in destroying of Idols, and false Worship. Ye shall destroy their
Altars, and break down their Images, and cut down their Groves, and burn their
Graven Images with fire ( Deuteronomy. 7.5.) But, if St. August. may be admitted to
Comment upon the Text, he tells you, that they might not do it, without
Authority from the Higher Powers. Cumacceperitis potestatem, hoc facite: ubi
non est data nobis potestas, non facimus. ( Sermon. 6. de verb. Dom. sec. Mat.)
You may do this, when you have received Authority, but without Authority we do
it not. Hence Nicephorus reprehends, and condemns Abdas the Bishop, for
demolishing the Persians (...), the Temple, in which they Worshipped the Fire;
which proved a matter of much inconvenience, and trouble to the Christians. The
Pagan Temples, in the City of Rome, were not shut up by the Christians, till
Constantine made a Law against them. And the Elibertine Council ( An. 305.)
provides by a Canon (Si quis Idolum fregerit, and ibidem occisus fuerit, ne in
Martyrum numerum recipiatur) that, if any person be killed for breaking an Idol
in pieces, he shall not be enrolled among the Martyrs of the Church; because
(says the Council) (Neque in Evangelio scriptum sit, neque ab Apostolis factum
reperiatur) we have neither precept in Scripture, nor example of the Apostles
to countenance the Fact. And thus you see The Supreme Magistrate is entrusted
with a Coercive Power in matters of Religion.

The Reason why he is entrusted with this Power is, Because, without this, he
would bear the Sword in vain. The Apostle St. Paul tells us, that he bears
not the Sword in vain. ( Romans 13.4.) The Sword (says Theophylact) is the
Coercive Power, ((...)) and he bears it not in vain ((...)) but that he may
punish Evildoers.

It is a thing to be wished, to be begged of Heaven, with our most Fervent
Prayers, that all Christians might be like those in the Acts, of one Mind, and
of one Soul: that all, who confess God's Holy Name, should agree in the Truth
of his Holy Word (as our Church teaches us to Pray) but the peevishness of
some, the interest, and malice of others, renders this a thing scarcely to be
hoped for. Yet must not the Prince for all this abandon the care of Truth,
Unity, and Peace: neither of which could possibly be provided for by him,
without a Coercive Power. For, nothing has a greater influence upon the
External Happiness, and Peace of a Kingdom, then Religion. And that in a double
respect.

First, In respect of the Divine Providence, which has promised to reward
Piety, or Religion, not only with the great things of Eternity, but with the
good things of this present life. Godliness (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy ^.8.) is
profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come. And thus Livy; Omnia prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos,
adversa spernentibus: that is, All things succeed prosperously to those, that
Worship the Gods, but nothing well to those, that despise them. And Horace
ascribes all the miseries, and calamities, that befell Italy, to their neglect
of the Gods; Dii multa, neglecti, dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuosae.


And it is no wonder (says Vat. Max.) that the Gods watch over the Roman
Empire with a most indulgent care; seeing the Romans are so scrupulous, in
examining, and observing the smallest matters in Religion. (Quod tam scrupulosa
cura parvula quaeque momenta religionis examinare videretur.)

Secondly, In respect of the Nature, the Genuine, and proper Tendency of
Religion, which is to render men Peaceable, Obsequious, Lovers of their
Country, and Studious of the Common welfare. Now, where men are generally thus
spirited, that State, or Kingdom, must needs be flourishing, and happy. Thus
Plato makes Religion (Legum, and honestae vitae vinculum) the bond of Laws, and
all good life; and Cicero, (Humanae societatis fundamentum) the foundation of
all Humane Society. I shall add only to this, that such a Coercive Power is
necessary to restrain that curiosity, and itch of Novelty, that is in men.

All mutation in Religion (though but in the Rites, and Ceremonies of it) if it
be without the Authori^ty, or consent of the Prince, breeds an Earthquake in
the Bowels of the Commonwealth, and brings it many times into utmost danger.
Hence the great Council of Nice cried out so Passionately, (...) Let the old
Customs take place. But, without a coercive Power in the Prince, this cannot
be: for there is in every man a Natural affection of novelty. As they in
Ezekiel, who did set their posts by God's posts, and their thresholds by his
thresholds. ( Ezekiel. 43.8.) so men will be bringing a Basin, instead of the
Font; a new Directory, instead of the old Liturgy: unless their curiosity by
the Prince's Edicts be constrained. And thus the Commonwealth, or Kingdom,
will be cast into a quoti^dian Fever, or Palsy-fit. I conclude this with that
rational saying of Parisiensis; Licitum est principi, abusum gladii Spiritualis
repellere, eo modo quo potest, etiam per gladium materialem: aliter enim
gladium sine causa portat. ( De pot. Regis, and Papae, c. 21.) It is lawful
for the Prince to repel the abuse of the Spiritual Sword, in such a way as he
best can, yea by taking into his hand the material Sword: for otherwise he
should bear the Sword in vain.

But in what cases has the Prince a Coercive Power? and how far does it extend?

First, He has a coercive power, not only in the grand cases of Blasphemy,
and Heresy but in those lesser occasions of Error, and Schism: he is entrusted
with Power to quench the least spark, as well as the devouring flame, Arius in
Alexandria was but a little spark in the beginning, but, because the Christian
Emperor did not timely interpose his Authority for the quenching it, (Totum
orbem ejus flamma depopulata est) it became a flame, which consumed (almost)
the whole Christian World.

The Prince's Authority may (and ought to) be exercised, in restraining
dangerous Disputations concerning Religion. Sozomen ( l. 7. c. 12.) tells us,
that Constantine enacted a Law against Disputes of the Trinity: (Nemo
Clericorum de summa Trinitate disputet) And Marcianus prohibited all Disputes
(De fide Christiana) of the Christian Religion. Andronicus the Emperor, when
his Bishops were disputing curiously, and subtilely, of those words of Christ,
(Pater major me est) My Father is greater then I; threatened to cast them into
the River, (Ni tam periculosis sermonibus abstinerent) unless they did forbear
such dangerous Discourses. That of Sisinius to Theodosius being most true,
(Disputando de sacris accendi tantum contentiones) that Contentions only are
fostered by Disputations.

Secondly, To the second Question, How far the Coercive Power of the Prince
extends? It is acknowledged, that his Authority may extend to Imprisonment,
Confiscation of Goods, and Banishment of persons sinning against his Commands:
but, whether it may extend to Life, is not so manifest; because the Apostle
says only, Haereticum hominem devita ( Titus 3.10.) The Gloss upon Gratian
turns the Verb into a Substantive; de vita, and adds, supple, Toll.

There is not (as a learned Gentleman of our Church, in His Historical
Vindication, has observed) any example in History, of prosecuting an Heretic
further, then to avoid him; till after God, having given peace to his people,
under Christian Emperors; they finding, that, if the Church were in trouble,
the State was seldom otherwise, provided by Laws to punish Heretics. The
Council of Nice therefore having, in the year 325, censured the opinion of
Arius for Heretical, the Emperor (who had formerly granted certain
considerable Privileges to Christians) declared in the year following (
Haereticos, atque Schismaticos, h^ privilegiis alienos) that no Heretic, or
Sch^^smatick, should have any part in those Privileges, but they rarely
proceeded to blood unless (perhaps) against some seditious Preacher. And the
Holy men of those times used earnest persuasions, to deterr men, inclining to
that severity, from it; as not esteeming it to agree with that entire Charity,
that should be in Christians. St. August. professes, he had rather be himself
slain by them, then, by detecting the Donatists, be any cause they should
undergo the punishment of death. ( Ep. 127) This was the Temper of the
Christians, at least 800. years after Christ. But about the year 1000, the
Christian World began to punish Miscreants (as branches not bearing fruit in
Christ) by casting them into the fire. But the Devout men of those Times did
not approve of this rigor. St. Bernard, explaining those words of Solomon,
Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines ( Cant. 2.15.) If
(says he) according to the Allegory, by the Vines we understand the Churches,
and by the Foxes Heresies, or rather Heretics; the meaning is plain, that
Heretics be rather taken, then driven away (Capientur, dico, non armis, sed
agrumentis) taken, I say, not by Arms, but Arguments, whereby their Errors may
be refuted, and they themselves reconciled (if possible) to the Catholic
Church. And that the Holy Ghost intends this, is evident (says he) because he
does not say simply, Take the Foxes (sed capite nobis) take us the Foxes: sibi
ergo, and sponsae suae, id est Catholicae, jubet acquiri has vulpes, cum ait
capite eas nobis ( In Cantic. Sermon. 64.) He commands therefore, that they be
taken for himself, and his Spouse, that is the Catholic Church, when he says,
Take us the Foxes, Thus the holy men, in that Age, in which they first stopped
men's mouths, not with Arguments, but Arms, judged of it. And indeed we have not
many Examples of persons, suffering merely for Conscience, till after the year
1216. in which Pope Innocent the Third laid the foundation of that new Court,
called since the Inquisition; who appointed such, as should be convicted of
Heresy (ut vivi in conspectu hominum comburentur) to be committed alive to the
flames of fire.

And though such proceedings are not at any good agreement with those rules,
and examples, which Christ has left us in holy Scripture: yet the practice
has been long since taken up in this Kingdom, and is in force at this day by
the Laws.

Anno 1166. about thirty Dutch came hither, who detested Baptism, the
Eucharist, and other parts of Religion: and being by Scripture convicted in an
Episcopal Council (called by the King at Oxford) they were condemned to be
Whipped, and burnt in the face, and a command given, that none should either
receive, or relieve them, so that they miserably Perished.

By the Common Law (that is, the Custom of the Realm) of England, Heretics are
to be Punished by Consuming them with Fire: and (accordingly) there is a Writ
De Haeretico comburendo.

An Apostate Deacon, in a Council held at Oxford (by Stephen Langton) was first
degraded, and then (by Lay-hands) committed to the Fire. ( Bracto, l. 3. de
Corona, c. 9)

In Edward the Third's days (about the Year 1347.) two Franciscans were Burnt,
quod de Religione male sentirent: because they thought amiss of Religion. (
Pol. Virg. Hist. Ang. l. 19.)

And in the year 1583. Copin and Thacker were hanged (at Saint Edmonds-Bury)
for publishing Brown's Book (Cambd.) which (says Stow, p. 1174) was written
against the Common Prayer Book. (A Fair warning!) And thus you see, if men will
not be Subject to the Higher Powers, in matters of Religion for Conscience
sake, they must be subject because of wrath: for the Prince is entrusted with a
Coercive Power, and bears not the Sword in vain.

But because it is a thing Morally impossible, for one man (as the King) to
Govern the whole Church in his Kingdom, Personally, by himself: He may
substitute, or delegate others under him, to manage all his Power (which is
communicable) in the Government of the Church. I say [communicable] because
there are some things inseparable from the Supreme Power, as to Correct, Alter,
Ratify, Repeal, or Make Null Canons, and Constitutions, made by any persons
under him; to reverse, or mitigate a Sentence injustly, or unduly passed; the
right of Appeals; of nominating Bishops to their respective Sees; of
translating, or deposing them, where he sees cause. These, and such like, are
incommunicable unto any, inseparable from his Crown. But in all other things,
that are not of this nature, he may give Power to others to Govern the Church,
to whom all persons ow their obedience, by virtue of his Delegation, as much as
to the King himself; because it is the King, that requires, or forbids any
thing by them. Thus St. Peter requires Christians to pay their obedience unto
Governors sent by him, as well as to the King (the Supreme Power) Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the
King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them, that are sent by him, for
the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them, that do well. (1 Pet.
2.13, 14.)

The Governors sent by the King in Ecclesiastical Affairs are the Reverend
Bishops. I take the word Bishop, not in the Common and General notion; as every
Pastor, or Presbyter, is a Bishop: as he does ((...)) oversee the particular
Flock, committed to his charge. Thus the Municipal Aediles, among the Romans,
were styled Bishops: and Cicero (Campanae orae Episcopum se dicit constitutum)
was Bishop of the Campanian Territory. But, (in a more proper, and peculiar
sense) for persons, who have not only the oversight of the Flock, but even of
the Pastors themselves, a distinct Function, and Dignity from Presbyters, as
the Fathers, and Councels generally understand the word Bishop. Now concerning
these I affirm,

First, Episcopacy (that is the Prelacy, or Pre-eminence of one Pastor among
the rest) is not repugnant to the Scriptures. If I evince this, that saying of
Christ, He, that is not against us, is on our part (Mark 9.40.) will contribute
not a little to the confirmation of this Order. And, if any man shall say, that
this Order is repugnant to the Scripture (that is, if he presume to condemn the
whole Christian Church, for more then 1000 years after Christ, of impiety, or
folly) he must necessarily take upon him the heavy (that I say not,
intolerable) burden of making it good.

There is not (that I am conscious of) one Text of Scripture, that affords any
countenance to that opinion, unless that in St. Matthew; Jesus called them (the
ten Apostles) unto him, and said, Ye know, that the Princes of the Gentiles
exercise Dominion over them, and they, that are Great, exercise Authority upon
them: But it shall not be so among you: (Mat. 20.25, 26.) And somewhat more to
their purpose) in the tenth of St. Mark, 44. Whosoever of you will be chiefest,
shall be the servant of all. To these Texts I Answer, 1. The Anabaptists (of
old) and other Fanatic spirits, supposing the Antithesis here to be between
the Gentiles, and the Christian State, have extended the Pronoun [(...)] among
you, to the whole Gospel Church, and all Christians in it. And from thence they
conclude, that It is unlawful for Christians to exercise any Rule, or
Authority, over their Brethren. So that the same Text, by which some would cast
Episcopacy out of the Church, is made use of by others (to as good purpose) to
thrust Magistracy out of the Christian World. 2. Some Learned Interpreters
(weighing the expression used by Christ, [(...)] in eas dominari, they Lord it
over them ( Id est, cum quadam acerbitate; Beza) with bitterness, and rigor)
understand Christ's prohibition of an unjust, and Tyrannical Power only: such
as the Princes of the Gentiles generally used over those, that were subject to
them. And so Christ does not dehort his Apostles from exercising Power, and
Authority over their Brethren, but only from the Tyrannical abuse of Power. 3.
The Presbyterians themselves (in foreign Parts) do generally acknowledge, that
this Text (in St. Matt.) does not take away the Ecclesiastical Authority of
Teaching, Binding and Loosing, according to the Gospel, vel gradus
Ecclesiasticorum, a Christo institutes, and datos Ecclesiae; no, nor those
degrees of Ecclesiastical Persons, that were instituted, and appointed his
Church by Christ; Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, etc. (Paraeus) he intends not
by that Prohibition (in St. Matt.) to bring a Parity, or Equality into the
Church: Nam sic tolleretur omnis ordo, inveheretur confusio (as He) for so all
Order would be abolished, and Confusion introduced in the room of it. 4. The
design, and intent of Christ (in the forementioned Text) is not to take away
all Pre-eminence, or Primacy among the Apostles, or Pastors of the Church; but
to admonish the Apostles (and ensuing Pastors) of the Church; that their High,
and Honorable Calling, has the Ministry, or Service of the Church, annexed to
it. Now this is so far from being inconsistent with Pre-eminence, and
Authority, that even Kings themselves serve the Church, and Kingdom, in their
High Calling. So King Antigonus to his Son; An ignoras, fili mi, nostrum regnum
nobilem esse servitutem? Art thou ignorant, O my Son, that our Empire is
nothing else, but a more noble servitude. Though therefore the Apostles, and
their Successors, are required to be Ministers, and Servants to all; this does
not take away their Pre-eminence any more, then a Shepheard's serving his
Flock, or a Tutour's serving his Pupil, or the King's serving his Subjects,
takes away the Respective Authority, or Pre-eminence of the Shepherd, Tutour,
or King, over those, whom they serve. 5. This Text is so far from abolishing
Prelacy, and Pre-eminence, among the Apostles, and Pastors, that it confirms,
and establishes it. For, when St. Matthew, and St. Mark say, He that will be
greatest among you; St. Luke says, [he that is greatest] and [he that is
chief] Luke 22.26. and you may observe, that our Lord Christ propounds his own
example, as a pattern to them, Whosoever will be Chief among you, let him be
your Servant; even as the Son of Man came not to be Ministered unto, but to
Minister. (Mat. 20.27, 28.) The Duty therefore of Ministering to, or serving
others, does not hinder; but that he, who Ministers, or serves, may be Greater,
then those, to whom he Ministers: unless, by urging this Text for a Parity
among Pastors, they intend to level (the great Apostle) Christ himself, to be
no more, then equal to the other Apostles. And one would wonder (did not
Prejudice, and Interest draw a Film over the eye of men's Reason) how any man
could entertain a thought, that ever Christ intended a Parity among
Ecclesiastical Persons, when, by his own finger from Heaven, he has so
evidently pointed out a disparity among them. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors, and Teachers: ( Ephesians.
4.11.) which are not only distinct Functions in the Church, but distinct
Degrees; as is evident by the Apostle, in the first to the Corinthians, 12.28.
And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healings, etc.


The Evangelists themselves are (as Hienom. ad Fabiol.) Secundi ordinis, and
minoris gradus; but of a second Order, and inferior degree, ( Dignitate
minores Apostolis, as Calvin) inferior to the Apostles in Dignity. The first
Assertion then (namely, That Episcopacy, that is the Prelacy, or Pre-eminence
of one Pastor among the rest, is not repugnant to the Scriptures,) is
undeniably true.

Secondly, The Church Catholic (that is, the Congregation of Christians in all
the World,) has received, and embraced the Episcopacy we contend for. To this
all the Fathers (without exception of any one) bear witness. He among them, who
ascribes least to Episcopacy, St. Jerome, who was not a Bishop, but a Presbyter
of an inferior Order (whose Testimony therefore may stand in stead of many)
says, In toto orb decretum est, ut unus, de Presbyteris electus, caeteris
superponeretur: ad quem omnis cura Ecclesiae pertineret. It is universally
decreed, that one, chosen from among the Presbyters, should be set over the
rest, to whom the whole care of the Church should appertain. And that this was
the universal Custom of the Church, appears by this, because those Heretics,
who made a separation from the Church Catholic, did yet retain this Order
among them. Thus the Author of the Homilies upon St. Matthew. Heretics, in
their Schism, have all those things among them, which are proper to the true
Church. (Similiter Ecclesias, similiter Scripturas, similiter Episcopos,
caeterosque Clericorum ordines.) They have their Congregations, Scriptures,
Bishops, and other Orders of the Clergy, as the Church has. Aerius indeed (in
a Pang of indignation, because he missed a Bishopric, which he stood for)
would have made himself equal to the Reverend Bishops, by broaching this
Doctrine (Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia discerni debere.) That a
Presbyter ought not to be distinguished by any difference from a Bishop; but
this error of his was condemned by the whole Church. When one wrote to St.
Jerome, (Nihil interest inter Episcopum and Presbyterum.) There is no difference
between a Bishop, and a Presbyter: he reproved him sharply in the Answer, which
he returned (Hoc satis imperite) This was not said for want of ignorance (In
portu, ut dicitur, naufragium) you make shipwreck (as they say Proverbially) in
the Haven.

Thirdly, The Episcopacy under our present consideration, is of venerable
Antiquity in the Church: having it is rise in the Apostles time. In proof of
which, we can have no better Evidence, then the Catalogue of Bishops in
Irenaeus, Eusebius, Socrates, and Theodoret; who begin from the Age, in which
the Apostles lived. Now no man can deny his assent to such Grave Authority, so
unanimously conspiring in matter of fact, without incurring the guilt of
singular irreverence, and pertinacy. It is, as if one should deny (that, which
all the Roman Histories affirm) that the Consulship of Rome began from the
Banishment of the Tarquins.

Will you hear St. Jerome? Alexandriae, a Marco Evangelista, Presbyteri unum
semper, ex se electum, in celsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant. (Ep.
85.) The Presbyters of Alexandria, ever since St. Mark the Evangelist, having
chosen one from among themselves, and exalting him to an higher place, styled
him Bishop.

St. Mark died in the eighth year of Nero, about the year of our Lord 62. whose
Successor (St. John the Apostle yet living) was Amianus; to him succeeded
Abilius; to Abilius, Cerdo. After the Death of St. James, Simon succeeded him,
in the Bishopric of Jerusalem. After St. Peter's departure Linus, Anacletus,
and Clement; or (as some) St. Peter yet living, sat in the Episcopal Chair at
Rome: as Evodius, and Ignatius did at Antioch. A Record of such Antiquity,
confirmed by Ignatius, the Disciple of St. John, cannot be rejected by any,
save such only, who have no Faith for any thing, that themselves saw not. Who
may as well deny, that ever there was a Philip of Spain, or Lewis of France, or
Henry King of England; as that the persons, before mentioned, were Bishops of
their respective Sees.

Fourthly, The Episcopacy we intend, is approved by Divine Right, or (as Bucer
expresses it) Visum Spiritui Sancto, utinter Presbyteros unus cur am
singularem gereret. It seemed good unto the Holy Ghost, that one among the
Presbyters should have the especial care of the Church. Of this we have an
undeniable Argument, in the book of the Revelations: where we find Christ from
Heaven commanding St. John to write unto the seven Angels of the Churches of
Asia.

The Title of Angel may, I acknowledge, be applied (in a general signification)
to every particular Pastor, or Presbyter. But here it is manifest Christ
intends one, in each Church only: whom he styles the Angel, in a proper, and
peculiar sense. For, It is no ways probable, that Churches so large, of such
vast extent, as Ephesus, Smyrna, and the rest were, had but one Pastor, or
Presbyter, in each of them. Nay, it is certain, and evident, concerning
Ephesus, that in the days of St Paul, there were many Presbyters ordained, or
constituted to feed the Church of God. Acts 20.17. And from Miletus he sent to
Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church, and said unto them (verse 28.)
Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock, etc. to feed the Church of
God. And we may as rationally conclude, concerning the rest, that there were
many Pastors in each Church. Why then should Christ direct his Epistle to one,
[the Angel] if there had not been one among them of a Superior Function, and
more eminent Dignity? Sub Angeli nomine (says St. Augustine, Epist. 162.)
laudatur praepositus Ecclesiae; Under the name of the Angel he commends the
Prefect of the Church. Angelos, Ecclesiis Praesidentes dixit: (Hierom) By
Angels, he understands the Presidents of the Churches. And for Smyrna,
Polycarpus was (without controversy) Bishop of it, ordained by St. John (as
Bullinger himself acknowledges)and Irenaeus says of him ( l. 3. c. 3.)
Polycarpus non solum ab Apostolis eruditus, etc. Polycarp was not only
instructed by the Apostles, and conversant with diverse of those persons, who
saw our Lord in the flesh; but in Asia he was constituted, by the Apostles,
Bishop of the Church of Smyrna, whom I saw (says the Father) while I was a
young man. I wholly wave many other Evidences, and descend to a late Protestant
Writer, Marlorat (in locum) St. John, says he, mentions first the Church of
Ephesus, in respect of the dignity of the place; Nec populum aggreditur, sed
Principem Cleri, utique Episcopum. And he does not apply himself to the people,
but to the Principal of the Clergy, to wit, the Bishop. And because the
Authority of Mr. Beza, and Doctor Reinolds, may possibly go furthest with
those, who have no great friendship for the Episcopal Dignity, let us (in the
Point in hand) hear them. To the Angel (says Beza) id est, (...), Quem nimirum
oportuit inprimis de his rebus admoneri, ac per eum caeteros collegas, totamque
adeo Ecclesiam. That is the President, who first ought to be admonished, and by
him his Colleagues, and so the whole Church.

Reinolds, in his Conference with Heart ( c. 8. Sect. 3.) says. Though there
were in the Church of Ephesus many Presbyters, and Pastors, to Administer to
that Church, yet there was one ever those many, whom our Savior styles the
Angel of the Church, to whom he directs those things, which he would have the
rest to learn from him.

Again, the most ancient Greek Manuscripts of the New Testament, in the
concluson of the second Epistle to Timothy, have these words (...), etc. The
second Epistle to Timothy, erdained the first Bishop of the Church of the
Ephesians, etc. And in the end of the Epistle to Titus, we translate from the
same Manuscripts, It was written to Titus, ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Cretians. And St. Ignatius tells us, that Evedius (his
Predecessor) was ordained Bishop of the Ephesians, by the Apostles ((...).)

I will add only to this, that God himself (who gave Laws in mediately to the
people of the Jews) constituted, and appointed an High Priest, upon whom he
conferred Prelacy, and Pre-eminence, over the rest of the Priests. And if any
man object, that the High Priest was a Type of Christ, I acknowledge it is true.
But the entire Institution of his Office was not for that end only, his
Eminence was conferred upon him for Order sake in the Church. As Kingly
Government, was (in a sort) Typical of Christ; but because it was not only
Typical of Christ, but Instituted likewise for the great ends of Government, it
may, and ought to be retained: and so Prelacy among Pastors, conducing so
much, as it does, to Order in the Church, ought not to be abolished, though it
were Typical in the High Priest.

Thus you have an account of these Governors in the Church (the Reverend
Bishops) sent by the King; I mean, in respect of the External, and Accidental
things of Religion: they have another Mission, even from the Holy Ghost, in
respect of the Internal Preaching, and Administering Sacraments, Ordaining,
Binding and Loosing, and such like. Since then Prelacy is not contrary to the
Scriptures, since the Church Catholic has received, and embraced it, since it
is of very Reverend Antiquity, and approved of by Divine Right; this one would
think, should be enough to prepare a room for it in the heart of any pious, and
sober Christian; enough to beget in us a reverent esteem of the calling of
Bishops, to work in us a cheerful submission to, and ready compliance with the
Rites, and Ceremonies in the Worship of God, commended to, and required of us,
by such persons, delegated to that end by the Prince, whose Authority, in
matters of Religion, has sufficiently been asserted.

I will yet add (for the better reconciling this Order to the affections of
some men) two words.

I. The Convenience, and Expediency (that, I say not, Necessity) of Conformity,
and Agreement, between the Ecclesiastical, and Civil Government. There is such
an affinity between these two, that in Commonwealths, where the Government is
by many, they always commend the Affairs of the Church to the Clergy, or
Presbytery, and not to a Bishop: but where the Government is Monarchical in the
State, Episcopacy in the Church is only conformable to it; Presbytery no way
comporting with Monarthy. Hence that Preverbial saying, No Bishop, No King. A
saying that may be easily derided, but not so easily refuted. Our late sad
Experiences have engraven it in such Capital Characters upon the understandings
of all sober, and unprejudiced persons, than it will not easily be defaced.

II. The Utility, and Advantages, that redound to the Church by Episcopacy. I
might entertain you (upon this Head) with the unanimous consent of all
Historians, but I select his Testimony only, who, of all the Ancients, had the
least affection for Bishops. St. Jerome (ad Tit. c. 1.) Toto orb decretum est,
ut ad tollenda schismata, and dissidia, unus, de Presbyteris electus,
superponeretur caeteris. It is universally decreed, that, for the prevention of
Schisms, and differences, one chosen out of the Presbyters, be set over the
rest. And again; Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis, id est, Episcopi,
dignitate consistit; The safety of the Church consists in the Dignity of the
High Priest, that is, the Bishop: to whom, if there be not a Peculiar Power,
distinct from all others, annexed; Tot in Ecclesia efficientur schismata, quot
sacerdotes (advers. Lucif.) There will be as many Schisms, as Priests in the
Church.

Our own Chronicles tell us, that King Edward the Elder, by Constituting five
new Bishops, stopped an Inundation of Paganism, ready to break in on the West,
for want of Pastors.

If any man question, or doubt of the Utility of this Reverend Order, let him
look back upon the Torrent of Confusion, Heresy, and Blasphemy, that brake in
upon us, while these Banks were by violent hands thrown down. Hoc Ithacus
velit, etc. The Extirpation of Episcopacy in these Kingdoms is the firstborn
of the Pope's desires; That, which his Soul longs for, as for the first-ripe
fruit; you know the Apologue, how the Wolves would make peace with the Sheep,
upon the condition, they would hang up all their dogs. Let but Episcopacy, and
the Liturgy, be abolished, and the Papists, assure you, shall promise you peace
upon any terms.

There is nothing (that I know of) objected against this Order, but (that great
Bugbear) the Covenant. Have we not lifted up our hands to the God of Heaven,
and sworn the Extirpation of Prelacy? How then can we admit of Bishops, or
submit to them, being restored?

To this I Answer; An unlawful Oath obliges to nothing, but repentance. An
unjust Oath, voluntarily taken, or imposed by an unlawful Authority, is not
binding to any man's Conscience.

You have Covenanted, and sworn the Extirpation of Prelacy: so did Herod bind
himself with an oath to Herodias Daughter, that he would give her whatsoever
she should ask; Matthew xiv. 7. so did certain Jews bind themselves with an
Oath of Execration, that they would neither eat, nor drink, till they had
killed Paul; Acts xxiii. 12. Had those men done well in killing Paul; because
they had bound themselves by a curse? or did Herod well, in giving John
Baprist's Head to the Damsel, for his Oath's sake? you will (I presume) say,
No. Why No? would you not have them keep their Oath? I; but it was an unjust
Oath. So was yours, and will be found defective in the Properties, required in
a just Oath, Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness ( Jer. iv. 2.) And we may
soberly suppose, that many men Covenanted against the Bishops, for their Land's
sake only. As the Earl of Kildare, being Arraigned for burning a Church in
Ireland, said, He would never have set fire to the Church, if he had not
thought the Bishop had been in it. Bur, if any man can say, He took the
Covenant, in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, he might lie under some
temptation or keeping it, had it not wanted (that, which is essentially
necessary to render an Oath obliging) a lawful Authority to impose it. But,
seeing it wanted this, (which it were Treason to deny) no man's Conscience is
obliged by it: and he, who will persist in it because he has taken it,
justifies his doing of evil, by doing of worse. Since therefore through the
goodness of God, and his Majesty's undaunted Resolution) the Reverend Bishops
are restored to the Church, and sent as Governors by the King: if you be
Members of this Spiritual House, you must submit to their Directions, and
Injunctions, in all Rites, Ceremonies, and Circumstances of Religion. Which
fairly leads me to (the last thing intended) the Consideration, and Vindication
of the Liturgy of our Church.

The Calves of our lips (our Prayers) are a service more acceptable to the God
of Heaven, then Hecatombs of Oxen, Thousands of Rams, or ten Thousand Rivers of
Oil. An Heathen could say, (...) Prayers are a more acceptable Sacrifice to
God, then Oxen. That part of our lives, which we spend in Prayer, is the most
celestial, and Divine. Prayer is a Duty so absolutely necessary for every
person, who acknowledges a Deity, that Nature has dictated it to those, who
were strangers to the Scriptures, and Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel.
The Mariners (in Jonah) when the Storm was upon on them, cried, every man, unto
his God; (Chap. i. verse 5.) and the Mr. of the Ship rebuked the Prophet
himself sharply for neglecting this Duty, with What meanest thou, O Sleeper?
Arise, call upin thy God; verse 6. The Sun has never yet beheld a person so
impudent (provided he did not say in his heart with David's Fool, There is no
God) as plainly, and directly, to condemn this Duty. In the exercise, or
performance of which we are diversely concerned: after one manner, as we are
men, private persons: and after another, as we are Christians, and members of
(this Spiritual house, on family) the Church.

As Private persons, we are left free, to make choice of such Time, Place, and
Form, as the Exigence of our present occasions require.

Firs, For Time: either the Sixth hour (as St. Peter, in Acts x. 9.) or the
Ninth hour (as the Centurion, verse 3) either thrice a day, as David) at
Evening, Morning, and Noon (Psalm. lv. 17.) Or Seven times a Day, as He, Psalm.
cxix. 164.

Secondly, For Place: either in Closet, Vpper-Room, Garden, Fields, or
elsewhere, with convenience.

Thirdly, For the Manner: either taking unto our selves words, and expressions
of our own, or making use of apt, and pertinent Forms invented by others. In
all these Circumstances we are free, and at our own election, as private
persons. But, as we are in Family, Members of the house, a public body, we are
not left free, but are under the direction on of our Spiritual guids, or
Governors, in all these respects of time, place, and form. In then two first
of these, time, and place, all (who are called Christians) agree, that the
King, (or Governors under him) may prescribe, that public Prayers shall be
made at such times, and in such places only. But the third, the prescribing a
Form, will by no means be allowed by some to the Spiritual Governors, or any
others. And others (who allow the King, and those, who are under him, authority
to prescribe a form of public Prayer) will not admit of that, which we call
The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments. I shall
endeavor therefore, first, to vindicate set Forms of Prayer in General; and,
secondly, the Liturgy of our Church in Particular.

First, For the lawfulness, and expediencie of set Forms of Prayer, I offer
four Arguments.

First, The Example of God himself, and of some Holy men, who were enspired by
the Holy Ghost. In the sixth Chapter of the Book of Numbers, verse 22, and
foreward, you have a form of Blessing the people prescribed, by God himself, to
Aaron, and his sons. The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron, and
his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying
unto them, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his face shine
upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon
thee, and give thee peace. And, as God prescribed the Priests a Form to Bless
the people, so he prescribes the People a Form, in these words; And thou shall
go unto the Priest, that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess
this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the Country, which the
Lord swear unto our Fathers for to give us (Deuteronomy: xxvi. 3) and ( verse 5.) Thou
shall speak, and say before the Lord thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my
Father, etc.

When they went to Battle, a Form was prescribed ( Deuteronomy: xx. 3.) a form of
Thanksgiving for victory, and deliverance. Then sang Moses, and the Children of
Israel, this Song unto the Lord, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto the Lord:
for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse, and his Rider has He thrown into
the Sea, etc. (Exodus xx. 1.) This Song was composed by Moses, and learned by
all the People, and repeated again, in the same words, by Miriam, (verse 21.)
And Miriam answered them, Sing ye unto the Lord: for etc. King Hezekiah,
delivered from Death, did not only compose a Set-Form of Thanksgiving; but
used it all the Days of his Life. The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we
will sing my Songs to the stringed Instruments, all the days of our Life in
the House of the Lord. (Isa. xxxviii. 20.) And the same Hezekiah commanded the
Levites to ling praises to God, with the words of David, and Asaph. (2 Chronicles.
xxix. 30.) With the Words of David, and Asaph; that is, with Forms, composed
by those Sacred Penmen.

Secondly, The Practice, and Precept of our Lord Christ in the New Testament is
a second Argument.

1. This Practice (Matthew. xxvi. 44.) And he left them, and he went again, and
prayed the third time, saying the same words. And again upon the Cross (Matthew.
xxvii. 46.) My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? The express words' of
David (Psalm. xxii. 1.)

2. We have his Precept likewise, in prescribing the Pater Nester, not only
as a Pattern, but Form of Prayer. For, though he say in St. Matthew, After this
manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. ( Matt. vi. 9.) yet he says in St.
Luke, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. ( Luke xi. 2.) Since therefore Christ
(in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge, were hid, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, to whom the Spirit was not given by
measure prescribes, and practisech a Form of Prayer; the Sons of men may,
without disparagement to their Parts, or Gifts, lawfully make use of a Set-Form.

Thirdly, The Example of St. John Baptist; who taught his Disciples to Pray, by
prescribing them a Form (which occasioned the Disciples of Christ to desire,
and him to answer their reqnest, in giving them a Form) Luke xi. 1. To which
(that excellent Person, whose loss the Church could hardly have sustained, had
not God, by his Providence, in taking him from us, near the time of His
Majesty's happy Restoration, swallowed up our Sorrows in victory of that Joy)
the ever-to-be-Honoured Doctor Hammond adds an Apostolical Example, from that
saying of Saint Paul, in the first to the Corinthians, xiv. 26. How is it then
Brethren? When you come together, every one of you has a Psalm. Which (says
he) refers to some of the Psalms of David, or Asaph; which were then ordinarily
used in their devotion: and, because every one had his several Psalm, it is
therefore reproved by the Apostle; as a thing tending to confusion.

Fourthly, The Practice of the Universal Church. He, who lists, need not glean
after the Reapers; but may fill his Bosom with sheaves of Testimonies,
collected by the diligent hand of Cassander: and since by the late VVriters
concerning Liturgies.

The Greek Church has Records of Liturgies, or set Forms of Prayer, made by
St. James, contracted by St. Basil, and again abbreviated by St. Chrysostom.
And Histories mention a short Form of St. Peter's; which alone (they say) was
used in the Roman Church for a great while. And we have mention likewise of St.
Mark's Liturgy. But (though these may admit some scruple, or doubt) St.
Augustine (I am sure) speaks of some Forms, retained in the Church, (and still
to be found in our Liturgy) particularly that (in the Administration of the
Lord's Supper) of Sursum corda, etc. Lift up your hearts. Of which he says,
that they are ( Verba ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus petita) expressions
borrowed from the very times of the Apostles.

And for many other particular Forms (used by us) we find them in Cyril of
Jerusalem his Catechism. Ignatius is clear, and express for a Form; (...) ( Ep.
ad Magnes.) Let all meet together to the same action (or, place) in Prayer, Let
there be oue Common Prayer, one mind. And (waving plenteous Instances) take
one Grand Testimony of Set-Forms, in stead of many. The Milevitan Council, c.
12. Plaeuit, ut preces, quae probatae fuerint in Concilio, ab omnibus
celebrentur, nec aliae omnino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a prudentioribus
tractantur, vel comprobatae in Synodo fuerint; ne forte aliquid contra fidem,
aut per ignorantiam, aut per minus studium, sit compositum. The Council thought
good, that the Prayers, which were approved in the Council, should be used by
all, and that no other should be said in the Church, but those, that had been
weighed by the more prudent, or approved in a Synod; lest any thing through
ignorance, or neglect, should be done against the Faith. These are some
Arguments (among others) for the vindication of Liturgies, or Set-Forms of
Prayer in General. I proceed to consider,

Secondly, The Composition of our Liturgy (the Liturgy of the Church England)
and in pursuance of this, I shall advance by three steps.

I. The Derision, Scorn, and Reproach, which is cast upon our Liturgy, by many,
is so far from being a stumbling block, or stone of offense, to scandalize any
discerning Christian, that it is rather an Argument, evincing the dignity, and
excellency of it. For

First, The best things when they are set up as a mark to shoot at, by persons
possessed with disdain, or dislike of them, may be cavilled at, and faulted,
easily scorned, and derided. Some Critics have been so bold, as to find fault
with the Frame, and order of the great Fabric of the World, and called it
(Blasphemously) (...), and (...), confusion, or Confused mixture, and it is
reported of Alphenso (Surnamed The Wise) one of the Kings of Castile, that he
used many times to say, That, if he had stod at God's elbow when he made the
World, many things should have been ordered better, then they were in die first
Creation.

Secondly, We ought not to be Scandalized at our Liturgy in respect of the
scoffs and jears of its adversaries, because it is no more then the Holy Ghost
has foretold concerning these times, by the Apostles, St Peter, and St. Jude.
There shall come in the last days scoffers, 2 Pet. 3. There shall be Mockers in
the last time; (Jude 18.) Though therefore men style it, in derision, The
English Mass Book, and The Starve-us-Book, and what not that is ugly; these may
argue the Unchristianness of the persons, that belch them forth, but they do
not evince the Anti-Christianity of our Liturgy.

Thirdly, As when one goes forth to encounter his Adversary, with a Rush, or
Reed only in his hand, we rationally conclude, that he has not a Sword, or
Spear in his Armory: So, when men bring railing Accusations only against our
Liturgy, we may safely conclude, That it is because they are destitute of
every thing, that is solid, or substantial to charge it with. Vtatur motu
animi, qui uti ratione non potest. We may indulge them the liberty, of their
Passion, who know not how to make use of Reason.

II. Though some persons have (through ignorance or malice) bitterly reproached
our Liturgy, yet God has raised up others, who have fairly blessed, and put a
Crown upon the head of it. Mr. Calvin himself has afforded it such a fair
Testimony under his Hand, that one would think, his Disciples (for their
Master's reputation at least) should forbear to blaspheme it. Quod ad formulam
precum, and Rituum Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet, a qua
Pastoribus discedere in functione sua non liceat. Tam ut ccnsulatur quorundam
simplicitati, and imperitiae, quam ut certius ita constet omnium inter se
Ecclesiarum consensus. Postremo etiam, ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundam
levitati, qui novationes quasdam affectant.(Ep. 87. wrote to the Duke of
Somerset the Protector, 22 October. Anno 1548.)

Concerning your Form of Prayer, and Ecclesiatical Rites, I do much approve of
a certain Set-Form; from which it shall not be lawful for the Pastors, in
their Ministration, to recede; as well for their sakes, who are ignorant, and
unlearned; as that the Consent of the whole Church may thereby the better
appear. And lastly, to prevent the Desultory Levity of some, who affect
Novelties.

Archbishop Cranmer, having Translated King Edward's Common Prayer Book into
Latin, sent it to Mr. Bucer, and required his Judgment of it: who answered,
That there was nothing in it, but what was taken out of the Word of God: or
which was not against it (commode exceptum) being taken in a good sense. There
are some things indeed (quae nisi quis, etc.) which unless they be interpreted
with candor, may seem not so agreeable unto the Word of God, and which unquiet
men may wrest unto matter of Contention. Upon which occasion, that Book was
surveyed; and, in those particulars, subject to such Cavils, corrected. I shall
add only to these two Foreign Testimonies, an equal number of our own
Contrymen, (both Martyrs.)

Mr. John Hullyer, (Fellow of King's College in Cambridg) who suffered
Martyrdom in Queen Mary's days, Anno 1557.) being at the Stake, among many
other Books, that were thrown into the fire to him, it happened, that a
Common Prayer Book fell between his hands, which he joyfully received, opened,
and read, till the flame and smoke suffered him not to see any more: and then
he fell to Prayer, holding his hands up to Heaven, and the Book between his
Arms, next his Heart, thanking God for that mercy in sending him it ( Acts, and
Men. page 18 18.)

Doctor Tailor (in the Conference between him, and Gardener, Jan. 22. Anno
1555.) There was (says he) set forth by the most innocent King Edward (for
whom God be praised everlastingly) the whole Church Service, with great
deliberation, and Advice of the Learned Men of the Realm, and authorized by the
whole Parliament. Which Book was never Reformed, but once; and yet by that one
Reformation, it was so fully perfected, according to the Rules of our Religion,
in every behalf, That no Christian Conscience can be offended with any thing
therein contained, ( Acts, and Mon, fol. 1521.) Mind the words of this Holy
Martyr [No Christian Conscience can be offended with any thing therein
contained) and yet what Swarms of Exceptions fly in the Face of it? A plenteous
shower of Rain, seldom brings forth more Mushroms, (or Toad-Stools) then the
late Luxuriant Age has produced Exceptions against this Book. Concerning
which, take the Judgment of Mr. Hooker; Whosoever does measure them by number,
must needs be out of love with a thing that has so many faults: Whosoever by
weight, cannot choose but esteem very highly of that, wherein the wit of so
scrupulous Adversaries has not hitherto observed any defect, which themselves
can seriously think to be of moment, (Eccles. Pol. B. 5. Sect. 27.) The
examination of these Exceptions, will be our third Step.

III. The Exceptions commonly brought against our Liturgy, are either general,
or more particular.

First, In general, two things are chiefly laid to its charge.

1. It is a Superstitious Worship.

In answer to this,

First, I presume, that (as they say Proverbially) Every man, that talks of
Robin Hood never shot in his Bow: So every one, that cries out Superstition,
does not well understand what Superstition is, for Superstition (in the proper,
and strict Notion, and signification of the Word) is the Worship of Idols, or
Dead Men, (...), or Superstites. Thus St. Paul tells the Athenians, I perceive
that in all things you are too superstitious; (Act. xvii. 22.) (...). Thus I
suppose no man has the Forehead to charge our Liturgy with Superstition.

Superstition (in an improper, and more generally-received Notion) is, when
things are either abhorred, or observed, with a zealous, or fearful, but
erroneous relation to God: By means of which, the Superstitious serve, either
the true God, with needless Offices, or defraud Him of Necessary Duties, or
bestow such honor, and service upon others, as is proper for, and should be
peculiar to him only.

That our Liturgy confers any Honor, or Service, proper, and peculiar to God,
upon others, no man has yet affirmed; That it requires needless Offices, to be
performed to the true God, no man can say, who believes that God (who made oar
Bodies, as well as our Souls) requires the external Worship of our Bodies, as
well as the inward Service of our Mind. A man cannot express too much in the
outside, provided the invisible part come not short of it; and (I must-say) I
know not how the stifness of the Knee, can be (...) from defect of Humility at
least, if not of true Piety also.

Secondly, There may be as much Superstition, in rejecting of our Liturgy, as
in retaining it: as much Superstition, in opposing as in asserting Ceremonies.
A Negative. Touch not, Taste not, Kneel not, Bow not, may be Superstitious, as
well as the Affirmative. An ignorant fear of displeasing God. (...) such a
Form, or Circumstance of Worship, ^ay, be Superstitious as well, as a Blind
Ze^^ or Fear is of all Affections (Anger excepted) the unaptest to admit any
Conference with Reason. While a man Superstitiously fears, lest he should
offend, in doing this, or that, he sins against God, and his own Soul, in
leaving that undone, which his Reason (if he hearkened to the Voice of it)
would tell him he might, and ought to do. This is the first, and great, but
(you see) groundless, Exception, against our Liturgy. The second is like unto
it; namely, that, Our Liturgy is Popish: or too near Popery, being taken out
of the Mass Book To this I answer,

First, (In the words of Learned Mr. Hocker) It were violent, and extreme, to
say, that in nothing they may be followed, who are of the Church of Rome. (They
acknowledge the Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament, to be the Word of God:
They make Profession of all the Articles of the Faith; one God, one Savior,
one Baptism: it will not (I hope) be deemed Popery in Us to do so, because they
do it.) Some things they do as men, some things as wise men, some things as
Christian men; in these we may follow them: Some things they do as misled, and
blinded with Error; As far, as they follow Reason, and Truth, we fear not to
tread the same steps, in which they have gone, and to be their followers. While
Rome keeps that, which is antienter, and better, others, whom we much more
affect, leaving it for newer, and changing it for worse, we had rather follow
the perfection of them whom we like not, then in their defects resemble them,
whom we love; (Eccles. pol. B. 5. Sect. 28.) We are sorry (says Learned
Doctor Covel) that their weakness takes offense at that, which we hold as an
honor, and a virtue in the Church of England; namely, that we have so
sparingly, and as it were unwillingly, dissented from the Church of Rome; with
whom, if the Corruptions of that Church would have given us leave, we would
have willingly consented in their whole Service: which being unsafe, and
unlawful, we follow them, notwithstanding, in all, wherein they follow those
Holy and Ancient Fathers, which first planted the Truth among them. (Modest
Exam. page 185.)

Secondly, It is no ways probable, were our Liturgy Popish, that the Papists
would be such violent Opposers of it. We are assured by an Argument of Christ's
own making, that it is not Popish: for (says our Savior, Every Kingdom,
divided against it self, is brought to desolation; and an house divided against
an house falls; (Luke. xi. 17.) John Old (in Queen Mary's days) wrote
against the Papists, in Defense of the Common Prayer Book. And Cranmer made a
Challenge, That, if he might be permitted by the Queen, to take to him P.
Martyr, and four, or five more, they would enter the Lists with any Papists
living, and defend the Common Prayer Book, to be perfectly agreeable to the
Word of God, and the same, in effect, which had been for fifteen hundred years
in the Church of Christ.

Thirdly, It is a known truth, that our Reformers retained not any part of the
Popish Service, but reformed their Breviary, Processional, and Mass Book (as
they did their Doctrine) retaining nothing, but what the Papists had received
from purer Antiquity: which argues only a fair compliance in us with the
Ancient Church, and not at all with them. And if it be said, that some Papists
have boasted, that our Service is but their Mass in English. It is (certainly)
a most unreasonable thing, that they who will not believe the Papist in any
thing else, should believe them in their vain boast against us, and think it
an accusation sufficiently proved, because some Papists have impudently said it.

Fourthly, The truth is, the Papists condemn our Book as much of Schism, as the
Consistorian do of compliance; they accuse it as much of departing from, the
Church of Rome, as the others of remaining with it. Now there cannot be a surer
evidence of the innocence of our Liturgy, then the contrary Censures, which it
has undergon between these two Persecutours in the extreme: it being the
dictate of natural Reason, that Virtue is infallibly known by this, that is it
accused by both the Extremes, at guilty of either; as (for instance) the true
Liberality of mind is by this exemplifyed, that it is defamed by the Prodigal
for Parcimony, and by the Niggard for Prodigality. Thus you have some thing in
Reply to the Objections in general, whereby it appears that our Liturgy is
neither) Superstitious, nor Popish.

The particular Objections are exceeding many; but (as Mr. Hooker in his Ep.
Dedicatory to his fifth Book:) for the greatest part, such silly things, that
the easiness renders them hard to be Disputed of in a serious manner. I shall
briefly consider the most principal of them.

First, For the Litany (against which a Cloud of Darts are cast) Mr. Hooker (a
Person, of whom it is hard to say, whether his Sobriety, or Learning may
challenge the greatest admiration) tells us, that the absolute perfection of
this piece, upbraids with Error, or something worse, them, whom in all points
it does not satisfy. ( Eccles. Pol. B. 41. (Of the rare effects of which, he
gives us (there) two famous Instances: the one of Mamercus Bishop of Vienna
(about 450. years after Christ) the other of Sidonius Bishop of Averna, who by
the frequent and fervent use of the Rogation, or Litany, obtained of God the
aversion of portended Calamities, and the removing of Famine, and a Potent
Enemy, which besieged them.

This part of our Service ( the Litany) was Called by the Ancients (...)
earnest, or intense Prayer: and in the Greek Liturgy, simply (...) intense, or
earnest. And therefore the Courch requires the Congregation (or, People) to be
more exercised in it, then in any other part of the Service, Concerning which
three things have been offered to be justified against any Gainsayers; (but no
man has yet entered the Lifts.)

1. That there is not any where extant a more particular excellent enumeration
of all the private, or common wants of Christians, so far as it is likely to
come to the cognizance of a Congregation. 2. Not a move innocent, blameless
Form, against which there lies no just Objection; and most of the unjust ones,
that have been made, are reproachful to Scripture it self, from which the
Passages excepted against are fetched. As (for instance) That it may please
thee to have mercy upon all men, from 1. Tim. ii. 1. I exhort therefore that
first of all. Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men.
Not a more artificial composure, for the raising of our zeal, and keeping it
up, then this so defamed part of our Liturgy. For which (and other
Excellencies, undoubtedly it is (and not for any coniuring or swearing in it
(as some Blasphemously have said) that the Devil has took such care, that it
should drink de peest of the bitter cup of calumny, and reviling.

Secondly, For the Responser, and following the Presbyter, or Priest, in the
Confession of Sins, and Profession of Faith. They were designed by the Church,
(from the example of pure Antiquity) to very profitable uses: as 1. By way of
mutual Charity, the people returning a prayer for the Priest, who begins one
peculiarly for them. The Lord be with you, says the Priest: And with thy
Spirit, Answer the people 2. To quicken devotion which is but to prone to dull
and slacken by continual heairng. 3. To engage every one present, to be no
idle, or unprofitable spectatour, or auditour of the Service only.


Thirdly, For the three Creeds (the Apostles, Nicene, and Athanasius his Creed)
they have been (of old) a badg of the Church, a mark to discern Christians,
from Infidels, and Jews. I have not yet heard of any thing objected against the
matter of any of them. The Apostles Creed (whether delivered by the Apostles to
the Church by Oral Tradition, that famous Tradition so much mentioned by the
Fathers: or gathered out of the Writings of the Holy Apostles) is the sum of
the whole Catholic Faith, the Key of the Christian Faith.

That of the Council of Nice was made in that famous Assembly of 318. Bishops,
against the Heresy of Arrius, who denied the Coeternity, and Coequality of the
Son with the Father

Athanasius his Creed, composed by that Father. (who alone opposed himself to
that Torrent of Arrianism, which had over flowed the whole world) was, both in
the East, and Western-Church, accounted as a Treasure of great price. There is
not any imaginable ground of rejecting either of these, unless is be to
gratify the Separatists, who are professed denyers, of one Article [the Holy
Catholic Church.]

Fourthly, For the Doxology (or, Glory be to the Father, etc.) it is a very
ancient Piece; the former Versicle of it, being (according to good Authors)
composed by the first Council of Nice: and appointed by those Fathers to be
used in the Church, as a lesser Creed, or Confession of the Trinity, and (...),
Consubstantiality of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, with the Father. At which it
has therefore been the Custom anciently to stand up: Confession of God being a
praising of Him; to which that Posture is most due, and proper. And for the
other Versicle [ As it was in the Beginning, etc.] when the Macedonian
Heretics excepted against the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, as a Novel Doctrine,
Saint Jerome, Opposition to them, added that unto the former Versicle.

Fifthly, For the reading of the Commandments and the Responses after them: It
must be acknowledged, that it is not anciently to be found in the Church, as a
part of the Service, no not till King Edward's second Liturgy, (by which yet
we have this Advantage, That Popery cannot be charged upon it) yet it will
appear to be a profitable Part of Devotion. For the Priest, after a Prayer for
Grace to love God, and keep His Commandments, [ Almighty God, unto whom all
Hearts be open, etc.] is appointed to stand, and read the Commandments
distinctly to the People: and they to receive them in an humble Affection of
Heart, and convenient Posture of Body, as means to try, and examine themselves,
to humble themselves in a Sense of their several Failings, and thereupon to
implore, every one for himself, and for others (even for the whole Kingdom)
First, God's Mercy for Pardon, for every thing, in which we have violated his
Holy Commandments [ Lord have Mercy upon us] Secondly, Grace for the time to
come, to perform that, which is acceptable to God [ And incline our Hearts to
keep this Law.]

Lastly, For the Communion of the Sick. It is of long standing in the Church,
we have an undeniable Evidence of it, in the Canons of the Councels about the
Lapsi, and excommunicati, (the Fallen into some scandalous Sin, and
Excommunicate) which take Care, that they should have the Peace of the Church
at their Departure out of the World ( in extremis) and (if with Expressions of
Penitence they, desire it) the Holy Sacrament. No Person can be dissatistied
with this, who has, or shall, read the famous Story of the dying Serapion, in
Eusebius, lib. 6. cap. 36.

And thus there is enough (I suppose) said, to reconcile any sober Person (who
has a better Esteem of Antiquity, then Novelty) to the Liturgy of our Church,
and to confirm those (who are persuaded, according to Saint Peter's Doctrine)
that they ow Obedience to the Reverend Bishops, as Governors sent by the King)
in their Religious Observation of it, and that strictly, and precisely,
according to the Rubric, in every thing contained in, and required by it at
least till the same Authority, that Established, and has so often Confirmed
it, shall think fit in their great Wisdoms to reform it, I mean, with Soap to
wash, and cleanse it from any pollutions, that it may possibly have contracted,
not by Nitre, to tear out the Bowels of it.

The Inconveniences of altering any thing in the Public Established Liturgy of
a Church are so visible and notorious, that no Wise men will, without Cogent
Necessity, rush upon it, because (as Cicero says from Socrates,) Mutata
Musica, mutantur and Mores: A Change of Manners is consequent to a Change of
Music.

It is a thing justly to be feared, if the Prince shall consent to the taking
one, or a few Bricks out of the Wall, because they are not (as is pretended)
well burnt, that the Persons of that Persuasion and Importunity, will take
leave to pluck them out one by one, till they leave no Wall at all. But I hope,
the persons in Authority over us have learned (by a dear bought Experience) to
take heed of Root, and Branch men; and not to consent to pull down the whole
Fabric, because a Window, or Chimney, it may be a Tile only, is misplaced.

It is an unpardonable Error in any, to think, that the Act of Reformation,
consists in the taking away things, together with the abuse of them (if any be)
for, that cannot be said to be Reformed, which is made New Reformation is
(properly) Repetitio vel restitutio facti antique, The Repetition or
Restitution of an ancient Custom. Thus, let our Liturgy, (if it stand in any
need) be reformed; but God of his Mercy grant, that neither our Liturgy, nor
the Administratours of it, fall again under a Gunpowder-Reformation.

It is said of Rome, that she never understood what Cato was aright, till she
had lost him ( Catonem non intellexit civitas, nisi cum perdidit) the loss we
sustained through the abolishing our Liturgy (by that Ordinance, which was
discharged against it) will have (I hope) such an impression upon the Spirits
of all those, that have good will for the Church of England, that it will not
(for the time to come) be an easy matter for those, that rise up against it, to
cast it down a second time. To prevent which, 1. Do not provoke God through
your want of Diligence, in assembling your selves together, to deliver up the
Liturgy into the hands of violent men, skilful to destroy. If the God of
Heaven once perceive (by your negligence in frequenting it) that it is a matter
of Indifferency to you whether you enjoy it, or enjoy it not, he will have a
just occasion Administered, to take that from you, upon which you set so little
value. 2 Let your Ardour and Fervency in performing this prescribed Service
testify to God, Angels, and Men, that your Souls are delighted with it: that
it is not the labor of your Lips only, but the devout breathings of your
pious Souls. If you do thus, God will delight to establish it, and make it
appear, that it is a Plant of your Heavenly Father's Planting, which no mortal
hand shall be able to pluck up.


And, if any person (to conclude) be offended at it, because it is ancient, or
solemn, or sober or charitable; you may be sorry for their weakness, and labor
to inform them: but be sure you choose rather, to displease one, or a few
peevish Servants in the Family; then to offend the whole Hous-hold, and incurr
the displeasure of the great Master of the House, God himself.

FINIS

