Effigies Tho: Mace Trin: Coll: Cantabr: Clericus. Aetat: Suae 63.
portrait of Thomas Mace Hen. Cook pinx.
W. Faithorne sculp.


Musick's Monument, OR, A REMEMBRANCER Of the Best Practical Music, Both
DIVINE, and CIVIL, that has ever been known, to have been in the World. Divided
into Three Parts.

The First PART, Shows a Necessity of Singing Psalms Well, in Parochial
Churches, or not to Sing at all; Directing, how They may be Well Sung,
Certainly; by Two several Ways, or Means, with an Assurance of a Perpetual
National-Quire; and also showing, How Cathedral Music, may be much Improved,
and Refined. The Second PART, Treats of the Noble Lute, (the Best of
Instruments) now made Easy; and all Its Occult-Lock'd-up-Secrets Plainly laid
Open, never before Discovered; whereby It is now become so Familiarly Easy, as
Any Instrument of Worth, known in the World; Giving the True Reasons of Its
Former Difficulties; and Proving Its Present Facility, by Undeniable Arguments;
Directing the most Ample Way, for the use of the Theorboe, from off the Note,
in Consort, etc. Showing a General Way of Procuring Invention, and Playing
Voluntarily, upon the Lute, Viol, or any other Instrument; with Two Pretty
Devices; the One, showing how to Translate Lessons, from one Tuning, or
Instrument, to Another; The other, an Indubitable Way, to know the Best Tuning,
upon any Instrument: Both done by Example. In the Third PART, The Generous
Viol, in Its Rightest Use, is Treated upon; with some Curious Observations,
never before Handled, concerning It, and Music in General.
By Tho. Mace, one of the Clerks of Trinity College, in the University of
Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliffe, and N. Thompson, for the Author, and are to
be Sold by Himself, at His House in Cambridge, and by John Carr, at His Shop at
the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1676.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
TO Thee, One-Only-Oneness, I Direct
My Weak Desires, and Works; please to Protect
Both Them, and Me; For Thou alone art Able,
(And one but Thee) to make us Acceptable
Unto the World. --
I am not of That Catholic Belief,
(I mean the Roman's Faith) who seek Relief
(At the Second Hand): from Saints; but I Thus take
My Freedom, and (sans Complement) Thus make
My Seeming-Bold-Address: Not Judging It
A Crime with Thee; but rather count It fit;
Part of my Duty called for, which I owe
Unto Thy Goodness; Therefore Thus It show.
I Have wondered much, to see what Great Ado*
Men make, to Dedicate their Works, unto
High Mortals; who Themselves can no way Save,
From the Slan'drous Tongues, of every Envious Knave.
Thou (only) art The Able-True-Protector;
Oh be my Shield, Defender, and Director,
Then sure we shall be Safe. --
Thou know, (O Searcher of All Hearts) how I,
With Right-Downright-Sincere-Sincerity,
Have Longed Long, to do some ^^ttle Good,
(According to the Best I understood)
With Thy Rich Tallent, though by me made Poor;
For which I Grieve, and will do so no more,
By Thy Good Grace Assisting, which I do
Most Humbly beg for: Oh Adjoyn It, to
My Longing-Ardent-Soul; And have Respect
To This my weak Endeavor; and Accept
(In This Great Mercy) both of It, and Me,
Even as We Dedicate Our Selves to Thee.
AN EPISTLE TO ALL DIVINE READERS; ESPECIALLY, Those of the Discenting
Ministry, or Clergy, who want not only Skill, but Good Will to This Most
Excelling-Part of Divine-Service, viz. Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, to the Praise of the Almighty, in the Public Assemblies of His Saints;
And yet more Particularly, to All Great, and High Persons, Supervisors,
Masters, or Governors of the Church, (if any such should be) wanting Skill, or
Good Will Thereunto.
NExt unto God, I turn my Self to You,
High Men of Honor, Judging It your Due;
You are the Chiefest Objects of Respect;
And Therefore you* (if Any) might Protect
Such Works as These: But not by your Great Names;
Renowned Titles; Worshipnesses; Fames:
The Best way to Refine our Cathedral-Church-Musick.
Those will not do it; Example is The Thing;
There Is but One Way, which is, Your Selves to Sing:
That sure will do it; for when the Vulgar see,
Such Worthy Presidents, Their Leaders be,
Who Exercise Therein, and Lead the Van,
They will be brought to it, do they what they can;
How Church-Musick is come to Decay.
But otherwise, for want of such Example,
It Is meanly Vallu'd, and on It they Trample:
And by That Great Defect, so long unsought.
Our Best Church-Musick's well-nigh brought to Naught.
Besides, An Excellent Ornament, for Great, and Divine Persons.
No Robes Adorn High Persons, like to It,
No Ornaments for Pure Divines more Fit.
That Council given by the Apostle Paul,
Does certainly Extend to Christians All;
Especially to You, who Leaders are;
And therefore Judge to have the Greater Care*
Collossians* the ^^. the 16th. Verse*
(Turn to the Place;) That Text will Thus Rehearse*
(Viz.) Let the Word of Christ dwell in you Plentiously* Christ's Command for
the use of It.

(What Follows? Music in Its Excellency)
Admonishing your selves, (in Sweet Acchord)
In Singing Psalms, with Grace unto the LORD*
Sed sine Art, That cannot be done,
Et sine Art, Better let alone.
I Will Hint you to an Eminent Example, A Most Eminent Example in Music, worthy
Imitation.

Who was a Singer, Singularly Ample;
Though not a Priest, yet He a Prophet was,
And did All Priests, and Prophets far surpass,
In This same Art; and in It Sang so Well,
That He, The Singer Sweet of Israel,
Was called. --
He was both Prophet, and Great King of Fame,
Of High-Transcendent* Acts DAVID by Name,
A Man (Recorded) aften Gods own Heart;
And (Scripture says) could Sing, and Play His Part;
Or else, what mean Those Instruments* which Those
1 Chr. 23. ^.
Four Thousand used, (in Chronicles) He chose
To Praise the Lord with? Nay, The Greatest Quire in the World.
Much more than That
He did, toward That Great Work: But wat ye what?
He made Those Instruments; which shows, That He
Did more than Slightly Price* This Mystery: King David's Extraordinary skill,
and Activity in Music.

And had much more than Ordinary Skill:
Nor was He Lazy in His Mind* or Will;
He was Mechanic, Musicus, and Poet;
His Various Works in Scripture, Plainly show It.
He was not well Content to be One Thing:
(The Greatest Thing that wa^* to be a King;)
Much less to be enclosed within a Cell*
Amongst Piles of Books, which All Things would Him tell,
And He tell Them again, as if that He
Had Skill and Knowledge* in each Mystery*
Lip-Knowledge was to Him no Satisfaction,
But Vigorous He always (...) for Action;
He would be ever Doing something; and
What e're opposed Him, could (...) Hi^ withstand.
Who can Example better for for us be* The Best Example for Great Persons, and
Divines, in the World, as to This Thing.

Than such a Man? Yet such a Man as He?
WHO was Beloved of God; His Chosen One;
WHO sat upon an Everlasting Throne;
WHOSE Power was such, as He commanded All,
Both Princes, Priests, and Levites at His Call;
He Summoned Those together; 1 Chro. 23.3.
and They came
Immediately, to Perform That same,
Which He should Them Command; and Streightway They
Chap. 25.7.
(As you may read) fell close to Sing, and Play,
Till they were Cunning; that is, Skilful; and
Not only Chatter'd* but did Understand
The Mystery, (without all doubt) so well,
That None each Other Therein did Excel;
Verse 8.
For by That Text, you will read, They Lots did Cast,
Who should be First, and who should be the Last:
So Equal were They, Learned in Their Skill,
That Any might, Another Place well fill,
Without Defect, or Blemish; which (in such
A Number as we Read of 288
There) was much
And shows, a Wondrous Dilligential Care
Was had, to make That Service Choicely-Rare:
Nor can This Service, which we now do use,
(Instead of It) be done without Abuse,
Except such Hints as I have given, may
Prevail with You; not only for to Say;
And Sit; and Hear; and Pay; and give Command,
In That same Thing you do not understand;
But that you enter your own Selves into It,
That, That Is the only way will surely do It.
How can a Master be a Right Commander,
When as He stands under so great a Slander,
As Ignorance?
How can He be a Judge of Good, or Ill,
When (in That Thing) Defective He Is of Skill?
Or how can He tell, who Sings Right, or Wrong,
Who in the Chorus, cannot Join among?
What shall I say? or shall I say no more?
I must go on, I Am Brim-full, Running over:
But yet I Will hold, because I judge ye wise;
And few words unto such, may well suffice.
But Much-much more than This, I could Declare;
Yet for some Certain Reasons I Will forbear;
But less than This, I could not say; because,
If saying less, I should neglect Gods Cause;
For it is His Cause Alone, I plead so strong for;
And it is His Cause-Compleated, that I long for:
And it is True Doctrine certainly, I Preach:
And it is That Doctrine every Priest should Teach:
Therefore I hope your Pardon I shall have,
For being Thus Bold; the which I Humbly Crave.


THE PREFACE.
ALthough I have Fronted my Book, with the Divine Part; in which I have
Preached my Little Short Sermon, upon That Text of St. Paul, (as you will find)
Relating to the Most Excellent Part, or Biece of All True Christians Public
Service, to God Almighty; the which I hope I have done, to the Satisfaction of
All Rationally-Pious Christians, who do, and cannot but Account It Most
Necessary, to Serve Him, according to His Own Exhortations, Order, or
Appointment. Yet My 1 st, and Chief Design, In Writing This Book, was only to
Discover the Occult Mysteries of the Noble Lute, and to show the Great
Worthiness of That too much Neglected, and Abused Instrument; and my Good Will
to All the True Lovers of It; in making* It Plain and Easy; (as now It will
certainly be found) Giving the True Reasons, why It has been Formerly, a Very
Hard Instrument to Play Well upon; And also why Now, It is become so Easy, and
Familiarly Pleasant: And I believe, that Whosoever will but Trouble Himself to
Read Those Reasons, which he shall find, in the First Chapter of the 2 d. Part
of This Book; and Join his own Reason, with the Reasonableness of Those
Reasons, will not be able to find the Least Reason to Contradict Those Reasons;
But must needs Conclude with Me; That the Lute is a very Easy Instrument.

That is, Any Person (Young or Old) shall be Able to Perform so Much, and so
Well upon It, in so Much, or so Little Time; (toward a Full, and Satisfactory
Delight, and Pleasure; Yea, if it were but only to Play Common Toys, Giggs, or
Tunes) as upon* Any Instrument whatever; yet, with This most Notable,
and Admirable Exception, (for the unspeakable Commendations of the Lute) that
they may (besides such Ordinary, and Common Contentments) Study, and Practice
It, all the Days of Their Lives; and yet find New Improvements; yea doubtless,
if They should live unto the Age of Methusalem, Ten times over; No Limitation
to the Bounds, and Bravery of the Lute.
for there is no Limitation to Its Vast Pounds, and Bravery.

Yet for Common Pleasure, (such as most Ayrey, and Ingenious Persons Learn upon
Instruments for) I do Really Affirm, There is no Easier Instrument in use, than
is the Lute.

I have spoken in That 2 d. Part to every Particular Thing, (so far as I could
Remember) concerning Its whole Progress, from the very Rudimental Beginning, to
the Highest known Perfections of It; and in such a Plain, and Exact Manner,
that None can doubt of my Meaning, or of a Right Information concerning It; so
that ( New) the Lovers of It can find no Greater Enemy to It, and Themselves,
than Faithlesness; nor Greater Friend, than Belief, and Resolution to Attempt
the Trial of It.

I have Proved This out, by several Young Ladies, and others, in London,
Nothing omitted concerning the very Mystery of the Lute, either Practical, or
Mechanical.
during the Time of my Attending the Press, since I began to Print; and Two of
Those Young Ladies, before They had Learned out their 1 st. Month, (which was
but Twelve Times to Their Month) were so Fully Satisfied, (by Their own
Experimental Trial) that Both of Them agreed in the very same Saying, viz.
Eminent confirmed. Testimonies, concerning the Easiness of the Lute.
That They did wonder, why any Body should say, the Lute was Hard. And These
Two Persons were not at all Acquainted with each other, nor had either Seen, or
Heard one another Play; But both Played so very well for such a Time, as much
Rejoiced both Themselves, and all Their Parents, and Friends, beyond all
Expectation.

This is a Real Truth, of which I can Produce diverse Witnesses, if need were.

Why the Mechanical Part is Published.
And as to the Mechanical Part Thereof, (about which I have taken up the Room of
2 Chapters, viz. the 4 th. and 5 th.) I apprehend, that some will think It
Superfluous, and others, a Thing too far below Them to undertake; which I grant
may be for very many; yet Below None to be able to know how It should be done,
or when Well, or Ill done; so that Thereby They may not be Gulled, No Injury to
an Honest Workman.
or Their Instrument Injured by some Ignorant, Careless, or Knavish Workman;
who too often Abuse both It, and the Owners; which He durst not venture to do,
but that he presumes They are wholly Ignorant of His Art.

Besides, I have known many, Living in the Country, (Remote from Good
Workmen) upon some very Slight Mischance happening to their Instrument, A
Great Loss for want of the Knowledge of It.
(for want of That Knowledge, which Here they may find) quite Lay It by; and
the Instrument, for want of Timely Assistance, has grown Worse and Worse,
(sometimes) to Its Utter Ruin.

These are no Small Inconveniences.

Besides, (to some sort of Ingenious, and Active Persons, (although of Quality)
there is a Satisfactory Recreation, attending such Agitations.

And whereas in my Expressions I am very Plain, and Downright, and in my
Teaching-Part, seem to Tautollogize; It would be Considered, (and whoever has
been a Teacher, will Remember) that the Learners must be Plainly dealt with,
and must have Several Times Renewed unto Them the same Thing; which according
to my Long, and Wonted Way of Teaching, I have found very Effectual; Therefore
I have chosen so to do in several Places; because I had rather (in such Cases)
speak 3 Words too Many, than one Syllable too Few.

But if I had been only to have spoke to Those of Experience and to show the
Elegancy of my Tongue; I should have contrived my Discourse into another Shape;
But in that I intend It chiefly for Learners, I conceive I have not spoke Much
too Much: And whereas I may seem too Smart, or Satirical, in some Particular
Places, concerning the Great Abuse, and Abusers of Music; I do not at all
Repent me, as thinking what is said to such Ill deserving Persons, Much too
Little.

It Is like I may be condemned by some, for speaking so Confidently, against the
General Swing of the Times, so very much in Force, and Estimation.

The Truth is, I have considered: that if I should say Any Thing to the
Purpose, I cannot tell how to say otherwise, except I should be a Time-Server;
to Connive, Dissemble, Flatter, and Speak against my own Knowledge, and
Conscience; in Joining with what is Slight, and Trivial, and forsaking that
which is Solid, and Substantial; which, ( I thank God) I have been too Long,
and Well Grounded in, to Renounce; and to Turn me (now) to Embrace Jingles,
Toys, or Kick shawes; which at This Day, too Generally bear Sway, to the Great
Prejudice, both of the Art, and the True Lovers of It.

If This Apology will not serve, to Excuse the Errat's in my Book, of Those
Natures,; I must rest satisfied, to undergo the Brunt of It.

The Best on it is, I need not Fear, any Judicious Masters, or other Ingenious
Knowing Solid Persons, (some such, God be thanked, we have still Living;) and
as for others, I am as Careless, as They can be Envious.

And although These Instructions, are chiefly intended for Learners; yet (upon
due Examination, it will be found) they may be of Good, and Necessary use, to
some Young, Raw, and Unexperienced Teachers, who are often too Confident of
their Own Supposed-Skill, and Ways.

But the Chief Sum of the whole Work it: The Sum, and Great Benefit of the
whole Book.
That It shall stand as a Monument, or Remembrancer of the Very Best
Performances in Music, (both Divine, and Civil) which have been known in the
World; and (as to the Civil Part) Practiced by the Best Masters of These last
50 Years; Better than Which, no Memory of Man, Record, or Author can be
produced, which can say, That Ever there was Any that could Equal It; nor
certainly Any Ever likely to Exceed It.

But yet more especially, as to the Particular Benefit of Any Person making use
of This Book, whether He be Skilful, or not Skilful in the Art; yet if He shall
employ a Teacher in His Family, for His Children, or Others; He shall need, but
to turn to the Contents, of whatsoever Business may be in Hand; and by That, He
may be able to judge (Exactly) of the Right, or Wrong Dealing of such a
Teacher; and may (if He have any Indifferent Skill in Song) Teach Himself*
without the Assistance of any other Teacher.

Of Procuring Invention, or Playing Voluntarily.
The Hints and Directions which I have given, as toward the Procuring of
Invention, or Playing Voluntarily, will be of no Small, but Great Advantage, to
any who are capable of such Observations, and will take Good Notice of the
manner of Them, in Their Explanation; the Way to which may be Plainly
Perceived, in the whole Number of Lessons, quite through the Book.

And whereas I Treat, and Compare, or Similize Music to Language, Concerning
the Language of Music
I would not have That thought a Fantacy, or Fiction: For whosoever shall
Experience It, as I have done, and consider It Rightly, must needs Conclude the
same Thing; there being no Passion in Man, but It will Excite, and Stir up,
(Effectually) even as Language, or Discourse It self can do. This, very many
will acknowledge with me.

The Divinity of Music.
But whereas I Similize It to Divinity, etc. I am not unsensible, but too-too
many will Descent from me, in That Particular; concerning Which, I shall
Conclude my Preface with These following Rhimes, and only Thus much say.

Where in This Book, in certain Places, I
Do mention Music, in Its Mystery;
And in Its Vast Profundity, do tell
Such Stories, as perchance will not Relish well,
In the Ears of some; To whom I thus much say;
Let Them go Practice well, to Sing and Play,
And Study in the Art, as much as I:
Then, may They Understand Its Mystery,
As I have done. -- It Is Foolishness in Men,
To Contradict, they know not what; and when
They'v done, Pretend Authority; because
They Are some ways Learned: Therefore their Words are Laws
They think; or else would have Them so; but I
Do understand, that True Authority,
Comes from True Knowledge, and Experience,
In That Same Thing, of Which It gives Its Sense,
And by no other means.
How can a Blind Man, Judge of Colors be,
Which should be Judged, by Those, who Well can See?
How can a Deaf Man Judge of Sounds, by the Ear,
Who, Thundering Cannons, cannot cause to Hear?
Or how can He, who Understanding Lacks,
In the Mystery, be Judge? although He Cracks
Never so much, of His Great Wit, and Parts;
True Artists They must be, who Judge of Arts.
Therefore, Forbear to Judge, who e're you be, that Thus
In your own Conscience, are Thus Conscious:
Let Things Alone, you do not Understand;
Take Them on Trust, rather at the Second-Hand;
It Is far more Crdit so to do, than Vant
Of Skill, and Knowledge, when you are Ignorant.
The Fool, oftentimes by Silence, Credit gains,
And is thought Wise, whilst Wiselings for their Pains,
In Talking, often are known for Fools; yet They
(Through Self-Conceit) will still find what to say,
Though little to the Purpose; and their Talk,
Much like to Parrots, who Cry, Walk Knave Walk;
Though Naught they understand, as to the Sense;
Yet think Themselves the Birds of Eloquence.
What Here I Have said, I Have said to None but Such*
Whose Knowledge, is Beneath their Tongues, too Much*
And if I Have said too much, they will say;
I Am Sorry not at all;
For much more unto Such, I may,
And not be Criminal.


A Short EPISTLE OF THANKFULNESS, To all my NOBLE SUBSCRIBERS;
WHat Differs Men, but Heaven? Inspiring Arts
Into some Certain Souls of Worthy Parts;
And Tinct'ring them, (at least) with so much Love,
That Nothing seems so Good, They Will Prize, above
Such Excellent Endowments; which they show,
By Countenancing All Things, that they know
Are Fit, and Worthy to be Known, and Prized,
By True Ingenious Souls, and Exercised.
Lo* Here such be; Each in This Number stand,
Who Freely lent, a Ready-Helping-Hand,
To Raise This Work of Mine; which otherwise
Would Scarce 'been Able of It Self to Rise.
Alas, Alas! Poor Arts; yea Artists too;
Were It not for Such as These; what would you do?
I say again, were not for Such as These,
What could you do? -- You might go do your Ease;
And when ye'd done, ye might go Beat your Brains
Again; and have your Labor for your Pains;
This would be your Reward; and Nothing More,
Which to a Manly-Man must needs seem Poor;
But Thanks to Heaven, whose Wisdom's-Ordring-Might,
Not only made the Darkness, but the Light.
Those Two Contraries, which in Nature be,
In All Created Things, are Mystery.
The 2 Contraries in Nature.
Good, could not (Properly) be said to Be,
Were not the Ill, to cause Diversity;
Nor could the Ill, be said to bear a Name,
But for the Good, which Diff'renceth the Same.
The Ill in all Things, is of Ex'lent use,
If Men could use It Right, without Abuse;
The very worst of Evils, (understood)
Was made (for certain) to Set off the Good,
Those Heavy-Moulded-Saturnines, which do
Despise all Liberal-Arts; yea Artists too,
Are much to be Regarded in their Places,
Even like Black-Patches, in Fair-Ladies Faces;
Which though They Bright, and Beauteous were before;
Yet when Those Dulls appear, They are much more
Esteemed Fair. --
God 'twixt His Creatures, has Vast-Diff'rence made,
Witness the Racey Courcer, and the Jade,
The Towering-Faulcon, Lessning in his Flight,
The Buzzard-Dull, the Heavy-winged Kite,
The Nightingale, with Her Sweet-Jugging-Note,
The Screech-Owle, with His Dismal-Frightful-Tote,
The Famed Camelion, Living on the Air,
The Cormorant, who no Good Things will Spare.
And as the Creatures Thus do plainly show,
This Contrariety which All Men know;
So may the very Same be seen amongst Men;
Yet Differenced Thus; that scarcely One in Ten
Adheres unto True Worth,
But You,
Renowned Worthies, worthy of Renown,
You are the Men, High Jupiter will own:
And were not for Those Virtues you Retain,
Within Your Noble-Breasts, It were in Vain,
For Artists Thus to strive, as I Have done Here,
(For Public Good) in making Art appear
Delightful; Lovely; Facile; Acceptable
Unto the Weaker Sort; who are made Able
Now, to Enjoy such Things, as formerly were Hard,
And They (by that means) utterly Debarred.
Therefore to You, and only Such as You
Belongs all Real Praises, as Your Due;
You are the Men I Will Value, Love, and Prize,
And whom (if any) I would Idolize.
But lest I should both You, and Heaven Offend,
(In Modesty to Yours) I Will make an End;
Only
My Just-Due-Debt I Will Pay: My Thanks
I give
And Thus will own Your Favors whilst,
I Live.
The Names of Diverse Honorable, Reverend, Worshipful, and very Worthy Persons,
who did Encourage toward the Printing of This Book, by Subscribing Their
Names, Each One to take a Copy of the Same, at the Price of 12 s. But It cannot
be Expected, in the setting down of These Names, that I should know How to
Place every One according to the Right of Precedence; nor (It may be) give
every One His Due Title* because many (unknown to me) sent in Their Names
without any Titles Expressed; Therefore I hope None will take Offense, that I
Thus set Them down Promiscuously, as They happened to come to my Hands, from
Their own Hand Writings; yet I have, (as near as I could) Set Such and Such of
a County, etc. to stand together; and Begin with the City of York First;
because There, I First Tendered This Business to the Right Honorable
John Lord Frescheville Baron of Stavely, and Governor of York.

Bishopthorpe.
Rich. Stern Esquire Sim. Stern Gent. Lion. Fanshaw Gent. Sam. Brearey Gent.
York.
Tob. Wickham D.D. Ant. Wright B.D. Will. Lo A.M. Will. Ayscough M.B. Madam
Mary Harrison. Sir Jo. Hewley Knight. Jo. Brook Esquire Will. Brearey LL.D Walter
Brearey Gent. Hen. Maisterman Esquire Tho. Jackson Esquire Hen: Mace Cler. Eli.
Micklethwaite Cler. Tim. Wallis Cler. Geo. Tiplin Cler. Tim. Welfit Cler. Rich.
Tenant Cler. Tho. Preston Gent. Jo. English Gent. Tho. Hesletine Gent. Will.
Stubs Gent. Theo. Browning Gent. Tho. Thompson jun Gent. Tho. Fairfax Gent.
Ambr. Girdler Gent. Nath. Topham Gent. Rich. Procter Cler. Joh. Farrer Gent.
Jo: Baines Gent.
Yorkshire.
Sir Jo. Reresby Baronet. Sir Tho. Yarbrough Knight. Walter Laycock Gent. Sam.
Savile Gent. Hen. Air M.D. Jo. Ixem Cler. Geo. Westby Gent. Fra. Stanhope.
Gent. Will. Sympson M.D.
Nottingham.
Robert Pierrepont Esquire Geo. Gregory Esquire Tho. Charleton Esquire Char. Hutchinson Esquire
Sim. Every Esquire Will. Graves A.M. Chri. Hall Gent. Jer. Cudworth Gent. Ben.
Richards Gent. Jos. Clay Gent. Rich. Rippon Gent.
Nottingham-Shire.
Sam. Brunsell D.D. Joh. Brunsell Gent. Will. Sucheverill Esquire Joh. Dand Gent.
Madam Mary Saunderson Will. Cartwright Gent. Joh. Burton Cler. Sam. Leeke Cler.
Rich. Slater Esquire Hen. Watson M.D. Will. Deancleer Gent. Will. Levett Cler. Ste.
Masters Cler. Joh. Richardson Cler. Jo. Holmes Gent. Hen. Smith Cler. Will.
Coodall Cler Arthur Warren Gent. Edw. Carver Cler. Phin. Mace Cler. Fra.
Walsall Cler. Will Norwich Cler. Tho: Cotchet Esquire Tho: Morton Phi. Ellis
Farnworth Cler.
The University of Cambridge.
Dr. Pet. Gunning Bishop of Ely. Dr. Ja. Fleetwood B. of Worcester Dr. Isa.
Barrow Vice Chancellor, and Mr. of Trin. College. O. Mountague, Noblemen. J.
Mountague, Noblemen. Sir Tho: Slater Baronet. Sir Tho. Page Provost of Ks.
Coll. Sir Jo: Rous Knight. Sir Hen: Hobert Knight. Dr. Tho Holbeck Mr. of Eman:
C. Dr. Ja: Duport Mr. of Mag: Coll: Dr. Theop. Dillingham Mr. of Cl. H. Dr. R.
Cudworth Mr. of Chr. Coll. Dr. Jo: Spencer Mr. of Ben: Coll: Dr. Fra. Turner Mr
of St. John's C. Dr. Rob: King Mr. of Trin: Hall. Hen: James Mr. of Qu. Coll.
B.D. Geo. Chamberlain D.D. Ant: Marshall D.D. Hen: More D.D. Ra: Widdrington
D.D. Tho Watson D.D. Clem: Nevill Senior of Trin. Col. Hum: Babington D.D. Will
Linnet D.D. Tho: Belk D.D. Geo: Bright D.D. Ja: Jackson M.D. Jo. Board LL.D.
Will: Fairbrother LL.D. Ra: Flyer M.D. Jo: Gostlin M.D. Pierce Brakenbury M.D.
Edm: Matthewes Bs. D. Ja: Chamberlain Bs. D. Joh: Bougton Bs. D. Hum. Gower
Bs. D. Fr: Roper Bs. D. Jos. Johnston B.D. Jo: Hawkins B.D. Mich. Belk B.D.
Tho: Peel Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Geo: Griffith Mr's of Art, and Fellows.
Tho: Fairmeadow Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Cha: Smithson Mr's of Art, and
Fellows. Will: Buckley Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Tho: Bainbrigg Tho: Gipps Mr's
of Art, and Fellows. Tho: Boteler Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Jos: Gascoigne Mr's
of Art, and Fellows. Sam: Scattergood Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Isa: Newton
Mr's A. and Fell. Jo. Batteley Mr's A. and Fell. Jo: Wickins Mr's A. and Fell. Jo:
Goodwin Mr's A. and Fell. Ric. Staunton Mr's A. and Fell. Rob: Paston.
Fellow-Commoners. Will: Humble Fellow-Commoners. Maurice Kay Fellow-Commoners.
Jo: Milner Fellow-Commoners. Hum: Skipwith Fellow-Commoners. Will Bows
Fellow-Commoners. Will. Sampson Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Not. Coga Mr's of
Art, and Fellows. Marm: Urlin Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Ric: Neech Mr's of Art,
and Fellows. Fr: Grigg Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Rob: Peachey Mr's of Art, and
Fellows. Ed: Duncon Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Tho: Brown Mr's of Art, and
Fellows. Ric: Blyth Mr's of Art, and Fellows. Sam: Bale Mr's of Art, and
Fellows. Ra: Earl Fellow Com: Joh: Wodehouse Fellow Com: Ni: Bacon Fellow Com:
Joh: Alport Fellow Com: O. Doyley Mr's A. and Fell. Arth: Fleetwood Mr's A. and
Fell. Eze: Foxcroft Mr's A. and Fell. Tho: Palmer Mr's A. and Fell. Edw: Goodall
Mr's A. and Fell. Matthew: Rutton Mr's A. and Fell. Not: Vincent Mr's A. and Fell.
Sam: Blythe Mr's A. and Fell. Ja: Loud Mr's A. and Fell. Rich: Hook Mr's A. and
Fell. Joh: Scamler Mr's A. and Fell. Joh. Love Mr's A. and Fell. Ja: Hollis Mr's
A. and Fell. Sam: Herne Mr's A. and Fell. Rich: Leach Mr's A. and Fell. Will:
Buckley Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Sim: Bag Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Cha:
Alston Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Geo: Whichcot Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Ja:
Goodwin Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Jos: Maryon Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Luke
Bagwith Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Tho: Houghton Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Joh:
Spencer Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Edm: VValthew Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Jo:
Eachard Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Jo: Spurling Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Jo:
Pern Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Jo: Glover Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Barlow
Wickham Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Robert Eade Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Jo:
Hughes Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Geo: Oxinden Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Tho:
Fairmeadow Mr's of Art. and Fellows. Char: Smithson Mr's of Art. and Fellows.
Tho: Burlz: LL.B^ Robert Drake Gent^ Robert Wilson Mr. in Music. Tho: Tudway
Mr. in Music. Fra: Crispe Mr. in Music. Dan: Price Batchelors in A. Jo:
Brookbank Batchelors in A. Jo: Tuthill Batchelors in A. Jos: Oldroyd Batchelors
in A. Joh: Caesar Batchelors in A. Jo: Galurd Batchelors in A. Will: Umfrevile
Batchelors in A. Tho: Felstead Batchelors in A. Will: Ashton Batchelors in A.
Cambr. Town.
Ja: Robson Gent. Isa: VVatlington Gent. Tho: Flack Gent. Mrs. Eliz. Heath.
Mrs. Sarah Lilly
County of Camb.
Joh: Robson Gent. Rich: VVinde Gent. Char: Studeville Esquire Captain Roger
Thornton Esquire Joh: Badcock Gent. Tho: Archer Cler.
Bedf. Shire.
Rich: Lee D.D. Jo: Brown Esquire Hen: Beacher Esquire Tho: Salmon Cler.
Norwich and Norfolk
Herbert Ashley Dean of Nor: D.D. Will: Herbert D.D. Joh: Hobert Esquire Will:
Crabe M.D. Ow: Hughes LL.D. Tho: Tenison B.D. Cha: Robotham B.D. Will: Adamson
Cler. Jo: Connould A.M. Hen: Mazey Cler. Jo: Paris A.M. Gawen Nash Cler. VV:
Rawley Gent. Joh: Hayward Schoolmaster. Tho: Pleasants Organist. Sam: Cook
Gent. Sam: Rix A.B. Rich: VVebster Cler: Fra: Price Gent. Fra: Emperor Gent.
Will: Ferrer Gent. Ja: Laws Masters in Music. Tho: Laws Masters in Music.
Nath: Burrel of Sudbury Cler.
Kings-Lynn.
Hen: Bell Jun' Gent* Hen: Hoogan M.D. Jo: Putuertoft Gent. Joh: Carry Gent.
Manch. C.
Nich: Stratford Warden D.D. Fra: Mosely Fellows. A.M. Mich: Adams Fellows.
A.M.
Linc. Sh.
Sir Robert Bolles Baronet. Math: Barraford A.M. Ja: Spencer A.M.
Peterbor.
Fra: Standish Cler. Joh: Workman Cler. Will: Forster Rich: Carier Cler. Jo:
VVyldbore
At London.
Dr. Hen: Bridgeman, Bishop of the Isle of Man. Sr Will: Langham Knight. Sir
Sam: Morland Baronet. Sim: Patrick D.D. Jo: Gardener D.D. Luke Ridgeley M.D.
Peter Barwick M.D. Edw: Duke M.D. Dr. Chamberlain Jun' M.D. Peter Vinke B.D.
Robert Tatnall A.M. Eze: Lampen Gent. Hum: Dove Gent. Hen: Dove Gent. Ja: Chase
Gent. Ja: Heart of the Royal Chap. Gent. Bryan Fairfax Esquire Geo: Evelyn Esquire Madam
Ann Monteth Jer: Forcer Mr. in Music. Josias Chorley A.M. Tho: Clebourne Gent.
Basil Hill Chyrurgion. Ja: White Organmaker. Sam: Bishop, of Finchingfeild
Cler. Jo: Bourn, of Wiltshire Cler. Lawr: Fogge, of Chester B.D. Tho: Clark of
Chester Cler. Jo: Nicolson, of Durham M.D.
Mid. Temple.
Jo: Orleber Esquire Tho Sergeant Gent. Tho: Brandon Gent. Char: Blount Gent. Jo:
Sturt Gent.
Gr. Inn.
Justin Paget Esquire Will: Drake Gent. Rich: Hacker Gent.
Lincoln's Inn.
Sir Rich: Stote Knight. and Serj. at Law. Will: Lodge Gent. Fra: Bows Gent. Will:
Jenison Gent. Will: Faithorne, for 3 Books. Gent.
Hum: Salt, the Printer-Composer of This Book.

These are All the Names which have been Hitherto sent me In, from Sundry
Friends, ( My Self having Visited very Few, of the whole Number;) Therefore I
hope I shall not be Blamed, for not Publishing the Names of Diverse, (who I
doubt not but have already Subscribed; but (as yet) not come to my Hands) the
Work not admitting any Longer Delay. Yet I have left This Next Page Blank, on
Purpose, for the Names of All Such Persons, as may happly be sent In, before
the whole Impression be Quite put off: And if so, I do intend (God willing) to
have Them set down in That Page, in Those Books which shall Then Remain un-put
off.

Having This Little Room to Spare, I thought It convenient to insert Thus much,
by way of Answer to some, who seem to dislike my way of Rhiming.
I Hear, some Are, who do pretend to Spy
Faults in my Rhimes, but give no Reason why.
The Rhimes are Perfect; All True-Number'd-Feet;
Run Glib, and Smooth; and in True Accent meet;
What should They more? I Will tell Them: There Is Good Store
Of Sense, and Reason too; which They, Alas!
Regard not much; But let That Slightly pass;
That Is not the Thing They Look for; yet should be:
And is The Chief, Wise Folks desire to see.
If That be wanting Here; Then let Them Shame Me:
If Otherwise; Then let Them Cease to Blame Me.
Yet for Their Further Answer, let Them know,
It Is for my Recreation, Thus I do;
And for my Pleasure, why I Thus sometimes
Link Sense, and Reason In, with Musick-Rhimes;
(Yea, Solid Matter too.) Let This Suffice
To Answer Those, who are so very Wise.
A Short Epistle to the READER, concerning the Authors several Reasons for
Writing This Book.
1st.
LOok for no Splendid-Painted-Outside Here;
But for a Work Devotedly Sincere;
A Thing Low-Priz'd, in These too High-flown Days;
Such Solid, Sober Works get Little Praise;
Yet some there be, 2d*

Love True Solidity.
And unto Such Brave Noble Souls I Write,
In Hopes to do both Them, and Music Right.
I Write It not to please the Itching Vain
Of Idle-Headed Fashionists, or Gain
Their Fond Applause;
I Care for no Such Noise.
I Write It Only for the Sober Sort, 3d.

Who love Right Music, and will Labor for it:
And who will Value Worth in Art, though Old,
And not Affrighted with the Good, though told
It Is out of Fashion,
By The Reader has Liberty to put in what Word he thinks most Proper.
-- of the Nation:
I Write It also, 4th*
for to Vindicate
The The Lute.
Glory'f Instruments, now out of Date,
And out of Fashion Grown, (as Many Tell)
It Is doubtful (sure) that All Things are not Well,
When Best Things are
Most Slighted, though most Rare.
I Write It likewise, 5th*
for That Fervent Love
I Bear unto the Lute, which far Above
Most Instruments I Prize; This cannot be
A Fault; For All Men have Liberty,
To Like, and Love,
What They do Most Approve.
I Write It also, 6th.
out of Great Good Will
Unto my Contrymen; and Leave my Skill
Behind me, for the Sakes of Those, that may
Not yet be Born; But in some After-day
May make Good Use
Of It, without Abuse.
But Chiefly, I do Write It, 7th.
for to show
A Duty to my Maker, which I Owe;
And I no Better Way know how to do,
Than Thus, to strive to make One Tallent Two:
If Thus too Blame,
I Will Humbly Bear my Shame.
AN ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning the Value and Price of the BOOK. Licensed R.
L'Estrange, May 5. 1675

Reader,
YOU may see, by This Worthy Person, (the Licenser) who is an Eminent, and
Skilful Critic in This Noble Art) and by Those Honorable, Learned, and Worthy
Persons (my Subscribers) before mentioned, what Fair Encouragement I have had
to Publish This Piece; (the which has been Freely Exposed to the View, and
Examination of many of Them;) However, I must not expect It can Please All; But
if It Please the Judicious, Wise, and Sober Sort, I shall have what I look for.

And as to the Price:

Take Notice, That although It has been Hitherto Subscribed but at 12 s. in
Sheets, by All Those Honored Persons, Yet in regard of My Unexpected Great
Charge, besides My Inconceivable Care and Pains, to have It Completely done; It
cannot well be Afforded at That Price, to return Me any Tolerable, or
Reasonable Requital.

However, out of a High Respect to All the True Lovers of the Art; and more
especially to Diverse, (and I believe very many) who would willingly have been
Subscribers, (together with Those abovesaid) had they known of It, or could
have had opportunity of So Doing; I do (I say for Their sakes) Declare, That
whosoever shall Purchase This Book within the 1st. 3 Months, viz. before the
10th. day of August, in This Present Year 1676. shall be looked upon as a
Subscriber, and shall only pay for It, the Subscription Price, viz. (in Sheets)
12 s. But after That day is past, the Price is intended to be Raised; There
being not Many of Them Printed.

I shall only Add Thus much, (as being bold to say) That there are several
Pages; yea several Lessons in This Book, (according to the Ordinary Value,
Esteem, or Way of Procuring such Things) which are every one of Them of more
Value than the Price of the whole Book, by Far.

And for the peculiar Credit of my Printer, (upon the Comparative Examination
of the Well-doing of This Work, in reference to his Undertaking,) It will be
found that He has Outdone all Musick-work in this kind, Ever before Printed in
this Nation; And is the only fit Person to do the like: He only having those
New Materials, the like to which we never had made before in England.

Concerning the Church-Psalms, In reference to the POETRY: Composing and
Singing of them. By way of Preparation.
CHAP. I.
ALL things in the Church, and in its Service, would be so contrived and
ordered, that the Common-Poor-Ignorant-People might be so much capable as it is
possible of Apprehending, Discerning or Understanding; so, as they might unite
their Voices, Hearts and Affections together with the Congregation, and the
Service. The which cannot more hopefully be effected, or brought to pass, than
by making all things in the Service plain and easy to their Capacities.

Now as to Music, it is known and observed by Experience, The benefit of short
and uniform Ayrs.
that Short-square-even and uniform-Ayres are both Pleasant, and readily
Apprehended and Learned by most.

And as there are likewise a great number, who are but indifferently inclined
by Nature to Singing, who notwithstanding, if they were considered after this
manner, together with what I shall further make mention of, would make a very
good Assistance in the Chorus, which otherwise are utterly debarred, and made
incapable.

There are two things very considerable as to this Preparation of good Singing
in Churches.

First, the Poetry. Secondly, the Composition of Music. For Psalms what manner
of Poetry best.


The Poetry would be, 1. Even and uniform, as to the number of Feet in each
Staff.

2ly. Every Staff of the same Psalm would correspond with the first Staff, in
the same order of Feet; otherwise the same Tune which his the first Staff, will
not serve the whole Psalm.

There would not be too great a variety.
Again, (as to the whole number of Psalms) there would not be too great a
variety of Poetical forms or shapes in the Staves: Because that then a fewer
number of Tunes might serve for the whole; so that if the Book of Psalms were
composed by an Excellent Poet, and as Excellent a Musician, into a matter of 8,
10, or 12 Varieties, and those Varieties even, smooth, short, and uniform to
themselves, it might be enough, and doubtless conduce very much to the drawing
in of a Congregational-good-Quire.

But if the Poetry be too various and intricate, as I will instance in that
Excellent Piece of Mr. or Dr. Woodford's, (which I have lately seen) in which
there is scarcely two of the whole number of his Psalms which are of the same
order or quantity of Fee^ quite through his whole Book, and several of them
un-uniform to themselves, viz. not one Staff like another of the self-same
Psalm. I say, that although it be an Excellent Piece, for a Poet to look upon,
yet it is not a fit Piece to be composed for the use of a Congregational Quire,
for those Reasons aforesaid. There being work more than enough, for a most
excellent Musician during his whole life, to compose proper and fit Airs to
those Psalms, but never to have them Sung by any Country or City Congregation.

For those Airs which are intricate and un-uniform (the which I call
unnatural, as those must needs be) are difficult to be Sung, especially by
those who have no Skill.

The Poet and the Composer to be of the same understanding.
The Poet therefore and the Composer ought both to be so much of the same
Understanding in each Art, that these, or such like Observations might guide
them both. And doubtless he is to be looked upon as the most exquisite Poet,
who is that able to command his Fancy.

The Common Rhimes and Phrases in our Psalms are many of them very absurd and
ridiculous, and it is to be wished that they might be amended. Many of our old
Psalm Tunes excellent.
But many of our old Psalm Tunes are so excellently good, that I will be bold
to say, Art cannot mend them or make better.

I conceive it might be very well worth a Considerative Poet's undertaking, to
suit some of those Psalms which need amendment, to some of those our old good
Tunes; because those Tunes are already apprehended and learned by most of the
Common People. The benefit of retaining them.
Therefore they will the more readily embrace a new Alteration, when as they
find they are not too much puzzled with Novelty, but can bring them with ease
into their old Tunes.

Concerning the Composer, and his Observations in Composing.
As for the Composition, making, or inventing Tunes for the Church-Psalms, it
would, First, be done by a Chief Musician, according to the Example of the
Prophet King David.

Secondly, the Musician should observe to cast all such Psalms as are
concerning Humiliation, Confession, Supplication, Lamentation or Sorrow, etc.
into a flat, solemn, mournful Key; and on the contrary, all such as are
concerning Rejoicing, Praising of God, giving Thanks, or extolling his wondrous
works or goodness, etc. into a sharp, sprightly, brisk Key; contriving for both
as much Majesty and Stateliness as can be found out in the Art, which abounds
with plenty; observing the nature of the words, so as to suit them with the
same likeness of conceit or humor from his Art. There being a very great
affinity, nearness, The great affinity betwixt Language and Music too much
neglected; and known to very few*
naturalness or sameness betwixt Language and Music, although not known to
many. And it is a bemoanable pity to consider how few there are who know, but
fewer who consider, what wonderful-powerful-efficacious Virtues and Operations
Music has upon the Souls and Spirits of Men Divinely-bent. And to publish here
what I am able to say in this particular, according to a daily experience which
(I thank God) I have of it, will be looked upon as a piece of Vanity, therefore
(as to that) I shall be silent, and so proceed to my intended purpose of giving
Directions for the best way of Singing Psalms in Parochial Churches; concerning
which there are two ways which I have prompted unto, so that either may be
followed to very good purpose, but both together put into Practice will be most
magnificent, and is as follows.

CHAP. II. Concerning Parochial Music, viz. Singing of Psalms in Churches.
I Shall not need to blazon it abroad in Print, how miserably the Prophet
David's Psalms are (as I may say) tortured or tormented, and the Service of God
dishonored, made course, or ridiculous thereby; seeing the general outcries
of most Parochial Churches in the Nation are more than sufficient to declare
and make manifest the same, so often as they make any attempt to sing at those
Psalms.

Therefore I will say no more to that particular, nor rubb that sore place.
Only thus much I will presume to say, viz. That (sure) it were far better never
to sing at all in Churches, or in Gods Service, than to sing out of Tune: that
is, not in Harmonical Conchord or Agreement.

For as I often use to say, The signification of Conchords and Dischords in
Music.
that as Conchording unity in Music is a lively and very significant simile of
God, and Heavenly joys and felicities, so on the contrary, Jarring Discords
are as apt a simile of the Devil, or Hellish tortures.

This observation is clear enough to all who understand those
Admirable-Divine-Mysteries, which lie couch't in Music, and This (too much
neglected) part thereof (Singing.)

Certainly the first Institution of Singing of Divine Hymns and Psalms in
Churches was, both to illustrate and adorn the Service, and likewise to be as a
means or an occasion of help toward the raising of our Affections and
Devotions, to praise and extol God's Holy Name.

How Christ's Church was exhorted to Sing with a Grace, and to make melody.
It Is very well worth noting how St. Paul instructed the Ephesians, chap. 5.
verse. 18, and 19. Thus. Be fulfilled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves
in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; singing and making melody to the Lord
in your hearts, etc.

So likewise does he exhort the Colossians, chap. 3. verse. 16. in these words:
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your own selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing
with a Grace in your hearts to the Lord.

This was (we may see) the undoubted practice and endeavor of Christ's Church
in His, and the Apostles time, not only to Sing, but to Sing with a Grace and
making melody. The which two things are not possibly to be done, without some
skill, and singing in Tune.

And that ( viz, Singing in Tune) I do confidently affirm can never be done,
except there be some other way found out than that which at the present is
generally in practice in our Churches; the which I shall by and by demonstrate
and make very plain, by undeniable Arguments.

But first I desire that Those foregoing Admonitions of St. Paul might be a
little better taken notice of than generally they are.

And because I am as much a Divine (I mean a Priest, and Son of the Church) as
a Master in Music: I will take the liberty to give my Explanation of those
words of St. Paul, yet humbly submitting to better Judgments.

St. Paul speaks to the Colossians thus: Let the word of Christ dwell in you
plenteously in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves in Psalms
and Hymns, The Explanation of St. Paul's words.
and spiritual Songs, etc. which to me seems as much as if he should have said,
Let that word which Christ formerly spoke unto you about such things dwell in
you, or be remembered by you, etc.

Whence I do infer thus much, viz. that it was Christ's own instruction,
direction, advice, or command formerly given unto them, to teach and admonish
one another in that very exercise of Singing of Psalms, etc. otherwise what can
be meant by that saying of St. Paul's, Let the words of Christ dwell in you,
but that Christ had taught and admonished them before concerning it, and so
that by their diligence and careful practice therein (which was a piece of
wisdom in them so to do, in regard they had been formerly so admonished by
Christ) they might thereby be enabled so to Sing, as it might be both graceful,
and melodious.

The Reason why Christ and St. Paul gave this earnest Instruction.
For without all question Christ (who was the wisdom of his Father) was not
ignorant of the least secret or mystery in any Art whatsoever, nor of any
thing that might conduce to the Benefit or Completing of any Performance in
reference to any undertaking. Christ knew the difficulty of that service of
Singing so very well, that (I am subject to believe) therefore it was that he
had formerly by his own word admonished them to that Duty of practicing and
teaching one another: And therefore likewise was it, that St. Paul thus was to
re-mind them of it, their Duty; well knowing how very needful such a piece of
practice was to the right performing of so solemn and Saint-like a Duty, in
that it was as a Sacrifice done unto God. And how subject men are to do it
lamely or ill-favour'dly without skill, care, or practice, is too manifest by
the general ignorance in that quality of Singing, which may be perceived in
most, who chiefly should, or ought to have so much skill in it, as both to
perform in it themselves, and also to teach and admonish those who are weak or
ignorant, according to that Exhortation of the Apostle in those last quoted
places. By which Exhortation it plainly appears, Singing of Psalms no slight or
negligent business, as too often is seen*
that Singing of Psalms is not a Duty of so slight or negligent regard, as all
those who do not enable themselves to have that skill, seem to believe it is,
otherwise (sure) they would not be so idle, careless or negligent, to make so
slight of it, as not to endeavor for so much skill (at least) as to be able to
set or lead a Psalm-Tune by the Rule of Art, which a Child may be taught to do
in a months time or less.

And those who have not that faculty, nor do endeavor so far as in them lies
to obtain it, shall never make me believe that they have the word of Christ
dwelling in them plenteously, etc. let them talk never so fairly and well.

Yet I will not deny but some there are who by Nature are absolutely incapable
of Singing any Tune Harmonically Who are to be excused from it.


Such, I say, after they have endeavored all they can, and find that
impossibility of attaining it, are justly excusable.

Provided they still encourage and promote it in others. But certainly all
Christians who are in Nature capable of it, Who are culpable*
and do neglect it, are culpable before God.

Now by what I have here said it cannot but appear, that Singing of Psalms is
both a Christian man's Duty, and ought to be his great care to do it well, and
no ways slightly or negligently.

But because this Duty is generally neglected in most Parochial Congregations
in the Nation, and that they are also at a loss how to have it well performed,
(and I do confidently affirm that it is absolutely impossible ever to have the
Psalms rightly and well performed according to the common way used throughout
the Nation) I will (here following) first give my Reasons why I thus conclude,
as also propose an absolute-certain and infallible way, Impossible to have the
Psalms constantly well Sung, but by some other means than formerly.
how to have them well and rightly performed.

CHAP. III.
ANd as concerning this matter, I will not deliver my Opinion, but my practical
Experience, Knowledge and Judgment* both according to the rules of Reason, and
above 50 years experience and practice in this Art of Singing. And thus I
proceed.

First, It is to be noted what a general defect, Note how hard it is to Sing in
Tune.
or insufficiency there is in Nature, observable in all Voices whatever; so
that let the most curious, tractablest, and best accomplished Voice, adjoined
to the most exact Ear, both which uniting in one person, together with the most
perfect and profound skill in the Art of Music that can be imagined; Proved by
the rule of Reason and Experience in the Art.
this person (I say) shall not assure himself to be able to Sing any one Song
(although never so well practiced in it) of the length of one of our ordinary
Church-Psalms, but that he shall be proved to have Sung out of Tune, before he
has finished that Song.

This is a real Truth, which I doubt not but all experienced Masters in the Art
will affirm with me; Experience having all along confirmed this thing, (viz.)
That no Voice has ever been found able (certainly) to sing steadily and
perfectly in Tune, and to continue it long, without the assistance of some
Instrument, but that it would either Rise or Fall some small matter from the
first pitch it began at before it had made an end.

Yet I will not say that it is so impossible but that by chance it may be done,
but not certainly.

Nor need any one fear to lay a good wager against the most confident Attempter
of such an undertaking; especially when the Key shall be given him from another
person,
as always the Psalm-Tunes are (in Churches) given by the Clarks.

The consequence, proving the necessity of some assistance.
Now what I would infer from hence, is this, viz. That if such an absolute
Voice as I have made mention of, shall be thus uncertain of Singing in Tune,
etc. what shall the unskilfull-inharmonious-course-grain'd-harsh-Voice be able
to do without some certain help or support? most apparent it is, that it must
needs Sing miserably out of Tune, and all others who venture at it thus
confusedly, without regard, skill, or any other help besides their own
ignorance, etc. And this is the general condition of most of our Parochial
Quires. And certainly God Almighty can take no delight or pleasure in such
halt, lame and blind Sacrifices.

Therefore I say, and advise, that if you will Sing Psalms in Churches, Sing in
Tune.

But now you will say, That Is impossible by your own Arguments. I say so still.
Why, what will you have us to do? you will say. Note just here what you are to do.
Still I say, Either Sing in Tune, or Sing not at all. Why then you will say, Sure
we must not Sing at all. I say not so, but yet I say Sing, for Christ has bid
you Sing, and Sing in Tune too, or with a Grace, which can never be without it,
viz. Singing in Tune. How can that be? why now I Will tell you how, viz.

The certain way how to Sing Psalms well and in Tune according to the best
Advice.
If you will Sing well and in Tune, the first thing you are to do is to take the
advice of St. Paul, which is to teach and admonish one another, as before he
has directed you unto, in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, etc. This is
his advice and counsel; and if it be worth any thing take notice of it: but if
you think it be not worth noting, continue still in your ignorance, but yet
speak plainly and outright what you think,
viz. That St. Paul's counsel is not worth a Rush, and that you care not a pin
for it: Plain dealing's a Jewel you know; and this would be far better so to
say, and make an end of the business and trouble, than to guggle and gull, or
sooth up your selves in a false show, Hypocritically seeming to approve of his
counsel, in doing of some slight things scurvily, which please your own lazy
humors, and are things of little labor and small cost: But where you can
swallow such goblets, (I mean, as to save both your pains, and your purse) let
St. Paul go whistle with his Psalms, and give his counsel to those who have
nothing else to do.

These, or such like close-lurking-sayings, Arguments or Thinkings must needs
be supposed to be the result of such strange and gross negligence, which is
generally found, and too apparent in most Parish Congregations.

But now methinks I hear some of the most ingenuous and pious of you say, Alas,
how is it possible that we should teach and admonish one another according to
St. Paul's directions and advice? since none of us have any (the least) skill
in the Art of Singing, nor was it ever put to us; and so are utterly destitute
of all hopes of ever attaining to that ability.

Truly this is a very sad complaint, and much to be lamented. And the first
thing I shall say unto it is this, viz. The more shame be upon your Parents and
your selves for it.

But here secondly I would ask this one Question, A very pertinent Question.
viz. Whether you think that St. Paul was such an impertinent Fellow (as by
your neglect he seems to be made) to counsel and advise the Colossians to a
thing with such Emphasis, as here in this place he does, where he says, Let
the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; Singing with
a Grace in your Hearts unto the Lord: if it were not a matter of more then
ordinary concern? Sure, sure, sure, Singing of Psalms and spiritual Hymns by
Art and skill (though it be much out of fashion, and slightly regarded, or
ill-favourdly performed by most, or very many) is a thing of so much wisdom,
whereby good Christians might show the plenteousness of Christ's word dwelling
in them, that it would undoubtedly most gloriously become the gravity,
splendor, or function of the most illustrious, even Princes themselves; and if
so, then questionless All others.

CHAP. IV.
DAvid the King, and the beloved Prophet of God, was called the sweet Singer of
Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1. which denotes to us, that he did not only satisfy himself
with that most eminent Quire that ever mention was made of in the whole World,
The most magnificent Quire that ever was in the world.
viz. 4000 persons, of Princes, Priests and Levites, and the very best of the
People, who praised the Lord with Instruments, which he (David the King)
himself had made, 1 Chronicles. 23.5. But without all question he himself was a
performer amongst them, yea and a very skillful one too: otherwise he would
never have made, or given directions for those Instruments, much less have
assumed that Name of the sweet Singer of Israel.

Now upon a solemn consideration of these things, how really true they were,
how wonderfully Glorious they must needs be, considering that choice and
curious care which was taken in the preparation for that Service, and how
exceedingly acceptable they were unto God Almighty; for it is doubly worth my
writing and your reading to take notice of that place of Scripture which here I
will set down, viz. 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13, 14. the words are these: And when the
Priests were come out of the Sanctuary, Note carefully.
(for they were all sanctified) and the Levites the singers of all sorts being
clad in fine linen, stood with Cymbals, and with Viols, and Harps, at the
East End of the Altar, and with them an hundred and twenty Priests, blowing
with Trumpets; And they were all as one, blowing Trumpets and singing, and made
one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord;
And when they lifted up their voice, with Trumpets, and Cymbals, and with
Instruments of Music, The wonderful effects of Music and that Quire.
and when they praised the Lord, singing, For he is good, because his mercy
lasts for ever: Then the house was filled with the Glory of the Lord, so that
the Priest could not stand to minister.

These things, I say, upon a solemn consideration how exceeding acceptable this
Service (thus unanimously and univocally offered) was unto the Almighty, should
stir us up, and rouse us from that drowsiness, or lethargy of stupidity, which
has well-nigh benumbed us into an insensibility, and an uncapableness of
understanding any thing in these Divine Mysteries.

How Music has come to be undervalued.
And certainly Music, (especially such Singing, I mean, with the skill and Art
thereof) for want of a true rational and pious consideration of its
unexpressible excellency and Divine worth and use, has come to fall into the
conceits of most men, (and which is most to be lamented, of some who pass for
learned and pious Divines) an
inferiour-low-slighted-undervalu'd-regardless-despicable-needless Thing, and
not at all thought fit to be brought into the House and Service of God.

And others again there are who can just endure it there, but take no care to
understand any thing in it, letting it pass for an Airy-vapour, a pretty Toy to
keep them from sleeping, and so forth.

Yet ( thanks be to God) some there are who on the contrary are more
considerative, pious and worthy, who esteem it (as indeed it is most fit to be
esteemed) an Ordinance of God, otherwise why should the Apostle Paul so
pressingly call upon the Colossians to let Christ's words dwell with them
plenteously in reference to it, as has been before declared sufficiently.

I will now proceed and make good my Promise; and propose an undoubted way how
the Psalms may be exactly performed, to the great illustration of the Service
of the Church, your own comforts, and the Glory of God; infinitely beyond
whatever has been, or can be by the contrary.

And because I have made it manifest how difficult a thing it is for any person
to Sing in Tune alone; but ten times more difficult when he is within hearing
of any who sings out of Tune; (nor is it possible for any to do it) It is to be
noted, Note when it is impossible to sing in Tune.
that where Nature is deficient, or obstructed, God Almighty has infused into
the Understandings of men wit and ingenuity, by Art to be assisting unto it.

And it is known by all experience, that there are certain ways found out in
this Art to cause men and women, who are but of indifferent capacities, (as to
Music) so to Sing in Tune that (at the worst) they shall not interrupt or
disturb any who are within hearing of them, but (with a very little use and
practice) they shall assist and augment the Chorus to very good purpose.

CHAP. V.
NOw as to this, The best assistance for Voices in singing Psalms.
there is no better way than to Sing to some certain Instrument, nor is there
any Instrument so proper for a Church as an Organ; so that it will follow by
right reason in consequence, that if you will Sing Psalms in Churches well, and
in Tune, you must needs have an Organ to Sing unto; by which means the whole
Congregation will be drawn (or as it were compelled) into Harmonical unity;
even so, that it is impossible for any person, When impossible to sing out of
Tune.
who has but a common or indifferent Ear, (as most people have) to Sing out of
Tune.

This is the way, and None in compare unto it; nor can the performance be
excellent without it, or as it ought to be.

For when we Sing unto God, we ought to Sing cheerfully, and with a loud voice,
and heartily to rejoice: The Scriptures make mention of all this, and much
more, as I have quoted elsewhere sufficiently in this Book.

It Is sad to hear what whining, toting, yelling, The sad Singing in most
Country Churches.
or screeking there is in many Country Congregations, as if the people were
affrighted, or distracted. And all is for want of such a way and remedy as This
is.

Now if (by what I have hitherto said) I may (happily) have gained so much
credit as thus far to be believed by any, as I doubt not but I have with the
rational and ingenuous-well-composed-willing-good-Christians, who would gladly
serve God aright, if possibly they knew but how; yet methinks I hear them make
this scruple, and doubt whether or no this thing be possible ever to be
attained unto, saying, What! An Organ in our poor Parish Church? and An
Organist too? (for if we have the one, we must have the other) This sure can
never be; which way can we compass two such difficult things as These? Answer.
Most easily.

But before I show you the way, I would propose unto your consideration only
these two things, which will be a right preparative to the business.

Two needful things by way of preparation toward a right singing the Psalms,
easily attainable.
The first is, I would have you seriously to consider what it is you are about,
when you pretend to offer this Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to the
Great God, Creator of Heaven and Earth; and likewise consider and ask your self
this Question, viz. If you ought not to perform that Service in the most exact,
sincere, and excellent manner that possibly you can imagine lies in you, both
as to Body, Soul, Spirit, and Estate. This you must needs grant is your Duty,
and that you cannot think any thing too good, too precious, or too dear unto
you to part withal for his Service. All this I am confident you will say is
true.

Now take heed you lie not to God: For if you say it, and are unwilling to do
it, you do worse than lie, for you know your Masters will, but do it not.

The second thing I would have you consider is, only to examine well where the
main impediment, stop, or hindrance lies, and if you can once find it out,
remove it.

This with the former will certainly put you upon doing the business.

And now methinks I hear you cry out aloud and say, that truly if we knew how
to raise an Organ, we would have it very suddenly.

An easy way how to procure an Organ in every Parish Church.
If therefore ye be brought but to this place, doubt it not; for I make no
question but to put you into a ready way, which is this: viz. First I would
have you propose to your selves some very great and urgent occasion, or
necessity for a speedy raising of a sum of Money, supposing such an one as
this; viz. the Parliament has made a great Tax to run quite through the Nation,
such an one as the last 18 months Tax, or rather the Chimney-money; and it must
be paid in presently, without any contradiction or delay.

This I know you would most certainly prepare to do, without accounting it
impossible.

Now I say, do but suppose this, or some such like thing, and presently go
about getting up the money, every man his share, and lay it by for that use,
till your Organ be ready, and you will soon see it set up in your Parish
Church, to your great content and commendations.

The Charge of procuring an Organ in every Parish Church.
The matter of 30, 40, 50, or 60 pounds will procure a very good Instrument, fit
for most little Churches, and so accordingly in proportion for greater.

Therefore now cheer up, the way is plain and easy, if you be willing, and
dare but venture thus much upon the account of Gods Service, (supposing he has
commanded you to this small, or great Tax.) Thus much for an Organ.

But now as to an Organist; That is such a difficult business, as I I believe
you will think absolutely impossible ever to be obtained; a constant Charge! a
Terrible business!

For how many hundred Parish Churches are there in England? and there must be
so many Organists at a yearly charge, whereas when our Organ is once set up, a
small matter will maintain it for ever; But as to the charge of an Organist,
this is sad.

Now for your comfort know, that this is ten times more easy and feasible than
that other of the Organ; and that after ye are once gotten into the way, you
will have Organists grow up amongst you as your Corn grows in your Fields,
without much of your Cost, and less of your Care.

CHAP. VI. How to procure an Organist.
THe certain way I will propose shall be This: viz. First, A far easier way how
to procure an Organist.
I will suppose you have a Parish Clark, and such an one as is able to set and
lead a Psalm, although it be never so indifferently.

Now This being granted, I may say, that I will, or any Music Master will, or
many more Inferiors, (as Virginal-Players, or many Organ-makers, or the like)
I say, any of those will teach such a Parish Clark how to pulse or strike most
of our common Psalm-Tunes, usually Sung in our Churches, for a trifle, (viz.
20, 30, or 40 shillings;) and so well, Note, Note.
that he need never bestow more cost to perform that Duty sufficiently during
his life.

This I believe no judicious person in the Art will doubt of. And then, when
this Clark is thus well accomplished, he will be so doated upon by all the
pretty ingenuous Children, and Young men in the Parish, that scarcely any of
them, but will be begging now and then a shilling or two of their Parents to
give the Clark, that he may teach them to pulse a Psalm-Tune; the which any
such Child or Youth will be able to do in a week or fortnights time very well.

And then again each Youth will be as ambitious to pulse that Psalm-Tune in
public to the Congregation, and no doubt but shall do it sufficiently well.

And thus by little and little, the Parish in a short time will swarm, or
abound with Organists, and sufficient enough for that Service.

For you must know, What is one of the most easy performances in Musicks Art.
(and I entreat you to believe me) that (seriously) it is one of the most easy
pieces of performance in all Instrumental Music, to pulse one of our
Psalm-Tunes truly and well, after a very little showing upon an Organ.

The Clark likewise will quickly get in his Money, by this means.

And I suppose no Parent will grutch it him, but rather rejoice in it.

Thus may you perceive how very easily, and certainly these two Great
difficulties may be overcome, and with nothing so much as with a willing mind.

Therefore, be but willingly resolved, and the work will soon be done.

And now again methinks I see some of you tossing up your Caps, and crying
aloud, We will have an Organ, and an Organist too; for it is but laying out a
little dirty money: and how can we lay it out better, than in that Service we
offer up unto God? and who should we bestow it upon, if not upon Him, and His
Service.

This is a very right and an absolute good Resolve; persist in it, and you will
do well, and doubtless find much content and satisfaction in your so doing.

A most excellent Benefit arising to all young Children.
For there lies linked to This an unknown, and unapprehended Great good Benefit,
which would redound certainly to All, or most young Children, who by this means
would in their minorities be so sweetly tinctured, or seasoned, (as I may say)
or brought into a kind of familiarity or acquaintance with the
harmless-innocent-delights of such pure and undefilable practices, as that it
would be a great means to win them to the love of Virtue, and to disdain,
contemn and slight those common gross ill practices, which most Children are
incident to fall into in their ordinary and accustomed pursuits.

For if they be once truly principled in the Grounds of Piety and Music when
they are young, they will be like well-season'd Vessels, fit to receive all
other good things to be put into them: And I am not only subject to believe,
but am very confident, that the vast Jarrings, and Dischording-untunablenesses,
over-spreading the face of the whole Earth, might be much rectified, and put
into Tune sooner this way, than by any other way ( without a miracle) that can
be thought upon.

This I speak from an experience in my own Soul, who am a man subject to the
passions and imperfections of the worst of men: Yet by This virtue, This
sublime Elixir of Musical and Harmonical Divinity, have found as much (in a
comparative way) as this comes to, upon my own Soul and violent passions.

It cannot be too often repeated, how the Evil Spirit departed from Saul, when
David played upon his Harp: True Music being a certain Divine-Magical-Spell,
Music is a Divine-Magical-Spell against the Devil.
against all Diabolical operations in the Souls of Men. But how little This is
taken notice of, believed, or regarded by most, is grievous and lamentable to
be thought upon.

Well; Let thus much suffice as to an encouragement toward an Organ, and an
endeavor to have good Church-Musick after this manner, which is the most easy
and sure way I can think upon: An Organ being such a prevailing, or commanding
Instrument, and so naturally-suitable to our humane Organs, viz. our Voices,
that after a little time of use and custom to it, there will scarce be one
Voice in an hundred, but will be drawn in, and be able to uni^^ Harmonically,
and to very-very good purpose, although he or she should have no skill at all
in Song, but by a mere natural aptitude they shall do it well.

CHAP. VII. How Psalms may be well performed in Churches without an Organ.
HAving laid you down the most certain, easy, The best way for a certain and
continual Quire in every Parish, or a National Quire.
and excellent way of Singing Psalms to an Organ, which (whatever else can be
said or contrived) shall (still) be the most glorious, magnificent, and a
stately-steady way. Yet because I know there are many who take Boggle at the
very Name of an Organ, and yet otherwise (perhaps) would be content to Sing
Psalms well if they knew how.

I will therefore (according to my best Ability) put them into a most
substantial and infallible way, whereby the Psalms shall not only be well Sung,
and gracefully; but that there shall also be an ability of teaching and
admonishing one another perpetually: (But it is supposed they must follow my
counsel.)

And as to This, it must be considered, that nothing of Excellency or of
High-worth can be done without Forecast, Care, and Industry.

Therefore if we think this Thing we are talking about be such a Thing, viz. of
Excellency, or High-worth, and worthy of our Forecast, Care, and Industry: Then
I say there is no way but one to compass or effect it. That is,

We must once more Face about, and back again to Good old St. Paul, (one of
Christ's Deputies) and try if his counsel be like yet to do us any good, who
says still, Teach and admonish one another in Psalms, etc. (These words must
not be razed out of the Gospel.)

But as to This, it is already confessed, that none of you are able to teach or
admonish in That Faculty; and it may be some of you are grown so old, and
others too full of more necessary Business in your Worldly Affairs, than to
look after such needless things of this nature, due to God and his Service,
(for so it must needs be judged of all, who do so shamefully neglect it.)

But although you will not trouble your selves in This matter, yet it cannot be
thought, but that you will find some little scruples, or motions of Conscience,
secretly whispering and telling you, (as it does all sorts of Sinners) That you
ought to do it, and that it is your Duty so to do it. For it is Christ's own
Order to St. Paul to put you in mind of it, (as has been already proved) and
no humor or conceit of mine, but Christ's and St. Paul's, (if you dare, and
will call it so:) Therefore look to it, as you intend to answer for the
contrary.

But now (to ease you a little of that burden of Conscience) I Will tell you how
you may in some measure make amends for your former neglect, if first (after
your true Repentance) you will strive but to bring up your Children so, as (in
time to come) they may be enabled to understand, and capable to perform in this
so Christian a Duty.

And This must be done by putting them to learn the Art and skill of Song, or
Singing.

Now this again will seem a hard task for those who love their Money better
than the Service of God. Pretend not to serve God at all except, etc.
And to such I say, Pretend not to serve God at all, or else serve him as he
has commanded you; You must bestow something upon Him and his Service.

Imitate that most eminent pattern and example, which you will find in the 2 Samuel 24. and 24. no worse Person then a Prophet and a King, who would not offer
up That unto God which cost him naught; yea although he might have had it
freely given him, as there you may read he might.

Consider, I say, and bestow something upon God; or if not upon Him, bestow it
upon your Children for shame.

The many Benefits attending those who attain to skill in Music.
For this Quality of Music is a Gentile Quality at the very worst: And it will
adorn your Children much more than ten times the cost can be worth, which you
shall bestow upon them in the gaining of it.

Besides, it will make them acceptable to all ingenuous people, and valued
amongst the best.

They will be more capable of Preferment in the world, in case of any necessity.

Moreover, the great content and delight your selves will daily take in them,
and they in themselves, in that they are made fit Instruments to serve God in
the best of his daily Services, which is to Sing, and set forth his praises, in
imitation of the glorious Saints and Angels, in his Heavenly Quire, where they
eternally sing and rejoice before God.

And now methinks I hear some of you say, that you would gladly have your
Children learn this so excellent a Quality, if you knew how to have them taught.

To this I must confess I know not readily how to assist you, (the Harvest is
great, and the Laborers but few) yet I doubt not but to find out a way how to
advise you.

The truth is, there is so great a barrenness of Musical Assistants in most
Country Towns, caused through the neglect, disesteem, or the undervaluing of
this Divine Quality in some, and also through the ill use, and abuse of it in
others, that at the present it will be something difficult to have all Children
taught who live remote from great Towns.

But if I could be assured that you all would be as willing to promote the
business, as I am willing and ready to advise you, I question not but that I
have already found out the way for it: As thus.

CHAP. VIII.
WHeresoever you send your Children to School, How all Children may be so
brought up as they may be useful in the Church and Service ever after.
(I mean to the Grammar School) indent so with the Master, that your Children
shall be taught one hour every day to Sing, or one half day in every week at
least, either by himself, or by some Musick-Master whom he should procure: And
no doubt but (if you will pay for it) the business may be effected.

For there are diverse who are able to teach to Sing, and many more would
quickly be, if such a general course were determined upon throughout the Nation.

There would scarcely be a Schoolmaster, but would, or might be easily able
himself to do the business, once in a quarter or half a year; and in a short
time every senior Boy in the School will be able to do it sufficiently well.

And this is the most certain, easy, and substantial way, that can possibly be
advised unto.

And thus, as before I told you, how that your Organists would grow up amongst
you, as your Corn grew in the Fields, so now (if such a course as This would be
taken) will your Quiresters increase even into swarms like your Bees in your
Gardens, by which means the next Generation will be plentifully able to follow
St. Paul's Counsel, namely, A perpetual ability to follow St. Paul's counsel.
to teach and admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
and to Sing with a Grace in their hearts and voices unto the Lord, and to the
setting forth of his glorious praise.

Which that they may do, I pray God to give all Parents of ingenuous Children
so much Grace, as to bestow this little-poor-trifle upon them, (I mean, that
pitifull-inconsiderable-cost) in their Educations extraordinary, the which will
extraordinarily much conduce to their Advantages, your own Comforts, the
Churches Service, and the Glory of God.

Thus have I with much ardency and zeal for God, and with no less love and
affection unto his true Service, and unto all Christian people, laid down two
undoubted certain-good ways of Singing Psalms well; and either of which will
serve very well, but both together much-much better.

And if neither of These two ways shall be thought fit to be followed, nor some
other way, that may be equivalent (at least) thereunto; whereby the Common way
of Singing may be amended, so as the Service may not become injured or
blemished thereby; it were far better sure only to have the Psalms Read, and
never more pretend, or offer at the Singing of them.

CHAP. IX.
I Will now conclude all with this general and very needful Caution to all
Christians, of what Ranks or Qualities soever, (for it highly concerns every
one to take especial notice of it:) And it is this, viz.

A very needful Caution for every Christian to take notice of.
That every Person (who at any time shall attempt to Sing a Psalm in the Church)
do well consider what it is he is about, or in doing at that time; and whether
or no that performance be not, or ought not to be esteemed as a Sacrifice which
he is then offering up unto God? The which surely cannot be denied.

And if so, then to consider farther the Nature of a Sacrifice, and how it
ought to be prepared and offered.

Now to know all this, and clearly to understand it, there is no readier way
than to turn to the 22 d. Chapter of Leviticus, and read from the 17 th. verse
to the end of that Chapter.

But more especially take notice of verse the 19 th. where it is said thus, (by
Gods own Commandment unto Moses.)

Concerning the Sacrifices offered unto God, and the Purity of them.
Ye shall offer of a free mind a Male without a blemish, etc.

Where note, first, that the Sacrifices offered unto God, should be done
willingly and freely, and not by compulsion or force.

Again, in the 20 th. verse, Ye shall not offer any thing that has a blemish,
for that shall not be acceptable.

Again, verse 21. His offering shall be perfect, no blemish in it.

And in verse the 22 d. (mark well) Blind, or Broken, or Maimed, or having a
Wen, or Scurvy, or Scabby, or Ill-favored, etc. these shall ye not offer unto
the Lord.

Note here how often it is pressed verse after verse, [ not having blemish.]

(...). 1.1(...). ^um. 28 ^1. Deuteronomy. ^5 21.1^.1. Ezekiel. 4^.22. Eccl 35.12. etc.
Sure it is of very great concern. And to this very purpose I could quote you
many more places quite through the whole Levitical Law, as in the margent here
I have set some down; whereby you may plainly see your own Duty, and the great
Care you ought to take therein.

An Object or against Sacrifices.
But here an Objector tells me, that then, under the Law, such Sacrifices were
indeed so and so performed; but now, under the Gospel, there are no such things
to be done.

Answered.
To the which I first answer thus, That herein we may be said to be the more
beholding unto God Almighty, who has disburthen'd us of such grievous burdens.

And I cannot but so call them grievous, because when I reflect upon the great
charge, constant trouble and attendance belonging unto them,
and also upon the general covetousness, and griping humors of too too many in
these our days, and how loath they are to bestow any thing either upon the
Church, or its Services, or upon God himself.

And that if now they were called so constantly to bring in of the best and
fattest of their Herds and Flocks, as then they were; how loath, I say, and
grudgingly surely would they do it? and not at all freely, and of a willing
mind, as God requires it.

I say, when I consider upon these things, I cannot but still say we are much
beholding unto God, for so great an ease and freedom, both to our Purses and
Persons in that particular.

But now secondly, What are the Christians Sacrifices.
although we are not commanded any of these things under the Gospel, yet we
cannot deny but that we are to do some Duties to God, which stand in the room
of those Legal Sacrifices;
the which can be none other than the Sacrifices of Praise, Thanksgiving,
Adoration, and sincere Devotion, etc.

These certainly every good Christian will affirm to be still due unto God; nor
can it be denied, but that these ought to be done without blemish; that is, not
Blindly, Maimedly, Scurvily, Scabbily, or Ill-favour'dly, according to the
words before recited.

Now I say, how these Sacrifices in our time are generally performed, is the
thing chiefly to be noted and regarded.

Nor is there any better way to examine them, The Best way to Examine them.
than according to the last repeated words which God spoke unto Moses his
Servant, saying,

Speak unto Aaron and his Sons, and to all the Children of Israel, etc.

Ye shall offer of a free mind, a Male without a blemish unto the Lord; not
Blind, nor Broken, or Maimed, or having a Wen, or Scurvy, or Scabby, or
Ill-favored, etc.

Which to me seems as if Christ Jesus, or any of his Deputies, (viz. St. Paul,
etc.) should say now unto Aaron, viz. the Archbishop; and to his Sons, viz. the
whole Clergy; and unto the people of Israel, viz. the whole Christian
Congregational Churches, (none excepted,)

Ye shall offer these Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, How they are to be
performed.
viz. Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, of a free mind, viz. liberally,
willingly, cheerfully, and without constraint or grudging.

A Male without a blemish, viz. the most principal piece of Industry, which Art
or Nature has furnished you with ability to perform with.

Not Blind, viz. not ignorantly, but skilfully, (for we ought to be skillful in
the Service of God.)

Nor Broken, viz. not divided, but united.

Nor Maimed, viz. not out of Tune, but in Conchord.

Nor having a Wen, viz. not having any superfluous vain actions either of
Ostentation, or seeming Holiness; but in all humility, and simplicity of heart.

Nor Scurvy, viz. not envious at another who has a better faculty then your
self; but rather rejoice in him, and applaud him.

Nor Scabby, viz. not giving any infectious ill examples, in superfluity of
gorgeous Attire, (beyond your Degree, Rank, or Quality) by Pride, or other
impurity, but in all purity and humility both of body and mind,

Nor Ill favour'dly, viz. no conceited humorous behaviors or affected
gestures, unbecoming the Service of God, but in all comeliness,
sincere-pious-gravity and sobriety.

Thus may the Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving be offered up unto God,
and accepted of Him; but otherwise not.

The Chief Note.
Therefore it behooves every Christian to examine himself, how he is affected
when he is in these Performances, and above all whether his Heart go along with
his Voice or not; without the which all will be but as vain babbling, sounding
Brass or Tinckling Cymbals.

And thus have I according to my small Talent, cast into Gods Treasury my
little Mite, sincerely praying Him so to bless it, as it may become of some
good use to my Fellow Christians, to the Praise and Glory of His Eternal Name.
Amen.

The end of the Directions for Parochial Music.
CHAP. X. Concerning the great Excellency and Eminency of a Psalm well Sung.
I Will now in the Conclusion of this Discourse, add only one Chapter more, in
making mention, both of the Time and Place, when and where was heard (I
believe) the most remarkable, Where and when has been the Best singing of
Psalms that ever the Author heard.
and most excellent Singing of Psalms, that has been known or remembered any
where in These our latter Ages.

But most certain I am, that to my self, it was the very best Harmonical-Musick
that ever I heard; yea far excelling all other either private, or public
Cathedral-Musick; and infinitely beyond all verbal expression or conceiving.

The Time when, was in the year 1644. the Place where, was in the stately
Cathedral Church of the Loyal City York.

And because by the occasion of it, you may the better apprehend, and the more
easily be brought to believe the gloriousness and illustriousness of that
Performance; I will here (in a Short seeming-Digression) declare it unto you:
As also something of more then ordinary remark, relating to that Time and Place.

The occasion of that Singing.
The occasion of it was, the great and close Siege which was then laid to that
City, and strictly maintained for eleven weeks space, by three very notable and
considerable great Armies, viz. the Scotch, the Northern, and the Southern;
whose three Generals were these, for the Scotch, the old Earl of Leven, viz.
David Lessley, (alias Lashley;) for the Northern, the old Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax; for the Southern, the Earl of Manchester: And whose three Chief
Commanders next themselves, were, for the Scotch, Lieutenant General --; for
the Northern, Sir Thomas (now Lord) Fairfax; and for the Southern, Oliver
Cromwell, (afterward Lord Protector.)

By This occasion, there were shut up within that City, abundance of People of
the best Rank and Quality, viz. Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of the Countries
round about, besides the Soldiers and Citizens, who all or most of them came
constantly every Sunday, to hear Public Prayers and Sermon in that spacious
Church.

And indeed their Number was so exceeding great, that the Church was (as I may
say) even cramming or squeezing full.

Now here you must take notice, A Good Custom* not commonly used in Cathedrals.
that they had then a Custom in that Church, (which I hear not of in any other
Cathedral, which was) that always before the Sermon, the whole Congregation
sang a Psalm, together with the Quire and the Organ; And you must also know,
that there was then a most Excellent-large-plump-lusty-full-speaking-Organ,
which cost (as I am credibly informed) a thousand pounds.

This Organ, I say, (when the Psalm was set before the Sermon) being let out,
into all its Fullness of Stops, together with the Quire, began the Psalm.

But when That Vast-Conchording-Vnity of the whole Congregational-Chorus, came
(as I may say) Thundering in, even so, as it made the very Ground shake under
us; The unutterable Excellency and Benefit of a Psalm Rightly sung.
(Oh the unutterable ravishing Soul's delight!) In the which I was so
transported, and wrapped up into High Contemplations, that there was no room left
in my whole Man, viz. Body, Soul and Spirit, for any thing below Divine and
Heavenly Raptures; Nor could there possibly be any Thing in Earth, to which
That very Singing might be truly compared, except the Right apprehensions or
conceivings of That glorious and miraculous Quire, recorded in the Scriptures,
at the Dedication of the Temple, of which you may read in the 2 Chronicles. chapter 5.
to the end; but more particularly eminent in the two last verses of that
Chapter, where King Solomon (the wisest of men) had congregated the most
Glorious Quire that ever was known of in all the world: And at their Singing of
Psalms, Praises, or Thanksgivings, the Glory of the Lord came down amongst
them, as there you may read.

I say, the true apprehensions of This Quire, comes nearest of any thing to be
admitted as a Comparison.

But yet still beyond This, I can truly say, it was useful to me in a much
higher manner, viz. even as a most lively Similitude, idem.
or Representation of the Beatifical, Celestial, or Angelical Quires above,
which continually Rejoice before God, Adoring and singing Praises to Him and of
Him in all Eternity.

But still further, that I may endeavor to make this something more livelily
apprehended, or understood to be a real true Thing;

It would be considered, that if at any Time, or Place, such a congregated
Number could perform such an outward Service to the Almighty, with
True-ardent-inward-Devotion, Fervency and Affectionate-zeal, in expectation to
have it accepted by Him; Doubtless it ought to be believed, that it might be
and was done There, and Then.

Because that at That Time, the desperateness and dismaidness of their Danger
could not but draw them unto it, in regard the Enemy was so very near, and
Fierce upon them, especially on That side the City where the Church stood; who
had planted their Great Guns so mischievously against the Church, and with
which constantly in Prayers time they would not fail to make their Hellish
disturbance, A strange piece of Heathenish Incivility of the Enemy in time of
Divine Service.
by shooting against and battering the Church, in so much that sometimes a
Canon Bullet has come in at the windows, and bounc'd about from Pillar to
Pillar, (even like some Furious Fiend, or Evil Spirit) backwards and forwards,
and all manner of side-ways, as it has happened to meet with square or round
Opposition amongst the Pillars, in its Returns or Rebounds, until its Force
has been quite spent.

And here there is one thing most eminently remarkable, and well worth noting,
which was, That in all the whole time of the Siege, there was not any one
Person (that I could hear of) did (in the Church) receive the least Harm by any
of their Devilish Canon Shot: And I verily believe, there were constantly many
more then a thousand Persons at That Service every Sunday, during the whole
Time of that Siege.

Thus much shall suffice to notify the ( General-unknown or unconceiv'd)
Excellency and Divine worth of Singing Psalms well.

I will now proceed to Cathedral Music.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Cathedral Music.
HAving said so much concerning Parochial Music in the preceding Part, there
is but little left for me now to say as to This, because the Fundamental
Supports of Both being the very same, the very same Fundamental Rules ought to
be observed in Both.

That is, The best way to Refine and Illustrate Cathedral Music.
that All who have any Relation to the Service of the Church, to be able to
teach and admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs; And to
Sing with a Grace in their Hearts unto the Lord: For there is nothing wanting
in the Cathedral Music of our Nation, so much as This.

And if This One Thing were but done, This Alone would do The Work; viz.
Refine, Illustrate, and make a Glorious Quire, in imitation of That in King
Solomon's time, mentioned before in the 2 Chronicles. chapter 5. which undoubtedly was
The Pattern or Original from whence All Cathedral Music was first derived; and
in Allusion to which it is still (even) kept Alive, or used to this day in All
Cathedrals: Yet Infinitely short of what was Then.

But why we in These our Days should come so short of Them, I can see no
reasonable cause for in Nature or Art; because we are without doubt in all
outward Respects, in as good a capacity as They then were, if not in a far
better.

For we have in This our Nation a large Collection, Our Cathedral Store, of the
best Pieces of Art in the world.
Store or Provision of the very Best Pieces of Art (properly fit for That
Service) that can be produced in the whole World.

Made by the most Principal and Choice Masters in That Art; so magnificently
lofty and sublime, that (truly I believe) it is impossible they should ever be
Excelled by Art or Industry.

For certainly we (in these our latter Ages) are arrived to that Eminent height
of Knowledge, Skill and Excellent Proficiency, both as to Composition and
Expression, Vocal and Instrumental, which never was before attained unto in
This Art.

Except it might possibly be by Those most Excellent and Choice Musicians which
the Holy Scriptures make mention of in King David and King Solomon's time,
those Prophetical Singers, Asaph, Haman, Jeduthun, together with their Sons,
Priests and Levites, and the rest of that Vast Quire, the like to which was
never any known to be in the world.

And therefore we may probably be thought to have the very Best, Utmost and
Principal Part of That Knowledge and Skill, Never to be Exceeded or Excelled.
which the Almighty has permitted and thought sufficient for the Sons of men to
enjoy Here, till transplanted Hence.

And also in regard there is Nothing remaining of their Art, Skill, or Labors
in this kind; And likewise in that the World has labored ever since in this
most worthy and profound Art, and nothing is produceable which may be compared
to what at This Day we do most happily enjoy; yet too much unhappy in that so
few know, or endeavor to understand the Thing, much less the unexpressible
Good of it; and therefore make not the Right use thereof, (nor can,) but rather
(on the contrary) slight, disregard, contemn, or profane it.

Therefore I say, we may with much Reason conclude, that we are arrived to the
utmost height that is permitted the Sons of men to reach unto.

And the rather we may so conclude, in that if it be considered how in This
present Age, (if we seem not to decline, or go backwards, The most Excellent
Works of best Authors.
yet) we nothing at all Excel or Exceed those Divine Works of the foregoing,
and never to be forgotten admired rare Authors of the last Century of Years,
whose Names are recorded in our Church-Books, and (doubtless) will be
preserved, as precious Monuments and Examples to all after Generations, so long
as the World and the Church endure.

The consideration of these things should excite and stir us up to endeavor
more after the Knowledge, Skill, and true Understanding of it, and its Divine
Use, than is generally known or done.

The most Excellent Singers of this our Age.
2dly. We have likewise in This our Nation, Men most Excellently skillful and
Expert, as to the Art of Singing; sufficiently able to perform Those so Eminent
and Artificial Composures and Services, far beyond whatever History or Record
makes mention of, since those Prophetical Singers.

The perpetual Allowances given to the Church.
3dly. We have also Pious and very worthy Donations, Stipends or Allowances left
us, by the Devout Zeal of many our Godly and very Exemplary Predecessors,
toward a perpetual maintaining of That so Glorious and Illustrious Service.

Stately Churches built us.
4thly. We have moreover many stately and magnificent Structures, ready built
us, by the Care, Industry and Cost of Those our Benefactors, fit for such
Services.

Now all These Things considered, and Thus concurring, how should it be
doubted, but that we must necessarily have Excellent, and most Exquisite
Church-Musick?

The truth is, I do not doubt it, but can say, I Know, and am Assured that we
have, in some Places.

But this also I must needs say, that in many, or most Places, it is Deficient,
Low, Thin and Poor; and the Great Grief is, in that it cannot possibly be
Bettered or Amended, (Rebus sic stantibus) as the Constitution of things stand
at present, except there be some other way found out for its Assistance, then
now is.

Now here it may be demanded, what way that should, or might be?

The best way to discover the defects in our Church-Musick.
The which to answer Rightly, can be done no better way then first to consider
well, what may be the Defect; which still can be no better way done, or
discerned, then by making a Comparison, betwixt the Original Sampler, and the
Sample, and by observing how They agree, or differ, or what likeness or
unlikeness there may be between Them.

The Sampler or Pattern is expressed before, viz. the Cathedral Music of King
Solomon's Temple.

And here I confess I could make a Long-comparative-Recital, between what was
Then, and what is Now; but I shall forbear That (in This Place) and leave it to
the Considerations and Apprehensions of the Learned and Skillful in the Art,
and shall only speak something to the Defect.

And as to That, it is most apparently to be seen, and in these two Respects.

First, By the General Thinness of most Quires, Two Defects generally in
Cathedral Music.
viz. the Paucity or small number of Clarks belonging to each Quire.

Secondly, By the Disability or Insufficiency of most of Those Clarks.

Now the Thinness of our Quires will appear by This, viz. that in most Quires
there is but allotted One Man to a Part; and by reason of which it is
impossible to have That Service constantly performed, although but in a very
ordinary manner, ( Thinly, yea very Thinly) because that often by reason of
Sickness, Indispositions, Hoarceness, Colds, Business, and many other Accidents
and necessary Occasions, Men must be Absent, Disabled, or Impedited from doing
Their Duties; so that at such Times, the Service must suffer: And such like
Accidents happen too often.

Then again, 2dly. As to the Insufficiency of many of Those (Few) elected
Clerks; it is likewise apparent, that very Few of Them are (or can possibly be)
Masters in the Art of Song, or Singing; much less in the Art of Music in
general.

And except they be Masters in the Art of Singing, (which is no such easy Task
as is vulgarly thought to be) They are not to be accounted Fit for the
Performance of That Choice Duty, which is the most Eminent Piece of Our Church
Service.

If therefore These two Defects were Well Weighed, and considered upon, So, as
they might possibly be Remedied; doubtless our Church-Musick would be
Exceedingly much Refined, and Improved; otherwise Not.

And now because it must needs seem a Hard matter to Rectify These two so very
Great Difficulties, in regard they proceed from an Occult, Remote, or seeming
undiscernable Cause; I will first lay open That unperceivable Cause, and then
show how both Those former Difficulties may (very probably) be Overcome, or
Rectified.

And as to this Cause of the Thinness and mean performance of our Cathedral
Music in the general; The undiscernable but true Cause of the Defects in our
Church-Musick laid open.


I conceive it proceeds from nothing so much as from the low Esteem, and great
Disregard, which most People have, and all along have had of it, in These
latter Ages, since the first Institution Thereof.

The which may be well perceived, in that there is Nothing, or very Little (to
be seen or heard of) Given from any late Benefactors, toward the Augmenting or
Maintaining of it, since the first very liberal and well-meaning Founders large
Bounties and Donations; which although They were very large, liberal, and
sufficient Then, yet They are Now in a manner as it were shrunk to Nothing.

This very Thing, I say, must needs argue a general Low, Slight, and
Disregardless value or Esteem had unto This Service.

Whereas (on the contrary) if we cast our Eyes about, into any County, City,
Town-Corporate, or University, etc. we may soon find out Numbers of late
Benefactors or Donors, to sundry and various intended Good Ends and Purposes.

As, viz. so much given for Ever (in Good Lands) toward the maintaining of a
Lecture, a Free School, an Almes-house, a Fellowship, a Scholarship, Building
of Churches, Chapels, Monuments, or such like.

But still we see This very Excellent, and most Glorious piece of the
Church Service, to stand Forlornly Thin, and very meanly accommodated or
Provided for.

No late Benefactors toward that Service of the Church.
No Great-Rich-Men (Living or Dying) in These our latter Ages, so much as
Thinking, or taking the Least Notice of its Absolute and very Great
Necessities, so as to bequeath some small matter toward its Needful
Augmentation and Illustration.

And that there is such an absolute Necessity, must needs appear, if it shall
be considered, what manner of pittifull-low and mean Allowances the Poor
Servants of the Church (in such Places) are Generally forced to Live upon; The
Clerks Statutable Wages.
where Their Yearly Wages are in some Quires not exceeding eight, ten, or
twelve pounds a year; but none amounting to One quarter so much as may
sufficiently, or comfortably maintain such Officers, according to the Nature or
Dignity of Their Places, in These our Excessively-heightned and Dear Times.

Large, liberal and sufficient when.
Yet I do verily believe, that such Stipends or Wages might plentifully suffice
Them, in Those former Cheap Times, when (as I have heard) Good Wheat was bought
for 4 d. the Bushel; and so in proportion (doubtless) all other Commodities
answerably low-priz'd and Cheap: And Money Then (on the contrary) at a High
value.

So that (without all Question) such a Provision of eight, ten, or twelve
pounds a year, was Then a very Considerable, Ample and sufficient Provision;
(...) insufficient, and the Reason why.
whereas Now, All things being so mightily altered from Cheapness to Dearness,
it must needs be judged a very Low, Inconsiderable, Insufficient, Vnbecoming
and Uncomfortable Livelihood, for such an Officer of the Church, who (according
to the Exhortation of the Prophet King David) should Sing cheerfully unto God,
and Heartily Rejoice.

But Alas! Alas! He or They have little Heart or Courage, in These our Griping
Days, So to Do; but rather on the contrary, to make Sour Faces, and Cry, or
Roar out aloud, and say, Who will do us any Good? etc. For We and our Families
are almost starved.

And how should they be thought otherwise then well-nigh starved; were it not
for that Notable piece of Connivance, or Contrivance of the worthy Prelates and
Masters of our Churches, who suffer Them to Work and Labor (otherwise) for
Their necessary Livelihoods; some in one Calling, and some in another, viz. in
the Barbers Trade, the Shoe-makers Trade, the Tailors Trade, the Smiths Trade,
and diverse other (some) more Inferior Trades or Professions, (God knows.)

These Things, although they seem to the Eyes of some very commendable and
plausible; yet to others Not; who say, it is rather a kind of Dishonor to the
Function of a Churchman, and his Office, etc.

Yet I confess, considering the urgent Necessity; as First, That no more then
Statutable-denominated-Wages can be had;

Then 2dly. That Meat, Drink, Clothes, and House-Rent must be had for
Themselves, Wives and Children:

Therefore of Two Evils the Less is always to be chosen.

So that in This Hard Case, there is a seeming kind of Necessity (pleaded for)
to make Choice of such Men into Those Places, as will Sing so well as They Can,
for so much Money, although they be of other Trades and Professions.

And indeed This is the Real, True, and Miserable Condition of the
Church Service, (in That kind) and of Those Poor-drudging-Clarks of Quires
generally at This Day, The great need of some new Benefactors.
for want of some Open-hearted-Good-willing-Benefactors, to This Choice Piece
of the Service.

So that considering the Old-nominated-Statutable-Wages, being (as I have said)
but So or So; and those who list not to Sing (as generally most of them do) So
or So, for So Much, may go Whistle if they will; for they are like to get No
More; there being No other Provision (as it is said) left, by the Precise Words
of the Statutes. (A sad Case indeed, in These
Miserable-hard-dear-Griping-Times!)

Now I say, These Things considered how certainly True they are, first in
reference to the Clarks Pitifull-poor-Wages, and likewise to the general
Dead-heartedness, or Zeal-benumb'd-Frozen-Affections in These our Times,
toward the Encouragement of Such Things; how can it be imagined, that such
Clarks should be Fit and Able Performers in That Duty, which necessarily
depends upon Education, Breeding, and Skill in That Quality of Music, which is
both a Costly, Careful, and a Laborious-Attainment, not at all acquirable (in
its Excellency) by any Inferiour-low-capacitated Men.

Nor can Such Men be any way Capable of getting It, in That Condition They Now
are in; and very few of Them brings it with Them into Those Places, (as is too
generally seen.)

And here to say what I my self have been an Experimental Witness of, for more
then these 50 years, (in which I have been all along a Member of the Church,
and in That particular Service) would be too tedious and uncomely a Recital in
This Place.

Therefore out of a very Real and True Respect, which I bear to the Honor of
our Church and its Service, I shall forbear.

The Author's Good Hopes.
Yet hoping, that This Little which I have here said, may (one time or other)
happily appear unto the Eyes, and enter into the Hearts of some Considerative,
worthy, Able, and Willing-Good-Christians, who may possibly think it (as indeed
it is) a Most Necessary piece of Renowned and Christian Benefactorship, to
Assist (by Augmentation) our Cathedral Music in These Two former recited
needful Respects.

And in the mean time, till This shall happen to be done, by the
Large-heartedness, Freeness and Zealousness of some such Nobly-minded
Benefactors, (Lovers of That Art and Service;) There can doubtless be found out
no better present Remedy, then has been already (above) mentioned; which is, by
adhering to, and putting into Practice, the Counsel and Advice of Good St.
Paul; which as it has been the Alpha of This my Discourse, so likewise must it
be the Omega; The Alpha and Omega of this Discourse.
viz. that every one who is Related to, and receives Benefit of the Church,
(being in a Fit Capacity thereunto) endeavor to have so much Skill, as to be
Able to Teach and Admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs,
etc.

For doubtless there cannot possibly be found out or thought upon a Better or
more Certain way than That, especially in This so Difficult a Case.

CHAP. XII.
Many of the Masters of our Church very Skillful at this Day, to the great
advantage of the Service.
AND that there are many such Able, and very Skilfull-worthy Persons, Masters of
Our Church at This Day, who are Thus Extraordinarily Qualified, is sufficiently
known, to Their own deserved Great Commendations, and the Churches most happy
and necessary Support.

Who so often as They can be Resident; Themselves not only help to bear up the
Burden of That most Excellent Service, by uniting their Voices (in Skill)
together with the Quire; But also by reason of Their so Great Knowledge and
Understanding in the Art, are able to discover any the least Fault or Blemish
in the Service, committed by others who are less Skillful: And Thereby become
much more Useful and Helpful in that particular Service, in many Respects,
than otherwise They could possibly be, (had they but little or No skill in the
Art.)

For They give Example to others Profitably; Rectify Errors Effectually; and
Reprove Ignorance or Insufficiency Knowingly and Confidently.

Whereas on the contrary, I have known a Reverend Dean of a Quire (a very
notable, A notable Story of a confident ignorant Clark.
smart-spirited Gentleman) Egregiously Baffled by one of the present Clarks;
who to my knowledge was more Ignorant in the Art of Song, then a Boy might be
thought to be, who had Learned to Sing but only One month; yet could make a
shift to Sing most of the Common Services and Anthems, by long use and habit,
(with the Rest) pretty well, (as Birds in Cages use to whistle their Old Notes.)

Yet I say, This Dean being known by This Bold-Confident-Dunce-Clark (who you
must know took himself to be a kind of Pot-Wit) to have No Skill at all in the
Art of Music; The Dean, I say, upon a Time (after Prayers) coming out and
following This Great-Jolly-Boon-Fellow, and as he was pulling off his Surplice,
began to Rebuke him sharply, (and indeed very justly) for a Gross Absurdity
committed by Him in That very Service Time, by reason of his
Great-Dunstical-Insufficiency in Singing of an Anthem alone; in which he was so
Notoriously and Ridiculously Out, as caused All, or most of the Young People
then present, to burst out into Laughter, to the Great Blemish of the
Church Service, and the Dishonor of God, (at That Time, and in That Place.)

But Thus it fell out, (in short) viz. that after the Angry Dean had Ruffled
him soundly in very smart Language, so that he thought he had given him Shame
enough for his Insufficiency and Duncery;

How think ye This Blade came off?

Why, most Notably, The strange Confidence and shrewd Wit of an ignorant Clark
of a Quire.
and in such a manner as made all the standers by Wonder and Admire Him;
venting himself in These very Words, (for I my self was both an Eye and Ear
witness) with a most stern Angry Countenance, and a vehement Rattling Voice,
even so as he made the Church Ring withal, saying, Sir-r-r-r (shaking his
head) I Would have you know I Sing after the Rate of so much a Year, (naming his
Wages) and except ye Mend my Wages, I am resolved Never to sing Better whilst I
live.

Hark ye Here, Gentlemen! was there ever a more Nicking piece of shrewd Wit, so
suddenly showed upon the Occasion, than This was? Yea, or more Notable and
Effectual to the Purpose? as you shall hear, by the Sequel.

For the Choleric Dean was so fully and sufficiently Answered, that turning
immediately away from him, without one word more, He Hasted out of the Church,
but Never after found the least Fault with This Jolly Brave Clark; who was
Hugged more then sufficiently by all the Rest of the Puny-Poor-Fellow-Clarks,
for This his Heroic Vindication and Wit.

I have here set down This Story out of no Jocundity, or Jolly-Light-Humour,
(God knows) but only to show what Confidence many such Ignorant Clarks have
grown up unto, merely as it were to shroud themselves in their Insufficiency;
and seemingly likewise to Justify the same, only for want of Better or more
sufficient Allowances.

Therefore that they might be void of All Excuse, An assured way to take off
all Excuse for Faults committed by the Clarks.
and also be in a Capacity to be Able Performers, there can be but One way to
Effect it; which is, that if it were possible, Their Wages might be Enlarged,
so that They might be taken off, from all other Employments whatever, and
wholly attend and wait upon the Church, and Its Service; by which means they
would not only have All the opportunities imaginable for their Improvements in
the Art, whereby to gain perfect Skill, etc. but also it would be no small
Inducement (but a main Motive) to Encourage, or win Them to Sanctified and
Pious Lives and Conversations; An assured way to stop all the mouths of the
Adversaries of This Service.
the which questionless would so Amplify and Adorn (yea make Amiable) the
whole Service, that the very worst of its Enemies, must necessarily (at least)
stop their mouths from speaking Evil either against It or Them, (which too many
do;) if not also be a means whereby to draw Them into a Love and Delight of
That Service.

This I humbly conceive may be a Business worthy Consideration; But which way
to bring it to pass is the Great Difficulty, for want of Open-hearted New
Benefactors, which we are utterly destitute of in These our Days.

However, I am not doubtful but I shall here propose a Way, both very Natural
and suitable, if it may only find Favor in the Eyes of our Reverend and worthy
Masters and Rulers of our Church, (for it solely depends upon their Goodness,
Good-wills and Kindness.)

A way proposed for a present Help.
The way is This, viz. That considering there is Much given by the Old Founders
and Benefactors in Good Lands for Ever, toward the maintaining of the Church,
its Officers and Services; And all which Lands, have undoubtedly been mightily
Improved, as to the Increase of Rents, for Stipends, Wages or Dividends, etc.

If therefore, in regard of This; and also, that the Poor Clarks Proportion of
Lands (if any such may be thought to be, which in Reason might well be
conceived to be) yet stands at a stay, and nothing at all Improved since the
first beginning, by any sign's of Increase coming to Them, (Poor men.)

And that the seeming present urgent necessity of Augmentation in That kind
does so plainly appear, and as it were Cry out aloud for some Relief or
Assistance, and no other Hopes or Expectation in any kind (effectual) can
Probably be Thought upon, Hoped for, or Expected.

How the Business might be much assisted, in case of no more Benefactors.
I say, if therefore (in This sad Case) They Themselves would please to be so
kind, as to Condescend a little, and allow Them something (if not the whole) of
such Improvements, Proportionable to Those Ancient (former denominated)
Statutable Wages of 8, 10, or 12 l. a year, etc. to the present very needful
support of Them and the Service; the Business (no question) might (in This
respect) be Effectually done.

And This I presume cannot be thought an Unsuitable, Unnatural, or Unreasonable
Remedy or way, and therefore may as Reasonable be allowed an Humble Desire, or
a Longing Expectation.

But if This cannot be Had, Things are like to stand as They do, without any
Hopes of Refinement or Improvement.

And thus I humbly leave them to the Wise, Just, and Pious Considerations of
All Those who have to do, and are chiefly concerned in This Great and most
Eminent Affair of our Church-Musick.

Very much more might be said (in diverse and sundry Particulars) concerning
This Business of Cathedral Music; But These Two chiefly being the Principal
and Main Considerable Things, whereby our Service can possibly be thought any
way to be Illustrated, (and by No other way Imaginable) for if They were once
perfectly and sufficiently Effected, These two main things provided for, would
draw All whatever else is needful.
they would consequently draw after them, or to them, whatever else might be
thought needful; Therefore I say, These Two Things, viz. the Thinness or
Weakness of most of Our Quires, and the too low Wages or Allowance of the
present few Clarks, would necessarily be provided for, or else it is in vain to
think of, or expect any Illustration of That Service, otherwise then what at
the present we now enjoy.

Therefore I shall here conclude All, with my very Hearty Prayers, and Fervent
Desire, that (as This most Illustrious and Best Piece of our Public
Church Service to the Almighty, has in All Ages been had in high veneration and
esteem amongst the Saints and Servants of God, even from the first Institution
of it, The high Veneration in all Ages had unto This Service.
all along down through the Law and the Gospel, until This day) it might still
Flourish; and more and more appear to be (what indeed it is, if Rightly
performed) THE MOST EXCELLENT AND MOST GLORIOUS THING IN THE WHOLE WORLD.

Which that it may,

The God of all Harmony, No Illustration conceivable like This, and which must
needs be Acceptable unto the Almighty.
bring into Concord and Perfect Unity All Dissenting, Jarring, and Discording
Christians, so that they may have a Right Discerning of the True Worship and
Service of Him; And if it be possible, that they might Join Hearts, Affections,
and Voices in the Public Assemblies; in Zeal to God, and Love to one another.

By which means only, might our Christian Oblations, and Sacrifices of Praise,
Thanksgiving and Adoration, be both Augmented, Refined and Illustrated, and
also assuredly Acceptable unto Him; As are Those of the Celestial Quires
Above, whose Eternal Work and Recreation is, Only Singing, and Rejoicing before
Him the Eternal Being, in Unutterable and Inconceivable Allelujahs.

Glory be to God.
The end of Cathedral Music.
An EPISTLE To all Ignorant Despisers OF THIS Divine Part of MUSIC.
KInd Ignoramus, whosoever Thou art,
Not having Skill in This most Glorious Art;
Nor knowing Note, and Careless e're to Learn,
I prithee Read This Book: Thou Wilt then Discern
Thy Gross Defect; and the great Necessity
Of Learning something in This Mystery.
But now I think on it, lest Thou should Grutch
So Hard a Task, and think such Pains too much,
I Will for Thy sake a shorter way contrive,
And Here in These few Lines my Counsel give:
But first I Will ask Thee This one Question,
Which is a Question worthy Thinking on.
And This it is, 'What think Thou Music was ordained for?
'That Thing which Angels Love, and Devils Abhor;
'That Thing which Evil Spirits does Expel;
'That Thing which clearly differs Heaven from Hell;
'That Thing which Best of Men do chiefly Use;
'That Thing which Worst of Men most what Refuse;
'That Thing which sure's of Chiefest Excellence,
'Next to Divinity's Pre-eminence;
'That Thing which in High Heavens Angelick Quire,
'Both Cherubins, and Seraphins Admire;
'That Thing in which the Enthroned Hosts do Praise
'The Lord of Life, in Everlasting Lays;
'That Thing which all along in Churches Story,
'Both Jews and Christians used for God's (true) Glory:
'They knew amongst Arts no Better Art than This;
'No, none so Good to suit Heavens Mysteries.
This Art Excels All without Control;
The Faculties it moves of the Soul:
It stifles Wrath, it causes Griefs to cease;
It does excite the Furious Mind to Peace:
It stirs up Love, Increases Good Desires;
To Heaven alone, its Center, it Aspires.
It kindles Heavenly Raptures, and does make
That Soul that is thus enflamed for to partake
Of Heavenly Joys. --
And can Thou think that God made This for naught?
Or that Its Mysteries should not be sought,
But be neglected by His Chiefest Creature
Man?
Oh fie! Oh fie! Sure, sure The Wise Creator
Did not intend It so to be Neglected;
But by Thy wise Regard to be Respected;
And sought into; and Labored for; and Used;
But Great Care taken, Not to be Abused,
As it is too much by most: But Music Right,
And Rightly Used, No better Soul's Delight.
These are such Certain Truths, none can deny;
The Scripture speaks them plain, much more then I.
Read, Read Those Sacred Texts in the Margent Quoted, 1 Chronicles. 23.5, ch 25.7.
Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Col. 3.16. Psa. 33. Psa. 45. Psa. 47. Psa. 81. Psa. 92. Psa. 95.
Psa 96. Psa. 98. 1 Chronicles. 13.6, 7, 8. chapter 15-16, 28. 2 Chr. 29.25, 26*27, 28.
chapter 30* 21. Judge. 5. Ex. 15. Ezra 3.10*11. 2 Samuel 6.5. 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13, 14.

Then sure Thou Wilt think Them worthy to be Noted;
If any Spark of Love-Divine be in Thee
Unto God's Glory, doubtless then they will win Thee
Not only to the Love of This High Art,
But also move Thee 'strive to bear Thy Part
In This so Heavenly and sublime a Thing,
In which the Angels, and Archangels Sing
Eternal Allelujahs to Heavens King.
This out of Great-good-will to Thee I write,
Hoping it may help Tune thy Soul aright.
Read, Read Those Quoted Places; Read but Four,
And if Thou like them not, then Read no more.


The English and ye French Lute Joined are Both which have made a Lute beyond
Compare. The Lute Dyphone or Two Lutes in One.
Concerning this Instrument Read Page: 203.


The Second, and CIVIL Part: OR, The LUTE made Easy.
A Recreative Praeludium to This Work of the LVTE-PART. BEING A Dialogue
between the AVTHOR and His LVTE: The Lute complaining sadly of Its Great Wrongs
and Injuries. With something Remarkable adjoining, in Reference to the Language
of MUSIC.
Author. WHat makes Thee sit so Sad, my
Noble Friend,
As if Thou were (with Sorrows) near Thy End?
What is the Cause, my Dear-Renowned-Lute,
Thou art of late so Silent, and so Mute*
Thou seldom do in Public now appear;
Thou art too Melancholy grown I fear.

Lute. What need you ask These Questions why it is so?
Since it is too obvious for All men to know.
The World is grown so Slight; full of New Fangles,
And takes their Chief Delight in Jingle-Jangles:
With Fiddle-Noises; Pipes of Bartholmew,
Like those which Country-Wives buy, Gay and New,
To please their Little Children when they Cry:
This makes me sit and Sigh thus Mournfully.

Author. Alas my Dear* too sensible I am
Of thy Just Grief; Therefore I hither came
To Comfort Thee, if possibly I might,
And let Thee know, I mean to do thee Right.

Lute. How can that be, since Fame has Cried me down
With That Fools-Bolt, I Am out of Fashion grown?

Author. Fear Thou it not* for such a Course I Will take,
I do not doubt, Thee many Friends to make.

Lute. I doubt it much, for several Reasons why;
I Am Injured not with One, but, Many a Lie:
Besides, I Am Tortured much with Fumbling-Fools,
And often Abused by Bunglers, and Their Tools.

Author. This is confessed; All which I know, and more
Than Thou can say, with what Thou'st said before.
There Is naught of thy Concern but I it know,
And soon can 'spie Thy Friend out from Thy Foe:
Thou may not Thus Despair.

Lute. Despair I do:
Old Dowland he is Dead; R. Johnson too;
Two Famous Men; Great Masters in My Art;
In each of Them I had more than One Part,
Or Two, or Three; They were not Single-Soul'd,
As most our Some Pitiful thin Composers of This Age.
Upstarts are, and too too Bold.
Soon after Them, that Famous man Gotiere
Did make me Grateful in each Noble Ear;
He Is likewise gone: I fear me much that I
Am not Long-lived, but shortly too shall Dye.

Author. Cheer up, Brave Soul! And know that some there are
Yet Living, who for Thee will take such Care,
That Thou shall be Restored Thy former Glory,
And be Eternized to Eternal Story.

Lute. I know I have some Friends which yet do Live,
But are so Few, can scarcely make me Thrive:
My Friend Jo. Rogers, He Is The only Man
Of Fame; He Will do me All the Good he can:
But He grows Old now; has not long to stay;
And when He Is gone, go Hang my self I may
Upon the Willows, or where else I list,
And there may long enough so Hang, I wist,
Ere any Take me down.

Author. Come, come forbear
Such Pensive Thoughts as These; Cast off Thy Fear,
And know, ' All Things their Revolution have;
'The Great Creator, He This Order gave
'To his Chief Workman Nature, that he should
'All Things in This same manner Turn and Fold
'Vpon that Wheel which ever turns them Rown,
'One while they are Up, another while they are Down:
It Is now your Lot to be Below you see,
'But Up you shall again as Certainly.

Lute. You speak some Comfort.


Au. Doubt it not, I say,
It is so sure, as Night is to the Day;
True worth can never decay.

Lu. I Am much Refreshed; my Heart you hugely Cheer:
But yet methinks I have some little Fear,
Because amongst all the Books of sundry Arts,
There Is not One Book yet writ of my Deserts,
Which gives both Full and Certain Rules whereby
To be Assisting to Posterity
In my Beloved Art.

Auth. It Is true, it is so:
Now for Your better Comfort, you shall know,
There is a Friend of Yours, I Will not yet Name,
Is very Ready for to do The same;
And fully has intended It shall be
Put into Print; the which e're long you will see:
This for your Comfort take.

Lu. I Am much Revived:
But is It made, or yet to be Contrived?

Auth. It Is almost wholly made, and so near done,
As is the Day, near setting of the Sun.

Lute. I joy, I joy; Cheer up my Grieved Heart,
And all my Drooping Spirits, come bear a Part;
Unite your selves in Cheerfulness and Mirth,
Yet longing for That Day of our New Birth.
Chorus.
We All Unite and Join in Joyful Mirth,
And Long for That Good Day of our New Birth;
In which we will Triumph, in Harmonious Cheer,
And keep That JUBILE-DAY Year after Year.

The Language of Music confirmed.
BEloved Reader, you must know, The Lutes Language.

That LUTES could Speak e're you could so;
There has been Times when They have been
DISCOURSERS unto King and Queen:
To Nobles, and the Highest Peers;
And Free Access had to Their Ears
Familiarly; scarce passed a Day
They would not Hear what Lute would say:
But sure at Night, though in Their Bed,
They Would Listen well what then She said.
She has Discourses so sublime,
No Language yet in Any Time
Had Words sufficient to define
Her Choice Expressions so Divine.
Her Matter's of such High Concern,
No Common Folks can It discern;
'Twas never intended for the Rude
And Boisterous-Churlish-Multitude;
But for Those Choice-Refined-Spirits
Which Heav'nly-Raptures often Inherits.
''Tis fittest sure for such as They
'Who Contemplate and Daily Pray;
'Who have their Souls Divinely Bent
'To Serve their God, with Hearts Intent:
'Such Students as These be can Spell
'Her meaning out; and often can tell,
'By Her Inspiring-Influence,
'What is Her Choice Intelligence:
'Yet want they Words for to express
'Such Raptures as she does possess
'Their Minds withal; and makes Them be
'Like Men Inspired, through Harmony;
'This is no Fiction, but well known
'To Some, though not to Every one.
The various Capacities of Men.
But if you doubt of This, you may
Consider well All men how They
Are several ways Endowed; some be
As 'twere Cut out for Mystery:
Others again, so Hugely Dull,
That naught of Art comes near their Skull;
Yet He who e're had Ripest Wit,
And made the Highest Use of It
In Arts that e're was known; even He
Came short of knowing Mystery
In General: He had his Bound,
His Limitation sure He found:
And though the most He did Excel
In Chiefest Knowledge; yet to Spell
He must again; and show that He
Is Ign'rant in most Things that be:
And very few attain so High,
To understand This Mystery.
Yet that It may appear more plain,
I Will instance to you once again
In one Comparison, which You
Will not deny, but say it is True.
He who considers Right and well The Language of Birds and Beasts.

How Beasts and Birds their Stories tell
To One another Certainly,
And yet no Words they speak Plainly;
But by That Language which is given The Language of Nature.

In Nature, (by Decree from Heaven)
They Understand undoubtedly
Each others Speech, as well as we
Do our own Words, which we do say,
As by Experience see you may:
If you will regard with steadfast Eyes,
And dive into such Mysteries,
You Will find that Nothing's Plainer then
That BRUTES have Speech as well as MEN.
A little further still I Will go,
And speak of what I cannot know;
Yet do believe it to be so,
And doubt not but you will do so too.
Consider how that Spirits use The Language of Spirits.

(Though not by Words) for to infuse
Their Meanings to each other so,
That Each, Each others Meanings know.
Though Words to Men a Language be,
Yet something else we may well see
Does do the Office of the same,
But not a Word, or Letter Name.
Why may not Lute then Tell to me, The Consequence.

(Who know Her Hidden Mystery)
Such Stories as I Understand,
Though some in Them are at a stand,
As to the Couchant Sense therein,
Being chiefly pleased with That sweet Din
Which Grateful is to the Outward Sense,
But wants the Inward Intelligence.
To clear this by Comparison,
In Aptness here I Will give you One.
The Comparison made good from Divinity.
It Is known even in Divinity,
There lies the self-same Mystery;
The outward Meanings many know
Oth' Texts oth' Scripture, and can show
By words significantly good,
The proper Meaning understood
Of This or That Discourse; they will tell
According to Right Reason well.
'Yet beyond This a Secret lies,
'Hid from all outward Ears and Eyes;
'And's only to the Inward Sense
'Perceiv'd, by Divine Influence.
'This, True Divines can surely tell,
'Who by Experience know it well;
'There is an Inward Ear and Sense,
'Which is the very Quintessence
'Of Man's true Understanding Part,
'Not to be attained by Humane Art;
(Much less to be expressed,)
'But it is Infused, or Inspired.
Innate, and to Him given
'By God alone; (a Gift from Heaven.)
I might from hence Long Stories tell,
But I will here no longer dwell;
I Will hasten to my Work away,
Only This One Thing I will say;
No LANGUAGE is of greater Force to me,
Than is the Language of LUTE'S Mystery.
The Second Part. The LUTE made Easy.
CHAP. I.
THat the LVTE was a Hard or very Difficult Instrument to Play well upon, is
confessed; And the Reasons why, shall here be given: But that it is Now Easy,
and very Familiar, is as Certainly True; And the Reasons shall likewise be
given.

The First and Chief Reason that it was Hard in former Times, The first and
Chief Reason why the Lute was Hard, by fewness of Strings*
was, Because they had to their Lutes but Few Strings; viz. to some 10, some
12, and some 14 Strings, which in the beginning of my Time were almost
altogether in Use; (and is this present Year 1675. Fifty four years since I
first began to undertake That Instrument.)

But soon after, they began to add more Strings unto Their Lutes, so that we
had Lutes of 16, 18, and 20 Strings; which they finding to be so Great a
Convenience, stayed not long till they added more, to the Number of 24, where
we now rest satisfied; only upon my Theorboes I put 26 Strings, for some Good
Reasons I shall be able to give in due Time and Place.

Now (having but yet said so) I will Prove it very manifestly: Proved by Good
Reason.
Thus therefore;

To be expected to Perform much, and to be Confined and Limited to Straitness,
or Narrow Bounds, certainly must needs be concluded more Difficult, than where
there is Liberty, Scope, and Freedom.

This is the very Case between the Lutes of Former Times, and the Lutes of This
present Age.

Yet a little more fully, especially to Those who are Vnexperienc'd in the Art
or Instrument.

You must know, that he who undertakes the Lute, will meet with things becoming
the Lute, viz. Composures of Parts, with much variety of Trebles, Basses, and
Inner Parts.

All which upon the Old Lutes, by reason of the Fewness of Strings, was
(really) extreme Hard to perform.

And from Thence chiefly did it derive the name of Hardness, Vulgar Errors
continue long.
or a Hard Instrument; which ever since (through the Ignorance of People) has
continued upon It.

Whereas Now, (on the contrary) as Really as it was Then Hard, so Truly is it
become Easy, and very Familiarly Pleasant to the Learner, by reason of the
Increase of Strings.

A Second Reason is, from the Workmen in those days.
Secondly, The Workmen of Those Times did not Lay their Lutes so well, fine,
and easy for the Fingers, as now by experience our late Workmen have been
informed to Rectify; which is a very great, yea a main matter in the Use of
the Lute. (A more particular explanation of This, shall be when I come to show
the whole Order of the Instrument.)

A Third Reason, from the Closeness of Masters.
A Third and very Considerable Reason is, From the Closeness of Masters in the
Art, who (all along) have been extreme Shie in revealing the Occult and Hidden
Secrets of the Lute.

The French (who were generally accounted Great Masters) seldom or never would
prick their Lessons as They Played them, much less Reveal any thing (further
than of necessity they must) to the thorough understanding of the Art, or
Instrument, which I shall make manifest and very plain.

Nor was there, nor yet is there Any Thing more constantly to be observed among
Masters, than to be Very Sparing in their Communications concerning Openness,
Plainness, and Freeness; either with Parting with their Lessons, or Imparting
much of Their Skill to their Scholars; more than to show them the Ordinary way
how to play such and such Lessons.

This has been, and still is the Common Humor, ever since my Time.

So that it is no marvel, that it continues Dark and Hidden to All, excepting
some Few, who make it their Chief Work to Practice, and Search into its
Secrets.

Which when they have done, and with Long Pains, and much Labor obtained, THEY
DYE, AND ALL THEIR SKILL AND EXPERIENCE DIES WITH THEM.


So that the next Generation is still to seek, and begin again Anew, for such
Seize.

Note, that rarely not above one or two Eminent Lute-Masters in an Age.
And it may be noted, That seldom in an Age appears above One or Two who are
Excellent or Rare Artists in This kind.

So that (to Magnify, and make Themselves more Illustrious) they keep All
close to Themselves, communicating Nothing but upon a Pecuniary Account.

This must needs make Easy Things Hard, and Long before they be known in a
General way, so as they may become Easy.

Whereas, if such knowing Masters, would be so kind to their Fellow Creatures,
as to Reveal and Discover their Knowledge and Experience (whilst They Lived)
more freely, or at least leave it behind them to be published to the world for
a Common Good after their Decease, it would much redound to the facilitating of
the Art, and Gratifying of Posterity.

Which by the Grace of God I will make my Business to do, according to my Best
Abilities, and Understanding in the Art.

And if to the Purpose it I shall not do,
Say, Good Will was not wanting thereunto.
Thus much I think may be sufficient to gain Belief, that the Lute must needs
have had such Impediments, by reason of which, it might well be accounted a
Hard Instrument.

The which being taken away, I doubt not but it will appear both Easy, and
very Delightful.

Now I will give you some Reasons why it is become Easy; The first Reason why
the Lute is become Easy, yet a seeming Riddle.
and is, by the Increase of Strings; which (although it may seem a Riddle to
some) is most True.

And here you must take notice, that when we say a Lute of 12 Strings, there
are but 6; and likewise a Lute of 24 Strings, there are but 12* (as to
substantial Use.)

For we always Tune and strike two Strings together as one.

So that in the Old Time upon their Lutes of 12 Strings (as to use) they had
but 6: Therefore were they constrained to extreme hard, cross, and wringing
Stops, both above and below upon the Finger-board.

Yea, such Stops have I seen, that I do still wonder how a Man's Hand could
stretch to perform some of them, and with such swiftness of Time as has been
set down.

Whereas Now, by the Addition of six Ranks of Strings, All those hard
cross-grained Stops are undone, and brought to a Natural Form, and Aptitude for
the Hand; And are so very Easy, A Child in half an hour able to perform the
hardest stops upon the Lute.
that an Ingenious Child in half an hours time, may readily Form its Hand to
the whole Number of Hard Stops, ordinarily in use, and generally Requirable for
the necessary scope of Lute-play.

The which I shall most plainly Demonstrate, when I come to inform the Learner
and set down the Rudiments thereof.

Again, A second Reason why easier, in 3 Respects.
There is found by Experience a Better manner of Laying our Lutes, (as we term
it) which is done, by causing the Finger-board, 1. to lie a little Round, or Up
in the middle; as also that the Bridge (answerably) rise a little Round to it.

Then 2dly. to lay the Strings so close to the Finger-board, that the Strings
may almost seem to touch the first Fret. This is called Laying of a Lute Fine,
when all the Strings lie near the Frets.

3dly. Laying the Ranks of Strings so carefully, that the Pairs may be
conveniently Near, and the Ranks pretty wide.

By which means we have a more ready and certain Command over them, for neat
and clean Play.

These things were not in the Old Lutes so regarded, as may still appear by
many of Them, yet to be met withal.

The Instrument-makers were not Then acquainted with That Secret, which
assuredly is such an extraordinary Great Advantage to the Hand; That if Two
Equal Players of a years standing, Note.
should either of them take up a several Lute, the one well Laid, and ordered
as I have described; and the other Ill Laid, (as were generally the Old Lutes)
it would be judged by their difference in Play, that the One having learned a
Year, the Other had not learned above a Quarter.

This I do assure you is a most Certain Truth.

Therefore you may very well conclude from these Reasons only, there must needs
be a Great Facility in Playing upon These Lutes of Our Time, Whence the name of
Hardness is derived.
more than upon Those of the Old Time: From whence has come, and still remains
most Falsely, the name of Hardness.

Now besides all These Reasons for Advantage and Easiness, (which I doubt not
but do seem apparent to the Reader) being only in the Instrument, which Time
and Experience has reformed; It will not be unreasonable to conclude,
Advantages from the Artist included.
but that there are, or may be likewise several other Advantages from the
Artist, whereby the Work may be made more Easy.

Otherwise we have labored many years in Vain, which would be too great a
Disparagement unto us of This present Age to be Guilty of; since it is
generally seen and known, that in All Arts, Time and Experience finds out more
Compendious and Ready ways to perfect and accomplish their Works in, than was
known in the Beginning and Infancy of Arts.

Some of them named.
I will nominate some Particulars here in reference to the Great Benefit of the
Scholar, and toward the facilitating of the Work.

The First shall be, I would (by all means) that the Scholar be taught to
String his Instrument, with Good and True Strings; also to Fret it, and to know
when the Frets stand Right or Wrong, which may be easily and quickly done.

Secondly, That the Scholar be taught (so soon as possibly may be) to Tune the
Lute, which likewise may in a reasonable Time be done.

A woeful mischief to Learners.
For, the want of such Skill, is not only a great Discouragement to the
Learners, and also a great Hindrance to their Proficiency; but is a Grand Cause
of much Corruption of the True Distinguishing-Musical-Faculty of their Ear.

For, long and much use of Playing with an Instrument out of Tune, does
habituate and wont them so to False Sounds, that at last they grow Careless,
and scarcely ever after become Good and Accurate Tuners.

This I have proved by Experience.

The Helps to All This I shall set down in its proper place, when I come to
Instruct my Scholar in the Documents of Lute-play.

CHAP. II.
NOw after all this that has been said, I cannot but hope that Those many
False and Ignorant Outcries against the Lute will be laid aside, and deemed
(as indeed they are) False.

I will here Name some of Them;

First, That it is the Hardest Instrument in the World. Common Aspersions upon
the Lute.


Secondly, That it will take up the Time of an Apprenticeship to play well upon
It.

Thirdly, That it makes Young People grow awry.

Fourthly, That it is a very Chargeable Instrument to keep; so that one had as
good keep a Horse as a Lute, for Cost.

Fifthly, That it is a Woman's Instrument.

Sixthly, and Lastly, (which is the most Childish of all the rest) It is out of
Fashion.

I will here give a short (but True) Answer to each of These Aspersions.

And as to the First, viz. that it is the Hardest Instrument, etc. The first
Aspersion answered.
I suppose my former Reasons may sufficiently convince any Reasonable Person of
the contrary; However (in that This is the main Objection) I will spend a
little more labor against it, than against any of the Rest; And doubt not but
so clearly to Rectify that Error, that whosoever will rightly consider what I
shall here write concerning it, will never more give Credit to that
Flim-Flam-Ignorant saying of the Vulgar.

To which purpose I will make a Comparison betwixt the Lute and the Viol.

The Viol is confessed to be a Plausible Instrument; The Lute is proved as
Easy, as is the Viol, by Reason.
and no Affrightment to any Person to undertake it; and in a short time they do
much upon it.

Now that the Lute must needs be so Easy as the Viol, examine them Both after
This Right manner, by way of Comparison; not comparing the Music of the one
with the Music of the other, for that is confessed by All in General, that the
LUTE IS THE RAREST AND MOST EXCELLENT PORTABLE INSTRUMENT IN THE WORLD, but
barely as they are Instruments, and as to the performance upon either.

And in such a Comparison we must consider, What makes an Instrument of Strings
hard or easy.
what it is that makes an Instrument of Strings Hard or Easy.

The Answer to which must be, The Number of Strings, and the Grasping, or
Stopping of That Number. Well then;

The Viol has six Strings, The Comparison between the Lute and the Viol.
which are all used in Grasping or Stopping.

The Lute likewise has but six Strings, which are used in Grasping or
Stopping; For although it have 12 Strings, all the other Ranks of Basses are
not used at all in Stopping: But only struck open with the Thumb, which serve
both to Amplify the Harmony, as also very much to facilitate the Stops or
Grasps of those other six Strings.

Now if This be True, (as I appeal to All the Experienced Men in our Quality,
whether This be not Truly declared;) How then must it not needs be, but that
the Lute is as Easy as the Viol?

But to This I know it will be presently objected, That Those Basses are very
Hard to be Hit, so that the Lute must needs be Harder thereby.

To which I answer, No. But on the contrary, the Lute-play is made far more
Easy (in its general scope) thereby, as I shall make appear.

Now therefore that you may perceive what an Easy matter it is, (viz.) to Hit
those six Basses, (which Thing in all my whole Progress of Teaching (Young or
Old) seldom or never was above One quarter of an Hours work;)

And to make you understand the Easiness of it, consider it thus, in a plain
and homely Comparison, viz.

An apt Comparison.
Suppose you had Fixed before you upon a Table, six or seven Ranks of Strings,
in that nature as Country People (many of them) have at the end of some
Cupboards, fastened on with Nails at each end; And so, lifted up a little from
the Table or Cupboard with small Stones or Sticks, to cause them to rise and
sound from the Wood.

How easily, I say, could not any Ingenuous Child strike Those six or seven
Ranks in Order; First as resembling the Bells, and then with as little trouble
strike them out of Order into Changes; And so presently be able (looking off)
to do the same? I say, He or She who could not do such a thing pretty perfectly
in less than a quarter of an hour, either would have a very Ill opinion of
Themselves for Blockishness or Doltishness, or had cause enough so to have.

Now the Truth is, those six Ranks of the Lute Basses (which are never stopped)
have no other manner of use than those upon the Country-Peoples Cupboards.

Nay it shall appear, they must needs be Easier to Hit certain than such like
of the Cupboard; because the Country People do it without a Rule (and yet by
Habit) well enough; whereas we have an Infallible Rule by which we can scarcely
miss, except on purpose; which is, the setting down of the Little Finger in a
certain place by the Bridge, so that with opening the Hand by way of Span, we
ascertain our selves (after a little use) with the Thumb to reach to what Bass
we please, without the least impediment to any our other Performances.

And now methinks I hear some say, you will make the Lute too Easy, if you go
on in this manner.

Half the Performance of the Right Hand
Why, truly I cannot tell how to speak otherwise than True: It is even so, and
no otherwise; And which to do, is Half the performance of the Right Hand; And
the other Half, which is to be performed with the Two Fore-fingers, is (upon
the matter) as Easy, The whole.
if not Easier: So that there you have Half Lute-play already set forth.

But I shall begin my Work out of Order; therefore I will break off This
Discourse, and desire your Patience till I come orderly unto it; And then if
you will but give me the Attentive Reading, as also laying what you read to
your Reason and Consideration, I do not doubt but I shall be the occasion of
many Good Lutenists.

Now by what has been here declared, Several Aspersions against the Lute
answered.
how can any Rational man think the Lute the Hardest Instrument in the World?
or that it is not, as I have explained it to be, Full as Easy as the Viol?

I wish I were to try it out with any man for a Considerable Wager, to see what
we could bring a couple of Scholars unto (one upon the Lute, and the other upon
the Viol) in the space but of one Quarter of a Year.

But here I desire that none will make a Bad Construction of This my seeming
Challenge; For I Challenge None: neither will any, I hope, take it as an
Affront, for truly I mean no such thing; But only for the Lutes sake, I say, If
I were Challenged in such a way, to try if I would make Good what I have thus
set down here concerning the Lute; I should very gladly embrace the Challenge,
(as I said) for the Lutes sake, and the Lovers thereof, that it should be seen
I do affirm nothing, but what I would make Good by such an Adventure.

Thus much against the First Aspersion, viz. That the Lute is a Hard Instrument.

That the Lute will take up the Time of an Apprenticeship, The second
Aspersion, and the Answer to it.
before one can Play well upon it, is a very False Aspersion, and a manifest
Injury done both unto It, and to all the Lovers of It: As by many years
Experience I can Justify, and by eminent Performances upon that Instrument by
diverse very Worthy Persons; several such at this present remaining in our
University of Cambridge, who have not been at It from their first undertaking
yet a full Year; and in one Quarter of a Year could play extremely well, even
to Admiration.

I shall forbear here to Name Them, lest I may (in so doing without their
consent) give an occasion of Offense.

However in that This may be taken as an Excuse, and in that I have undertaken
to prove the Falsity of the Lutes Aspersions, I will take the liberty of naming
One Person as a sufficient proof to this purpose, who is my Youngest Son,
(named John Mace; A most absolute and sufficient proof of the Lutes easiness,
etc.
) And has very lately undertaken both the Lute and Viol, contrary to my
expectation or knowledge, till of late; nor have I Assisted Him much in either,
since I knew His drift.

But as to His Performance upon the Lute, I do here most solemnly and really
affirm, I have not taught him, nor spent so much time with him in the way of
teaching, as in the whole (since his first beginning with it) will make up the
quantity of one Day; (if I should say half a Day, I am assured I Lie not.)

The Chief Advantage he has had toward it, This was writ in the year 1672.
has been the Perusal of This my Work since I made it: And at Christmas last
was a Twelvemonth, viz. 1671. there was not one word of it writ; but since
that time wholly Composed thus as you see.

This Young man (my Son) has been indeed very Inquisitive concerning the Nature
of my Work, and has so far Dived into It, as (to speak modestly, yet truly of
him) I believe he understands it so sufficiently, and has gained a Hand upon
the Lute so Notably, for his short time of Inspection, that let whomsoever
please (to inform Themselves of the Truth of what I have here writ) Call him
out for My Witness; who I hope (and doubt not but in a short time) will make as
Able a Master-Teacher both upon the Lute and Viol, as need to Undertake Them.

I must be Pardoned for This my so strange, and seeming-Boasting way in His
Commendations; yet I neither Boast, nor purposely speak in His Commendations;
only for the Lutes, and Truths sake, (having, amongst many, none I may make so
bold with as I may with Him) I do in this manner attest (by This Proof) the
extreme Falsity of This second Aspersion upon It, viz. That One must be an
Apprenticeship at It before they can Play well: which is so absolutely False,
That I do still affirm, that an Ingenuous Child may be made to Play very well
in one Quarter of a Year.

Let thus much suffice to Contradict so Gross a Mistake.

The third Aspersion answered.
The Third Aspersion upon the Lute is, That it causes Young Folks to grow awry.

To This I can only say, That in my whole Time I yet never knew one Person,
Young or Old, that grew Awry by That Undertaking.

Yet do believe it is possible, if (through their own Negligence, and their
Teachers Disregard, and Unskillfulness) they be suffered to Practice in an Ill
and wrong Posture.

So may they do by several other Exercises and Employments, (which is often
seen.)

But let Them be first set Right to the Lute, according to such Directions as
hereafter I shall set down, it shall be impossible for any Person to grow Awry
by Lute-play.

This Aspersion I doubt not but will appear False, like All the Rest, when you
shall (with your Reason) consider of the Exactness of my Rules and Order.

The fourth Aspersion answered.
That one had as good keep a Horse (for Cost) as a Lute, is the Fourth
Objection.

This likewise is so Gross an Error, that I have disproved it all my Life
long; and which All my Scholars will affirm, if need were; of whom I never took
more than five shillings the Quarter to maintain each Lute with Strings; only
for the first Stringing I ever took ten shillings.

I do confess Those who will be Prodigal, and Extraordinary Curious, may spend
as much as may maintain two or three Horses, and Men to Ride upon them too, if
they please.

But 20 s. per Ann. is an Ordinary Charge; and much more they need not spend,
to practice very hard.

The fifth Aspersion answered.
The Fifth Aspersion is, That it is a Woman's Instrument.

If This were True, I cannot understand why It should suffer any Disparagement
for That; but rather that It should have the more Reputation and Honor.

I suppose I need not make any Arguments to prove That.

But according to Their Sense of Aspersion, I deny it to be a Woman's Instrument
so, as by That means It shall become less Fit for the Use of a Man.

For if by That Saying They would insinuate, That it is a Weak, Feeble, Soft
Instrument, as to the sound; what can that signify whereby to make it a Woman's
Instrument more than a Man's?

But whereas first they say, It is the Hardest Instrument in the World; That
shows They Contradict Themselves in This particular; and conclude by That
Saying, It cannot so properly be called a Woman's Instrument, in regard They are
the Weaker Vessels; and therefore not so Fit to set upon and attempt the
Mastery of Things of such Difficulty.

Therefore if still They will needs put it upon the Woman, I say, the more
shame for Them; And so much for That.

Now Lastly, whereas They most Sillily say, It is out of Fashion. The sixth
Aspersion answered.


I say, the Greater Pity, and still the Greater shame for a Man to Refuse the
Use of the most Excellent Thing in Its kind; and especially, Because it is out
of Fashion! which, although it be Thus Aspersed, (as I have here mentioned) by
the Ignorant and Inconsiderate, yet notwithstanding It has This General
Applause and Praise, viz. THAT IT IS THE BEST MUSIC IN THE WORLD.

This is acknowledged by All who are men of Knowledge and Experience in the
Art, (unprejudiced;) and if together with This so High, so True, so Deserved
and most Uncontrollable Commendations, it shall also appear (by This my
Faithful and Well-intended Work) Easy, yea Very-very Easy; there is no doubt
but It will come into Fashion again with All wise Folks.

Thus having (I hope) to full satisfaction explained the Matter, I doubt not
but the Lute henceforward will be more looked after and esteemed than of late
years it has been.

I will now draw nearer to The Work it self, and provide my Scholar with a Fit
and Good Instrument.

CHAP. III.
First provide a good and fit sized Lute.
THe first thing to be thought upon before you begin to Learn, must be to get a
Good Lute, and of a Fit Size for your Hand: In reference to which I shall give
this Advice, by These Directions following.

A common Error in Learners.
It is very usual with many, at the first to make shift with almost any
Instrument for a Trial, (as they say) be it never so Bad or Unfit.

Now I must assure Them, who do so, do themselves much Wrong, and to their
great prejudice; as by Experience I have proved.

For I have known some Young Persons so Discouraged, under the Sense and
Inconvenience of a Bad and Ill-contriv'd Instrument, that in short time they
have grown Out of Love with their Undertaking, and have indeed been so quite
Discouraged Thereby, that they have wholly left it off, and never Returned
again; whereas others on the contrary, who have had Apt and Good Instruments,
have come on exceeding Delightfully to Themselves, their Teachers, and Others.

I shall therefore advise All Learners, At First to provide them with Good
Instruments; and then they will proceed Cheerfully.

How to know and choose a good Lute.
Now to know a Good Instrument, is something Hard for a Young Scholar; therefore
he must take the Advice of some Friend who has Skill. Yet for his better
Information, I shall give him some General Hints and Signs how he shall know a
Good one.

First, know that an Old Lute is better than a New one: Then, The Venice Lutes
are commonly Good; which you shall know by the writing within, right against
the Knot, with the Author's Name.

There are diversities of Men's Names in Lutes; but the Chief Name we most
esteem, Laux Maller Lutes the best.
is Laux Maller, ever written with Text Letters: Two of which Lutes I have seen
(pitiful Old, Battered, Cracked Things) valued at 100 l. a piece.

Mr. Gootiere, the Famous Lutenist in His Time, showed me One of Them, which
the King paid 100 l. for.

And Mr. Edw. Jones (one of Mr. Gootiere's Scholars) had the other, A true
Story of a Lute.
which He so valued; And made a Bargain with a Merchant, who desired to have It
with him in His Travels, (for his Experience;) And if He liked It when he
returned, was to give Mr. Jones 100 l. for It; But if he Refused it at the
Price set, he was to return the Lute safe, and to pay 20 l. for His Experience
and Use of It, for that Journey.

I have often seen Lutes of three or four pounds price, far more Illustrious
and Taking, to a common Eye.

Therefore I say, it is a Difficult Thing for an unexperienced Person to Choose
a Good Lute.

The next thing to be observed is, the Shape of the Lute.

The Shape generally esteemed, is the Pearl-Mould; The best shape of a Lute.
yet I have known very excellent Good Ones of several Shapes or Moulds: But I
do acknowledge for constancy, the Pearl-Mould is Best, both for Sound, and
Comeliness, as also for the more convenience in holding or using.

Then again observe the Number of Ribbs.

The Complete Number (most esteemed) is Nine; How many Ribbs best.
yet there are very Good Ones of several Numbers.

Next, what Wood is Best for the Ribbs.

The Air-wood is absolutely the Best. What Wood best.


And next to that, Our English Maple.

But there are very Good Lutes of several Woods; as Plum-Tree, Pear Tree, Yew,
Rosemary-Air, Ash, Ebony, and Ivory, etc. The two last (though most Costly, and
Taking to a common Eye) are the worst.

Next, observe the Color; What Color best.
which is the Dark-black-reddish-Colour; though I believe it contributes
nothing at all to the sound; only the Best Authors did use to lay on That
Color, especially Laux Maller.

Thus much for the Choice of your Lutes by the Back-sides.

Then for the Bellies, The choice of the Belly of a Lute.
make choice of the finest-grain'd Wood you can, free from Knots or
Obstructions, which you may easily perceive to hinder the Grain of the Belly
for Running smooth to your Eye, as it were by small Strings or Threads of Wood
from the Bridge upward, etc.

The Best Wood is called Cullin-cliff; and is no other than the finest sort of
Firr, and the choicest part of That Firr.

I have seen some of Cyprus very Good, but none like the Cullin-cliff.

The Knot or Rose in the Lute Belly, would be little, The Knot or Rose.
and smoothly cut.

If there be any Cracks in Back or Belly, let not them trouble you, except They
be Cross-wayes; Those are to be disliked: But if Long-wayes with the Grain of
the Wood, it makes no great matter, so as they be neatly and well glewed
together again.

And before you part from the Belly, The Bars.
try whether the Bars (which are within to strengthen and keep It strait and
tite) be all fast; which you may do, by gently knocking the Belly all along,
round about, and then in the midst, with one of your Knuckels; and if any thing
be either loose in It, or about It, you may easily perceive It, by a little
Fuzzing or Hizzing; but if all be sound, you shall hear nothing but a
Tight-plump and Twanking-knock.

Then lastly about the Belly, see that the Bridge be close, The Bridge, and its
dangers.
Trimly and firmly Glew'd to the Belly, without any the least sign of parting:
For if it begin never so little to part, you shall be sure (the next moist
season, if you leave it abroad, especially in a damp room) to have It come off,
and so endanger the Belly, in bringing some part of It along with it, which is
a common decay in many a Good Lute.

After you have thus surveyed the Back and Belly, cast your Eye up toward the
Neck and Heads;

The length and thickness of the Neck.
And in the Neck observe the Length thereof, which you shall know to be Good or
Bad, according to the Number of Frets It carries: If it carry less then Nine,
it is too short; and if more, it is too long: Therefore Nine is esteemed the
Best Number of a True-siz'd Neck.

Yet I had rather have a Neck too long, than too short:

For if it be too long, (in which are two Inconveniences, viz. the one will
cause Strings to break too fast, the other makes the distances of the Frets too
wide) I can cut that Neck shorter, without any Inconvenience at all to the
Instrument; But if it be too short, there is no Handsome Remedy but to have a
New Neck.

Again, the Neck would not be over Thick or Gouty, to cause too great an
Extention in the opening of the Hand, in the Grasp or Use of It; which will be
unpleasant to the Practitioner.

About an Inch Thick at the first Fret, is a good scantling for an ordinary
sized Lute, and so increasing in Thickness almost insensibly down to the last
Fret.

But for my own part, I did not care how Thin it were, provided it were so
strong, as (by the strength of the Strings pulling) it did not come forwards,
by which means many a Lute is caused to Lie too Course.

The Finger-board to lie Round.
The Finger-board is the next thing to be minded; which would be made of Hard
Wood, of which Ebony is both Handsomest and the Best.

See that it be not Joynted or Pieced upon the very Edges, which if they be,
(as sometimes they are) will hinder the Frets from running smoothly, when you
have occasion to put them on, or move them.

Again, observe how It lies, whether Flat, or a little Round under the Frets,
from the Treble to the 5 th. or 6 th. Strings.

If it lie Flat, it lies Not well; which was the General Fault of the Old
Workmen a hundred years ago, and since; till of later Times we find that a
Round-laid Finger-board, is a Great Advantage to the easy stopping of a
String, especially in Cross-stops.

The two Heads.
The next things you are to view are the Two Heads, the one Turned back, which
must carry 16 Strings, (accounting the Treble Peg double) and the Upright Head
must carry 8; all which make a 24- Strung-Lute.

The more neat Those Heads are wrought, the more Commendable; Yet they add
nothing to the Sound, but it is the Back and Belly, which Principally give the
Sound; and we use to say, the Belly is the Chief producer thereof.

The Pegs the greatest trouble about an Instrument.
Then look well unto the Pegs, that They be Truly Fitted; for if They be not,
you will find more Trouble by reason of Them, than by any other Thing about the
Lute.

The first thing you must observe is, whether They be exactly Fitted at both
ends, that is, that they Bite equally stiff at both Holes; for if they be slack
at one Hole, and stiff at the other, they will constantly be slipping, and so
the Tuner loses much Labor and Time.

And you must know, that From the Badness of the Pegs, arise several
Inconveniences;

The first I have named, viz. the Loss of Labor. 7 Inconveniences attending
them.


The 2d. is, the Loss of Time; for I have known some so extreme long in Tuning
their Lutes and Viols, by reason only of Bad Pegs, that They have wearied out
their Auditors before they began to Play.

A 3d. Inconvenience is, that oftentimes, if a High-stretch'd small String
happen to slip down, it is in great danger to break at the next winding up,
especially in wet moist weather, and that It have been long slack.

The 4th. is, that when a String has been slipped slack, it will not stand in
Tune, under many Amendments; for it is continually in stretching it self, till
it come to Its highest stretch.

A 5th. is, that in the midst of a Consort, All the Company must leave off,
because of some Eminent String slipping.

A 6th. is, that sometimes ye shall have such a Rap upon the Knuckels, by a
sharp-edg'd Peg, and a stiff strong String, that the very Skin will be taken
off.

And 7thly. It is oftentimes an occasion of the Thrusting off the
Treble-Peg-Nut, and sometime of the Upper long Head;

And I have seen the Neck of an Old Viol, thrust off into two pieces, by reason
of the Badness of the Pegs, merely with the Anger and hasty Choler of Him that
has been Tuning.

Now I say that These are very Great Inconveniences, and do add much to the
Trouble and Hardness of the Instrument.

I shall therefore inform you how ye may Help All These with Ease; viz. Thus.

When you perceive any Peg to be troubled with the slippery Disease, assure
your self he will never grow better of Himself, without some of Your Care;
therefore take Him out, and examine the Cause.

For there are Three Causes of a Pegs slipping; Three Causes of a Pegs slipping.


The One is, the not equal Fitting or Biting at both the Holes; therefore you
must observe at which Hole it bites least; for if it bite hard at the wide
Hole, which is the thickest part of your Peg, The first Cause.
and slack at the other, then your String will constantly slip down, so soon as
the Peg or Hole is worn smooth.

But if it bite hard at the small end, and slack at the great, it will not so
often slip, but many times cause your Peg to twist in pieces.

Now the Remedy for all this, is only to scrape the Peg a little smaller at the
end which is too Thick, so long, till upon Trial you find that It bite at both
ends a-like.

Another cause of a Pegs slipping is, when both ends are equal, The second
Cause.
yet both the Peg and the Holes are worn smooth, (being made of soft Wood;)
wherefore so near as you can have all your Pegs of Hard Wood, (and without Sap)
as of Plum-Tree, Box, or Ebony, etc.

The Remedy for This Inconvenience, is only to scrape the Peg at both ends a
little, and then rub it at the two biting places with a piece of Chalk, and
then* It will stick fast.

The third Cause.
A third and very Common Cause, is from the putting on of the String, which
although the Pegs be never so well Fitted and Good; yet if the String be put on
so, that in the twisting about the Peg at either end, the String lie too near
the Cheeks of the Pin-holes, it hinders the Peg from biting.

And I have often seen some Fumblers, Fret and Vex Themselves a quarter of an
hour or more, to fasten such a Peg, and when 'twas done, by and by slip again;
And so Ignorant have They been of the Cause, that they have not so much as
tried to see if it might be mended, but Cry out, Oh here is a base Peg, or
something like it.

Now the Remedy for This is the Easiest of all, and lies only in the Care of
the Putter on of the String, to see that it lie wholly Clear from both the
sides.

And take This Rule along with you, never to twist too much String upon the Peg.

The common Destruction of a good String.
This fault of the Putter on is very often the Destruction of a Good String,
than which, a man had better sometimes lose a Shilling: For the Trebles, and
Seconds, (which are the most Chargeable and Breaking Strings) come where you
will, you shall find Them most commonly close and hard wound up to the Cheek of
the Peg-holes, by which means the String is so pinched and squeezed, that it is
not Long-lived after; And then they Cry out, Oh these are base rotten Strings,
etc.

I have insisted the longer upon These Inconveniences of the Pegs, because I
know they are so generally Common: And indeed if regarded, they will contribute
much ease and pleasure to All, but especially to Learners.

I have now run through all the particular parts of the Outside of the Lute,
excepting the Five Nutts, which the Strings lie upon; And on purpose I have let
them alone till Now in the last place, because they so necessarily relate to
the Stringing of the Lute, which is the next thing to be done.

The ordering of the Five Nutts.
And as to Those Nutts, there is not much to be said concerning Them; yet so
much, as cannot be left unsaid without a Great Defect to the Business.

First then, they are most generally made of Ivory, (which is Best) and do
require a Curious Care in the accurate Laying, and Notching of Them, according
to the right Distances between Ranks and Ranks, Pairs and Pairs; A Rule for
which take Thus.

First you must lay your Long Nutt (which must carry seven Ranks of Strings,
besides the Treble String) in a Notch cut out of the Plate of the Finger-board,
fit for Its proportion, and so neatly, that the Top of the Neck of the Lute,
and the Top of the Nutt, may join equally-even in all that same length, to the
end that the Strings which must be twisted upon the Pegs, may lie smooth upon
that part of the Flatness of the Neck, immediately joining to the Nutt; which
will secure the Strings from being Cut with the sharpness of the Edge of the
Nutt.

Then after it is thus Truly Laid, you must cast for the True Laying and
Dividing the Ranks of the Strings.

To the doing of which, you must first of all take a Treble String, The best
way to Rank the Strings truly.
and fasten it in the first Hole of the Bridge, (which is for the Treble
String;) then bring that String up to the Treble Nutt or Peg, and there hold It
in your Left hand in such a place, as It may lie all along within a little less
than a quarter of an Inch of the outside of the Finger-board; and when it so
lies, take a Knife and make a little impression upon the Nutt, just under the
String, which must serve for your Mark, and must afterward be Filed down deep
enough for the String to lie in: But let that alone till you have first marked
the Places, for all the Strings to lie in; which may be done with a Pencill, or
a Pen and Ink.

After your Treble Notch is thus marked, then put on your eighth String (next)
upon the Bridge, and draw it up to the other end of the Nutt, as you did the
Treble, and so make Its mark.

Thus then having the Two Extremes of your Nutt, it will be easy to mark out
the Places for all the rest proportionably.

Yet observing, that the Pairs of the 2 ds, 3 ds, 4 ths, and 5 ths, would be a
very little closer together, than those of the 6 ths, 7 ths, and 8 ths. The
reason I give is, because they are always in the use of stopping, and so may
the more easily be stopped close, clean, and sure, than if they lay wider.

But here you must Note of what Length the Nutt should be.

The Length of the Nutt of a Full-siz'd Consort Lute, Of what length the Long
Nutt should be.
fit for a Man's Hand, or a Woman's, would be just Two Inches, quarter and half
quarter long; and in a Nutt of This proportion, you will have full scope and
freedom to lay your Strings so conveniently wide, that they shall all speak
Clear, and your stopping will be very Roomey and Large; which is a mighty
matter for Clear and Good Play: Yet too much Room is an Inconvenience.

But upon Little-siz'd-Lutes, for Children, or the like, the Nutts must be
shorter, according to Discretion and Proportion.

Thus when you have Marked, and Ranked all your Strings, and that you see the
Distances please you well, then take off your Nutt, and with a fine smooth
File, cut the Notches to a convenient depth, so that all your Strings may lie
at an even and equal height, from the Finger-board, which would be about the
thickness of a Half-Crown, or a little more; and will be a convenient Height to
let the Strings have scope enough to whirle about with clearness of Sound, and
not to touch the First Fret.

There is one thing more concerning the Shape of the Nutt, Note a great
Convenience toward easy Play, by the Shape of the Nutt.
very considerable, for easy and neat Performance in Lute-play; viz. that Care
be taken to File the Nutt thinner a little toward the 3 ds, 2 ds, and Treble,
than it is in the farther part: The Player will find much advantage in his Play
by this very Observation.

Then, when your Long Nutt is thus far in Order, you must take It and Pollish
It very well, (but especially the Notches;) the which to do is Thus; How to
Pollish the Nutts.
viz. take a piece of New Neats-Leather, and a little scraped Chalk wet in
Spittle, which with good Pains must be Rubbed so long, till you be assured that
the Notches at the Bottom be very Smooth and Glib, so that the String in the
winding up may have no Impediment either in Gauling, or in Sticking fast in the
Nutt, which are very Common Inconveniences, to the Loss of many a Good String.

Clear it with a Dry Linen Cloth.

This being done, you may proceed to the Stringing your Lute, which must have a
Peculiar Direction.

Let your Four little Nutts alone, till you have Strung so far.

All These Things which I have set down, (although I say you must do Thus, The
Reason of the necessity of knowing these Things.
and So) are not properly a Work for You to do, (except you will be Ingenuous
and Mechanical) but for the Instrument-Maker; And when ever you Buy a Lute, it
ought to be Thus Fitted: Yet because I know that sometimes Workmen are
Careless, and suffer Instruments to go out of their hands Defective in many
such respects; and also that I would have you able to Judge of These so
necessary Concernments, Therefore I have Thus given you Information, that
thereby You may have any thing amended, before it comes out of their Hands.

As also, that many times you living in the Country, far from Workmen, may
either Your self be able to mend any such Fault, or give Directions to some
Ingenuous Country Workman to assist You Therein.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Mechanical Order of the LUTE.
ANd now I talk of living in the Country, it puts me in mind of One very
needful Thing, which whosoever lives far from Workmen, and keeps a Lute,
cannot be without the knowledge of, without extraordinary Inconvenience; which
is, How to take off a Lute Belly, and set it on again Completely, and is a
Great Curiosity to perform well and neatly.

A Lute Belly often in need to be taken off.
And you must know, that once in a Year or two, if you have not very Good luck,
you will be constrained to have It taken off.

Because the Belly being so very Thin, and only supported with six or seven
small weak Bars, and by the constant stretch of the Strings, (which is a Great
strength) the Belly will commonly Sink upon the First Bar next above the
Bridge, but sometimes upon any other, and so cause It to let go Its hold at the
ends of the Bar, and then your Lute will Jarr, and Grow unpleasant.

And if it be not timely amended, worse Inconveniences will follow, which may
endanger the spoiling of the Belly.

Therefore when ever a Bar is loose, let it be quickly amended, or presently
set your Lute down to a Lower Pitch, or untwist your Strings, and Lay it by,
till you can get It mended.

Now therefore that you may know how to Help your self, by your self, or by
your own Directions to any Country Workman, as need shall be; I will show you;
and give you a Reason why.

For I have known a Lute sent 50 or 60 miles to be mended of a very small
mischance, Danger in sending a Lute far to be mended.
(scarce worth 12 d. for the mending) which besides the Trouble, and cost of
Carriage, has been Broke all to pieces in the Return: So, farewell Lute, and
all the Cost.

This Thing therefore which I am about here to set down, is of such absolute
Necessity, that it is fit for all Persons who keep Lutes, to be acquainted with
it.

The way unto it is Thus:

First, Implements fit to be had always in readiness.

1. A Glew-Pot. 2. Glue and Izing-glass.


you must be provided of some certain little necessary Instruments or Tools,
fit for such an Undertaking.

The first may be a Glew-Pot, of about a Pint, made of Lead.

2dly. Have ever in readiness some of the Clearest and Best made Glue, together
with Izing-glass, (both which mixed together make the Best Glue.)

3dly. Let your Smith make you a Apiece Iron, 3. An Iron.
about the length of your Middle Finger, and about three quarters of an Inch
square, Filed flat and smooth at one end, and at the other let there be a long
Shank (much like to a Steel-stick, but Thicker) with a sharp end to run into
some Handle of Wood, to hold it by; but if you had two of These, the other
about a quarter so thick, it were better for some small uses.

4thly. You must have a Curious sharp Chizzel, 4. A Chizzel.
about an Inch broad; but if you had two or three, you would find convenience
by them, some broader and narrower.

5thly. A little Working-Knife; such, 5. A Knife.
are most commonly made of pieces of Broken-Good-Blades: One of them fastened
into a pretty Thick Haft of Wood or Bone, leaving the Blade out about two or
three Inches, and then Grind it down upon the Back to a very sharp Point, and
set to a Good Edge, it will serve you for many Good Uses, either in Cutting,
Carving, making Pens, etc. which is called a Working-Knife.

The 6th. is, a little Three-square File, 6. A File.
which must serve to make Notches in the Nutts, or Ruff and fit the Pegs, as
need shall require.

The 7th. and last is an Aul, a pretty strong and straight one, 7. An Aul.
which you will find a necessary use of.

These seven Implements will take up no great matter of Room in the Corner of
any Gentleman's Study, being all put up in one little Box, so that at any time
they may be in readiness, and not to seek.

I would have added unto them a Whetstone, of a fine and smart Gritt; for your
Chizzel and Knife must always be kept very sharp.

And being Thus Accommodated, you may (when occasion is) fall to work on This
manner; viz.

Preparations toward taking off the Belly.
First, untwist your Strings, only so much, as you may have Liberty to take them
from the Bridge; which when you have done, draw those of the first Head all
together through your Hand, and twist them about that Head and Pegs: Then take
the other four Ranks of Basses, and do the like with them, amongst the Peg's of
the Long Head.

This being done, your Strings will be safe, and well out of your way, and
ready to find their Places in the putting on again.

If any of your Nutts fall off, you must be careful they be not Lost.

How to take off the Lace.
Proceed next to the taking off the Lace, and if it be a Parchment, you may be
the bolder with it, and never fear the spoiling it, for you must have a New one
put on.

But if it be Silk or Silver, and that it shall serve again, take This Course
with it:

First, have a Dish of Water, and set it close by you upon a Table, and with a
Linen rag, (wet in the water) anoint (as it were, or bedabble) the Lace all
over, about half a quarter of an hour together; and then warm all your Lace
over with your Iron, being red hot, drawing your Hand slowly and closely, from
place to place, till you think the Lace is hot quite through, (but take heed of
Burning) and when you have so done, you may take the Lace at one end, and draw
it off, so easily as if It had never been Glewed, without the least damage to
your Lace at all.

How to take off the Belly.
This being done, Attempt the Belly after the same manner, but yet with more
Caution: And as you used the Lace with your wet rag, so use the Edge of the
Belly all over where the Lace was, (but with more Time, at least a quarter of
an hour) and especially That uppermost flat-narrowest-part of the Belly next
the lowest Fret, (at least an Inch and a half) for that part lies Glewed upon
so much of the Finger-board, and will ask good Suppleing with Water and Heat,
before it will yield.

Thus when you have well Suppled It, take your Red hot Iron, and heat it very
well all over, till you think the Glue within is dissolved.

Then take your Little Working-Knife, and begin to try to get it between the
Belly and the Back, Note.
at the Bottom first; at which place take notice that the Belly lies upon a
Flat, about a quarter of an Inch, the whole square of the Bottom; so that you
must put in your Knife accordingly.

And if you have Wetted, and Heated enough, your Knife shall find an easy
Entrance; which if you find not, Wet and Heat that part still again where you
are at work, till you perceive it will willingly yield to the gentle force of
your Hand and Knife: So when that Flat bottom is opened; Wet and Warm again a
little further upwards (an Inch or two) well, and then put in your Knife again,
and when you feel a Bar, then get your Knife under that Bar, and so gently
force it, till you perceive It loose. And so from Bar to Bar, till you come
to the Top-broad-flat-place; The which place you must again Wet and Heat very
well and thoroughly, and then taking the bottom of the Belly (which is loose) in
one hand, and the Neck of the Lute in the other, you will find (with a little
forcing) that it will come off very readily; but if need be, you may take a
broad Meat-knife, and getting it underneath within, help it to part by degrees.

And now your Lute is quite undone, The Lute undone.
you must get it mended again as well as you can.

A Careful Messenger to London will do very well; a convenient Box, and an
Easie-going Horse, or a Coach, will be very needful; for it is in a woeful
Pickle; a man would scarcely think it would ever come to good again: Well, fear
it not.

And now because I have been an occasion why it is brought to This pass, and
also that it is pity a Good Instrument should be endangered in such a Long and
Hazardous Journey, I will direct you how you shall Mend it, and put it together
again, without the least prejudice, and to very Good advantage.

Therefore begin where you left off, that is, with the Belly, and before you
lay it by, take your Hot Iron, (viz. not red hot, but only so hot as it may lie
upon the Belly and not discolor or scorch it;) I say, take such an Iron, and
laying that end of the Belly (which you last took off) upon a Table, with the
Inside outward, and holding it at the bottom with one hand, and the Iron in
the other, and all to be-heat It, by which means you will straighten It again
after that bending, which was caused by the taking off; (for Heat will set any
thing straight, or awry.)

And in that manner may you likewise straighten any part of a Belly, which
oftentimes will be risen or swelled to an unevenness.

This being done, lay your Iron away, How to find the Faults in a Belly.
and begin to view the Belly all over on the Inside, and find out what Bars
are loose, and what Cracks there are, which by your Eye (oftentimes) you will
hardly find, especially in the Knot: Therefore to make All sure, take the Belly
in one hand, and with the other, Knock it gently all over with your Knuckle
upon the outside, by which means you may discover the least Crack or Looseness
of any Bar, by the shattering or Fuzzing it will make, (if you be not Deaf.)

Then, when you have found out what Faults you can, The work is half done;
Therefore to Work; and first mend all the Cracks, How to mend a Crack.
before you meddle with fastening any Bar; which to do well and neatly, you
must first cleanse all the Belly within, from any Old Glue, or such Patches as
may hinder, (if any such be) which (with a scorching hot Iron) will presently
come off.

Then with your broad Chizzel scrape and make all clean.

And for the mending a Crack, it is only taking a little Thin Glue upon the tip
of a Thin-cut-stick or Chip, (for you need no Brush, as Joyners do) which you
may with the assistance of your Finger, (opening the Joint or Crack with a
small force) let in, and rub a little Glue, only enough to wet every part of
the Crack; which when you have done, then take your Hot Iron, and hold it so
close, as may thoroughly heat both the Glue and the Belly, which will cause the
Glue to incorporate, and take fast hold of the Wood.

Then laying the Belly flat upon some smooth place, Press the Joint close and
even with your Fingers, and then lay all along upon the Crack a little slip of
Paper, about a quarter of an Inch broad, or less, wet with Glue very thinly,
and with your hot Iron fasten on the Paper, which will immediately cause that
Crack to be as Firm as any part of the Belly.

Note how hot the Iron must be.
And here you must note, that your Iron must be so hot, as to scorch the Paper,
and the out-edges of the Glue only, and not at all to scorch the Belly; for by
that little scorching the Crack is more quickly and strongly mended: Thus much
for mending a Crack either in Back or Belly, etc.

Only Note, that if you find the Belly or Back in any such part to be Infirm or
weak, with Worm-holes or the like, you may either let such Paper remain on
still, or add a larger Paper or Parchment, as you see cause, either upon That,
or instead of It: Yet I do not allow of too much Lining, No lining of Cracks
but upon Necessity.
either in Back or Belly, the which do Clog an Instrument, and dull the Sound
of It; But upon Necessity (in some cases) it must be done.

Note further as to the General use of Glue, whenever you have occasion to
Use it, be sure to cleanse away all the Old Glue first very well; because that
New Glue will not take any fast hold upon Old; and that must be done by a
Scorching Iron, as aforesaid.

The Bars mending.
Thus having mended all the Cracks, fall to work upon those Bars you find
Loose, which most commonly be at the Ends about an Inch or two, and are
likewise easily mended, first by heating and cleansing off the Old Glue, and
then, with your thin Glew-stick, put a little Glue between the Belly and Bar;
then laying your Belly upon a smooth Table, heat again the Bar and Belly with
your Iron as it lies, and so hold it down close to the Table till it be cold,
which will be in less than half a quarter of an hour.

But because you may (if you will) be eased of so much trouble of Holding, it
will be convenient that you have in readiness two or three pair of little slips
of Trenchers, such as Boys make for Snappers, about an Inch broad, and 4, 5, or
6 Inches long.

Tie these, two and two together, at one end with a strong Pack-thread, and
they will serve to slip over the Bar end, and so hold It and the Belly very
close: These you may let stay on so long as you please, which will save you so
much Labor and Time, the which you may spend in doing another, or any thing
else needful.

These are very necessary Implements, fit to put up with the rest of your
Tools, to be in readiness when need requires.

Then when all your Bars are thus well mended, lay by your Belly Carefully,
lest any body Tamper with It, before It be well dry and hardened, which in 5 or
6 Hours will be sufficiently fit to be handled again, if it be a
dry-warm-season; but if not, then set it in some Chimney-Corner, (only within
the Air of the Fire;) for too much Heat will warpe and prejudice the Belly.

Thus you must do if you be in Have; but if not, it were better to stay till
next day, before you handle It any more.

Then you may confidently prepare for a Conjunction Copulative; first by
cleansing all the superfluous roughness, of Glue and Paper, remaining about
Those mended Places; the which to do is a Curiosity: But Thus must you do it.

If you have a less Iron, heat it and use it; if not, The cleansing of all
Glewed places.
your other may do well enough: I say, Heat It to such a height, that you may
nimbly and lightly touch, and scorch all those Rough Places, either of Glue or
Paper; But take heed of scorching the Belly, or overheating the Joints lately
Glewed, lest your work come in Pieces again.

When you have thus scorched all, and would have them come off, then take your
Chizzel, (your Belly being laid Flat upon a Table) and scrape gently all Those
Places, and all will come off very cleanly, as you would desire, to the very
Wood: But if at the first time all comes not off, as you would desire, Then,
lightly, and with a quick touch of a Hot Iron, scorch it again, and so time
after time, by little and little, you must work, till you see All clear and
smooth.

Take notice, that in cleansing off Glue, and Paper by scorching, An especial
Note concerning cleansing off Old Glue or New.
it is only to be done in the Inside of Instruments; for it will spoil the
Gloss or Varnish of the Outside of any.

The Outsides therefore must ever be cleansed by moisture only.

There is but One thing more to do, before you join Back and Belly again, which
is, to cleanse carefully every Bar end, and the whole Round-side-edge, of the
Back and Belly, with the Two Flats, at Tops and bottoms; All which must be done
as aforesaid, with a Scorching Iron first, and then with your Working-knife, or
Chizzel, take off the Scorchings, to the clean Wood, that the New Glue may take
fast hold; which being done, proceed in This manner.

First bring your Back and Belly together, and see if they will fit; by which
doing, you will perceive (it may be) some little Impediment, or Fault, fit to
be amended, before you come to Glewing, and so do and try till you are fully
satisfied that all is clear and fit; Then fear nothing, but boldly proceed to
the Uniting, which must be done after This manner.

Take your Aul, The Uniting of Back and Belly.
and after you have laid the Belly True in the uppermost Flat, (which you
cannot well miss of, because the Points of the Neck will give you infallible
directions) I say, when you are fully satisfied, that your Neck lies close,
direct, and right to the Top, then (with your Aul) prick a Hole quite through
the Belly, in the midst of that upper Flat, and join Belly and Back together; A
Choice piece of Curiosity.
then when you have thus Fitted them, pluck out your Aul again; for This doing
is but as a Mark or Direction for you, against you have occasion to come There
again, (which shall be very soon.)

Now to your Glew-Pot, with Back and Belly, and begin with which you please,
and anoint all the Edges Carefully round, where you know they must Join, and
every Barr-end be sure you touch well, and when Both are thus Carefully done,
(for here lies the strength of the Work) then (having a Good Fire ready) bring
Both to the Fire, and warm them a little, and clap them quickly together, and
with your Aul prick and fasten them together at the Top in the same Hole which
before you Joined them at.

Take heed of clogging with too much Glue.
But here in This Work you must be exactly Careful, that you Clog neither the
Back nor Belly, with the least drop of Glue more than is needful; for all
superfluity of Glue, is hurtful to the Sound of an Instrument.

Now having in readiness your Great Iron, red hot, heat the Edges thoroughly all
over, and then especially the upper Flat where your Aul sticks, till you
perceive the Glue is become warm and thin.

Then begin with your upper Flat, and with your Fingers you may Force it close
to its old and true place, and then with little pieces of Paper, (so big as
pence, or two-pences, wet with Glue) cover all the upper Flat in the Joints,
yet leaving about a Strawbredth or two betwixt Paper and Paper, so that you may
see how the Joint joins, and presently scorch on those Papers, one after
another, leaning pretty hard upon each one, with the squared end of your broad
Iron, which must not be too Hot, for fear of burning the Belly, yet hot enough
to scorch the Papers, and the superfluous Glue, into a Crustiness.

This being done, it will be a good Guidance to make It fall right all along;
Then after this manner proceed Inch by Inch, first on one side, and then on the
other, (for if you Glue all one side first, you may chance find it fall uneven
at last:) Therefore have a Care often to be viewing how it fadges on both
sides, and be sure at every Bar, you thrust it so close as possibly you can,
with your Thumb and Fingers; and Paper it well all the way with Scorching, as
abovesaid, and when you have rounded It Thus, lay it by till next day before
you cleanse off Those Papers, etc.

But if you be in have, you may cleanse It within 6 or 7 hours after, provided
you handle it gently, otherwise you may loosen something within.

And to cleanse It, only do Thus;

How to cleanse the Lute.
Take a dish of Water, and with a Rag bemoisten all those scorched Papers and
Glue, often renewing the moisture, (yet but a little at a time) and once in
Half an Hour, they will be so soft, that only with your Nails lightly running
them backwards upon It, it will all come off as you will have it.

Note.
And here I would have you Note, and Remember, that you use no other Tool
saving your Nails, for any such work; because you may Gaul and blemish the
Instrument with any hard Tool; but your Nails will not Hurt it, if you take
Care.

When This is done, proceed to the putting on of your Lace, or Parchment, which
if it be the Old Lace, you shall first lay it in water a while to steep, both
to dissolve the Old Glue, and also to make it Gentle and pliable, and when it
is steeped enough, you may with the Edge of a Knife run off all the Old Slime
and Glue, which with twice or thrice drawing over, betwixt your Thumb and
Finger gently, will be done, and then it is fit to be put on.

Then (sitting down and taking the Lute into your Lap, How to put on the Lace.
having your Glue warm and close by, and your Great Iron very Hot) Anoint about
a Fingers length or more of the Lace lightly with Glue, then with your Iron,
warm so much of the Edge of the Lute, (where you intend That shall lie)
together with the Lace and Glue, and begin your work at which side you please,
and holding It hard and close with your Thumb and Finger at the Top, draw it
hard down with your other hand, only so far as it is anointed, and so pinch it
close on both sides, smoothing it gently backwards and forwards with your Thumb
and Finger, till you perceive It has fastened, which will not be long till you
may proceed to the doing of such another length; then (cunningly taking up the
Lace so, as you may not undo the former) anoint so much more of the Lace, and
do as you did before, and so proceed till all be Finished.

All this will not be one quarter of an hours work.

But yet Note, Note what part of the Lace will be most troublesome.
that when you have wrought it down so far as the turning (about the Bridge,)
you will find those turnings more troublesome than the rest; Therefore you must
(after anointing and heating that place) pluck the Lace very hard there, and
smooth it well between your Thumb and Finger often, till you at last find It
ply and lie smooth and close.

You may for the more Curiosity in keeping the Lace clean, take a clean Linen
rag, and hold between your Thumb and Finger whilst you are in smoothing, and so
it will be neat.

There is nothing else to be said as to This doing, but be Careful to lay it
on straight, that you may have Credit of your Work, and that it be not too much
upon the Belly, which will clog the Sound.

The Narrower your Lace is, the Better it is, provided it will but just appear
with a little Edge upon Back and Belly.

But supposing you are to put on a Parchment, The way to put on a Parchment.
(which is every way as Good for use, if not Better) then cut a Convenient
breadth, and if it be in one, two, or three Lengths, it makes no matter.

Then lay it in Water a little while to soften it, and make it take Glue and
ply, and after it has soaked, take it out and draw it over your Knife Edge
gently, between your Thumb and Finger, to take out the Water and the Slime, and
by so doing it will be fit enough to take Glue, and to be dealt with as
abovesaid concerning the Lace; only take heed of letting your Hot Iron come too
near it, because it will be subject to run up into wrinkles, (with too great a
Heat.)

This being done, lay by your Lute for a Day or Two, that the Glue may harden,
and then you may proceed to the Stringing of it.

CHAP. V.
NOw your Lute is pretty well come to It self again; and without all question
(if you have rightly followed the Order of Those Directions prescribed) you
will find it in all respects so Good as it was, if not Better; Therefore doubt
it not in the least, but so soon as It is Dry enough, put on the Strings: Yet
before you proceed to That, take These necessary Directions concerning the
keeping your Lute.

Choice Observations about keeping* a Lute.
And that you may know how to shelter your Lute, in the worst of Ill weathers,
(which is moist) you shall do well, ever when you Lay it by in the daytime, to
put It into a Bed, that is constantly used, between the Rug and Blanket; but
never between the Sheets, because they may be moist with Sweat, etc.

This is the most absolute and best place to keep It in always, by which doing,
you will find many Great Conveniences, which I shall here set down.

The first Commodity by keeping a Lute well.
As, First, for the saving of your Strings from Breaking; for you shall not
spend half so many Strings as another, who lays their Lute open in a Damp Room,
or near a Window, etc.

Lute constantly in a Good Order, so that you shall have but small Trouble in
the Tuning of It.

Sound more Lively and Briskly, and give you pleasure in the very Handling of
It.

Occasion Extraordinary to set up your Lute at a Higher Pitch, you may do It
safely; which otherwise you cannot so well do, without Danger to your
Instrument and Strings.

Safety to your Instrument, in keeping It from Decay.

much Trouble, as in keeping the Bars from flying Loose, and the Belly from
sinking.

Now these six considered all together, must needs create a seventh, That
Lute-play must certainly be very much Facilitated, and made more Delightful
Thereby.

And because you shall not be wanting, in being able to give a Reason for any
of These seven Conveniences, I will here in Order set you down the Reasons why.

The first Reason given for those ^ Conveniences.
As first, That it will save your Strings from breaking very much; Your small
Experience will find That apparent; because a String exposed to the Air,
(especially if it be a moist Air) will not last Long: For the moisture causes
it to Swell; Therefore it cannot hold stretching like That String which is kept
Dry, and in a Good Temper.

2d. Reason.
Secondly, That it will keep your Lute in a Good Order and Temper, you will
likewise find by as small Experience.

For That String which suffers the Inconvenience of the moist Air, as it will
certainly Swell, so as certainly will it go out of Tune.

Therefore it must necessarily follow, that That String which is constantly
kept in a Dry Temper, (as in a Bed it will be) must needs stand more constantly
at, or near the Pitch it was set at, than the other, exposed to moisture.
Therefore your Trouble will be less in the Tuning: This is plain. Yet know,
Note.
that the Bed does alter It a little; but still for the Best.

For when you put it into the Bed, it is supposed to have been out, and in the
Air, which if it have been moist, never so little, will have Raised the Strings
a little; which you must grant an Inconvenience, (although it should be but
small;) But by putting It into a Bed, Remedied.

And always observe, when a Lute is taken out of a Bed, the Strings are more
Lank than they were before; which may more easily be perceived by the bigger
Strings of the Basses: for They will ever (at the coming out of the Bed) be
Flatter than any of the smaller Octaves, which Pairs with Them: The Thicker
therefore a String is, the more does it partake of the moistness of the Air,
and so must needs Swell proportionably, and be the more sharp.

Thirdly, 3d. Reason.
Whereas I said the Lute would sound more Lively and Briskly; There is very
good Reason for That: Because all the Misty Vapors and Dampness (which is the
cause of the Dullness of Sound) will be expelled; so that all the Natural
Briskness which is in a Lute, will show it self, having no Interruption.

Besides, it helps to Mellow a Lute; For Experience tells us, that an Old Lute
is Better than a New One.

And the Reason must needs be, because that in a New Lute there is more of
moistness in the Pores of the Wood, than when it is Old, Seasoned, and well
Mellowed.

And truly I have found as much Difference at Times, in One and the same Lute,
as if I had played upon Two several Lutes; which is very easy to be perceived,
by any one who will observe a Lute at one Time left Carelessly* and exposed to
damp Air, and at another Time, laid up in a warm Bed, and ordered as I have
given Directions.

And as I also said, It will give you Pleasure in the very Handling of It; you
will as easily perceive the Reason of that: For the Bed will dry up all the
Moisture and Clamminess, which moist weather constantly occasions to any thing
made of Wood, etc.

Fourthly, If you have occasion to set your Lute at a Higher Pitch, 4th. Reason.
you may then the better do it; because the Strings being Dry, and free from
Swelling, they will both hold better, and also the Lute is in no danger
thereby; because the Glue is hard and strong, so that both the Bridge and Bars
are Tite, and all things well able to endure the stretch; which if you should
do to a Lute lying abroad, exposed to the moist Air, in a Damp Room, or the
like; first, Snap goes your Strings, and it may be by and by off comes your
Bridge; and your Bars cannot hold long fast.

All which Mischiefs I have often known; the which are assuredly prevented by a
Warm Bed.

5th. Reason.
Fifthly, It will keep the Instrument from Decay.

It is a usual saying, That an Oak is 100 years in Growing, 100 years Standing,
and 100 years in Decaying; which is supposed to stand in all Weathers, wet and
dry.

Now if This Thick-strong-lusty-sturdy-Oak will (in 100 years) Decay, by such
usage; How much more easily then, must a Lute (made of so gentle soft Wood, and
so very Thin) with such like Ill usage) Decay?

Yet we see, that many Lutes there are, of a Great Age; and I my self have at
this present, a Lute made of Air, that is above 100 years old, a very strong
and Tite Lute, and may yet last 100 or 200 years more, provided it can be kept
according to This Careful Order prescribed.

6th. Reason.
Sixthly, It will save the Bars from sinking, except you now or then give it a
knock; for nothing sooner than Moisture (except It) gives liberty, or occasions
the Bars to sink, for the Reasons aforesaid.

Therefore, a Bed will secure from all These Inconveniences, and keep your Glue
so Hard as Glass, and All safe and sure; only to be excepted, That no Person be
so inconsiderate, as to Tumble down upon the Bed whilst the Lute is There; A
Caveat needful.
For I have known several Good Lutes spoiled with such a Trick.

7th. Reason.
Seventhly, and Lastly, That Lute-play thereby must needs be much Facilitated,
will appear very Plain; when as it will be considered, That all Those foresaid
six Inconveniences will be taken away, by This Order and Care.

Therefore it must needs follow, that the Young Scholar will be eased of much
Trouble, and consequently take a greater Delight and Pleasure both in the Lute,
and in his Practice.

I have now done with Those Reasons, why I would have a Lute kept most
constantly in a Bed, when it is in daily use; But at other times, when it is
not used, a good warm Case, lined with Bays within, and covered with Leather
without, with Lock and Key, and Hasps, will be very necessary.

Yet All These are not a sufficient security for It, if it should stand in a
Damp Room, for then both Lute and Case will be all moldy, and Come in pieces.

Therefore care must be taken that It always stand in some warm Room, where a
Fire is constantly used, or (next to that) upon your Bed-Testor.

Let This suffice for keeping your Lute safe.

I have now (except Stringing) spoken of All Things I can at present think upon
that I judge fit, or may conduce to the Benefit of every One, who is a Lover
and Keeper of a Lute, that they may know how to be able either to do, or give
Directions to have Them done, according to This most Complete and necessary
Order: and it is no Hard Work, nor Troublesome, but very Delightful to any
Active and Ingenuous Person, and a Commendable Recreation, besides all the
aforesaid Benefits and Conveniences*

I will next proceed to the Stringing of the Lute.

CHAP. VI.
AS to the Stringing of the Lute, take This General Direction. Some General
Directions as to the well Stringing of a Lute.


The first thing you are to consider, is the Size of your Lute; 2ly. The
Substance and Strength of it.

And as to the Size, if it be a Large Lute, it must have the Rounder Strings;
and a Small Lute, the Smaller.

Then again (as to the Substance) if it be a Strong firm-made Lute, it may bear
the Thicker Strings; but if Weak and Crazy, then the Smaller Strings.

Yet I rather advise to String it, according to the Size, than the Strength,
etc.

First, Because in so doing, a Lute has more Natural Right done it, and will
return you, more Acceptable Content, in token of Its Gratefulness.

2ly. Because a Lute that is Crazy and Weak, may have Ease done it, in setting
it at a Lower Pitch, (if you see cause) sometimes.

But if you be to use your Lute in Consort, then you must String it, with such
sized Strings, so as it may be Plump, and Full Sounded, that it may bear up,
and be heard, equal with the other Instruments, or else you do Little to the
purpose.

Another General Observation must be This, which indeed is the Chiefest; viz.
that what sized Lute soever, you are to String, The very principal Observation
in the Stringing of a Lute.
you must so suit your Strings, as (in the Tuning you intend to set it at) the
Strings may all stand, at a Proportionable, and even Stiffness, otherwise,
there will arise Two Great Inconveniences; the one to the Performer, the other
to the Auditor.

And here Note, that when we say, a Lute is not equally Strung, it is, when
some Strings are stiff, and some slack.

Nor can any man play so Evenly, or Equally well, upon such a Strung
Instrument, as upon one well Strung; especially when he is to Run Division: For
it will be, as if a man were to show Nimble Footmanship, and were confined to
Run over a piece of uneven Ground, with hard, and soft Places mixed together.

Sure, he must needs Run unequally, in Those places, or slack his Pace, or else
stumble and fall. Even so is it with such an unequal Strung Instrument.

Then again, it must needs be perceivable by the Auditor; for whenever such
unequal performance is made, the Life and Spirit of the Music is lost.

Thus having given you These General Observations, in Stringing your Lute, I
shall now more Nicely, give you some other, more Particular.

The first and Chief Thing is, to be careful to get Good Strings, More
particular Observations as to Strings.
which would be of three sorts, viz. Minikins, Venice-Catlins, and Lions, (for
Basses:) There is another sort of Strings, which they call Pistoy Basses, which
I conceive are none other than Thick Venice-Catlins, which are commonly Dyed,
with a deep dark red color.

And what sort of Strings are Best.
They are indeed the very Best, for the Basses, being smooth and well-twisted
Strings, but are hard to come by; However out of a Good parcel of Lion Strings,
you may (with care) pick those which will serve very well.

And out of these three sorts, First, choose for your Trebles, 2 ds, 3 ds, and
some of your small Octaves, (especially the sixth) out of your Minikins.

Then out of your Venice-Catlins, for your 4 ths, 5 ths, and most of your other
Octaves.

Your Pistoys, or Lions, only for the Great Basses.

There is a small sort of Lions, which many use, for the Octaves; But I care
not for Them, they being constantly Rotten, and good for little, but to make
Frets of.

How to choose your Strings.
Now that you may know, all these Strings, and also how to know Good, from Bad,
take these following Observations.

Minikins.
First know, that Minikins are made up always, in long-thin-small Knots, and 60
are to be in a Bundle.

Catlins.
Venice-Catlins are made up, in short double Knots, and 30 doubles in a Bundle.

Both which, are (generally) at the same Price, and the signs of Goodness, both
the same; which are, first the Clearness of the String to the Eye, the
Smoothness, and Stiffness to the Finger, and if they have Those two qualities,
dispute their Goodness no further.

Lions.
The Lion String, is made up in a double Knot; but as Long as the Minikin.

They are sold (commonly) by the Dozens, and not made up into Bundles. Their
Goodness may be perceived, as were the other: But they are much more Inferior
Strings than the other.

Colored Strings.
I have sometimes seen Strings of a Yellowish Color, very Good; yet, but
seldom; for that Color is a general sign of Rottenness, or of the decay of the
String.

There are several Sorts of Colored Strings, very Good; But the Best (to my
observation) was always the clear Blue; the Red, commonly Rotten; sometimes
Green, very Good.

How to keep your Strings.
As concerning the keeping of your Strings, you must know, there ought to be a
Choice Care taken; for they may be very Good when you buy them, but spoiled in
a quarter of an hours time, if they take any wet, or moist Air. Therefore your
best way is, to wrap them up close, either in an Oiled Paper, a Bladder, or a
piece of Sear-cloath, such as often comes over with Them, which you may (happily)
procure, of them who sell your Strings: Yet they are not very willing to part
with it, except they sell a Good quantity of Strings together.

Which, when you have thus done, keep them in some close Box, or Cupboard; but
not amongst Linen, (for that gives moisture;) and let them be in a Room where
there is, or uses to be, a Fire often: And when at any time you open them for
your Use, take heed, they lie not too long open, nor in a dark Window, or moist
place: For moisture is the worst Enemy to your Strings.

Forget not, to Tie, or bind them close, or hard together.

I will now begin to help you to String your Lute, The first thing toward
Stringing the Lute to be observed.
and the first thing I would have you take notice of, is to know how to pull
out a String well; For I have seen many a Good String spoiled for want of the
best way, and Care in this particular: And Thus it is;

Your Minikins and Venice-Catlins, will generally Run quite out, after you
begin to pull them at the right end.

In your Minikin, observe to find the running end.

Then take it either with your Fingers, or your Teeth, (holding the contrary
end fast with your Finger and Thumb, to keep it from Ruffling, or Running upon
cross Twists) so may you draw it quite out, to the twisted place; the which you
must be Careful to untwist, otherwise you will draw it into a Knot, and so
lose a good, (or it may be the best) part of your String.

Thus will most Strings run out easily; yet sometimes they will run across,
and not come out well, without your farther Care; which must be, to find out
the other Twisted end, and so with a Pin, or some such Thing, open that Twist,
by which means you will save your String, otherwise (if you force it) you
spoil, or break it.

Secondly, when your String is well open, and you find it smooth, The second.
and free from Knots, Try its strength, by taking it at one end in both hands,
pulling it so hard, till you perceive it Strong, or Rotten; And if it be a
right good strong String, it will many times endanger the Cutting into your
Flesh, rather than it will break, yea, although it be a small Treble-Minikin
String: But your Venice-Catlins will scarcely be broken, by a Man's (reasonable)
strength.

Thirdly, The third.
when you are thus far satisfied concerning the Fitness of your choice, both
for strength and Size, then endeavor to find, a True length of that String,
for your purpose, (the which is both a pretty Curiosity to do, and also
Necessary;) And thus it is done.

First, draw out a Length, or more, then take the End, How to choose and find a
true String, the most curious piece of Skill in Stringing.
and measure the length it must be of, within an Inch or two, (for it will
stretch so much at least, in the winding up) and hold That length in both
hands, extended to a reasonable stiffness; Then with one of your Fingers strike
it, giving it so much liberty, in slackness, as you may see it Vibrate, or open
it self; which if it be True, it will appear to the Eye, just as if there were
Two Strings; but if it shows more than Two, it is false, and will sound
unpleasantly, upon your Instrument; nor will it ever be well in Tune, either
stopped or open, but snarle.

But then again, if you find it to be True, at the whole length, you must
further examine it, how it will show it self upon the Frets, (viz. stopped;) For
you must know, that most Strings that are True Open, (that is, the whole Length
unstopt) when you come to make use of Them amongst the Frets (stopped,) they will
be False; Therefore This must be your constant way, to Try Them, viz. when you
have found a String True the whole Length, hold it still as you did; but with
that hand which holds the End you intend for the Frets, (or uppermost) take up
about an Inch shorter, and then strike it, and see how you like it, according
to your former Directions: Then again another Inch, and so try it again, and in
conclusion again and again, so far as you have use of that String amongst your
Frets.

Note how far you must find your String True.
And here Note, some Strings (generally) are not stopped beyond the Letter d, as
the 4th. String, upon the French Lute, Flat Tuning.

The 5th. String, not usually beyond the Letter f.

The 6th. not beyond the Letter d, etc. according as you may perceive, by the
Reason of Tuning; in regard every smaller String takes off the Greater, at the
Tuning Place.

A Good Note for the setting of Lessons, either upon Lute or Viol.
So that in the General and Ordinary use of the Lute, Lessons are not set (nor
should be, except upon some Extraordinary Occasion) with stopped Strings, when
you may have Open Strings, which will do the Business; and for two very good
Reasons.

First, because an Open String is more sweet, and Freer of Sound, than a stopped
String.

2ly. Because the fewer stopped Strings you have, the easier must your Lesson
needs be.

How far there is a Necessity of finding a String True.
But your Treble String, would always be examined and found True, to h, y, or k,
because there is no other String, to take it off.

Your 2 d. String likewise to h, or y; because it is often used so far.

Your Third would be found True to e, or f, at least, for the same Reason.

But all your Diapasons, if you find them only True open, (viz. at their
Length) it will be sufficient, because They are never stopped.

Thus much may suffice for direction of finding a True String.

Yet you must know, that although you put on All your Strings True to day, to
morrow some or other of Them will many times stretch Themselves false or
uneven: Therefore you must be the more careful to give It a Review the next
day, if you intend to be very Curious.

To Fret the Lute.
The next Thing (after your Lute is Thus Carefully Strung) is to Fret It; which
if your Lute lie well, and your Strings be put on True, is no hard matter to
do: Yet there is a Curiosity in doing it; Therefore Note,

First, to choose your B Fret, so Thick as well you may, (according to the Lying
of your Nutt, and Strings;) For the Thicker That Fret is, the more easily may
you fit all the Rest: because that in Fretting, every next Lower Fret, would be
some small matter Smaller, than the next above, (quite through:) Yet This Rule
is not observed by most, who are Careless; so that oftentimes, their Instrument
Jarrs, and Sounds unpleasantly.

Now therefore observe first, to Tie on, or fasten a Fret well, so that it may
be stiff, and not to be moved (easily) out of Its Place.

And you will find, that the first Fret, will be ever the hardest, to Tie well
on, for two Reasons.

First, because it is the Thickest, therefore not so ready to ply, and stretch.

2dly. Because there is but a little narrower room above It, by reason it is so
near the Nutt: Therefore you must be the more careful, to stretch It very
well, before you settle It.

The way to Tie on a Fret the best way, is Thus; viz. The best way to Tie on a
Fret after the old Fashion, viz. Double.
Your Lute standing (as it were) before you upon a Table, upon Its Back, take
your Fret, and put It double, under all the Strings, beginning from the Basses,
toward the Trebles; then (putting your Left Hand under the Neck) take That
Middle Double, and draw it under the Neck toward the Basses, (holding fast the
two Ends in your Right Hand) till you have brought them together, (viz. the
Middle Nooze, and the Two Ends.)

Then take that End next you, which you held in your Right Hand, and put it
through That Nooze, so, that you make another Nooze of That End, and then let
the first Nooze go.

Then again, take but the other End, which still remains in your Right Hand,
unused, and put It through your last Nooze, taking the Ends, (in each hand one)
and let All else go, and (only drawing them straight) your business of Tying is
over.

This being done, (now comes the Curiosity, to Stiffen, Fasten, The Curiosity
of Stiffning, or Fixing a Fret.
and Fix This Fret) I say, take the Fret (thus far fastened) and draw It so
close (by both ends) as you can well, to stiffen It to the Neck; then, (holding
both Ends fast, in your Left Hand) with your Right Hand and Left, force It down
so low (toward C. D. E. F. etc.) as you can; then put It up again to the Nutt,
where you will find it much too wide or slack; therefore take the Ends, (in each
hand One) and draw It stiff, and close again; then (as before) down with it, so
low as you can, and up again: Thus do it three or four times, till at last you
find it stiff, and so fast, that it will scarce be stirred, to Its place of B.
(which is but a very little space.)

But here Note, that at last, before you force it down, to Its place at B. you
are (after all stretching) to Tie it, of another hard Knot, and then it is
firmly fast.

And except you serve This first Fret Thus, you will always be Troubled with It
in your Play.

And if you take notice of most Lutes and Viols, wheresoever you come, you will
find Them defective in This first Fret, for want of such a Care, as here I have
directed unto, which is a great Inconvenience to the Instrument, and the Music
Thereof.

I have been the longer about This, because I know it so very Needful; and
also have taught you to Tie on All the other by This; but they will all be
easier to stiffen than This, because they all have more Room upwards, in the
Narrow of the Neck, than That has; And besides, they being all smaller sized
Strings, will the more easily stretch, and ply, to their stiffness and
closeness.

A single Fret the best.
There is a way which I have lately tried, and I find it much Better, which is,
to Fret a Lute with single Strings.

My Reason is, because it is not only sooner done, and with a shorter String;
but chiefly, it does (assuredly) cause a Clearer Sound from the String stopped;
which must needs be granted, if it be considered, that the String lying upon
This only Round single Fret, cannot but speak Clear, when as (on the contrary)
it lying upon Two, (as in the Double Fret it does) it cannot be thought to
speak so Clear, because, that although it Lie hard and close, upon the
uppermost of the Two, next the Finger, yet it cannot lie so very close and
hard, upon the undermost; so that it must needs Fuzz a little, though not
easily discerned, and thereby, takes off something of Its Clearness, especially
if the Fret be a Thick-broad-Double-Fret.

This I confess is a Curiosity, yet I think it worth Examination, because the
Business it self is a Curious Thing.

This is sufficient for Stringing and Fretting.

The next thing is to Tune your Lute, and place your Frets Right.

CHAP. VII.
How to place the Frets by Tuning the Lute.
NOw to Tune your Lute, (which is a principal piece of Curiosity) you must begin
where you left, viz. at the Frets, for your Frets are not to be drawn quite
down, to their proper Places, till you have some Assurance, of those proper
Places; the which must be, by your Ears, in Tuning.

I confess there is a Mathematical Rule, and way, to place the Frets, and is
used in Bandores, Auferions, Citterns, and Instruments Strung with Wyar
Strings; by which any Person, having neither Ear, nor Skill in Music, may set
them perfectly right, by That Rule: Yet That way will not hold exactly (always)
with our Gutt-Strings, except they were exactly True, as generally Wyar Strings
are; but in regard of their so often being False, the Best way is to place your
Frets as you Tune up your Lute, by your Ear, according to Unisons, 3 ds, 5 ths,
and 8 ths.

Therefore I say, first, Tune It so well as you can Open, (without Frets)
making All agreeing Strings accord, in their several Concords; And when you are
so satisfied, then attempt the fixing of your Frets to their Certain Places,
and not before.

The which must be, by fixing your Frets exactly, according to the Unisons of
your Tuning, set, (the which shall be set you in Its proper place:) And the
more Exact your Lute is Strung, the more readily will your Frets find their
Places, and consequently your Business of Tuning the easier.

This being done, your Lute is ready for a Good Hand; which, because I would
have you to have, I will proceed by such Infallible Rules and Directions, as
you shall not fail in the obtaining Thereof.

The Rule for Tuning, is set down in the 12 th. Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
I Will suppose you to be a Very New Beginner, Concerning Lute-play.
and that you know Nothing at all toward the Business; for such an One I had
rather Choose for my Scholar, than One already Entered; except by a Skillful and
Careful Master, who has not suffered them to run into Ill-Habits: My Reasons
for this shall be showed in their due place.

The First Thing I would have you regard, is your Posture, viz. The first
Document toward Lute-play.
How to sit, and hold your Lute: For the Good Posture has two Commodities
depending upon it.

The first is, it is Comely, Credible, and Praiseworthy.

The 2d. is, it is Advantageous, as to Good Performance, which upon your Trial,
you will soon perceive, although very many do not mind it.

Now as to This Order, first set your self down against a Table, The Posture.
in as Becoming a Posture, as you would choose to do for your Best Reputation.

Sit Upright and Straight; then take up your Lute, and lay the Body of it in
your Lap Across; Let the Lower part of It lie upon your Right Thigh; the Head
erected against your Left Shoulder and Ear; lay your Left hand down upon the
Table, and your Right Arm over the Lute, so, that you may set your Little
Finger down upon the Belly of the Lute, just under the Bridge, against the
Treble or Second String; And then keep your Lute stiff, and strongly set with
its lower Edge against the Table-Edge, and so (leaning your Breast something
Hard against Its Ribbs) cause it to stand steady and strong, so, that a
By-stander, cannot easily draw it from your Breast, Table and Arm.

'This is the most Becoming, Steady, and Beneficial Posture.

The reason why I order your Left Hand to lie upon the Table, is for an
especial Great Benefit; Note the Reason of laying the Left Hand upon the Table.
For if first you be thus able to manage the holding of your Lute with One
Hand, the work will come easily on, because the work of the Left Hand is the
most Difficult, and therefore must have no hindrance, or impediment, but must
be Free.

And the holding of the Lute Neck up with It, (as very many do) takes away the
Chief Strength, Liberty and Activity of That Hand; therefore gain but this One
Ability at the very first, and it will give you Ease, and Content ever after,
and enable you to do that which others shall never be able to do, who hold
their Lutes by the Labor of the Left Hand.

This at first will easily be gained, but afterward not.

The 2d. work is the Little Finger.
The 2d. thing to be gained is, setting down your Little Finger upon the Belly,
as aforesaid, close under the Bridge, about the first, 2 d, 3 d, or 4 th.
Strings; for thereabout, is its constant station.

It steadies the Hand, and gives a Certainty to the Grasp.

The 3d. is your Thumb.
The 3d. thing is, (keeping all hitherto in This Posture) span out your Thumb,
amongst the Basses, and lay the end of It down, upon which you please, but
rather upon the Last, Twelfth, or Greatest Bass; and when you have thus made
your Span or Grasp, view your Posture in all respects. Review your Posture.


And First, mind if you sit Comlily, Upright and Straight. 2dly. If your Lute
be not sunk down, A most necessary work to be gained.
from its Exaltation, with the Heads. 3dly. That you continue It stiff, and
steadily-strong, against the Table. 4thly. That your Left Hand, remain still
upon the Table. 5thly. That your Little Finger, be still fixed under the Bridge.
6thly. That your Thumb End, lie upon the last Bass; I mean, the End of your
Thumb, about half an Inch over the last Bass, and about three or four Inches
above the Bridge. Lastly, That in This Posture of your Right Hand, your
Right Hand Wrist, rise up, to a Convenient Roundness; yet not too much, but
only to an Indifferency, and to keep it from Flatness, or Lying a long, etc.

Now, by that time, which you can Examine well, all These Performances, it is
two to one, but you find your self to fail, in some one, or other of Them;
therefore, before you proceed any further, Rectify your Fault or Faults, and
enable your self, to sit in This Posture, for some time, till you find an
Aptitude thereunto, which will be, in one quarter of an hour, or less.

This, although it seem but little, will be Greatly to the Purpose.

And now, supposing you are perfect in your Postures, proceed to the striking
of a String, the which first, shall be the Twelfth, (the String on which your
Thumb lies.)

Note how to strike the first stroke after your Posture is gained.
And as to that Work, it is only (first) keeping your Thumb straight, and stiff,
and gently pressing down that String, (with an easy strength) so, as your
Thumb may only slip Over it, viz. That Pair, (for you must know, that always
the Pairs, are struck together) and rest it self upon the next (or Eleventh)
String, your Thumb then standing ready, to do the like to That String; and so
from String to String, till you have served all the row of Basses after the
same manner.

And when you are able thus, to strike them Forwards, try to practice them
Backwards, which will presently be done, and the whole duty (or work) of the
Thumb, quite finished.

But This you must remember, viz. when ever you strike a Bass, be sure, you let
your Thumb rest it self, upon the next String, and There let it remain, till
you have Use of It elsewhere.

And this is the only way, to draw from a Lute (as we term it) the sweetest
Sound, that a Lute is able to yield; which being perfected, you may conclude,
half the work of your Right Hand accomplished.

The 4th. thing is, to teach you the Use of your Fingers, The 4 th. Thing, is
the use of the Fingers.
and is Thus done.

First, observing still, all your former Postures carefully, with your Thumb
ever resting upon some one of the Basses, (where you please) put the End of
your second Finger, a very little under the Treble String, (about three Inches
above the Bridge) as if you did intend only to feel your String, having your
Forefinger (at the same time) close adjoining in readiness, (yet not touching
your second Finger, or the String;) then draw up your second Finger, from under
the String, forcing the String with a pretty smart Twitch, (yet gently too) to
cause it to speak strong and Loud; the which, try to do several times, so long,
till at last you perceive, (by several ways of Trial) you can draw a sweet,
smart, and pleasant Sound from That String; and when that is done, strive to do
the like with your Forefinger* (your second Finger keeping the same Posture of
closeness and readiness, as your Forefinger kept.)

Then, try to divide your strokes equally, betwixt your Fingers; beginning
first, with your second Finger, and then with your first: And so endeavor to
strike the Number of four strokes, equally and evenly; ever observing to begin
with the second Finger: at which stroke, you shall count one, then, with your
Forefinger, count two, your second Finger again, count three, and the last,
with your Forefinger, count four.

And Thus practice to count 1, 2, 3, 4, often; and so long, till you find you
can do them readily, equally, and evenly; and never to strike twice together
with the same Finger.

Now what I mean by Equally, and Evenly, will be well worth your ^oting, and
has a double signification or meaning. Equally and Evenly, doubly to be
understood.


First, I mean by Equally and Evenly, that all the number of strokes which you
make, be for Loudness alike.

Secondly, for proportion of Time alike, neither one louder or softer than
another, nor one quicker or slower than another; the which to do, is a very
Curious piece of Performance, and will lay a substantial Ground, or Foundation,
for Excellent Good Play; Both which may well be attained unto, in half an hours
time, with diligent observation.

But in the doing of This, take notice, that you strike not your Strings with
your Nails, as some do, who maintain it the Best way of Play, but I do not; and
for This Reason; The Reason. why the Nails are not so good to draw Sounds with,
as the Flesh.
because the Nail cannot draw so sweet a Sound from a Lute, as the nibble end
of the Flesh can do.

I confess in a Consort, it might do well enough, where the Mellowness (which
is the most Excellent satisfaction from a Lute) is lost in the Crowd; but
Alone, I could never receive so good Content from the Nail, as from the Flesh:
However ( This being my Opinion) let Others do, as seems Best to Themselves.

And that you may learn to strike a String Clear, and Clean, take notice, that
in your stroke, How to strike a String Clear, and Clean.
you strive to draw your Finger a little Upwards, and not Slanting, for that
will endanger the hitting of another String, together with That String, you
intend to Strike Single. This is called Clean Striking.

And Thus, when you find your self able to strike, and Count the Number of 4,
or 8, or 16, (or what even Number you please) Equally, and Evenly, upon the
First String; Then try to do the like upon the Second, Third, Fourth, or Fifth,
etc. All which, I would have you Practice, to do Smoothly, and Neatly,
according to all my former Directions.

And here suffer me to Tautologize a little, viz. Your Left Hand upon the
Table; your Lute Firmly Fixed; your self and It, in your True Postures; and
when (but) This is done, suppose your self, half a Lute-Player; For now you
have little, or nothing to do more, besides the bringing up, and ordering of
your Left Hand, and so to join their Forces both together; which you shall
presently, and very readily know how to do; as Thus, viz.

How to order the Left Hand
First, (keeping your self still in all your Exact Postures, before mentioned)
bring up your Left Hand from the Table, bended, just like the Talents of a
Hawk; All, excepting your Thumb, which must stand Strait, and Span'd out; your
Fingers also, all divided one from the other, in an Equal, and Handsome Order;
and in This Posture, place your Thumb under the Neck of the Lute, a little
above (b) Frett, just in the midst of the Breadth of the Neck; all your Four
Fingers, in this Posture, being held close over the Strings on the other side,
so that each Finger, may be in a readiness to stop down upon any Frett.

And now in This Lively, And Exact Posture, I would have your Picture drawn,
which is the most becoming Posture, I can Direct unto, for a Lutenist; and is
all I can think upon Necessary, as to Preparation for Good Play.

All the Preparations are Finished.
The next thing therefore shall be, to proceed to It: To which End, take notice
of This Music Line, (which although there be Six Lines, yet we call them, a
Music Line, and the meaning of It is This.

Those Six Lines, bear a reference to the First Six Ranks of your Lute-Strings:
As for Example.

CHAP. IX.
^ a b G d e f th h y k

THe First, or Uppermost Line, you must suppose to refer, to your First, or
Treble-String, the 2 d Line, to your 2 d String, the 3 d Line, to your 3 d
String, the 4 th, to your 4 th, the 5 th, to your 5 th, and the lowest, or
last, to your 6 th String.

And whereas you see several Letters placed upon all those several Lines; know,
That those Letters do refer to the several Fretts, upon the Neck of the Lute:
As for Example.

The Letter a, is ever to be Struck Open (viz. unstopt) upon that String, on
which It stands; or plainer, Thus; viz. That String is ever to be Struck Open,
when the Letter a stands on That Line, which refers to That String. Explained
Thus, viz. The First Letter a stands upon the First, or Uppermost Line;
Therefore the First, or Treble String, is then to be Struck Open,: Likewise,
the 2 d Letter ^, standing upon the 2 d Line, shows, That the 2 d String of
your Lute, is then to be Struck open; and so of all the rest, as aforesaid.

Now, for the Letter b, upon any Line, it shows, That the same String of your
Lute must be stopped close, to the uppermost Frett, with the very Tipp of One of
your Fingers; And, so of all the rest.

The Letter G, close to the 2 d Frett, ^, to the Third, etc. and so of all the
rest, till you come to y and k. (The Letter y being put instead of i. And the
Letter k, is the Last, and Lowest Frett.

And here Note, That the Number of 9 Fretts, is the Best Number for a Lute-Neck
to carry; for if it bear fewer, What Number of Fretts is best upon a Lute.
It will be too short, both as to the Proportion, and Comeliness of the
Instrument, and Deficient as to the proper good use required in a Lute; and if
it bear more than 9, It will be Inconvenient, both as to the Proportion of the
Lute, and also, as to the Breaking of Strings.

Now, supposing you can find out (readily) every String, and Frett, according
to those Six Lines, as also, stop every Letter by the same Rule, your Work will
be very Easy; for you have only, Six other Ranks of Strings to take Notice of,
which have no other Trouble, or Use, than to be constantly Struck Open with
your Thumb only.

And you shall Know, and Distinguish them Thus; viz. They ever standing under
those Lines, and so Marked; as you see by This Explanation. a a a a 4 5


The First a, being called the 7 th String; the Second, with a Dash before It,
the 8 th; the Third, with Two Dashes, the 9 th; the Fourth, with Three Dashes,
the 10 th; the Figure of 4 the 11 th; and the Figure of 5 the 12 th.

And, but that Custom has prevailed, to make Those Six Ranks of Strings Thus, I
conceive, It might be much Better, and more Proper, to Mark Them, with Six
Figures, Thus, viz. 1.2.3.4.5.6. However, there is no great matter in It; yet
the Figures are both sooner Set, and something more Reasonable.

By this time, I suppose, you are sufficiently informed in All these most
Necessary Rudiments; so that me thinks I hear you say, Pray Set, and Teach me a
Lesson; And indeed you are not far from It: And for the Preparation of which,
take Notice once more of your Music Line, where you may see the full order of
all your 12 Strings together, according as we constantly use Them.

^

And before you attempt any thing farther, view them well; and taking your Lute
into your Hand, enter into All your former Exact Postures, viz. First sitting
in an Vpright-Comely-Posture of your Body, with your Lute well set, and firmly
fixed between your Breast, and the Table-Edge, your Right Hand placed over the
Bridge, your Little-Finger set down in Its proper place, about the Treble Part
of It, and your Thumb Spann'd from It, to the Last, or Twelfth String, (viz.
The Figure of 5.) from which place (by the advantage of the certainty of the
Little-Finger's Place, being surely kept) you shall first Practice to hit all
your Basses, backwards, and forwards, in Order, and out of Order, all manner of
Cross-ways, so long, till you are assured of a ready Knowledge of each one,
both by your Eye from your Book, and by the performance of your Thumb; which,
(as I said before) if you do it not all well, in One Quarter of an Hour, you
will have cause to Suspect your self of Doltishness.

But I (suspecting no such matter from you) believe by this time, you are able
to Hit every String readily.

Therefore I will now proceed, to show you the use of your Two First Fingers,
the which will be about such a quantity of Time, in which you will have Them
likewise Perfect and Ready; to which purpose, see here your Music Line again,
which is an Explanation, by Letters and Line, of what I formerly told you, viz.
Counting One, Two, Three, Four, etc. yet (with all) there is an Addition of
Time, or Proportion, by certain Notes, or Characters, set over the Heads of the
Letters, viz. Thus.

4 Things observable in This Music Line, carefully to be Noted, and Practiced.
^

In This Line there are 4 Things, which you are to take notice of.

First, The Letters, and what Lines they stand upon.

Secondly, The Characters of Time, standing over the Heads of those Letters.

Thirdly, The Fingering, expressed by those Pricks, underneath each Letter.

Fourthly, The Dividing or Barring of Four, or Eight Letters, by those
downright Lines or Strokes. Explained Thus, viz.

The 1 st. 4 a 's, stand upon the Treble String.

The Character of Time, over the 1 st. a, shows, that the other 3. a 's are to
be performed (every of them) as the 1 st. a is, for matter of Time, or
Proportion; and so of the rest.

The Pricks underneath, stand, to show, with what Finger you are to Strike each
Letter, viz. Two Pricks, signify the Second Finger, and One Prick the
Forefinger.

Lastly, The downright Stroke, (or Bar, as we call It) shows the Evenness,
Sufficiency, or Observation, of a Full Time, (as I shall here-after declare.)

And now (as to your practice from This Line, I would have you ( sitting, as I
said, in all your comely and convenient Postures) with your Thumb Span'd out,
and Resting, or Lying, with the End of It, upon some of your Basses) strive to
hit the 1 st. 4, a 's, as they are there set.

The 1 st. a with your 2 d. Finger; and the 2 d. with your Forefinger. (The
which, is All you have to do:) For you may perceive, the other Two, are but the
same repeated.

Then strive to put 4 Together, as you see in the 1 st. Bar; and when you can
put 4 Together, pretty readily, then strive to put 8, as Evenly as you can.

But before I proceed any farther, I must acquaint you with Those Characters
standing over the Heads of those Letters, which are of 2 several sorts, as you
may perceive, by their various forms; and They (with some few more, which I
shall here set you down in This next Music Line) are of such Eminent Use, and
Necessity, in all manner of Music, both Vocal, and Instrumental, that Nothing
can be performed well, without the knowledge of them. Therefore, see Them All
Here set down together.

CHAP. X.
* Semibreve, * Minim, * Crochet, * Quaver, * Semiquaver, * Demiquaver.
THese are the Chief Notes and Characters, of Musick's Proportions, The meaning
of those Characters.
by which, (as they are placed, or set over any Letters, in a Lesson, (as you
see in the foregoing Music Line they are) you may know of what Quantity, any
Note or Letter is, in your whole Lesson. As for Example.

If a Crochet stands over any Letter, (as there stands one over the first a, in
that Line aforesaid;) you must say, that That a is a Crochet; and because there
stands nothing over the next aaa 's, they are also of the same Quantity with
the first a, viz. all Crochets. So likewise there stands a Quaver over the
Fifth a. Therefore That a must be called a Quaver: And the next 7 aaaaaaa 's
are therefore all Quavers, by the same Rule: And so likewise of all others.
This is sufficient to let you know the meaning, or use of Them.

Now I will more particularly let you know their Differences, in their Exact
Proportions, and Quantities.

Know therefore, (1 st. in general) that the first Character, (viz. the
Semibreve) is the Character of the Longest Proportion, generally needful in
Lute-Play: And the last, (viz. the Demiquaver) is the Shortest.

And they are in Order, from the first (every one) but half so much as the
foregoing Note. As for Example.

I will Compare them to Money, (and most People will be ready enough to count
them the better (I suppose) for That.

Suppose therefore, that the 1 st. Note (viz. the Semibreve) be a Groat, (which
is your Chief Note, of Note.)

The Characters of Time Compared to Money.
And because you must still divide by Halfes, you will say, That the Minim must be
but a Twopence, The Crochet a Penny, The Quaver a Halfpenny, and the
Semiquaver (which is the Last, and Shortest, generally in use) a Farthing.

Trouble not your self, for the Demiquaver, till you have a quick Hand; It
being half a Semiquaver.

This is an Easy, and Plain way; and in regard you have but Five only to
Trouble you, I suppose you will the more intently strive to be able to
understand Them, and be Exact in performing Them; the which to do, I shall put
you in such a way, that you cannot possibly but be able to do Them in a very
short time Perfectly.

The Definition of a Semibreve.
I will begin first with the Semibreve, and give you Its Definition according to
Its General Use, by which you will understand all the rest.

To the right understanding of which, you must know, That in All Musical
Performances whatever, if they be done according to Art, they are done
according to the Rule of Time-keeping, (as we call It) which is ever observed,
and done by the Motion, either of Hand or Foot, during the whole time we either
Sing or Play.

Now, because upon an Instrument, both our Hands are employed, we must
therefore keep Time, with a Foot: Which is to be done with an Exact
Observation, in putting the Foot down and up, Equally; that is, to be Constant
to a True, and Even Motion, with the Foot, down and up; like unto the Balance
of a good Clock.

And the Best way to do it, is first to be able to Count the Number of 4,
Evenly, viz. as if you were supposed to Measure every Count, with a pair of
Compasses; Thus,.1.2.3.4, and not Thus,.1.2.3.4,
nor any way unequally; by which Explanation, I suppose you may understand my
Meaning, and is Thus (more plainly) viz. Note well This.
Just at your saying One, your Foot must knock, and remain down, till you have
counted the Word Two; then, just as you say the Word Three, your Foot must
rise, and continue up, till you have said the Word Four, and then down again at
the Word One. And thus must your Foot constantly be in Motion, during your
Play, and Equally dividing your Down from your Up, so Exactly, that not the
least Difference may be perceived; which, if you Carefully practice at the
first, you will ever continue It; but, if you be remiss in the beginning, you
will always after, be uncertain, not only, to your own hindrance, but also, to
all others, who shall Play in Consort with you: Therefore you cannot be too
Careful, till you have gained your Habit, which will quickly be got.

And here you must take notice, That Those 4 Counts, What is the Time Called s
Semibreve.
performed with your Foot, down, and up, is the Time, which we call a
Semibreve, (viz. your Groat;) so that, if you observe, you will perceive, in
the performance of It, that you have performed both the Minim, (viz. the Two
Pence) and the Crochet, (the Penny) only with This Difference; That whereas you
have made but One Semibreve, you have made Two Minims; and also 4 Crochets; for
the Minim, is only the Down, or the Up; and the Crochets are any Two of Those
Counts, down, or up.

Now here must needs arise a Question, viz. How long must you be, in Counting
Those 4 Counts? For you may be an Hour, or Two, (more or less) in doing of Them.

And as to This, I shall direct you unto, Two manner of Ways, (and both Good)
the first is This.

Let Those 4 Counts be spoken Deliberately, viz. as a Man would speak Gravely,
or Soberly, and not Hastily, or Huddlingly; yet not Drawlingly, or Dreamingly;
but in an Orderly Familiar way of Speaking.

And This is one very Good Way, of laying a Notion into your Head, of some kind
of Certainty, in Measuring your Time; and with a little Practice, you will gain
a Readiness, and Familiarity unto It: Yet There is a Better, and more Certain
Way, than This, which I will show you, after First, I have given you a View of
your Music Characters, as Here they are set down, with Their Explanation.

**************** ******** **** ** *




Observe Here, in the Lowest Place, stands the Semibreve, (or Groat) marked
Thus (*)

In the next place above It, stands Two Minims, (or Two Twopences) marked Thus
(**)

Over Them, stand 4 Crochets (or 4 Pence) marked Thus (****)

Over Them, Eight Quavers, (or 8 Half Pence) marked Thus (********)

And next above Them, at the Top of all, stand 16 Semiquavers, (or 16
Farthings) marked Thus (****************)

These Five Characters, are All you need to trouble your self to take notice
of; only sometimes you will meet with a Pricked Note, Thus, (*^) or Thus, (*^)
Thus, (*^) or Thus, (*^) which, whenever It happens, You must know, That That
Note, is Augmented in Quantity, half so much as it was before; viz. a Pricked
Semibreve, is made Three Minims; a Pricked Minim, Three Crochets; and so of the
rest. The which I shall Explain here following, in the next Chapter, more
particularly.

CHAP. XI.
An Infallible Rule, how to keep Time well.
NOw I will proceed to the enabling of you to perform your Time, and by a most
Exact, Easy, and Infallible Way; which shall be as a Touchstone, to try
whomsoever shall pretend to keep Time, the most Exactly; and it is Thus.

Take a Bullet, or any Round Piece, of what weighty thing you please, to the
weight of half a Pound, or a Pound, (more or less) and fasten It, to the End of
a Pack-thread, or any other String, long enough to reach the Top of the Seiling
of the Room, in which you intend to Practice.

Then fasten the End of the String upon some Hook, or Nail, to the Top of the
Seiling, so, as the Weight may well-nigh touch the bottom of the Floor; and
when this is done, set It to work, after this manner, viz.

Take the Weight in your Hand, and carry It to one side of the Room, lifting It
so high as you can reach; then let it fall out of your Hand; and you shall
observe, That This Weight, will keep an Exact True Motion of Time, forwards,
and backwards, for an Hour or Two together.

A strange Secret of the Pendent.
And that although, at every Return, It strikes a shorter Compass, than It did
the Time before; yet it keeps the former Exact Proportion, (for Length, or
Quantity of Time) Infallibly: Yea, when It makes so little a Motion, as you can
scarcely perceive It move, It Then gives the self-same Measure, (for Quantity)
as It did at first: The which is a pretty strange thing, yet most Certain; And
Easily proved, by any.

Now I say, having found out, such an Assured Time-keeper, as This is, Let it
be your Director, in all your Curious Private Practices.

How to make use of This Perfect Time-keeper.
And thus, I would have you make use of It, viz. when you have set it to Work;
First, Sit, and Observe It in Its Motion, Well; and take good Notice, of the
Proportion of Time It strikes: And here you must know, That according to the
Length, or Shortness of the String, It will have a Slower, or Quicker Motion.
Therefore a Long String is Best to Practice with, at first, A Long Pendent,
best to Practice with.
and such a Length, as will allow you to Count the Number of 4, with
Deliberation, (as before I hinted you to) in Its whole Course, viz. Beginning
to Count, One, just with the Turn, and meet It with the Count Three, at the
next Return; and so Counting, (with Its Motion) One, Two, Three, Four, Exactly,
in the time of Its coming, and going; and to be able, Punctually, still to meet
the next Return, with the like Count, is the Work I would advise you to
Practice well, along with It; and, so long, till you perceive you have gained
an Indifferent good Habit, in this manner of Time-keeping, with your Tongue,
and Foot. Which, after you can confidently do, by the Order of 4, (in which is
included, Crochets, Minims, and Semibreves) and perceive your self Perfect;
Then adventure to Count 8, viz. Quavers; by Numbering 4 to the Down, and 4 to
the Up; Always remembering to be Extremely Careful, to begin your First Count,
just with the Beginning of the Swing's Turn, or else you will fail much, and
do your self no good.

And in This undertaking, you will find a necessity to Count, Note well, all
This Side.
and to Play, just so fast again, as you did before; the which will be Nimble,
and pretty difficult to perform, at the first; yet soon overcome, with good
Care; and so well, that by This Practice, you will be brought to have an Exact
Motion, of True Time-keeping; which is one of the most Necessary, and Main
Things, in Music; especially for a Beginner to know, and Endeavor after.

And indeed, there is a General Fault, in This Particular, in most Performers;
yea, in Masters Themselves: When in Playing of Divisions, they come to
Sub-divide, ( upon a Plain Song, or a Ground) They (Generally) are subject to
Break Time, and (most what) to Play too Fast.

And Here, a Man might venture to lay a Good Wager, That there is scarcely One
Artist, (of the Highest Form) among Ten, How to be assured, to win a Music
Wager of a Good Artist, if it were laid.
(I mean, a Very Master) that shall be able to keep an Exact True Time, (by
This Infallible Rule) for 20 Semibreves together, (His Back being Turned
toward the Pendent, for That Time.)

I speak not This, to disparage any Master, or other; But only, because I know,
It is so very Critically-Nice, and Hard to be Performed.

But now again, you must know, That, although in our First Undertakings, we
ought to strive, for the most Exact Habit, of Time-keeping, that possibly we
can attain unto, (and for several good Reasons) yet, when we come to be
Masters, so that we can command all manner of Time, at our own Pleasures; we
Then take Liberty, (and very often, for Humor, and good Adornment-sake, in
certain Places) to Break Time; sometimes Faster, and sometimes Slower, as we
perceive, the Nature of the Thing Requires, which often adds, much Grace, and
Luster, to the Performance.

But, This ought not to give the least Liberty, (to Young Beginners) to neglect
their Chiefest Endeavor, after the most Exact way, of True Time-keeping.

Thus, having prompted you, to the very Best way of learning, to keep Time,
Truly; and as but yet, only with your Tongue, and Foot, I now would have you
try, to perform some such Counts, (with your Practice) in some Lesson, upon
your Instrument.

And at first, your Best Way will be, to take your last Music Line, which I
set you, (and is Here again renewed to your view;) and enable your self, to
strike all those Letters, along with your Swing, according as I have Directed.

But 1 st. you must take notice of the Pricks, standing under each Letter;
which are to signify, with what Finger each Letter is to be struck; viz. 2
Pricks, show the 2 d. Finger, and one Prick, the First, as was showed before.

^

Now therefore, go back to your Practice, of Time-keeping again, and try with
your Swing, Hand, and Foot together; and enable your self, to strike These
Letters, with True Fingering, (so set) in a Just, and Even Proportion of Time;
and so long Practice Them, till you perceive, you can Readily, and Familiarly
do Them, with your Swing; The which will be one of your Greatest Difficulties
in Lute-Play, The Chiefest Work of the Right Hand.
and the Chiefest Work of your Right Hand.

This being done, I shall proceed to show you, how to Tune your Lute; And as to
That, you must take notice, There are diverse sorts of Lute-Tunings, (as there
are also Viol-Tunings.) All which, when you have gained an Ability, of Good
Play in This One, (which I shall here set you,) you may very Easily (of your
self) be able to Tune, and Play, in any of the Rest, at your Pleasure.

Therefore, for your Best Profit, and Advantage, I shall set you down, in This
Music Line, That Tuning, which I Esteem The very Best, among the French
Tunings, (as they call Them) or the late New Tunings; and is the Last, and
Newest, Excepting only One. And because I Esteem It, and say it is the very
Best of Them All; I shall most Plainly Demonstrate It, so to be, to the
Reasons, and Judgments of All Men, before I End This Work.

CHAP. XII.
^ The Tuning of the Lute, (Erroniously) called, the Flat-Tuning, etc. The Best
of French-Tunings.


THis is called, (Erroniously) the Flat-French-Tuning; Reasons, for the Calling
of a Tuning, Flat, or Sharp.
but might more properly go under the Name of Sharp; both in Reference to the
Tuning of the Three 1 st. Ranks of the Diapasons, (beginning at the 12 th.
String;) as also the Three 1 st. Ranks of Trebles; By which Observation, we may
(more Reasonably) Term a Tuning, Flat, or Sharp.

But This is not so fit Discourse in This Place, for my Young Scholar;
Therefore I will break it off, at present, and inform him, how to Tune his
Lute; This way: As for Example.

If you would learn, well, to Tune your Lute, It is to be supposed, that you
know an Unison, 3 d, 5 th, and 8 th: Or else you must learn, so to do; and then
take notice, of Those Letters, set in the last Music Line; which show, That
every String, must be an Unison to the next, under, or above It, as I have
there set them down; only the Basses, and their Octaves, must be an Eight, to
each other; and all the rest of the Double Strings, (which are Equal in their
Sizes) must be Unisons, one to the other.

This will be sufficient, for you to know, as concerning Tuning your Lute; and
a little Use, will make you Ready at It.

I will now show you, the further use of your Right Hand.

^ The further use of the Right Hand.


You see Here, still, the same Line you had, before; only I have added (under
every first of a Down, and first of an Up) a Bass, which must be struck,
together, with the very same Letter, at the very same time; with the Thumb;
(which at the first, will seem a little troublesome, yet soon gained, or
overcome.)

Your 1 st. Rule holds good, in both Thumb, and Finger; for your Thumb must
rest upon the next String, but your Finger not, but pick up. And your General
Rule is, always, to strike a Single Bass, and Treble, with your Thumb, and 2d.
Finger Remember, to stop the (b) with your Forefinger, and hold It so stopped
all the Time, till you have Played the whole Line; and when you can do It
pretty readily, Then Practice it with Time, by your Swing, Hand, and Foot, as
you did, with the Single Line, last before set you; The which, in half an hours
time, will be your own, tollerably well: But, at 2, or 3 such half hours,
Exactly; and Then you are in a Higher Form, and with Good Desert.

Next, Learn the Order, and Fingering of your Left Hand, Thus.

CHAP. XIII.
^

But before you touch the First Letter (a,) upon the 2 d String, Remember to
lay your Thumb upon the Last Bass, (which is to be struck, the last Note of the
2 d. Bar) that it may be both in Readiness, and Resting some where, (as always
it must be.)

The most Comely Posture of the Left Hand, Carefully to be Observed.
Then, (having prepared your Right Hand) bring up your Left, (your Fingers
standing Hollow, and Round; and of an Equal Distance (as the Tallents of an
Hawk;) which is the most Comely, and Useful Posture, for that Hand to be in.

Yet Noting, That your Left Thumb, stand not Bending, but Strait out; Then,
placing That Thumb a little above the (b) Frett, underneath the Neck of the
Lute, so that your Forefinger, may stand just over the Letter (b,) upon the 2
d. String, Pick up the Letter (a,) with the 2 d. Finger of your Right Hand, and
then be ready to stop down (b,) with the Forefinger of your Left Hand, and so
strike It, or Pick It up, with your 2 d. Finger, (as It is Marked) of your
Right Hand.

Then (holding it still stopped) stop the Letter (d) with the Tip of your Little
Finger, and so strike it, or pick It up, with your 2 d. Finger, (as it is
marked.)

These 4 Letters only, Practice so long as you please, (20, 30, or 40 Times
over) till you have gained an Exact Habit in doing Them; In This Little doing
well, a Great-way is gained in Lute-Play.
And in which doing, you will have gained, an Exceeding Great-way into
Lute-Play: Yet taking Notice, That when you come to the 3 d. Bar, (which shows
the work of the 3 d. String) you are not to keep your Thumb above the (^)
Frett, (as I formerly gave Direction) but plant it (according to the
Reasonableness of the Work) a Frett lower.

And so you must ever move It, (as occasion requires.)

Then, when you perceive, you can put Those 4 Notes together, Truly, and
Readily; proceed to the rest, as you find Them pricked down; and Endeavor to
Play Them, as you did the first Four, (for all the Rest, must be stopped, as
Those 4 were, ( viz. with the First, and Little Finger.)

And Here take notice, of One very Great Piece of Care, which by all means, you
must now (at First) Observe: For fear of an Ill Habit, which is;

That after your Stopped Note, (whatever it may be) you are not to take up That
Finger, which you last Stopped, until necessity require, or that you find some
Reasonable Cause; as either to give way, for some other Letter, (as your (b)
here must give way, for (d) to sound, (in your coming back) or else, for that
you are to use, That last Stopped Finger, in some other Necessary Place;
Therefore* take notice of This, for a General Rule, (both in Lute, and
Viol-Play) That you never take up any Stopped Finger, One of the Best General
Rules for Fingering, either in a Lute, or Viol-Play.
(after you have struck it) till you have some necessary Use of It, or that
your holding of it so Stopped, may be inconvenient for some other performance;
And when you do remove, (or unstop It) let it be so very little from the
String, as One can scarce perceive your Finger, to have unstopt It; which
Custom, will teach you to Play Close, and Quick, Neat, and Fine: But if (on the
contrary) at the First, you use your self, to Lift, or Toss your Fingers High,
(as too many use to do) you shall never Play Handsomely, Quick, or Well.

I used to compare such Tossing-Finger'd-Players, Toss not your Fingers High.
to Blind-Horses, which always lift up their Feet, Higher than need is; and so
by that means, can never Run Fast, or with a Smooth Swiftness: It is therefore,
both Commendable, and Profitable, to Play Close; so that in doing much, you
seem to take little, or no pains; and in so doing, you cannot but do Neatly,
Nimbly, and Well: But if in your Beginning, you get an Ill, Beware of an
Ill-Habit, at First.
or False-Habit, you will scarcely ever be Reclaimed; which is (indeed) One
main Cause, of so many Bad Performers, and the Lute's Discredit; either, in
that Masters have not an Especial Care, in the 1 st. Entering of their Scholars,
or that Scholars are not Ingeniously Observant, to Practice, as they are
Directed.

Thus have I been Long, in showing you a Little, viz. to Perform the Last Line;
yet think you it not Long, but be Patient to overcome It, and you will (by That
Time) be able to do a Great-Deal, with Ease.

Here follows the Natural Formation of all the Stopped Strings, in these 5
following Musick-Lines; which if you can once do, Nothing can be Hard for you,
and it is but One Half-hour's Work.

The Formation of the Treble String.
^



Gain the Formation of the Treble String, and you have Gained All.
And here take notice of those Figures, which stand under each Letter; and are
to direct you, with what Finger you must stop each Letter; viz. the 1 st. 2 d.
3 d. or 4 th. Finger, according to the Figures.

Now, you must endeavor, To make This Line Exactly Perfect upon your Fingers,
just as you see It set.

And the Quickest, and Best way to do it is; First only to Practice the 1 st. 4
Letters, 20, 30, or 40 times; or so long, till you find a ready aptitude, to
perform Them Equally, and Evenly, at your Command.

Then do the like to your next Four; and so from 4 to 4, till you have gained
Them All. And in This one Line doing, you have more than gained the doing of
All the other stopped Strings; as you may plainly perceive by their standing, No
String needful to be so much stopped, as the Treble String.
(there being no necessity of stopping, so much, any String, as the Treble
String.

The Formation of the Second String.
^



The 2 d. String, is very seldom, so much stopped, (nor is it needful;) because
(a) upon the Treble, takes the 2 d. String off, at the Letter (d,) from any
Necessity of Use; only sometimes, for Convenience of Fingering, etc. we Play,
or Prick the same Tones, upon the 2 d. which otherwise belong, properly, to the
Treble: Or sometimes, when the Treble String is Broke, you may make a good
shift, to Play many Lessons, (without It) upon the 2 d. String, by the same
Rule.

The Third String's Formation.
^



This is the whole order of the 3 d. String: And as the Treble took the 2 d.
off, at the Letter (d;) so does the 2 d. take This off, at the Letter (d;) so
that there is no necessity of stopping This String, any further than (e,)
except for the same Reasons aforesaid.

The 4th. String's Formation.
^



This is the whole order of the 4 th. String, and more than needs, by much,
because The 3 d String, generally takes the use of This off, at the Letter (d)

The 5th. Strings Formation.
^



This is the whole order of the 5 th. String; the 4 th. taking It off, at the
Letter (f.)

The 6 th. String, needs no Explanation, in that It is seldom stopped, beyond the
Letter (d.)

This I think fully sufficient, to give you the Exact Information, concerning
the whole Fingering of the Lute, as to Single Stopping.

It only remains for you, to acquaint your self, with the Ready Use of every
String, as It is Thus ordered; (the which will soon be done) and Then, you will
proceed, with much Cheerfulness, and Delight, to the Full-Stops, which are not
many, nor at All Hard, but very Familiarly Easy, and Natural, for the Hand.

But before I proceed to Them, I will make Perfect, all your Work, Thus far, as
we have gone.

Therefore, take notice, of This next Music Line; which is the very same I set
you a little before, only I have added to It, some Basses, or Diapasons; and if
you forget not my former Directions, I doubt not, but you will Play It, at the
first sight.

^

There being no difficulty, in the Playing of This, the Treble, or upper part,
being (as I said) the same you had a little before; only strike the Basses,
with Those Trebles, you see set under Them.

CHAP. XIV.
Seven Handsome Lessons, or Praeludiums, follow.
HItherto, I have given Sufficient Directions, as to the whole Order of the
Lute, in Reference to Single-Play; I should therefore proceed, to inform you
the way toward a Full-Play: But, because you shall be more Perfect in This,
(by which means, the next, will be much more Easy) I will, here following, set
you down 7 Praeludes, (in each Key One) which shall serve you, as so many
handsome Lessons, upon any after occasion, in any One of the 7 Keys. The 1 st.
shall begin here, in C-fa-ut-Key.

The 1st. Lesson, being a Praeludium for the Hand in C-fa-ut-Key.
^ ^ ^ ^

This I Will call a Lesson; All the other were only Rudiments, and of no further
use, than to give you Insight, Thus far: Therefore, when you have made your
intended use of Them, leave them, and adhere to your Lessons only.

This may serve you, as a Praelude, at any time, upon This Key; Take good
notice, in what Key you Play in, at any Time.
being called C-fa-ut-Key.

Now, before I proceed any farther, It will be very needful, that I, and you,
make sure of the True, and Exact Performance, of This Lesson, in every
Punctilio; For it will profit you Extremely much, so to do; and if you do not
This well, you will be Deficient, in many Things: Therefore take Patience unto
you, and Examine, every Bar, in the whole Lesson.

The Number of Bars, are 16, and every Bar, has just one Semibreve, in It.

First then, take notice, that in the 1 st. Bar, are 8 Quavers, (which, you
know, makes a Semibreve:) In the Playing of which, (before you attempt the
striking of the first Stroke) you must be sure to provide, or make preparation
for the 3 Notes following (at least.)

The first Stroke, is (b) upon the Sixth, and the Figure 5, (being the last
Bass;) both which, must be struck, at the same time, with the Thumb, and 2 d.
Finger.

But your Preparation, must be Thus, viz. Having stopped the (b) with the End of
your Forefinger, and made ready your Right Hand, An Explanation of All the
Particulars, in the foregoing Lesson; and of Great good use to a Beginner.
you must take the 3 following Letters, into your Consideration, (before you
strike the first stop) and so make ready your Little Finger, by setting it
close over the Letter (d;) by which means, you may readily stop It down, so
quick, as you please; And being in this ready Posture, strike the 1 st. stop,
but take not up the (b,) till you come to the last Note of that Bar; nor (d,)
till you come to the last (b;) by which means, the stops will be All ready; and
the Thus holding of your Letters stopped, all the while, will give a very Fine
Sound, or Gingle, beyond any other way of Play.

Thus, The first Bar Explained.
(having Explained the 1 st. Bar) when you perceive you can put them together
Readily, and Truly; Practice them over, 20, 30, or 40 times, before you attempt
a Note farther; and then, undertake the 2 d. Bar; Remembering, to observe all
the same Directions, as you did in the 1 st. Bar, viz. Always prepare for the
ensuing Notes, before you strike the First Note of any Bar; then take up no
stopped Finger, till need so require; for any stopped Finger, remaining still upon
Its stop, gives you a better advantage, than if it were taken off, as being a
sure Guide, to any other stop following; and by This Habit, or Custom, your
Hand will have a kind of assured Knowledge, and Aptitude, to reach from place
to place, Certainly.

Whereas, on the contrary, when the Hand is loose, and off, Several Benefits of
holding a stopped String stopped, till there be need of Its Release.
from the stops, It is uncertain, and cannot be assured to stop, so perfectly
well, as by that other Habit, without taking your Eye off your Book, which
often proves very prejudicial; but by This way of Practice, you shall suddenly
gain the way, to Play without any Trouble of looking upon your Fingers, or
otherwise; the which, is both Commendable, and very Beneficial; for It will
quickly make a Ready-Hand, and most Neat, and Curious Play; And, (besides All
which) sometimes It is of Absolute Necessity, This Punctilio is Explained at
large in the Viol Part. Page
(in reference to the strict Rules, and Laws of Composition) that such a Note,
ought to be held stopped, and sounding, so long, till such a Number of Notes,
(following) are all performed; as upon occasion, in your farther Proceedings, I
shall explain, by some Examples.

This Punctillio, I stand very much upon, and so would I have All my Scholars,
because I know, It is of most Excellent Use, both in Lute, and Viol-Play.

In your last Bar, save one, the 5 th. Letter of that Bar, is a (G.) upon the
4 th. String, and has before it a little Crook, or Comma, Thus (,) which is the
Mark of a Grace, in Play, which we call a Back-fall; and if you can do It, in
This place, you will do It, (upon occasion) in any other place, upon the Lute.

Now, how to perform It, is Thus, viz.

If you remember, (according to my General Rule) that the precedent Letter (d,)
is to remain stopped, till you come to strike This Letter (G,) you will find,
that the Back-fall, will be very easy to perform; for, (you are to know that)
to make a Back-fall Right, Explanation of a Back-fall,
you are always to strike the Precedent Letter, (which stands upon the same
String) instead of That Letter, which is to be Back-fall'd) with your Right
Hand, and not at all to strike the Letter It self; yet you must make It sound,
by your Left Hand Finger, (so soon as you have struck the Precedent Note) by
shaking It from That (d,) (so struck) into the (G.)

This is the Nature of all Back-falls, viz. They ever partake first, of that
Tone, either of a half Note, or a whole Note, next ascending, (according to the
Air of the Lesson, or Key.

This last Saying, viz. according to the Air of the Key) will be a Mystery to
you, at present; but I shall take a fitter time, and place, to Explain It in;
In the Interim, let It not trouble you.

I will now make an End, of showing you This Lesson; and there is only the last
Bar of it to speak to, in which is a Full Stop; the first part of it, is to be
struck with a Raking, or Brushing-stroak, downwards, by the Thumb, immediately
after you have struck the (b) upon the Sixth; and the last 4 Letters in one
Stop, Raked over, with your Forefinger, upwards, all at once; but strive to
Rake Them smoothly, and neatly; or (to say better) only stroke them all over
Gently, or Lovingly, from the uppermost, to the undermost, and Then the work is
done; but be sure to stop Clean, (as we use to Term It) so that one Finger
hinder not another.

B^ the W^^^-Learning of This Lesson, all such Lessons are Learned.
By this plain Direction, I suppose, This Lesson is your own; and likewise,
(together with It) All other such Single Lessons; I mean Single, because there
is only Expressed a Bass, and a Treble.

Now, because it is a great Trouble for the Master, always to set down Figures
for Fingering, What is injurious to a Learner.
as also, a Greater Injury to the Scholar to Expect It, (for the Custom of It
keeps Him in Ignorance) so that He learns without any Reason, Rule, or Skill;
only, because It is so Marked, or Figured for Him,) I will therefore (to cut
off all such inconveniences on both sides) give an Assur'd-General-Rule for
Fingering, with Examples to confirm the same*

First therefore, Let the foregoing Memento, be ever had in Mind, when you are
to Play a Lesson, at first-sight, (viz.) before you attempt to stop, or strike
the first Note of any Bar, A General, and Certain Rule, for True Fingering,
with the Left Hand.
be sure to view the whole Bar, and observe how the Notes stand, one differing
from another, Then order the first Stop, with such a Finger, or Fingers, as may
be held stopped, (if you can) till the first Bar be performed, or further (if
without inconvenience) you may.

This Rule alone, will almost do the whole Business; as by Example, you may
perceive very much, in This next Lesson, which is a Praelude in D-sol-re-Key.

CHAP. XV.
The 2 d. Praelude in D-sol-re.
^ ^



THe 1 st. stop is a double Note; This Lesson Explained, so, that by This
means, One may Play Blindfold.
and both the Letters may be held stopped, very conveniently, till the whole
Bar be performed; in the holding of which, you have an absolute certainty of
Fingering, for all the rest of That Bar, without the least doubt; For by
holding the first stop stopped, your Forefinger, and Little-finger, will
naturally ply, or take b and d. So that if you were blindfold, you could not
tell well how to miss Them; especially, after you have wonted your Hand a
little to that order by Habit, (which is soon gained.

In the 2 d. Bar, (b) may very conveniently be held, till the whole Bar be
performed.

In the 3 d. Bar, you can but perform the 1 st. 4 Letters, before you remove.
But, in the Playing of those 4 Letters, Note well, This New Rule.
observe a New Rule, (which yet I have not given) both for the Right, and Left
Hand, Thus.

Stop the b, and the G, both together, at the same time, as if you did intend
to Play them at the same time, both together.

Then, (before you strike the (b) lay on your Thumb, Forefinger, and 2 d.
Finger, all together, upon the b, a, and G, as if you did intend to strike Them
all together; Then, when both your Hands are in This Readiness, How to draw a
sweet Sound, and not to Knock, or Drum upon the Lute, as too many do.
you will find it, not only very Easy to pick them up, one after another, (as
they must be) in their due proportion; but also they will yield a far more
Curious Sound, than if you should (as most do) stab upon Them, at a Venture,
(the which I call Knocking, or Druming upon the Strings;) But This way I call,
Feeling your Strings, before you sound Them, and Drawing a Sweet Sound from the
Lute; which is so very Considerable, as any performance you can make upon your
Instrument.

There is yet one little Punctilio, which I must acquaint you with, before I
leave these 4 Notes, viz. The first Letter (b) is a Bass, and therefore to be
struck with your Thumb; yet in this place It must not be struck, as other
Basses, (viz. Resting your Thumb upon the next String) according to the General
Rule;) because, if you should do so here, the Resting of your Thumb, would
hinder the next following (a) (upon the 4 th. String) from Sounding Readily;
The General Rule of the Thumb, contradicted, and why?

Close-Play, and Its Certain Rule,


so that you must give that (b) a little Lift up, and cast your Thumb, beyond
the End of your Forefinger, without Resting; and so it will do very well.

This I call Close-Play; And in All such Cases, when you have Close-Play (with
your Thumb, and Fingers, so very High together, (as Here you have) you must do
so; otherwise, ever Rest your Thumb.

The next 4 Letters of This Bar, likewise prepare for, together, with both
Hands, before you strike the first Note, and then Play Them Evenly, and
Equally, as you did the other; only Here you must Rest your Thumb, This not
being accounted Close-Play, because you have a String, or Two, between the
Thumb, and the Treble.

And In This Order, perform the whole Lesson through, and all such like Lessons
in the world, This last Example is a General Rule, soal Close Play, especially
the 3d. Bar, of It.
as you meet with.

This Rule, carefully observed, will undoubtedly teach you, True Fingering,
Good, Sweet, Neat, and Curious Play, in any Lesson.

You have in the End of the Last Bar, save One, a Back-fall to the uppermost
(a,) on the 2 d. String; which must be Back-fall'd from (b,) upon the same
String, as in the former Example, you had your (G) Back-fall'd from (d,)

A General Rule, to perform all Full-Stops.
The last Note of this Lesson is a Full Stop, (which yet you have not met with
before) therefore take this General Rule for It, and all Full Stops; viz. when
you have made it ready, by stopping it True, and Clear, strike it altogether
with your Thumb, and Forefinger; The Bass only with your Thumb, and Rake all
the rest, (beginning with the Treble String) with your Forefinger, which is
enough for This Lesson.

I call That, the Treble of a Full Stop, which is the uppermost of any Stop,
though not the Treble String.

CHAP. XVI.
I Will still farther Explain (by Example) the General way, A further
Explanation of the General Rule for Fingering.
of Good, and True Fingering, by setting you a short Praelude, upon each Key,
and by that means, you will also gain, so many Lessons.

I have told you, There are but Seven Distinct Keys, (Naturally) in the whole
Scope, and Nature, of Music; and You have had Two, already, viz. C-fa-ut, and
D-sol-re; This next shall be in E-la-mi.

The Third Praelude, in E-la-mi.

^ ^ ^

The 1 st. thing needful, in this Lesson, for you to Remember, is to hold the
last (d), in the 1 st. Bar, stopped, till you have struck the 2 d. (d,) in the 2
d. Bar; then hold that (e) still, that whole Bar.

At the 3 d. Note, of the 4 th, Bar, plant your Forefinger In that (e) by
which you are Enabled to Play all that Bar, and the 2 1 st. Notes of the next
Bar, without any trouble, or other form, (you perceiving, how aptly f h, and f
e will fall to be stopped, according as I have marked them.

The 5 th. Note of the next Bar, is (e,) which you must (according to their
General Rule) hold, till the (d) following be struck upon the Sixth String.

The next G G 's, must be both stopped with your Forefinger, Here the General
Rule of Stopping, is again excepted against.
by laying it across, close and hard, which is contrary to the General Rule of
stopping, as aforesaid, yet sometimes you will find it needful, as here in this
place It is; and though It be more troublesome than with the End of your
Finger, yet it will soon be Eased; for It is but for them 2 Letters. I have
nothing more to say of This Lesson, than still to put you in mind, constantly
to hold every 1 st. Letter, till your 2 d. be struck, when you have them come
by 2, and 2, as in the next Bar they be, and so forwards.

The Back-fall, at the 9 th. Note, in the last Bar, but One, must there be
taken from the (G,) which stands before it, (which in that place is from a
whole Note, or 2 Fretts; but your other, which you learnt before, was only from
a half Note; and One Frett, is always a half Note.

Your 2 last Full Stops must be struck, the 1 st. wholly with the Thumb, in the
way of a Rake, beginning at the Bassest String; and the Last wholly with the
Forefinger, beginning at the Treble String. So This Lesson is finished, I hope
to your perfect Understanding of It.

The next, is a Praelude, in F-fa-ut-Key, as you may here see.

CHAP. XVII.
The 4 th. Praelude for Fingering, in F-fa-ut-Key.

^ ^ ^

HEre is nothing in This Lesson, that you can doubt of, but is according to
your General Rules, till you come at the 5 th. Bar; where you shall see the 2
d. and 3 d. Notes, both marked with the Forefinger, which is contrary to the
General Rule; yet oftentimes we do Play, (as there you see) twice with the
Forefinger, the Notes standing as there you see them, (one under another:) But
then we strike, Them Two Notes, after another manner, viz. not picking up the 1
st. Note, but Slipping-wise, (as it were) and resting the Finger, upon the 2 d.
Note a little, and then strike the 2 d. Note, as you do others. The General
Rule excepted against, by the Slip-stroak.


I call this a Slip-Stroak; you have it again in the 5 th. and 6 th. Notes, in
the same Bar, and twice more in the 8 th. Bar: Therefore, if you can do it in
One, you may do it in All. And again upon a Close.


There is another kind of Exception, from your General Rule, by hitting twice,
with your 2 d Finger, as in the last Bar: But that is always upon the Close;
or after a Long, or Shaked Note; and the Reason is, chiefly in regard that your
next Note is so very short; and also, because that the Full Stop, in the next
Bar, must be struck with the Forefinger; so that it would be far more
inconvenient to strike both Them, with the Forefinger, than the 2 former with
the Long Finger: which indeed is no Inconvenience at all, in regard there is
time enough, to turn the 2 d. Finger again, whilst the Shake, or Back-fall, is
in agitation,

There is no need of Direction, for This Lesson, only remember, that the last
Full Stop, must be struck, with the Thumb, and the Forefinger.

CHAP. XVIII.
The 5 th. Praelude for Fingering, in Gam-ut-Key.

^ ^ ^

THe Directions for This Lesson, will be very short; there being nothing in it,
that (I think) you can doubt of; yet, because in the Sixth Bar, those 2 (^ 's)
are marked for several Fingers.

Exceptions from your General Rule, in shifting of Fingering, very needful to
be known.
And you might think, that because your Rule bids hold the one, till you come at
the other; therefore the other might best be still kept stopped with the same
Finger; I shall here, give you a Reason (both why) it is altered in this place;
and in all such Cases, you may alter your Fingering, for a better advantage, in
performing the Ensuing Notes.

You see that ^, and ^, follow the 2 d. ^; therefore, because of that
Convenience, (which you see you gain, by altering your 2 d. ^) you do much
better, than if you should hold it still stopped, with your 4 th. Finger;
besides, you have time enough, to shift Fingers, by reason of the Eighth
String, coming between; in which time, you may do it, without the least
Inconvenience.

There is another the like shifting of Fingering, in the 2 last Notes of the
next Bar, viz. ^; your ^ being held still stopped, from the last Bar, might,
(you may say) very well be still kept, with the Forefinger; I say so too, If
it were not so short a Note, as you see It is, which will be troublesome, to
skip back to the next Letter (^,) in the next Bar; therefore, in that respect,
as also the precedent Note ^, being a Long Note, viz. a Pricked Quaver, you may
better make your shifting, in that place, than in the next.

You will find many such occasions, reasonable to contradict your General Rule;
for which Cause, I thus Explain, upon These 2 Places; that thereby, you may
make your own Observations in the like Cases, Hereafter.

This is all that is needful, for This Lesson. Here Is another in Are-Key, being
the Sixth Praeludium, for Fingering.

CHAP. XIX.
The Sixth Praelude in A-re-Key, for the Fingering.

^ ^ ^

IN the Ninth, and Tenth Bar of This Lesson, observe only to lay the End of
your Forefinger, flat* over both Those 2 (^ 's) which you see Marked with the
same Finger, and I question not, but you will Play the whole, without any
further Direction.

Now we come to the 7 th, and Last Key, being B-mi; and is a Key, which seldom
any Master Setts, or Plays any Lessons, in; except He alter the proper Nature
of It, by making it Flat; and Then (indeed) It is a very Noble, Brave, and
Brisk-Lively Key, as Any Key in the whole Scale: But as It is here Natural, It
is Seldom, or very Rarely Composed In; However, in that you shall see, It is a
Thing, that may be done; And also, that This Tuning is capable of Bearing It
Sufficiently, and Well: I will Here set you a Praelude in It also, as It now
follows in the next Page.

And likewise, among the Number of Setts of Lessons, (following) you shall have
a whole Suite, or Set, in the same Key: and I doubt not, but They will Please
you, as well, as Any, or Most, in the whole Book.

CHAP. XX.
The 7 th. Praelude, for Fingering;

^ ^ ^ ^ ^

I Believe, there is nothing in This Lesson, which you will make any doubt of;
A short Repetition of the whole Rudiment for Fingering, very profitably to be
repeated; being a General Rule for True Fingering.
yet, because it is the last of the 7, which I intend for Rudiments, in Single
Play for Fingering; I will not think my pains ill spent, to renew unto you a
short Repetition, of the Substance, of what I have already been about, in all
these 7 Praeludes or Rudiments, if you will not think your pains ill spent, in
Reading, and Observing.

I say, (in the 1 st. place) for Single Fingering; Hereafter put away all
Marks, and Figures, and commit your self, wholly to your Reason, and let that
Guide you; yet upon any difficulty, or doubt (through forgetfulness) you may
have recourse hither, to these Rudiments; for they carry in them, the whole
natural Formation of every String, for ordinary Play.

In the 1 st. place therefore, you are to remember, The 1st. Remembrance.
that in the Playing of every Bar, in a Lesson, you are to view the whole
Bar, (or more) before you attempt to stop, or strike any one Letter.

Then 2 dly, when you stop the 1 st. Letter, 2d.
you must have regrrd to stop it, with such a Finger, as you may (with ease,
and convenience) stop, and provide for the following Notes, in that (or the
next) Bar.

But 3 dly, and chiefly, in Plain Time, that is, 3d.
when your Bars consist of 4 Crochets, or 8 Quavers) you must ever contrive,
to put 4, or 8, Equally together. As for Example.

In the 1 st. Bar of this last Lesson, I have Marked the 1 st. 2 (^ 's) with
the 2 d. and 3 d. Finger, which I might have done several Other ways; but in
respect of the subsequent Notes, of the same Bar, I count it better to stop
them all, as you see.

Then 4 thly, 4th.
you must (above all) not forget to keep your Holds; that is, (as before) ever
hold fast-stop'd, the 1 st. Letter, (at least) till you have struck the 2 d.
But if you can, (and that there be no inconvenience, either for hindering of
some other Notes, or performance of some Curious Grace, or that your Hand may
be too much bound, etc.) hold it, till you have performed all, that
conveniently you can.

This last Rule alone, will be almost sufficient, to teach any one, Good, and
True Fingering, for the Left Hand.

Fifthly, you must be Very Careful (now, 5th.
in your first beginning) to get a Good Habit; so that you stop close to your
Fretts, and never upon any Frett; and ever, with the very End of your Finger;
except, when a Cross, or Full Stop is to be performed.

And Sixthly, take heed of Tossing your Fingers, 6th.
high from the Strings, when you have occasion to take them off. But let your
Play be Gloss, and scarcely seem to move your Fingers, which is a great
Commendation, but a far greater Advantage to your self; For, whosoever gets That
Ill Habit of Tossing, shall never Play quick, nor well, but very uncertainly,
and most unhandsomly.

I will here repeat; because I know there is one thing more, 7th.
E^^^eamly well worth your Remembrance; which is, That always in playing of 2,
3, or 4 Single (or Divided) Notes, (which begin a Bar, or begin at any Bass,
or the like:) I say, be sure you provide both your Hands to perform, so far, as
conveniently you can, before you hit the first Note: My meaning is, prepare for
the stopping of 2, or more; and striking of them also, as if they were to be
struck, altogether, The most absolute, and best performance, (or observance)
toward Good Play.
by setting your Left Hand upon the Stops, and your Right Hand upon the String,
ready to strike; yet strike them in their due time, and at your leisure,
according to their true Quantities.

Thus I have (perchance) seemed too Teadious, in Repeating unto you; but I know
it so needful a thing, for a Learner to be told more than once, of such
Considerable Rules, without the which observing, Note.
he shall never Play well; So that still, I do persuade you to Read them over,
very often; but especially to put them Carefully into Practice.

I will now trouble you with no more Repetitions of this matter; only refer you
to those Particulars, which Explain the manner of performing those 7 Praeludes;
I shall only desire, that you Perfect them upon your Fingers, before you
attempt any thing else; for in so doing, you will advantage your self very much.

CHAP. XXI.
I Will now proceed to show you, what belongs to Full-Play; (for all these have
been Single, except your Closes.

Full Play.
Your General Rules for that, will be short, and very easy. As for Example.

Here is an Example, for all Notes of 3 Parts, viz. a Bass, and 2 Trebles; and
if you can do This, you will do All in This Kind.

^ Explained in the next Line, Thus.

^

Those 4 First Bars, in the uppermost short Music Line, are sufficient for
the General Knowledge of the like.

Their Explanation, is in Those Notes, in your last undermost Line, and show,
that the Letter ^, must be hit with the Thumb, and the 2 (^ 's) with your 1 st.
and 2 d. Finger; yet, though I have so divided them, (for your sight) they must
be struck altogether, or but a very little dividing, (which may be allowed, in
many Cases;) However practice them both ways.

Here is another Example for Nearer, and Closer Play, with your Thumb, and
Finger.

^ Explained in the next Line, Thus.

^

Here follows an Example for 4 Parts, viz. Three Trebles, and a Bass.

^ Explained in the next Line, Thus.

^

You must know, That the Explanation of This last Example, Either Raking, or
Dividing Play: Which is a very good old substantial way.
as I have Explained It, is not the way, which is much used, in these days,
(although I use It often, as you may do, upon occasion;) but the Fashionable
way of Playing them, (now used) is much more easy; namely, only to hit the
Bass with your Thumb, and Rake down all the other 3 Letters, with your
Forefinger, at the same time; and is the General way of Playing all other
Full, or Fuller Stops.

An Example of some, you may see in this following Music Line.

^ Raking Play


Begin to Rake (or Smoothly Stroke) all those 1 st. Six Strings, at the Treble
String, laying on your 1 st. Finger, How to Rake a Full-Stop.
at the same time you lay on your Bass; Then, just as you hit the Bass with
your Thumb, draw all over your Forefinger, very gently, till you have hit the
Sixth String, and you will hear a very Full Consort, of 7 Parts, (provided you
stop Hard, and Clean;) and thus must you do, by all the rest of the Full Stops,
till you come to the 2 last Notes of the 3 d. Bar, which ^ and ^ are to be
struck, with your 2 Fore-fingers, with the Bass; as in your former Examples of
Dividing Play; Then make your Back-fall to the ^, in the last Bar, from ^; and
after you have well Shaked it, stop the last Full Stop, before you hit the
Single ^, between them, because it is a short Note, and will not admit of any
delay, after it is struck; but requires the last Note, quick upon it: So that
in the time of your foregoing Pricked- Crochet, (which we count a long Note,
especially at a Close) you may have liberty to stop the last Full Stop, (which
will take you up a little time; A way to bring in a Close, Neatly, without
Blemish.
) Then (you being thus ready) strike that ^, and so bring in the last Stop,
with the more Compleatness, and thus of all such Close Notes.

CHAP. XXII.
BY this time, I will conceive you sufficiently ready, at all these foregoing
Rudiments, which (although but very few) yet are as the main Foundation, of
your whole Business, which I count well over with you, because I suppose you
Ingenious.

I will now, in these 2 Chapters following, lay down, all the other
Curiosities, and Nicities, in reference to the Adorning of your Play: (for your
Foundations being surely Laid, and your Building well Reared, you may proceed
to the Beautifying, and Painting of your Fabric) And those, we call the Graces
in our Play.

The Names of such, which we must commonly use upon the Lute, be These.

The Names, and Marks of the Graces.
The 1 st. and Chiefest, is the Shake, Marked Thus, with a Prick before it, as
here you may see, (^) The 2 d. the Beat, Thus, (^) The 3 d. the Back-fall,
Thus, (^) The 4 th. the Half-fall, Thus, (^) The 5 th. the Whole-fall, Thus,
(^) The Sixth, the Elevation, Thus, (^) The 7 th. the Single Relish, Thus, (^)
The 8 th. the Double Relish, Thus, (^) The 9 th. the Slur, Thus, (^) the 10 th.
the Slide, (the same) Thus, (^) the 11 th. the Spinger, Thus, (^) The 12 th.
the Sting, Thus, (^) The 13 th. the Futt, Thus, (^) The 14 th. the Pause, Thus,
(^) or Thus, (^) The 15 th. and last, Soft and Loud Play, Thus, (so: lo:) which
is as Great, and Good a Grace, as any other, whatever. These are the 15 Graces,
which may be used upon the Lute; yet Few, or None use them All. Their
Explanation follows; And first of the Shake.

The Shake, is 2 ways to be performed, either Hard, or Soft, the Hard, (or
Tearing-Shake) is thus done, viz. If you Shake any String Open, you must first
strike it with some Right Hand Finger, and then be ready with the Forefinger,
The Explanation of the Hard, or Tearing-Shake, open.
of the Left Hand to pick it up, with the very Tip (near the Nail) of your
Finger; and so, by often, and quick picking it up in that manner, or (more
plainly) Scratching It, in a Smooth, Nimble, and Strong Agitation, you will
have performed It.

The Soft-Shake, is done, in all respects, like the former, The Soft-Shake open.
except the Tearing, and Scratching; and only by Beating the String Strongly,
and with a Quick Motion, in the same place, as you did the other; which always
must be either in ^, or ^- Frett; and if it be done Evenly, and Strongly, it
gives a very Pleasant Grace unto your Play.

Some there are, (and many I have met with) who have such a Natural Agility (in
their Nerves) and Aptitude, to That Performance, that before they could do any
thing else to purpose, they would make a Shake, Rarely Well. And some again,
can scarcely ever Gain a Good Shake, by reason of the unaptness of their
Nerves, to that Action; but yet otherwise come to Play very well.

I, for my own part, have had occasion to break, both my Arms; The Authors
Inability, to make the Nerve-Shake.
by reason of which, I cannot make the Nerve-Shake well, nor Strong; yet, by a
certain Motion of my Arm, I have gained such a Contentive Shake, that
sometimes, my Scholars will ask me, How they shall do to get the like? I have
then no better Answer for Them, than to tell Them, They must first Break their
Arm, as I have done; and so possibly, after that, The Arm-Shake.
(by Practice) they may get My manner of Shake.

The Stopt-Shake, is (only) differing from the Open-Shake, The Stopt-Shake, and
its Explanation.
in that you are always to use some One of your Vnder-fingers, in your Shaking,
and to Stop, one of your Vpper-fingers, upon some Letter, and then Shake with
an Vnder-Finger. As for Example, Suppose you stop the Letter ^ upon the 2 d.
String, with your Forefinger: Then must you make your Shake, from the Letter
^, (because It is the Air) upon the same String, with your Little Finger*
Remembering to Stop the ^, Hard and Close, all the time of your Shaking; and if
you will have a Soft, and Smooth Shake, then only Beat the Letter ^ Hard, and
Quick, directly down, and up, with the very Tip of your Little Finger; but if
you would have a Hard, or Tearing Shake, then Nibble the ^ strongly, and very
quick, and it will give you Full Content; and so for all Stopped Strings, which
require Shaking.

You must likewise know, That a Shake is not always to be made 2 Fretts off,
(which is a Full Note Distance,) but as often from One Frett, (which is but
Half a Notes Distance.)

And to know certainly, when to do One, A General Rule, how to make All Shakes
properly, and in their True places.
and the Other properly; Take This General, and Certain Rule; (never to be
altered) which is, That All Shakes, must be made, either from the Half, or
Whole Note; according to the Air, and Humor of your Tuning, and Lesson. As
for Example. In this next Music Line, I have set the Air of the Tuning down,
upon every One of the Six Strings, which only are to be Shaked; the Bass, never.

An Example of whole Notes, and half Notes, in reference to Shakes, and
Back-falls, in their proper Air.
^

Observe the Order of the Treble String first, and see which are Whole Notes,
and which are Half Notes, from each other.

First, from ^, to ^, is a Whole Note, (because 2 Fretts.)

From ^, to ^, is likewise a Whole Note, for the same Reason.

From ^, to ^, is but Half a Note, (because but One Frett.)

From ^, to ^, is a Whole Note; and from ^, to ^, a Whole Note.

A certain General Rule, for Graces; never to be Contradicted.
Thus, by This Rule, Examine all the rest, and you cannot fail, to know Whole
Notes, and Half Notes; which is a certain Rule, both for Shakes, Relishes,
Elevations and Back-falls, never to be contradicted; That is, Every Shake, is
to be made in the Air, viz.

If I would Shake ^, upon the Treble String, I must first stop ^, and then
Shake It, in ^- Frett.

Likewise, If I would Shake ^, upon the 2 d. or 4 th. String, I must stop ^,
and then Shake it in ^- Frett, (because that is the Air, and but Half a Note.)

This I suppose enough, to make you know the Certain Place of Shaking any Note.

I will, from hence, proceed to the Back-fall, because the same General Rule,
is proper for them both.

The Back-fall Explained.
A Back-fall, is only Thus; viz. Let your Note be what it will; It must 1 st.
partake of the Tone of another Note, or Half Note above it, before it Sound, As
for Example.

Suppose I would Back-fall ^, upon the Treble String, then I must 1 st. stop ^,
upon the same String, and strike it, as if I did absolutely intend ^ (only)
should Sound; yet so soon as I have so struck ^, I must, with the Stopping
Finger (only) cause the ^, to sound, by taking it off, in a kind of a Twitch,
so that the Letter ^, may Sound, (by reason of that Twitch, or Falling back)
presently after the Letter ^, is struck, etc.

This is called a Back-fall, and there needs no more to be said of it, (It
being so Easy to be understood.)

Now you must know, That the Back-fall may be either Plain, or Shaked; if
Plain, you have done it already, by the last Direction.

If Shaked, then Thus, viz.

When you have given it that Twitch, (I have not a fitter word to give it) you
must Shake it, either with the Loud, or Soft Shake, (in the proper Letter)
afterward, as if it had not been Back-fall'd; and This, is likewise sufficient
for It.

The Beat, is your Letter struck; The Beat, Explained.
(be it what it will) and so soon as it is struck, that Sound must be
Falsified, always into a Half Note beneath, by taking up your Finger, (as if
you would Back-fall the False Note, from that stopped Letter) and strongly, so
shaked, to and again; yet, at last, the same Finger, must rest down, in the 1
st. True Note. As for Example.

If I would make a Beat upon ^, on the 4 th. String, I must, at the same time,
(together with that ^) stop ^, on the same String;; and, so soon as I have
struck the ^, I must Twith it up, and by the Twitch, cause the ^ to Sound, and
so continue in that Quick Motion, as if I did only intend to Shake the ^; yet,
so strongly knocking down my Finger into ^, that at every Knock, or Motion, ^
may be Equally heard with ^; and when I have thus continued Beating, so long as
my Time will allow me, I must then give the last Knock into ^, with all the
strength I can; so that ^ must be Eminently heard at that very last: Observe,
not to make a Grace, to prove a Disgrace.
For you must know This, That whatever your Grace be, you must, in your
Farewell, express the True Note perfectly, or else your pretended Grace, will
prove a Disgrace.

The Half-fall, is ever from a Half Note beneath, The Half-fall, Explained.
(as is the Beat) and is performed, by striking that Half Note first; but so
soon, as that is so struck, you must readily Clap down the True Note, (with the
proper Finger, standing ready) without any further striking. Explained Thus.

Suppose I would make a Half-fall to ^, upon the Treble, (or any other String)
I must place a Finger in ^ upon the same String, and absolutely strike ^, as if
nothing else were intended* but so soon as ^ has given its perfect Sound, my
next Finger, must fall smartly into ^; so that ^ may Sound strongly, only by
That Fall; which will cause a Pretty, Neat, and Soft Sound, without any other
striking, and this is the Half-fall.

The Whole-fall, is a Grace, much out of use, in These our Days; The
Whole-fall, Explained.
yet because, in some Cases it is very Good, and Handsome, and may give
Delight, and Content to many, who think fit to use It; know, it is Thus
Performed; viz. It gives Two False Letters, before the True intended Letter
comes in. Explained thus.

Suppose I would give a Whole-fall, to the Letter ^, upon the 5 th. String:
Then I must first strike ^, upon that String; and then fall my Forefinger
hard, upon ^, on the same String, and so closely after, (holding ^ still stopped)
fall my 3 d. or Little Finger, as hard into the True intended Letter ^; and
thus the Performance is Finished; yet always observing, (that for an Equality,
and Evenness, in these 3 Sounds) which is a thing Chiefly to be Regarded) you
must take Care, Choice Directions, for It Exact Performance.
that you strike not the first so Loud, as that the strength of the Finger, is
not sufficient to cause the other 2 following Letters to Sound as Loud, as the
first, which was struck. Therefore, ever at a Whole-fall, strike the first Note
of the 3, Softly; so may you with the more Ease, and Certainty, make the next
2, as Loud; for a Man cannot fall a String so Loud, as he can strike it.

This is sufficient to Explain the Whole-fall; Only Note, That you always fall
it, through the proper Ayre-Notes of the Key, (which to a Musical Ear, is
Naturally known.)

Sometimes, it will be 2 Full Notes; as, suppose you should Fall ^, on the 3 d,
String; Then must you Fall it from ^, into ^, and so into your True Note ^,
which is the Air of that 3 d. String, for Those Notes in this Tuning.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Elevation, and its Explanation.
THe Elevation, the Single Relish, and the Double Relish, will take up too much
Trouble to Explain Them, by Words only; and will better be done, by Notes, or
Letters, because they are to be performed, by many, and various Notes.
Therefore, in Their Explanation, I will use a Music Line* and Letters, for
your more Easy understanding of Them.

The Elevation, is generally to be made in the Ascension, or Descension of a 3
d. and always upon the Middle Note; (But in saying a 3 d. or 3 Notes, I do not
mean always ^ 3 Full Notes; for there is a 3 d. Major, and a 3 d. Minor, as are
Here Explained. As for Example.

Those 3 1 st. are a 3 d. or 3 Full Notes Ascending, which we ^ call 3 d.
Major, or Sharp 3 d. and the 2 d. 3, are a 3 d. or 3 Full Notes Descending.

The 1 st. 3 of these, are a 3 d. Ascending,, with the Half Note in the midst,
which we call a Flat 3 d. or a 3 d. Minor; the last 3, are the same Descending.

Now, from any of These Notes, you shall know, how the Elevation is to be made,
and that is always upon the midst of the 3; Thus, 1 st. according to the 3
Full, or Whole Notes, as in the 1 st. Six Letters upon the 3 d. String.
Explained Thus.

The 2 d. 3 Thus.

The Elevation, Ascending, and Descending.
^

Thus the Elevation is expressed, both Ascending, and Descending, as you may
see (by this Line) upon the Letter ^, which takes up 5 Letters; (as you see
linked together by a Hoop'd Stroke) None of which, are to be struck, but only
the 1 st. ^, and all the rest are to be performed by the Activity of the Left
Hand, in the manner of Falling, or Sliding.

The Falling, you have had expressed before; and the Sliding, shall by and by
be Explained.

Let this suffice to express the Elevation; only you must Remember, that as in
your Falling of the Whole-Fall, I gave you a Note, not to Hit your 1 st. of the
Number, Harder than you were able, to cause All the rest following, to give the
same strength of Sound; so must you do in This: For they must always be Equal
in Loudness; which will require a pretty Careful Practice: For it is a Hard
Grace.

The 3 d. Minor, or Flat 3 d. is done after the same manner; yet observing the
Air of your Lesson.

The Single Relish, (after This, The Single Relish.
is understood) will be very Easy, as being but a piece, or part of the
Elevation; and is likewise generally done upon the Ascension, or Descension of
a 3 d. Thus.

Ascending a 3 d. Thus. Descending a 3 d. Thus.

^

Explained Thus, 1 st. Ascending.

^

2 d. Descending.

^

Note, That the 2 d. Note, upon which you perform the Relish, has a Back-fall,
which would always be performed very strongly, and smartly, before you attempt
the other 2 Notes; which is All that is needful to be expressed, concerning the
Single Relish.

The Double Relish, is a Grace, very profitable to practice, The Double Relish.
for the making the Hand Nimble, Quick, and Even; But upon the Lute is not used
to be performed, by any Sliding, or Falling of Notes, as Others are; because It
consists of too many Notes, to be performed, without some other Help, than by
the Left Hand; But is done in This following manner, Thus.

^

All This, is but called the Double Relish, expressing Those 3 Plain Notes.

In Encient Times, the Well, and True Performance of It, upon the several Keys,
throughout the Instrument, (either Lute, or Viol) was accounted an Eminent
piece of Excellency, though now, we use it not at all in our Compositions upon
the Lute.

However, I shall commend the Private use, and Practice of It, to All
Practitioners, as a very Beneficial piece of Practice, for the Command of the
Hand. And although the very Shape, and Fashion of It, be not at This Day in
General use; yet I will set down such Allusions to It, or such Kind of
Dependences upon It, (when I come to give Further Directions for the Hand) as
shall pass, with very much Grace, and Modish-Good-Applause.

But I must 1 st. make an end of Explaining the rest of These Graces, which I
will hasten to do.

The Slur.
The next therefore, is the Slur, and is no more than the Falling of so many
Letters, (Ascending) as you can, upon Any one String; only by hitting the 1 st.
as you did the Whole-fall. As for Example. All Those, which are Hooped in, go
under the Name of Slurr'd-Notes; only hitting the 1 st. and Falling the rest,
as in the Elevation before.

Explained Thus. ^

The Slide, is near of Kin to the Slur, and differs only Thus; your Notes are
always Descending, The Slide.
and Marked with a Hoop, or Slide, as your Slur. As for Example.

The Slide Explained.
^

We seldom Slide above 2, or 3 at a time, ^ as you may see marked in the 1 st.
2 d. and 3 d. Bars, with the Slide.

Sometimes we Slide Four, as in the Little Short Line.

The doing of This, is no more, than 1 st. to make all the Stopped Letters Ready,
(that is, have Them all Stopped together;) Then hit the 1 st. and Twitch the
rest, with your Stopped Fingers, one from another, as you take Them off, and
Remember to do them All Equally, for Distance, and Loudness, according to
former Directions.

The Spinger, is a Grace, very Neat, and Curious, The Spinger, Explained.
for some sort of Notes; and is done Thus, viz.

After you have Hit your Note, which you intend to make the Grace upon, you
must (just as you intend to part with your Note) Dab one of your next Fingers
lightly upon the same String* a Fret, or 2 Fretts below, (according to the
Air) as if you did intend to stop the String, in that Place; yet so Gently,
that you do not cause the String to Sound, in That stop, (so dab'd;) but only
so, that it may suddenly take away That Sound, which you last struck; yet give
some small Tincture of a New Note; but not Distinctly to be heard, as a Note;
which Grace (if Well done, and Properly) is very Taking* and Pleasant.

The Sting, is another very Neat, and Pretty Grace; The Sting* Explained.
(But not Modish in These Days) yet, for some sorts of Humors, very Excellent;
And is Thus done, (upon a Long Note, and a Single String) first strike your
Note, and so soon as It is struck, hold your Finger (but not too Hard) stopped
upon the Place, (letting your Thumb loose) and wave your Hand (Exactly)
downwards, and upwards, several Times, from the Nut, to the Bridge; by which
Motion, your Finger will draw, or stretch the String a little upwards, and
downwards, so, as to make the Sound seem to Swell with pretty unexpected
Humor, and gives much Contentment, upon Cases.

The Tut, is a Grace, always performed with the Right Hand, The Tut, Explained.
and is a sudden taking away the Sound of any Note, and in such a manner, as it
will seem to cry Tut; and is very Pretty, and Easily done, Thus.

When you would perform This Grace, it is but to strike your Letter, (which you
intend shall be so Graced) with one of your Fingers, and immediately clap on
your next striking Finger, upon the String which you struck; in which doing,
you suddenly take away the Sound of the Letter, which is that, we call the Tut;
Which makes the Lute to speak.
and if you do it clearly, it will seem to speak the word Tut, so plainly, as
if it were a Living Creature, Speakable.

The next, (which I ( my self) only call a Grace; Soft and Loud Play, a most
Excellent Grace.
because no Master ever yet (as I can find) directed it, as a Grace, but my
self) is to Play some part of the Lesson Loud, and some part Soft; which gives
much more Grace, and Luster to Play, than any other Grace, whatsoever:
Therefore I commend It, as a Principal, and Chief-Ornamental-Grace (in its
Proper Place)

The last of All, is the Pause; The Pause.
which although it be not a Grace, of any performance, nor likewise Mumbered
amongst the Graces, by others, yet the performance of It, (in proper Places)
adds much Grace: And the thing to be done, is but only to make a kind of
Cessation, or standing still, sometimes Longer, and sometimes Shorter,
according to the Nature, or Requiring of the Humor of the Music; which if in
Its due Place be made, is a very Excellent Grace.

I have now done, with the Declaration, and Explanation of the Graces.

I will therefore proceed, to (what I suppose you long for) viz. the further
Explaining of Lute-Play.

CHAP. XXIV.
I Can Remember but One Thing more; which I count Needful, that you be informed
in, before you shall find your self sufficiently Able to give a True Account of
every performance in Any Lesson, that you shall meet with.

And it is the knowledge of the Right-Hand-Fingering, in a General way: A
General Rule for the Right Hand Fingering.
Which Thing, in this Chapter, I will endeavor to Explain; and the rather,
because it is too Great a Trouble, in the Pricking, or Printing of Many
Lessons, to set down the Fingering, to every Note.

Besides, for your future satisfaction, and that you may Play by a Certain
Rule, and not upon Trust, at a Venture, with much Uncertainty, not knowing a
Reason for what you do: Wherefore, attend This General Rule; which shall never
fail you, for True Fingering.

You must know, all Lessons you shall meet with, either will, or should be
Barred; All Lessons should be Barred.
so that when you see the Bar, you will easily perceive, what sort of Notes it
consists of, viz. of Even, or Odd Notes.

If They be all Even Notes, either of One Kind, or Mixed, (provided they be mixed
Even; as 2 Crochets, and 4 Quavers together, or any such;) Then, ever begin the
first, with your 2 d. Finger, and then the 2 d. with your 1 st. Finger, etc. as
you will see in most of Those 7 Praeludes, I set you down before, with their
Fingering Marked.

But in Case your Thumb shall begin any Bar, with a Single Letter, When your
Thumb single, begins any Bar, what Finger follows.
(as in the 7 th Praelude, in B-mi, It did) you must know, that In such a Case,
your Thumb supplies the Place, and Office of your 2 d. Finger, as in that
Praelude you may see, in most of the Bars, quite through.

But when the 2 d. Finger, shall begin a Bar Single, and the 2 d. Note of the
Bar shall be struck with the Thumb, When the Thumb supplies the place of the
Forefinger.
(as in the 5 th. Praelude in Gam-ut, you may see;) Then the Thumb supplies the
Place, and Office of the Forefinger, your 2 d. Finger still keeping Its
Course, in taking the 3 d. or next Note. Thus, (let your Lesson be so long as
it will) if your Bar consist of Even Notes, or Evenly Mixed; make no Scruple,
but perform it always in This Even manner; which is the Sure, and Best way of
Playing All Divisions, so falling out.

But if you meet a Bar, not Evenly Mixed, as one Crochet, and 2 Quavers, for
the 1 st. 3 Notes; and then the like again, for the 2 d. Three Notes, (or the
like;) In such a Case, you must only have Respect to Those Even Notes, of a
Kind, (in that Bar) viz. which are the 1 st. 2 Quavers, and which the last 2
Quavers; and begin Them, with your 2 d. Finger, although you struck the Former
Note, with the same Finger; as Thus, for Example, you may see in These 2 Bars.

^ Even Notes of a Kind, in a Bar, how to be Played.


I suppose, you remember, that a Single Treble, and a Bass, is always to be
struck with the 2 d. Finger, and the Thumb.

Let This suffice, for Even Notes in a Bar.

But when you meet with Odd Notes in a Bar, Thus.

Odd Notes in a Bar, how.

^

Then Play Those Three 1 st. Notes of the Bar, as you see them Marked, (which
is Natural, and proper Fingering;) but then, at the 4 th. Note, you will
perceive, that Those remaining 4 Notes, will prove to be Even Notes, and of a
Kind, (as to the Rule of Fingering) though Two of Them be Semiquavers, and Two
of Them Quavers; That is, they are 2 and 2 of a Kind; which is all the Concern
of your Observation in Fingering: Therefore, you must Turn your 2 d. Finger,
although you struck the stop before, with the same Finger.

The 2 d. and 3 d. Bars* are both of the same Nature, as you see I have Marked
Them.

This may serve for a Sufficient Direction, Even Notes of a Kind.
for your General Observation, in your Right Hand Fingering, viz. That
whenever you meet with Even Notes of a Kind, in a Bar, you are to begin the
1 st. of that Even Number, with your 2 d. Finger; although the Bar, in the
whole, consists of Even, or Odd.

In Triple Time, you will often meet with Three Odd Quavers, Triple Time.
Thus, as in this Example following on the other side.

An Exception for the General Rule, of Fingering, for the Right Hand.
Example Thus. ^

The Rule will still hold Good; For you must hit the 1 st. odd Quaver, with
your Forefinger; and then the 2 last, (which are Even Notes of a Kind) begin,
as you see, with the 2 d. Finger.

I think I need say no more, concerning this General Rule, for Fingering: Yet
sometimes, there will happen such kind of Notes, and Passages, which we find,
will be more Handsomely Convenient, to be Played, Contrary to This General Rule;
some of which I will here set you down.

The 1st. Example, contrary to the General Rule.
^

Observe the 3 d. Note of This Rudiment, and you will perceive, that It is a
Semiquaver; and they are all so, till you come to the Fifth Note of the last
Bar: They are likewise Notes of a Kind; so, that according to your General
Rule, All Those Notes should be Played with contrary Fingering, to what you see
them here set; viz. Whereas you see them Marked, to begin with the First, and
Second Finger, they should begin with the Second, and First Finger.

The Reason, why the General Rule, is contradicted Here.
Now, my Reason is This; because, that in This Place, It is more Natural,
according to the Formation of the Hand; and so It will be more familiarly
easy, and ready for the Hand, to perform Those Notes (as they so stand) than
according to the General Rule: Which if you attentively observe, you may easily
perceive.

As for Example; Take notice, how that the Forefinger, of your Striking Hand,
(stands in Its Posture of Play) more conveniently ready over the 2 d. String,
than over the 1 st. So also does the 2 d. Finger, (at the same Instant) stand
more ready, over the Treble String, than over the 2 d. So that, if you will
make your Preparation, as formerly I have directed, viz. To make your 2 d. Note
ready, (with both Hands) before you strike your First; I say, (Thus Preparing)
you cannot choose but perceive, how that the Natural Formation of the Right
Hand, does Invite you to This manner of Play, in This Place; And so would be in
all other, happening in the same Kind. As for Example.

Here is another such.

^ The 2d. Example, contradicting the General Rule.


The 1 st. Bar, is according to the General Rule; But the 2 d. you see, is
just in the Nature of the other above, Contradictory; and therefore, would be
so performed.

Now, It will be very good, (for your Experience, The best way to confirm you,
in this particular Play.
and Confirmation) to try to Play These 2 last Examples, according to the
General Rule; by which means, you will more apparently perceive the Difference,
and Reasonableness of This Exception; For you will find, by such Trial, that
you cannot perform Those Notes, so smoothly, and easily by the Rule-Play, as by
the Exception-Play.

I will still proceed in This Kind of Explanation; because, that in the doing
of It, I shall do you Two Great Advantages.

The One shall be, I will Explain All (or the most part of) such Passages, as
usually are so performed upon This Tuning, or the Lute in General; by which
doing, you shall ever after be put out of doubt, as to the right order of all
such Performances.

Then 2 dly. I shall give you such an Advantage, as to the General way, of
Curious coming to the several Closes of Those several Keys; in which I shall
Express Them, as will be a great means, to enable you to Command a Kind of
Voluntary Play upon the Lute; which Thing indeed I do aim* at; And it shall be
the very next adjoining Work to This, which I do intend (God Willing) to
Endeavor: The which, (to be able to do) is the Most Absolute, and Most
Satisfactory Piece of Performance, What is the most Absolute satisfaction, upon
the Lute*
that any Person can Attain unto, upon This, or upon any other Instrument.

But First, I will make an end of This kind of Play.

Here therefore, are Five other such Examples; which, (with the former Two)
runs through All the Keys; and I suppose will be sufficient, to enable you,
both to know when, and how to Break the General Rule-Play, upon All such Cases,
at any time. And also, (if you often Practice These following Examples; which
you may do at any time, upon Tuning your Lute, etc.) and which will seem very
Handsome, upon That, or any other Occasion, and add Luster to your Play also,
and make your Hand Neat Agile, and Fine; For you must know, That such kind of
Come-offs, as These, are accounted Quaintnesses, or Elegancies; and in Play,
Esteemed very Credible, in the Performer, if he Perform Them Accurately, and
Curiously Well. And here, in this next Page following, you shall have Them set
you.

Example in D-sol-re-Key.

^ ^

Example in E-la-mi-Key.

^ ^

Example in F-fa-ut-Key.

^

Example in Gam-ut-Key.

^

Example in B-mi-Key.

^

In this last Example, Tune F-fa-ut, (or the Ninth String) Sharp.

Now, I will (according to my promise) proceed, and endeavor, both to
advantage you farther in your Experience, and Abilities, in Reference to your
more Exact Performances; As also, (if you take good notice of what you shall
meet withal) to enable you, to Manage the Lute, (not only like a Good Scholar
in Playing of Lessons, (set you) well, but) as a Master: That is, To be able,
(upon the Touch of any String, or Key) so to follow such a Touch, or such a
Humor, as on the sudden, you either accidentally Hit upon; or else shall
Design unto your self, to follow like a Master; the which shall be done, by the
Expressions of sundry and various Humors, and Conceits, in the Nature of Ex
tempore, or Voluntary Play, What is to be known, in Reference to a Voluntary
Play, very necessary.
proceeding from One Key to Another, Orderly, and Naturally; which is a Thing
very few know how to do, and fewer put in Practice: But none at all, (that yet
I could ever hear of) who have attempted, to give it in Example, as hereafter,
(...) Work, you shall find done.

I will therefore proceed to Examples; and make my Discourses upon several
Cases, according as Need shall require.

To which end I must first inform you, of Two Principal Matters, in Reference
to Voluntary Play.

The First is. Concerning the Key.
You must have a special regard to That Particular Key you first Touch, or
attempt to Play upon; and is commonly done, when your Lute is well in Tune: And
in the doing of which, It is ordinary to seem to Dwell, or Abide upon some
String, or Note, by which the Key will quickly be known.

Then 2 dly, Express some little Humor, or other, presently after; Concerning
the Fuge, Form, or Shape.
by which the Auditor may discern some Shape, or Form of Matter* which you
intend to follow: Both which, if you can do Well, and Maintain; you will pass
for an Able Lutenist, or Master.

The Key may be known 4 several ways. How to know the Key, 4 several ways.


First, By the Bass, or Diapason; which if you make for your Beginning Stroke,
there is no doubt, but It must stand for your Key.

Secondly, by the Third, or Tenth, to your Bass (reckoning upwards.)

Thirdly, by the Fifth, or Twelfth, to the Bass.

And Lastly, by the Eighth.

I say, by these Four ways, your Key may be known.

As for Example: Suppose I intend to Play a Praelude in C-fa-ut-Key, and to
manifest, what Key I do intend to Play in, I will begin Thus, with the last
Great String, which is the Diapason of C-fa-ut.

The First Praelude beginning in that Key C-fa-ut.

^ ^

Here you may apparently discern the Key, of This Praelude, by the First Note,
which is C-fa-ut.

Now for the Fugue, Shape, or Form of This Lesson, you shall know It Thus.

The Fuge is seen in the first Bar, in which is expressed a determinate Order,
intimating Matter, and Form of Notes, which Matter, or Conceit; I do intend to
pursue, quite through the Lesson.

This Term Fuge, is a Term used among Composers; by which They understand a
certain intended Order, The meaning of a Fuge.
Shape, or Form of Notes; signifying, such a Matter, or such an Extention; and
is used in Music, as a Theme, or as a subject Matter in Oratory, on which the
Orator intends to Discourse.

And this is the Nature, and Use of a Fuge in Music; and, as you may most
plainly discern, in This last set Lesson.

Examine It therefore, and observe the 1 st. Bar, which speaks the Intent, or
Conceit of the whole Lesson; each Bar varying a little; yet (as I may say)
Tasting of the First, or Alluding Thereunto

The very Best way, to procure Invention.
This is the very way, if well Understood, and Imitated, which will occasion
Invention, with much Ease, and Great Delight: But at the present, will (or may)
seem a Mystery: However, I will pursue It so long, in what I shall hereafter
set down, that I doubt not, but you will Grapple with the meaning of It, well,
before I conclude, and to your great Satisfaction, and Advantage.

From this Place, quite through the Book, there is scarce a Lesson, but will
Exemplify This particular Matter of Invention.

I am Engaged next, to let you know, how to express your Key, by a 3 d. or 10
th. to your Diapason intended.

Now for Example, you still intend C-fa-ut-Key; and you begin to touch your 2
d. String, which is a 3 d. or 10 th. to your intended Key.

Here is a Praelude, which will show you, how That may Handsomely be done; As
also to Maintain a Fuge, or Humor.

The 2 d. Praelude in the 10 th. above the Key.

^ ^ ^

Here the Key is obvious, and Plain, as beginning on the 2 d, String, (the
Letter ^, on the same String being but the same Tone, yet augments the Sound,
and makes it a little Fuller;) And that 1 st, ^ may properly have a Beat to
It, for Its Grace, (the which is set;) Likewise the 1 st. ^, in the 2 d. Bar;
The 1 st. ^, in the 3 d. Bar; The ^, in the 4 th. Bar; The 1 st. ^, in the 5
th. Bar; And the 1 st. ^, in the 9 th. Bar.

Note likewise, That All those Letters, Note.
which I have Noted for Beats, must be struck with the Thumb; and the Treble
above each, with the 2 d. Finger.

This may suffice, for the Fingering of the Lesson.

Now, as to the Humor of It, you may observe, That It All Tastes of, or
Similizeth with the 1 st. Bar, in some small kind; yet not too much of the
same Humor; for that is Nautious, and Tiresome, (which has been Anciently, by
some, used too much; but too little now a days, by others.

Judgment, gained by Experience, must be the best Director in This Matter.

The last part, Is a little a Kin to the Fuge; yet peculiarly a Humor by It
self.

For you may carry on, and maintain several Humors, and Conceits, in the same
Lesson; provided they have some Affinity, or Agreement one to the other: But
That does require some Experience* and Judgment also; and more than some of our
Late Composers of These Times show, who make their Lessons, as I have known
Boys to make their Jacks of Lent; A Comparison, concerning Ridiculous
Composures.
Their Doublet-Sleeves of several Colors, and both differing from the Skirts,
and the Body differing from All, (and yet all very Good Stuffs, Cloth, or
Silks, had they been properly, and Judiciously placed;) which kind of
Ridiculous Composures, have no Good Order, or Compendious Artifice in Them; but
are made up at Random, by Hab-Nab, without Care, Skill, or Judgment. A
Necessary, and short Digression, Comparing Music to Language, or Oratory.


Now here, it will not be Impertinent, to make a short Digression, and to say
something in This Respect, of Music; which I believe, every one will not
believe, or think possible; and especially, in the matter of Invention, in
Composition.

But Thus much I do affirm, and shall be ready to Prove, by Demonstration, (to
any Person Intelligible) That Music is as a Language, and has Its
Significations, as Words have, (if not more strongly) only most people do not
understand that Language (perfectly.)

And as an Orator, (when he goes about to make a Speech, Sermon, Further
Explained.
or Oration) takes to Himself some Subject Matter, to Exercise Himself upon, as
a Theme, Text, or the Like; and in That Exercise, can order His Discourse, or
Form, various, and sundry ways, at his Pleasure, and yet not stray from, or
loose His intended Matter. Even so may a Learned Master, in This Art, do the
like; and with as much Ease, Scope, and Freedom (significantly.)

And as in Language, various Humors, Conceits, and Passions, (of All sorts)
may be Expressed; so likewise in Music, may any Humor, Conceit, or Passion
(never so various) be Expressed; and so significantly, as any Rhetorical Words,
or Expressions are able to do; only, (if I may not be thought too Extravagant
in my Expressions) if any Difference be; It is, In that Music speaks so
transcendently, and Communicates Its Notions so Intelligibly to the Internal,
Intellectual, and Incomprehensible Faculties of the Soul; The Divine Rhetorical
Power of Music.
so far beyond all Language of Words, that I confess, and most solemnly affirm,
I have been more Sensibly, Fervently, and Zealously Captivated, and drawn into
Divine Raptures, and Contemplations, by Those Inexpressible Rhetorical,
Uncontrollable Persuasions, and Instructions of Musicks Divine Language, than
ever yet I have been, by the best Verbal Rhetoric, that came from any Man's
Mouth, either in Pulpit, or elsewhere.

Those Influences, which come along with It, may aptly be compared,
to Emanations, Communications, or Distillations, of some Sweet, and Heavenly
Genius, or Spirit; Mystically, and Vnapprehensibly ( yet Effectually)
Dispossessing the Soul, and Mind, of All Irregular Disturbing, and Unquiet
Motions; and Stills, and Fills It, with Quietness, Joy, and Peace; Absolute
Tranquillity, and Inexpressible Satisfaction.

I speak not by Roat, but by Experience, and what I have often found, and felt.

This Relation will seem strange to many; which I shall not wonder at; because
I know there are but few, which do arrive to that Height, and Degree of
Experience, and Knowledge, both of the Art, Practice, or Effects of It, or
(which is more) that do make use of Their Music, in such a Solemn, and Divine
way.

But I must break off This Discourse, in This Place, and return to teach my
Scholar, how to begin to Play a Praelude, from the Fifth, or Twelfth. The
Example follows, in the next Page.

The Third Praelude in the Fifth.

^ ^

Here is a short Praelude, which begins in the Fifth, or Twelfth, as appears by
the First Letter (^) upon the Treble String.

The Fuge, or Humor, you may observe lies in the First 4 Notes, and is
maintained, quite through; One Strain Retorting upon the Other, in Uniformity;
which is a very Great Loveliness, in Musical Expressions; but is too much
dis-regarded by many.

In the Playing of This Praelude, use your Forefinger, and Thumb, almost quite
through, according to the Rule of Close-play; which I conceive you may Remember.

The 4 th. Praelude in the Eighth above.

^ ^ ^

This Praelude begins in the Eighth, to the Diapason; but is properly enough
said, to be the Key; yet because I told you of the Eighth, I have here done It.

You must know, that an Eighth, and a Unison, (in Musick's Nature) is the self
same Thing in Effect; as I shall here demonstrate, by an Example.

How an Eighth, and a Unison, is signified to be the same Thing in Nature.
For, let a Man, and a Woman (or a Boy) sing any Song together, (Note, for
Note;) And the Woman, or Boy, will as Naturally (and cannot but) sing an
Eighth, above the Man, as if they were both the same; which will not do in any
other Chorde whatever besides.

And in a great Mystery.
This Thing must needs be accounted a strange Mystery; and is a Fit Subject for
the Greatest Philosopher to study to give a Good Reason for.

Now, as you have observed the last 3 Praeludes, in respect of Their Fugues,
Orders, and Forms; So I pray do This, and you will find* that the Humor of the
1 st. 2 Bars, is answered, and maintained in the 3 d. and 4 th. Bars; Then,
from thence, there is Another Humor or Fuge maintained to the End* yet
various, but alluding partly to the 1 st.

In the Playing of It* use your Thumb, and 2 d. Finger for the First Note; and
so with your Thumb, and Finger, all the way* as you see It Marked.

I will now set you a Set, or a Suit of Lessons, (as we commonly call Them)
which may be of any Number, as you please, yet commonly are about Half a Dozen.

The First always, should begin* in the Nature of a Voluntary Play, which we
call a Praeludium, or Praelude.

Then, Allmaine, Air, Coranto, Seraband, Toy, or what you please, provided
They be all in the same Key; yet (in my opinion) in regard we call Them a Suit
of Lessons) They ought to be something a Kin, (as we use to say) or to have
some kind of Resemblance in their Conceits, Natures, or Humors.

I will begin This First Set, with a Praeludium; and still, by It, Endeavor
your further Information, concerning Voluntary Play, and maintaining a Fugue,
Conceit, or Humor. Therefore Note This following Praelude.

Here begins the First Praelude of the 8 Suits of Lessons, next following.

^ ^ ^ ^

Here is now a Longer Praelude, than any yet you have had before; and if you
observe the Humor of the 1 st. Two Bars, you will perceive, That the whole
Lesson alludes to the same Thing; and yet with pleasant variety: I suppose you
will not fail in Playing it with True, and Proper Fingering, by reason, that
your Rules are so Plain, and often Repeated before.

Therefore I Will say no more of This, but proceed to the rest of the Set. And
Here is the First.

The First Lesson of the First Set, called the Authors Mistress.

^ ^ ^

Soft Loud

A Story, (not Impertinent) concerning This Lesson; although many may chance to
smile at It.
This Lesson I call my Mistress; And I shall not think It Impertinent, to detain
you here a little Longer than Ordinary, in speaking something of It; The
Occasion of It; And why I give It That Name: And I doubt not, but the Relation,
I shall give, may conduce to your Advantage, in several Respects; but chiefly,
in respect of Invention.

You must first Know, That It is a Lesson, though Old; yet I never knew It
Dis-relished by Any; nor is there any One Lesson, in This Book, of that Age, as
It is; yet I do Esteem It (in Its Kind) with the Best Lesson in the Book, for
several Good Reasons, which I shall here set down.

It is ( This very Winter) just 40 Years since I made It; (and yet It is New,
because All like It) and Then, when I was past being a Suitor to my Best
Beloved, Dearest, and Sweetest Living-Mistress; But not Married; yet Contriving
the Best, and Readiest way toward It: And Thus It was,

The occasion of This Lesson.
That very Night, in which I was Thus Agitated in my Mind, concerning Her, (My
Living Mistress;) She being in Yorkshire, and My Self at Cambridge,) Close shut
up in My Chamber, Still, and Quiet, about 10, or 11 a Clock at Night, Musing,
and Writing Letters to Her; Her Mother, and some other Friends, in Summing up,
and Determining the whole Matter, concerning Our Marriage: (You may conceive, I
might have very Intent Thoughts, all that Time, and might meet with some
Difficulties. (For as yet, I had not gained Her Mothers Consent.) So that in My
Writings, I was sometimes put to My Studyings. At which Times, (My Lute lying
upon My Table) I sometimes took It up, and Walked about My Chamber;
Letting my Fancy Drive, which way It would, (for I studied nothing, at that
Time, as to Music) yet my Secret Genius, or Fancy, prompted my Fingers, (do
what I could) into This very Humor; So that every Time I walked, and took up
My Lute, (in the Interim, betwixt Writing, and Studying) This Air would needs
offer It self unto Me, Continually; In so much that at the last, (liking it
Well, (and lest It should be Lost,) I took Paper, and set It down, taking no
further Notice of It, at That Time; But afterward, It passed abroad, for a
very Pleasant, and Delightful Air, amongst All; yet I gave It no Name, till a
long Time after, nor taking more Notice of It, (in any particular kind) than of
any other My Composures, of That Nature.

But after I was Married, and had brought My Wife Home, to Cambridge; It so
fell out, that one Rainy Morning I stayed within; and in My Chamber, My Wife,
and I, were all alone; She Intent upon Her Needle-Works, and I Playing upon my
Lute, at the Table by Her; She sat very Still, and Quiet, Listening to All I
Played, without a Word a Long Time, till at last, I happened to Play This Lesson;
which, so soon as I had once Played, She Earnestly desired Me to Play It again;
For, said She, That shall be Called, My Lesson.

From which Words, so spoken, with Emphasis, and Accent, It presently came into
my Remembrance, the Time when, and the Occasion of Its being produced, and
returned Her This Answer, viz. That It may very properly be called Your Lesson;
For when I Composed It, You were wholly in My Fancy, and the Chief Object, and
Ruler of My Thoughts; telling Her how, and when It was made: And Therefore,
ever after, I Thus Called It, My Mistress; (And most of My Scholars since, call
It, Mrs. Mace, to This Day.)

Thus have I detained you, (I hope not too long) with This short Relation; Nor
should I have been so seemingly Vain, as to have Inserted It; But that I have
an intended purpose, by It, to give some Advantage to the Reader, and doubt
not, but to do It, to Those, who will rightly consider, what here I shall
further set down, concerning It.

Now in Reference to the Occasion of It, etc. There are Times of Barrenness,
and Times of Plenty, in Matters of Invention.
It is worth taking Notice; That there are Times, and particular Seasons, in
which the Ablest Master, in his Art, shall not be able to Command his
Invention, or produce things, so to his Content, or Liking, as he shall at
other Times; but he shall be (as it were) Stupid, Dull, and Shut up, as to any
Neat, Spruce, or Curious Invention.

But again, at other Times, he will have Inventions come flowing in upon him,
with so much Ease, and Freedom, that his greatest Trouble will be, to Retain,
Remember, or Set Them down, in Good Order.

Yet more particularly, as to the Occasion of This Lesson; I would have you
take notice, that as it was at such a Time, when I was Wholly, and Intimately
possessed, with the True, and Perfect Idea of my Living Mistress, who was at
That time Lovely, Fair, Comely, Sweet, Debonair, Vniformly-Neat, and every way
Complete: How could (possibly) my Fancy Run upon any Thing, at That Time, but
upon the very Simile, Form, or Likeness, of the same Substantial Thing.

And that This Lesson does Represent, The Story applied to use; And the Lesson
Explained.
and Shadow forth such a True Relation, as here I have made, I desire you to
take notice of It, in every Particular; which I assure my self, may be of
Benefit to any, who shall observe It well.

First therefore, observe the Two First Bars of It; The Fugue.
which will give you the Fugue; which Fugue is maintained quite through the
whole Lesson.

Secondly, observe the Form, and Shape of the Whole Lesson, The Humor.
which consists of Two Uniform, and Equal Strains; both Strains having the same
Number of Bars.

Thirdly, observe the Humor of It; The Form.
which you may perceive (by the Marks, and Directions) is not Common.

These Three Terms, or Things, ought to be considered, in All Compositions, and
Performances of This Nature; viz. Airs, or the Like.

The Fugue, is Lively, Ayrey, Neat, Curious, and Sweet, like my Mistress.

The Form, is Uniform, Comely, Substantial, Grave, and Lovely, like my
Mistress.

The Humor, is singularly Spruce, Amiable, Pleasant, Obliging, and Innocent,
like my Mistress.

This Relation, to some may seem Odd, Strange, Humorous, and Impertinent; But
to Others, (I presume) It may be Intelligible, and Useful; in that I know, (by
Good Experience) that in Music All These Significations, (and vastly many
more) may (by an Experienced; and Understanding Artist) be Clearly, and most
Significantly Expressed; yea, even as by Language It self, (If not much more
Effectually.)

And also, in that I know, that as a Person is Affected, or Disposed in his
Temper, or Humor, by Reason of what Object (of his Mind) soever; He shall at
That Time produce Matter, (if he be put to It) Answerable to That Temper,
Disposition, or Humor, in which he is.

A Good Caution for Composers.
Therefore I would give This as a Caviat, or Caution to any, who do attempt to
Exercise Their Fancies, in such* Matters of Invention; That They observe Times,
and Seasons, and never Force Themselves to any Thing, when they perceive an
Indisposition; but wait for a Fitter, and more Hopeful Season; for what comes
most Completely, comes most Familiarly, Naturally, and Easily, without Pumping
for; (as we use to say.)

Strive therefore to be in a Good, Cheerful, and Pleasant Humor always, when
you would Compose, or Invent; and then, such will your Productions be: or to
say better, Choose for your Time of Study, and Invention, (if you may) That
Time, wherein you are so Disposed, as I have Declared.

And doubtless, as It is in the Study, and Productions of Music; so must It
needs be, in all other Studies, where the use, and Exercise of Fancy is
Requirable.

I will therefore take a little more pains than ordinary, to give such
Directions, Directions, to Play the Mistress well.
as you shall no ways wrong, or injure my Mistress, but do Her all the Right
you can, according to Her True Deserts.

First therefore, observe to Play, Soft, and Loud, as you see It Marked quite
through the Lesson.

Secondly, use That Grace, which I call the Sting, where you see It set, and
the Spinger after It.

And then in the last 4 Strains, observe the Slides, and Slurs, and you cannot
fail to know my Mistress's Humor, provided you keep True Time, which you must
be extremely careful to do, in All Lessons: For Time is the One half of Music.

And now I hope I shall not be very hard put to it, to obtain my Pardon, for
all This Trouble I have Thus put you to, in the Exercise of your Patience;
especially from Those, who are so Ingenious, and Good Natured, as to Prize, and
Value, such Singular, and Choice Endowments, as I have here made mention of, in
so Absolute, and Complete a Subject; As also, in that they may several ways
gain Advantages Thereby; which is my Chief Aim, and Drift.

I will now set you, the 2 d. Lesson of This Set, The 2d. Lesson of the first
Set, Named the Offspring.
which shall be as one of the same Kindred; and indeed It is so nearly Related
unto the First, as I can give It no Name so proper, as the Offspring; because
It came (as I may say) out of the First, (as you shall hear;) For after some
time, that My Mistress grew in Esteem, and to be so Generally well liked of (as
I have declared) I was desired by some of My Scholars, to make another Part, to
Play at the same time with That my Mistress, upon another Lute: Whereupon I Set
This next Lesson; and It is so made, that It is both a Consort Lesson, (to the
former, upon another Equal Lute) and does pass also for a Lone-Lesson; and
called often the 2 d. Part, or Part of My Mistress. And here It is.

^
^ ^ ^

In the use of This Lesson, you must Note Two Things especially. The
Explanation of the Offspring.


The First is, That if at any time you Play It in Consort, (with That other)
Those Two last Notes of the Fourth Bar, and the Three First of the Fifth Bar,
may be left unplayed, (which thing we call Resting;) because They are the very
same Notes, in that place, of the foregoing Lesson; so that although It will be
no Discord, (if Played) yet It is not accounted Handsome to Play the same Thing
upon 2 several Instruments, Consort-wise, at the same time.

But when It is Played as a Lone-Lesson, Those Notes are very Proper, and Fit
Air, to come in, in That Place, in Reference to the Retort in the next Two
Bars following.

But when It is Played, as a Part-Lesson to the other Lute, It is more Ample
and Modish to Rest Them 5 Notes, (The other Lute then Playing Them) for that
the 2 Lutes will Retort, and Answer one the other much more completely, in the
same Kind, or Humor.

The 2 d. Thing observable is, That when you Play It for a Lone-Lesson, you
must, (for the Humor sake) make Three Pauses, in the last Strain, at Those
Three Places where you will find Them Thus ^ Marked; and Those Three Notes also
to have the Sting-Grace, (as you may see It set before Them.)

This is all I shall hint you unto, in This Lesson; for I believe you will find
the Humor of It Easily, in regard It is so near of Kin to the former; only
remember to Play It Soft, and Loud, as you see It Marked.

Take notice also of the Fugues which are in It, maintained to the end, yet
various from the other.

The 3 d. Lesson of the 1 st. Set, named the Cozen-German.

^
^ ^ ^

I have on Purpose, set you These Three Lessons together, in that you may the
more (for your Experience, and Practice) be informed in That Main Thing, which
I have driven at for you, viz. To be able to know, the manner of Managing a
Fugne, and so to maintain It, as to bring It in, Properly, with your whole
Discourse, into a True and Handsome Form, or Shape, in any Matter you intend to
pursue, or have a Design for; and in way of Extemporary, or Voluntary Play.

And as you see, These Three Lessons, are of such a Near Affinity, or Likeness
of Humor* or Conceit, one to the other, you may the more plainly perceive by
Them, after which manner, you may follow, and vary a Fugue, etc.

In This last Lesson, you will see the Fugue followed, and maintaind to the
End; and without being Glutted; or Cloyed with It; because It is so variously
performed, and upon Sundry, and Pleasant Keys. As also the Exact Uniformity, or
Likeness of each Strain, both within Themselves, and also of One Strain to
another.

When I talk of Uniformity in a Lesson, I mean Thus. What is meant by the
Uniformity of a Lesson.


We are to consider of the Lesson, chiefly as to Form, or Shape; which Thing
concerns the Composer, principally to be careful of; But as for Fugue, or
Humor, you may let Them be what they will; yet They would be so contrived, as
to have Neatness, and Spruceness in Them; and to be maintained Uniformly, and
Evenly.

In which Thing we must ever have a Care, The first Thing observable in
Uniformity.
first to make our Bars of every Strain, in Number, Even, (viz. 4, 6, 8, 10,
12, or etc.) and Rarely, or Never to make a Strain of Odd, (viz. 5, 7, 9, 11,
or 13, etc.) Bars in a Strain; for if at any time you chance to meet with a
Strain, consisting of Odd Bars,
peruse That Strain well; Ponder It in Its Fugue, Matter and Form, and you will
(in the End) perceive, that either some one of Those Bars, might well have
been spared, or else some other put in, or added, (here or there) which might
much more have Amplified the Strain; But being as It is, with an Odd Bar, you
will find it Incomplete, and Dis-satisfactory; that is, It will not thoroughly
please you, (if you have a True, and Uniform Fancy.)

For It may very aptly be compared to an Oversight, in the making of Verses, A
Comparison betwixt Music, and Poetry, as to Quantities, etc.
where the Poet (inconsiderately) puts in a Foot too much, or a Foot too
little; and in the True Scanning of such Verses, you may easily perceive them
Hobble, and not run smooth, which is a great blemish to the Work.

There have been, and still are, very good Masters, and Composers; as also,
Poets, which do not regard this one Thing; And I am very confident, if They
were hinted to It, and did well consider It; Themselves would acknowledge Their
Oversight, and for the Future, always retain the Observance of It.

The 2 d. Thing, which makes Uniformity more Lovely in a Strain, is, That Those
Even Bars, may bear some kind of Correspondency, (as I may say) Affinity, or
Likeness in their Form, or Shape, one to another; as you may very plainly
perceive there is in These 3 foregoing Lessons; (more Examples of which, I
shall not need to set down, to cause you to understand my meaning.)

These Two Considerations are to be had, in Reference to one Strain of a Lesson.

But the 3 d. Thing, which will make an Absolute, Complete, The Third Thing is
absolute Uniformity.
and Perfect Uniformity in a Lesson, is, when both Strains, are so contrived,
That They agree Equally, both for Number of Bars, and for Shape and Form, in
such a Retorting way, as is likewise plainly to be seen in Those 3 last
mentioned Lessons.

I speak not This to Bind, or Restrain the unbounded, and unlimited Braveries
of Fancy, or Invention of any; For I know there are very Excellent Composures
of all Forms, and Shapes, and of Even and Odd Bars, according to the various
Humors, and Pleasures of Men.

And sometimes for a Conceit sake, I have done the like; yet (for all that)
upon a Review, and better Consideration, I could see where, and how easily to
Correct such a Defection, (for so still I must call It) in the Fancy, or
Humor, by either Adding, or Diminishing; and so make my Lesson still the more
Complete, and Uniform.

Many things are Good, yea very Good; but yet upon After-Consideration, we have
met with the Comparative, which is Better; yea, and after That, with the
Superlative, (Best of All) by Adding to, or Altering a little, the same Good
Thing.

This Thing which I thus hint unto, with what went before, (I dare avouch with
confidence) will (by a due Observance of It) prove a most steady, An assured
way, to make Handsome, and Good Lessons.
and certain way (easily) to make Handsome, and Good Air; especially for
Lessons of a short Cut, such as are Allmaines, Airs, Corantoes, Serabands, and
such like.

They would ever be made Uniform, and Even.

But as long Lessons, viz. Praeludes, Fancies, Pavines, etc. It is not a Matter
of so great Concern; because, that in the Exceeding Length of Them, there
cannot be such a Nice Notice, taken of their Cuts, or Shapes; besides, They
have many times Humors of Pauses, and Flourishes, in a ^ild way, according to
their Nature, that it is not expected from Them, to appear in such an Exact,
and Punctual Form, as one of These short Ones, which is (more in use, and of a
more easy Discern;) Commonly, like a Pair of Verses, of Six, Eight, Ten, or
Twelve Feet, which if either be too long, or too short, a very Indifferent
Observer, may soon espy the Defect.

These 3 last Lessons, although I have given them such Fansical, Humorous, or
Conceited Names; yet (according to their Forms, and Shapes, and Order of their
Time, or Proportion) may be called short Allmaines, or Airs.

And that you may hereafter know how to give Right, and Proper Names to all
Lessons you meet with, take notice of This General way, how you may know Them,
and how you may Order Them.

There are first Praeludes, then 2 dly. Fancies, and Voluntaries, 3 dly.
Pavines, How to know, and give right Names to all sorts of Lessons, etc.
4 thly. Allmaines, 5 thly. Airs, 6 thly. Galliards, 7 thly. Corantoes, 8
thly. Serabands, 9 thly. Tattle de Moys, 10 thly. Chichona's, 11 thly. Toys,
or Jiggs, 12 thly. Common Tunes; But lastly, Grounds, with Divisions upon them.

And of every of These, I will give you some kind of Knowledge, by way of
Description. The Description of Them. 1. The Praelude.


The Praelude is commonly a Piece of Confused-wild-shapeless-kind of
Intricate-Play, (as most use It) in which no perfect Form, Shape, or Uniformity
can be perceived; but a Random-Business, Pottering, and Grooping, up and down,
from one Stop, or Key, to another; And generally, so performed, to make Trial,
whether the Instrument be well in Tune, or not; by which doing, after they have
Completed Their Tuning, They will (if They be Masters) fall into some kind of
Voluntary, 2. The Fancy, or Voluntary.
or Fansical Play, more Intelligible; which (if He be a Master, Able) is a way,
whereby He may more Fully, and Plainly show His Excellency, and Ability, than
by other kind of undertaking; and has an unlimited, and unbounded Liberty; In
which, he may make use of the Forms, and Shapes of all the rest.

Pavines, are Lessons of 2, 3, or 4 Strains, very Grave, and Sober; Full of
Art, and Profundity, but seldom used, 3 Pavines.
in These our Light Days.

Allmaines, are Lessons very Ayrey, and Lively; 4. Allmaines.
and Generally of Two Strains, of the Common, or Plain-Time.

Airs, are, or should be, of the same Time, 5. Airs.
(yet many make Tripla's, and call them so;) only they differ from Allmaines,
by being commonly Shorter, and of a more Quick, and Nimble Performance.

Galliards, are Lessons of 2, or 3 Strains, 6 Galliards.
but are performed in a Slow, and Large Triple-Time; and (commonly) Grave, and
Sober.

Corantoes, are Lessons of a Shorter Cut, 7. Corantoes.
and of a Quicker Triple-Time; commonly of 2 Strains, and full of
Sprightfulness, and Vigor, Lively, Brisk, and Cheerful.

Serabands, are of the Shortest Triple-Time; 8. Serabands.
but are more Toyish, and Light, than Corantoes; and commonly of Two Strains.

A Tattle de Moy, is a New Fashioned Thing, 9. Tattle de Moys.
much like a Seraband; only It has more of Conceit in It, as (in a manner)
speaking the word, (Tattle de Moy) and of Humor; (as you will find, quite
through This Book, where they are set;) That Conceit being never before
Published, but Broached together with This Work.

It may supply the Place of a Seraband, at the End of a Suit of Lessons, at any
Time.

Chichona's, are only a few Conceited Humorous Notes, 10. Chichona's.
at the end of a Suit of Lessons, very Short, (viz.) not many in Number; yet
sometimes* consists of Two Strains, although but of Two Semibreves in a Strain,
and commonly, of a Grave kind of Humor.

Toys, or Jiggs, are Light-Squibbish Things, 11. Toys, or Jiggs.
only fit for Fantastical, and Easie-Light-Headed People; and are of any sort
of Time.

Common Tunes, 12. Common Tunes.
(so called) are Commonly known by the Boys, and Common People, Singing Them in
the Streets; and are of either sort of Time, of which there are many, very
Excellent, and well Contrived Pieces, Neat, and Spruce Air.

The Ground, is a set Number of Slow Notes, very Grave, 13. Grounds.
and Stately; which, (after It is expressed Once, or Twice, very Plainly) then
He that has Good Brains, and a Good Hand, undertakes to Play several Divisions
upon It, Time after Time, till he has showed his Bravery, both of Invention,
and Hand.

Thus, I have given you to understand, the several sorts, and Shapes, of most
Lessons in use.

I will now proceed in This Suit of Lessons, and here set you a short Coranto,
as you shall see following in the next Page.

The 4 th. Lesson of the 1 st. Set, being a Coranto.

^
^ ^

This Lesson I call a Coranto, and Properly, as you may see, both by the Time,
and Shape of It; However, I would have It Played in a Slow, and Long
Proportion: For the Nature of It, is far more Sober, than a Coranto, and will
please you much better so.

The Fugue is seen, in the 3 First Notes, and perceptible all over the Lessons.

The Form is Even, Uniform, and Perfect.

The Humor, is a kind of Sorrowing, Pitying, and Bemoaning. A General
Observation* how to find out the Humor of a Lesson.


And as to the General Humor of any Lesson, take This as a Constant
Observation; viz. observe It, in Its Form, or Shape; and if you find It
Uniform, and Retortive, either in Its Bars, or Strains, and that It expresses
Short Sentences, (as you may observe in All These last Four Lessons, that they
have done;) Then you will find it very Easy, to Humor a Lesson, by Playing
some Sentences Loud, and others again Soft, according as they best please your
own Fancy, some very Briskly, and Courageously, and some again Gently,
Lovingly, Tenderly, and Smoothly.


And forget not especially, in such Humors, to make your Pauses, What gives the
Chiefest Luster to Play.
at Proper Places, (which are commonly at the End of such Sentences, where
there is a Long Note, as easily you will know how to do, if you give your mind
to regard such Things, which give the Greatest Luster in Play, as I have
already told you.

The Playing of This Lesson, is so Familiarly Easy, that I need say no more to
It. Therefore here is another.

The 5 th. Lesson of the 1 st. Set, being a Coranto, but called, I like my
Humor well.

^
^ ^ ^

This Lesson may rather be called a ^ Humor, than a Coranto; and has Its
Fugue, or Subject Matter (upon which It Treats) expressed in the 1 st. Two Bars,
which is throughout maintained, with Handsome, and Various Intermixtures.

The Form is Uniform, (each Strain within It self) though not All of the same
Number of Bars; and yet the 1 st. Two Strains are; which is no Error, but
sometimes, (for Humor-sake) more Pleasant, and Delightful, as in this 3 d.
Strain, which is Humorous, and Conceited, and seems to Mock, or Mow, or Jest;
to be Blyth, or Merry; as if it were telling some Jiggish Story, and Pointing
at This, or That Body, all along, till it comes to the 4 last Bars, where you
see the Letter (^) upon the 2 d. String, with a Full Stop; and where you must
Pause, and use the Stinging Grace a Pretty while; and then Softly whirl away,
and Conclude.

And although it be Coranto-Time, yet (in regard of the Conceitedness of the
Humor) I give It That Name.

And because, that Corantoes (Generally) are but of Two Strains; Therefore I
will here following, set you a Perfect Coranto, having said sufficiently
concerning This.

The 5 th. Lesson of the 1 st. Set, being a Coranto.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

This Lesson is a Perfect Coranto, and has Its Fuge expressed ^ in the 1 st. Two
Bars, and is throughout maintained.

Its Form is Uniform, each Strain within It self; the Humor is Solid, Grave,
and very Persuasive, by way of Argumentation; Expostulating (as it were) the
Matter with much Ferventness; which you must Humor, by performing Soft, and
Loud-Play, in Proper Places; where you may easily perceive such Humor to lie.

Such Observations, as These, will prove several ways Beneficial unto you; both
as to your Delight, in your undertaking; and also, a Help to Increase your
Knowledge, and Judgment; far beyond that Common way of Poaring, and Drudging at
the Practice of Lessons, only to Play them Readily, and Quick, which seldom, or
never Produces Judgment, but leaves This Knowledge ever behind It; which is
much more than the one Half of the Work.

I will now Conclude This Suit of Lessons, with a Light Business, as commonly
we use to do, (and most commonly called a Seraband;) But because I will be a
little Modish, I have invented a New-Fashion'd-One, which I call a Tattle de
Moy; Because It Tattles, and seems to speak, Those very Words, or Syllables, as
you may perceive by the Five First Letters of It.

The 7 th. Lesson, and Conclusion of This 1 st. Set.

^
^ ^ ^

This Lesson is not without Its Fugue, Form, and Humor; All which I doubt not,
but you will readily find out.

The Fugue, is in the 1 st. 2 Bars; the Form is absolutely Perfect, and
Uniform, as you may perceive by the whole.

For you may (by your Eye) divide It into 4 Equal Parts, (viz. 4 Times Eight
Bars.)

Its Humor is Toyish, Joccond, Harmless, and Pleasant; and, as if it were, one
Playing with, or Tossing a Ball, up and down; yet It seems to have a very
Solemn Countenance, and like unto one of a Sober, and Innocent Condition, or
Disposition; not Antic, Apish, or Wild, etc.

As to the Performance of It, you will do well to Remember, Memento, that Soft,
and Loud Play, is a Chief Grace.
(as in all the rest, so in This) to Play Loud, and Soft, sometimes Briskly,
and sometimes Gently, and Smoothly, here and there, as your Fancy will (no
doubt) Prompt you unto, if you make a Right Observation of what I have already
told you.

These ways of Discourse, will seem strange, to very many, at the first,
because They are unusual; yet I am not out of Hope, This way of Teaching,
differs from the Common way.
but that after a Deliberate-Consideration, had upon the Matter, (together with
the Practice, of what they may here find; as also comparing This way, of Open,
and Free Teaching, with That General Close, and Reserved way, all along used) I
do not doubt, but they will find such Good Acceptance, as there will be a Right
use made of Them; by which the Lute shall be Redeemed from Those Ignorant, Its
Benefit, and Advantage.
and Belying-Reproaches, and Slanders, which It has (hitherto) all along
undergone: And also be so Illustrated, and brought into Deserved Esteem again,
that for Ever after, It shall be accounted, and approved (according to Its True
Worth) the Best of Portable Instruments: And also very Easily Attainable, both
in the Practick, and Understanding Part thereof; which is the Scope of my
Endeavors.

CHAP. XXV.
I Suppose now, by what I have hitherto said, and done, you believe there is a
Necessity of Observing These Rules, Thus set down; and that you perceive the
great Benefit, that may attend the Observing Them.

However, lest you may not yet be fully satisfied in your
Thorough-Apprehensions of Them, I will next, set you down, another Suit of
Lessons; in another Key, and Treat upon Them, as I have done upon These, and by
That Time, I shall not the least doubt of your sufficient understanding my
Meaning.

Yet, before I set them down, I think it very requisite, to inform you in one
most Necessary Piece of Mastership; A Complete Piece of Mastership.
which is ever performed, by Those of Good Skill, when They End a Suit of
Lessons, in any one Key, and do intend presently to begin another, in a
Differing Key; which is:

They do not Abruptly, and Suddenly Begin, such New Lessons, without some Neat,
and Handsome Interluding-Voluntary-like-Playing; which may, by Degrees, (as it
were) Steal into That New, and Intended Key.

Now, that you may be able to do It Handsomely, and without Blemish, or
Incompleatness, (for you must know, It is a Piece of Quaintness so to do) you
must take Notice, that always, when you have made an End of Playing, upon any
One Key, (if Discourse, or some other Occasion, do not cause a Cessation of
Play, for some pretty Time, so as the Remembrance of That Former Key, may, (in
a manner) be Forgotten) It will be very Needful, that some care be taken, that
you leave That Key Handsomely, and come into that Other you intend Next to Play
upon, without Impertinency.

For such Impertinencies, will seem to be very like such a Thing as This, A
Comparison, betwixt Language, and Music.
which I shall name viz.

That, when Two, or more Persons have been Soberly, and very Intently
Discoursing upon some Particular Solid Matter, Musing, and very Ponderously,
considering thereof; All on the sudden, some One of Them, shall Abruptly
(without any Pause) begin to talk of a Thing Quite of another Nature, nothing
relating to the aforesaid Business.

Now, Those Bystanders, (who have Judgment) will presently apprehend, That
although His Matter might be Good; yet His Manner, and His Wit, might have been
better Approved of, in staying some certain, convenient Time, in which he might
have found out some Pretty Interluding Discourse, and have taken a Handsome
Occasion, to have brought in his New Matter.

Just so, is it in Music, and more particularly, in this Last-Recited-Matter;
as to Chop Different Things of Different Natures, and of Different Keys, one
upon the Neck of another, Impertinently.

For I would have It taken Notice of, That Music, is (at least) as a Language,
if It will not be allowed a Perfect One; because It is not so well understood,
as It might be, (as I have Declared in my little Piece of Poetry, which adjoyns
to the Dialogue betwixt My Lute, and My Self.

Having thus far prepared you, The way how to pass from one Key to another,
without Abruption, or Absurdness.
with an Apprehension of the Needfulness of the Thing; I will now show you how
It is to be done, without Abruption, and Absurdness.

First, (as abovesaid) it may be, that Discourse, may take off the Remembrance
of the last Key, in which you Played, or some Occasion of a Leaving-off, for
some Pretty Time, by a String breaking, or the like; or if not, then (as
commonly It happens) there may be a need of Examining the Tuning of your Lute,
(for the Strings will Alter a little, in the Playing of One Lesson, although
they have been well Stretched.

But if lately put on, or have been Slacked down by any Mischance of Peggs
Slipping, then they will Need Mending, most certainly.

I say, some such Occasson, may sometimes give you an Oppertunity of coming
Handsomely to your New Intended Key: But if none of These shall happen, then you
ought, in a Judicious, and Masterly way, to work from your last Key, which you
Played upon, in some Voluntary way, till you have brought your Matter so to
pass, that your Auditors may be Captivated with a New Attention; yet so
Insinuatingly, that they may have lost the Remembrance of the Foregoing Key,
they know not how; nor are they at all concerned for the Loss of It; but rather
taken, with a New Content, and Delight, at your so Cunning, and Complete
Artifice.

Now, as to your better understanding of This Piece of Art, and Skill; you must
first know, that there is a greater Dis-relish, or Offense to the Ear, in
passing to some Keys, than to Others. As for Example.

If you end a Set of Lessons, in C-fa-ut, A Caution, not to go from any Key
immediately into a 2d. or 7th. from that Key.
(as in this last Set you have done) then do not presently begin a Set,
either in a 2 d. above, or below That Key, viz. either in D-sol-re, or in B-mi.
For they are the 2 Great Insufferable Discords in Nature, (viz. a 2 d. and a 7
th.)

And although they are not so to be considered, as in Composition, in This
Place; yet there is a secret Tincture of, or Alluding to such a Thing, which
will Infuse It self into the Harmonical Part of a Man, whereby he will be a
little Disturbed, or Displeased, although he be unskilful, and know not for
what Cause; but contrary-wise, fall into any Other Key, and the Blemish will
not be so Great, by far.

I will now set down some Examples, how to pass from one Key to another, Neatly.

The last Set, was in C-fa-ut; your next shall be in F-fa-ut; so that It is
Needful, you be able to Play some Little Handsome Thing, to bring you off
orderly, from That Key to This.

CHAP. XXVI.
Here are therefore, Half a Dozen Interludes, to pass from C-fa-ut, to
F-fa-ut-Key,

1 st ^
^ ^ ^ 2 d ^
^ ^ 3 d ^
^ ^ 4th ^
^ ^ 5th ^
^ ^ 6th ^
^ ^

The Benefit of these Six Interludes, will be much more than so many Lessons.
These Six Examples of Interludes, will do you more Credit, and Service, and
give you more Satisfaction, and Understanding, in managing of the Lute, in a
Masterly way; if you Practice to Play Them Neatly, and make your Observations,
how to Imitate, and Make the like, than if I had set you Twice so many Long,
and very Good Lessons.

And that you may not doubt of Any Thing you see Pricked in Them, know, That
the first Bar in every one of Them, stands only to show you the Common Ending
of Lessons in C-fa-ut-Key; some being of Triple Time, and some of Plain, or
Even Time. So that when you have ended any Lesson in that Key, then you have
your Choice of any of These Six Come-offs, to pass Smoothly, and Commendably to
F-fa-ut-Key, which you next intend to Play in.

Fugue, Matter* Form, or Shape; Humor, Life, or Conceit.
Now for your better understanding of the Notion of Fugue, (or Matter;) Form,
(or Shape;) Humor, (or Conceit;) I would have you to observe, that in every
one of Those Six Interludes, though you see they be very short) may plainly be
perceived, All Those 3 Necessary Pertinencies, The Chief Things Regardable in
Composing.
in reference to Invention, Voluntary-Play, and a Good Composer, viz. Matter,
Form, Humor; Life, or Conceit.

And without a due Observance of These, None shall Compose Music with that
Ease, The Readiest way to a Good Invention.
Familiarity, and Certainty, Compleatness, and Pleasure, as Those who do
observe Them.

I will not deny, but that it is possible, to Light, or Hit upon something that
may be Good; and do believe, that through a Natural Aptitude, (which is in
many) Many do attempt to Compose, and often happen upon very Good Air; but
know not how it came to pass: Nor do They observe These Things, (because, as I
conceive, They might never be informed Thus, concerning Them) yet I say, such
Productions must needs be, with Much More Labor, and Trouble, than if They did
Thus go about Their Work, by a Certain Rule; which (together with a Good Fancy)
would never fail, Quickly to do the Business; yea, and with much Ease, and
Readiness.

Why the Rules of Composition are not Treated upon, in This Book.
The Rules of Composition, are Few and Easy; and Attainable in a Months Time:
And They are published so very well, and Substantially by diverse, that I shall
count it an Unnecessary Trouble, to say any Thing of Them.

But as to the Great, and Principal Matter of a Composer, which is Invention;
Want of Invention, the greatest Discouragement to Young Composers.
(and commonly the want of It, is the Greatest Discouragement that a Young
Composer meets with) I know no Better way, than what may be found by These
Discourses, and Examples; which all along, quite Through the whole Number of
Lessons, both for Lute, and Viol, in This Work, I have so contrived, That
whosoever shall Diligently observe the Order of Them, cannot (possibly) but by
Them, and the Discourse, find such Advantages, as I speak of; there being no
better way for such a Thing, than Example; the which He shall find in every
Lesson in This Book, (excepting One, which shall be Set in the next Set)
according to the above-laid-down-Principals, viz. Fugue, Form, and Humor, etc.

I will not say neither, that every One, who makes the Rightest Use, and
Observation of the Best Rules in Art, shall by Those Rules attain to such
Curiosity, Quaintness, or Excellency; as shall some Others, who have more
Accute, Active, and Spruce Parts Naturally; But shall ever be outdone by Them:
However, by These Rules, they shall have such Advantages as abovesaid; and so
much for their Certain Assistance, that they shall scarce ever do Ill; although
not so Eminently well, as others.

I will now break off This Discourse, and set you another Set of Lessons; and
in F-fa-ut-Key: The first is a Praelude.

CHAP. XXVII.
The 2 d. Set of Lessons, in F-fa-ut-Key, being a Praelude.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

The 2 d. Lesson of the 2 d. Set, being an Allmaine.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

The 3 d. being an Air.

^
^ ^ ^

The 4 th. being an Air.

^
^ ^

The 5 th. Lesson, being a Coranto.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

The 6 th. Lesson of the 2 d. Set, being a Tattle de Moy.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

Observations* upon This last Set of Lessons.
Observe the Praelude of This last Set, and you will find the Fugue apparent, in
the 31 st. Odd Notes, and the Bar following; and is maintained quite through,;
yet Pleasantly, and Variously.

And if you Note the Form, you will find It Uniform, according to what I have
before told you.

The Humor must be found out, by Playing Soft, and Loud, and making your
Pauses, etc.

The 2 d. Lesson, has also Fugue, Perfect Form, and Humor, as you cannot but
easily perceive, and find out.

The 3 d. has all in It, viz. Fugue, Form, and Humor; yet the Fugue, is not so
easily perceived from the beginning, as in the former Lessons. But the Form is
Perfect, viz. Even Number of Bars, in both Strains. The Humor Easy.

The 4 th. has All very Perfect, and so visible, that I need only desire you,
to Play It Neatly; for it is a Pretty Knack.

The 5 th. begins not with a Visible Fugue, but has several Allusions, and
References, one thing to another, as you will perceive easily in the Playing of
It.

Each Strain is Uniform, and even to It self, though not a Perfect Even Form,
one to the other; as one Strain having 18 Bars, and the other 20. You cannot
miss of Its Humor.

The 6 th. is apparent in Its Fugue; Its form as the last; Its Humor Familiar,
Pleasant, and Innocent.

Your Great Benefit will be, by well Noting, and Studying upon These
Discourses, and Lessons, as you Play Them; The Benefit of One Suit of Lessons,
well Studied, and Practiced.
and be very Curious in That Performance, Playing Them all Smooth, and Clean,
without Slubbering the least Letter: By which means one Suit of Lessons,
Played, and Understood Right, and Well, will Enable you to Play Twenty, quickly.

I will now proceed, and set you another Set in A-re-Key: Therefore you must
first know, how to Pass Handsomely from This last F-fa-ut-Key, unto It; for
which end, I have likewise set you Half a Dozen of Interludes, Here following.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Interludes from F-fa-ut, to A-re-Key.

1 st ^
^ ^ 2 d ^
^ ^ 3 d ^
^ ^ 4th ^
^ ^ 5th ^
^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^

These Six Interludes, do all partake of the Foregoing Rules, viz. Fugue, Form,
and Humor; as you may see plainly; but you must Examine Them Well, and you
will Loose no Labor in so doing.

I will now set the Praelude to This 3 d. Set; as you shall see following in
the next Page.

CHAP. XXIX.
The 3 d. Set of Lessons in A-re-Key; Praelude 1.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

This is a Flourish, or a Short Come-off at the End of a Lesson; which may be
Imitated upon the like occasion, at any time.

The Praelude you see, has Matter, Form, When Soft, and Loud Play is most
Necessary.
and Humor in It. And ever when you meet with such
Seeming-Single-Moving-Walking Things; and find Affinity between Parts and
Parts, or Bars and Bars, (as in This you may) then Soft, and Loud Play is the
Most Necessary, for to Humor It withal; The which* I would have you to
observe in All such Lessons; which Thing alone will much Conduce to the
Improvement of your Fancy, and Judgment.

Many Drudge, Many Drudge and Practice Hard, to little purpose.
and take much Pains to Play their Lessons very Perfectly, (as they call It
(that is, Fast) which when they can do, you will perceive Little Life, or
Spirit in Them, merely for want of the Knowledge of This last Thing, I now
mention, viz. They do not labor to find out the Humor, Life, or Spirit of
their Lessons: Therefore I am more Earnest about It, than many (It may be)
think Needful: But Experience will confirm what I say.

The 2 d. Lesson of the 3 d. Set, being an Allmaine.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

This Allmaine has the Fugue maintained quite through.

The Form is Uniform, and Perfect; both Strains being of an Equal Number.

Its Humor I will leave to your Finding out; because I will ^xercise your
Industry; and so proceed to the next.

The 3 d. Lesson in the 3 d. Set being a Coranto.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

This Coranto, is not without Its Fugue, Form, and Humor.

The Fugue, is not so Apparent, as most of the Former; yet if you seek for It,
you will easily perceive It; which I do forbear to tell you; because now it is
Time, that you look after It your self; which will be the Greater Improvement
unto you.

As to the Form, you may observe an Uniformity in each Strain to It self; yet
both Strains are not Equal.

The 1 st. Strain, has 3 Times Four Bars; which speak, (as it were) 3 several
Sentences, (Equally.)

The 3 d. Strain likewise speaks 3 Sentences, viz. the 2 first, are 4 Bars a
piece: But the last concludes the same Number of Them both, viz. 8 Bars; the
which Vniforms the whole Strain.

Now the Humor, I have assisted you withal, in writing Lo: and So: viz. Loud
and Soft; which is enough for This Lesson.

Here is another, which I would have you Play, in a very Sober, and Grave
Proportion; for It has a most Singular Humor, in the way of Expostulating
Grief, and Sorrow, as much as possibly a Lesson can do; Therefore I call It the
Penitent.

The 4 th. Lesson of the 3 d. Set, being a Galliard-shape; yet for Its
singular, and most Eminent Humor, I call It the Penitent.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

I shall not need to say more of this Lesson, than that It is Artificial, with
Fugue, Form, and of a very Singular Humor: Therefore Labor to find It out, and
then you will be well pleased with It.

Now comes a Lesson, which has neither Fugue, nor very Good Form, yet a
Humor, although none of the Best, which I call Hab-Nab.

The 5 th. Lesson of the 3 d. Set, called Hab-Nab.

^
^ ^ ^ ^

This Last Lesson, (quite Differing from all the whole Number going before) I
have set you here on Purpose; because by It, you may the more Plainly Perceive,
what is meant by Fugue: Therefore view every Bar in It, and you will find not
any one Bar like another, nor any Affinity in the least kind betwixt Strain,
and Strain; yet the Air pleases some sort of People well enough: But for my
own Part, I never was pleased with It; yet because some liked It, I retained
It. Nor can I tell, how It came to pass, that I thus made It, only I very well
remember, the Time, Manner, and Occasion of Its Production; (which was on a
sudden) without the least Praemeditation, or Study, and merely Accidentally;
and as we use to say, A Story of the Manner, and Occasion of Hab-Nab's
Production.
Ex tempore, in the Tuning of a Lute.

And the Occasion, I conceive, might possibly contribute something toward It,
which was This.

I had, at that very Instant, (when I made It) an Agitation in Hand ( viz. The
Stringing up, and Tuning of a Lute, for a Person of an Vnuniform, and
Inharmonical Disposition, (as to Music;) yet in Her self well Proportioned,
Comely, and Handsome enough; and Ingenious for other Things; but to Music very
Unapt; and Learned It, only to please Her Friends, who had a great Desire she
should be brought to It, if possible; but never could, to the least Good
purpose; so that at the last we both grew weary; (For there is no striving
against such a Stream.)

I say, This Occasion, possibly might be the Cause of this so Inartificial a
Piece, in regard that That Person, at that Time, was the Chief Object of my
Mind, and Thoughts. I call It Inartificial; because the Chief Observation, (as
to good Performance) is wholly wanting: Yet It is True Music and has such a
Form, and Humor, as may pass, and give Content to Many; Yet I shall never
advise any to make Things Thus by Hab-Nab, without any Design, The Reason of
that Name, Hab-Nab.
as was This: And therefore I give It That Name.

There are Abundance of such Things to be met with, and from the Hands of some,
who fain would pass for Good Composers; yet most of them may be Traced, and
upon Examination, their Things found, only to be Snaps, and Catches; which they
(having been long Conversant in Music, and can command an Instrument, (through
great, and long Practice, some of Them very well) have taken here and there
(Hab-Nab) from several Airs, and Things of other Men's Works, and put them
Handsomely together, which then pass for their Own Compositions.

Yet I say, it is no Affront, Offense, or Injury to any Master, No Offense for
one Master to take another's Fugue.
for another to take His Fugue, or Point to work upon; nor Dishonor for any
Artist so to do, provided He show by His Workmanship, a Different Discourse,
Form, or Humor: But rather a Credit.
But it is rather a Credit, and a Repute for him so to do; for by His Works He
shall be known; It being observable.

That Great Master Composers may all along be as well known by Their
Compositions; (or Their Own Compositions known to be of Them) as the Great, and
Learned Writers may be known by Their Styles, and Works; which is very Common,
and Usual to be so Distinguished, by Those of Judgment, and Experience, in such
matters.

These last Ages have produced very many Able, Mr. William Laws, Mr. John
Jenkins* and Mr. Christopher Simpson Quoted for their Eminent Works.
and most Excellent Masters in Music; Three only (of which) I will Instance
in, in This Particular; because they were so Voluminous, and very Eminent in
Their Works, viz. Mr. William Laws, Mr. John Jenkins, and Mr. Christopher
Simpson.

These Three Famous Men, although Two of Them be laid asleep, (or as we say,
Dead;) yet by Their most Singular and Rare Works, They Live; and may so easily
be Distinguished, the one from the other, and as Exactly known, which is which,
as if they were present in person, and should speak Words.

This is known (to Observable-Able-Masters, and many Others, who are Conversant
in such Observations) to be very True.

A Comparison betwixt Music, and Language
I speak thus much for This End, and Purpose, That it may be more Generally
Noted, That there is in Music, even such a Signification to the Intelligible,
and Understanding Faculty of Man; and such a wonderful-various-way of
Expression, even as is in Language, Unbounded, and Unlimited; and we may as
properly, and as Aptly take a Subject Matter to Discourse upon, (for so I will
term It) and as Significantly Express to That same, or such a Purpose; and show
as much Wit, and Variety, as can the Best Orator, in the way of Oratory: And I
would, that this were Better known, and more put into Practice, than (by many)
It is.

The 6 th. Lesson of the 3 d. Set

^
^ ^ ^ ^

Here is a Lesson will make a mends for the last, if you Play It Slow, make
your Pauses, and observe the Humor of It; which is very Easy, and Familiar;
so that I need say no more, but take care to perform It.

The 7 th. Lesson of the 3 d. Set.

7th ^
^ ^ ^ ^

This Ends the 3 d. Set, being a Tattle de Moy.

Find out the Humor your self, by Soft, and Loud Play, in Proper Places; as
you may most apparently perceive where.

Here follows Interludes, to carry you Handsomely off from A-re-Key, to the next
Set in D-sol-re; which if you Imitate, you may do the like your self; and so
be able to pass from one Key to another, in a Voluntary way; which is the most
Commendable way of using any Instrument.

CHAP. XXX.
Examples of Interludes, to pass from A-re-Key, to D-sol-re-Key.

1 st ^
^ ^ 2 d ^
^ 3 d ^
^ 4th ^
^ ^ 5th ^
^ ^ 6th ^
^ ^

Any of these last Interludes, will seem, (if handsomely played) as a little
Voluntary, or Extempory Business; in which (after you have used your self unto)
you will take as much Delight, as in Set Lessons.

CHAP. XXXI.
Here begins the 4 th. Set in D-sol-re-Key.

The 1 st. is a Praeludium.

Praelude.

1 st ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Allmaine.

2 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Galliard.

3 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Coranto.

4^h ^
^ ^ ^

Coranto.

5th ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Seraband.

6th ^
^ ^ ^

Tattle de Moy.

7th ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Here Ends the 4 th. Set, in D-sol-re. The next shall be in Gam-ut.

And Here follows Examples of Interludes, to pass from D-sol-re, to Gam-ut.

CHAP. XXXII.
The 1 st. Interlude.

1 st ^
^ ^ 2 d ^
^ ^ ^ 3 d ^
^ 4th ^
^ 5^h ^
^ ^ ^ 6th ^
^ ^

Here follows the 5 th. Set. The First being a Praelude.

But raise your Ninth String half a Note higher.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The 1st, Lesson of the 5th. Set.

Praelude.

1 st ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Allmaine.

2 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Air.

3 d ^
^ ^ ^

Coranto.

4th ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Seraband.

5th ^
^ ^ ^

Tattle de Moy.

6th ^
^ ^ ^

Here ends the 4 th. Set.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Here begins the Interludes to the 6 th. Set, which shall be in E-la-mi Key,
to show the way from Gam-ut-Key, to It.

1 st ^
^ ^ 2 d ^
^ ^ 3 d ^
^ ^ 4th ^
^ 5th ^
^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^

The Set follows, the first being a Praelude.

CHAP. XXXV.
The 1 st. a Praelude.

1 st ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Allmaine.

2 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Air.

3 d ^
^ ^

^ ^ ^

Galliard.

4th ^
^ ^ ^ ^ Play This Lesson very Slow Time.

Seraband.

5th ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Tattle de Moy.

6th ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

The End of the 5 th. Set.

And now shall follow a Set in B-mi-Key, Natural; which I never yet see set
upon the Lute. It being a Key, (as some say) very Unapt, and Improper to
Compose any thing in: Yet because you shall see the Bravery, both of the
Instrument; as also of This Flat Tuning, I will set down a Set of Lessons in
It; as I have done in the rest of the Keys: And first Usher you into It with
some Interludes, here following.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Here begins the Interludes to the 7 th. Set, in B-mi-Key.

1 st ^
^ ^

2 d ^
^ ^ 3 d ^
^ ^ 4^h
^ ^ ^

5th ^
^ ^ ^ ^ 6th ^
^ ^

To Crackle such 3 Part-Stops, (as abovesaid) is only to divide each Stop, with
your Thumb, and 2 Fingers; so as not to loose Time; But give each Crochet Its
due Quantity; And (...) Prittiness; Cause Them to Sobb, by Slacking your
Stopping Hand, so soon as They are Struck; yet not to unstop Them, but only so
much as may Dead the Sound on a sudden. This gives Great Pleasure in such Cases.

Tune up the 9 th. String Half a Note to all This Set; and also to the
Interludes.

And put down the 12 th. Half a Note.

Here Ends the Interludes. The Set follows in B-mi-Key.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Praelude.

1 st ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Allmaine.

2 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Allmaine.

3 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Coranto.

4th ^
^ ^ ^

Air.

5th ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Ringing, or Bell-Galliard.

6th ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Saraband.

7th ^
^ ^ ^

Tattle de Moy.

8th ^
^ ^ ^

I have now made an end of These Seven Suits of Lessons, which I promised you,
viz. In every Key upon the Scale (Natural) a Suit, with Praeludes, and
Interludes; by which it may appear, how Easily, and very Familiarly, This
Tuning affords convenience for Substantial Matter, in every Key; the which you
will not find done upon That Other, called the New Tuning: Nor (indeed) is It
capable of that Familiarity, Ease, and Fullness, so to do, as This Flat Tuning
is. However, I love It very well; and will likewise set you (here following) a
Suit of Lessons in That Tuning; because, I suppose, you may love to be in
Fashion: Therefore first see the Tuning Set, in this Vnder-Line.

Unisons Eights

^

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Here follows a Set of Lessons in the New Tuning.
Praelude.

1 st ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Allmaine.

2 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^

Air.

3 d ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Coranto.

4th ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Seraband.

5th ^
^ ^ ^

Tattle de Moy.

6th ^
^ ^ ^

Here Ends the Set.

I have now Finished, and Furnished you, with 8 Suits of Lessons, with
Praeludes, Interludes, and Florishes, besides all the Former
Rudimental-Initiations; from which alone, you may attain to an Exact Order for
the Best way of Lute-Play; if you carefully observe Those Directions given.

You have here likewise, seen both the last New Tunings; which (of diverse
others, now forsaken) are chiefly thought fit to be Retained, (Generally) both
in England, France, Germany, Italy, etc. But of These 2 last Tunings, I do
Prefer That First, which goes under the Name of the Flat Tuning, and Judge It
to be the very-very-Best of Those, called the French Tunings; which I shall
Endeavor to make Manifest, after I have first showed you, how to Translate
Lessons, from the One Tuning, to the Other; as by This following Table, you may
most easily do.

CHAP. XXXIX. The First Table of Translation.
The Flatt Tuning.

^

The New Tuning.

^

Flatt.

^

New.

^

This Table of Letters, Comprehends all the Strings, and Letters upon Each
Tuning; by which any Person, (who can but Write, and Read) may Readily
Translate any Lesson, from the One Tuning, to the Other, and must be done after
This manner. As for Example.

First, (laying your Table before you) Thus.

What Letter soever you see upon such a String, in the one Tuning, you must set
down (for your Translation) the same Letter, which you find in your Table,
answering to That Letter on the Other, viz. More Plainly, Thus.

I find an ^, upon the Treble String of the New Tuning, in a Lesson, which I
would Translate to the Flat Tuning; I must then set down an ^ likewise, upon
the same String, for my Translation; because That Letter ^ is in answer (to It)
in my Table. So likewise of all the Rest, upon the Treble, 2 d. 5 th. and 6 th.
Strings. All the Difference will be only in the 3 d. and 4 th. Strings,
excepting some little Matter in the Diapasons.

Further yet, supposing you find the Letter ^, upon the New Tuning, on the 3 d.
String; then for your Translation, set down an ^ upon the 3 d. String; and so
forwards, as you see set on that String.

Then again, you find the Letter ^, upon the 4 th. String, in the New Tuning;
for which, you must set down the Letter ^* for your Translation, upon the 4 th.
and so of all the Rest in that Line, or String.

Now, whereas the Diapasons do differ, (some of Them in Half Notes, Flatter, or
Sharper, the One, from the Other) there is no way to Reconcile Them, but either
to Tune Them up, Note, how to Reconcile the Difference in the Diapasons.
or down, the One, to the Other, (as is very usual, in any Tuning, to alter a
Bass, I latter, or Sharper, upon occasion) or else take such a Letter, as you
may see in your Table, which answers to such Basses. As for Example.

The Ninth String, in the New Tuning, being Sharp, and the same String, in the
Other Tuning, being Flat, you must (if you will not Sharpen your Bass) set down
for It, the Letter ^, upon the Fifth String; and so of all the Rest.

This I think sufficient, for your Directions, toward the General Translating
of any Lessons, in These Two Tunings.

But whereas I said, any Person might do This Thing, by This Rule; yet know,
That He who has Skill and Experience in the Instrument, shall do It more
Completely; because there are certain Stops, in either Tuning, which will fall
out a little Cross for the Hand, which by the Skilful may be contrived more
aptly, and easier for the Hand; A Caution worth Noting, in Translating of
Lessons.
some times by changing one Letter, for another; as ^ upon the Treble, ^ upon
the 2 d. and h upon the 3 d. are all the same Sound; and so you find the same
Tones various, quite through the whole Instrument.

Then again, sometimes by Varying, or Transposing the Parts of several Full
Stops; all which consists (most commonly) of Unisons, 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8
th's; so that if the Parts chance to lie (in one Tuning) 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8
th's, from the Pass; It may be, they will fall out to lie Better, in the other
Tuning, viz. 5 th's, 3 d's, and 8 th's; or 8 th's 5 th's, and 3 d's from the
Bass; which is no Difference in the main, and may very well, at any time, be so
Transposed, in most Full Stops.

So that I say, although the Injudicious may (by This Rule) Translate a Lesson,
Well, and Truly; yet the Experienced, and Skillfull, shall do It more
Completely.

And to make This Particular Business yet more Plain, and Satisfactory, take
here a View of a Short Lesson, which I have Translated from the New, to the
Flat Tuning; after which, I will give you another Exemplary Table, to Translate
from the Theorboe, to These Tunings, or from These, to the Theorboe.

This is the Lesson of the New Tuning, to be Translated.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

It will be very well worth your Exact* Noting, the whole Order of This
Translated Lesson in both the Tunings; and what Difference there will be found
as to their Performance in the whole: And withal Take Notice, That I have
chosen This Lesson in E-la-mi-Key; which is the very (and only) Glory of That
whole Tuning, as may be seen by the First, and Last Stops of the Lesson, which
give the Fullness of Harmony, (viz. 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 th's) all upon Open
Strings, which in the Translation you see is a Full Stop, yet easy enough; And
by Thus doing, you may see how very Fairly I have dealt by Those who oppose the
Flat Tuning, etc. whereas, e contra, If I had taken a Lesson from the Flat
Tuning, (in almost any other Key) and made such a like Translation, (as now by
the Rule of Translation any Person may do, and which I shall Advise unto) you
would have seen a Vast Difference.

This the Translation.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

In this Translated Lesson, you may see, how that in the very first Full Stop,
the Concords are Transposed; that is, they lie not in the self-same Order in
one Tuning, as they lie in the other; yet both absolutely bear the same Sense,
as to Allowance in Composition; and also will satisfy fully, in giving the
same Air to the Ear; which may be sufficient to Hint you to the Observation of
the like, in several such Places, when as the Parts cannot lie in the same
Order, yet may do as well (so Transposed.)

I will now proceed, and set you another Example of Translation, from the
Theorboe, to the French Lute; or from the French, Lute to the Theorboe; as
follows.

The 2 d. Table of Translation from the Theorboe to the Lute:

The First Note of the Theorboe is Gam-ut.

Theorboe.
^

Gam-ut.

Flat Tuning.
^

The Theorboe Basses.

Theorboe.
^

French Lute Basses.

Flat Tuning.
^

Here you may Note, That although in This Table, I have made the 7 th. String
Gam-ut, upon the Theorboe; yet you may make such another Table, and make your 6
th. String Gam-ut, (which indeed is most proper for a Large, What String is
most proper for Gam-ut, upon the Theorboe.
and Full-Sciz'd Theorboe) or any other String you please; only take Notice,
That These Two, viz. the 6 th. and 7 th. Strings, are most generally chosen in
most Theorboe-Lutes, for the Gam-ut String.

What upon the French Lute.
So likewise know, That the 8 th. String, is the most Proper String for Gam-ut,
upon most French Tunings, and Lutes of a Pretty Full-Scize; yet I say (for your
Pleasure) you may make a Table, and set what String you please, for your Gam-ut
String, there likewise.

Thus also may you make Tables, for all manner of Tunings, for the Viols, etc.
and choose what String, or Letter you please for your Gam-ut; yet with This
Proviso, That you have Respect unto Lessons, Note well
and Tunings of Sharp, and Flat Keys; which if you neglect, you will find your
Work very Crabbid, and Unnatural in your Play. That is, your Parts, and Stops
will not lie easy, and familiar for the Hand; which is the Chief, and Main
Thing Regardable, in any Composure in Tablature-Play.

Remember also to have Respect to the Scope of the Lessons; that is, to pitch
It for such a Key, as you may have Liberty sufficient, for the Compass both of
the Treble, and Bass.

I will now make you a Short Treatise, Concerning the Difference between These
Two Tunings, and then proceed to the Theorboe.

CHAP. XL. Concerning the Two last French Tunings, and which is the Best.
THere is a Dispute among some, A Dispute, concerning the Difference betwixt
the 2 last French Tunings, Determined.
concerning the several Tunings upon the Lute: But the Generality Run after the
Newest; which although It be (to my knowledge) at least 40 years old; yet It
goes under the Name of the New Tuning still.

Now, because I have in This my Work preferred This Senior Tuning, (which is
Generally known by the Name of the Flat Tuning) before That New One; and have
also called This most Noble Tuning, the Best among the French Tunings: I shall
endeavor to prove It so to be, by very Good Reason: And Thus I Will Argue, viz.

That Tuning upon any Instrument, A Sure Argument, to prove which is the Best
Tuning upon any Instrument, from the Foundatition of the Art.

But 7 Keys Distinct in Nature.


which allows the Artist most Scope, Freedom, and Variety; with most Ease, and
Familiarity; to Express his Conceptions most Fully, and Completely; without
Limitation, or Restraint; throughout all the Keys; must needs be accounted the
Best Tuning, Now I say, if This be granted, I desire no more: And Thus I
proceed.

It Is well known to all Masters in This Art, That in Nature, Naturally there are
but 7 Keys Distinct, and Proper; by which we Express All Things, in Music; for
when we come to the Eight from any one Key, we have but (as it were) Rounded
the Circumference, and come again to the same Point, where we first began; (as
shall be Explained in This Book hereafter.) This cannot be denied by any.

Now I say, if This Flat Tuning will give me the Freedom, Naturally,
Familiarly, and with Ease and Advantage, to Work, in Fullness of Parts, etc. in
all Those 7 Keys; And That Other, (called the New Tuning) will not so
Naturally, Familiarly, and with the like Ease, and Advantages, allow me the
like Freedom, to Work with the same Fullness of Parts upon all the 7 Keys: It
must needs be granted, That This Flat Tuning, (so called) is the Best Tuning,
which is the Thing I shall endeavor to prove; and I doubt not, but very
Plainly to do It, to Satisfaction.

And because I will for ever cut off all Disputes, and Jangles about this
Matter, I will take such a Course, that It shall be undeniably Plain to any
Rational Knowing Person: And this shall be my way. As for Example.

I will set down, here following, (upon some Music Lines) all the Full Stops,
consisting of 3 d's. 5 th's, and 8 th's, which can be performed upon every Key
(Naturally) in both the Tunings; by which Device It will very obviously appear
to the Eye of any Indifferent Performer, (much more to the Reason of a
Judicious, and Shilful Artist) which of them affords (in the whole Scope, and
Latitude of the Instrument) the most Variety, with most Ease, and Advantage to
the Hand; and most Fullness of Parts; in Familiarity to each of the 7 Keys: And
in Those Lines following take a view of the Differences betwixt the one, and
the other. I will therefore begin with the Strings, as they lie in their Order,
from the greatest String first, and so forwards to the Treble String.

And in your Observation, I pray take notice, that although I speak of setting
down the Full Stops, consisting of 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 th's; yet you will meet
with some, which have not above 2 Treble Strings joined with the Bass, which in
some places sound Unisons to Themselves; However, They, and such like, in
Lute-Play, pass for a Variety, and help to Fill up: There are not many of
Those; but I could not well avoid Them, because of giving all the Variety I
could, in the Breaking of the Full Stops; the which you will see I have done
Equally for both the Tunings.

An undeniable Device, to prove the Difference, and Best of Tunings.
And also I desire, It be Noted, That I do not positively affirm, That I have
thus given All the Varieties, which can be given, in either Tuning; (for indeed
that would have been too Critical a Trouble to search for) yet I dare say, I
have gone very near the matter; However, I am ascertained, that there can be no
such Considerable Oversight in either Tuning; but that This Draught which I
have Thus Drawn, may fully satisfy any Reasonable Person, that there is a Vast
difference betwixt These 2 Tunings, and that the Advantage lies wholly in This
very Excellent Flat Tuning, (so called.)

C-fa-ut-Key. Flat Tuning.

^ ^

In all of This C-fa-ut-Key 110.

^

C-fa-ut-Key, New way. In all Here but 38.

^

D-sol-re-Key, Flat Tuning. In All of This 46.

^

D-sol-re-Key, New Tuning. In All Here but 24.

^

E-la-mi-Key, Flat Tuning. In All Here 102.

^ ^ ^

Turn over for the New Tuning.

F-la-mi-Key, New Tuning. In All Here but 100.

^ ^ ^

F-fa-ut-Key, Flat Tuning. In All of This 51.

^ ^

F-fa-ut-Key, New Tuning. In All Here but 16.

^

Gam-ut-Key, Flat Tuning. In All of This 61.

^ ^

Gam-ut-Key, New Tuning. In All of This 67.

^ ^

A-re-Key, Flat Tuning. In All of This 168.

^ ^ ^ ^

A-re-Key, New Tuning. In All Here but 51.

^ ^

B-mi-Key, Flat Tuning. In All Here but 31.

^

B-mi-Key, New way. In all Here 52.

^ ^

The Number of Altogether in the Flat Tuning, Thus appearing, is 549.

'And of the New Tuning but 350.

Near 200 Stops Difference betwixt These Two Tunings.
So that It appears, in the Flat Tuning, there are very near 200 Stops of
Variety, (in such like Chordes as These, viz. of 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 th's,
according to their Natural Flat and Sharp 3 'ds) more than are in That, They
call the New Tuning; and without all Question, It must needs follow, That the
Proportion will answer alike in Those other Stops of Contrary 3 d's, 6 th's,
and all other Varieties, in passing Handsomely, and Conveniently through
Discords, and in making up of Cadences, or Closes, etc. as in the whole Scope
of Composition there is a Vast Variety.

And since I have thus far troubled my self, (and perchance some Readers in
This Matter) I shall not think It Lost Labor, a little farther to Explain my
self in This Particular Thing; because I have known very many to contend for
the Credit of This New Tuning, with far Greater Zeal, (but much more
Confidence) than True Skill, Examination, or Judgment; And indeed They do pass
for very Skilful Men, and may be so, for ought I know; yet Overseen in This
Particular; because They have not, (I dare say, in the least) Compared Them
together, nor Observed the True Difference between Them; but have been more
Ready, and Glad to follow the Modes, and Fashions, than Minding, or Caring for
the Substantial Use of their Art.

Now I desire, for the better understanding of This Dispute, to have It
considered upon, How many of the 7 Keys This New Tuning is straightned in;
First, as to C-fa-ut-Key, (which is the most Noble, Heroic, Note well the most
Principally-Eminent Key upon the Lute.
and Majestical Key, in the whole Scale;) and, if there be any Preheminency to
be given to any Key, certainly it is due to This, most Eminently; you may see,
He is Extremely Pent, and Straightened. I have a 106, most of Them are very Free
and Familiar Stops, easy for the Hand; and he has but 36, and Pitifully
Crowded-Bombast Things, in respect of the Flat Tuning, and most of Them
Difficult.

See again for D-sol-re, which is likewise a very Stately, Noble, The
Examination of the several Keys.
and Majestic useful Key; I have 46, and he but 24, and very much more
Intricate, in the use of them, than are those in the Flat Tuning.

Come we now to Ela-mi-Key, (which is the only, and Principal Key of the New
Tuning) and there I do acknowledge, he has a very Handsome, Free, and Pleasant
Scope; and I believe, If I would have troubled my self, to have found out a few
more Varieties in It, I might have done so; but when I came to see they were
both capable of 100 a piece, I thought it sufficient; they both having Latitude
enough.

But now we are to view F-fa-ut-Key, which is an exceeding Brisk, Lofty, and
Sparkling Key; and see, how Miserably he is Pinioned: I protest, I have been
very solicitous, for to augment the Number of 16 Stops for him, but cannot do
It any way; whereas the Flat Tuning has, as you may see, 51, Liberal, and Free.

Now as for Gam-ut-Key, I must Vail-Bonnet a little for Number, he having 67,
and I but 51; yet if It be truly considered, according to the Compleatness of
the Well and Formal Lying of the Parts, in Reference to Composition; It will be
found, that my small Number, will advantage me more in my Performances, than
will his Greater, for matter of Compleatness; and that small difference in
Number, is not considerable, in respect of what he loses in the others,
especially this next Key to be looked into, viz. A-re-Key; in which I have (as
you may see) 168; Cross-stopping, the hardest piece of Lute-play.
he having but 51; and observe what Brave ones they be, viz. most of them
Clutter'd, Crampish Stops, which must be performed with laying Cross your
Forefinger, which is the Hardest Piece of Play (for clear Stopping) that can
be: In this he is (as it were) quite shut out of doors, or so Penned up, that he
has scarcely any Scop at all. A-re is a Most Excellent Key.

Now come we to the last, viz. B-mi-Key; B-mi-Key Natural seldom used as the
Key in Consort, etc.
which may very well be put Hindmost; for It is a Key seldom, or never made use
of, (as to be called the Key (except It were B-mi-Flat:) I cannot say, that I
ever saw a Lute-Lesson set in This Key natural, in all my Life; yet I have
attempted the setting of some in This Work, (as you may find:) And in This Key
I must again Vail-Bonnet, and give him the Greater Number; but what signifies
It? as much as comes to nothing, in regard that Little use is made of It: But
that (in the whole) I have Advantage enough, I am sufficiently satisfied; and
so I hope will all Vnbiassed Persons be, who will examine the Business aright;
and not suffer themselves to be Abused, and led by the Swing of the Silly Modes
and Fashions, who must needs forsake the Better for the Worse, and connot be
therewith contented, except to cry down all besides what They like of; (which
if It be New, no matter.)

And now I think I have Explained this Business, to the satisfaction of all
Rational Men; and as for others, who are only for Fashions; the Fashions go
with Them, and They with the Fashions.

A very Considerable Thing, as to the Compleatness of the Lute-Tuning.
And as for the compleatness of any Lute-Tuning, there is one thing mainly
considerable, which I perceive is not much regarded, and is, viz. the Formation
of the Diapasons of the Instrument, to this purpose, viz. That they may Tone in
a Natural Order, the True Proportionable Tones of the Scale, as they lie
Naturally in their Ranks, or Orders; as you shall find in This Flat Tuning
perfectly they do; and so likewise in the Theorboe-Tuning; Explained (for
Example) Thus.

Or Thus.

^

The Order of the Diapasons, in the Flat Tuning,

^

This very thing adds so much Luster, and Advantage, to the Tuning of an
Instrument, and the Music thereof, that I cannot but desire, it may be taken
Notice of. Whereas upon the other, which they call the New Tuning, they want,
and are forced at their last Diapason, (which should be the Chief Glory of
their Lute, as to the Basses, in that kind) to make a Skip, or an Ill-favored
kind of Halt,
(as we use to say,) as if they were Lame; and indeed, what have they Halted
unto, but to the most useless, and Improper Key, in the whole nature of Music,
to make a Period upon, ( viz. B-mi; or a Half Note) as upon all Judicious
Examinations, you will find to be very Silly: For who (in his Natural
Recreation of Voice, when he would Please, or Refresh himself, in Toning, in a
Pleasant way) will Sing Thus?

Who (for Recreation) will Sing Thus?
^ But rather Thus, which ^ is most Natural.

But if you were pleased, or could thus Cross-grain'dly be so contented to
Sing, or Toy with your self after this first Order: I say, Examine that Tuning,
(upon the New French way) which I speak of; and you will find It take very
unhandsome pains, (as I may so say) to get to the last Note, viz. the Octave,
or Diapason; and for to get to It, It must (as I said) make a Hop, or a Skip;
as for Example, Thus.

^

A Great Blemish to a Tuning.
And if this be not a Grand Blemish to the Tuning, let any one of a Musical
Genius, or of Experience, Judge; It being so very Unnatural, and (as to
Signification) Nonsensical.

For in a Comparative way, A Comparison betwixt the 2 Tunings.
(as I use to tell (and have so done in This Book) Music, or Musical-Tones,
Motions, Forms, or Shapes, are Significant, in reference to something in
Language, viz. Conceits, Humors, Passions, or the like.

And here give me leave to be a little Merry, in the midst of Seriousness; (for
I cannot choose but Laugh, when I look upon, Sing, or Strike This Inharmonical
Form, or Order of Notes, especially in the Period of Those Diapasons of That 40
Year-Old-New-Tuning, viz. Thus.

^

For me think, I Fancy strongly, the Relish, or Resemblance, of a Person
sitting upon a Close-stool; which doubtless you cannot but likewise do,
especially, if in Singing of Them, you will add a little Humor, and Conceit,
in Nosing, and Toting out the 1 st. Note, and Grooning, or Grunting at the last.

This Uncouth Form, or Order of Notes, is (I say) Thus Aptly, or Naturally
Capable of such a kind of Ridiculous, or Humorous Conceit. Whereas That other
Form of the Flat Tuning is such, that it is impossible for Envy, or the Wit of
Man, to put any the least Slur, or Affront upon It, and is so Perfectly
Harmonical, so Naturally Sweet, Noble, Generous, Free, and Heroic; Expressing
so much of Bravery, Gallantry, Resolution, yea even Majesty (...) self; that
(Really) I cannot but wonder, How such a Dispu^^ as* This, should be thus long
undetermined, by the Right (...), viz. That the Flat Tuning, is Most Certainly
the Best; (...) Excelling in many Respects.

But as an Old Master-Teacher upon the Lute* (and one who has been all along
very Zealous for That New Tuning) coming lately to my Chamber, (whilst I was
attending the Pre^^^*) to see what Progress I had made in This My Work; After
he had (...) over so much as was Printed, and seeing most of my Lessons were in
the Flat Tuning, seemed not to be well pleased at It, whereupon I took an
occasion to Discourse the Business with him a little, and to Vindicate It; but
still he seemed to persist in his Former Humor, (of Opinion only; for he could
give no Reason but only 'twas the Fashion, and the New-Tuning) Then I turned
him to That Device, which I have set Here in Page 192 etc. which after he had
Read, and a while Considered upon, he was still and quiet; whereupon I desired
Him to tell me seriously what he had to say to It: His Answer was Quick, and
Short, (in These very Words) viz. These Things were never looked into Thus
before; which was as much as a Perfect acknowledgment of the Thing which I
stand up for. And doubtless All must do the like, when once They Truly look
into the Right Reason of It, or else Renounce their own Reason.

I have likewise wondered sometimes, how It came to pass, They have stuck so
very long, ( viz. 40 Years, or more, and still call It the New Tuning (for
shame call It not so) and not yet Changed It for another.

But now I think on it, I verily believe I have Hit upon the Right and Perfect
Reason, and I am confident, there can be no other possibly, which is This: for
no doubt, but they (I mean the Modists) have been long enough Nibbling,
Hammering, and Pumping at It, to find out some Other, and would rather than a
Great deal they could hit upon One which should be cried up for New; The Reason
why ^o late New Tuning for the Lute.
but they are at a Non plus ultra; that is, they are Outwitted; for except they
should produce something that may carry a Plausible kind of show with It, they
do nothing. And truly I believe, that the Wit of Man shall never Invent Better
Tunings, either upon Lutes, or Viols, than are at this day in Being, and Use;
No better can be Invented, than what we now Enjoy.
for questionless, All Ways have been Tried to do It, and the very Best is now
in Being; so that let none expect more New Tunings, than now they have, except
some Silly, and Inferior Ones, (as several I have all along seen) but they dye
quickly, and follow after their Inventors; but this of the Flat Tuning, and
that of the Old-Lute-Tuning, viz. the Theorboe-Tuning, undoubtedly will remain
so long as Lutes, and Music remain upon Earth.

And I am very subject to believe, That there are some Lute-Masters,
who do well enough know the True Difference betwixt These Two Tunings; yet
because they have, (Inconsiderately) either undervalued This, or Cried up That
so strongly, are now Ashamed to return again unto It, and God knows, the
General Ignorance of the People, is too much, to find out the Truth, etc. But
Here it is Plainly laid Open, if they can but Believe It, when they See It. But
one Main Injury by This, is fallen upon the Simple Learners, who are made to
Believe, that which is not in Nature, viz. That it is the Manner of Tuning of an
Instrument, that causes the Excellency of Music: A Great Gullery to Young
Scholars, who think, that New Tunings bring New Music into the World.
Now There lies a Great Gullery; for Music is the same, (quasi Music) upon
all Instruments alike; only some Instruments have a Better Twang, than others
have; and also some Tunings, are Better, than others; that is, are more Proper,
and Apt, (as I have Sufficiently Demonstrated already) to perform some things
upon, than are others: But this the Scholar understands not; but Thinks, That a
New Tuning brings New Music into the World.

Now, that they shall be undeceived, who are thus Captivated for want of Skill,
and Right Information, I have, (you see) set them down a Rule in Page 186. how
They Themselves shall Translate any Lesson, from one Tuning to the other, and
the Music (they shall find) will be the very Same in all Punctilioes, (only as
I said) in some Particular Cases, Stops, and Places, there may be a more Easy,
or Familiar Way of Expressing such and such things in one Tuning, than in
another, which alters not the Music at all.

Now to Conclude This Business in Few Words; Let both These Tunings be
Examined, according to a Judicious, and Rational Account; and It shall be
found, That the Flat-Tuning, is a most Perfect, Full, Plump, Brisk, Noble,
Heroick-Tuning; Free and Copious; Fit, Aptly, and Liberally to Express any
thing, in any of the 7 Keys. But That New Tuning is far short of These
Accommodations, and is obviously subject to several Inconveniences, as before I
have manifested, and made plain. Yet I do acknowledge, for some things, upon
some Keys; it is very Fine, and Neat; but nothing so Substantial, as That Flat
One; which most worthily ought to have the Preheminency, and which I doubt not,
but It will again Reassume, when These Things shall be once Examined, and
Considered upon. Besides, view here but of a Common Toy, yet an Excellent Old
Lesson, known by the Name of the Nightingal, which I have here set down on
purpose, in That Incomperable Flat Tuning, for their Eternal Shame, who shall
yet contend for the Pre-eminence between These 2 Tunings; and I only set It
down Single, (without Its Translation) because I leave that to Themselves, or
any other to do, (to the Best Advantage) lest I should be thought to do It
Partially: And let them then tell me their Judgments, after they have made
their Best Trials to Translate It. It is (you see) in C-fa-ut-Key, and (which
is yet more for the Credit of the Flat Tuning, it is Set to be Played without
the Treble String, which is no Small Consideration.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

And let Them do by This of Mine, as I have done by That (before) of Theirs,
viz. Set It in the same Key: And Then Thus much I Will adventure to Say, and
Promise, viz. That if they Equallize This Lesson, (Thus Set (by Their
Translation) in Freeness, Fullness, Ease, Familiarity, and Compleatness; (and
This Lesson is but (as I said) One of our English Toys, or Common Tunes.) I
will be Bound to stand upon the Pillory, 3 Market Days, with my Book in my
Hand, and make an open Recantation, and Beg Their Pardon; which will be but a
Fit Punishment for Me, who have Thus Irreverently attempted, and Spoken against
Their Great Idol, the Mode; and to Contradict the
General-Swallow'd-down-Gobblet of the Inconsiderate Opinion, of the 40
Years-Old-New-Tuning.


I must be pardoned for This my Earnestness, (or rather Zeal) in This Particular
Thing, viz. against the Humor of Invegling Learners to Hanker, What has been
one main Cause of making the Lute Hard, and Troublesome to Learners.
and long after New or Various Tunings, etc. because I am most Assured, It is,
and has been (all along) one Grand Cause of making the Lute-Play Hard, and
Troublesome; to the Great Discouragement, and Hindrance of most Young
Undertakers upon It; Whereas, if Masters would rightly Consider Their own Ease,
and Profit; Their Scholars Benefit, and Content; and the Promotion, and
Facilitating of the Art: They would Certainly Reduce All, or most of Their
Performances to That One Only Copious, Easy, and Best of Tunings; which is
most Sufficient, and least Troublesome; the which They might (with much Ease)
do: and I am Confident, that where there is One now Learns, (in a Short Time)
there would be 20, (yea very many more;) and the Lute brought into Deserved
Esteem, and Request again; for It has no manner of Opposition, What is the
Lute's Greatest Enemy.
or Enemy, but only the Opinion of Hardness, or Difficulty; and by This Means,
It would Certainly be much more Easy, as I have made sufficiently appear all
along, in This Work; So that I will say no more to This Particular; but Proceed
to the Dyphone.

Concerning the DYPHONE: OR Double-Lute, The Lute of Fifty Strings.
CHAP. XLI.
THE Figure of which Instrument, you may see in Page 32; which Figure does so
Perfectly Represent the Original, that if you mind It well, you may Fancy, you
see the very Instrument It Self; and is (as yet) the One Only Instrument in
Being of That Kind; and but Lately Invented, by My Self, and made with My own
Hands, in the Year 1672.

The Occasion of Its Production, was My Necessity; viz. By what Occasion It
came to be Invented.
My Great Defect in Hearing; adjoined with My Insatiable Love, and Desire after
the Lute; It being an Instrument so Soft, and Past my Reach of Hearing, I did
Imagine, it was possible to Contrive a Louder Lute, than ever any yet had been;
whereupon after diverse Casts, and Contrivances, I pitched upon This Order; the
which has (in a Great Degree) answered my Expectation; It being absolutely the
Lustiest or Loudest Lute, that I ever yet heard; for although I cannot hear the
least Twang of any other Lute, when I Play upon It; yet I can hear This, in a
very Good Measure; yet not so Loud, as to Distinguish Every Thing I Play, How a
Deaf Person may Hear Music; and the Unvaluable Benefit of It to the Author,
being Deaf.
without the Help of My Teeth; which when I lay Close to the Edge of It,
(There, where the Lace is Fixed) I hear All I Play Distinctly; so that It is to
Me (I Thank God) One of the Principal Refreshments, and Contentments I Enjoy in
This World; what It may prove to Others, in Its Use, and Service, (if any shall
think fit to make the Like) I know not; but I conceive It may be very Useful;
Two Great Avantages It has of all other Lutes, as to Augmentation of Sound.
because of the several Conveniences and Advantages It has of All Other Lutes;
as I shall here declare. First,

You may well conceive, It may have a Fuller, Plumper, and Lustier Sound, than
any Other; because the Concave is almost as Long again, as most Ordinary Lutes;
for it is clearly Hollow, from Neck to Neck, without any the Least Interruption;
so that when you Play the One, you have the Advantage of the Other, at the same
time, Turn which you will: This is One Augmentation of Sound; There is yet
Another; which is from the Strange, and Wonderful Secret, which lies in the
Nature of Sympathy, in Unities; The wonderful Secret of Unities in Sound.
or the Uniting of Harmonical Sounds; the One always Augmenting the Other: For
let 2 Several Instruments lie asunder, (at any Reasonable Distance) when you
Play upon One, the Other shall Sound; provided They be both Exactly Tuned in
Unisons, to Each Other; otherwise not. This is known to All Curious Inspectors
into Such Mysteries.

If This therefore be True, It must needs be Granted, That when the Strings of
These Two Twynns (Acchordingly) put on, and Tuned in Unities, and set up to a
Stiff Lusty Pich, They cannot but much more Augment, and Advantage One the
Other.

These are the 2 Main Advantages, as to Augmentation of Sound; which no
Rational, or Understanding Man can doubt of.

There are several other Benefits by This Instrument; as First, you are
provided of Both the Most Complete, Some other Considerable Benefits by This
Instrument.
and Useful Lutes in the World; and you have Them Closely Ready, upon any
Contrary, and Sudden Occasion; The Majestic Theorboe, either for Voice, Organ,
or Consort, etc. and The High Improved French Lute, for Airy, and Spruce,
Single or Double Lessons; and is also a Most Admirable Consort-Instrument,
where They know how to make the Right Use of It, and not suffer It to be
Over-Top'd with Squaling-Scoulding-Fiddles; but to be Equally Heard with the
Rest, etc. These I say are always at Hand, to Pleasure Friends Entreaties, etc.
But for any Ones Private Practice, It is of Most singular Advantage for
Differing Practices; and will most certainly make a Man both an Able Master,
and gain Him an Able Hand: But These Things must be only Believed; very Few
having Tried it out by Experience, as I my self have done, with both Lute, and
Theorboe.

Another Benefit by This Double-Strung-Lute, is; whereas other Lute-Bellies
constantly Sink between the Knot, and the Bridge, by reason of the Great Force
of the Strings Drawing; so that They are often to be taken off; This Belly will
not so soon Sink there; because the Strings draw contrary ways; so that They
may be said to Counterbuff one another: By which means This Belly of Mine has
been kept Straight, and Tight, ever since It was made, and not any one Bar
Sunk, or Loosned. And It always stands at a very Stiff, and High Pitch, and
Strung very Round.

Another Convenience is, It will Endure a Lusty Strong Play, without Jarring,
or Snarling; All which other Weaker Lutes will not do.

One only Objection against It, sufficiently Answered.
Now against all These Conveniences, and Advantages, there may be One very
Plausable, and Probable Objection, (and there can be no more) viz. It must
needs be Cumbersome, or Troublesome in the Holding, and Use. To which I Answer
Thus. First, As to the Grasp of either Hand, I have taken such Care, that It is
the very same, with All manner of True Sciz'd Lutes, both Theorboes, and French
Lutes, nothing at all Differing.

Then as to the Holding of It betwixt the Arm, and Breast, the French Lute, (as
I said) is the very Same; but the Theorboe much more Easy, than Most
True-Consort-Pitch'd-Theorboes; because They are Commonly more Wide, or Broad
in the Ribs, and Belly, than is This; For It is every way as Compendious, and
Handy, as is the French Lute; there being scarcely any Difference in Their
Scize, or Bulk; (as you may perceive by the Figure) the which I chose to do;
because I did Consider, That what I might Loose, as to Fullness of Sound, (one
way) in the Breadth, I knew I should gain much more in the Length (the Other.)

The Length of the 2 Necks, and Heads, is no Inconvenience at all, after you
are a little used to the Holding of It; for neither of Them touch the Ground as
you Play: So that for My own Part, I know no Inconvenience at all in It; but
find many Great Conveniences by It.

Now as to Its other Dimensions, Concerning the Dimensions of This Instrument.
It is in Its Body of a Perfect Pear-Mould, both Ways, (which is Judged the
Best Shape for any Lute;) And indeed the Very Best Sounding Lutes are
Pear-Mould.

It Carries Completely 50 Strings, viz. 26 upon the Theorboe-Part, and 24 upon
the French-Lute-Part.

The Length of the Strings of Both, from Bridge to Nut, are Exactly
Consort-Pitch: The Treble Strings of Both, to be Pitched to G-sol-re-ut: The
Heads of the French Lute, the very same with Others: But the Head of the
Theorboe is much Shorter, than most Theorboes; the which (upon a Judicious
Examination, is still the More Complete; but much more Naturally Uniform,
Proportionable, and Even, (as to Sound; The Great Inconvenience of
Disproportionable Heads to Lutes or Theorboes.
) For Those very Extreme long Heads, which usually are put upon Theorboes, are
both Troublesome to Tune, and Inconsistent with the Punctilioes, and Criticisms
in Art; They Rendering the Instrument Disproportionable within It self; for in
the Use of It, Those Extraordinary Long Basses commonly Over-Ring, and Drowned
the Trebles, or if (to help the matter) you strike Them so much the Softer; yet
They seem not to be of the same Kin-ship with the Shorter Strings, but as if
They belonged to another Instrument. Whereas This Instrument is so
Proportionably made, that each Diapason Descends Gradually, Step by Step; by
which means, the whole Number, both of Short, and Long, Strings, Speak
Uniformly, and Evenly to Themselves; which is a very Considerable Matter, in
any Instrument.

I have now done with the Description of This New Instrument; only I must needs
Beg for It, and My Self, One, or Two Favors, in Reference to some Allowances,
which It ought to be Considered in: As First, It is a New-made-Instrument; and
therefore cannot yet Speak so Well, as It will do* when It comes to Age, and
Ripeness; yet It gives forth a very Free, Brisk, Trouling, Plump, and Sweet
Sound: But it is Generally known, That Age adds Goodness, and Perfection to All
Instruments made of Wood: Therefore Old Lutes, and Viols, are always of much
more Value, than New Ones; So that if an Instrument be Good, when New, there is
no doubt but It will be Excellent, when It is Old.

Secondly, It was made by a Hand, that Never (before) Attempted the Making of
Any Instrument; Therefore It must needs want Those Perfections, which a Skilful
Practical Operator in such Things, would doubtless have Given It.

Concerning the Inside of This Instrument, in Reference to the Taking off the
Belly, Concerning the In side of This Instrument, and Its Conveniences
at any Time, upon Necessity; Know, It is so Contrived, that either Part of the
Belly may come off Single, and the other may still stay on; For between the 2
Bridges, there is a Dividing Joint, which may easily be Parted, with a Hot
Iron, and a little Moist Cloth, etc. (as by Direction, in the Mechanical Part,
Page 56. you may see how to do;) and It is much more Easy to Take off This
Belly, and set It on again, than the Belly of any Other Lute; for there is a
Strong Bar, Glewed to the very Edge of each Divided Part, in That Place, which
will come off with each Belly, and is of Substantial Use for strengthening the
whole.

Let Thus much suffice to be spoken by Me, Concerning This New Instrument; but
whosoever pleases, may Hear It Speak much Better for It Self.

Yet only, because It is My Beloved Darling, I seemed (like an Old Doting Body)
to be Fond of It; so that when I had Finished It, I Be-dect It with These Fine
Rhimes, following; Fairly Written upon each Belly; viz. First, Round the
Theorboe Knot, Thus.

A Recreative Fancy.
I am of Old, and of Great Brittain's Fame,
Theorboe was My Name.
(Then next, about the French Lute Knot, Thus.)

I Am not so Old; yet Grave, and much Accute,
My Name was the French Lute.
(Then from thence along the Sides, from One Knot to the Other, Thus.)

But since we are Thus Joined Both in One,
Henceforth Our Name shall be The Lute Dyphone.
(Then again Cross-wise under the Theorboe-Knot, Thus.)

Lo Here a Perfect Emblem seen in Me,
Of England, and of France, Their Unity:
Likewise Viz. When They United Both against the Dutch, and Beat Them Soundly.
That Year They did each other Aid,
I was Contrived, and Thus Completely made.
Anno Dom. 1672.
(Then (Lastly) under the French-Lute-Knot, Thus.)

Long have we been Divided; now made One,
We Sang in Viz. Discords; for the 7th. and 2d. are the 2 only Hateful Discords
in Nature.
7th's,; Now in Full Unison.
In This Firm Union, long may We Agree;
No Unison's like That of Lute's Harmony.
Thus in It Is Body, it is Trim, Spruce, and Fine;
But in It Is Sp'rit, it is like a Thing Divine.
Concerning the THEORBOE.
CHAP. XLII.
THE Theorboe, is no other, The Description of the Theorboe.
than That which we called the Old English Lute; and is an Instrument of so
much Excellency, and Worth, and of so Great Good Use, That in dispite of all
Fickleness, and Novelty, It is still made use of, in the Best Performances in
Music, (Namely, Vocal Music.)

But because, I said It was the Old English Lute, The Difference between It,
and the Old English Lute.
It may be asked, Why is It not then still so Called; but by the Name of the
Theorboe?

I Answer, That although It be the Old English Lute, yet as to the Use of It
Generally, there is This Difference, viz. The Old Lute was Chiefly used, as we
now use our French Lutes, (so called;) that is, only to Play Lone-Lessons upon,
etc. But the Theorboe-Lute is Principally used in Playing to the Voice, or in
Consort; It being a Lute of the Largest Scize; and we make It much more Large
in Sound, by contriving unto It a Long Head, to Augment and Increase that
Sound, and Fullness of the Basses, or Diapasons, which are a great Ornament to
the Voice, or Consort.

Now by this little that I have said, it may well be asked, (if It be an
Instrument of such Worth) Why is it not then made use of, as a Lute to perform
such Lessons upon, Reasons, Why It may be called a Theorboe.

1 st. Reason.


as are performed upon the Lute? To which I Answer, for several Good Reasons.

First, This Great Lute, is of too large a Scize for such Performances; They
being commonly of a Nimbler Agitation, than Those Things which are most usually
performed in Consort, or to the Voice.

And admit that any the Most Nimble Things, which are used in Consort, come to
be performed upon a Theorboe, you must know, that That Part has only the
Ground, or Bass, Chiefly to Act in, which is (in All Consorts, or what
Generally is made) the Slowest Part of Motion; yet if the Performer upon the
Theorboe, has a Quaint, and Skilful Command, both of his Instrument, and the
Theoretical Order of Music, he will show you Agillity, and Nimbleness enough,
for your Great Content.

But as It is Ordinarily used, It is not an Instrument of That Activity and
Spirit, (appearing) as It is Really and Truly in It self, and Its Capacity,
capable of.

Let This suffice for one Reason, why it is not Called a Lute, or not put to
That use of a Lesser, or Well Sciz'd Lute, for such Nimble, and Active
Performances.

2 d. Reason.
The 2 d. is This, that by Reason of the Largeness of It, we are constrained to
make use of an* Octave Treble-String, that is, of a Thick String, which stands
Eight Notes Lower, than the String of a Smaller Lute, (for no Strings can be
made so Strong, that will stand to the Pitch of Consort, upon such Large Sciz'd
Lutes) and for want of a Small Treble-String, the Life and Spruceness of such
Ayrey Lessons, is quite lost, and the Air much altered. Nay, I have known,
(and It cannot be otherwise) that upon some Theorboes, they have been forced to
put an Octave String in the 2 d. String's Place; by reason of the very long
Scize of the Theorboe, which would not bear a Small String to Its True Pitch;
because of Its so great Length, and the Necessity of setting the Lute at such a
High Pitch, which must Agree with the rest of the Instruments.

Truly I cannot tell, why It was so called Theorboe; but for These Reasons; the
Distinction of Names, between It, and the Smaller Lute, may well enough be
maintained, seeing It has Now got the Name. ((...) in Greek, begins a very High
Name.)

A 3 d. Reason,
Another Good Reason I shall give, (which is not considered of by many) Namely,
That Those very Long, and Long-Sounding Diapasons, (before mentioned) are often
Great Inconveniences to the Compositions of such Lessons, as are usually made
for Lesser Lutes, which have their Diapasons in a Shorter, and more
Proportionable Agreement with Those other Treble, and Tenor Strings.

For if you meet with a Lesson which runs much with Quick-Proportion'd Time,
Inconveniences, by Reason of too long Diapasons in a Lute, or Theorboe.
upon Those Long Basses; you will find That Great Inconvenience before
mentioned; which is, That the Former-Struck-Bass will Sound so Strong, and so
Long, that the next immediately following, will be so harsh, (they Two Snarling
together, as I may so say) that it will be as Bad, as False
Dischording-Composition, and very Confounding.

This Inconvenience (Here) is found upon French Lutes, when their Heads are
made too long; as some desire to have them; because (indeed) Length of String,
in any Instrument, causes Bravery, and adds Luster to the Sound of That
String; but if They did advisedly consider This Inconvenience which I have
mentioned, They would forbear such Contrivances; and choose to make Their Lutes
Artificially Proportionable, betwixt Their Basses, and Trebles; which as to
Complete Performance, is Extreme Needful.

Now as to Directions for Playing This Instrument, you need none; Directions
for the Playing upon the Theorboe.
because I have sufficiently directed the Way thereunto in all Particulars, in
my Former Discourse concerning the Lute; which Way and Order, you are to
observe in This Exactly, in all Punctilioes; and you may Play Lessons upon It
as Completely, as upon the French Lute; provided They be Lessons proper, and
becoming the Gravity of This Instrument; (for it is very Improper to Play Light
and Jiggish Things upon It) especially in regard of the Octave Treble, which
will not give you the Liveliness of the Air, as your Smaller Lutes will do:
Yet you may make very Excellent Things upon It, to Play alone, if you observe
the Scope of the Instrument. And indeed I have taken so much Pleasure in This
Instrument, in That Particular way, That I have made diverse Things to It in
That Nature; a Taste whereof I shall Hereafter set you down; the Playing of
which will enable your Hand sufficiently for a better use of It, in Playing a
Part in Consort off a Bass; which is no Ordinary Piece of Skill.

Directions unto which I shall likewise set down immediately after what here
follows.

The Theorboe Tuning.
Unisons.
^
Eights. Fifths.
^
And Here is That One Only Lesson for your Hand; which although It seem long,
may be Divided (as it were) into 13 Several Strains; which you may perceive by
the Pauses, and Double Bars, I have made; and also set Figures at the
Beginning of every Place: So that you may (if you please) leave off at any of
Those Places; But I set It Thus, to show you the way and manner of Playing
Voluntary, which you may Imitate,

This* Lesson alone will make your Hand Sufficiently for the whole Business of
the Theorboe, be It what It will.

Therefore Practice It well; for I intend to set no more to That Purpose; for I
Aim at Short Work: Therefore I Will proceed to the Directions of Playing a Part;
your Hand being first made, there will be much Less Difficulty in That.

A Fancy-Praelude, or Voluntary; Sufficient Alone to make a Good Hand, Fit for
All manner of Play, or Use.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over for the Next.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over for the next.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over for the next.

^ ^ ^

CHAP. XLIII.
I Remember, I promised some Directions for Playing a Part upon the Theorboe;
which Here following are set down.

The first Thing therefore, (after the commanding of the Instrument, in some
Tolerable way of Readiness; (the which I shall Advise you unto, etc.) you are
to know your Notes upon every String, and Stop, according to the Scale of
Music, viz. the Gam-ut.

Therefore that you may know Them; Here (under) stand All the Notes of the
Scale, (according to Song) in one Order; And beneath Them the same Notes,
Letterwise; as we use Them upon the Theorboe.

^ ^

These are the Natural Notes of the Scale, the Sixth String being Generally
used for Gam-ut, upon a Full-Sciz'd Lute; but upon Lutes of a Smaller Scize,
which will not bear up to Speak Plumply, or Lustily, according to a
Consort-Pitch; then we make the 7 th. String Gam-ut, as here in This next
Vnder-Line you may see.

^

Gam-ut, etc. for a Less Lute.

But because the Sixth String is most Generally used for Gam-ut; and also it is
best for your Practice, to use a Large, and Full-Sciz'd Lute. I will pursue the
Business in that Proper, and most Rightful way, making the 6 th. String Gam-ut.

Now you must know, What is necessary for a Theorboe-man to know.
That He who would be a Complete Theorboe-man, must be able to understand
Composition; (at least) so much of It, as to be able to put True Chordes
together; and also False, in Their proper Times, and Places; and likewise to
know, how to make all manner of Closes Amply, and Properly.

And to Assist you in That Particular, I shall only refer you to Mr.
Christopher Simpson's Late, and very Complete Works; where you may inform your
self sufficiently in That Matter, who has saved me a Labor therein; (for had
It not been already so Exactly done by Him, I should have said something to It,
though (it may be) not so much to the purpose;) But my Drift is not to Clog the
World with any thing that is already done; especial so Well.

My Business shall be, (to save you much labor in finding out all the Chords)
and to give a Quick sight of Them, 1 st. according to their Natural Agreement,
in 3 d's, 5 th's 6 th's, and 8 th's, etc. And then to show you Examples of
Closes, or Cadences for every Key; which when you can Readily perform, from off
a Song-Note, you may be said to be a Tolerable Performer in a Consort, upon
This Instrument. And some there are, who cannot Compose; yet by doing Thus,
pass for very good Theorboe-Men.

But still you must further know, The Greatest Excellency in a Theorboe-man.
That the Greatest Excellency in This Kind of Performance, lies beyond whatever
Directions can be given by Rule.

The Rule is an Easy, Certain, and Safe Way to walk by; but He that shall not
Play beyond the Rule, had sometimes better be Silent; that is, He must be able
(together with the Rule) to Lend His Ear, to the Air and Matter of the
Composition so, as (upon very many Occasions) He must forsake His Rule; and
instead of Conchords, pass through all manner of Discords, according to the
Humor of the Compositions He shall meet with.

This Thing will require a Quick Discerning Faculty of the Ear; Things
Requisite in a Theorboe-man.
an Able Hand; and a Good Judgment. The 1 st. of which must be given in Nature;
the 2 last will come with Practice, and Care.

I will now proceed, and 1 st. let you see all the Chordes-Harmonical, upon
every Key, viz* 3 d's, 5 th's, 6 th's, and 8 th's; To which purpose, take a
View of These following Lines.

Gam-ut Sharp.
^ All the Natural Stops proper to Gam-ut, with Its Sharp-Third.
^

All These Stops are proper to Gam-ut, considered in Its Sharp Third, Fifth,
and Eighth; and you have Liberty to use which of Them you please, when Gam-ut
requires no other Chordes;

Besides, to amplify Gam-ut at any time; if It be a Long Note, you may put to
It the Greatest Long Diapason; which we call Double-Gam-ut: Which String I have
added to all my Theorboes; though very many, either want It, (as having but 24
Strings;) or else when they would have It, they are fain (to do as they do in
the New Tuning of the French Lute) make an unhandsom Skip, or Halt unto It, by
Tuning their last Bass a Note Lower; by which means they take away, and want
Double Air* which is a very Brave Ornament to the Theorboe.

A Theorboe is Incomplete, without It carries 26 Strings.
Therefore I say, a Theorboe cannot be Complete, if it have not 26 Strings; so,
as that from the Gam-ut String, there may be a perfect Gradual Descent of a
Complete Eighth in Diapasons; which is very Ornamental, and Useful in a Lute:
Concerning which Thing, I have spoken more largely, in that Device I made, to
Distinguish betwixt the Two French-Lute-Tunings, in p. 203.

Now see Gam-ut with Its Flat Thirds, with all Its Stops usual.

Gam-ut Flat.
^ Here They are, with Its Flat Third.
^

All These are proper to Gam-ut Flat: That is, when Gam-ut has the Third above
It, (viz. B-mi) Flat; (as It is Sharp, by reason of Its Third-Place-Sharp above
It:) Which may in Compositions be either Flat, or Sharp, according to the
pleasure of the Composer.

Therefore That is one of the Main Things you are to regard in your Play, A
Flat or Sharp-Third, a Chief Thing to be regarded*
viz. whether your Third (to any Key) be Flat, or Sharp; either according to
the Nature of It, as It stands Fixed in the Scale; or else according to the
Liking, or Humor of the Composer, as he will Form It.

This next Line shall show you A-re, with all Its 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 th's,
Natural.

^ A-re Flat and Sharp.


Thus with Its Flat-Third. Thus with Its Sharp-Third.

^

The next Key is B-mi; which is a Key seldom or never Played upon, (as the
Proper Key of the Song or Lesson;) however you will have occasion to use It in
Its 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 th's sometimes. Therefore Here It is set you.

^ B-mi Natural Flat and Sharp.


Thus with Its Flat-Third. Thus with Its Sharp-Third.

^

And because B-mi Flat is a Key, us^d for the Key of a Song, or Lesson, (and
indeed is a very Brisk, and Sprightly Good Key to Perform in) I will here set
It down, as I have done the others, with Its 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 ths.

B-mi Flat.

^

Thus with Its Sharp-Third. Thus with Its Flat-Third.

^

C-Fa-ut-Key is next, and is a Most Noble, Generous, and Heroical Key, fit to
Express any thing of Magnanimity, and Bravery upon.

And therefore Turn over to It.

C-fa-ut Sharp and Flat.

^

Thus with Its Sharp-Third. Thus with Its Flat-Third.

^

D-sol-re Flat and Sharp.

^

Thus with Its Flat-Third. Thus with Its Sharp-Third.

^

E-la-mi Flat and Sharp.

^

Thus with Its Flat-Third. Thus with Its Sharp-Third.

^

F-fa-ut Sharp and Flat.

^

Thus with Its Sharp-Third. Thus with Its Flat-Third.

^

Thus I have given you a sight of the most Familiar Stops quite through the
whole Instrument, proper for These 7 Chordes; which 7 Keys are all we have in
the whole Nature of Music Naturally; for as I said, in my Former Discourse,
when you come to the Eighth, you are come but as to the 1 st. Point, or Place
where you began.

Now the adding a Diapason to any of All These, will both give a Greater
Luster, and also add more Variety; and be a Cause of Greater Freedom, and
Advantage for the Hand, in many Cases, which you will meet with. As for
Example, See in This next Line, what Bravery, and Variety there is, only in
This Key of F-fa-ut, being the Last Line I Set you; And that the Addition of
One Diapason has given you above a Double Number of Stops; and diverse more
could I find, which I forbear.

This is no small Consideration to the Ease and Advantage of Lute-Play.

F-fa-ut Augmented by Its Diapason.

^

Thus may you see,
what an Exceeding Great Advantage It is to have These Diapasons added unto Our
Lutes; which as I said in the Beginning of This Book; is one Cause that the
Lute is become far more Easy, than It was in Former Times, when they had but
half so many Strings to Play upon.

Besides, the Instrument is made Thereby far more Illustrious, and Noble, than
ever It was in the Old Time.

Now by the Example of This Last Line, you may your self Examine the whole Lute
in all Its Varieties, with Ease; for it is too much trouble for me to go
through the whole Number of Stops, through all the Keys in This manner: But I
hope This Hint may suffice to set you to Work; which will be also much more
Profitable for you; for what is Gained by your own Industry, Wherein lies the
Greatest Profit, or Advantage for a Learner.
and Experience, will be ten times more Advantageous to you, than Discourse, or
seeing of a Business done to your Hand.

This last very Line may be a sufficient Argument, and Demonstration, A vast
Difference, and Convenience betwixt the Lutes of our Time, and Those of former
Times.
to prove the Vast Difference between the Lutes of This Our Time, and Those of
Former Times; and that we have Infinite Advantages of Them, both for Scope,
Ease, and Freedom; and Principally above all; Our Lutes, must needs Sound more
Livelily, Brisk, and Clear, in regard we are not Pestered through Necessity, to
Stop such Difficult Cross Full-Stops, which They were Compelled unto, to
produce Variety, by Reason of such a small Number of Strings.

The next Thing I Will set you down, shall be to show you the way of Amplifying
your Play, by Breaking your Parts, or Stops, in way of Dividing-Play upon
Cadences, or Closes; The Best way to Amplify your Play.
which is one of the most Complete, and Commendable Performances upon a
Theorboe in Playing of a Part.

And to make the whole Business Compendious, and Short, learn to do It upon
This One Cadence well, and (by It) you may do the like your self (by
Observation) upon all the other.

And Here It is in Gam-ut Close.

^
^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over for the 17 th. Variety.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

A Right Observance of These 21 Varieties, will enable you to do the like upon
all Closes, or Long Notes in any Key: Therefore I may save much labor in
Exemplifying upon any other Key.

Now because I would have This Work Completely able to manage you to Play a
Part upon the Theorboe, without the Use, or Knowledge of any other; Take only
These Few Following Observations; which with what I have already said, and you
connot miss of It.

In the first place therefore you are to Take Notice of your Key, How to know
your Key.
which you must Examine for, and find from the Close-Note of the Bass* for that
is (or ought certainly to be) the Key.

Secondly, Observe whether It be a Sharp, or a Flat Key; How to know whether It
be a Flat or Sharp Key.
which you shall know by the Third above your Key. As for Example, If Gam-ut be
the Key; and if no Flat be set in B-mi: then It is called a Sharp Key, in
respect that the Third to the Key is Two Full Notes; but if the Third be but a
Note and a Half; then it is called a Flat Key; and for That Cause is the General
Custom of calling a Key Flat or Sharp.

3 dly. How the Work will be made much Easier, than It is Imagined.
Take notice what Chordes you are to put (Generally) to every Key; and bearing
in your mind, that you have but 7 Keys to trouble you, your Work will be the
more Easy, and Comfortable.

Those 7 Keys, or Distances, as they are used in Composition, go by the name of
Chords, viz. a Unison, 2 d. 3 d. 4 th. 5 th. 6 th. and 7 th. And whereas you
have heard talk of an 8 th. 9 th. 10 th. etc. They are but as the very same
before Repeated, viz. an Eighth, is as an Unison, the 9 th. as a 2 d. the 10
th. as a 3 d. So that your Business will be no more, than to understand the
Right use of the 7 Chords.

Now you must know, that the same General Rules do not hold to all the Notes of
every Bass for if Gam-ut be your Key, (or whatsoever be your Key) there will be
Two of the Seven, at least, excepted from the General Rule; as Thus.

Your General Rule for Uniting of Parts, is This, That to every Note of your
Bass, The General Rule for Uniting of Parts, in Composition.
(except what you shall have excepted against) you may put a 3 d. 5 th. and 8
th. or to some, but One, or Two of Them; (which Number 3 are all that Nature
affords us Single, at the same time.) And there are Generally, 5 of the 7,
which are Thus to be observed; but the other 2, most commonly, are not to have
the 5 th. but a 6 th.

Now that you may know which Those Two are certainly; you are to take notice,
they are Those Two in the Scale-Natural, Concerning the 6 th. when It is to be
used Generally.
which are immediately under the 2 Half Notes, viz. B-mi is the one, and
E-la-mi is the other. Yet also, if at any time, you meet with an Artificial, or
Forced Half Note, (that is) which is only made so, by reason of a Sharp added
unto It; as for Example, If Gam-ut be your Key, and F-fa-ut shall be made
Sharp; then that Sharp Note is properly capable of a 6 th. as well as those
other 2 Naturals; and so of all other such Forged Sharp Notes of your Bass, at
any Time.

Nor do I mean, that upon necessity you must always use the Fifth in all other
Notes, excepting such as These; but sometimes you will have occasion to use the
Sixth in any Key; but your Eye and Ear must be your Chief Guide: Yet you must
never begin nor end a Strain with a Sixth, nor make any Full Close with It, in
the midst of any Strain; but ever in Passing-wise; yet I find* that it is many
times very Pleasant to Pause upon a Sixth, in the Nature of a False Close; but
all that while of the Pause, you may observe, there is still an Expectation of
something to follow, as an Appendix to the foregoing Matter; which when it
comes in, is the more wellcom, by reason of that Seeming Defraud, or Long
Absence; and (to my Content) it is one of the most Handsome Cheats, (as I may so
say) or Cozenings in Performances: That is, to Insinuate, or make you believe
you shall hear a full Close; but with a Fall-off into a Six, or sometimes some
other way, (as I shall show you by Example, when I come more Particularly to
Explanation) you deceive Their Expectations, (which is often very Taking, and
Handsome.)

There is One Observation more, for the General use of the Sixth, viz. It is
proper, and Usual to put It to the 3 d. Note above the Key, whether That Note
be Flat or Sharp; yet with Reference to your Intended Air.

The meaning of the Figures over the Notes of the Bass.
4 thly. You are to take Notice, That (if a through Bass be Rightly Ordered) you
shall find in all Places of Exception, certain Figures set over the Heads of
the Bass-Notes, viz. from 3 to 7; which are to inform you, That to such a Note
there must be such a Chord or Chords put, as Those Figures Hint unto, viz. If
the Figure 7, then a Seventh; if the Figure 6, then a Sixth; If 7 6, then a
Seventh, and a Sixth; and so of all the Rest.

And sometimes Those Figures shall have a Flat or Sharp set with them; which
show, that such Chords must be likewise Flat or Sharp.

These Observations being well Noted, you may go forwards toward your Work.

The meaning of a Flat or a Sharp over the Note of a Bass.
Note further, That a Single Flat or Sharp set above any Note of your Bass,
without a Figure, signify, that such a Third is required to That Note.

The Flat Third is only One Note and a Half, as is betwixt A-re, and C-fa-ut,
D-sol-re, and F-fa-ut.

The Sharp Third is always 2 Full Notes, as is betwixt Gam-ut, and B-mi;
C-fa-ut, and E-la-mi; and F-fa-ut, and A-la-mi-re; and you may use which of
Those you please in your Composition.

But take Notice, That no Half Notes will agree together; so that although I
said, you might use which of Those Thirds you pleased; you must know, that you
are ever to observe the Natural Order of the Scale, both for Sharp and Flat
Thirds; and you must never Clash, so as to put a Flat Third, and a Sharp Third
together at the same time, or of any other Chord, in their Octaves.

The Consecution of 2 5 th's, and 2 8 th's to be avoided.
You will do well also to avoid the Consecution of Fifths and Eighths; which
although they be very True Chords, (and indeed the most Lushious ones; for
which cause They are called the Perfect Chords) yet we account it not complete,
to let 2 of the same Kind move together in any 2 Joining Notes. The Reason is,
They are too Lushious, or Cloying, like too much of any Sweet Thing.

Concerning the Cadence.
The next Thing shall be to inform you concerning the Cadence; which is always
used at the Conclusion of a Song, or Strain, and oftentimes in the Midst; and
known certainly by the Falling of the Bass a Fifth, or Rising a Fourth; both
which Signify the same Thing: They both passing into the same Key, or Letter
of the Scale.

Now This Cadence, is as it were the Summing up, Sweetning, or Completing of
the whole Story, or Matter foregoing; The meaning of a Cadence, or Close.
or Period of some Sentence Intended; and indeed is the very Choicest, and Most
Satisfactory Delight in all Music, (nothing so Sweet and Delightful, as a
Sweet Close or Cadence.

And that you may not be Deficient at That, take Notice Here, how It is to be
Performed.

In which Performance, are always a Mixture of Conchords, and Dischords
together; as you may perceive by That Example of Closes, a little before set
you, where the 4 th. is Bound In with the 3 d. and 5 th. Thus.

The 3 d. coming in after the 4 th. must always be Sharp, at a Close.

^ ^

You may likewise make This Close or Cadence, by Joining to the Fourth and 3 d,
a 7 th. 6, and 5; or 6, and 5.

Thus for Example.

^ ^

Remember always, when you use a Sharp Third, A General Rule for the Flat or
Sharp Sixth.
if you then make use of the Sixth following, let it be Sharp; so likewise a
Flat Third, and a Flat Sixth.

These 7 th's and 6 th's, in a Binding way, as I do here set Them, are only
proper, when you have Notes of Gravity, and Long Closes, viz. Semibreves, or
Minims; but seldom upon Short Crochet-Closes.

See These Two last Examples. The Former I have given you with a great deal of
Variety; your self do so by These.

Thus may you see what a Cadence is. And after This Manner may you perform It
upon any of the Keys. But lest That Trick should be too long in finding out,
I Will give you These Two last Examples upon another Key; which when you see the
manner of doing, all others will be the more Easy.

The same upon another Key.
^

This last Line is the very same in Chords and Sense, as is that other above,
only it is in C-fa-ut-Key; That being in Gam-ut.

So that you may perceive, It is an Easy Thing to find out the Chords, as well
in one Key, as in another; and Good Order of Play.

Here follows the most usual manner of taking the Sixths to any Note, when
Notes Ascend or Descend, in This Gradual Manner, as you see the Bass does.

I will set you Two Several Ways of Breaking your Parts upon It; for your
Better Experience; the 1 st. is not so much Broken, as the 2 d.

^ ^ ^ ^

A Second Variety upon the same Notes.

^ ^ ^ ^

There is likewise another way of using the Sixth, when your Notes fall after
This Manner, as is set you in This next Example. But in all such, or other
Various Cases, as shall happen, your Chief Director must be your Ear; for
without a Diligent Regard to the Parts, That way, your Rules will often deceive
you.

^ Another usual way of using the Sixth.
^

However, These Rules which I have Thus Set, will stand you in very great
stead; nor can you be without the Knowledge of Them, to be steady in your
Performances.

I think I need not say much more to This Business, but leave you to Experience
and Practice: And Truly I am Confident, by These Short Directions, you may be
enabled to Play a Part, with Credit, and Applause enough, upon a Theorboe.

I might Trouble you with several other Observations; but They are all Couched
in These which I have already set down: Only one Thing I think Necessary to let
you know, That whenever you meet with any Passages in your Bass, of a Nimble
and Quick Motion, (as often you will do) viz. Quavers in a Continuation for
some Semibreves together; know, That you need not strive to put Parts to every
Quaver; only let it suffice, that (taking Notice of the order of Them) you put
a Full Stop, or Part only, of a Full Stop, to the 1 st. Quaver of every Four,
or sometimes, of every Two, as your Judgment shall Direct you, and pass away
with Striking the Rest Single; and if you find it convenient, you may here and
there Easily Clap along with them, 3 d's, 5 th's, or 6 th's, as the Descant
requires; which will be Sufficient, and very Complete.

Yet Note One Thing more, That (when we Talk of 3 d's, 5 th's, and 8 th's) we
are not Precisely Tied to give just Those the very Notes to our Bass; but still
according to our Best Convenience, upon the Instrument; sometimes 10 th's, 12
th's, or 15 th's; as you may perceive, I have done in some of Those Examples I
Set you; which are as the same Thing in Composition: For sometimes you will be
very much put to It, to find your Parts Conveniently; especially when the Bass
moves in the Lower Sphere; nor will your Parts be so Pleasant to It, if taken
Near; but far Better Above, in Their Eights.

The End of the Directions for the Theorboe.
The Third Part: CONCERNING The VIOL, AND MUSIC in General. Giving some
Particular Directions toward a Righter Use of That Instrument, than is
Commonly Known and Practiced.
CHAP. I.
HAVING said so much in my Former Discourse, concerning the Lute; as also taken
so much Pains in Laying Open All the Hidden Secrets Thereof, (as to Its
Rightest Use,) etc. It may be thought, I am so great a Lover of It, that I make
Light Esteem of any other Instrument, besides; which Truly I do not; but Love
the Viol in a very High Degree; yea close unto the Lute: And have done much
more, and made very many more Good and Able Proficients upon It, than ever I
have done upon the Lute.

And this I shall presume to say, That if I Excel in Either, it is most
certainly upon the Viol.

And as to other Instruments, I can as truly say, I Value every One that is in
Use, according to Its due Place; as Knowing, and often Saying, That All Gods
Creatures are Good; And all Ingenunities done by Man, are Signs, Tokens, and
Testimonies of the Wisdom of God Bestowed upon Man.

Yet This One Thing I shall not forbear to say, (in Regard of the Great
Inconsiderateness, which Generally Bears Sway among Men) That It would be very
well, (not only in Music, but in Every Thing else, which is Our Humane
Concern) If there were a Reasonableness, and Examination always attending upon
Our Actions, by which They might be Governed and Guided; And not like
Ignorants, take Things upon Trust, as Generally too Many do; and confirm
Themselves with a Belief of such Things upon too Slight, or rather no
Examination at all, and Violently Pursue, Magnify, and Cry up Things, so or
so, merely because it is the Mode or Fashion, as They say.

Concerning Modes and Fashions.
Now as to Modes and Fashions, I willingly grant a Due Observance unto, in such
Things, as are Reasonably Proper for Modes and Fashions; especially where, or
when They are not Incongruous to Right Reason; or that we do not forsake a
Better, or more Convenient Fashion, for a Worse, or more Inconvenient; as might
Easily be Instanced in the Modes and Fashions of Apparel, or the like Slight
and Trivial Things; which are only (or should be) the Proper Business (if it
ought to be a Business at all) of Modes and Fashions.

Arts and Sciences, not subject to Modes and Fashions.
But I cannot understand, how Arts and Sciences should be subject unto any such
Fantastical, Giddy, or Inconsiderate Toyish Conceits, as ever to be said to be
in Fashion, or out of Fashion.

I remember there was a Fashion, not many Years since, for Women in their
Apparel to be so Pent up by the Straitness, and Stiffness of their
Gown-Shoulder-Sleeves, that They could not so much as Scratch Their Heads, for
the Necessary Remove of a Biting Louse; nor Elevate their Arms scarcely to feed
themselves Handsomely; nor Carve a Dish of Meat at a Table, but their whole Body
must needs Bend toward the Dish.

This must needs be concluded by Reason, a most Unreasonable, and Inconvenient
Fashion; and They as Unreasonably Inconsiderate, who would be so Abused, and
Bound up.

An Abuse put upon Women, by the Roguish Tailors.
I Confess It was a very Good Fashion, for some such Viragoes, who were used to
Scratch their Husbands Faces or Eyes, and to pull them down by the Coxcombes.

And I am subject to think, It was a mere Rogery, in the Combination, or
Club-council of the Tailors, to Abuse the Women in That Fashion, in Revenge of
some of the Cursed Dames their Wives, who were too Lofty, and Man-keen.

For Those Tailors can make the Fashionists Believe, and Wear whatever Fashion
they inform them unto: But whatever the Original of It was, I am sure It could
never be accounted a Good-Housewives Fashion; However, It was then the Fashion,
and People of Fashion would have It so, though with never so many
Inconveniences.

Now in such Things as These, I could set forth a vast deal of
Inconsiderateness, which People constantly run into; yet They are nothing
Considerable, in Comparison to such Inconveniences, as commonly attend
(pretended) Modes and Fashions in Arts and Sciences: The very Naming of which,
was always so Nautious unto me, that I confess It was ever attended with a
Secret Undervaluing of the Judgment of That Person, who would tell me, This
sort, or That sort of Music, or Instrument, was in Fashion; and I still am of
that mind, nor will I Stop my Pen, but let It Run Freely, and Publish Boldly,
No Good Fashion to take a New, and leave an Old much Better.
That It can be no Good Fashion in Music, to bring up any Way, Thing, or
Instrument, and Cry It up for the Mode, and leave a Better, and Cry It Down.

Such Things as These, are too frequent at This Day, as I shall make appear;
and because I have begun to speak of the Sprightly, Generous, and Heroic Viol;
which Instrument I Love, and Highly Value; and indeed, is an Instrument of such
Excellent, and Admirable Use, (were It not too much Abused) but Rightly Used)
that It deservedly takes the Next Place to the Incomparable Lute; and
Therefore, for Its sake, and the Lovers thereof, I shall take a little more
than Ordinary Pains to Illustrate, and give That Brave Instrument Its Due: But
first I will Instance from It, How Music is Injured, and very Eminently too;
as Thus, How Music is Injured.


For, what is more Reasonable, than if an Artist upon the Composition of a
Piece of Music (suppose) of 3, 4, 5, 6, or more Parts,; (but hold there; the
Moads has cut off most of the Greater Numbers: Well I Will say 3 or 4, (yet most
commonly 2 Parts) suppose what Number you will;) I say is it not Reasonable,
yea Necessarily Reasonable, That all Those Parts should be Equally Heard? sure
it cannot Reasonably be Denied.

Then, what Injury must it needs be, By Unsuitable, or Unequal Instruments, and
Numbers.
to have such Things Played upon Instruments, Unequally Suited, or Vnevenly
Numbered? viz. One Small Weak-Sounding-Bass-Biol, and 2 or 3 Violins; whereas
one (in Reason) would think, that One Violin would bear up Sufficiently against
2 or 3 Common-Sounding-Basses; especially such as you shall Generally meet
with, in their Ordinary Consorts.

This is a very Common Piece of Inconsiderate Practice, at This Day.

But It has been Objected, There has been an Harpsicon, or an Organ with It;
what then? Has not the Harpsicon, or Organ, Basses and Trebles Equally mixed?
and must not still the Vnequalness be the same? or suppose a Theorboe-Lute; the
Disproportion is still the same. The Scoulding Violins will out-Top Them All.

Nay, I have as yet but supposed a Small matter of Vnequalness, in respect of
what I have heard, and is still very Magnanimously Endeavored to be Daily
Performed, viz. Six Violins; nay Ten; nay Twenty or more, at a Sumptuous
Meeting, and scarce Half so many Basses; which (as I said before) were more
Reasonable, sure, to be the Greater Number.

Now I say, If This be not an Injury both to Music, the Composer, and the
Compositions, let any Judicious Person Judge.

What is the Music of Parts Composed for, if not to be Heard?

But I cry you Mercy, I had almost forgot; It is the Fashion.

But I remember what I said before, viz. That It is no Good Fashion to bring up
a New, and cry down an Old, which is far Better.

Now I will suppose I hear it as'kd me, What is a far Better? why here I Will
tell you.

And for your Information, (Young Gentleman, or Young Lady (for Young and
Unskillful I must needs suppose you to be, who ask me such a Question;) And it is
much Pity of your Want of Skill) Know, That in my Younger Time, What Music was
Better than now is.
we had Music most Excellently Choice, and most Eminently Rare; both for Its
Excellency in Composition, Rare Fancy, and Sprightly Air; as also for Its
Proper, and Fit Performances; even such, as (if your Young Tender Ears, and
Fantacies, were but truly Tinctured therewith, (and especially if it possibly
could but be cried up for the Mode, or New Fashion) you would Embrace, for some
Divine Thing,

And lest It should be quite Forgot, for want of Sober Times; I will set down
(as a Remembrancer, and Well-willer to Posterity; and an Honourer of the Memory
of Those most Emenent, Worthy Masters, and Authors, who some of Them being now
Deceased, yet some Living) the Manner of such Music as I make mention of, as
also the Nature of It.

The manner, and Effects of our Music in the late former Times, to be Imitated
as the Best in the World.
We had for our Grave Music, Fancies of 3, 4, 5, and 6 Parts to the Organ;
Interposed (now and then) with some Pavins, Allmaines, Solemn, and Sweet
Delightful Airs; all which were (as it were) so many Pathettical Stories,
Rhetorical, and Sublime Discourses; Subtle, and Accute Argumentations; so
Suitable, and Agreeing to the Inward, Secret, and Intellectual Faculties of the
Soul and Mind; that to set Them forth according to their True Praise, there are
no Words Sufficient in Language; yet what I can best speak of Them, shall be
only to say, That They have been to my self, (and many others) as Divine
Raptures, Powerfully Captivating all our unruly Faculties, and Affections, (for
the Time) and disposing us to Solidity, Gravity, and a Good Temper; making us
capable of Heavenly, and Divine Influences.

It Is Great Pity Few Believe Thus Much; but Far Greater, that so Few Know It.

The Names of many of our Best Authors Deceased.
The Authors of such like Compositions, have been diverse Famous English Men, and
Italians; some of which, for Their very Great Eminency, and Worth, in that
Particular Faculty, I will here name, viz. Mr. Alfonso Ferabosco, Mr. John
Ward, Mr. Lupo, Mr. White, Mr. Richard Deering, Mr. William Laws, Mr. John
Jenkins, Mr. Christoper Simpson, Mr. Coperanio, and one Monteverde, a Famous
Italian Author; besides diverse, and very many others, who in Their Late Time,
were All Substantial, Able, and Profound Composing Masters in This Art, and
have left Their Works behind Them, as sit Monuments, and Patterns for Sober,
and Wise Posterity, worthy to be Imitated, and Practiced: It Is Great Folly they
are so soon Forgot, and Neglected, as I perceive they are amongst many.

What Instruments were used, and how in the Best Old Music.
And These Things were Performed, upon so many Equal, and Truly-Sciz'd Viols;
and so Exactly Strung, Tuned, and Played upon, as no one Part was any
Impediment to the Other; but still (as the Composition required) by Intervals,
each Part Amplified, and Heightened the Other; The Organ Evenly, Softly, and
Sweetly Acchording to All.

Whereas now the Fashion has Cr'd These Things Down, and set up others in
their Room; which I confess make a Greater Noise; but which of the Two is the
Better Fashion, I leave to be Judged by the Judicious.

We had (beyond all This) a Custom at Our Meetings, that commonly, after such
Instrumental Music was over, we did Conclude All, with some Vocal Music, (to
the Organ, or (for want of That) to the Theorboe.

The Best which we did ever Esteem, were Those Things which were most Solemn,
and Divine, some of which I will (for their Eminency) Name, viz. Mr. Deering's
Gloria Patri, and other of His Latin Songs; (now lately Collected, and Printed,
by Mr. Playford, (a very Laudable, and Thank-worthy Work) besides many other of
the like Nature, Latin and English, by most of the abovenamed Authors, and
Others, Wonderfully Rare, Sublime, and Divine, beyond all Expression.

But when we would be most Ayrey, Jocond, Lively, and Spruce; Then we had
Choice, and Singular Consorts, either for 2, 3, or 4 Parts, but not to the
Organ (as many (now a days) Improperly, and Unadvisedly (perform such like
Consorts with) but to the Harpsicon; yet more Properly, and much better to the
Pedal, The Organ not a proper Instrument for Consorts.
(an Instrument of a Late Invention, contrived (as I have been informed) by one
Mr. John Hayward of London, a most Excellent Kind of Instrument for a Consort,
and far beyond all Harpsicons or Organs, that I yet ever heard of, (I mean
either for Consort, or Single Use;) But the Organ far beyond It, for Those
other Performances before mentioned.

Concerning This Instrument, (called the Pedal (because It is contrived to give
Varieties with the Foot) I shall bestow a few Lines in making mention of, in
regard It is not very commonly used, or known; because Few make of Them Well,
and Fewer will go to the Price of Them: Twenty Pounds being the Ordinary Price
of One; but the Great Patron of Music in His Time, Sir Robert Bolles, (who, in
the University, I had the Happiness to Initiate, in This High Art) had Two of
Them, the one I remember at 30 l. and the other at 50 l. very Admirable
Instruments.

This Instrument is in Shape and Bulk just like a Harpsicon; The Description of
the Pedal. The Best of Consort Instruments.
only It differs in the Order of It, Thus, viz. There is made right underneath
the Keys, near the Ground, a kind of Cubbord, or Box, which opens with a little
Pair of Doors, in which Box the Performer sets both his Feet, resting them upon
his Heels, (his Toes a little turning up) touching nothing, till such time he
has a Pleasure to employ them; which is after this manner, viz. There being
right underneath his Toes 4 little Pummels of Wood, under each Foot 2, any one
of Those 4 he may Tread upon at his Pleasure; which by the Weight of his Foot
drives a Spring, and so Causes the whole Instrument to Sound, either Soft or
Loud, according as he shall choose to Tread any of them down; (for without the
Foot so used Nothing Speaks.)

The outside of the Right Foot drives One, and the Inside of the same Foot
drives another; so that by treading his Foot a little awry, either outward or
inward, he causes a Various Stop to be heard, at his Pleasure; and if he clap
down his Foot Flat, then he takes Them both, at the same time, (which is a 3 d.
Variety, and Louder.)

Then has he ready, under his Left Foot, 2 other Various Stops, and by the like
Order and Motion of the Foot, he can immediately give you 3 other Varieties,
either Softer or Louder, as with the Right Foot before mentioned, he did.

So that thus you may perceive he has several Various Stops at Pleasure; and
all Quick and Nimble, by the Ready Turn of the Foot.

And by This Pretty Device, is This Instrument made Wonderfully Rare, and
Excellent: So that doubtless It Excels all Harpsicons, or Organs in the World,
for Admirable Sweetness and Humor, either for a Private, or a Consort use.

I caused one of Them to be made in my House, that has 9 several other
Varieties, The Theorboe Stop in the Pedal.

Thus 24 Varieties at least.


(24 in all) by reason of a Stop (to be Slipped in with the Hand) which my
Workman calls the Theorboe-Stop; and indeed It is not much unlike It; But what
It wants of a Lute, It has in Its own Singular Prittiness.

We had in those days Choice Consorts, fitted on purpose to suit with the
Nature of This Instrument,

The Truth is, The Great Grace which Music receives by the Right Ordering of
This Instrument, to Compositions and Performances suitable thereunto, is such,
that It far Exceeds any Expressions that can be made of It.

We always Added to This Consort, the Theorboe Lute; which likewise could
Humor the Consort, Properly, and Evenly, with the Pedal.

Very little of This so Eminent Music do we hear of in These Times, (the Less
the Greater Pity.)

Concerning the Consorts, with Viols, and their Rare use.
Then again, we had all Those Choice Consorts, to Equally-Sciz'd Instruments,
(Rare Chests of Viols) and as Equally Performed: For we would never allow Any
Performer to Overtop, or Outcry another by Loud Play; but our Great Care was,
to have All the Parts Equally Heard; by which means (though sometimes we had
but indifferent, or mean Hands to Perform with; yet This Caution made the
Music Lovely, and very Contentive.

The Great Idol in Music, of late Years, set up.
But now the Modes and Fashions have cried These Things down, and set up a Great
Idol in their Room; observe with what a Wonderful Swiftness They now run over
their Brave New Airs; and with what High-Priz'd Noise, viz. 10, or 20 Violins,
etc. as I said before, to a Some-Single-Soul'd Air; it may be of 2 or 3 Parts,
or some Coranto, Serabrand, or Brawle, (as the New-Fashion'd-Word is) and such
like Stuff, seldom any other; which is rather fit to make a Man's Ears Glow, and
fill his Brains full of Frisks, etc. than to Season, and Sober his Mind, or
Elevate his Affection to Goodness.

Now I say, Let These New-Fashion'd Musicks, and Performances, be compared with
Those Old Ones, A Comparison betwixt the Old and New Music, to be Judged.
which I have before made mention of; and then let It be Judged, whether they
have not left a Better Fashion, for a Worse. But who shall be the Judges? If
Themselves; then All Is Right.

Now I apprehend I hear some say, I like This New-fashion'd Music the Best; so
does a Child a Rattle, or an Oaten Pipe, etc. which must needs be, because they
never Heard any Better.

There is another Great Injury, A Common, and main Injury occasioned unto the
Art, by some Great Persons* being unskilful in It.
very Pernicious to the Substantial Support of This Art; which is, that
oftentimes Great Persons, (Lords or Ladies) not having Skill; yet) spend Their
Judgments in the High Commendation of Things, which come before Them,
(Commending This, or Disliking That) according to that Humor which They
Possess, etc.

Now look whatsoever Judgment They give, the same presently is swallowed down
by the Multitude, Doted upon, and Strongly Cried up for Orthodox, ( viz. the
Mode or Fashion;) and presently spreads abroad; and Fame (the Great Dame of
Lies, as well as of Truths) Toots it all over; and what is Stronger than the
Great Multitude?

This I say, is a cause of much Error, and Wrong done to Our Art; for by this
means; many a Confident Young Vp-start (through the Unskillfulness, of such, or
such a Great Person; who is taken, with This, or That Pretty Gingle or Toy,
proceeding from That forementioned Youngster) becomes Famous; for the Great
Person (seeming to Admire Him, in This, or That Thing, Toy, or Gingle) sets him
up, as it were upon a Pinnacle; and whether It be Right or Wrong, presently
comes others, (of the same form of Greatness, and Unskillfulness) and Joins
Applause to the former; so that This Young Man is All-to-be-Dignified, and
Noted for a Wonder amongst others. Then, whatsoever he Performs, becomes
Imitable, and Fashionable; (several such have I observed in my Time) whereas
let him be brought to the True Touchstone, or Right Examination, by Judicious
Persons, he will be found a very Weaklin, in the Art which he Professes; only
he may (as many of them) have a Particular Singularity, or Twang, upon some one
Instrument, or other; It may be the Violin, or the Flagilet, or the Guittar, (a
Bit of the Old Lute) the Jews Trump, etc. or some such Slight Business.

Now This Brave Young Man assumes to himself a Great Presence, Looks Big, and
Magnifies Himself; and (though Ignorant in the Main) thinks himself really to
be The Thing, which he is Cried up for; though nothing Nothing so; and
presently falls to give Laws, and Rules, in the Art; making Determinations in
his Judgment of This, or That Work, of Profound Learned Able Masters, which he
himself (understands little or nothing of. But his Name being Thus got up, he
may (as the old saying is) Lie in Bed; and his Work shall go forwards.

Then with much Confidence, he daily spreads his Humors, The Common Occasion
of Modes, and Fashions in Music.
and Conceits, which must (forsooth) still be Highly Prized, though never so
Silly. By which means, and the like, there becomes a General Over-spreading of
Errors, and Ignorance; and a Crying-down, and Neglecting the Best Things in
True Art and Worth, and Crying up the Gingles, etc.

This I have Seen, and Noted, all along my Time, in This Our Art of Music; and
therefore thought fit Thus much to declare of It, as a Main Injury done unto
the Art.

But I shall cut off This Discourse, and Here give you some certain Directions,
for Procuring, and Maintaining the Best Music Imaginable.

Concerning a Proper* and Fit Music Room; the 1 st. Thing considerable.
The 1 st Thing to be considered, as to the Advantage of Good Music, should be
a Convenient, and Fit Place to Perform It in; such I would call a Music Room;
and is considerable in a 4 Fold Respect, 1 st. in Respect of the Instruments, 2
d. the Music, 3 d. the Actors, and 4 th. the Auditors.

4 Chief Inconveniences, for want of It.
1 st. The Instruments; be they never so Good, will not show half so good in an
Improper, Stuffed, or Clogg'd-up Room, either with Household-stuff, or Company.

2 d. The Music very oftentimes is much hindered, by Crowding, and Noise.

3 dly. The Performers as often, are so interrupted and hindered, that they
cannot Act as They might.

4 thly. The Auditors cannot receive such Ample Satisfaction, as otherwise they
might do; besides their uneasy, and unhandsom Accommodation, which too often
happens to Persons of Quality, being sometimes Crowded up, Sqweez'd, and
Sweated among people of an Inferior Rank, etc. and cannot be avoided. These
Things, I say, should be considered,

Again; it is observable, That all Persons who pursue Music, do endeavor to
procure the Best Instruments that can be gotten. Now let the Instruments be
what they will, a Good Room will make Them seem Better, and a Bad Room, Worse,
as I said before: Therefore It is of a Great Concern, to have a Room, which may
at least, Advantage your Instruments, if no other Convenience were gained
thereby.

Now as to the Right Contrivance of a Music Room, there are several
Considerations depending, as I shall make appear in the Description and
Explanation of one Hereafter following, which I wish might be (by some Good,
and Worthy Benefactor to Our University) Bestowed, A Worthy Benefactor to the
University wished for.
and Erected There, for a Public Benefit, and Promotion of the Art, and
Encouragement of the True Lovers of It; there being likewise a Great Need of
such a Thing, in Reference to the Completing, and Illustrating of the
Vniversity-Schools; such a School, or Room, being greatly wanting with Them
There.

And in hopes, that (at one time, or other) there may arise some Honorable,
and Truly Noble-Spirited Person, or Persons, who may consider the Great Good
Use, and Benefit of such a Necessary Convenience; and also may find in his
Heart to become a Benefactor, to such an Eminent Good Work; I will here give a
Description of a Most Excellent Music Room, together with Its many Great
Conveniences, as Here in This Next Page you may see.

The Description Of a Musick-Roome, Uniform With Convenience for Several
Sorts of Auditors, Severally placed in 12 Distinct Rooms* besides the
Musick-Roome* which would have none in It besides the Performers.
Supposing the Room to be Six Yeards Square



CHAP. II.
A further Explanation; and the Meaning of This Music Room.
THe Room It self to be Arched; as also the 4 Middle Galleries, (at least) if
not All Twelve; and Built one Story from the Ground, both for Advantage of
Sound, and also to avoid the Moisture of the Earth, which is very bad, both for
Instruments, and Strings.

The Room would be One Step Higher, than the Galleries, in the Floor; the
better to conveigh the Sound to the Auditors.

The Height of the Room not too High, for the same Reason.

In the Building of This Room, there may be Respect had to the Lower Rooms, for
Advantage of Dwelling, etc. And no doubt, but upon the Contrivance of such a
Room, many Pretty Advantages may be thought upon; which in This Sudden Glance,
I cannot reach unto.

Yet take but This One Caution, in your Contrivance; and then Add, or Alter
what you will, viz. That Nothing he Added to, or Altered from; which may be any
Hindrance to the Free, and Glib Passage of the Sound, to All Places intended;
but rather Advantage.

The Situation of the Room.
The Room to be Built in a Clear, and very Delightful Dry Place, both free from
Water; the Over-Hanging of Trees; and Common Noises.

1 st. Let the Arched Seiling be Plain, and very Smooth.

The Wainscoting of the Room.
2 dly. Let the Lower Walls be all Wainscotted, Hollow from the Wall, and
without any kind of Carved, Boss'd, or Rugged Work; so that the Sound may Run
Glib, and Smooth all about, without the least Interruption.

3 dly. Let there be several Conveyances out of the Room, through that
Wainscot, by Groves, or Pipes, to certain Auditors Seats, where (as they sit)
they may, at a small Passage, or little Hole, receive that Pent-up-Sound, which
(let It be never so weak in the Music Room) he shall (though at the furthest
end of the Gallery) Hear so Distinctly, as any who are close by It.

If such a Room as This, were to be Built at a Public Charge; and for a
Public Benefit, and Promotion of the Art; this Little Model might be
Amplified, and Enlarged, several ways, upon more Deliberate Consideration.

Considerable Reasons, why a Music Room should be so contrived. And the many
Conveniences Thereby.
The Reasons for such a Music Room, are Diverse, and very Considerable; as First.

The Room being Thus Clear, and Free from Company, all Inconveniences of
Talking, Crowding, Sweating, and Blustering, etc. are taken away.

2 d. The Sound has Its Free, and Vn-interrupted Passage, etc.

3 d. The Performers are no ways Hindered, etc.

4 th. The Instruments will stand more steadily in Tune, (for no Lutes, Viols,
Pedals, Harpsicons, etc. will stand in Tune at such a Time; No, nor Voices
Themselves;) For I have known an Excellent Voice, well prepared for a Solemn
Performance, who has been Pent up in such a Crowd, that (when he had been to
Perform his Part) could hardly speak; and by no other Cause, but the very
Distemper, received by That Crowd, and Over-Heat.

5 thly, The Music will be Equal to all alike.

Many other Inconveniences might be taken off, viz. Particular Persons being
Ill at Ease, or Vnhandsomly Accommodated, and Mixed, etc. All which are not only
Clearly Remedied, by such a Room as This, but your Music far more Illustrated,
The Conveniences of It.
by the Instruments showing Themselves, and the Auditors infinitely more
satisfied.

Note, That the In-lets into Those Groves, or Pipes abovesaid, should be pretty
Large, viz. a Foot Square at least, yet the Larger, the Better, without all
doubt; and to begin in the Wainscot, within the Music Room; and so the
Conveyances to Run Proportionably Narrower, till They come to the Ear of the
Auditor; which Hole at the End, need not to be above the Wideness of ones
Finger End.

It cannot be easily Imagined, what a Wonderful Advantage such a Contrivance
must needs be, for the Exact, and Distinct Hearing of Music; without doubt far
beyond all that ever has yet been used. For there is no Instrument of Touch, be
It never so Sweet; and Touched with the most Curious Hand that can be; but in
the very Touch, if you be near unto It, A Good Note.
you may perceive that Touch to be heard; especially of Viols, and Violins; but
if you be at a Distance, that Harshness is Lost, and Conveyed into the Air,
and you receive nothing but the Pure Sweetness of the Instrument; so as I may
properly say, you loose the Body, but enjoy the Soul, or Spirit thereof.

Those 4 Double Doors into the 4 Middle Galleries, The Doors.
would be so made, that they might shut at Pleasure; so that the Music Room
might be private at any time, for any other Occasion.

The meaning of These Narrow Galleries is, The meaning of the 12 Galleries.
In that Experience tells, Any Sound, forced into a Narrow Place, is Heard much
more Strongly, than Sounds Dilated, and Spread abroad.

Those 12 Galleries, though but little, will (I believe) hold 200 Persons very
well, without Crowding; which Thing alone, having such convenient Distinct
Reception, for Persons of Different Qualities, must needs be accounted a Great
Convenience; besides all Those others before Specified.

The 4 Pair of Stairs, 4 Pair of Stairs
(if for a Public use such a House were Built) will be Necessary, that Persons
may come, and go, without disturbing the Rest of the Company.

But if for a Private use, one Pair of Stairs; though much better with Two Pair.

I have here said but a little of a great deal, that might be said in Reference
to such a Good Work; yet, I suppose sufficient to give a Light, or a Hint to
Better Inventions, according to that Saying, Old, and True, Facile est Inventis
addere.

It Is no great Matter of Difficulty to have It done, How easy it is to have
such a Room made.
by almost any Ingenious Workmen, where they are to make New Erections, and
have Room enough, if they cast for It in their first Contrivances.

It may become any Noble, or Gentleman's House; and there may be Built together
with It, as Convenient and Necessary Rooms for all Services of a Family, as by
any other Contrivance whatever, and as Magnificently Stately.

Having thus described the way to such a Necessary, Ample, and most Convenient
Erection, I shall only add my Wishes, that It might be once Experimented; and
then no doubt, but the Advantages, and Benefits would apparently show
Themselves, and be Esteemed, far beyond what at the present They can conceive,
or I have Writ.

CHAP. III.
THere is yet one Thing more, which I will Propose, in Reference toward a more
Absolute Exactness, A Table Organ to stand in the midst, much better, than an
Upright Organ.
and Compleatness, in setting off the Music; and in making It more Even, and
Distinctly Equal, viz. Suppose the Organ to be so Contrived, as to be Placed in
the midst of the Room, and serve instead of the Table,; also I conceive, (nay I
know, in that I have made Experience of the Thing) It would be far more
Reasonable, and Proper, than an Upright Organ.

Because the Organ stands us in stead of a Holding, Vniting-Constant-Friend;
The Chief Office of the Organ in Consort.
and is as a Touchstone, to try the certainty of All Things; especially the
Well-keeping the Instruments in Tune, etc.

And in This Service the Organ should be Equally Heard to All; but especially
to the Performers Themselves, who cannot well Perform, without a Distinct
Perceivance Thereof.

The Organ standing in the midst, must needs be of a more certain and steady
use to Those Performers, than if It stood at a Distance; They all Equally
Receiving the same Benefit, no one more than another; whereas according to the
constant Standing of Upright Organs (at a Distance from the Table, and much
Company usually Crowding between the Organ, and Table of Performers) some of
Those Performers, who sit farthest off, are often at a loss, for want of
Hearing the Organ, so Distinctly as they should, which is a Great
Inconvenience. And if It be so to the Performers, It must needs be alike
Inconvenient, or more, to Those Auditors, who sit far from the Organ.

But This Device of a Table Organ, sends forth Its Notes so Equally alike, The
Great Advantages of the use of a Table Organ in Consort.
that All, both Performers, and Auditors, receive their just, and due
Satisfaction, without the least Impediment; the Organ in This Service not being
Eminently to be Heard, but only Equal with the other Music.

Now as to the Description of This Table Organ, I cannot more conveniently do
It, than first in giving you a View of It, by This Figure here Drawn, and then
by telling you all the Dimensions, and the whole order of It, (I mean my
Second, which is the Largest, and the Best.) And take as Here follows.

A Table Organ.


The Description of the Table Organ fit for such a Room.
Two of such Organs only, (I believe) are but as yet in Being, in the World*
They being of my own Contrivance; and which I caused to be made In my own
House, and for my own Use, as to the maintaining of Public Consorts, etc.

I did also Design the Erecting of such a Music Room, as I have described; But
it pleased God to Disappoint, and Discourage me, by Disabling me several ways,
for such a Work; as chiefly by the Loss of my Hearing, and by that means the
Emptiness of my Purse, (my meaning may easily be guessed at) I only wanted
Money enough, but no Good Will thereunto.

It is in Its Bulk, and Height, of a very Convenient, Handsome, and Complete
Table-Scize; (which may Become, and Adorn a Noble-Mans Dining Room) All of the
Best sort of Wainscot.

The Length of the Leaf 7 Foot, and 5 Inches.

The Breadth 4 Foot, and 3 Inches.

The Height 3 Foot, Inch, and Better.

Beneath the Leaf, quite Round, is Handsome Carved, and Cut-Work, about 10
Inches Deep, to let out the Sound: And Beneath the Cut-Work, Broad Pannels, so
Contrived, that they may be taken down at any time, for the Amending such
Faults as may happen; with 2 Shelv'd Cubbords at the End* behind, to Lock up
your Music Books, etc.

The Leaf is to be taken in 2 Pieces at any time for convenience of Tuning, or
the like, Neatly Joined in the Midst.

The Keys, at the upper End, being of Ebony, and Ivory, all Covered with a
Slipping Clampe, (answerable to the other End of the Table) which is to take
off at any time, when the Organ is to be used, and again put on, and Locked up;
so that none can know it is an Organ by sight, but a Complete New-Fashion'd
Table.

The Leaf has in It 8 Desks, cut quite through very Neatly (answerable to that
Vp-standing One, in the Figure.) with Springs under the Edge of the Leaf, so
Contrived, that they may Open, and Shut at Pleasure; which (when Shut down)
Join Closely with the Table-Leaf; But (upon occasion) may be Opened, and so set
up, (with a Spring) in the manner of a Desk, as your Books may be set against
Them.

The meaning of the 8 Desks, and their Excellent use.
Now the Intent of Those Desks, is of far more Excellent use, than for mere
Desks; For without Those Openings, your Organ would be but of very Slender use,
as to Consort, by Reason of the Closeness of the Leaf; But by the Help of Them,
each Desk opened, is as the putting in of another Quickening, or Enlivning Stop;
so that when all the 8 Desks stand open, the Table is like a Little Church
Organ, so Sprightfully Lusty, and Strong, that It is too Loud for any Ordinary
Private use: But you may Moderate That, by opening only so many of Those Desks,
as you see fit for your Present use.

There are in This Table Six Stops.

The Number of Stops in It. and what they are.
The first is an Open Diapason; The Second a Principal; The Third a Fifteenth;
The Fourth a Twelfth; The Fifth a Two and Twentieth; And the Sixth a Regal.

There is likewise (for a Pleasure, and Light Content) a Hooboy Stop, which
comes in at any Time, with the Foot; which Stop, The Humane Voice in This
Instrument.
(together with the Regal) makes the Voice Humane.

The Bellow is laid next the Ground; and is made very Large, and driven either
by the Foot of the Player, or by a Cord at the far end.

Thus I have given you a Short Description, of This most Incomparable, and
Super-Excelling Instrument; not doubting, but when It is well Pondered, and
Considered upon, It will be approved of, and brought into Use.

And, An Advertisement.
if any Person (upon the Reading of This Description) shall be Desirous to
Purchase such an Instrument; I believe, I can Procure for him the Very Same,
which I have Thus Described, etc. For my Unhappiness has been such, (by Reason
of my Deafness) that I have (of Late Years) parted with It; and It is (at This
Time, I think) to be Sold;
so that if any Person send to me about It, I shall do him the Best Service I
can in It: And indeed It is a Very-Very-Jewel.

Your Pedal, and Organ, being Thus Well Fixed, the next is, Note well, How to
order your Press for Instruments.
to Furnish your Press with Good Instruments: But first see, that It be
Conveniently Large, to contain such a Number, as you shall Design for your Use;
and to be made very Close, and Warm, Lyn'd through with Bays, etc. by which
means your Instruments will speak Livelily, Brisk, and Clear.

CHAP. IV.
YOur Best Provision, (and most Complete) will be, The Best Provision for
Viols, and of what Authors.
a Good Chest of Viols; Six, in Number; viz. 2 Basses, 2 Tenors, and 2 Trebles:
All Truly, and Proportionably Suited.

Of such, there are no Better in the World, than Those of Aldred, Jay, Smith,
(yet the Highest in Esteem are) Bolles, and Ross, (one Bass of Bolles's, I have
known Valued at 100 l.) These were Old; but We have Now, very Excellent Good
Workmen, who (no doubt) can Work as well as Those, if They be so well Paid for
Their Work, as They were; yet we chiefly Value Old Instruments, before New; for
by Experience, they are found to be far the Best.

The Reasons for which, I can no further Dive into, than to say; I Apprehend,
that by Extreme Age, the Wood, Age Adds Goodness to Instruments, and the Reason
why.
(and Those Other Adjuncts) Glue, Parchment, Paper, Lynings of Cloth, (as some
use;) but above All, the Vernish; These are All, so very much (by Time) Dried,
Lenefied, made Gentle, Rarefied, or (to say Better, even) Ayrified; so that
That Stiffness, Stubbornness, or Clunguiness, which is Natural to such Bodies,
are so Debilitated, and made Pliable, that the Pores of the Wood, have a more,
and Free Liberty to Move, Stir, or Secretly Vibrate; by which means the Air,
(which is the Life of All Things) both Animate, and Inanimate) has a more Free,
and Easy Recourse, to Pass, and Re-pass, etc. whether I have hit upon the
Right Cause, I know not; but sure I am, that Age Adds Goodness to Instruments;
therefore They have the Advantage of all our Late Workmen.

Now, suppose you connot procure an Entire Chest of Viols, Suitable, etc. Then,
Thus.

Endeavor to Pick up (Here, or There) so many Excellent Good Odd Ones, as near
Suiting as you can, (every way) viz. both for Shape, Wood, Color, etc. but
especially for Scize.

A certain Rule to make a True Scizable Chest of Viols
And to be Exact in That, take This Certain Rule, viz. Let your Bass be Large.
Then your Trebles must be just as Short again, in the String, (viz.) from
Bridge, to Nut, as are your Basses; because they stand 8 Notes Higher than the
Basses; Therefore, as Short again; (for the Middle of Every String, is an 8 th.
The Tenors, (in the String) just so long as from the Bridge, to F Fret; because
they stand a 4 th. Higher, than your Basses; Therefore, so Long.

Let This Suffice, to put you into a Complete Order for Viols, (either way; The
True Place for the Bridge.
) Only Note, That the Best Place for the Bridge, is to stand just in the 3
Quarter Dividing of the Open Cuts Below; though Most, most Erroniously suffer
them much to stand too High, which is a Fault.

After all This, you may add to your Press, a Pair of Violins, to be in
Readiness for any Extraordinary Jolly, or Jocund Consort-Occasion; A Proviso,
as to the use of Violins.
But never use Them, but with This Proviso, viz. Be sure you make an Equal
Provision for Them, by the Addition, and Strength of Basses; so that They may
not Outcry the Rest of the Music, (the Basses especially) to which end, It
will be Requisite, you Store your Press with a Pair of Lusty Full-Sciz'd
Theorboes, always to strike in with your Consorts, or Vocal-Musick; to which,
That Instrument is most Naturally Proper.

And now to make your Store more Amply-Compleat; add to all These 3 Full-Sciz'd
Lyro-Viols; 3 Lyro-Viols, the Completing of the Store.
there being most Admirable Things made, by our Very Best Masters, for That
Sort of Music, both Consort-wise, and Peculiarly for 2 and 3 Lyroes.

Let Them be Lusty, Smart-Speaking Viols; because, that in Consort, they often
Retort against the Treble; Imitating, and often Standing instead of That Part,
viz. a Second Treble.

They will serve likewise for Division-Viols very Properly.

And being Thus Stored, you have a Ready Entertainment for the Greatest Prince
in the World. An Entertainment for a Prince.


I will now give you some Directions for the General Use of the Viol, and are
as follows, in This Next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
THe Viol is an Instrument so very much in use, Concerning the Right use of the
Viol.
and so many Professed Teachers upon It, that It may seem Impertinent to give
Directions concerning It; especially since that Excellent Master, Mr.
Christopher Simpson, has done It so very well already; yet because some may
Happily meet with This of Mine, who may not have That of His, and that I shall
Exemplify something, which He has not done in the General; I will therefore
(to make This my Work useful to the Lovers of the Viol) set down (in short)
That Way, which (according to my Long Experience, I have found most
Advantageous, both to My Scholars, My Self, and the Promotion of the Art in
General.)

First therefore, Let the Young Beginner enter into Its use, The very Best
Prae-directions for the Young Beginner.
in That way, which we call the Plain-way, viz. Viol-way, or Lute-way, (which
is all one) and is the Very Best of Tunings; and Infinitely Best for the
Learners Profit.

2dly. Let him Learn to Play by Notes, viz. according to the Old Substantial
Rule of the Scale; and not by Letters, or Tablature, (the which is to begin at
the wrong End First.)

3dly. Let him have Patience, (yet, for one Week, or Fortnight) to make himself
thoroughly Perfect, in Those Notes, or Rudiments, by the Book; and also upon the
Instrument, before he Hanker after any Lessons.

4thly. Let him undertake an Exact Performance of his Time-keeping, Daily, as
he goes on, By which his whole Work shall be made very Short, and certain.
(which may likewise be gained in One Fortnight more;) the which being done,
with a Diligent Care of Right Order, Exact Postures, and True Fingering, the
Difficulty of the Whole Work will be Over. For then he will have little or
nothing to trouble himself with, but only to Practice, and Gain a Ready Hand;
the which likewise in a Short Time* (by These Rules only) will follow. But if
They be neglected, his Work will be Shabby, and Lame, for ever after, and never
Perfect, and Complete.

Therefore take Good Heed, to This Good Council.

CHAP. VI.
NOw that you may know how to Act All This.

First, make Choice of a Viol fit for your Hand; What Sciz'd Viol is Best to
begin upon.
yet rather of a Scize something too Big, than (at all) too little, (especially
if you be Young, and Growing.)

Then Enter into your Posture; which is Thus.

Having Placed your self in such a Convenient Seat for Height, The Posture.
and in a Comely, Upright, Natural-Posture; so, as your Knees may not hinder
the Motion of the Bow, by Bending; set your Viol Down, between the Calves of
your Legs, and Knees; so, as by Them, It may stand steadily, without Help of
your Left Hand, and so fast, that a Stander by, cannot easily take It Thence.

Let the Head of It be Directed over your Left Shoulder; yet some small matter
Inclining toward your Elbow: The Bow-Holding.
Then take your Bow betwixt your Right Thumb, and 2 Fore-fingers, near the Nut;
the Thumb and 1 st. Finger Fastening upon the Stalk, and the 2d. Finger's-End
Turned in Shorter against the Hairs; by which you may Poyze, and keep up the
Point of your Bow; but if that Finger be not Strong enough, join the 3 d.
Finger in Assistance to It; but in Playing Swift Divisions, 2 Fingers, and the
Thumb, is Best.

This is according to Mr. Simpsons Directions.

Yet I must confess, that for my own Part, I could never Use It so well, as
when I held It 2 or 3 Inches off the Nut (more or less) according to the Length
or Weight of the Bow, for Good Poyzing of It: But it is possible, that by Use I
might have made It as Familiar to My self, as It was to Him.

So likewise, for the Exact Straitness of the Bow-Arm, which some do Contend
for, I could never do so well, as with my Arm, (Straight enough, The Straitness
of the Arm.
yet) something Plying, or Yielding to an Agile Bending: and which I do
conceive most Familiarly Natural.

For I would have no Posture, Urged, Disputed, or Contended for; that should
Cross, or Force Nature.

A Good Stroke above All Things.
Now being Thus far ready for Exercise, attempt the Striking of your Strings;
but before you do That, Arm your self with Preparative Resolutions to gain a
Handsom-Smooth-Sweet-Smart-Clear-Stroak; or else Play not at all: For if your
Viol be never so Good, if you have an Vnhandsom-Harsh-Rugged-Scratching,
Scraping-Stroak, (as too many have) your Viol will seem Bad, and your Play
Worse.

Now the way to gain This Right Stroke, is from your Intent-Care (at First) in
the Order, and Right Motion of the Bow; and although, as concerning the Holding
the Viol; the Bow; Order of the Arm; and Use of the Wrist; several Very
Excellent Masters do something Differ; yet All Perform Rarely Well; because
They Agree in the Main and Principal Thing, viz. The Care in Gaining the Good
Stroke; (as aforesaid) which is done after This Manner, viz.

The Surest way to gain a Sweet Stroke.
Only to draw your Bow just Cross the Strings in a Direct Line, endeavoring to
Sound one Single String, with a Long Bow, wellnigh from Hand to Point, and from
Point to Hand Smoothly, and not Dripping, or Elevating the Point in the least.

This is the First, and Best Piece of Practice you can follow; and till you
have gained This, think of Nothing else.

And as to the Place, where your Bow must Move, you are to regard 4 Things, The
Right Place for the Bow to move in.
viz. The Scize; The Stringing; The Pitch; and also the Various Uses of the
Viol.

1 st. If It be a Large Consort-Viol, your Bow must Move about 2 Inches and an
Half from the Bridge; if a Treble-Viol, about an Inch and a Half; and so upon
all Others, according to This Suitable Proportion.

2 dly. According to Its Stringing, viz. If It be Stiff Strung, or Stand at a
High Pitch, (which is both as one) then Play a little Further from the Bridge.

3 dly. According to Its Use, viz. If for Comfort Use, Play nearer the Bridge,
than when you Play Alone; which although It be not so Sweet, yet It is more
Lusty, and that little Ruffness is Lost in the Crowd; so likewise you may do,
if you be to Play at a Great Distance from the Auditors, for the same Reason;
for the Roughness will be Lost before It come at Them: But if you be to Play
very near your Auditors, especially unto Curious Ears, Play a little too far
off, rather than too near; for by that means, your Play will be the more Sweet,
etc.

The next Thing is, to gain the Motion of the Wrist, How to gain the Motion of
the Wrist.
(which with the Former is the Accomplishment of the Right Arm;) and is Thus
gained, viz. only by causing the Hand, at the very Turning of the Bow (either
way) to incline to a Contra-Motion; the Arm (as it were) leaving the Wrist
behind It, seems to draw It again after It; Explained otherwise Thus, viz.

Let your Stroke be at what Length. It will; before you would leave the Motion
of your Bow, (if It be a Long Stroke) Stop the Motion of your Arm Suddenly: yet
Jet your Wrist still onwards, 3 or 4 Inches, and It is done: But if It be a
Shorter Stroke; then according to Discretion, a Shorter Jet of the Wrist,
Performs It.

I cannot Explain It Better, nor need I; for Ingenuity, and Practice, will get
It in one Quarter of an Hour.

Thus far may be Performed, without the use of the Left Hand.

And Thus much may be Sufficient for Directions for Viol-Play, in This my Work;
because in the 1 st Part, Turn back, for further Directions, to the Lute Part.
the same Order and Directions, which I have given for the Lute, must be
Exactly Performed upon the Viol: Therefore Turn to Those Directions about the
12, 13, or 14 Chapters, etc. and you cannot fail of a Right Order for your
Left-Hand-Fingering; Exact Time-keeping; and all other Particulars.

Therefore I will save much Labor, Two Gross* Faults Generally Committed in
Play, Explained, and Rectefied.
and Proceed to something else more Needful, and show how to Rectefie 2 Very
Grand Faults; Generally committed in Viol-Play, by most Scholars, and some
Masters also, (or at least such as go for Masters.)

The One Fault is in the Right Hand, the other in the Left.

That of the Right Hand is, The First of the Right Hand.
that whenever They should strike a Full Stop, They seldom Hit the Lowest
String, which is the very Substantiality of That Stop; It being the Ground to
all Those Upper Parts; and without which the rest of That Stop is (Generally)
all False Music.

Therefore I Advise, ever when you come to a Full Stop, be sure to give the
Lowest String a Good Full Share of your Bow, (Singly, by It self, before you
Slide It upon the Rest) and Leave It likewise with a little Eminency of
Smartness, by Swelling the Bow a little, when you part with That String. This
will make your Play very Lovely.

This very Observation, whoever shall take Notice of, so, as to put It into a
Constant Practice, shall find far Greater Content, and Satisfaction, in Their
Play, than at the present They can Imagine.

The 2 d. is no less Gross, yet more Commonly Committed, and is of the Left
Hand, The 2d. Gross Fault of the Left Hand.
viz. They seldom Hold their Holds according to the Propriety, and Necessity of
the Composition.

Now This is a Mystery to all Common Performers; and (to my Knowledge) to
several, who go for (or serve the Turn instead of) Very Good Master-Teachers,
to their Own Great Disgrace; The Abuse of Good Lessons; The Authors of Them;
and Their Scholars; as I shall make very Plain, by Example.

And I will take the more Pains to Explain This Error, because It is the
Grosest that can be Committed in the Kind.

And that you may know the Right meaning of a Hold, Observe; the Best Lessons
of the Best Masters are often so Composed, as They shall seem to be Single, and
very Thin Things, viz. All Single Letters, without any Full Stops, etc. Yet
upon a Judicious Examination, there will be found a Perfect Composition, of an
Entire Bass, and Treble; with Strong Intimations of Inner Parts.

And whosoever shall undertake the Management of a Viol, and shall not in his
Play, or Composition, be able to show such a Piece of Mastery, must needs be
accounted beneath a Master-Composer: But he who shall Neglect, or be Ignorant
in the Way of Right Playing such Compositions of other Men, whereby Those
Perfections ought to be Expressed, which are mainly Considerable, as to the
Propriety, Who not fit to be owned as a Master, upon a Lute, or Viol.
and Support of such Compositions; He, I say, must needs be counted Deficient
in Judgment, and Skill; and not fit to be owned, as a Master, or Teacher.

And All This I will Explain by an Example Here following; which is a Lesson I
have so Contrived; that if It be well understood, and Rightly made use of, will
Teach Exact Fingering, and Perfect Good Play, in All Lessons whatever; and
therefore of Great Good Use.

So that I shall Advise All, who intend to come to any Good Proficiency upon
This Instrument, to take Great Notice, of This Lesson, and not only to Play It
well, according to Those Marked Holds, set quite through: But also, to observe
the Reason of That Discourse which follows, concerning the same Lesson; and so
to lay It into his Understanding, as to be made Master of This One Thing; which
shall Amplify, and Complete his Play for ever after.

Here is the Lesson following, together with the Tuning.

The Tuning Viol-Way.
^
CHAP. VII.
^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

The Former Lesson Explained in Scores, in which appears a Perfect Bass, and
Treble, quite through.

The Treble of the Lesson.

^
^

The Lesson.

^
^

The Bass of the Lesson.

^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

This Last is a Product, or a Third (Forced) Part, of the 1 st. Lesson, and may
be Played upon another Viol, together with That Bass and Treble* though I
intended It not for any such use; but only to show how Familiarly* and
Naturally a Third Part might be put to such a like Contrivance; which is all I
intended It for.

That Lesson, The Authors Reasons for setting This Lesson Thus.
(which you see set by Scores) is rendered Exactly to be 2 Parts, quite through;
and I have set It Thus (in Notes, with the Tablature between) On purpose, that
you may the more clearly see the True Nature of such Things; The Right Way of
Composing such Things; and the Absolute Necessity of Playing such Things Thus,
according to This Rule of Holds.

I will yet further, for your Satisfaction, make It more Particularly Plain; as
Thus.

You see, that every 1 st. Note of a Bar, in the Tablature (excepting the
Closes) is but a Quaver; yet, look into the Score-Notes underneath Them, and
you will find, That every such 1 st. Note, is much more, viz. Some 2, 3, 4, 5,
or 6 Quavers; as for Example.

The 1 st. Note of the Tablature is an (^) upon the Sixth, and but a
Prick-Quaver.

But the 1 st. Note of the Score under It (being Double D-sol-re) is a
Prick-Crochet, and Sounds all That Time, till you come to the Letter (^. Note
the Necessity of a Clear-Smart-Stroak, especially upon a Bass.
) And the which must be done, by giving That (^) a Strong-Clear-Stroak; and
leaving It Smartly, at Its Farewell.

Now because That (^) is an Open String, It will continue Its Sound, till taken
off, by some Stopped Letter, (as you see the Letter (^) takes It off.

But then the Letter (^) being a Prick-Quaver; yet) by the Rule of Composition)
a Prick-Crochet, (for the aforesaid Reason.) If you Stop It Close, and Hold It
steadily so Stopped, It will Sound Its Full Due.

And This is the True Meaning, Explanation, and Necessity of a Hold; which in
all such Cases must be so Performed; or else you both Injure the Lesson; and
want That Great Benefit of Its Virtue, etc.

The whole Lesson through, is Thus to be Performed; which by the Explanation of
this 1 st. Bar only, may certainly be done; and is sufficient for General
Directions, in All such Cases.

There is one Curiosity more depending upon Holds, viz. that at any time, A
Singular Curiosity, not much regarded by many.
when (by the Rule of Composition) a Letter is to be Held Longer, than it is
possible you can Hold It, by Reason of some Cross, or Skipping Passages; in
such Cases, Hold That Letter so long as you can; but at the Release, be sure
you take off That Finger, so cunningly, as you cause not, That (so
sudden-Open'd) String to Sound, (which is a Hard Matter to avoid in Quick Play.

This is a Piece of very Commendable Skill, and Activity; but not regarded by
many.

The Last, and Great Advantage, (by This Rule of Holds) will most certainly
Prompt, or Teach the Player, Right, Proper, and True Fingering, in all Lessons
whatever. For by Experience, he will find a Necessity of Stopping, such or such
Stops, with the Proper Finger; otherwise he cannot Perform It according to This
Vn-erring Rule.

I might trouble my self, and you, with many common Things belonging to
Viol-Play; But It being an Instrument known, and so Generally in Use, it needs
not.

But These Things which I have mentioned, are so Singularly useful, and so
Generally Neglected; but not commonly understood, that I thought Them needful,
and worthy your Knowledge.

I shall conclude all with some certain Things Profitable to your Practice, and
in Reference to what Rules I have thus far laid down; and so Conclude This Work.

This First Long, and New Fashioned kind of Praelude, or Fancy, (being
Plain-Way-Tuning, in the Nature of Voluntary-Play) may seem to be several Short
Ones Joined together; but is not so: For I Composed It all as one; yet for the
Better Information of the Learner, and the Greater Luster of his Play, I thus
Contrived It, that It might seem to be a kind of Extemporary Business, making
several Periods, and beginning again; each seeming to have some Relation to the
Praecedent.

The Strains are all various for Humor; and you may Play so many, or so few of
Them as you please, at any Time.

The whole would be Played in a Slow Proportion of Time; observing strictly all
the Pauses, with Soft, and Loud Play.

CHAP. VIII.
^
^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over for Another.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over for the Next.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^

This (with the Former) may suffice for the Best Directions in Viol-Play, both
as to the Gaining Exact Knowledge, for the Best Performances upon That
Instrument; and for the Gaining of a Tolerable Good Hand. Yet because I will
Gratify you a little further Herein, I will Set you one more Masterly, and
Large, in the Harp-Tuning-Sharp; which shall Complete the whole Business, and
so Conclude This Work.

And Here It is, with Its Tuning Expressed.

CHAP. IX. Harp-Way-Tuning Sharp.
^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Turn over.

^ ^ ^

Here Ends all the Directions for the Practick Part.
CHAP. X.
Three Reasons, why the Author has set so Few Viol-Lessons.
BUt whereas I have not Amplified This Viol Part, with such Store of Lessons, as
I did the Lute Part; take These several Reasons for It.

1st.
First, There is no such need in the General; because there are Great Store of
Viol-Lessons to be had (almost) every where; and but Few for the Lute; and
Those Generally Corrupted in the Pricking, etc.

2d.
Secondly, These (Here Set) are Fully Sufficient, both to Explain my Rules, and
also to make an Exact, Able, and Good Hand fit for any Undertaking; without the
Help of any other.

3d.
Thirdly, and Lastly, If (by what I have Here Published) I shall find a Further
Encouragement, by Its being well Accepted; I do intend (God willing) to put
forth another Piece, in which shall be Store of Viol-Lessons, of all sorts of
Forms, and Shapes; Suited to the Five Best of the Viol-Tunings, now in use,
viz. Viol-way; Harp-Way-Sharp; Harp-Way-Flat; High-Way-Sharp; and
High-Way-Flat. These being Chiefly Set for your Profit; Those will be more for
your Pleasure.

The Conclusion of the Work; with some Divine Considerations
I will therefore Now Conclude This Work, as I First began It, viz. with some
Divine Considerations, and give some Hints or Glances, Worthy your High Regard;
manifesting thereby, the Great Excellency of Music, in Reference to the
Contemplating Part Thereof; in which you will find there are 3 Great Mysteries
lie couched, yet made Clearly Discernable, by the Practick Part.

The 1 st. is, concerning the Two Differing, or Contra-Qualities, 3 Great
Mysteries in Music, apparently Discernable by the Art.
in whole Nature, viz. The Good, and the Evil; Love, and Hatred; Joy, and
Sorrow; Pleasure, and Pain; Light, and Darkness; Heaven, and Hell; God, and the
Devil; Plainly Perceived, by the Conchords, and Dischords; Agreements, and
Disagreements, betwixt the 7 Distinct Tones.

Two of the which are so Horridly-Hateful, and Unpleasing; The 2 Hateful
Dischords in Nature.
that no Harmonical Ear is able to endure them; Those are the 2 d. and the 7
th; both which (in a manner) are the same; For if we will admit an Eighth, to
be the same with an Unison, (as we must do; both from the Nature, and Use of
It) the 7 th. being a 2 d. to the 8 th.) They must needs be both of the same
Nature.

The 2 d. That Profound Mystery of Mysteries, viz. of the Holy Trinity, is
Perspicuously made Plain, by the Connection of Those 3 Harmonical Conchords,
viz. 1, 3, 5, (more than which Number, The 3 Lovely Conchords.
cannot (by all the Wit, or Art of Man) be put together at the same time, (in
Counter-point;) Any one of Them, Sounding Alone, (or with Its Unities, or
Octaves, (never so many) is very Pleasant, and Delightful; but all 3 Sounding
together, is much more; yea Vnutterably-Contentive.

The 3 d. is the (no less Strange, than) Stupendous Mystery of an Octave, or
Eighth; the which, although you seem to Absent, or go far off from the Unity;
yet in Its Center Line, you Marvilously, and Mysteriously Unite, and Harmonize,
even as It were in Unity It self.

I will speak a Little, of a Great Deal, that might be said of These 3
Wonderful Mysteries; and so Finish This my whole Work.

And in the Contemplation of These 3 so very Notable, High, Concerning the 1st
viz. Dis-unity.
and Sublime Speculations; First take Notice, that in This Art, the very Least
Imaginable Degree of Departure, or Separation from Unity, is Irksome, and
unpleasing to the Ear of any Harmonical, and Well-tuned Soul. As for Example;
We will suppose, that the Distance of a whole Note in Music, may Consist of
10, 20, or an 100000 Parts, or Degrees; or as many as you can Imagine, or
Number up, (with Pen, Ink, and Paper) in so many Years, etc. (for so It may be
very, Easy to give a Lively Demonstration Thereof.)

I say, the Least Departure, or Distance Imaginable, of any of Those Degrees,
from the True Central-Point of Unity, is That Dis-satisfaction before
Specified; the which may be perceived as well by the Eye, (in the Vibration of
a False String, where there may be discerned a kind of Restlesness, or
Unquietness, by Reason of Its Unequal Weight, or Poysing) as by the Ear, in the
Dis-unity, or Vntunableness, either of Voices, or Strings; for there cannot be
in either, any True Satisfaction, or Content; but there will seem to be an
Unquiet Snarling, and Jarring, little or much, according to the Distance from
the True Center of Unity; yet when They Meet just in That Central-Point, there
will be discerned, a Perfect Quietness, or Stillness; a Pleasure unexpressible:
This is apparent to All Experience, and may easily be Tried, and Proved Thus:
As for Example.

Let any 2 Voices, endeavor to Sing (strongly) together, Gam-ut, and A-re;
A-re, and B-mi; or any other 2 of the Scale, (next adjoining) and there will
quickly be perceived That Tormenting Insufferable Horror before mentioned;
even such, as a True Harmonical Ear, is no more able to endure the noise of,
than the cutting of his own Flesh.

And This is that we call a Dischord in Music; and is a most Exact, A Lively
Simile of the Bad Nature.
and Lively Simile of the Bad Nature, viz. Perplexity, Vexation, Anxiety,
Horror, Torture, Hell, Devilishness; yea, of the Devil It self; so Abominably
Hateful, and Contrary is It, to Perfect Unity, or Goodness: And is the True
Nature of Those 2 Distances in Music, viz. the 2 d. and the 7 th. so that
although they be (of all other Distances) the nearest to Unity; yet are They
the Most Remote in their Nature; Contrary, and Hateful; so that That Old Common
known Proverb, (The Nearer the Church, the further from God) may Here be said,
to find Its Original; and It may as Aptly be said of This Experiment, viz. The
Nearer to Unity, the farther from Agreement; except involved into the very
Heart, or Center Thereof.

Concerning the 4 th. which is both Concord or Discord; or neither.
There is yet another Distance, called a Discord, viz. the 4 th. but nothing of
the Nature, or Kind with Those other Two; But (as I use to say) a very
Favorable Discord; Its Hurts not like to the other; and there is a way in Art
found out, (yet indeed is Natural) to make the 4 th. a Perfect Harmony; and for
my part, I cannot call It a Discord; but shall rather call It a Newter, viz.
neither Concord, nor Discord; but as It may be used, It is both, and of very
Eminent Good Use, in the Mixture of Parts; But to Strike It, or Sound It Bare,
or Single, to Any one Part, It is a Hard-Staring-Note.

Let Thus much suffice, for the setting forth the Bad Quality in Nature;
Plainly Discernable, Thus, in This Art of Music.

Concerning the Good Nature, and the 2d. Great Mystery.
Now as to the Good Quality in Nature, before made mention of, (and the Contrary
to This) It will as Plainly show It self, by the very Single Unity (or Unison)
alone, viz. the Central-Vniting together of any 2 Voices, or Sounds, at the
same time; but is more wonderfully apparent in the Connection, or Uniting
together of the 3 Parts; from whence likewise This Old Proverb, (Tria sunt
Omnia) may as properly be said to take Its Rise; and will as significantly
Explain, That forementioned 2 d. Great Mystery, which is a kind of Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity, (with Reverence be It spoken) in the Consenting,
and Agreeing Chords among Those 7 before spoke of, viz. that in That whole
Number, there are but only Three, which may, or can be Joined together at the
same time, in Harmonical Agreement; which Three (in the Expression of Them) are
All, so at Unity, and Consent, that we receive Them, (though All Various) into
our Capacities, as one Entire Unity. And They please us Much More so United,
than any one of Them Single, or any 2 together. And there is such an Amplitude,
or Fullness of Satisfaction, in Those 3 Conchords, that no Expression of Words
is sufficient to declare the Height of Pleasure, and Satisfaction received from
Them. Much less unfold the Secret, or Occult Mystery which lies in Them.

Thus much of the 2 First Mysteries, Explained from the whole Number of the 7
Chords, or Keys in the Art, beyond which (according to the very Nature of It)
we cannot Pass; yet we are said to Exceed, into the 8 th. 9 th. 10 th. 11 th.
12 th. 13 th. 14 th. 15 th. etc. which is the Double Eighth: All which are no
more, (Indeed) than to Repeat over, the very same Chords again; for the 8 th.
is as an Unison, the 9 th. as a 2 d, the 10 th. as a 3 d. etc. The 3 d.
Stupendous, and most Admirable Mystery.
But This is still more a Stupendiously-Strange-Mystery; for although you seem
to Absent, or go farther off, from the Unity; yet in the End, you Marvilously
Harmonize, Accord, and Agree, even as It were in the Unity It self.

Now Reason in all These Things, is at a perfect Stand; can say Nothing
Satisfactorily unto It; How, or by what Means, It should Thus come to pass; But
that It is so, is Plain by All Experience.

I will a Little Demonstrate the Wonderfulness of an Eighth, in Music,
according to my best Conceptions, (though very weak Abilities) yet doubt not,
by what I shall say, but to give you some such Lively Apprehensions of the
Truth, and Reality of This Vast Mystery, that you shall certainly be touched
with Admiration, in a Due Consideration Thereupon.

As First, take Notice of the Ground, and Certainty of an Eighth, What is the
Certainty, or Ground of that Mystery of an 8 th. in Music.
Thus.

By Experience, we find, that in any String, be It of what Length soever, (
Short, or Long) the very midst of That String, will produce an 8 th. So that
(to come quickly to discern This Wonder) you may suppose a String to be 10000
Miles Long; or so Long, as would Encompass the whole Earth, or Heavens; That
String divided in the midst, would produce but Only One Octave, or Eighth; (but
you must suppose, by some Art, or Power, that That String may be Stretched, and
made to Sound:) Then again, the other Half, in Its Midst, would as certainly do
the like; and so on, in Sub-division, till you come to the Length of a Lute, or
a Bass Viol* String, which we see, does the like; so also does the Half
Thereof, viz. the Treble-Viol String; so again, Diminute-Less-Instruments, viz.
the Little Kitts, etc. The Halfs of all which, produce their Eighths: Then
still you must run down (Thus) in Subdividing, till you come to a String of an
Inch Long; and There, the Half Inch, will still be an Eighth; and from thence,
unto the very Least Imaginable Diminuteness, viz. an Attome; which although, by
Reason of Our Bounded Limitation, as to Our Natural, and Corporial
Organical-Capacities, we are made Incapable of either Expressing, or
Distinguishing such Invisible-Littlenesses; yet by our more Capacious,
Rational, and Apprehensive Faculties, we must needs grant a Consent unto, A
most Infinite Strange True Thing.
viz. that still an Attome-Length of a String, may be Infinitely Divided; and
so consequently produce Its Eighths.

This is an Undeniable, and Unutterable Mystery, viz. Infinity of Infiniteness;
both of an Unlimited, and Wondrous Vastness; and likewise a kind of Boundless
Interminated-Littleness; both which, in the Mystery, signify the same Thing to
me, concerning the Wonderfulness of the Almighties Mystical Being; which is the
Thing, I would have Well Noted, from This last mentioned Mystery, so
Discernable Plain in Music; and is a Most Worthy, and High Consideration,
becoming the Highest Divine Philosophers, and the Largeness, and Capaciousness
of our Souls and Minds.

And from hence, I cannot but Apprehend some sort of Analogy, relating to the
Manifestation of some Significant (though Inexpressible) Conception, of the
Infinite, and Eternal Being; the Center, and the Circumference, have such an
Absolute Uniform Relation, and Dependence the One to the Other, that Both are
Equal Mystery, and Wonder.

And Thus by Music, may both of Them be Contemplated, and made perceptible so,
that whosoever shall Experiment, what I have here writ, as being Himself made
Master of it, by His own Observation, and Understanding; He shall not only
believe what I Thus say, concerning These Mysteries of Music; but shall say,
He Knows It to be True, and together with It, find such an Instance, (yea
Confirmation) of the Wonderful Working Power, and Wisdom of the Almighty God;
that His Faith shall be so far strengthened Therein, A Security against Atheism.
that He shall never after Degenerate into That Gross Sub-Beastical Sin of
Atheism.

Thus I hope Music may be conceived, and allowed to have a near Affinity to
Divinity, in reference to the Deep, and Vndeterminable Mysteries of Both, after
This way of Comparison.

Much-much more could I say, of the Admirable, and Sublime Effects: The
Inexpressible, and Invaluable Benefits of This Divine Art; the which (I thank
God) I have found to my Internal Comfort, and Refreshments; but my Book is
Swell^d to too great a Bulk, and Therefore I must Conclude.

I will only set you Here, for the use of your Contemplation, concerning This
last Mentioned Mystery, the best Explanation I can conceive of the Reason of an
Eighth in Music; and so commit you to your own Pious, and Divine Conceptions,
concerning the Infinite, and Eternal Being.

And Here It is.



Great GOD.
MYsterious Center of All Mystery;
All Things Originate Themselves in Thee;
And in Their Revolution, wholly tend
To Thee, Their Octave, Their Most Happy End.
All Things (what e're) in Nature, are Thus Rounded,
Thus Mystically Limited, and Bounded;
Some Harmonize in Diapasons Deep,
Others again, more Lofty Circles Keep.
But Thou, the Moving Cause in every Thing;
The Mystic Life, from whence All Life does Spring.
That Little Spark of Life, which I call Mine,
It came from Thee; (a Precious Gift of Thine)
I Bless Thy Name, I Daily feel It move,
And Circulate toward Thee, Its Highest Love.
I Have almost Run my Round; it is well nigh past,
I Joy to think of Thee, (My First; My Last*)
A Unison (at First) I was in Thee;
An Octave (now at Last) I hope shall be,
To Round Thy Praises in Eternity,
In the Unconceiv'd Harmonious Mystery.
A Persuasive Adjunct, Directed to All Sober, and Serious-meaning Christians,
who are in a Mistake, concerning the True, and High Worth, of Music, if
Rightly made use of.
THE Great Benefit arising from These Sublime, and Transcendent Speculations,
will be an undoubted means to Raise, and Elevate, Sober, and Pious Minds,
beyond All Inferior, Low, and Common Things; so as They may be Fixed, only
upon (That Proper, and True Object of Souls) the Being of Our Beings; who
although Invisible, as to our Outward Bodily Eyes, yet Nothing is more
Certainly, and Clearly Obvious to our Internal True Sight.

How Music would be made use of, to the Best Advantage.
Thus would I have Music to be made use of,; there being Nothing of Art, and
Science, under Heaven, more Properly, Significantly, and Powerfully fit for
Divine, and Contemplative Good Christians, than It; by Reason of Its
Acchording, or Sympathizing Faculty with our Souls, and Minds, if Rightly
understood, and used. But if Abused, (as Divinity It self, together, with It,
is most Grossly) It works to Vanity, Lycenciousness, and the Intoxicating of our
Minds, with Folly, and Madness; even as may be seen in the mis-use of Divinity,
according to another Old Proverb, (Corruption Optimi est Pessima) viz. The Best
Things Corrupted, are the Worst.

Now, if in This My Discourse I have said any Thing which may not Sound
Pleasing in the Ears of Any; especially Those of the Sober Sort, under any Form
of Religion, Sect, or way of Divine Worship whatever, etc. I desire to be
Excused, in regard I have Writ Nothing, in This Book, taken up upon Trust,
either by Hearsay, or from any other Author, much less out of any Humorous, or
Conceited Fancy; but Really, and Sincerely, what I have Experimented in my own
Soul; and therefore think It very Fit, and Worthy to be Related.

The Principal Argument that I could ever yet hear spoken against Music, (by
Those who pretend most to Zeal, and Piety) and none more speak against It, or
slight It, than many such (which is Greatly to be Lamented) was occasioned, by
Reason of the Great Abuse of Music, which It daily suffers; and I do
acknowledge, with much Sorrow, that It is Generally Abused, even as Divinity It
self is, (than the which, Nothing is more) and very justly might, and may they
still say, that It is used (by too many) to stir up, (...) Cause, why Music is
so much Slighted, or Dis-regarded by Sober Good People.
and Excite Lightness, Vainness, Jocundity, and Folly; and nothing more True;
which is the Great Cause, why so many Hundreds, or Thousands, of Sober, and
Well Disposed People do Avoid It, as being Afraid to meddle with It, though
(indeed) It is Most Proper, and Fit, even for such Disposed People, of Grave
Serious Considerations, Who only can find the True Benefit of Music.
and Inclinations, for None but Such, can use Music, so, as to find the Right
Use, and True Benefit of It.

Therefore to such Sober People, I thus much say, It would be very well worth
Their Examination, to try, whether They Themselves do not Err on the One Hand,
in the Neglect, and Contempt of It; (being an Ordinance of God) whilst others
do mis-use It, and Err on the Other: And likewise to consider, Good Counsel
for Sectarians* who despise Church-Musick.
of what Eminent Use* It has been all along, both by the Authority of the Old
and New Testament, in the Church of God; And if They will be Ruled by Example
(as Most Religionists are, who Generally follow their Leaders, like so many
Harmless Silly Sheep; so that if one Leap Overboard, all the Rest immediately
follow, be It Right or Wrong) Let them make Choice of the Best, and most
Infallible Examples; and such as have been assuredly Inspired with the True
Spirit of God; (which too many now adays pretend unto, to very sad purposes.)
To which end, let them Search the Bible, and see if any such may there be
found; and if so, then to follow Them. To which purpose Read These certain
Texts of Scripture, here following; and there they will find a most Eminent
Example: One that was Infallibly Inspired; a Chosen Vessel of God, and Highly
Beloved of Him; Read 2 Samuel Chap. 7. V. 17.
a Prophet, and a Great King, whose Throne is Established for ever.

That Chapter is very Notable, in Expressing Gods Everlasting Love to David,
and His Seed, of whom came Christ, the King of Kings; who likewise gave
Exhortations sufficient Himself, for This Duty of Singing Praises in His
Assemblies, as you may find in my Former Discourse concerning Psalms-Singing.

Read again concerning David's Great Diligence for the House of God, in 1 Chr.
22. and so forward to the End of That Book; yet more especially Read Chap. 23.
v. 5. where you may find, that 4000 Praised the Lord, with Instruments which I
made (says David) to Praise therewith. Again Chapter 25. See what care was taken
to Separate Persons Fit for That Service, and Who should Prophecy with Harps,
Psalteries, and Symbols, (such Instruments of Music as They had in Those
Times) and the Number of Them, (as in the 7 th. Verse) that were Instructed in
the Songs of the Lord, (even all that were Cunning) was 288.

This was the Great Care of Prophet King David, That Holy Good Man (after Gods
own Heart) He knew not how to Praise God Better, than in such Expressions,
which were All Harmony, Lands, and Praises, Witness his whole Book of Ps. --
Some Particular Places only I will here name, (for It would be too Teadious to
set them all down.) -- Ps. 9.2. Mind the Joyful Expressions (surely as well of
His Soul, as) of His Voice, viz. I will be Glad, and Rejoice in Thee; I will
Sing Praises unto Thy Name, O Thou Most High. Again, Ps. 30.4. Sing unto the
Lord, O ye Note, who may properly be called Saints, and who not.
Saints of His; and give Thanks at the Remembrance of His Holiness. And from
This Place It may be Noted, That there are Properly Saints of God, and
Improperly Saints so called.

His Saints will not Refuse to Sing His Praises, Sure. Yet let us take Great
heed, when we take upon us That Sanctified Work, that we be not Unholy, in Its
Performance, and do It Hypocritically, Slightly, or Scurvily, or for any
By-End, or Respect whatsoever, but only for the Glory of God.

Read again Ps. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord O ye Righteous, for Praise is comely
for the Upright. And then V. 2. He shows them in what manner they should Praise
Him, viz. Praise the Lord with Harp; Sing unto Him with the Psaltery; and an
Instrument of 10 Strings, V. 3. Sing unto Him a New Song, Play Skilfully with a
Loud Voice: And then in the whole Psalm through, he gives the Reasons for so
doing, as so many Strong Arguments; which will be well worth your Reading, and
Noting.

Again Ps. 47. O Clap your Hands together all ye People, Shout unto Him with
the Voice of Trumpets; The Reasons again follow, till V. 6. where It is Thus,
Sing Praises unto God, Sing Praises; Sing Praises unto our King,
Note well.
Sing Praises: Thus 4 Times in This Short Verse It is Repeated; and as if It
were not sufficient, He still Adds in the 7 th. V. For God is King of All the
Earth; Sing ye Praises with understanding.

Again Ps. 66. Make a Joyful Noise unto God; Sing forth the Honor of His Name;
Make His Praise Glorious, V. 4. All the Earth shall Worship Thee, and shall
Sing unto Thee, They shall Sing unto Thy Name.

Again Ps. 81. Sing Aloud unto God Our Strength, make a Joyful Noise unto the
God of Jacob; Take a Psalm, and bring hither the Timbrel; the Pleasant Harp,
with the Psaltery; Blow up the Trumpet in the New Moon, in the Time Appointed,
on Our Solemn Feast Day; For This is a Statute, for Israel, and a Law of the God
of Jacob. -- Mark ye That; It is a Law.

Again Ps. 92. It is a Good Thing to Sing Praises unto the Name of the Most
High, V. 3. Upon an Instrument of 10 Strings, with the Psaltery and Harp; with
a Solemn Sound.

Thus is the Ferventness, and Great Devotion of This Good Man of God, Seen. And
to This Purpose, He may be Traced, almost quite through His Whole Life; as by
Abundance of Places more I might Instance in; which I suppose needless at This
Time.

Now were Music a Low Inferior Despicable Thing, as most of the Great Zealots
of This Our Age, An undeniable Argument, to prove Music Highly Valuable.
on the One Hand do Esteem It; And the Abusers, or Sleighters of It on the
Other, cause It so to be thought, by their Profanation, or Neglect of It;
Certainly, ( This Prophetical King) was some
Silly-Conceited-Idle-Headed-Intoxicated-Brainsick-Inthusiast; or one that
stands in Scripture-Story, for a mere Fixion, or a Lie; (and the Scripture It
self must needs be judged the Same,) or else They do not believe That Book;
some of These Consequences must needs follow; or else, most assuredly, Music
is (as Ever It must, and ought to be Esteemed) a Thing of High Value; and of
Principal Regard, and Use, in the Church, and Service of God. And the which,
(from what has been already said, or from whatsoever to the contrary can be
said, against It, by the Peevishness, and Ignorance of the Worst of Its
Enemies) will be a Lasting Monument, and a Glorious, and the Most Becoming
Ornament, for the Purest of Divine Souls, and the Most Worthy Worthies in
Divinity, and in Gods True Church.

And I am subject to Believe, (if in Eternity we shall make use of any
Language, or shall not understand One Another, by some More Spiritual
Conveyances, or Infusions of Perceptions, than by Verbal Language) That Music
(It Self) may be That Eternal, That Music may be the Language of Eternity.
and Celestial Language. Allelujah, Allelujah, Allelujah.

FINIS.

