The Prancing Swearer; Or, Perjury Militant. An HEROIC Poem.
By C. M.

AS Babylon of Old was fertile grown
In Perjuries, enough to cloud the Sun;
So has our Age (unhappy it is to tell!)
To Her approached the nearest Parallel.
Unheard of Villains, in our Matchless Age,
Publicly came on the Tribunal Stage;
Whose Poisonous Breaths endeavored to defame
The First of Rank in Sacred Honor's Name:
But as they are, so ever may they be,
The scumm and dreggs of open Infamy.
IN that Proud City, (to whose Sovereign Sway
The Eastern World did humble Homage pay)
Imperious, Haughty Babylon, by name,
Dwel^ (...), a man of (...).
To Him, as well deserving, was by Heaven,
For a Chaste Wife, the Fair Susanna given.
Susanna! Whose unspotted Life and Grace,
Showed her the Daughter of good Chelcias.
In Piety matchless was the Parallel,
Whether the Child or Father did excel.
Besides the Blessing of a Virtuous Mate,
Heaven blessed him with a Large and Fair Estate.
His goodly House, his Grotts, his Garden fair,
Invites the Jews to walk and take the Air.
Where must they go, but to good Joacim?
He loves them All, as All he thinks loves him.
But Oh! no Pleasures here below are found
To be complete; but an Eternal Round
Of changes, flow: Thus does a sudden Ebb
Stop Joacim's Tides of Joys oth' Marriage Bed.
The Time was come, that Babylon must name
Two of her Elders, to support the Fame
And Grandeur of her Laws; who Judge and Hear
All the Events of the Ensuing Year.
Chosen unhappy Choice, cried Heaven! who knew
That Punishments must Babylon pursue,
When her old Judges, judge not what is True.
At Joacim's House these Two did much abide,
And all depending suits of Law decide.
It chanced (the Business of the Hall being done,
And Crowds of People all returned home)
Susanna in her Garden walked alone:
The Elders this observed, (so sharply bent
Are lustful Eyes upon the Innocent;)
The more they gaze, the more they do desire;
Her Beauty Fanns their Feavourish Coals of Fire:
Hot burns the Calenture; no Med'cin's found;
Susanna gave, Susanna cures the wound.
These wretched Elders jointly do conspire
In chaste Susanna's Arms to quench their Fire:
Secret they lie purdeiu, and watch the time
In The Garden, for to act their horrid Crime.
And lo! unguarded Innocence comes in,
(Her Maids attending,) thinking no design,
Was against her Honor laid: (They only fear,
Whose Crowding Ills the sting of Conscience bear.)
The fervent day, fraught full with Phoebus Beams,
Invites Susanna to the cooling Streams;
Willing to bath, thinking no mortal Eye
Uncovered Innocence was there to spy.
Then on her Maids she forthwith laid Commands,
To fetch her Oil and Wash-Balls for her Hands;
To shut the Garden Doors, lest any one,
Whilst bathing, should approach to her alone:
The which, no sooner she to them had said,
But her Commands were willingly obeyed.
No sooner left, but from the secret Grove
The Elders rush, swelled full with poisonous Love
Tell her their purpose; bid consent or die;
Death is your Lot, except with us you ly:
If you refuse, against you we will swear,
That a young Youth in your Embraces here
You did Caress, all naked as you are.
She wept, and said, What Land or Sea is free?
What Refuge now remains for Wretched me?
Surpised! Betrayed! by Two cursed Villains Rage!
Naught but Almighty Power can it assuage.
If I consent, and grant you your desire.
^
Oh! better it is to suffer by your Hands.
Than Violate the Almighty's High Commands.
This said, her Tears and Sorrows spoke the rest;
But nothing moved Compassion in their Breast:
These Shamming Elders seize the Innocent;
And to take Life, and Honor, both are bent.
The noise being heard, the Servants all did run,
To know what in the Garden then was done:
The Elders blast Susanna with a Ly;
(What Innocence is safe from Perjury?)
It Is noys'd, and Rumors still in telling grow;
As rolling Snow-Balls ever gather Snow.
The People flock where Joacim does dwell,
To hear these Judges their Shamm story tell:
Who, in the Presence of the People, sent
For Chaste Susanna, who was Innocent.
She comes, attended with a numerous Throng
Of Kindred, weeping at her wondrous Wrong:
Her self serene, and beauteous to behold;
Framed by Angelick Art, in Heavenly Mould.
But, Ah! what help can Beauty her afford?
It Was that, at first, unsheathed the Villains sword;
The sharpest sword, the Villains Perjured Word.
Laying their hands on fair Susanna's head,
In public to the people, thus they said:
As in good Joacim's Garden we did walk,
Of Truth and Justice privately to talk;
This Woman, and her Maids, mean time came in;
(Alas! we little thinking 'twas to sin:)
But her Attendants, she soon sent away,
And shut the Doors, least they should Her betray.
Then to Her came a Youth, whose lustful Charms
She gladly clasped within her willing Arms.
This Wickedness we seeing with our Eyes,
'Cause 'twas Susanna, strangely did surprise;
Then made we have to seize the Adulterous Man;
But he forced ope' the Door, and from us ran.
Susanna then we took, who now stands here;
But her Adulterer she would not declare.
This, and much more, we both can Testify:
Therefore it is just, Susanna forthwith Die.
Now the Assembly did these Men believe,
Thinking that Judges never would deceive,
And spotless Innocence of Life bereave.
With a Loud Voice, Susanna then did Cry;
O God, in whom alone's Omnisciency!
Lo, here I am, by Villains Perjury,
For what I never did, Adjudg'd to die.
Almighty Lord, Thou Know my Innocence;
Thou Know, they swear under a false Pretense;
And Perjury's their only Evidence.
The Almighty heard the Innocent thus Cry;
And as they led her to her Destiny,
A Sprightly Youth cried out, ( Daniel by name)
Why do you thus the Innocent defame?
The Crowding People turning, asked the Truth,
And Meaning of those words, spoke by the Youth?
To whom; Your Folly I must plainly tell:
Are ye such Fools, ye Sons of Israel,
Thus rashly to Condemn the Innocent,
Without examining these men's Intent?
Return, return, unto the Judgment place;
Where you shall hear these wretched Elders case.
At which the Judges to him did reply,
Come public speak, where lies the villainy
Put these, says he, in separate Rooms aside,
And the whole matter I will soon decide.
Then calls he one, and to Him thus did say;
Thy wicked Perjuries appear to day:
Thou have maliciously false Judgment given;
And black'd with Lies, what is as clear as Heaven.
But hearken now to what the Lord does say;
The Innocent and Just thou shall not slay:
Under what Tree did You this Woman see,
Committing with the Youth Adultery?
Who Answer made, under a MASTICK TREE.
The Other being brought, thus he began;
Of Judah Thou art not, but Canaan;
Beauty to You has proved a Golden Bait;
And drawn upon You an Impending Fate.
Under what Tree did You this Woman see,
Committing with the Youth Adultery?
His answer was, under an OAKEN TREE.
Your Oaths, says Dan'el, are more false than Hell
Could ever broach, to make a Parallel;
And Heavens Revenge has justly found this Day,
Your Crimes with equal Punishments to pay.
The amazed Assembly, with Confused Noise,
Praised her Deliverer with Heart and Voice.
The Elders from their Honors were displaced,
Proved Perjured Men, abandoned and disgraced:
And as themselves endeavored, were they served;
Suffering that Day Susanna was preserved.
Then all Her Friends to God did Praises sound,
'Cause no Dishonesty in Her was found.
And from that Day the People did Proclaim,
Daniel most Wise, and Chaste Susanna's Fame.
THus Reader, have thou seen the blasted Times
Of Isreal's Honor, and her causing Crimes.
Here, not the Low and Humble do devise
To cut off Life and Fame with Perjuries:
But the great Rulers, (whose peculiar Care
Is Mercy, Truth, and Justice) falsely swear.
Unhappy Land, and People; for what Curse
Than Perjury can fall on Nations Worse?
What shield has Innocence, if that the Fiend
Will perjured be, Her self for to defend?
None, none, but Heaven, could poor Susanna find;
To Innocence may Heaven still prove so kind:
And for Revenge to perjured men, may Heaven
Decree the Elders portion to be given.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. in Jewen-Street. 1686.


