Matters of great Consequence, and worthy of Note to all England.

First the Royal Embassage from the Prince of Orange, to the well affected
Subjects of England.

Secondly, a Message from a Committee of both Houses of Parliament, to the
Spanish Ambassador, to make stay of the Ships at Dunkerk, which were intended
for the supply of the Rebels in Jreland.

Thirdly, the true and humble Petition of the Lords, and Commons now assembled
in Parliament, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty; concerning the Lord
Kimbolton, M. Hollis, and the rest of the Gentlemen that were accused of high
Treason.

Fourthly, An Order of the House of the Lords for suppressing of the
Archbishop of Armaghs Sermon, which was falsely put upon him.

Fifthly, Articles against Sir Edward Herbert Knight, His Majesty's Attourny
general, by the House of Commons.

Sixthly, An Ordnance from His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, for the
ordering of the Militia of the Kingdom of England, and also of the Dominion of
Wales.

Lastly, the names of all the Lievtenants of every Country, which are approved
by the Kings Majesty.

portrait

Printed at London for F. Coules, and Tho. Banks. 1642.

A Royal Embassage from the Prince of Orange, to the welaffected Subjects in
England.
WE have maturely considered of this disloyal opposition which have been
reflected on our Father, the manifold endeavors of your unwearied vigilance,
and the obstacles that interrupt the same, with the multiplicity of
distractions wherein your Kingdom is dangerously involved did forthwith
according to our indulgent ^ffection, think it expedient to premonish and
advertise you of them nerous perils which are imminent and impendent over you;
it struck a repercussive grief and careful solicitation into our Princely
mind, as soon as we had intelligence concerning the same; and that their
stratagems might prove abortive, for the prevention thereof we thought good to
show our ^^^lous duty to his Majesty, our respective affection to his
Parliament, and the fu^ure security of his Royal Throne and Realm.

And first were predictate unto you the obscurely hatched conspiracies of the
King of Spain, the o^ject of whose sole intents have principally aimed at the
destructive ruin of your Nation: We have had credible intelligence; that he is
suddenly resolved to raise a strong and formidable Navy (scarec inferior to
that almost Invincible Armado) and with a rushing and unexpected throng invade
the Land. Don Pedro affirmed this to be true, and has conducted many
paper-messengers to us concerning the absolute ^ste^pulation and credible
assertion of the same. Don Pedringano l^kewise (my singular and intimate Friend
did certify the same unto me: Wherefore we lovingly (...) and obsequiously
too, premonish you to be circumspective and cautious, for to our certain
knowledge Don Ke^valo Caris is in great preparation to raise and augment his
Fleet as appeared by the Notions of our dearest friends. But besides this trap,
there is likewise a dangerous snare distended against your Kingdom, which both
do violently threaten a most preciptious destruction. My intent is not
misterious or enigmaticall* but rather very perspicuous to be interpreted I
mean the Frenchmen, who, like the Egyptian Locusts, who are resolved to (...)
in the Realm suddenly, and so imbrew their inhumane hands in the ^ffusive blood
of the Protestants.

These with the anxiliary assistance of the rebels in Ireland, being link
confederates, and once conjoined in the cruel concatination of tyrannical
consp^reces are able to precipitate the whole Kingdom at one stroke, if Gods
omnipotent hand do not stay it, and your vigilant endeavors prevent it, Sed
meliora speramus, we hope and expect a more happy, favorable, and propitious
event. Yet notwithstanding without any sup'ne procrastination we humbly beseech
for your own safety particularly, and the Epidemicall security of the whole
Kingdom, that you would with judicious maturity of Counsel seriously consider
the perrilous precedent premises, and you may then (...), that the consquence
thereof is very dangerous. Wherefore in this respect our humble advice is, that
you would be graciously pleased to fortify all the chief Coasts and Cinque
Port with Military Arms, and strong Ammunition in defense of the Kingdom, for
otherwise nothing can be expected but ruinate and precipitate destruction.
Likewise that you would gravely consider and appoint, that the City of London
be strongly provided, and the Tower soundly searched, least any intestine plot
should be fomented at home. As also, that all Mill^^^ Ammunition be provided,
and it be forthwith ordered, that the Train Bands should daily wait for
prevention of any conspiracies that should ensu^. Thus as we have presented our
present care and indulgent solicitation for the safety and welfare of the
Kingdom: so likewise we presume to command respectively our petitionary
desire to your Honors: First, that your Honors would be graciously pleased to
condescend to his Majesty's pleasure and just Command, without repugnance and
opposition; for a distractes varience between a King and his Subjects, is the
first ground and principium of confusion to a Nation. Therefore we humbly
implore your Honors to conjoyne with his Majesty in a reciprocal concord,
that the knot of peace and tranquillity may be tied so securely fast, that all
the hell-guided Conspiracies of Foreign Enemies may be annihilated and
abollished. That you would likewise endeavor to concatenate the affections of
the people to his Majesty, that his Royal Prerogative and Imperial Throne be
not violated, and trampled down by the malicious aspersions of such as are
ill-affected and dangerous persons in the Realm. That the divisions and
distractions in the Kingdom may be allayed and assuaged, to the comfort of
his Majesty, the Honor of his Parliament, and the perpetual peace and
prosperity of the Realm. In the mean time my diurnall prayers assiduous
Supplications shall be invocated upon the mighty and Almighty assistance and
auxiliation of God that all your deliberation and determining Counsels may be
directed to the right object, and for my part I will confirm my resolutions, and
am fully intended to assist you with my full power and Forces, and I shall
likewise diligently endeavor to repe^ and detrude those Foreign Enemies: And
for the Irish Rebels we shall labor to quallifie, and by Gods divine
providence assisting us we shall crown England with an Olive Branch of
Victorious Tranquillity in the Kingdom.

The Impeachment of Sir Edward Harbert, the Kings Majesty's Attorney General.
THat the said Sir Edward Harbert Knight, His Majesty's Attorney General,
sworn the third day of January in the year of the Lord 1641. Contrary to his
Oath and the duty of his place, did falsely, scandalously and maliciously
advise, frame and publish certain false, scandalous Articles of High Treason
against the Lord Kimbolton, one of the Members of the House of Peers in
Parliament, Densil Hollis Esquire. Sir Arthur Hasilrig Barronet, John Pym, John
Hampdeu and William Strond esquires, being then, and yet Members of the House
of Commons in Parliament: A copy of which Articles I am commanded by the House
of Commons to deliver to your Lordships.

1. That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental laws and
government of the Kingdom of England, to deprive the King of his Regal power,
and to place in subjects an Arbitrary and tyrannical power over the lives,
liberties, and estates of his Majesty's liege people.

2. That they have traitorously endeavored by many foul aspersions upon his
Majesty and his Government, to alienate the affections of his people, and to
make his Majesty odious unto them.

3. That they have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army to disobedience
to his Majesty's Commands, and to side with them in their traiterous designs.

4. That they have traitorously invited and encouraged a foreign power to
invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England.

5. That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the right and very being
of Parliaments.

6. That for completing of their Traiterous designs they have endeavored (as
far as in theme lay) by force and terror to compel the Parliament to join
with them in their traiterous designs, and to that end have actually raised
and countenanced tumults against the King and Parliament.

7. That they have traitorously conspired to Levy, and actually have Levied
war against the King.

And the said Sir Edw. Harbert, the 3. day of Ian. did falsely, unlawfully, and
maliciously exhibit the said Articles unto the House of Peers in Parliament,
and caused the same to be entered into the Clarks Book of the said house,
intending and endeavoring thereby, falsely, unlawfully, and maliciously to
deprive the said houses of their said several Members, and to take away their
lives, estates, and good names: All which doings of the said Attorney, and
every of them, were and are high b^eaches of the privileges of Parliament,
tending to sedition, and to the utter subve^sion of the fundamental Rights and
being of Parliament, the Liberty of Subjects, and to the great scandal and
dishonor of his Majesty and his Government, and were and are contrary to the
oath of the said Attorney General, and to the great trust reposed in him by his
Majesty: and contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and a great derogation to his
Majesty's Royal Crown and Dignity.

For which High Crimes, and Misdemeanors, the said Commons saving to themselves
the liberties of exhibiting any farther or other Impeachment or accusation
against the said Sir Edward Harbert, do impeach him; And do pray that he may
be forthwith put to Answer the premises in the presence of the Commons.

An ordinance of both Houses of Parliament for the ordering of the Milicia of
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
WHereas there has been of late a most dangerous and desperate Design upon
the House of Commons, which we have just cause to believe to be an effect of
the bloody Counsels of the Papists and other ill-affected persons, who have
already raised Rebellion in the Kingdom of Ireland* And by reason of many
disorders, we cannot but fear they will proceed not only to stir up the like
Rebellion and Insurrections in this Kingdom of England, but also to back them
with forces from abroad.

For the safety therefore of His Majesty's Person, the Parliament and Kingdom in
this time of Imminent danger, It is ordered by the King, Lords, and Commons now
in Parliament assembled, that A. B. shall have power to call together all and
singular his Majesty's subjects, within the County of C. as well within
liberties as without, that are meet and fit for the wars, and them to train,
exercise and put in readiness, and them after their ability and faculties
well and sufficiently from time to time cause to be arrayed and weaponed, and
to take the Muster of them in places most fit and convenient for that purpose.

And the said A. B. shall have power and authority within the said County* to
nominate and appoint such persons of quality, as to him shall seem meet to be
his Deputy Lieutenants to be approved of by both Houses of Parliament. And that
any one or more of the said Deputies so assigned, shall in the absence, or by
the Command of the said A. B. have power and authority to do and execute within
the County of C. all such powers and authorities as before in this present
Ordinance is contained. And he shall have power to make Colonells and
Captains, and other Officers, and also to remove out of their places, and make
others, from time to time, as he shall think fit for that purpose. And his
Deputies, Colonells, and Captains, and other Officers, shall have further
power and authority to lead, conduct and employ the persons aforesay armyed
and weaponed, as well within the County of C. as also within any other part of
this Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, for the suppression of all
Rebellions, Insurrections, and Invasions that may happen, according as they
from time to time shall receive directions by his Majesty's
authoritie-signified unto them by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.

And it is further ordained, that such persons as shall not obey in any of the
premises, shall answer their neglect and contempt to the Lords and Commons in
Parliamentarie way, and not otherwise, nor else where: And that every the
Powers granted (as aforesaid) shall continue until it shall be otherwise
ordered, or declared by both Houses of Parliament, and no longer.

This to go also to the Dominion of Wales.

The names of those persons, that were thought fit by his Majesty, and the
Honorable Court of Parliament to be trusted with the Militia of this Kingdom.
Barkshire Earl of Holland. Bedfordshire Earl of Bol^nbroke. Buck^nghamshire
Lord Paget. Cambridg^shire and the Isle of Ely Lord North, Ch^shre and the
County and City of Chester Lord Strange. Cornwall Lord Roberts. Cumberland L.
Gray of Wark. Derby Earl of Rutland. Devo^shire, and of the County and ^^ity
of Exon Earl of Bed. Dor^etshire, and the County of the Town of Pool Earl of
Salisbury. For the Isle of Purbecke Com. Dorset. Sir. Ioh. Banks K. L. chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, etc. Durham S H. Vare the elder. Essex. Earl of
Warwick* Gloustershire, and the ^om and City of Glousester Lord ^handois.
Hampshirt, and of the town and County of Southamp. and of the Isle of Wight
Earl of Pembr. Hertfordshire Earl of Salisbury. Herefordshire Lord Dacres.
Huntingtonshire Lord Mandevile. Kent, and the City and County of Canterbury
Earl of Leicester. Com. Lancaster Lord Whart^^ Leicester Earl of Stamford
Middlesex Earl of Holl^^d Com. Northampton Lord Spencer. Nottingham, and of
the Town and County of Nottingham Earl of Clare. Northumberland, and of the
Town and County of Newcastle, and of the Town of Barwick Earl of
No^thumberla^d Norffolk* and of the Com. and C^^y of Norwich Earl of Warw.
(...) L. Vis Say and Seal Rutland Earl of Exon* Salop L. Littleton, L.
Keeper, etc. Somerset Marquis Hertford. That the Lieutenant of the County of
Worcest. shall be nominated before Somerset* Staffordsh and of the Com. of the
City of Lichfield Earl of Essex. Suffolk Earl of Suffolk. Surrey Earl of
Nottingha^. Sussex Earl of No^thumber. Warwick, and of the Com of the City of
Coventrie Lord Brook. Westmerland Earl of Cumbe^la^d. W^les Earl of Pembrook.
Wigorn, and of the County of the City of Worcest. Lord Ed. Howard of Estrig For
the County and City of Bristell Master Densil Holl^^. Yorkshire, and of the
Com. and City of York, and of the County of the town of Kingston on Hul Earl
of Essex. Of the parts of Kestaven and Holland, and the Com. of the City of
Lincoln. Earl of Lincoln For the parts of Lindsay, in the County of Holland
Lord Willoughby of ^arum. Monmouth Lord Phil Herbert. Isle of Arglesay Earl of
Northumber. (...) Lord Phil. Herbert. Caraigan Earl of Carbery. Carm^^ther,
and Carmarthen Town Earl of Carbery. (...) Earl of Pembrook. Denbigh Lord
Fielding. Flintshire Lord Fielding. Glamorgan Lord Phil. Herbert. Montgomery
Earl of Essex. Merioneth Earl of Pembrooke. Pembrooke, and the town of
Haverford West Earl of Northumberland. Radnor Lord Little^^^ L. Keeper. etc.
That for the levving, ordering, and exercising the M^litia of the City of
London, power is given un^o Sir John W^ll^stere, Sir Jacob Garret, Knights, and
Alder^en* Thomas Atkin Alderman, Sir John Wollistone, K. and Alderman, John
Warner Alderman, and John Toufe Alderman, Sergeant M^jor General S^^ppon, or
any three or more of them. Randolph M^^waring, William Gibs, John Fowke, Iam^s
B^^^ce, Francis Peck, Samuel Warner James Russ^ll, Nathanael Wright, William
^arkler, Alexander Norm^^nghton, Stephen (...), Owen Ro^e, Citizens of London,
or any (...) or more of them.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons now Assembled in Parliament.
Shows, Kimbleton, M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasserig, M. Pym. M. Hampden, and M.
Strode, Members of the Parliament, was pleased to signify, That as Your
Majesty once conceived, that You had ground enough to accuse them, So now Your
Majesty finds as good cause wholly to desert any further prosecution of them.
Notwithstanding which, they remain still under that heavy charge so imputed
unto them, to the exceeding prejudice, not only of themselves, but also of the
whole Parl^^ment. And whereas by the express Laws, and Statutes of this Your
Realm, that is to say, by two Acts of Parliament, the one made in the thirty
seven, and the other in the thirty eighth year^ of the Reign of Your most
Noble Progenitor, King Edward the third; If any Person whatsoever* make
suggestion to the King Himself, of any Crime committed by another, the same
person ought to be sent, with the suggestion, before the Chancellor or Keeper
of the great S^^^e, Treasurer, and the great Council, there to find surety to
pursue his sugg^stio^, which if he cannot prove, he is to be imprisoned till
he has satisfied the Party, accused of his (...), and slander, and made fine
and (...) to the King. The said Lords and Commons humbly beseech Your Majesty,
That not onelyin point of Justice to the said Members in their particulars, but
for the V^ndication of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament. Your Majesty
will be pleased to send the person or persons, that in this case made the
suggestions, or informations to Your Majesty, against the said Members of
Parliament, Together with the said suggestions or informations, to Your
Parliament, That so such fruits of the said good Laws may be had, as was
intended by them, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament may be
Vindicated, which of right and justice ought not to be denied.

A Message from a Committee of both Houses of Parliament, to the Spanish
Ambassador, to make stay of Ships at Dunkerk, intended for the supply of the
Rebels in Ireland.
THe Lords and Commons have commanded us, to intimate to the Spanish
Ambassador, the advertisement that they have received of certain Ships lying
in Dunkerk, laded with Ammunition ready to take sail, intended for the relief
of the Rebels of Ireland: This they hold contrary to the Articles agreed upon,
in the Treaties of Peace between the two Crowns; And therefore the Ambassador
is to be moved from both Houses, to send speedily to Dunkerk, and to all other
his Majesty's Dominions, and unto the King his Master, to make stay of those,
and, all such Ships, as may carry any supply of Men, Victuals, Money, or any
other aid to His Majesty's Subjects, that at this present are in Rebellion in
Ireland; which otherwise will be understood to be a Breach of the Treaties,
between the Crowns of England and Spain, and so resented by the Parliament.

To the Right Honorable, the House of Peers, now assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of James Archbishop of Armagh,
Humbly shows, December last; (which service, according to his mean ability,
he was careful to perform) so it is, that one John Nicholson, having got into
his hands, a collection of some rude, and incoherent Notes of that Sermon,
took the boldness to publish the same (under the Title of Vox Hiberniae) as a
true Relation of that which was uttered before your Lordships that day. Which
being in many places void of common sense, and in the whole, every way
unanwerable unto what was fit to have bin delivered before so Honorable and
Judicious an Audience:

His humble request is, That your Lordships would be pleased, to call in that
supposititious Pamphlet, etc.

Die Veneris 11. Februarii, 1641.
Ordered by the Lords in parliament, That a Book concerning the L* Archbishop
of Armagh, being published and Printed by John Nicholson, shall be called in
and suppress^d.

IO. Brown. Cleric. Parliam.

FINIS.

