A Representation of his late Majesty King Charles ye first His giving Thanks
to Almighty God for ye birth of his Son (now our most Gracious Sovereign)
King Charles ye 2d. at St. Paul's London May the 29th: 163^



KLPO'LOY (...).

THE MOST GLORIOUS STAR, OR, CELESTIAL CONSTELLATION OF THE Pleiades, or
Charles Waine, Appearing, And shining most brightly in a Miraculous manner in
the Face of the Sun at Noon day at the Nativity of our Sacred Sovereign KING
Charles 2d. Presaging his Majesty's Exaltation to future Honor and Greatness
Transcending not only the most potent Christian Princes in Europe, but by
Divine designment ordained to be the most Mighty Monarch in the Universe: Never
any Star having appeared before at the birth of any (the Highest humane Hero)
except our Savior.

Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness -- Psalm. 32.1. By Edw. Matthew of
the Middle Temple, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for J. Stafford and Edw. Thomas, and are to be sold near the
White-hart in Smithfield, and at the Adam and Eve in Little-Britain. 1660.

To the most Augustuous Prince my Dear and Dread Sovereign Charlemain the 2d.
by the Mercy and Divine decree of the Almighty, his Highness own Inhaerent
Inheritance, and legal Succession, The peoples surpassing desire, signal
Loyalty, longing affection, and especial Election, of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Jure Divino and humano, King Defender of the true ancient
Christian Catholic Faith, etc. And by Divine Providence preordained to be the
most pious, prudent and potent Prince in the Universe.
ERuctavit Cor meum verbum bonum; Dico ego opera mea Regi, Psalm. 45.1. My heart
is Inditing of a good matter, concerning the King; Divine providence disposing
my Meditations toward so sacred a subject, directs the Dedication thereof
according to the Princely Prophet David's pattern. Dico opera mea Regi. Quod
ausus sum tantae Majestatis Principem tantillo adire munusculo That so mean a
person should approach the presence of so mighty a Prince, with so poor a
present may be accounted high presumption; yet it is storied, that Jupiter was
pleased with the course fare of a poor person.

Baucis in hospitium magnum accepisse Tonantem,
Atque illi insuaves apposuisse dapes, etc.
Under the law he that had not a Lamb to sacrifice, was permitted to offer a
Turtle Dove, or pair of young Pigeons, and in the Gospel a small Mite renders a
poor Widow Liberal, Aeschines when he saw his fellow Scholars presenting
great gifts to Socrates their Master, being destitute of such a present,
presented himself, professing to be wholly devoted to his Master, which Socrates
accepted as the chiefest Gift. There is nothing worth your Majesty's acceptance
in the power of Your Highness meanest subject, Parasitical adulation I know
unpleasing to your prudent Majesty, and hateful to mine own Nature, my Life and
what else can be accounted dear usque ad aras, I have bin always and still
shall be most freely ready to sacrifice. It Is said of Caes^r that surely nature
meant him for a Conqueror, when she gave him both such courage and such
courtesy which put Marius into a muze (saying) that he that du^st speak to
him, was ignorant of his greatness, and he that durst not was so of his
goodness.

The incomparable Candor of your Majesty's sweetest disposition gives me
encouragement humbly to implore Your Majesty's princely pardon for this
presumption, and to vouchsafe your Highness Gracious acceptance of this
unpolished piece, penner whilst my Soul (though enlarged with surpassing Love
and Joy for my Sovereigns safe and happy Restoration, (for which my prayers to
Heaven were frequent and constant, my Tongue and Pen Head, Heart, and Hands
according to my best ability not wanting) yet was much straightened with
perplexity of spirit, by reason of long imprisonment and distracted with
distemper of Mind and Estate always attending the sad Condition of Prisoners!
Happily herein somewhat not unworthy your Majesty's serious consideration at
present) may be observed: and I hope I have herein delivered nothing touching
your Majesty but what I have received from the dictates of that Good Divine
spirit which has directed me through this whole discourse and what I
faithfully believe will in due time be fully accomplished, my faith herein
being in part confirmed not only by those prophetical presages in this Tract
specified, and by Dreams and Visions (which howsoever by some may be accounted
vain or deceitful) yet I have often proved, and since found really to come to
pass, and receive a plenary effect touching your Majesty's return and other
matters of Moment: But also by an irresistible and invincible pressure of
spirit, to publish what in this tract, I have written; so that I may truly say
with the Prophet Jeremiah, 'Twas a fire in my bones, and I could not supresse
it, but by Divine impulsion of spirit, was importuned and pressed to declare what
by divine designment I believe is determined touching your Majesty's exaltation
not only to be the most potent Christian Prince in Europe, But to be the phoenix
of this Age, and the most Famous and Illustrious potentate in the Universe.
This I shall be ready to avouch against the most critical carpers murmuring
and detracting Momusses, and seeming zealous Zoylusses; and it is probable some
pernicious Pashurs will conspire with other confederates cogitare cogitationes
to devise devises against Jeremiah and be ready percutere eum lingua, to smite
him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. Their malice shall render them nothing more
then Pashurs reward, but a new name of terror and shame, Magor missabib
signifying fear round about, we have of late unhappily had too many pashurs who
cannot abide to hear any truth spoken, such as will not hear any good declared
or prosperity presaged to their Prince, how pious and worthy soever, but are
ready rather to calumniate; let all such seditions Shebaes, Cursing Shimei's,
Railing Rabshekeis, and rebellious Korahs know, that though they rail and rage,
against their lawful Sovereign against whom they ought not to entertain so much
as an evil thought, he that sits in Heaven will not only deride but in the end
destroy all such disturbing Traitors, and will establish your Majesty's Throne
in righteousness, cause your Highness Crown to flourish and cloth your Enemies
with shame and confusion in conclusion. The King of Kings has set his King on
high upon his holy Hill, his Sion, over his People; and sent an heavenly Herald
to proclaim his present power, and declare a future enlargement of his
Dominion; A glorious Star, or rather(...) flial Constellation, the Pleiades
Charles Waine, shining brightlie on the day of your Majesty's Nativity, when
your Majesty's late pious Father of blessed memory came to offer his sacrisice
of praise as Incense at the Alter of St. Paul. That Celestial Ambassador was
sent to certify Gods acceptance of that sacrifice, and to confirm the
certainty of your Majesty's future Exaltation, to transcendent honor by divine
designment preordained. E Caelis tanti beneficii mittitur nunciusquia nemo in
terras illius magnitudinem nec intelligebat, nec credebat (as was said of our
Saviors star appearing upon his Nativity) Caelestium munerum merito caelestis
nuncius est, the people neither understanding nor believing the greatness and
goodness of the benefit bestowed on them, an heavenly nuntio is therefore sent
to assure them of both. I have wuch more to speak concerning Your sacred
Majesty who may well be resembled to the Golden Gandlestick, and the two
Renowned Dukes, your Majesty's Royal Brethren to the two Olive Trees on the
right and left side thereof Zech. 4. But least I should incur the censure of
the City of Myndas for making my Porch to large, I shall crave your Majesty's
pardon, and Conclude with the prayer of that Princely Prophet your Majesty's
most pious Father, I pray God bless Your Majesty and establish Your Kingdoms
in righteousness, your soul in true Religion, and your honor in the love of
God and your People, which is and shall be the daily and hearty prayer of

Most Gracious SOVEREIGN. Though one of the Lowest, yet no less Loyal and
Faithful then the Loftiest of your Majesty's Subjects and Servants, Edw.
Matthew.

The high and Mighty Monarch Charles the second by the grace of god King of
England. Scotland, (...) France, and Ireland defender of the faith



KLPO'DOY (...). Sidus sive Currus Triumphalis Careli a Carolo, majoris Carolo
magno.
The glorious Star of King Charles II. Or, the Triumphall Chariot of the
British Charlemaine, Charles-waine.
ALmighty God the King of Kings, to whom the Shield and Pillars of the Earth
belong, by whom Kingsraign, Princes bear rule, and Rulers have Dominion, as he
is the Author, Giver and Disposer of Dignities, Honors and highest
promotions; So his Divine Majesty is oftentimes pleased by remarkable preceding
signs, to demonstrate his purpose of doing great things, for those persons,
whom his Omniscient Wisdom predestinateth to superlative Honor and
Greatness. To omit Heathen History, holy Writ is full and frequent in Examples
of this nature, signs celestial, by Angels, Stars, signs in the Heavens,
Lightnings, Thunders, Clouds, and very frequently by fires from heaven, or
bright-shining lights, and flames and pillars of fires also on Earth; always
evident infallible presages, to persons or places, public or private of
extraordinary mercies or Judgments ensuing.

To instance in some few (for to mention all would be too tedious) the Lord by
Angels and Visions often appeared to Abraham, touching his seed and estate; so
to Isaac and Jacob; And upon Moses his call to be Leader of the Israelites out
of Egypt, the house of Bondage; the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a
flame of fire, in a bush burning, but not consumed; Exodus 3.2. Gods mercy
herein is evidenced to Moses and his people; And after Gods Judgments against
their Enemies, who kept them in bondage, is manifested by many miracles, showed
by the power of God in the hand of Moses, Exodus: 9.23. who ( inter alia)
stretching out his rod toward heaven, The Lord sends hail, mingled with
fire, thunder and lightning on man and beast.

The Israelites marching out of Egypt, the Lord goes before them, by day in a
Pillar of a Cloud, and by night in a Pillar of Fire, Exodus 13.21.

Aaron speaking to the Congregation of Israel, the glory of the Lord appears
in a cloud toward the Wilderness, Exodus 16.10.

Moses coming down from mount Sinai, with the two Tables in his hand, his Face
shines so bright, that Aaron and the people are afraid to come near him, Exodus
34.30.

On the third day before giving of the law, thunder, lightning, thick Clouds,
and the mount Sinai trembling, etc. Exodus 19.16.

An Angel of the Lord appeared to Manoah and his wife, predicting the
Conception and Birth of Sampson, and they offering Sacrifice, the Angel
ascended in the flame which came from the Altar, Judges 13. A wonderful sign
presaging Sampsons surpassing strength, to be given of God; and therefore it is
said when he showed any Acts of his valor and force, The spirit of the Lord
came mightily upon him, Jud. 14.6.15.14.

The Angel Gabriel was sent of God, to declare to the blessed Virgin Mary her
Conception and birth of our Savior, and give him the name Jesus, and
prenunciate his goodness and greatness, Mat. 1.21. Luke 1, 31.32. A Savior of
the people, and he shall be great, and called the son of the most high, etc.

After his birth, there appeared a Star, by which the Magi, the great wealthy
and wisemen of the East were directed to Christ, who came and worshipped, and
presented rich gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, etc. Mat. 2.11.

On the Birthday of our Sovereign Lord the King, being Saturday 29. of May,
1630. a bright star at noon shone gloriously in the heavens, his late Majesty
coming then to hear a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross; the Text whereof was,
Sampsons Problem or riddle, Jud. 14, 14. Out of the strong came forth
sweetness, etc. And to present his praise and Peace Offering at St. Paul's
Altar, for the Royal Queens happy delivery of our then hopeful Prince: our
now most blessed, loved and honored, King, Charlemaine, the II. from a plain
but happily prophetical Pen; this threefold distichon then dropped.

Du^ Rex Pauliu as accelsit gratus ad aras,
Emicnit medio splendida stella die.
Dic Diuina mihi tractans Aenign^ata praeco,
(...) prudicat stella ^ntanda micans.
(...) in Occiduo princeps jam nascitur orb,
Luct un and ecclipsi cras Orientis erit.
Thus Englished.

Whilst to the Altar of St. Paul the King
Approached with his grateful Offering:
A Star at noon appeared; tell me divine?
That preachest Riddles, why it then did shine?
To the Western world a Prince is newly born;
And the East too morrow in Eclipse shall mourn.
That there was on the day following being Sunday, an Oriental Eclipse cannot
be doubted; The effects and operation of which are yet in future to be
produced, of which something shall be said hereafter.

At the death of Julius Caesar, Qui in Deorum numerum relatus est, who was
numbered among the Gods, a Comet shined then for seven days together, arising
about the eleventh hour of the day, which by the blind Heathens was believed
to be Caesar's soul, who had been a Comet of Combustion to the World, Horace
lib. 1. ode 12. -- micat inter omnes
Julium sidus, velut inter ignes
Luna minores.


But what History do we find mentioning the Apparition of any celestial sign
or star, at the Birth of any the greatest persons before or since our Savior?
Surely, none of our highest humane Hero's have been honored herewith; but our
Sacred Sovereign, upon whose Nativity in the midday, in the face of the Sun
this Star appeared, and shined most brightly, in the fight of many of good
credit, yet living to testify the Truth hereof.

Let none maliciously mistake me, as though I compared our King with the worlds
Savior, far be it from even my imaginations, much more expressions; I know his
Majesty as much abominates profane adoration, as he hates parasitical
Adulation: I shall therefore only set down some brief but serious observations
of resemblance happening touching that Star, appearing at the Nativity of our
Savior, and this Star or sign C^^lestiall shining at the Nativity of our
Sovereign, and leave the signification, interpretation and amplification
thereof to some diviner Pens.

The first Observation, is, that as that Star did lead the wisemen to Christ to
worship his divine Majesty, so the wiser and better sort of men were directed
by divine Providence to yield due honor and obedience to our rightful
Sovereign Lord and King, which by wilfully wicked persons was long withdrawn
and denied.

The second, That as Christ Jesus was the worlds celestial and eternal
Savior, sent into the world to save his people from their sins, and Death and
Hell due for the same, and therefore had the sweet name Jesus given him by the
Angel from God: So has God sent our Sovereign King to be a Terrestial,
temporal Savior to our Microcrosm; these three Nations, ready to sinck in
misery and slavery, and to be swallowed up by divellishly minded Miscreants,
Rebellious Traitors, walking craftily, etc. Such as Jerewiah the Prophet
mentions, chap. 6.28.

But God has made our King as it is said, v. 27. of that Chapter; I have set
thee for a Tower and a Fortress among my people, etc. And chap. 15.20. I will
make thee unto this people, a fenced brazen wall, though they fight against
thee, they shall not prevail; for I am with thee to save thee, and to deliver
thee, says the Lords.

Thirdly, as the wisemen of the East seeing the Star, came to Christ, and
rejoiced with great joy, and fell down and worshipped him, and opened their
Treasures, and presented to him Gold, Incense and Myrrh, Mat. 2.10, 11. So
has the Lord touched and wonderfully inclined the hearts of the people toward
our gracious King, that with inexpressible joy, and surpassing affection, they
bow and submit to his Majesty, with rich Presents, in token of Love, Loyalty
and Homage: As the prophetical King, and Kingly Prophet David, of our Savior
prophesied; The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, like as the rich
also among the people shall do hommage before thy face, with presents. Psalm.
45.12. Is not this Scripture fulfilled at this time in our sight? Again, Psalm.
68.29. Kings shall bring presents unto thee, the Kings of Arabia and Saba shall
bring gifts, etc. This is in part fulfilled by the King of Spaines Royal and
kind Prefents, etc. But will hereafter be more fully accomplished, but by whom
and in what manner, the same shall be done (although I have good ground for my
Faith herein) I shall at present conceal, another opportunity happily for
discovery hereof may be fitter.

Many prophetical expressions in holy Writ might be produced; properly
appliable to our Sovereign, King Charles, and even parallel to the present times
and occasions, a short Tract whereof has been penned a year since, but not yet
published; which I now forbear to specify, intending only at present to speak
and write of the said Stars Apparition at his Majesty's Nativity, and
observations thereupon.

Yet thus much, I crave leave to say (I trust without offense to God or good
men) and propose this quare; What man, ever more like the Son of man our
Savior, in his humanity, then this our Sacred King in several respects, as he
was:

1. (In his own person) born to be a King: 2 Pointed at by an extraordinary
Star: 3. Both in his pious Fathers person persecuted, and in his own pursued
into exile, both in a worse case then Birds and Foxes, who have nests and
holes: Calamities upon calamities accumulated upon Innocent heads, (our late
Sovereign at length, causelessly yet barbaroufly murdered at his own gate.) 4.
Slandered as a Friend of Papists and Malignants, as our Savior Christ of
publicans and sinners; and many other such like sufferings as our Saviors. Yet
Orietur stella ex Jacob and consurget virga de Israel and percuties duces Moab,
vastabitque, etc. Number 24.17, etc.

There shall come a Star out of peaceable James the Olive-bearer of this Isle,
and a Scepter shall rise out of pious Charles (a precious Martyr for the Laws of
the Land, and Liberties of the People.) Ex Jacob erit qui dominetur, Number.
24.19. de forti egressa est dulcedo.

Out of the strong shall come the sweet, a Ruler so pleasing, so much longed
for, and desired by the People.

What King except our celestial Sovereign and King David, ever rod on so many
Clouds of Calamities? ever bare such a burden of bitter miseries? yet (maugre
the malice of all the most potent opposers.) Me thinks I hear the Lord thus
comforting his King and people; I will raise up for them a glorious plant of
renown; And they shall be no more consumed, nor bear the shame of the enemy for
Rebellion any more; I will raise up a righteous Branch, A King shall reign and
prosper. Jer. 23. I will give the Crown and Diadem to him, whose due and
undoubted right it is, Ezekiel. 21. It Is well worth our observation; seven several
sorts of Government in this last Years space, sought and endeavored to be set
up; yet Iniquitatem, iniquitatem, iniquitatem ponam eam, says the Lord,
perverted, perverted, perverted will I make it; Yet have I set my King upon my
holy, hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. The Lord made David prosper in all his
proceedings, what ever David did was pleasing to the people; their tender care
of him was such, that they said, thou art more worth then ten thousand of us:
The King of of Kings owneth eminently and evidently our King, as he did King
David, to be his King, on whom are set the hearts of all the people? Has he
not united and knit them fast, unto his and their King? Is not our King (by
Gods grace to his Majesty) become the love and longing of his people, even the
joy of their hearts? They have been (with the spouse in the Canticles) sick for
love, for lack of his Majesty, their dearly beloved Sovereign, and which is a
signal Note of Gods love likewise; those that were his very enemies are not
only now in peace, but in love with his Majesty; And as Balaam for Balac,
though hired to curse, yet bless altogether; The Lord God is with him, and the
shout of a King is among them; Surely, there is no enchantment against Jacob,
nor divination against Israel: Our Charlemaine, according to this time, it
shall be said, what God has wrought, Numb. 23.21, 23. As the trees, etc. which
the Lord has planted, and as the Cedar Trees besides the waters; The King
shall be higher than Agag, and his Kingdom shall be exalted. Blessed is he
that blesses thee, and cursed is he that curses thee: Number. 24, 6, 7, 9. This
is the Lords doing in love to our King, and it is wonderful in our sight.

The Star or celestial sign that appeared at the Nativity of our Savior,
was doubtless the Pleiades, [the name of the star or sign appearing] of a most
benign and benevolent Aspect, often mentioned in Scripture, and of most sweet
influences, as appears by the testimony of holy truth, Job 38. and 31.
sometimes it is called Charleswaine, sometimes the seven Stars; so it is named,
Amos 15.8.

Plcides, some derive from plurality, quod (...), i. e. plures essent hyadibus
rectius ex (...) or (...) Navigando navigars, quod sint utiles (...) i. e.
Navigantibus. Because they are profitable, useful, propitious or prosperous to
Navigation, Mariners, or Navigators. Quod primum Navigationis tempus orto suo
graecis oftenderent; alii volunt esse, eas dictas quod (...), i. e. plure^ quia
sunt septem numero, seven in number: Alii a pleione matre nominatas affirmant;
they were seven Sisters, the Daughters of Lygurgu^ or Atlas; They nourished
Bacchus and he afterward translated them into heaven, and are become the seven
Stars, one of them is seldom seen, because (as the Poets feign) all of them
married Gods, and she alone a mortal and obscure man: Atlas was a skilful
Astronomer, who gave the names of the seven daughters, to these seven Stars
comprised in these verses.

-- Soptem esse feruntur,
Quamvis sunt oculis hominum, sex obvia signa;
Alcione Meropeque Electraque, Diva, Celano,
Taygete, Sterope, Praeclaro lumine Maia.
What can this signify, but that ^ur Sovereign Charles, is divinely ^esigned
(as Atlas is said, to bear ^p Heaven) to be a most firm Pil^r for supporting
and promo^ing the glory of God, and good of (...) is people in many Nations,
the ^leiades signifying plurality, and ^even the number of blessedness, ^ee
Genesis 28.13, 14, 15. the blessedness ^romised by God to Jacob.

These seven Stars are so placed, ^t ternae quaeque stellae proxi^nae inter
(...) trigonon i. e. triquietram figuram, ^onstituant, i. e. triangulum. That
^ach three stars next being themselves altogether do constitute, or ^ake a
three square, or triangle ^ometimes they are called, Triones, War, possunt
Triones dici septem, quod ^a sitae stellae, ut terna trigonafaci^nt, seven
Stars, or Charles waine.

Several Observations may hence ^e probably deduced, as presages conducing to
his Majesty's futu^^ Progress, to that transcendent h^ nour and exaltation,
with which (...) vine Providence is determined (...) dignifie a Prince so
highly dese^ving, as our illustrious Soveraign^

Why may we not believe the heavens have decreed, as well i^ crease of Honor
and greatness (...) this one person his Majesty, as pl^rality of stars
appearing, united i^ to one sign, which in all prob^ bility should signify a
larger exte^ of Power, Dominion and Territ^ries to the King, at whose Nativity
they shined so brightly? Why man not this heap of stars signify acc^mulation
of Crowns, from a thre^ fold Throne, to a seven fold Scept^ according to the
number of t^^ stars? of which more hereafter.

Why may we not suppose (se^ing Providence disposed a ridd^ for the Preachers
Text, at the time of these stars apparition) that the^ may be much mystery, and
many ^erets specially considerable, and worthy the unfolding, lie hidden ^et,
which revealed, may happily five much satisfactory light to his Majesty's
future proceedings? Our ^strologers have faltred much, and shot wondrous wide
and most ^eakly failed in their predictions; ^onest, learned and witty Wharton
of any I observed) came nearest to ^e mark, when in April, he calls for (...)
Beesome to sweep the House; and rid the Palace both of Fox and Goose, etc.

Astrology comes herein too short ^o render a resolution of this Riddle ^f
Sampson; a Joseph or Daniel di^inely inspired will be requisite for ^iscovery
of those profound my^teries, which divine Providence by Apparition of this
celestial sign Pleiades at the birth of the King ^ath designed.

It Is evident their influence has operated upon his Majesty very plainly in one
particular (to wit) Navigation, being thereunto so much inclined, and therewith
so much delighted, and having arrived to so much knowledge therein, even to
admiration of expert Navigators; this being but one branch of their effects,
why may we not conclude all other their influences to attend his Majesty
propitiously?

This propitious celestial sign, the Pleiades has also another name, it is
sometimes called Charles waine, which seems to portend and signify our
Illustrious CHARLES, shall by glorious archievements gain the additional surname
of Charles the great, become a second Charlemaine, raise, rare Trophies of
Renown to his perpetual honor, riding triumphantly in the celestial Chariot
of resplendent Charles his Waine, from the Western and Northern bounds to the
Eastern and Southern parts. Dilataberis ad orientem, and ocridentem, and
Septentrionem, and meridiem.

That prophetical Distick before ^ecited upon the apparition of this ^igne,
intimatesas much: Magnus in occiduo Princeps jam nascitur orb,
^uctus and Ecclipsis eras Orientis Erit.
To the Western world, a Prince is newly born,
And the East to morrow in Eclipse shall mourn.


This, (Eclipse, being a priva^ion of light, signifies sorrow, ob^curity,
adversity, as light is an em^lem of Joy, Honor and Prospe^ity) presaging the
sorrow con^eived in the Eastern parts, for the ^reat Conquests which our
Charle^ain victoriously shall there obtain, where his Majesty shall appear, as a
new Sun, rising gloriously in the Oriental parts.

In a short Poem published in the year of our Lord 1635. is contained a
continued succession from King Henry the second, there styled the great
Plantagenet, To our late sacred Sovereign Charles le bon the first, with his
Majesty's many ancient and lawful titles to several foreign Scepters (which I
forbear at present to specify) therein also are many Prophetique expressions
touching that royal, thrice renowned Family, which by divine Providence may be
fullfilled in our now most hopeful Sovereign ( inter alia) take this into
Consideration, which to me seems not impertinent to our present purpose.

To him his Neighbor Potentates shall bend,
The poplar Princes shall his vassals be
Afric and India to him shall presents send;
The Turk shall sheath his raging Semiter,
And prostrate stoop unto his Amity,
Esteeming them the happiest which prefer,
A league with him and so his name grow great
As far as Neptunes wandering surges beat.
Another prediction touching the golden Mines and Indies, the discovery whereof
Christopher Col^mbus first offered to King Henry the seventh, who married
Elizabeth Plantagenet Daughter and heir of King Edward the Fourth, by which
happy match the civil feud which long before between the houses of York and
Lancaster remained, was reconciled.

Betwixt the Rose which first grew in the wood,
And that which Venus colored with her blood.
Ovid Met.
She and her Richmond that thric^ blessed pair,
Refused the Golden offer of Colone.
Because they had a secret reed that one;
Who should hereafter sit in Arthurs Chair.
Should fetch the Fleet when he occasion saw,
And hold the golden Monarch in his aw.
This prediction of our now sovereign King, then the Prince of great Britain,
and the royal issue of our late pious King, and his most Serene Queen, Devout
Sans Dout, a Mary full of grace, pronouncing them both thrice blessed in their
royal progeny, in this Distichon, not altogether to be despised.

Of the then Prince Charles now our King.

For he and they that shall of them descend.
Shall reign in Britain till the world have end.
Why should any Imagine these Predictions shall not attain accomplishment in
his Majesty's Honor and happiness, seeing the King of Kings, owneth his
Majesty with so many signal tokens of love, and marks of Mercy, by dispelling
those dark distructive clouds of bloody Rebellion, turning his peoples hearts,
as the Rivers of the South, making his Majesty the delight, and desire of those
people, who before despised him.

Observe I pray this Prophetique presage at hand, ready to be performed, above
25. years since penned and published.

But turn our eyes, now from the clouded West,
And see the new Sun rising in the east,
With what auspicious brows the Heavens expressed,
Their glad presages, the celestial signs.
With holy anguries shined; Saturn did Feast
With sprightly Jove, whilst Apollo divines,
In delychick Raptures, the Age renewed again;
And takes new influence from bright Charles his Waine.
Although these are but parcels of that Poem, touching the Royal line and
Family of Plantaginet; yet some poesy, has sometimes come so near to
Prophecy, that as there is some vicinity in the names, so many times it
happened in the matters of their writings. Propheta and poeta, differ not much
in the words; propheta (...), which comes from (...), praedico, signifies not
only a Prophet, but also a Poet; And Poets have had another name, and that of
Honor too, and that was Vates; How shall we distinguish between the Prophets
and Poets of Israel? What are Jeremies three in his Lamentations, but a kind of
Saphick Elegies? David Psalms are not only Poems, but Songs, snatches and
raptures of a flaming spirit. The Jews had not two such Kings in all their
Catalogue, as Solomon and his Father, P^ets both; There is a largeness in
their souls beyond the narrowness of other men; and why may we not then think,
this may embrace more both of Heaven and God, and they be endued with a
Prophetique spirit.

As Christ's Star (for so it is termed by the wisemen, Mat. 2.2.) appearing at
his birth, was by St. Augustine, called, magnifica lingua coeli, the glorious
tongue of Heaven; So I hope without offense, the star^ that appeared at his
Majesty's Nativity may be styled, Caroli meximi^ Epiphania, the glorious star,
and manifestation of King Charles the great his exaltation. And as of Christ^
star (as some observe) It was no ordinary star, Ex situ, mot^, and tempore
lucendi, in respect of the site, motion and time of shining^ so under favor
may it be said of the Kings star, touching the temp^^ (...), 'twas
extraordinary, in regard other stars shine in the night, this at noon day, in
the fight of the Sun, in its full glory; as it were^ star appointed to wait on
the (...) hereby happily signifying, that the great Jehovah, the sun of
righteousness has designed and elected our Sovereign KING, to be his High
STEWARD, for management of the greatest matters and affairs in his Family, in
his Church and State, over his people, throughout a great part of the Universe;
God giving his Majesty superiority over many other his servants, though seated
in high places of Honor and power also.

Houdemius an Englishman, thus sung of our Saviors star.

Nova Caelum stella depingitur,
Dum Sol novus in terris Oritur.
It Was fit a new star should adorn the skies,
When a new Sun does on the earth arise.
In honor of our Charlemain,
It Is hoped it will not be counted vain,
To frame according to this strain,
A short Ode, on bright Charles his Waine.
Clara Caelum stel^a depingitur,
Dum Rexclarus in terris oritur.
Thus Englished.

Why not a bright star to adorn the skies,
When a Prince so bright, does on the earth arise?
Of that star of Christ, it was prophesied, Numbers 24.17. And of this star of
our King, by the same sybill that prophesied of our Savior, as hereafter shall
be showed.

Stella luce vincens Luciferum.
Magis ducit ad regem siderum.
3. That star of Christ's served to the Wisemen, ad ducendum, to lead them to
Christ; This of our King Charles serves to us (if we will be wise) ad
docendum, to teach and instruct us in ready faithful and constant obedience
and loyalty, to Gods Vicegerent, our Liege Sovereign; and from thence never to
revolt, nor like broken bows start aside, least it should happen unhappily to
befall this Nation, as once it was spoken of Greece, in regard of the ruins
(yea even of the utter destruction, for etiam periere ruinae) Graeciam in
Graecia quaerimus and non invenimus; We fought for Greece in Greec. and found
it: let it never be said of us, in regard of our recidiuall disloyalty, and
disobedience (I will not say rebellion.) Angliam in Anglia quaerimus and non
inventa est, we seek peace and plenty and safety in England, we seek that
famous Church of England in England, but find it not.

The Celestial sign of the Pleiades, seven stars or Charles waine, whose
influence signifies, highest exaltation, appearing brightly at Midday, whilst
the sun shone in its glory, does doubtless plainly demonstrate, an ampler extent
or enlargement of power, even from a threefold to a seven fold increase of
Dominion and territory, to our most illustrious Charlemain; at whose Nativity
this glorious sign appeared, which I shall endeavor by evident predictions of
this nature more plainly to demonstrate, producing the Judgment of some learned
persons (profoundly sagacious in knowledge of secrets) touching other signs
and stars long before, and some smce, all concurring and conducing evidently to
this purpose; The new star in Cassiapeia, 1572. The memorable blazing Star,
1610. That speedy last Comet stella Crinita 9. of December 1652. sudden
appearance and motion violent, etc.


If we look into the History of nature, and the times, or enquire into the
secrets of Stars, or observe the predictions of some persons; of eminent
knowledge in the Mathematiques, we may find matter sufficient inducing us to
believe that the time draws near, and is even at hand, when as a miraculous
Change in Kingdoms and Nations shall manifest it self, in Europe, amongst the
Northern and North-west, yea, and North-east people also, as ever did in any
part of the world, fince the universal Deluge in Noah's time; and these so great
and formidable actions, are to be performed by the Power and Atchievments of
one eminently excellent Person, whom God has ordained for that purpose, to do
wonders, wheresoever he shall come, both in Church and State.

We may observe that as the first Empire of the world, was of the Assyrians,
and began, or was feated in the East; that of the Persians and Grecians in the
South, and that of the Romans in the West; so it is most probable God has
determined, to raise up a Prince to an Empire, Dominion or Principality of as
great Splender, Majesty, and largeness in the Northern parts, (if not
exceeding any of the former) and to make him the most potent Prince in the
terrestrial Universe; of whose surpassing might and extensive greatness; that
new Star in Cassiopeia (so called) 1572. was doubtless the prodromus or
forerunner; And this celestial sign of the Pleiades May 29.1630. shows his
birth, and presageth his promising growth unto future greatness.

For Confirmation of the credit hereof, that a mighty Monarch shall arise out
of the North parts of Europe, let us consider the Prophecy of Sybilla
Titurtina, wherein she speaks plainly to this purpose; A Star shall arise in
Europe, toward the great House of the North, whose beams shall unexpectedly
enlighten the whole world, etc.

This Siblla prophesied of Christ, in these words Nascetur Christus in Bethlem;
Christ shall be born in Bethlem. Annunciabitur in Nazareth, he shall be
manifested in Nazareth. Regnante Tauro pacifico fundatore quietis; A pacifical
Bull then reigning, being founder of peace; meant of Augustus Caesar, in whose
reign Christ Jesus was born.

If we shall diligently observe, the predictive judgment of some learned men,
supposed to be induced with prophetique Spirits, who have long since and of
latter times delivered their opinions touching this subject; we shall find the
result thereof, has been to this purpose, viz.

That the latter days or times might assuredly expect from the North, some
glorious Star or Prince, who from those parts of Furope should suddenly burst
out, and like a violent torrent, or sudden unexpected prodigious Meteor, break
his passage into the Southern, Western and other parts of the World, with as
much success and celerity in his undertakings, as attended that warlike
Gracian, Prince Alexander the great; at what time he not only invaded, but
also trampled down even to confusion, the Persian Monarchy or Dominion, which
had stood firm (as Chronologers deliver 202.) years before.

The Person they commonly styled the Eagle of the North, the new Star of the
North, or the Lion of the North. This is neither Novall, nor incredible, or
improbable. For many learned of the German and other Nations, for these last
three Centuries of years, have been very diligent in the iniquisition hereof,
but more especially from the year 1520. the point has been controverted, and
men's Expectations more impregnated, by reason of the prophecy of Sybilla
Tiburtina, then discovered, engraven in anci^ient Latin Characters, upon a
Marble stone, answering the Ro^ane language, 300. years before Christ, found in
the bowels of mount Taurus upon a Deluge of Water which hapened in the Country
of the Helvetians.

The Prophecy is thus Englished.

There shall arise a Star in Europe, over the Iberi, or Iberians, over or
toward the great house of the North, whose beams shall unexpectedly enlighten
the whole world;

This shall be in a most acceptable time, when as mortal men being wearied
with War and Arms, shall unanimously be desirous to embrace peace.

But at last the Offspring of the most ancient, or one of the ancient progeny
overcomes, and will proceed on in a course of war, etc.

But France must first be overcome, or subject her self to this Star, And
Brittany in ships shall humbly cast her self at his knees, or mercy, imploring
assistance from him.

There are also in this Sybilla's Prophecy very many other material
predictions touching Italy, and other parts and matters also, of most
remarkable moment (the mentioning whereof, at present I omit, and leave to some
future opportunity) which doubtless in their appointed time will be verified;
such as are incredulous touching the truth of this Prophecy, if they be not
resolvedly refractory, cannot but be convinced, by experimental effects, of
such parts thereof, as are already unquestionably fulfilled.

This prophecy which lay so long obscured, was no sooner discovered, but it was
presently transmitted by the Bishop of Sedam, unto Charles King of Spain,
elected-Emperour; he sends it to the Pope, who immediately conveens together
the most able Philosophers and Astrologians in Italy, to give the
interpretations thereof; these men to please the Pope and Emperor adjudged the
Emperor Charles to be intended by the prophecy; but others more judiciously
declared, the Irish nation and chief Ruler thereof, to be intended thereby, as
most probable in respect of the proximity of the word Iberi to Hiberni, which
doubtless was the true interpretation, as by the ensuing reasons shall be more
clearly manifested.

Full fifty years after discovery thereof there appeared in Europe that
miraculous new Star before mentioned in the year, 1572. in the Asterism or
Constellation of Cassiopeia, at which time a Nobleman of Denmark, called Tycho
Brahe, who being a very learned Astrologer, seeing and observing this new Star,
its first appearance until it ended, (It being as was prophesied, the
admiration of the whole world, because it was fixed and immovable almost
(sixteen month) with rare large and exact Mathematical Instruments, after
perusal of 30. several Authors and Books, written by men of severalnations of
the effects and quality of that new star, himself wrote a large Treatise
thereof, and of his own accurate Observations and Astrological predictions
thereof; wherein (with much honor) he mentions that prophecy of Sybilla
Tiburtina terming it. Vaticinium hoc per se est admodum memorabile and
diligenti animadversione dignum;

By the judgment of this Tych^ Brahe, and many other of the most exquisite
Astronomers; This new star seems by Divine Power, to be created as the
fore-running hand maid or harbinger, to give the first manifestation or
interpretation of his Sybill's Prophecy, both whose unanimous concurrence made
it evident, that the beginning of the most turbulent Changes in Europe, should
be occasioned from the North; which parts (it is agreed by most) are intended not
only in the said Prophecy, but also by that glorious new Star, and all other
the Stars and Comets since appearing.

This was such a star as no History relates the like. Hyperchus mentions one,
two generations before Christ, which was not vertical to the Northern People,
but this was vertical and appeared over their heads.

Of this same opinion was Cornelius Gemma, in his Astrological judgments given
upon this new Star, in his fecond book of Cosmocrit, printed 1575. p. 118.
where he assigns these Countries to receive the influence of that Celestial
Star, viz. England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. Grebnerus has somewhat
conducing to our purpose, which shall hereafter be mentioned.

Concerning Wars, troubles, and Changes in these Countries, what has come to
pass, we need not relate the sad experimental knowledge thereof, does
sufficiently show and testify; all Europe if not the whole world rings
thereof. That which is principally aimed at i^ this short Tract, is to
demonstrate the person intended in the said prophecy, and by the said star
appearing, 1572.

Quarta septentrialis sive Borealis Monarchia, quam Deus constituit in
septentrione, per leonem Septentrio. nalem, magna cum admiratione illorum aui
Divinam Apocal^psin and Harmonidm ill^m, quam excer^o digisa monstramus, etc.
The four Monarchs of the world are not by the more profound Theologians,
Mysteriarches and Sagacious Astrologians numbered, according to the Dominions of
Kingdoms, as they have been in the world; but according to the quarters of
Heaven; And therefore they affirm, the fourth Monarchy of the World, shall be
erected, seated and settled in the North by Divine Providence, by means of the
Lion of the North, or Septrional Lion, to the great admiration of those that
shall be then living, and shall rightly understand the misterious Harmony of
matters contained in the Revelation of St. John the Divine, and this Lion of
the North; at present (perhaps) they believing no such thing.

The effects of the said Star 1572. draw near ^o manifestation, upon what
Kingdom or Country the influence thereof shall be showed; several and various
have been the judgments of many learned men, touching the person, place of
being, time of his first appearance, and from what part or quarter of the
heaven, etc.

The Ottoman or Turkish Empire (though absolutely the greatest now in the
world) cannot be this Monarchy intended, nor the Emperor or King of Spain at
or near the time of apparition of yt star born, or born since, or to be born in
Spain or those parts, is or can be judiciously inferred to be the person born,
to the great house of the North; by the said Sybilla and others intended, to be
the Septronial Lion (though happily the Ottoman and other Dominions, must in
time be subdued by, and subjected to that great House of the North) nor yet the
King of Sweden so strenuously stood for, by some Astrologers, of our own
Nation, but strangely and miserably, if not maliciously mistaken, as Ex ore and
pennis suis propriis Judicetur, may appear from their own pens; their own
writings being Judges, (some of which I have herein the rather recited, that
the Conviction of their errors may be thence ye more evident) whose ignorance,
envy, or unhappiness, I know not, which is most to be condemned, who by their
false calculations would endeavor the translation of prosperity and
exaltation, from their own Liege Sovereign, to any other Foreign Prince or
stranger, and rob their more worthily deserving Ru^er of that just Right of
Renown; which the great Creator has preordained, to dignifie that Person
withal, which he has determined to honor above others.

It Is not to be imagined, that almighty God, did or ever does manifest, such
miraculous Prophecies, or cause apparitions of such new and strange stars, at
unusual times, to amaze or amuze mankind, or to presage no new or wonderful
changes in this inferior world; In our Microcosme, our British Isle, we have
seen several sad mutabilitie^ in Civil and Ecclesiastical Governments. But the
sweet influences of the Pleiades appearing at our Kings Nativity so gloriously,
gives Considence of operation thereof, according to this Aphorism: Ornabuntur
Reges, and clara fiunt, and maxim Rex illius clematis, quia cresce^ virtus and
Nobilitas ejus, and populi and vicini decorabunt eum regno suo, and
humiliabuntur ei, and obedient ejus Mandatis.

To what King or great Potentate in Europe, can this more aptly be applied,
then to our illustrious King, whose name shall grow Great and Famous; and he
shall increase in Virtue and Nobility, etc. And he and his people shall be
glorious in the Esteem of the World, and the neighbor Nations shall do him
honor, in his and their Territories, and seek and submit unto him, obey his
Orders and Commands, and count it an honor and happiness to be in League and
Favor with him.

The many preceding even miraculous Protections and Deliverances, from imminent
and almost inevitable dangers wherewith his Majesty has been surrounded and
circumvented, and the ineffable Joy and Affections of the People for his
Restoration, are clear Arguments and Testimonies of Gods great care and favouor
toward his Majesty. And that the Heavens have pointed his Majesty particularly
to be that mighty Monarch predicted by the Prophecies and Stars before spoken of.

The Fate of the Ottoman Family having stood 333 years or thereabouts, by most
of the learned Scrutators and Mysteriarches is drawing toward declension;
The summers Sun of his prosperity is descending; the insulting Sultan has no
happy stars attending his Fate; but violent Death, in a mutinous and tumultuous
manner, by a seditious Soldiery or rebellious Janissaries (if credit may be
given to Astrologers) is threatened to him. To be silent touching the Germane
Emperor and Kings of Spain and Almain, having very large portions of
terrestrial possessions, and the French King also; It Is conceived by men of
judgment in the Mathematics not only the Ottoman Family but these also must
bow to the Septentrionall Lion.

Who this incomparable Conqueror, which by some is commonly called the Eagle of
the North, by some the Lion of the North, and by some also the new Star of the
North; who though this most magnificent Monarch (I say) is, or shall be, has
been and still is by many sagacious and curious inquisitors and learned Men,
also not only in these but former times seriously controverted, most
concluding the name of this unparalled person to be Charles, of which opinion
is Grebnerus; but some Astrologers of late times applying it and contending
earnestly for Carolus Gustavus the late King of Sweden, whose Death has since
sufficiently convinced their error therein; and surely to any not weakly, or
wilsully blind, it is clear as the Sun, by what has been, and shall be herein
said, that our now King Charles is the very person intended by the said Sybill's
Prophecy, and the Star in Cassiopeia; many very material parts of that
Prophecy concerning his Majesty being manifestly already full filled, and the
rest in Gods due time, (I dare engage my Life) shall and will be accomplished.

And seeing some have acknowledged Charles to be the name of this great person,
though they do not grant his Majesty to be really that person; I shall humbly
crave his Majesty's leave to offer hereafter some brief observations, touching
his Majesty's Name, which happily may in some respects conduce to the clearing
of the scruple touching the Person.

I shall not herein pretend knowledge in Astrologicall Predictians, nor presume
to the name of a Prophet, or the son of a Prophet; but to speak with the
Prophet Jeremy, It is a fire in my boues, and I cannot suppress it. I have
long since been and still am pressed in my spirit to declare what I conceive
and believe God has determined for Exaltation of his Majesty, that
unparrallel'd Prince, our Charlemain the Second.

The said Star 1572. may be said to give the first signification to the said
Sybilla's Prophecy. But this celestial Sign or Star which appeared at the
Birth of our now King of Great Britain, 1630. is an evident Manifestation and
clear Confirmation of the fulfilling of that Prophecy, pointing out plainly our
Charles the Second to be another Charlemain, Charles the Great, the very person
in that Prophecy intended, and by Divine Providence preordained to perform and
accomplish all those admirable atchievments, and to attain that Superlative
Greatness and Exaltation therein predicted; even to be not only Carolus
Maguus, but also Carolus Maximus the Greatest that has been or shall be of
that Name.

Carolus a Carolo, Grebnerus being in England with Queen Eliz. 1582. declared
this as an undubitable Prophecy which should after be fulfilled, descendens,
etc administrabit imperium perfelicissime and long, lateque dominabitur, and
major erit Carolo Magno; Our Charles le grand descending from Charles le bon, is
undoubtedly that person, of which Grebner so prophecyeth. The Fathers goodness
is a firm Foundation for the Son's Greatness The Fathers Piety, a sure
Groundwork for the Son's Prosperity. It Is said of the late King that he was
Crowned in White Robes to signify his unpolluted Integrity. Psalm. 112: 6.
^^ro. 10.7. The Righteons shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance; the
Memorial of the Just shall be blessed. If the Memory, surely the Polterity of
the Just shall be blessed; If the Righteous shall be like a Tree planted by the
River side, etc. whose leaf shall not wither; a fortiori, his fruit shall
flourish and prosper.

This pious Father prays for this Son's Goodness rather then Greatness, that
he may be rather Charles le bon, the Good, then Charles le grand, the Great; God
is pleased to hear his Prayer, as he did Solomon's praying for Wisdom only, and
gives him Wealth, Honor and Greatness also, in an Extraordinary manner; So
will God give to our King, even give to his Majesty not only goodness, but
greatness also, destroy his Enemies out of his sight, make him a great Name
like unto the name of the great Men of the Earth, famous through the world, as
he promised to David and to his seed after him, 2 Samuel 7.

Our Sovereign Charles has had a threefold ground for his Greatness. 1.
Divine, Gods determination. 2. Paternall, a good Father. 3. Prophetical, The
Sybills Prophecy; after that the Star in 1572. was a prodomus going before the
Pleiades, which being a Sign Celestial, was as a John Baptist or Precursor,
appearing at his Majesty's Nativity, to show and certify his Majesty to be the
very person by the said Prophecy and Star predicted, in whom the effect of both
was to be fullfilled: All these successively presaging Gods preordinate
purpose, of making his Majesty Carolus Maximus, that most Magnificent Monarch
of the North, which by the said Prophecy and Star was prefigured, the great
Lion, and new Star of the North.

Let us consider the parts of the said Prophecy, and we shall find it most
properly, principally and solely applicable to our Sovereign Charles the Second,
rather then to any other Prince or Potentate in the world.

There shall arise a Star in Europe, over the Iberi or Iberians, over or
toward the great house of the North, whose Beams shall Enlighten the whole
world.

In this Verse are these 3. Points or Parts most considerable.

1. The place of the apparition of the Star. 2. House or Family. 3. Future
Glory or increase of Greatness.

In the year 1630, in the 110. year after the discovery of this Prophecy, and
fifty Eight years after the new Stars manifestation which appeared 1572. on the
29. day of May, was our illustrious Charles borne in that very part of the
World which both the old Prophecy and new Star designed, upon whose Nativity at
Noon, the Sun then brightly shining appeared the Pleiades, a celestial sign
full of sweet influences called also his Charles Wain, as before is showed, to
signify and clearly to manifest to the world, That the Prince then born, was
that great Star Sybilla intended; And the Star in 1572. to be but the Prodromus
or precuisor to this; And that by this God was pleased to demonstrate the
person intended by Sybills Prophecy; and to remove all Doubts and Scruples
which might arise touching the certainty thereof.

Out of the words of the Prophecy it self, it is evident, that our King Charles
is the only Person meant thereby; For whose is the Government? or who is over
the Iberi or Iberians, the Irish or Ireland, or for some hundreds of years have
been, but his Royal Majesty and Predecessors.

Again, what great House of the North is there in any part of Europe which is
greater, or in real truth so great, as our Sovereign, either in respect of
antiquity, being for 500 years and more descended and continued and derived
from the most Royal blood, and Line of most renowned Kings as any in
Christendom, or the terrene world. Whether we consider the Paternall or
Maternall part of his Majesty's Kingly Extraction, or in respect of the
Dominions and Territories de jure, belonging to his Majesty, being an Empire of
no mean power and Extent, not inferior to the greatest in Europe; and in
regard of the most illustrious prowess, valor, and glorious atchievments of
his Majesty's most heroical famous Ancestors and Predecessors.

And as to the last part of this Verse of the Prophecy, That the beams of that
Star shall enlighten the whole world, that relates to future Effects. But it is
most evident, that among all the highest humane Heroes, that History
mentions, none was ever honored with the apparition of a celestial Sign and
Star at his Nativity, Except our Savior Christ and our Sovereign Charles, which
does clearly presage great and wonderful Acts to be performed by that person
whose honor Heaven is determined to advance and make his Name and Fame
glorious through the Universe; neither do we find any Celestial sign, Star or
Planet, whose influeace has been honored with so rare and excellent an
Epitheton as God himself is pleased to attribute: in holy Writ to the Pleiades,
seven Stars, or Charls's Wain, stiling the influences thereof sweet and most
mellifluous, showing also the impossibility for any humane power to restrain
the same, Job 38.31.

The day of his Majesty's glorious renown now begins to dawn, And before the
number of years which equals the number of Stars in the said Celestial sign
Pleiades, appearing at his Majesty's Nativity, be expired, shall shine most
brightly throughout Europe, and other parts more remote; yea, before a Trigon
of that time be past, some fair foundation may be laid, for effecting of some
Famous future Enterprises, which with much celerity, will happily be
accomplished. Septem Stellae possunt dici triones, quod ita si^ae sunt, ut
terna trigona faciant. It Is observable that this Star Pleiades or 7 Stars
appeared about Noon, when the Sun in the Meridian shone gloriously; yet did not
the glorious brightness of the Sun, obscure the light or appearance thereof,
but rather add luster unto it, which may be interpreted as an argument of the
Heavens auspicious aspect upon his Majesty's undertakings, and that the Sun of
Righteousness with healing under his wings will smile upon him, and show the
light of his Countenance upon his Enterprises, and give thereunto happy
successes.

This vernall Figure of Heaven promises to his Majesty amplitude of highest
honor and authority, and that neither domestique Conspiracies, nor Foreign
Oppositions shall be able to prevent or restrain the sweet and smiling
Influences of the heavenly bodies, which promise him victorious success.

And happily it may not be unworthy our taking notice, that these Pleiades
appeared at Mid. day and in the spring, the Month of May the pleasantest time
of the Year, being that time and month of our Sovereigns Nativity; hence I
observe that the Stars signify his Majesty's eminent appearance by divine
designement, happens to be in or about the Meridian of his Age, the thirtieth
year of his Majesty's Age, at which time his Majesty's coming, is with a sweet
and comfortable Conquest of Love over his peoples Hearts, and it is well worth
our joy and notice, that his Majesty returns Triumphing, not so much over, as
with his people; And I am confident his Majesty conceives it a greater Honor
and Felicity in saving these sinking Kingdoms, then he would in gaining new
ones; And that it is, yea and will be a greater content to his Majesty, then
any Plots of projecting counselors would have been, were they at the ends of
their Designs. But this is the Lords doing, the work of the Divine hand;
Digitus Dei, and it is wonderful in our Eyes, and ought to be wonderful joy and
thankfulness in our Hearts.

The number thirty, a trigonon of tenus is memorable for many mysteries being a
trine of tenns, Ezekiall at the said Age began to Prophecy, John Baptist was
thirty years of Age when he began to preach in the Wilderness and to prepare
the ways of the Lord. And in the Roman Church (wherein although non omnia, yet
optima may be observed,) none are admitted to the Ecclesiastical function till
thirty years of Age. It Is observed that Joseph about the thirtieth year of his
Age, was brought out of Prison, and after his long Affliction and Imprisonment
came to his great Honor, and received the Government from Pharaoh in Egypt,
Moses about the same time of his Age was called by God to lead the Israelites
out of Egypt and to be their Governor. And David about that time of his Age
came to the Kingdom which God promised and gave him. And our Savior Christ
Jesus, by S. John in Jordan, in the thirtieth year of his Age was Baptized,
began to do Miracles, and to teach the Kingdom of God; And after many
sufferings on Earth, not long after the thirtieth year of his Age, Ascending
into Heaven, sits at the right hand of his Father who made his Enemies his
Footstool, and had all Power and Dominion given to him, being exalted from his
Cross to his Crown of Eternal Glory.

And as this was about the thirtieth year of his Age in his humanity, so it was
about the same time of the year also in the spring, Opima and optima pars Anni

The same time of Age, and of the year when our Saviors Resurrection and
Ascension came to pass, Divine Providence has brought to pass, for our
Sovereign King Charles his Restitution to his just Rights, and his Ascension to
his Royal Scepter and Crown, and Throne, notwithstanding the rage, and maugre
the malice of all his Adversaries; God has ownd him as his David, his
Dilectus, and said, and done for him as he did for his beloved David; Yet have
I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, etc. Psalm. 2.6. And his Majesty may
say with David; Ego autem constitutus sum Rex ab eo super montem sanctum ejus.

Our Kings coming may properly be compared to the comfort of the Spring; Jam
enim Hiems transtit, Imber abiit and recessit, flores apparuerunt in terra
nostra, Tempus avium Cantationis advenit, vex turturis andita in terra nostra:
ficus protulit grossos suos, vineae florentes dederunt odorem, Cant. 2.11, 12.
The Winter of our woeful Bondage and Affliction is passed over; the showers of
our sorrow and oppression are blown away, and the clouds of our calamities,
dispelled and dispersed, by the bright sun of Sovereign's shining, whose
enlivening influence revives the State, and makes it flourish; the fragrant
flowers of Comfort appear in the garden of our Lands: The voice of the Turtle,
Unity and Peace, is heard in our land; we may sit safely under our Vines, and
eat the Fruits of our Fig trees.

The Ancient Romans used ver sacrum facere to hallow the spring to God, and the
Primitive Church Consecrated the beginning of the year to God.

The time of our Sovereigns restitution to his Crown and Dignity being in the
spring, and in May Mensis Florum, the most Fragrant and sweetest Month of the
Year, (the virtue and quintessence of all Herbs, Flowers and Plants, being then
in their full force) which some derive a Majoribus, others a Maio, i.e. Jupiter
which may signify the sweet influences and effects of the Pleiades or Charls's
Wain, attracting the Hearts and affections of his people in a most Loyal and
Loving manner toward his Majesty; and promising gracious and happy success to
all his future undertakings.

But to return to the further consideration of the said Prophecy of Sybilla;
the Star was prophesied to appear in a most acceptable time, when as mortal men
being wearied with War, and Arms, shall Unanimously desire to Embrace peace.
This part of the Prophcy is fulfilled perfectly, wherein we may take notice of
Divine Providence, taking all occasions and opportunities of time to do for
persons whom God determines to promote and advance, and to prevent danger that
may befall them, as now appears by his Mercy showed to the Kings Majesty,
beyond all humane expectation in so wonderfully delivering his Majesty from
both Domestic and Foreign Perils, and preserving him to be the Joy and Delight
of his people.

To proceed to the verse or part of the Prophecy where it is said, but at length
the offspring of the most ancient, or one of the ancient Progeny overcomes:
This shows by what has been said before, that this part of the Prophecy
cannot be intended not applied to any other then his Majesty, being the
Offspring of the Blood Royal of the Kings of England and Scotland, and next
Heir to these Crowns.

The next thing offering it self to Consideration, is this; in the said
Prophecy it follows thus, but France must first be overcome o^ subject her self
to this star; and Brittany in ships shall humbly cast her self at his knees for
mercy, imploring assistance from him.

Touching the former part o^ this verse or particle of the said Prophecy
somewhat might be truly said concerning the right of that Crown and Kingdom,
to whom it belongs.

But I shall not presume to press or say any thing concerning that, but take
the Poets expression for a premonition. (Cum Canerem Reges and Praelia Cynthius
aurem
-- vellit.
And rest satisfied with that saying, quae supra nos nihil ad nos, His Majesty
is Wise and Valiant, and when Gods appointed time shall come, the Divine hand
will restore to his Majesty those Dominions which his Divine Majesty has
determined for his Enjoyment; as he has to those of great Britain and
Ireland; which leads me to the latter part of the verse of this Prophecy.

And Brittany in ships shall humbly cast her self at his Knees or Mercy
imploring assistance from him; how perfectly this is fulfilled, there is none
surely so blind or impudent, as to deny the accomplishment hereof: and those
Astrologers of our Nation who have heretofore, either infirmly, impudently, or
impiously opposed the application of this Prophecy, to our present sacred
Sovereign, (whom God has in so signal a manner several ways eminently owned
as his King, his Vicegerent on Earth) will be clearly connced by these evident
accomplishments of the most material parts of this Prophecy; and with all
submissive acknowledgement confess their Errors and Ignorance; and humbly
implore Gods, the Kings and the peoples pardon, for their false malevolent
calculations and deceitful delusions in denying Gods divine Decrees, detracting
from his Majesty's true honor, and deluding the people: And in all humility,
acknowledge his Majesty, our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, to be that
person intended by the said Prophecy, presaged by the said Star in 1572;
confirmed by that celestial sign appearing at his Birth, the Pleiades; whose
sweet influences have in several respects plainly appeared, And will attribute
(as justly due to his Majesty) that style and title of Eagle of the North, New
Star of the North, Lion of the North; sole Monarch of the fourth Monarchy
Septentrionall, to be settled and seated in the North. The Septentrional Lion
being signified by his Majesty's Star of Nativity, the Pleiades; and also by
the Kings Arms both of England and Scotland, both bearing Lions, England three
Lions passant, and Scotland the Lion Rampant. And Septentrio, signifying the
North Star being the same with his Majesty's Birth-Star; scilicet sidus ex
septem stellis quae Triones dicuntur; And Sidus being derived ex (...), ex
(...) quod plures simul videntur; vel quod fit plurium stellarum conventus: vel
ex seder, (...) ordo, significat enim ordines stellarum; the Pleiades, being
Conventus 7em stellarum, quae ita ordine sunt sitae, ut ternae quaeque stellae
proximae inter se trigonon constituunt, meaning thereby his Majesty's
threefold present diadem or Dominion to be amplified to a ^ld.

And as Divine Providence had so preordained, that the Preachers Text at the
time of the appearing of that Star should be a Riddle; so doubtless many
mysterious secrets and observations may be from the 7n. Stars deduced; the most
Mysterious numbers of three and seven, seven Stars so placed together, that
every three next make a Trigonon, or three quarter triangular, or three square
figur escomprehended in the word or sign Septentrio, septem Triones or ter
septem signifying perhaps his Majesty's first action in the 21 year of his Age;
wherein divine Deliverance with Honor appeared. The Pleiades Ministering
plentiful matter of serious consideration, which I shall leave to some other
opportunity; For although his Maje. prevailed not in the first attempt, yet a
dark and cloudy morning may and did presage a bright Sunshine day of a more
happy Conquest to ensue without blood even over the hearts of his people.

Our now most gracious King is the 3d. Monarch of great Britain, and the 3d.
Prince of Wales of the name Charles, though the second King of that name; into
this Prince happily Divine Providence has determined to infuse all the virtues
and powers of his Ancestors, the former Monarchs and Princes of these Nations,
and to make his Majesty more eminently glorious and famous then any or either
of those, or of his former Predecessors, and out of a three-old Dominion or
Diadem; to enlarge his Territories to a sevenfold Empire, which by the seven
Stars seems to be signified.

What means that following part of the Sybills Prophecy in these words: Italy
pawsing with great difficulty about these trouble some Governments, and
Scepters, will signify her right hand unto him, meaning the Star of the great
house of the North: whether Rome standing on seven Hills be intended for the
right hand of Italy, in the Prophecy it matters not? It Is not improbable to be
believed, that our Carolus Maximus, assisting the Christian, shall extend his
Empire into the Mahumetan Territories. I dare engage my life our Charle-main
into a sevenfold Sovereignty of Dominion Rides triumphant in his Chariot of
incomparable conquests, else what means Charles his Wain? seven Stars or
Peliades?

The number Seven is a number of various and manifold power; if we consider the
several parts thereof, and the joining together of them, we shall confess as
well by the joining as by its fulness apart, that it is most full of Majesty:
The Pythagorians call it vehiculum vitae, because it contains Body and Soul.
The body consisting of four Elements, and the number three respects the soul in
its threefold power, rational, irascible and concupiscible; seven consisting
of 3 and 4. This number (as some learned Philosophers affirm) joining the soul
to the body; the virtue hereof relates to the generation of mankind, and
causes Man to be conceived, formed, brought forth nourished, live, and indeed
altogether to subsist, as by many particulars (too long to relate) might be
proved.

It is most evident our Charlemain is the vehiculum vitae of these three
Nations; the only supporting Atlas of the State, quasi divinitus ortus the
prime and principal Pillar of the safety and welfare of these three Kingdoms.
Carolus, alter ut Atlas est, divinitus ortus,
Hic humeris Coelum sustinet, ille Statum.
There is also in Celestials a most potent power of this number 7; There are
four corners of the Heaven diametrically looking one toward the other, which
is accounted a most full and powerful aspect, and consists of the number
seven; For it is made from the seventh sign, and makes a cross, the most
powerful figure of all: By the same radiation and number the Solstice is
distant from Winter and the Winter aequinoctiall from Summer; all which are
done by seven Stars: there are seven Circles in Heaven according to the
longitude of the axletree; there are seven Stars greater or lesser, about the
Artick pole, called Charles wain; seven Stars called the Pleiades, seven
Planets, according to seven days constituting weeks. Why may not the principal
and most prosperous powers of those seven Planets, by the Influence of the
seven Stars of the Artick pole Charles wain, and the Pleiades, be signified, to
have their influences and operations upon the actions and proceedings of our
great Septentrional Star (who for his prudence, valor and piety (which is the
best policy) may be truly termed the Lion of the North or great Northern
Monarch.

It is also applied to Saturn, Planetarum primus deorum antiquissimus, which
ascending from the lower is the 7th. Planet; which be tokens rest, to which the
seventh day is ascribed (on which our Charlemain was born as before is showed
presaging rest to these Nations during his Majesty's Reign;) which signifies
the seven thousandth, Wherein (as St. John in the Revelation witnesses) the
Dragon, which is the Devil, and Satan, being bound, men shall be quiet and
lead a peaceable Life.

Why may not this be applied to the time of the Reign of our Charlemain the
Second? The seventh day, the Creator rested from his work, wherefore this day
was by Moses called the Sabbath, (i.e.) The day of rest; hence it was that
Christ rested the seventh day in the Grave. This number has also a great
Communion with the Cross; as also with Christ in whom is all our blessedness,
rest and felicity.

The Pythagorians call it the number of Virginity, and therefore they dedicated
it to Pallas the seigned Goddess of Chastity.

It has also in Religion most potent signs of its Esteem; and is called the
number of an Oath. Hence among the Hebrews to swear is called Septenary, (i.e.)
to protest by 7: so Abraham when he made a Covenant with Abimelech appointed
seven Ewe Lambs for a Testimony.

It is also called the number of blessedness whence that, O terque quaterque
Beatus! O thrice and fourtimes blessed! Hence the Pleiades a celestial sign,
coacted and compounded of seven Stars may be said to presage a sevenfold
blessedness to our Sovereign King Charles; upon whose Birth it appeared, and
those 7 beatitudes in the 5th. of St. Matthew to be conferred upon his Majesty;
Some Roman Authors seem to affirm, that the Star appearing upon the Birth of
our Savior was not a singular but an heap of Stars, deducing their opinion
from one, Albumuzar an Arabian, Physician, and Astrologer averring it to be
that sign in the Zodiak called virgo, the which virgin is composed of so many
Stars as may aptly pourtray, Virginem, gestantem inter brachia filium, a Virgin
bearing an infant in her Arms, and so have thought that to be this Star;
perhaps from the Prophecy of our Sybilla Tiburtina, who when Augustus boasted
of his super-human Majesty, showed him Virginem in caelo infantem portantem. A
Virgin in heaven bearing a young Child in her Arms; in these words hic puer
Major est te, ipsum adora; Yonder infant is greater then thou art, O Caesar
worship him, to this St. Chrysostom is produced as a witness who says thus;
this Star appeared to them descending upon that victorial Mountain having in it
the form of a little Child, and above him the similitude of a Cross.

What credit may be given to those opinions I dispu^e not, the Moral and
Divine applications thereof may be profitable for the spiritual health of the
Soul touching Faith in Christ our Savior; but it is most probable, that by this
heap of Stars at his Majesty's Nativity appearing, heaps of happiness and
accumulation of comforts are surely presaged to his Majesty and all his
faithful liege people in and through his blessed Government, and by plurality
of Stars Celestial, plurality of prosperity to the State terrestrial under
his Majesty's Dominion.

That those Observations touching the Numbers of 3 and 7. in the Pleiades,
seven Stars or Charles wain, and other numbers (whereof mention before is or may
be hereafter made) may not be thought tedious or impertinent; It will not be
unworthy our taking notice, that as amongst the Celestial (...), the Stars of
Heaven are reckoned among the most excellent Characters of the Divinity, Power,
wisdom and Glory of the Creator, in that they are written and engraven with
the finger of God himself (the Father of Lights;) Quibus invisibilia Dei
intelliguntur, ac providentur, ipsaque aeterna ejus potentia, quibus gloria Dei
enarratur: So not only the most eminent Philosophers do unanimously teach, but
also many Catholic Divine Doctors especially Hierom, Austin, Origin, Ambrose,
Gregory Nazianzen, Atha^asius, Bid, and many more confirm, That there lies
wonderful Efficacy and rare Virtue in Numbers. Severinus Boethius says, that
all things which were first made by the nature of things in the first Age, seem
to be formed by proportion of Numbers; for this was the principal pattern in
the mind of the Creator. Hence is borrowed the number of Elements, hence the
courses of Times, hence the motion of the Stars, and the revolution of the
Heaven and the state of all things subsist by the uniting together of Numbers;
which are therefore endowed with great and sublime virtues. All species of
natural and supernatural things are joined together by certain Numbers; which
made Pythagoras say, that Number is that by which all things consist, etc.

If there be so many great and occu^ virtues in natural things of manifest
operations, It is no wonder that there should be in Numbers much Greater and
more occult, and also more wonderful and efficacious; Forasmuch as they are
more formal, more perfect and naturally in the celestials, not mixed with
separated substances; but having the greatest and most simple commixion with
the Idaea's in the mind of God, from which they receive their proper and most
efficacious virtues; and so are of most force and conduce most to the obtaining
of spiritual and divine Gifts. Proclus says, that number has always a being:
yet there is several sorts of Natures of Numbers; there is one in voice,
another in the proportion of them, another in the Soul and Reason, and another
in Divine things.

Themistius Boethius, and Averrois the Babylonian, together with Plato, do so
extol numbers, that they think no man can be a true Philosopher without them.
But they speak of a rational and formal number, not of a material, sensible
or vocal, the number of Merchants, buying and selling; of which the
Pythagorians, Platonists, and Austin make no reckoning, but apply it to the
proportion resulting from it, which number they call natural, rational,
formal, from which great mysteries flow, as well as in natural, as divine
heavenly things. By this (say these and other profound Philosophers) is there a
way made, for the searching out and understanding of all things knowable. By it
the next access to natural prophesying is had; and the Abbot Joachim
proceeded no other ways in his prophecies, but by forma^^ numbers.

This Digession is made on purpose, if it may be to prevent those Objections
which may be raised against Observations upon Numbers, wherein (if some of the
most Learned not only Philosophers, but divines may be believed) are many
occult virtues, and distinct mysteries both divine and natural; But it must be
remembered that what has been said touching numbers or shall be said touching
the powers thereof, is not meant of vocal or Merchants numbers, but of
rational, formal and natural; But some divine and philosophical Authors affirm,
that he which knows how to join together the vocal numbers, and natural with
divine, and order them into some harmony, may happily be able to know and work
wonderful things by numbers. T^^ ^ythagorians profess they can prognosticate
many things by the numbers of Names; In which truly, if there did not lie a
great Mystery, why has St. John in the Revelation said Cap. 13.17.18. Hic
sapientia est, qui habet intellectum computet numerum bestiae, numerus enim
hominis est. He which has understanding let him compute the number of the name
of the Beast, which is the number of a man; And this was the most famous manner
of computing amongst the Hebrews and Cabalists; and happily may be at this day
in these times, a more certain way and course for conjecturall calculations,
then many, yea most of our late Astrologers have found out, at lest exposed to
public test; whose miserable mistakes and gross Errors, have somewhat
impeached the reputation of their science, and left some blemish upon some of
the reputed principal professors thereof, which I spare to specify, choosing
silence rather then taunting aspersions, knowing that although it is said and so
the verse begins with astra regunt homines, yet it concludes thus, sed regit
astra Deus, and what mortal is there, that keeps the key of the Almighties
Cabinet, or has known his mind; and considering as a man, that Humanum est
Errare.

But to return to the consideration of the number Seven, the number of his
Majesty's Nativity Star, a number of such various and manyfold virtue and
power, That to express the same would require a large single volume by it
self. Somewhat has been said before hereof, which I shall not repeat, but
proceed with all brevity to set down some short observations on that, and the
number three and some other numbers opportunely offered to consideration on
this present occasion.

Seven is a number of purification, Elisha the Prophet bid leprous Naaman wash
seven times in Jordan which done he was cleansed, and the Leprous person under
the law that was to be cleansed was sprinkled seven times with the blood of a
Sparrow. The Leprosy of Rebellion in these Nations, needs 7 fold cleansings
for purification. It is a number of repentance and remission, protending the
peoples penitential submission, and our Kings gracious Remission. It Is a number
of liberty, according to the Hebrews the Israelites law, where each Hebrew
servant the seventh year claimed Liberty may mind the King of a Jubilee; it is
suitable to divine praises the sanctifying of the Lords day, and people by
praises and prayers as says the Prophet seven times a day do I praise thee,
showing his gratitude for Gods goodness, etc. A good pattern for a pious K. it is
a number of revenge, as in Scripture often appears, Cain shall be revenged 7ld.
and the Psalmist says, render Neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, their
reproach, etc. Signifying his Majesty shall be enabled to take a sevenfold
revenge of his Enemies, God will give power so to do. It Is a number consecrated
to the Holy Ghost, which the Prophet Isaiah describes to be sevenfold
according to his gifts ( viz.) the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of council and strength, the spirit of knowledge and holiness, and the
spirit of the fear of the Lord, which we read in Zacharia to be the 7 Eyes of
God, why may we not conceive that, Hereby is noted the manifold rare Gifts
where with his Majesty is and shall be endowed from Heaven and the favorable
Countenance of the Lord looking toward him, shining graciously upon him? In
the book of the Revelation we may read of seven Angels spirits standing in the
presence of God, and seven Lamps burning before the throne of God, and seven
Golden Candlesticks, and in the middle thereof was one like the Son of man, and
he had in his right hand seven Stars. What is it not plain and proper, that by
the Son of man is our Savior, and by the seven Stars our Sovereign intended?
our King in the hand of our God? what other or better interpretation, in
relation to his Maje. by way of parallel from the Pleiades can be made, but
that Gods Divine Majesty will graciously give unto our King a 7ld. attendance
and guard of Holy Angels, his ministering spirits, to protect his princely
person from all eminent dangers: the burning Lamps and Golden Candlesticks, and
one like the Son of man, with seven Stars in his right hand, what application
can be made hereof, but that the Son of righteousness with healing under his
wings will guide his Majesty through the wilderness of this wretched world,
lead him through the dark deserts of dangers, as he did the Israelites day and
night, by a cloud and pillar of fire; illuminate his understanding to see the
wondrous things of Divine Laws, and give him a large portion of wisdom for
humane Government; and that Almighty God will so guide the King with his right
hand, that he shall not dash his foot against a stone: the seven Stars being
the Celestial sign at the Kings Nativity, may signify the King to be the
person, the Sidus of seven Stars said to be in the right hand of the Son of
Man, where is protection and safety infallible under the shadow of the sacred
wings of the omnipotent. Now by what has been said it is apparent, that the
number seven among all the other numbers may deservedly be said to be most full
of all efficacy: more over this number seven has great conformity with the
number twelve, for as three and four make seven, so thrice four makes twelve,
which are the numbers of the Celestial Planets and Signs resulting from the
same Root, and by the number three partaking of the Divinity and by the number
four of the nature of Elements and other inferior things.

There is in sacred Writ, a very great Observance of this number seven before
all others, and many and very great are the mysteries thereof, many have been
already reckoned up and many more might be repeated out of holy Writ, by which
it may easily appear that the number 7, does signify a certain fulness of
sacred Mysteries: what an admirable and unparrallel'd person may we then hope
and expect that to be, whose arrival on earth such a glorious mysterious
number, not of terrestrial, but celestial bodies, are sent to celebrate and
congratulate; surely God was pleased to send these heavenly Heralds to proclaim
this Prince to be in time convenient to divine Designment, the most pious,
prosperous and puissant Prince in Europe; Nay, is it not most probable, that
divine providence has determined to make that person superlatively Excellent,
whose Entertainment the King of Kings is pleased to Dignifie with the
Attendance of such heavenly harbingers, and anspioious Ambassadors, who are
praemised on purpose to premon^rate and promulgate to the world, the Nativity,
Apparition, and coming of the mightiest Monarch in the terrene Universe.

Dion writes of a Phaenix that was seen before the last year of Tiberius which
Byrd is a perfect Emblem of the Resurrection, and signified that at that time
Christ rose from the dead, and the Gospel was then to be spread abroad, which
is an asseveration of the dead rising again, of the resurrection, which the
sleepy Sadduces denied.

If there be Phoenix, it is our King, of this Age, causing a Resurrection of
these Nations from their Graves of Ruin and Slavery, to rejoicing and liberty.

What did the Favor worn by the people before the Kings coming in commonly
called the Kings colors; de phoeniceo color, of a phaenician, crimson, or
purpureo, a purple color signifies: what did that portend? but that our
Phoenix, should return triumphing; and be anointed with the oil of gladness,
and that God through his Majesty's Government should recover both Church and
State from eminent ruin, give us beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladness,
for the spirit of heaviness.

Those inconsiderable seeming signs of wearing the Kings Colors, the Phoenix
colors; however not noted, proves to be a plain prediction of the Kings and
Countries Restitution and Resurrection: when God has a purpose to bring to
pass any thing, be it ever so great, the meanest means is not to be despised,
nor any the least omen to be contemned. Ex parvis principiis ad summum saepe
pervenitur. Smal^^d sad beginnings, God oftentimes brings to glad and glorious
perfection, who has despised the day of small things, Zach. 4.10. Out of the
ashes of that pious, patient, prudent Phoenix, Charles the I. has God raised
for us another Phoenix.

The Phoenix as Pliny has it, takes her name, ex phoeniceo pennaerum color,
nomen invenit; from the color of the Phoenix wings or feathers: Vel a palmae
Genere, from a kind of Palm tree; quae (...) dicitur. Morientis and
renascentis ram^ figura. The emblem of a dying and reviving branch. Many
derivations are given of the word phoenix which are omitted.

It Is a Bird of Arabia (whereof there is never but one) living 660. years, (as
Pliny relates) which perceiving the end thereof to be near at hand, builds her
a Nest in the top of a Palm tree, with hot spices Cassia, Cinnamon, Myrrh, etc.
which being set on fire by the sun beams, her self therein is therewith burnt,
out of whose ashes arises a worm, which afterward grows to be a phoenix:
Many remarkable observations might hence be raised suitable to the present
matter in hand. I shall only touch upon a threefold parallel?

Is not our King as another rare phaenix to us? May it not be said of our
Sovereign, as God by his prophet, Zach. 3.2. said of Jehoshna, who was
wonderfully preserved in the Captivity, yet Satan stood at his right hand to
resist him, and sought to afflict and trouble him: Is not this a brand taken
out of the fire? The parallel holds very perfectly, between our King and
Jehoshun, throughout the whole Chapter: Has not his Majesty been most
miraculously preserved from many Domestic and Foraign dangers, by sea and
land, from plots of foes professed, and conspiracies of false seeming friends,
from public open perils of the sword, and secret and private practices of
many wicked, cunning and cruel adversaries: per mare, per terras, per sara,
perignes, per tot discrimina rerum: Through innumerable ineffable difficulties,
dangers, has the Lord restored our King, from his exile to his Crown and
dignity; and the Nations to Peace and safety, as a brand taken out of the fire,
kept from utter consuming.

To proceed with the parrallel, Jehoshua was clothed with foul or filthy
garments (as the text has it) which the Lord Commanded to be taken from him,
and caused him to be clothed with change of raiment, and a fair Diadem to be
set upon his head; And the Lord said, I will bring forth the branch my servant;
for lo the stone, that I have laid before Jehoshua: upon one stone shall be
seven eyes. Behold I will cut out the graving thereof, etc. And in that day
(that the Lord) shall ye call every man, his neighbor under the Vine and under
the Fig tree, Zach. 3.5, 8, 9, 10. The application is evident, the parallel
applying it self.

How plainly and perfectly is this prophecy fullfilled by parallel in our
Sovereign? are not those foul blots and stains of false reports and
reproaches, calumnies, and scandalous aspersions, by cursed slanderous
detractors, now cleansed and cleared, and his Majesty's untainted integrity
covered with the white raiment of unspotted Innocence; clad with the garments
of Glory and highest grandeur, and most richly arrayed, with the royal robes
of most ample and illustrious renown, adorned with the fairest Diadem of Royal
Sovereignty and Dignity, and for a Crown to all his Majesty's Felicities,
crowned with the fur passing love, and faithful loyalty, obedience and duty of
his Subjects:

And verse the 8. I will bring forth the branch my servant; what branch more
properly then growing from that royal root, of most ancient kingly Race;
Plantaginet according to that of Ezekiel 34.29. by God promised to his people
Israel. And I will raise up for them a plant of Renown, and they shall be no
more consumed, etc. Has not the Lord dealt as graciously with England, as with
Israel in this respect? Has he not brought forth for England, this blessed
branch, this Royal Plant of Renown, Charlemaine Plantagenet.

For lo the Stone says the Lord) that I have laid before Jehoshua; upon one
stone shall be seven eyes, etc.

To whom may this be more properly applied then to our Charlemain, whom the
Lord has laid as a firm foundation, or chief corner stone, whereon or by whom
a sure, certain and lasting form, and building of good and godly government,
both in Church and State, shall be settled, and established; And (to proceed
with the parallel) upon this one stone shall be seven eyes, to whom more
properly applicable then to that King at whose Nativity seven celestial eyes
vouchsafed a gracious aspect, to signify by that sacred number of eyes, God
would endue him with transcendent light of knowledge and wisdom, that should
prepare and fit his Majesty with rare and extraordinary gifts, for the
management of those great Affairs in point of Government; The number seven
showing a fullness of light and knowledge, in so much that he should not only
in state Affairs have full prudence and exquisite policy in himself, but that
others also should admire his Wisdom, and seek knowledge, learn and take
example from those excellent Rules, which he as a second Solomon should
prescribe, which doubt less in all probability is most likely to be fallfilled
in our Sovereign, whose excellency of matter and substance, together with the
exquisite Elegancy of Expression, in all Letters, Declarations, Proclamations
and other Writings, render his Majesty the style and Character (and that most
deservedly) of a most pious, wise, and prudent Prince; most like to be the most
potent Monarch that ever swayed the Scepters of these Nations. And as the Lord
promised to the said Stone, with seven eyes to cut out the graving thereof, to
take away the iniquity of the land in one day; And that in that day, ye shall
call every man his neighbor under the Vine, and under the Fig Tree, verse 9,
10. And how that should be done, is showed in the next Chap. Zach. 4.6. Neither
by an Army, nor strength, but by my spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. This day
is this prophecy most perfectly fulfilled in our eyes. Blessed be our good God,
who has been so gracious both to his King and people; and let the glory be
ascribed only to his Divine Majesty.

His Majesty having been before proved to be as it were another Phaenix sprung
from that Phaenix Prince his Father, for Piety, Prudence and Patience,
unparaleld, touching those colors worn by the people, and called the Kings
Colors, which being Crimson, Purple, or a Phaenix color, which bird builds
her nest in the top of a Palm Tree, some significations in brief observations
may be collected.

The purple being an emblem of wisdom and council (...), etimol: ex (...),
quid significal (...) concilium cogito; quod senatores and Consiliarij purpura
sunt induti, scat. ducit a bolla pro vest senatoria, ex (...), a consilio,
which imports dignity and wisdom, all things even the most inconsiderable,
by providence conducing to the Elevation of the Kings honor even those colors
being arguments of wisdom, counsel and dignity belonging to the king.

The Palm Tree also is an emblem of patience and victory to a person qui
patientia vincit, who overcomes by patience. Quod plana palma victoriam
denotat: si supra palmae arboris lignum magna onera imponas, non deorsum palma
cedit, sed adversus pondus resurgit, and quasi vi renitens promenti. Palma
significat togant quid simulitudine^^ palmae habet intextam palmata toga. The
sign of Reward, Felieity, or Victory. His Maj. by his pious and prudent
waiting and patience has overcome all difficulties and dangers, recoverd his
just rights, subdued his feircest adversaries by a bloudlesse conquest, brought
to pass by divine providence, and therefore most justly deserves the palm, in
si^ne of, or reward for his happy Victory. See Revel. 7.9. Long White robes,
sign of purity, palms in their hands, token of victory and felicity.

Much has been said touching the number seven, but not the moity of whatmay be
said thereof. The seven Stars in the right hand of the son of man, Revel.
1.16.20. Is there styled there the mystery of the seven Stars, which is there
declared to be the Pastors of the seven Churches which is set forth by the
seven Golden Candlesticks, and by the right hand is signified divine
protection. By the seven Stars appearing at his Majesty's birth, what else can
be signified but a seven Scepter, and that his Majesty shall be the pastor,
King, Emperor of seven Kingdoms at least, a plentiful benefactor to Pastor
and Church (which happily might be nominated, but at this time shall pass in
silence) and that by divine affistance these Dominions shall be attained,
before his Majesty's arrive at the age of seven times seven years, the major
part 7 years sooner, and contained to his Majesty's posterity, for seven
generations or successions ensuing: yea even until those things which St.
John. Revel. 6. from the 12. to the end, Upon opening the fixth seal of the
book sea. led with seven seals mentions to come to pass, shall be fullsilled.

Mention was made before out of the prophesy of Zechariah, cap. 3.9. of the
stone which the Lord laid before Jehoshua, and upon one stone there should be
seven eyes. The graving whereof, the Lord there promises, himself to cut out,
(that it might be perfect in all points, as a thing wrought by his own hand, as
the marginall note has it) and to take away the iniquity of the Land in one
day, so that the people might live in peace and quietness, under their vines
and fig trees as it follows in the tenth verse. of this chap. by way of
parallel application is made to our Jehoshua, our Sovereign Charlemaine; and
doubt. less most properly if we observe the scope of this, and the forth
chapter next following; our King may be said truly to be one stone with seven
eye, a stone which God prepares with the seven gifts of his spirit mentioned
Isaiah. 11. from the first to the sixth verse, which is worth the reading and
noting,

Again in Zachariah 4. what is meant by the Candlestick all of Gold (which the
Prophet saw) with a boul on the top of it and seven lamps; and seven pipes to
the lamps: and two olive trees over it, one on the right side, and another on
the left side of the boul. But the a royal Dukes, or the Graces of Gods good
Spirit, which he gives increases, and continues in those persons, whom he
raises to greatness for his own glory, and the good of his Church and
people? And this is performed; non in Execitu nec in robore; sed in spiritu meo
dixit Deus exercituum. Though he be Dominus exercituum Lord of hosts; yet non
exercitu, etc. Neither by an Army, nor by strength, but by his spirit shall
Zerubabel build up his Church and people. Quis tu magne, mons coram Zerubabel?
Who art thou O Great Mountain before Zetubabel? Thou shall be a plain, and he
shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shouting, and crying, grace,
grace unto it. The hands of Zerub. babel have laid the Foundation of his house;
his hands shall also finish it: and scietis, quia dominus exercituum m^sit me
ad vos. Quis enint despexit dies parvos? Who has despised the day of small
things? but they shall rejoice, and shall see Lapidem stanneum the stone of
tinn in the hand of Zerubabel: Septem isti oculi, sunt Domini, quid discurrant
in universam terram those seven are the eyes of the Lord which run through the
whole world.

Zerubbabel is often mentioned in scripture for many worthy acts, he reedified
the Temple in despite of all his Enemies ^z^a. 3.2. Zech 4 6.7.9, 10. He is
called Sheshbazzar. which signified joy in tribulation, Ezra. 1.8.15.14. and
Berechrah Nehemiah, 6.18. blessing or speaking well of the Lord. The name
Zerubbabel, signifies repugnant to confusion; A^^enus a Confusione strange from
Confusion, or a dispersion of confusion, or a stranger at Babel. How directly
suitable to our Sovereigns condition are these names of Jehoshua, which
signifies, Lord, Savior, or the Lords Salvation; and Zerubbabel; and how
properly applicable their offices and actions to his Majesty? Has not the son
of Man; the spiritual Savior of the world, Christ Jesus, in the midest of the
seven golden Candlestick, having in his right hand seven stars (the sign
celestial, shining in the presence of the Sun at the birth of our King) been
to the King a gracious Savior and Deliverer, but also made his Majesty a true
Joshua, a saving Lord, a temporal Savior, the Lords Salvation, for saving
these three sinking kingdoms? Is not his Majesty by divine Providence become a
zealous Zerubbabel, a bright sun, for dispersing and dispelling those thick and
dark mists and clouds of Confusion, wherewith these distressed and distracted
Nations, have for a long season been sadly coverd and almost consumed. Has not
his Majesty been repugnant to, and kept out as a stranger, whilst this land
was made a Babylon, a receptacle of Rebellion? And is not his Majesty in his
return become, and may be truly termed a Shashbazzar, a joy in tribulation, and
Olive bearer, coming with an Olive branch of peace to his people, and two
Olive trees, the two Royal Dukes, his Majesty's brethren to settle their
distractions? And howsoever those that according to Gods word, and holy
prophecies, may be worldlings be contemned, and accounted, as they are called
in the 8. ver. of 3. of Zachariah, Viri portendentes, Monstrous persons, who
presage or apply any such matter to his Majesty; yet, Ecce stella oritur ex
Jacobo; And Ecee Adducam servum meum Orientem, and Ecce vir Oriens Nomen enis.
Zech. 3.9.16.12. The Celestial sign of seven Stars in the right hand of the
sun of righteousness, shall show himself and shine brightly. Our Jeheshua,
shall have a fair Diadem set upon his head, and be clothed with glorious
garments of gladness, and his Crown flourish whilst his enemies are clothed
with shame; And the hands of our Zerubabel, shall not only lay the foundation
of Gods house in his Church and State, but his Royal hands shall also finish
it. The Great Mountain, (all his mightyest adversaries) shall be a plain, be
brought low? and shall know that the Lord has called and sent him to this
purpose. For who shall despise the day of small things, Let us not be
discouraged, though beginnings seem small and despicable yet we shall rejoice;
The stone which the Babylonian builders refused, will be the head stone of the
corner; and we shall see the Glorious glitering stone of Tin Zech 4. 10 in the
hand of our Zerubabel: The seven stars in the right hand of the Son of man; The
seven eyes of Lord which run through the world shall inlighten and enable his
Royal heart with high and heavenly indowments to go through with that great
work which the Great Jehova has ordained for him, and determined for his
majesty to accomplish: And then to his Royal servant, our Sovereign
overcomming, will the Lord give to eat of the Manna that is hid (and not common
to all and will give him a White stone (in sign of victory, honor and Gods
favor) and in the stone a new name.

This leads me to the next consideration or observation touching his
Majesty's Name.

Having showed somewhat touching his Majesty's Nativity and the Celestial
sign the Pleiades or seven Stars appearing thereat with the observations upon
the Number seven; I shall (with all humility crave his Royal license briefly to
express my mean meditations touching his Majestyes Names; which may be said to
be three, Bonum nomen, bonum omen.

1. Natural. 2. Christian. 3. Political.
All proper to his Majesty; Person, place, dignity, and promise, peace, honor,
and happiness to his Majesty; and the Kingdoms and people under his Dominions,
and Government. Nomen quasi notamen Name is a mark, note or sign by which any
one person or thing is distinguished from another: Nomen quod notitiem facit,
imago quaedem qua quid noscitur. Fest. nomen quasi nonimen. Scal. lib. 76.
(...), nomen.

1. Vocabulum proprium quo rem appellamus, a proper Denomination or term,
whereby we call a thing.

2. Vocabulum quod libet, quo aliquid intelligibile, vel intellectum efferimus,
any term or denomination, whereby we express any thing intelligible or to be
understood.

3. Id quod nomine expremitur: sive persona, suie res, etiam ipsa familia,
decus dignitas, famae existimatio honor, Cultus, authoritas, jus potestas nomen
per eo quod nominatur, etc: Name is often used, for the person the thing, the
family, the renown, dignity, fame, estimation, honor, worship, reverence,
authority, right power and name; for the thing named.

The name of the Lord is often taken for the Lord himself.

When God moved the hearts of men to restore Religion after it had been long
suppressed; It Is said Genesis 4.26. Then began men to call upon the Nam of the
Lord. And Abraham called on the Name of the Lord. Genesis 12.8.13.4. So did Hagar.
Genesis 16.13. and Izhak Genesis 26.25. Moses did publish the name of the Lord. Deuteronomy.
32.3. The Levit. blessed Israel in the name of the Lord. Deuteronomy 10.8. Gods Name
was in the Angel that guided Israel. Exodus 23.21. To put the name of God upon
any, is to pray for him. Numb. 6.27. Who so blasphemed Gods name, was stoned to
death, L^vit. 24.11.14.16. What shall be done to those who trace and caluminate
the King, Gods vicegerent. David blessed the people in the name of the Lord. 1 Samuel 6.17, (...) Elisha Cursed the children in ^he name of the Lord, name is
used for Power. Matt. 7.22. John 1.12. and 22, 23. Acts 3.6. For Dignity Phil.
2.19. So Names are put for m^n, Rev. 3.4. Acts ^.15. The Jews are commanded to
destroy the name of Amalek from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 25.19. The name of God is a
strong Tower, Prove. 16.10. David overcomes Goliath in the name of the Lord of
Hosts; 1 Samuel 17.45, 49. God exalts the name of such as keep his laws, Deuteronomy.
26.19. The Lord God made David to have a great name upon earth, 2 Samuel 7.9. And
made Ioshuah's name famous through all the world, Josh. 626. So will the Lord
do for our Joshua, our David. Make his name illustrious through the Universe;
and the Nations (over whom Gods makes his Majesty Ruler) happy in and through
hi^ wise-and godly Government.

Touching his Majesty, tria no^ina, or nomen triplex; I shall no^ presume to
say much, only humbly offer and tender those considerations, though imbecill
and slender touching the same, and begin with though the last, in time and
order, yet not the least in dignity and honor. The name Political King, in the
Saxon tongue Cy^^^g, in the German tongue Koning, the Dutch Kononingh, Koninck,
a (...)nen, 1. scire, to know, Quod Rex vera scientia imbutus esse debea^; a
King ought to be replenished with true, sound and saving knowledge; Cic.
according to the Psalmist: Et nunt reges intelligite, erudimini, qut indicatis
terram. Psalm. 2.10. Ve^a Konnen, 1. p^sse, polentemesse pollere. To be able, to
be powerful, to exce^^ others, as far in rare parts, as in p^^ority of place:
Propter summam a Deo regi potestatem concessam; in respect of the large power
given from God to Kings.

Latini potestates, vocant, principes potentes, The Latins call, powers potent
princes: Konnen (...), i. valere, vnibus pollere. To be valiant, to excel in
strength, (...), es^ vis, robur, potentia, id^^e a (...) Koach, in the French
tongue, King is called Roy, Italian Re, Spanish Rey, Latin Rex, a regendo,
from ruling: In the Greek (...), i. fundamentum populi, the foundation, basis,
and establishment of his people; without whom no sound, sure, or firm building
either in Church or State can be settled, established: Hebrew, (...) Melech, a
(...) Malach (i. e.) regnavit imperavit. Thus much of the political name, but
much more may be said of the Office, power, and prerogatives of Kings.

This double Distichon seems not to be impertinent touching the power of Kings,
upon these three words and things.

Rex, Lex, Grex:
Lex sine Rege, velut Lum^n, sine So^^ ^uisset;
Rex sine lege, v^lut Sol sine luce foret.
Grex Regem primo Legit, Rex cum Grege Legem,
Condidit, hinc legem Rex regit atque Gregem.
The powers, privileges and prerogatives of Kings by Laws, II. sages, and
Customs, Divine and Humane, Rational, Natural, are many; The Person,
presence, patrimony of Kings, by the Laws of our land, are in some sort Sacred;
The Villein of a Lord (which by law was seisable) in the presence of the King,
could not be seized, for the presence of the King, was a protection to him;
which shows what reverence the law gives to the person of a King, plod Com.
322.27. Assi. pl. 49. Kings Courts are places privileged from Arrests; so
ought the bodies of all his liege subjects in civil causes, as debt or the
like, by the ancient law of the land to be freed from imprisonment, that they
might serve his Majesty and the Kingdoms, being members of that body, whereof
his Majesty in his politic capacity is the head; whereas by an unjust, chielf
and wicked custom, under color of law, many thousand men's bodies are
maliciously upon bare pretenses, buried alive in loathsome prisons, and
restrained from the service of their King and Country, to the great displeasure
o^ God, damage of the King, by lo^^ng his subjects, dishonor of the Nation,
being branded with a mark of (...) parrellel'd Cruelty, to (...) scandal and
opprobry, of the law in maintainting malice, revenge and oppression; and
destruction of many thousand persons and their Families. This is digression,
but it is hoped and prayed, that hereof his Majesty will be graciously pleased
to make a speedy Reformation; which may prevent judgments upon the Nation.

Reges sacro oleo uncti sunt capacas spiritualis jurisdictionis, Kings are
anointed with sacred oil; so was Saul and David, by Samuel, Gods prophet by
Gods appointment, and many others mentioned in the old Testament, etc. Their
persons are sacred, as appears by that strict Command given from God, by his
prophet; Touch not mine anointed. Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, habet
ecclesiastieam and spirituale^ jurisdictionem. All power and Authority under
the Divine Majesty, whether it be Civil and Temporal, or Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual Jurisdiction, belongs to the King, within all his Majesty's Dominions
and is derived from the King; being the only supreme Governor over all
persons in all Causes, 33. Edw. 3. Aid de Roy. 103 Fi^^b^rt. 10, ^.7.16. 1.
Ed. (...) c. 1. Cawdries Case, Rep. 5. (...) Which Act is but Decta^ative of
the Common Law. 1. Jacobi c. 1. vid. 9. Edw. 4. f. 1.

The Lands of the King in law is called Patrimoniam Sacrum, Com. sur. Littl.
Sect. 4. What shall we think of those that endeavor to bereave his Majesty
hereof, or withhold and keep the same from the King? do they not commit
Sacrilege? And is not Sacrilege a sin, as much odious to God, as offensive to
the King his Vicegerent? Sacrilege, whether of Gods or the Kings due, Qua Dei
aut quae Domini Regis sunt, of any thing that belongs to God or the King will
prove a sad lading which in the end, will sink the best and ablest bottom. A
little of this Leaven may sour your whole lump; 'Twill be as Achans wedge,
bring a curse with it, a small parcel of this sacred patrimony, taken into
your Purchase, like the Kings waste, may alter your Tenor in Gods blessings,
and bring your whole fortune into Wardship. Those that be pecants in this kind,
let them not ever trust to their smooth sailing, sudden shipwreck may self
them in their seeming calmest security. It is a destruction to a man to devour
that which is sanctified, and after the Vows to inquire: If you believe
Solomon, who had wisdom from above, Pro. 10.2^.

As greater Power is by God, given to Kings and Emperors, and mighty Rulers
(...) greater parts, Diviner gifts also, of the mind, as Wisdom, Prudence,
Valor, and the like, are bestowed on them: Saul being anointed King, is said
to have another heart given to him by God, (...) Sa^^. 10.9. They have also
nobler names, and greater and awfuller Reverence is due unto them, and many men
are smitten with such terror of their Majesticall presence, as though they
were partakers of somewhat more the humanity, and that there were (as probable
it is there are) some rays of divinity evidently appearing and shining in their
Persons, Why else is God the great King of Kings pleased to be called King, and
suffer his name to be communicated to ^^^m, and by a proper denomination bath
confirmed it to them. They are called mortal Gods, Her^e's, Terrestrial gods,
compa^ions of the Superior Gods, (...) by whom the world is governed, and
disposed by their Laws, whom therefore at gods we receive, Worship, Reverence,
because God himself ^ath (...) the communication of his name (...) (...) them
gods, I have said, ye are all soms of the most high God; Psalm. (...) And to
Mose^ God said I have made (...) (...) else where he Gomman (...) concerning
(...) ye shall not detract from the gods; And concerning the reverencing and
honcuring of them, also deereeing riches and first fruits for them, and giving
them power of the sword, and forbidding any to curse them, but enjoining
obedience to be yielded to them (though wicked) How much the rather then ought
it to be rendered to good Kings.

Antiquity called their Princes gods, and worshipped them, as divine powers, as
Janus testifyeth in Ovid lib. d^ fast. 1.

And divine Plato in his third book de Republica, appointed that Princes both
alive and dead, should be celebrated with divine Honors which Institutiton
has been received amongst the most and best Nations even from the first age,
to deify their Princes with divine honors, a Gods vicegerent on earth and to
consecrate them with Eternal memory. Hence they did impose their never dying
names on little Provinces, Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, Islands and Seas; and
dedicated to them with great Pomp Pyramides, Colosses, triumphal arches,
Trophes, Statues, Temples, plays, feasts; etc, And also caled the Heavens,
Stars, Days and Months by their Name. Hence January from Janus, July from
Julius, August from Augustus, So Diet Mercurij from mercury Trismegest. Dies
Jovis from Jupiter, which custom we read was observed, not only by the
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, but also by the then not so Civilized, (as
now) a people, the Goths, Danes, and Teutours. Hence Saxo Grammaticus, being
witness, what day was formerly called Dies Mercury, these call Othines day;
and what day was formerly named from Jupiter, these do now call Thursday, from
Othin and Thor in times past Kings of Scotland and Denmark; neither are they
for any other reason called Goths, then that they call in their Language their
Chiefeit God, Got. Hence also the Dutch are thus called, because they named the
God Mars whom they worshipped. Tentan; By which name the Gauls also called
Mercury.

Why may not the Month now called May, which some derive a made faction, from
the moisture then caused by the rising of the Pleiades; be changed into
Carol^^, in regard of the Nativity of our Tresmegistus Carolus, in that month
1630. and the pleindes (whose rising is in that month, called also Charles
Waine) appeared at the time of his Birth on the 29th. day thereof on which day
also his Majesty returned Triumphantly to London to his P^rliament in the year
1660. to the ineffectable surpassing Joy of his people. Surely heaven
disdaining no^ ^o have a Celestial sign the Name of Charle^^ Why should we
not account it an Honor to the Nation to have this Month the best and
chiefest in the year, dignifyed with the Name of that Person who is the only
Joy, Com^hrt and Honor of ou^ horizon? His Birth Graced with a Celestial
Ch^ribus (...) His restitution the longing and thirsting desire of three
Kingdoms; The sta^^ and stay of (...) Hotions, and restoring the collepsed
Honor of our Country, a ^^mber less number with eyes to^^^ard their Joy,
tongues and lips (...) loud a cela^ations expressing (...) of their hearts,
(...) hand^dife up to h^aven ^^ith prayers and praises. Though ^^^use are not
Minarula, yet they are (...) mirauda. very admirable.

(...), such a people (...) view of their King, and such a King in view of his
People, handing their eyes to and fro, the one from the other, like the flowing
and falling of waters, a reciprocal and interchangeable motion of love between
them. I know not what others think, but to me, it seems worthy to add a
Rubric more to your Almanac, and make a new holy day amongst you, and give it
a new name, and call it Charles day. The Pope makes Jubilees at his pleasure,
why not this a Jubilee, a year of extraordinary joy to these Nations? The like
has not happened for many generations: No not since Britain bate the name of a
Nation, nor like to come to pass whilst the world lasts. And being a time
and occasion of so much Joy and happiness to King and people, let their hearts
unite in this one acceptable service to heaven, to comfort them that Mourn in
Sion, To speak and act comfortably to and for many thousands distressed and
oppressed debtors, destructive members of Christ, who have for many years lain
defolately and disconsolately languishing, buried alive in Prisons ready to
perish, that they may say to the prisoners go forth, and to them that are in
darkness show your selves, our Savior disdayned not to declare that the Lord
had sent him to preach good ridings to the poor, to bind up the broken
hearted, to give liberty to the Captives, and to them that are bound, the
opening of the prison; to show the acceptable year of the Lord, to comfort all
that mourn. To Give unto them beauty for ashes, that oil of joy for mourning,
the garments of gladness for the spirit of happiness; that ye might be called
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord. etc. neither can Kings
appear like gods in any thing more, then in works of mercy.

But to return to speak of the honor and powervouchsafed by God himself, to
Princes. Kings if just and merciful, are accounted Companions of the Gods, and
endowed in some respects with the like power. Hence they cure diseases by their
touch and word, and sometimes command the times and heavens, as Virgil sung of
Augustus.

Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane.
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
It raines all night, in'th' morn the rays return;
Caesar with Jove divided has the Throne.
And the Scripture testifyeth of Joshuah, who fighting in Gibeon, commanded the
Sun and Moon, saying, Sun stand still in G^beon, and thou Moon in the valley of
Ajalon, and the Sun and Moon stood still at his command, neither did the Sun
set in the space of one day, until he had revenged himself of his enemies, and
the Lord obeyed the voice of man; Also Moses divided the red Sea, and Joshua,
Jourden, and led the people over dryshod; The like did Alexander the
Macedonian, leading forth his Army;

Sometimes princes are endowed with aprophetical spirit, as in many respects
the sweet singer of Israel; the Kingly Prophet David appears to be; most alike
to whom not only in afflictions, but both in piety and prophecy. Was also our
late prophetical King and kingly Prophet Carolu bonus primus, Charles le bon
the good, the first, not only regno, aut reguan do primus, sed bonitate,
pretate prudent^a omnium predecessorum primus; whose prophetical expressions
in that incomparable divine piece, (...), are many and many already evidently
fulfilled: A particular Collection whereof in a peculiar small volumne by it
self, may hapily hereafter be published. I shall herein mention only three or
four at present.

In his late Majesty's Meditation upon the Armies wilful and wicked surprisal
of his Royal and Sacred person at Holmby, diverse dangerous divisions and
distractions are by his Majesty predicted to ensue in the Houses, the Army and
City which accordingly came to pass, ((...)) the Struglings of those two twins
(as his Majesty then called the Presbyterians and Independents) which lately
one wo^^^ enclosed. And the breach still not to grow wider, is as impossible,
as lines drawn from the center, it is impossible not to divice from each other to
much the wider, by how much they go further from the point of union.

That those Babel Builders should from division fall to confusion, and although
they pretended the building of Jerusalem, the deviding of their tongues and
hands was but an ill Omen, and tended to fatal destruction.

That Divine justice would bring it so to pass, that they which by Tumults
first occasioned the raising of arms, must be chastened by their own army for
new Tum^lts.

The plea against tumults holds good, which before was condemned, whilst they
are Judges of others, they are forced to condemn themselves.

And hereupon says his Majesty prophetically, I see vengeance shall pursue and
overtake (as the mice and rats are said to have done a Bishop in Germany) them
that thought to escape and fortify themselves most impregnably against it,
both by their multitude and compliance; and whom the Laws cannot, God will
punish by their own crimes and hands. His Majesty with a pious pity proceeds,
and toward the Parliament, City and all his people which were miserably misled
and mistaken, says this good King, I was sorry to see them do, or suffer
unworthily, I never had so ill thought of them as to despair of their Loyalty
to me; which mistakes might ecclips, but I never believed malice had quite put
out. I looked on them as Christ did sometime over Jerusalem, as objects of my
prayers and tears, with compassionate grief, foreseeing those severer
scatterings which will certainly befall such as wantonly refuse to be gathered
to their duty; (mark well this prophetical expression) fatal blindness
frequently attending and punishing will full; so that men shall not be able at
last to prevent their sorrow who would not timely repent of their sins, nor
shall they be suffered to enjoy the comforts, who securely neglect the
counsels belonging to their peace, They will find that Brethren in Iniquity,
are not far from becoming insolent enemies, there being nothing harder then to
keep ill men still in our mind. Vulgar compliance with any illegal and
extravagant ways, like violent motions in Nature, soon grow's weary of it
self, and ends in a refractory sullenness; peoples rebounds are often in their
faces, who first put them upon those violent strokes.

Let the accursed Authors and abetters of that Prodigious horrid Rebellion,
deny if they dare or truly can, his late most Religious Majesty to be a true
Prophet, whose predictions are in many respects so p^rfectly fulfilled upon
them their Families and adherents, and daily shall we find a more full
performance in future to be accomplished.

In these divine Meditations, of his late Majesty, touching Death, after the
Votes of non-Addresses, and his Majesty's close imprisonment in Carisbrook
Castle; these ^nsuing expressions, who can deny ^o be prophetique. There are I
know but few steps, between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes. And after; I
doubt not but mine Inno^ency will find him both my Protector and my Advocate
who is my one^y judge, and whom I own as King of Kings. Nor will the suffer
those men long to prosper in their Babell, who build it with the boughs, and
cement it with the blood of their Kings, My blood will cry aloud to heaven for
^engeance, but I beseech God not to ^oure his wrath upon the generality of ^he
people, who have either descerted ^e, or engaged against me, through the
Artifice and Hypocrisy of their leaders, whose inward horror will be their
Tormentor; nor will they after escape exemplary judgments. I am confident they
will find Avengers of my death among themselves: The injuries I have sustained
from them shall be first punished by them, who agreed in nothing so much, as in
opposing me. Their impatience to bear the loud cry of my blood; shall make them
think no way better to expiate it, then by shedding theirs, who with, them,
most thirsted after mine. The sad confusions following my destruction, are
already presaged and confirmed to me by those, I have lived to see, since my
troubles; and God alone (who only could) has many ways pleaded my cause; not
suffering them to go unpunished, whose confederacy in sin is their only
security; who have cause to fear, that God will both further divide, and by
mutual vengeance afterward destroy them. And again afterward by a lively
Faith his Princely resolution conclude, I Conqueror shall be more then through
Christ, etc.

And in the cause so long disputed by the sword, between me and my causeless
adversaries, I doubt not but his righteous Judgment will confute their
fallacies, who from worldly success, rather like Sophisters then good
christians) draw those popular conclusions, for Gods approbation of their
accounts, whose wise providence (we know) ost permits many events, which his
revealed word (the only clear; safe, and fixed rule of good actions and good
conscien^cs) in no sort approves.

The application of these prophesies are plain and facile to the meanest
apprehensions.

Has not divine prudence, made all the seditions Shebaes, ^ebell ous, Corake,
etc. Simeons and Lepi's brethren in iniquity, even all the Kings enemies by
division, among themselves, like to the mad Midiannes instruments of ruin and
destruction, one to another, of revenging the injuries done to his Majesty and
so clearing his innocence, and the justice of his cause?

Let it be considered, and observed what is become of all or the most part of
that pernicious party of the Long Black Parliament and their Army, which so
vehemently prosecuted and persecuted his late Majesty and his friends and
posterity, and it cannot but be confessed and without contradiction concluded.
That as God is just in all his just judgments and righteous in all his, ways,
so his maje^ries predictions have not failed, but received a sad and evident
accomplishment, to the confusion of the faces of his adversaries vindication of
his Majesty's Honor, and Gods glory.

Among the rest, in perpetuam rei memoriam, that O. P. omen proditionis, onus
and odium prineipis and patria, ought be recorded, and atro carbone notandum,
to all posterity, O. P. (for pretended writing of which two Letters with the
words Occidisti Possedisti; under (relating to the saying of Eliah to Ahab) 1
King. 21.19. the Author of this Tract, endured long and hard imprisonment)
which O.P. proved to be not a Protector, a title unworthily assumed, but rather
a Projector, perditionis and proditionis non solum principi and patriae, sed
fataliter and finaliter posteritatisuae; which (as a true token of divine
Judgment) were ruined in an instant, by their own near relations, which by O.
P. were raised to preserve them.

His late Majesty in a Letter of Advise to the then Prince of Wales, our now
most blessed King, has in many respects manifested himself to be a most wise,
and prudent Prince, by his political instructions in State Affairs; a most
pious Priest and Ecclesiastes in his divine Doctrines and directions, and a
true Prophet, in his infallible predictions, the particulars whereof, as it
would require much time to recite, express and apply, so, (I doubt) it would
be accounted more tedious, then requisitely necessary to repeat the same, being
already set down most fully and eminent for observation in that un; parrallel'd
piece (...).

I shall only mention briefly from his late Majesty Charles le sag and le bon,
the mirror of piety, patience and prudence, some few precepts or prescriptions
of advise to prayers for, and prophecies touching his now most hopeful and
happy Majesty.

Touching Afflictions, Religion and Resolution in all conditions; a Crown upon
sordid dishonorable irreligious terms is not worth taking up, or enjoying:
Keep you to true principles of piety, virtue and bonour, you shall never want a
kingdom.

Thus by our late Majesty of blessed memory, to our now renowned King was it
written, concerning, trouble and affliction, whereby to gain wisdom in youth.

This advantage of wisdom, you have above most princes: That you have begun,
and now spent some years of discretion, in the experience of troubles and
exercise of patience, wherein piety and all virtues both moral and political,
are commonly better planted to a thriving, as ^rees set in Winter, then in
warmth and serenity of times; or amidst those delights, which usually attend
princes Courts in times of peace and plenty, which are prone either to root up
all plants of true virtue and honor; or to be contented only with some Leaves
and withering formalities of them, without any real fruits, such as tend to
the public good; for which Princesshould always remember they are born, and
by providence designed.

The evidence of which different Education, holy Writ affords us in the
Contemplation of David and Rehoboam: The one prepared by many afflictions for a
flourishing kingdom; The other softened by the unparalleld prosperity of
Solomon's Court; and so corrupted to the great dimunution, both for Peace,
Honor, and Kingdom, by those flatteries, which are as unseparable from
prosperous Princes, as flies are from fruit in summer, whom adversity like cold
weather drives away.

I had rather you should be Charts le bon, then le grand, good then great; I
hope, God has designed you to be both; having so early put you into that
exercise of his gifts and graces, bestowed upon you, which may best weed out
all vicious inclinations, and dispose you to those princely endowments and
employments, which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare of those
over whom God shall place you.

Who sees not this divine direction digested, pious prayer heard and granted,
and the prophecy of good and great fulfilled? What greater, what better Prince
in Christendom, in Europe, then our most illustrious renowned Charlemain? and
unto this goodness and greatness attaining, not mollify and effeminated with
the wanton pleasures of a prosperous Court; but per mare, per terras, per tot
discrimina rearum; with David, tried and almost tired with terrors and
troubles; yet clearly prepared to be at last, terque quaterque beatus, by
divine providence restored to a triple Crown, his just right and due by Nature,
and legal descent, and designed to septem, plici sceptro, a sevenfold scepter,
which the Septentrional Lion, shall obtain and enjoy before, ter septies, or
septies tres, Number of years, and the major part of this sevenfold sceptor,
shall be gained into the power and Dominion of this Septentrional Lion, before
three and seven years expire: the extent of whose time of years or age shall be
to seventy three. And by the age of 37. that star of Sybilla in the North, said
to enlighten the world, shall shine most gloriously on this Septentrional Lion,
whose fame shall ring, and the terror of whom shall be resounded through't the
Universe; This digression I cannot avoid, being drawn thereunto by that divine
spirit, from whose dictates I am directed to declare, what by divine designment
is determined touching this transcendent superexcellent person; but to return
to the consideration of his late Majesty's prophetical expressions. Has not
Almighty God most graciously directed all those black lines of afflictions,
which he was pleased to draw on his late Majesty, and also on his Majesty that
now is (who has drank liberally also of that cup of careful troubles) unto a
center of true happiness? even to draw them nearer to himself; their sorrows
are become Gods Physic; having that in healthfulness, which was wanting in
pleasure: The Fathers sufferings shall be doubly recompensed in solaces to the
Sons.

Is not that sly old Serpent, which pretended new lights at length by his deeds
of darkness, detected to be a proselyte to the Father of Lies, by whose
persuasion and instigation, he an his adherents prosecuted so violently the
Innocents? And that seeming Saint which assumed the shape of an Angel of
Reformation, discovered to be the Devil of Rebellion? Have we not seen the
Serpent devour the Dove. Has not the faith of some proved mere Faction, and
their Religion Rebellion? Have they not always made their Interest, Gods? And
under the colors of Piety, have not there marched their ambitious policies, not
only with greatest security, but applause, as to the populacy? Has not Jacob
voice been heard, when Esaus hands have been felt? Has not God made his
Majesty an happy Instrument of dissipating these devilish Factions, which would
have destroyed the Nations? Has not a divine hand divided them to so high a
rivalry as sets them more at defiance against each other, then against their
first Antagonist? as his Majesty predicted. Have not those rough horns of
private men's covetous and ambitious designs, made a clear discovery of
themselves, which were at first wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smoth
pretensions of Religion, Reformation and liberty? And as the woolf is not less
cruel, so will he be more justly hated, when he shall appear no better than a
woolf in sheeps clothing. The mountains of congealed factions, by the sunshine
of Gods mercy, and the splendour of our Sovereigns virtues are thawed and
dissipated; and the abused vulgar has learned; that none are greater
oppressors of their Estates, Liberties and Consciences, then those men that
entitle themselves the Patrons and Vindicators of them, only to Usurp power
over them; Do not these deceiptions daily vanish, and the vazards fall off a
pace? The mask of Religion in the face of Rebellion, will no longer serve to
hide some men's detestable deformities in their damnable designs.

The precepts, prayers and prophesies of his late Majesty to, for, and touching
our now king and his kingdoms, are very remarkable and well worthy observation;
some whereof I have before mentioned, and some few hereafter I shall specify:
As first advice and precept touching Religion; I do require and entreat you as
your Father and your King, that you would never suffer your heart to entertain
or receive the least check against or disaffection from the true Religion
established in the Church of England. I tell you, I have tried it and after
much search, and many disputes have concluded it to be the best in the world,
etc. many incitements to the embracing and continuing thereof; which holy
directions his now Majesty has as dutifully and faithfully observed, what then
is or ought to become of those cursed calumniators, under whose lips is the
poison of Aspes, which charged the late and this religious Kings with popery
(which however contemptible here, yet teaching no such principles, as have been
held and practiced by some of those who would be accounted the modern
principal pillars of piety and Religion in these Nations)

Another direction touching revenge, savouring of a soul truly divine, notatu
dignum; Let no passion betray you to any study of revenge upon those whose own
sin and folly will sufficiently punish them in time. As your quality sets you
beyond any Duel with any subject; so the nobleness of your mind must raise
you above the meditating any revenge, or executing your anger upon the many,
you will find more inward complacency in pardoning one, than in punishing a
thousand Many other Observations, and those material, touching his Majesty's
Name, Natural and Christian, his royal Brethren, the two Renowned Dukes of
York and Gloucester, and other remarkable matter, relating to the noble General
Monk, not unworthy consideration, are penned and were intended at this time to
be published, but are reserved for a particular Treatise-hereafter; And this
Tract at present concluded, with yt prophetical prayer, or praying prophecy of
the late most pious King, Priest, and Prophet, of most blessed memory for and
touching his now Majesty (then Prince) in a good part granted, and in a fair
forwardness like to be fulfilled. That Almighty God will make his Majesty, an
Ankor or Harbor rather, to these tossed weatherbeaten Kingdoms (as is already
accomplished) his Majesty being become an happy haven of rest and safety after
so great danger of the Kingdoms naufragie. And by his wisdom, justice, piety
and fortitude a repairer of what the folly, wickedness, ambition and Avarice
of some men have so ruined; as to leave nothing in Church or state; to the
Crown, the Nobility, the Clergy, or the Commons, either as to laws, liberties
or estates, order, honor, conscience, or lives. This is in a hopeful way by
his Maj. through his Parl. preparing and by a prosperous progress therein,
like to attain speedy and happy perfection. Happy times I hope will attend his
Maj. wherein as all good subjects will be satisfied with the blessings of his
presence and virtues; so will they by preceding sad experiences have learned,
That religion to their God, and loyalty to their King cannot be parted, without
both their sin and their infelicity; as God promised, Ps. 132.17, 18. The
Kingly prophets prayer shall put a period to this present discourse, wherein he
desired God to purge his Church from Hypocrites and Rebels. Do well, (...)
Lord, to those that be good and true in their hearts: but those that turn
aside, by their crooked ways, them shall the Lord lead with the workers of
iniquity, but peace shall be upon Israel. Ps. 125 4, 5.

Finis.

