To his Highness, OLIVER, LORD PROTECTOR Of the COMMONWEALTH OF England,
Scotland, and Ireland, AND The Dominions thereto belonging:

Is Humbly presented A Mediterranean Passage by Water Between the Two Sea Towns
LYNN and YARMOVTH, Upon the Two RIVERS The Little OWSE, and WAVENEY. With
farther Results.

LONDON: Printed by Gartrude Dawson, 1656.

To his Highness, OLIVER, Lord PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
HAving made my former Addresses in this kind to your Highness concerning the
Navigable Passage upon the Rivers Avon and Thames, between Bristol and London,
and finding that to have been a Service so acceptable to your Highness as that
your deep judgment approved thereof, as a thing very advantageous to the West
and South of England, I thought good in this Paper to offer unto your Highness
a Work no less beneficial to the North and East, that by this means all parts
of this flourishing Commonwealth under your gracious Protection, might have
cause to bless your Highness, and to be suitors to your powerful hand for the
allowance and performance of a Work so highly conducing to the Public good,

By your Highness most Humble, and most Faithful Servant, Francis Matthew.

A Mediterranean Passage by Water between the two Towns of Lynn and Yarmouth,
etc.
May it please your Highness,
THus I shall state the business which at present I intend to present to your
powerful hand, and under your potent Protection to the whole Common wealth, the
which Work is even already framed to the end intended; that is, Nature having
so bountifully concurred with her own endeavors to the effecting thereof, in
undergoing the greatest charge, which commonly is the chiefest stop in all
businesses of this nature.

The flourishing Havens of Lyn and Yarmouth being so Portuous, so much
frequented with Shipping, and so plied with Trade, it is apparent that the two
Counties adjoining Norfolk and Suffolk receive much comfort thereby, being more
indulgently dealt withal by their two Havens then remoter parts, as
particularly assisted by their importations, furnished by that means with many
Foreign commodities, which come flowing into those Ports.

These two Rivers above named, the little Owse and Waveney, running as it were
between the two Havens, and in a manner dividing those two Counties, were they
opened for Navigation, would very much increase the benefit both to those Haven
Towns, in venting of those their Importations, as also prove a great ease to
the said two Counties to have so facile and cheap a passage made to bring those
Commodities unto them, and withal thereby to vent what they produce of their
own.

These two Rivers are so favorably cast by Nature, as in the Winter (when they
will be most for use) the Heads of them already almost meet, at a place called
Loppham-Bridge, where a Navigable Channel being cut, (in length less than a
mile) the two Rivers would join for mutual Commerce from Lynn to Yarmouth; and
withal Boats might rest at any place of these Rivers, there to make their
Magazins of such Foreign Importations, as the Countries adjoining stand in
need of; others might touch at every Market Town, there standing at the least
six or seven upon, or very near adjoining to the said Rivers; and within
distance of ten miles very many Market Towns more, the which in the end of this
Paper I shall set down, with their several distances from those two Rivers;
which Rivers I observe to lie so near upon a Level, as few Sasses will be
required, to lessen the charge. What a blessing and ease would this afford to
all the Inhabitants near adjoining, upon all Market days (as they do in
Flanders) to carry themselves and their Commodities by Water (avoiding those
deep ways in the Winter season, especially on Suffolk side) from Town to Town,
from Market to Market, at such rates, as will not be considerable, if compared
to their charge and trouble in going by Horse or Cart?

These advantages for the increase of Commerce, and Trade, your Highness wisdom
will soon penetrat and give heat unto, by your potent approbation, your
Highness being generally observed to be most zealous in the setting forward of
Trade, taking so much to heart the increase thereof.

Neither does this Design of mine contain it self within the verge of the
aforesaid two Rivers, nor in the advance of Trade brought into those great
Havens of Lynn and Yarmouth, but it reaches higher, and extends to the uniting
the Inland Commerce upon Rivers between the North and East of England, there
being no obstacle (were these two Rivers opened for Navigation) no hinderance
at all, (but that which our carelessness has negligently cast aside, and made
not use of for many years) to impead our Navigation upon Rivers within the
Land, from the Haven of Yarmouth, to the City of York.

Our Henry the first, (as Mr. Camden well observes in his description of
Lincoln shire) cut a Channel for the space of seven miles from Torksea upon
the Trent down to the City of Lincoln, there to join with the River Witham,
which falling into the Haven of Boston, come through the Isle of Ely, into
these our two Rivers the Little Owse and Waveney, and so to Yarmouth. Mr. Camden
says, this gallant King caused that memorable work of seven miles to be cast
up for the benefit of his City of Lincoln, though other Writers speak of a
mixed intention therein, as partly to facilitate his own Removes from one part
of the Kingdom to another, he being the first King who brought Progresses into
fashion, so making his people equally participant of him, that they might see
and know him better by himself, than by his picture.

He was an active and wise Prince, and as all Rulers of States have ever their
designs headed with several ends, so might this King in this very work; as upon
any foreign invasion, or domestic insurrection, to transport from one side of
the Kingdom to another his Army, without grievances to his people for
billeting of his Soldiers through the Country as they passed, or tyring out
his men with long Marches, but to have them ready for action upon a moment; for
by this very work of his of seven miles, cut out for Navigation, (conjoined to
what Nature before had wrought) he might have transported an Army by Water, all
within the Land from the East part of England into the North, without the least
noise of landing, and have been upon his enemies before they dreampt of him, in
this silent and covered way. Howsoever his ends were, it was a noble work, and
a gift worthy to come from a Crown, it being the first President that I have
found in England of joining Rivers for Navigation, which shows (even then)
how forward, and prone toward Improvement this Kingdom was.

But what an unworthy neglect thereof has been in these latter times, I blush
to write (...) To let it fall, to be of no use, and the Work (though yet
extant) to lie empty, waste, and dry, far from the intention of the Royal giver
(...) in so much as now Sheep and Cattle graze, where formerly Barks have
sailed, and perhaps a King in them.

This Work, or Channel of 7 miles, commonly called Fosse Dike, were it
repaired, and the Banks in some places made up, would easily again be made
capable of Navigation, and revive that safe, rich, and large extended Commerce,
which by that means did formerly spread it self within the Land, and would open
the passage for Boats, as has been said, between York and Yarmouth, to the
unspeakable comfort or very many Towns and Villages lying near, and upon the
Passage, and would yield a general benefit both to the East and North of
England, and by participation all England over.

It has been observed upon Level taken, that the Trent lies lower than Fosse
Dike by Two Foot, or thereabouts, so that of necessity in that place there must
be A Sasse to draw, and let down the Boats. And indeed if we look upon our Sea
Coasts of Lincolnshire and Norfolk, they are so wanting of Harbors, and of
places to relieve Ships in, in time of stresse, especially upon a strong
Easterly Wind, as I may well term them importuous, for any Ships of Burden, so
that in the Winter time (when our inland passage will be most in play) the
great frequented Haven of Hull will be willing to serve it self with these
Rivers Navigable, for the more safe conduct of their Merchandise into the East
parts of England.

These, and the further advantages of this secure Transportation of all
Commodities within the Land upon Rivers, between the North and East of England
all the Winter season (when the Coast is so dangerous) I need not any further
set forth to your Highness, whose Wisdom will soon embrace them all, and
accordingly reflect upon them to the benefit of the public.

One thing I had almost omitted, amongst the many helps which the opening for
Navigation of these Two Rivers between Norfolk and Suffolk would afford those
Counties, that is, the supply of Fuel, which by this means may be brought unto
them with great facilety, Sea Coal now supplying the defects of our Wood so
much these latter years consumed, and I may well say destroyed.

And were Fosse Dike repaired for Navigation (which now lies waste) what a
recruit would that also bring to all the East parts of England, by Transporting
this way out of Nottingham-shire, Darby-shire, and Leichestershire, Pit Coal
(which in Foreign parts they call Scots Coal) which in abundance might be
fetched by the help of this passage.

Though in this very point Caution were to be had; that no such Coal should be
carried out of those Counties this way, but from Pitts new sunk, and from
places where Coals have not been sought. That the inhabitants of those parts
should not suffer by this exportation: And I shall make evident to your
Highness, that there are indeficient Mines of this Coal to supply this Trade
abundantly, where never any yet were sought for, and not in any far distance
from the River of Trent; the State contracting with the owners of the Soil
(much of that Soil is now already in the possession on of the State) so that
by this means no prejudice should arise to the Inhabitants.

Moreover at Boston (where they must pass) there might be a Magzine for that
Coal, either for us to Transport, or for Forreiners to fetch them there, But
much fitter for us to do it.
which would raise a very great Revenue to the State, that Coal being sold in
Foreign parts by weight, at very high Rates.

This Paper out of my bounden Respect, and Duty to your Highness, I offer unto
your Prudence and deep Consideration, I conceiving it to contain matter of very
great Honor to your Highness, and no less benefit and comfort to the whole
Commons Wealth.

Rivers running through the Earth, at the Veins of that Body, which Opened in
due time, and with good advice, give comfort and refreshments to all the Earth
they run through, like to the veins in our bodies, which being opened by the
advice of the learned Physician, restore health, repair strength to the
decaying man, and brings him into a flourishing condition.

By this Passage your Highness will see all Foreign Commodities brought into
us from the East parts of the world equally distributed, to the North and East
of England; As by the former Design of Opening the Rivers between Bristol and
London, all the Western Commodities brought in from abroad, were to be
Communicated to the West and South of England.

Designs worthy to be brought forth under the happy Protection of your
Highness.

Market-Townes Standing upon, or near The Little Owse* AND VVAVENEY.
Brandon, Thetford. Dis, Harleston, Bungey, Beckles. Lestof, Yarmouth.
OTHER Market Towns Within ten Miles of these RIVERS
FRom Beckles to Yarmouth 9 miles^ From Beckles to Lestof 8 miles From Bungey
to Norwich 10 miles From Yarmouth to Norwich already a Navigable passage From
Harlestone to Windham 9 miles From Dis to Windham 10 miles From Loppham*Bridge
to Higham 10 miles From Loppham to Harling 3 miles From Loppham to Bucknam 5
miles From Thetford to Watton 9 miles From Brandon to Swasham 10 miles From
Beckles to Sowld 9 miles From Beckles to Harleston 7 miles From Bungey to
Harleston 7 miles From Harleston to Framlingham 8 miles From Dis to Buddesdall
3 miles From Dis to Debenham 9 miles From Dis to Aye 3 miles From Loppham to
Wolpett 9 miles From Loppham to Stow 9 miles From Loppham to Nedeham 10 miles
From Brandon to Mildnall 6 miles
All these Market Towns, besides innumerable Villages, with many
Gentlemens-Houses of Note, would so make use of these Two Rivers, Being but one
days Work for a Teem.
that a marvelous Trade would be driven upon them; and Sailing out of the
Little Owse, the Boats enter into the Great Owse, which already is Navigable to
Lynn, and to all the Towns within the Isle of Ely, even up to Cambridge.

FINIS.

