AN APOLOGY OF THE CHVRCHES IN NEW ENGLAND FOR CHVRCH-COVENANT.

OR, A Discourse touching the Covenant between God and men, and especially
concerning Church Covenant, that is to say, The Covenant which a Company do
enter into when they become a Church; and which a particular person enters into
when he becomes a member of a Church.

Sent over in Answer to Master BERNARD, in the Year 1639.

And now published for the satisfaction of all who desire resolution in this
point.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Benjamin Allen. 1643.

A DISCOVRSE TOUCHING THE Covenant between God and Men, and especially
concerning Church Covenant, that is to say, the Covenant which a Company do
enter into when they become a Church, and which a particular person enters into
when he becomes a member of a Church. 1639.
JER. 50. 5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten.
ALthough that which is foretold in these two Chapters, and namely in the
fourth and fifth verses of this Chapter, was in part fulfilled when the people
of God returned from Captivity in Babylon at the end of seventie years: yet
we must not limit the place to that time only, but may extend it further to
the days of the Gospel, and the spiritual return, not of the Jews only, but
of the Gentiles also, when men shall be converted from Pagan, Antichristian,
Babylonish, or Jewish bondage and captivity, or from slavery to sin, and
self-righteousnesse, and shall be joined to God in the fellowship of his
Church, in the days of the New Testament. For as some passages in this
Scripture were never fully accomplished at the return from the captivity of
the seventie years, and namely this, that the children of Israel and Judah
should return both together: (for the ten tribes returned not at all:) so many
things that literally concerned the Jews were types and figures, signifying
the like things concerning the people of God in these latter days: In which
respect sincere converts are called Jews, Romans 2. 29. and Israelites, Gal. 6.
16. Ioh. 1. 47. and our Sacraments are made (...) of theirs, a Con 10. 1, 2, 3.
and Rome is called Babylon, Rev. 17. 5, and Papists are called Gentiles* Rev.
11. 2. and therefore the captivity of Babylon might well be a Type of the
spiritual captivity of Gods people to Antichristian bondage, and t^eir
return from Babylon to Sion, a type of the return of Christians from Romish
slavery to the true Sion, the Christian Church. And this may be added further,
that this place seems not only to be meant of the private or personal
conversion of this or that particular Christian, but also further, of the open
and joint calling of a company, because it is said, they shall come, the
children of Israel and the children of Judah together, and that their saying
shall not be, Let me join, etc. but in the Plural number, (...) us join our
selves unto the Lord, so noting the joining of a company togeth^r in holy
Covenant with God.

Concerning which Covenant with God, it will not be amiss for the better
understanding of that which follows; first, briefly to show how diversely
Covenant is taken in the Scripture, which sometimes i^ports generally any firm
appointment or promise of God, when man does not promise unto God any thing
back again: Thus the preserving of Noah in the Arc, and of the wo^ld from
being drowned any more by a flood; the interchangeable succession of day and
night; the giving of the Priesthood unto Phin^as; the setting forth of the
Shewbread every Sabbath before the Lord, and the giving of the heave offering
unto the Priests, are said to be done by a Covenant, or an everlasting Covenant
of God, Genesis 6. 18. and 9. 9. 10. 11. Ier. 33. 20. Number. 25. 12, 13 (...). 24.
8. Number. 18. 19. But sometimes Covenant is taken more strictly and properly, for
an agreement which God does make with men, when he promises some blessing unto
men, and bin^es them to perform some duty back again to him. Taken thus it
has two parts: first, a promise or stipulation of some blessing on Gods part:
secondly, Restipulation or promise, or bind^^g o^ man unto duty back again on
his part: both these are in those words of the Covenant, I will be to thee a
God, thou shall be to me a people: and so Genesis 17. 1. and v. 7, 8*9, 10. The
Covenant taken thus is either the Covenant of works, or the Covenant of grace:
And again the Covenant may be considered, first as it is personal, private
and particular, between God and one particular soul, making Covenant with God,
and God with him, either at his first conversion, or at other times; of which
we read 2 Samuel 23. 5. and Psalm. 119. 106. and 66. 13, 14. and 27. 8. and Psalm.
119. 7, 8 Secondly, it is general and public of a company jointly together,
of which this Text Ier. 50. 5. seems most properly to speak: as also that
Deuteronomy. 29. 9, 10, etc. and that Exodus 19. 5, 6, and many others: A Covenant
taken thus generally when it respects spiritual blessings, and spiritual
duties, in the Communion of Saints, is that which is called Church Covenant,
which Church Covenant differs not in substance of the things promised from that
which is between the Lord and every particular soul, but only in some other
respects; as first, the one is of one Christian in particular, the other of a
company jointly together. Secondly, if right Order be observed, a man ought not
to enter into Church Covenant, till he be in Covenant with God before, in
respect of his personal estate. Thirdly, The one is usually done in private,
as in a man's Closet between the Lord and his soul, and the other in some
public assembly. Fourthly, The one in these days is of such duties as the
Gospel requires of every Christian as a Christian, the other of such duties as
the Gospel requires of every Church and the members thereof.

Now concerning Church Covenant, two things are to be noted for the better
understanding thereof: first, the description of it: secondly, the use of it,
and the benefit and fruit thereof. For the former it may be thus described,
viz. A solemn and public promise before the Lord, whereby a company of
Christians, called by the power and mercy of God to fellowship with Christ, and
by his providence to live together, and by his grace to cleave together in the
unity of faith, and brotherly love, and defirous to partake together in all
the holy Ordinances of God, do in confidence of his gracious acceptance in
Christ, bind themselves to the Lord, and one to another, to walk together by
the assistance of his Spirit, in all such ways of holy worship in him and of
edification one toward another, as the Gospel of Christ requires of every
Christian Church, and the members thereof.

In this description, there are compr^^ed six things: First the general name
of the thing: [ a solemn and public promise] a promise it is, and therefore
it is called, a joining in Covenant here: an entering into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.
10. Solemn and public, and therefore it is by the children of Israel and the
children of Judah together: and they say, let us join. Secondly, The object
[the Lord, and one another] join our selves to the Lord. it is not a promise
only to man, but to the Lord himself, and likewise to one another; for, come
let us join, implies mutual consent together. Thirdly, The Agents or the
qualification of the persons: [ Christians] not Turks, Indians, etc. Saints,
Psalm. 50. 5. 16, 17. [ called to fellowship with Christ] so 1 Cor. 1. 9. else
if they be not united to Christ by faith, they are not fit materials for such
a building as a Church of God, which is the house of the living God, Ephesians. 1.
1. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 1. Rev. 21. 27. [ By his providence to live together]
else they cannot partake in the Lords Ordinances together as Churches ought to
do, 1 Cor. 14. 23. Act. 14. 27. the whole Church comes together in one place [
cleaving together in faith and love] so Act. 4. 32. If they differ, namely, in
opinion, or in their affection, and should join in this Covenant, breaches,
factions, rents, and schisms, would be like to be the issue of such joining:
things so unlike would not close nor long hold together, Dan. 2. 43 [ Desirous
to partake in all Ordinances] this should be the ground of their joining in
Covenant together, Psalm. 110. 3. willing: and not pride, nor gain, nor the
like: Fourthly, The Act [ bind themselves] that now they are bound by their
own word and promise, that they may say now, as Psalm. 56. 12. Thy vows are
upon me, or as Number. 30. 2. if he bind his soul with a vow. Fifthly, The matter
promised; [ To walk together in all such ways of worship and mutual
edification, as the Gospel requires of Churches and Church-members] they bind
not themselves to observe any devises of their own, nor inventions of men, but
such things as the word of God requires; neither is it perfect obedience to
the Law, for that were impossible to perform, and presumption to promise; nor
is it only in general the duties of the Gospel, but specially such duties of
worship to God, and edification of one another as concern Church State, which
now they enter into. Sixthly, The manner of performing [ Confidence of Gods
gracious acceptance and assistance through Christ] for in all our ways God
must be acknowledged, Pro. 3. 6. and much more in such special matters of
weight: If men in entering into this Covenant look for acceptance, through any
worth of their own, or promise duty in their own strength, they show
themselves like to the Pharisees, Luke 18. 10, 11. and turn the
Church Covenant into a Covenant of works: and as many as are of the works of
the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10.

The use and benefit of this Church Covenant, and the fruit thereof, may be
seen in two particulars; first, That this is that whereby a company of
Christians do become a Church: It is the Constituting form of a Church.
Secondly, This is that by taking hold whereof a particular person becomes a
member of a Church, which was constituted before. For the former of these; every
Christian Church must have in it both matter and form, and as the matter by
Gods appointment are visible Saints, or visible believers, Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Cor.
1. 2. and in the New Testament, only so many as may meet together in one
Congregation: So the form is a uniting, or combining, or knitting of those
Saints together into one visible body, by the band of this holy Covenant. Some
union or band there must be amongst them, whereby they come to stand in a new
relation to God, and one toward another, other then they were in before: or
else they are not yet a Church, though they be fit materials for a Church; even
as soul and body are not a man, unless they be united; nor stones and timber
an house, till they be compacted and conjoined.

Now that a company becomes a Church, by joining in Covenant, may be made good
sundry ways; first, By plain Texts of Scripture; as from Deuteronomy. 29. 1, 10, 11,
12, 13. Ye stand this day all you before the Lord your God, your Captains of
your Tribes, your Elders, your Officers, with all the men of Israel* ver. 10.
That thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, ver. 12. and he
may establish thee for a people unto himself, ver. 13. So that here is plain^y
showed, that here was a company, ver. 10. and this company were to be
established to be a people unto the Lord, that is to say, a Church, ver. 13.
And this is done by the peoples entering into solemn Covenant with God, ver.
12. And therefore a company of people do become a Church by entering into
Covenant with God.

This Covenant was not like our Church-Covenants, Object. 1.
for it was of all the Nation together; whereas the Church Covenant with us, is
of some select persons, leaving out others.

1. This Objection concerns the matter of a Church, Answer.
but the Covenant is not the material cause of a Church, but the formal cause
thereof: and for this the Text is plain and express, that by entering into
Covenant with God, a people come to be the Lords people, that is to say, his
Church.

2. If it was of all the people together, the reason was because that Church
was a national Church: now if a national Church becomes a Church by entering
into solemn Covenant with God, then a Congregationall Church becomes a Church
by the same means; for there is no difference between them in this point.

3. Though it was of all the people, we may not say it proves that when we
look at the material cause of a Church, there may be a promiscuous taking in
of all Comers without distinction or separation of the precious from the vile;
for, first, when God took in this Nation to be his people, he separated them
from all the Nations of the earth besides: so that there was a distinction and
separation of some from others. Secondly, this generation was generally a
generation of believers; for it was they that were to enter into the land
within a while after; for they were forty years in the Wilderness, and this
Covenant, was made in the last month save one of the last of those forty
years, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. And their carcasses fell not in the Wilderness through
unbelief, as their Fathers did, Number. 14. Heb. 3. but entered by faith, and when
they were entered, subdued Kingdoms by their faith, Heb. 11. 33. and served the
Lord all the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that outlived Joshua, Josh. 24.
31. As for that which is said of them, ver. 4, 5. of this Chap. that the Lord
had not given them eyes to see, etc. that proves not that they were wholly
hardened in a carnal estate, but only that they were dull and slow of heart to
consider of sundry dispensations of God toward them; for as much is said of
the disciples of Christ, Mar. 8. 17, 18. when doubtless they were not mere
carnal or natural persons.

This people Deuteronomy. Object. 2
29. could not become the Lords people by entering into sol^mne Covenant with
God, for they were the Lords Church and people already before this.

1. If they were, Answer.
yet that was by entering into solemn Covenant with God on Mount Sinai, when
the Lord had brought them up out of the Land of Egypt; for then they entered
into solemn Covenant with God, and God with them, and so they became the Lords
peculiar people, Exodus 19 4, 5, 6, 8. etc. If they were his people before that,
yet that also was by Covenant made with them in the loins of Abraham, when God
took him and his seed to be his Church and people, yet separating Ishmael
from Isaac and Esau from Jacob, that the inheritance of the Covenant of God,
and of being the Church of God, might rest in the house of Jacob.

2. Yet it was not without great reason that the Lord should now establish them
by solemn Covenant to be a people to himself, because the Nation had been
much degenerated from the spirit and ways of Abraham in Egypt, and had broken
that Covenant by their Idolatries there, Ez^k. 20. 7, 8. And the Covenant made
in Sinai or Horeb when they were come out of Egypt, they had also broken by
their Idolatries in the Wilderness, Ez^k 20. 13, 16. for which causes, and the
like, the Lord consumed that generation, that they never entered into the Land,
Josh. 5. 4, 6. And therefore now when their posterity and children were ready
to enter in, the Lord entered into Covenant with them, and thereby established
them to be his people, their Fathers being cut off for breaking the Covenant.
But still it was by Covenant that both Fathers first, and children afterward
became a Church and people unto God; and when this generation were entered into
the Land, their Covenant made before between God and them, was confirmed by
Circumcision, Josh. 5. 3 7. they being not Circumcised before.

But this Covenant was of the whole Church with God, Object. 3
and therefore not like our Chu^ch-Covenants, which are between the Church and
the members concerning watchfulness over one another, and the like.

Our Church Covenants are with the Lord himself, Answer.
as was showed before in the description thereof. For watchfu^nesse and duties
of edification one toward another, are but branches of the Lords Covenant,
being duties commanded by the Law: and so it was with that people of Israel,
who when they promised and Covenanted to walk in all the ways of God; in all
his statutes and commandments and judgments, they promised these du^ies of
love and watch^ulnesse and e^ification one toward another, because these were
duties commanded and required o^ God, Lev. 19. 17 Deuteronomy. 29 ^8 the neglect
whereof in the matter of Achan was the sin of al^ the Congregation, and
brought judgment upon them all, Josh 7. 11, 12. Yea by this Covenant they were
bound to duties toward them that were not then present, but children afterward
to beborne, and prosely^es, that afterward should be added to them, ver. 14,
15. Like as our Church-Covenants are with them that now are, and that hereafter
shall become members of the same Church. When Iehojada made a Covenant between
the King and the people, 2 King. 11. 17. that Covenant was but a branch of the
Lords Covenant with them all, both King and people: for the King promised but
to Rule the people righteously, according to the will of God: and the people to
be subject to the King so Ruling. Now these duties of the King to them, and of
them to the King, were such as God required in his Covenant, both of him and
them: and so it is in Church Covenant, the duties of the Church to the members,
and the members to the Church, and one another, are no other but such as the
Gospel and the Covenant of grace requires both of the Church and the members
of it in their several places.

But this place of Deuteronomy. 29. is not sufficient to prove a Church Covenant in
these days: Object. 4.
because it is in the Scriptures of the old Testament, for whatsoever must be
used in the days of the New T^stament, must be proved from the Scriptures of
the New Testament, or else it is to be laid aside.

1. The Church Covenant may be proved from the New Testament Answer.
also, as will afterward appear.

2. But suppose there were not pregnant places for it in the New Testament, yet
it is not enough to prove the same unlawful: for whatsoever Ordinance of the
old Testament is not repealed in the New Testament, as peculiar to the Jewish
Paedagogie, but was of moral and perpetual equity, the same binds us in
these days, and is to be accounted the revealed will of God in all ages,
though it be not particularly and expressly mentioned in the writings of the
New Testament, else how shall we prove it unlawful for a man to marry his
Sister, or his Aunt? How shall we prove it warrantable and necessary for
Magistrates to punish Sabbath-breaking, blasphemy, and Idolatry? How shall we
prove it lawful to apply the seal of Gods Covenant unto Infants? or to admit
women to eat of the holy things; for the Scriptures of the New Testament do
speak little in these cases; only the Scriptures of the Old Testament do
give direction, and light about them, Lev. 18. and 19. Neh. 13. 15. etc. 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. and 2 King. 23. Genesis 17. 2. and Exodus 12. 4. 6. And the New
Testament has nothing to the contrary, and they are all according to moral
equity and reason, and therefore they are to be observed from the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, as the revealed will of God, though there were nothing
expressly for them in the New. And the same we say of the particular in hand.
For, that a company should be combined together into one body, in way of
Government and subjection, by way of mutual free Covenant; as men do when
they enter into Church Estate, nothing is more natural or agr^eable to moral
equity; nay, it implies a contradiction in the very name of liberty or
freedom, that freemen should take upon them authority or power over free men
without their free consent, and voluntary and mutual Covenant or Engagement.
And therefore seeing this Covenant is not repealed in the Scriptures of the New
Testament, the Scriptures of the Old are sufficient warrant for it.

Another Scripture to prove the same, is Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18. with Deuteronomy. 27.
9. This day the Lord has commanded thee to do these Statutes and Judgments,
thou shall therefore keep and do them, etc. Thou have avouched the Lord this
day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, etc.
And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people; Take heed
and hearken, O Israel, this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God.
This Scripture plainly shows these things: 1. That here was the making of a
Covenant between God and man; for that avouching of God to them, and them to
God, was the making of Covenant, ver. 17. 18. 2. This was not of one person,
but of a company together, the whole people of Israel, 26. 18. and 27. 9. 3
Here is the effect of this Covenant, that thereby they become the Lords people,
ver. 9. So that when a company do enter into holy Covenant with God, they
become thereby the Lords people, that is to say, his Church. So Ezech. 16. 8.
proves the same likewise: I ent^ed into Covenant with thee, says the Lord, and
thou becam^st mine. Here also is the making of Covenant between the Lord and
men; and this Covenant was not personal, but of a company; for it was with
Jerusalem, ver. 2. which was a whole City; it was with them that were
multiplied as the bud of the seild, ver. 7. and it was with them that did
prosper into a kingdom, ver. 13. and therefore not meant only of any one
particular person: And by this Covenant they became the Lords; that is, the
Lords Church and people; for it is expressly said, I entered into Covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine. So that when a company enter into Covenant with
God, and God with them, they become thereby the Lords Church and people.
Likewise Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will cause you to pass under the rod; and I will
bring you into the bond of the Covenant. In which place, there is first mention
of an holy Covenant. Secondly, This was not of one person, but of a company,
the whole house of Israel, ver. 30. 39. Thirdly, And this Covenant is called a
Bond, because it is by Covenant that a people are bound, and tied, and knit
together, as one Church, all of them unto the Lord, and one unto another; So
that the Covenant is the bond of union, by which a company are so combined and
united, as that they become a Church. It is also obs^rvable, how the Lord
before he would bring them into this bond of the Covenant, he would cause them
to pass under the rod; by which phrase, as Iunius upon the place well
observes, is meant trial and probation; drawn from the manner of Shepherds
or owners of Cattle, who went among their sheep, or other cattle with a rod,
and therewith pointed out such as were for the Lords holy use, as Lev. 27. 32.
And so hereby is noted that God would not ^n the days of the Gospel have men
to be brought into his Church hand over head, but he would first cause them to
pass under the rod of due trial and probation; and then such as upon trial
were found to be holy for God, or meet matter for his Church, should solemnly
enter into Covenant with God, and that Covenant should be the bond that should
combine them, and knit them together into one, that so they that were many
particular persons, should all become one body, that is to say, a Church.

And so much of the first Argument drawn from plain Texts of Scripture.

A second Argument may be taken from the Titles that are given Argu. 2.
to the Church; as first, that the Church is said to be married or espoused
unto Christ, Ier. 2. 2. and 3. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 2. From whence the Argument may
be formed thus: If every Church becomes a Church by being married or espoused
unto Christ, then a company becomes a Church by way of Covenant: But the former
is true, therefore the latter (...) true also.

The Assumption, that a Church becomes a Church by being married unto Christ,
is plai^e from the former Scriptures, where the ^hurc^ of Israel, and the
Church of Corinth, in regard of their e^tring into Church Estate, are said to
be espoused and married unto Christ, as a loving and chaste Virgin to one
husband. Which spiritual marriage between Christ and his Church, is also
taught in the type of the marriage between King Solomon and Pharoahs daughter,
Psalm. 45.

The Consequence of the Proposition is plain in reason; for there is no
marriage but by way of Covenant; no woman becomes a man's wife, but by way of
bestowing her self in Covenant upon such a man: neither does a man become an
husband, but by the same means; and therefore the Scripture speaking of the
violation of marriage, calls it a violation of Covenant, Prove. 2. 17.

Christ has but one wife or Spouse, Object. 1.
Cant. 6 9.

The Catholic Church indeed is but one; Answer.
viz* the whole company of Gods Elect in heaven, in earth, dead, now living,
and not yet borne: But as there is the Church-Catholique, which is but one; so
there are particular and visible Churches, which are in number many; and
therefore the Scripture speaks of Churches, 2 Cor. 8. 1. 19. Gal. 1. 2. Of the
Churches of the Gentiles, Romans 16. 4. Of seven Churches, Rev. 1. 4. Of all
Churches, 1 Cor. 14 33. and 7. 17. Rev. 2. 23.

But if every particular Church be the wife of Christ, Obj. 2.
how many hundred wives should he have?

1. If the Church of Israel, Answ.
Ier. 2. 2. the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11. 2. The Jewish Church, Rev. 19. 7.
be the Spouse and wife of Christ, there is no reason but others should be the
same also, especially seeing there is no particular Church, but in respect of
their Church estate, they may decline and go a whoring from Christ, and that
shows that they were first espoused to him; for no woman can be said to got a
whoring from a man, if she were never married, nor espoused to him at all.

2. This that seems an absurdity, and were a sinful practice among men, in
respect of Christ, is a certain truth, and no dishonor unto him at all, to
have more Spouses then one upon earth, many spiritual Spouses. Men cannot give
themselves wholly and entirely to many as Christ can. Every faithful soul is
espoused and married unto Christ; and in that respect he has not only many
hundred but many thousand, yea many millions of spiritual Spouses.

But this spiritual marriage is between Christ and the Church, Obj. ^.
But the Church Covenant is between the Church and the members, and therefore
this marriage does not prove the Church Covenant.

1. In some sort there may be said to be a marriage between the Answer.
Church and the members, viz. in respect of that dear love and affection, that
ought to be between them; and therefore it is said, As a young man marries a
Virgin, so shall the children of the Church be married to the Church, Isa. 62.
5.

2. But properly the marriage is between Christ and the Church, and so is the
Covenant also, so far as therein they give up themselv^s to Christ as unto an
head and Lord; as a woman in the Covenant of m^rriage does give up her self
unto her husband; And the performance of such duties as the Church and the
member owe one unto another, is a branch of that marriage-Covenant, wherein
they are tied to Christ; for Christ himself in his Covenant requires, not
only that they should give up themselves to him, but also that they should
perform these duties one unto another. And accordingly it is said of the
Churches in Mac^donia, that they gave up themselves first to the Lord, and then
to us by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. True it is, they do also bind
th^mselves by Covenant one unto another, but in that respect the Covenant is
p^operly a brotherly Covenant; like that 1 Samuel 20. 8. Am^s. 1. 9. because
there the engagement is to one another as brethren, fellow -members, and
fellow-helpers, and not as to one head or Lord, as it is in respect of Christ,
and therefore in that respect it is not so properly a marriage-Covenant as it
is in respect of Christ: though duties to one another are promised in their
Covenant with one another, and also in their Covenant with Christ. In brief
thus: They promise unto Christ duties to him, and duties to one another
according to him: and so their Covenant is a marriage-Covenant with Christ:
They promise also to one another, duties to one another, and so it is a
brotherly Covenant.

Another Title given to the Church (which also proves that a Church is made by
Covenant) is the Title of a City, or City of God, Psalm. 87 3. and 48 1. 8.
and 122. 3. Ephesians 2. 19. The Argument lies thus. If a true Church be a City
of God, then a Church becomes a Church by Covenant: But every true Church is a
City of God. Ergo.

The Assumption is proved by the Scriptures forealledged. The Consequence of
the Proposition is plain in reason, for every City is un^ted by some Covenant
among themselves, the Citizens are received unto (...) Civitatis, or right of
City privileges, by some Covenant or Oath; And therefore it is so likewise in
this City of God the Church; and men become Citizens of the Church by solemn
Covenant.

The third Argument Argu. 3.
may be drawn from the means of reforming and restoring a Church when it is
corrupted, which is by entering into Covenant a new with God, 2 Chronicles. 15. 10.
and 29. 10. and Neh. 9. 38. and 10. 28, 29 Ier. 50. 4, 5. The reason may be
taken thus: If a Church decayed is to be restored and refo^med by renewing
Covenant with God, then it was instituted and erected at the first by way of
Covenant: The reason of which Consequence is, because abuses and corruptions
are to be reformed by bringing things back to the first Institution: Thus
Christ re^ormes the abuses of marriage, by bringing them to the first
Institution of that Ordinance; From the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8.
And thus Paul reformeth the Abuses of the Lords Supper, by telling them what
was the first Institution thereof, 1 Cor. 11. 23 etc. And thus the Lord Jesus
calling on the declining Church of Ephesus for reformation, bids her remember
from whence she is fallen, and repent and do her first works. Rev. 2. 5.

Now the Assumption is plain from the Texts above alleged, that at the
reforming of a Church, there is to be a renewing of Covenant; and thence it
follows, that at the first erecting of a Church, there was the making of a
Covenant with God, for else this renewing of Covenant would not have been the way
to reform it.

The fourth Argument is taken from that which does dissolve a Church, Argu. 4.
which is the dissolving or breaking of the Covenant, Zach. 11. 9, 10 14. If
dissolving the Covenant be that which does dissolve the Church, then the making
of Covenant is that which constitutes a Church. The reason of the Consequence
is plain, because otherwise the Covenant might be dissolved and the Church
stand still, if it were not the making of the Covenant that did constitute the
Church: But if dissipating stones in a building do dissolve the house, then
the compacting and conjoyning of them is that which makes the house; If
separation of soul and body be that which destroys the man, that then we say
he is not: it must needs be the uniting of them, that did constitute and make
the man: and so it is (...) case. And that dissolving the Covenant is that
which dis^ol^ves a Church, is plain from the Text alleged, Zach. 11. Where
the breaking of the two staves, of beauty and bands, that is, the unchurching
of the Jews, is interpreted to be the breaking of the Covenant that God had
made with that people, and the brotherhood that was between Judah and Israel.

The fifth Argument is taken from the distinction which God has appointed
amongst Churches, Argu. 5.
and the confounding of all Churches into one, if there be not this Covenant to
distinguish them. If Churches be distinct Societies, and may not be confounded,
then Churches are compacted and combined by Covenant: But the former is true.
Ergo.

That Churches are distinct Societies, is plain in the Scripture, where we
have mention of many Churches in one Country or Province, Gal. 1. 1. 1 These.
2. 14. Of seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 1. 4. and of all the Churches, 1 Cor.
14. 33. Rev. 2. 23. Ephesus is not Smyrna, nor Smyrna is not Thyatira, nor
either of them Pergamus, but each one distinct of themselves, having Officers
of their own, which did not belong to others: virtues of their own for which
others are not praised, corruptions of their own, for which others are not
blamed; If it were not thus, then when Laodi^ea is condemned for
lukewarmenesse, or Ephesus for declining, all the rest should be reproved also:
And when Philadelfia is praised, all the rest should be praised also, which we
see is otherwise. Now from hence the Consequence is certain, that therefore
they are combined by some Covenant each one amongst themselves; for there is
nothing else without this that will sufficiently distinguish them. The Spirit of
God and Faith in their hearts, is common to all Christians under heaven, and in
heaven also, and therefore this is not the thing that makes distinction. Nor is
it habitation in the same Town together, for that may be common to such
Christians as are not of this Church, and usually is to many that are no
Christians. As it is with Companies in London; as the Company of Goldsmiths,
etc. that many others dwell in the same Town with them, yea it may be in the
same street that are not of their Company: and therefore it is not merely
habitation that does distinguish them from others, but some combination and
agreement amongst themselves; So it is not habitation in the same Town that
distinguishes Churches, and Church Members from other men, but their mutual
agreement and combination and joining themselves together in an holy Covenant
with God.

If the Spirit of God and Faith in their hearts cannot distinguish one Church
from another, Object.
because these are common to them all, then how can Covenant distinguish them,
since all Churches are joined by Covenant one as well as another?

It is not a Covenant simply or a Covenant in general that does constitute a
Church, Answer.
or distinguish one Church from another, but a Covenant with application and
appropriation to these persons. Even as it is in marriage, though all married
couples be united by Covenant, and a Covenant, wherein one couple promises the
same duties that another couple does yet a Covenant with application and
appropriation of the duties covenanted to this man and this woman in
particular, such a Covenant is the very thing that make a couple, man and wife
together, and gives them mutual power over each other, as husband and wife,
and puts a distinction between them and all other men and women in the world.
And so it is in this case; a Covenant to perform Church-duties with
application and appropriation to such persons, is the very thing that
constitutes a Church, and distinguishes one Church from another.

And thus much concerning the former of the two particulars, to show the use of
Church Covenant, viz. that it is that whereby a company do become a Church.

The second particular is this, taking hold of the Covenant, or joining in it,
is that which makes a particular person a member of a Church. And this follows
upon the former, and that may be the first Argument to prove it.

If joining in Covenant be that which makes a company to become a Church, Argu.
1.
then taking hold of that Covenant is requisite to make a particular person
become a member of the Church: But the first is true, as has been showed
before; Therefore the second is true also: If compacting and conjoyning of
stones and pieces of Timber, be that that makes an house, then a particular
stone cannot become a part of that house, till it be compacted and conjoined to
the rest: But the former is true, even in the Church of God, which is the
spiritual Spouse and City of God, living stones, Christians, believers must
be compacted together, and builded up together, Ephesians. 2. 21. 22. Psalm. 122. 3.
and therefore the latter is true also, that a particular Christian becomes a
member of the Church, a part of that building by being combined with the rest.

A second Argument may be drawn from the Scripture, Argu. 2.
Isa. 56. 3, 6, 7. Let not the son of the stranger, that has joined himself
to the Lord, speak, saying, the Lord has utterly separated me from his
people, etc. The sons of the strangers that join themselves to the Lord, to
serve him, etc. and take hold of my Covenant, even them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my house of Prayer, etc. Concerning which
Scripture, note three things to the present purpose. First, That these
strangers were members of Christ, true believers, joined to God by Faith; for
it is said, they have joined themselves to the Lord, v. 3 and v. 6. that they
loved the name of the Lord, served him, and kept his Sabbaths, v. 6. and yet
for all this they were not as yet joined, as members of the visible Church, for
if they had been joined, there would have been no cause for such a complaint,
the Lord has separated me from his people, v. 3. Besides, bringing them into
the Church as members, and granting them the privilege of members, is promised
as a reward and blessing upon this their joining to the Lord by faith and
obedience, v. 7. And therefore it is not the same, but a disti^ct thing from
it; the one being promised as a reward and blessing upon the other. Secondly,
The Lord promises that he will make them members of his Church: Them will I
bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of Prayer.
Thirdly, That among other things requisite to make them members, this was one,
viz. the taking hold of that Covenant which was between the Church of Israel
and God, v. 6. So that hence we may gather, that men may be members of Christ,
joined to the Lord by faith and love, and yet for the present not be members of
the visible Church: And that when God is so gracious to true believers, as to
make them members of his visible Church, it is requisite that they join in
Covenant before.

But might not faith in Christ, Object.
believing in heart on the God of Israel, be all the taking hold of the
Covenant that is here meant.

Not so, Answer.
but over and above that, here is also meant their open profession of their
Faith in the God of Israel, and open binding of themselves by Covenant to all
such duties of faith and obedience, as God required of the Church of Israel,
and the members thereof. Now distinctly take the Answer to this Objection in
three or four particular Propositions. First, There was a Covenant between the
Church of Israel and God, Exodus 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ezekiel 16. 8. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. etc.
Secondly, This Covenant was mutual; not only a promise on Gods part to be
their God, and to take them for his people, but also reciprocally on their part
to give up themselves unto God to be his people, and to do the duty of people
to their God; The Covenant is not merely to receive from God, and promise
nothing back again to him; nor does God bind himself therein, and leave men
at liberty, but it is mutual on both parts, as these Scriptures declare; Genesis
17. 1. Exodus 19. 7. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. and 6. 16, 17. Hos. 2. 23. and Zach. 13. 9.
Thirdly, Hereupon it follows, that if men had not promised, and also
performed, in some measure of truth, the duties of Faith and obedience unto
God, they had not taken hold of the Covenant, but had discovenanted themselves,
notwithstanding all the promises of God unto their Fathers or others. Thus
though God promised Abraham to be a God to him, and to his seed in their
generations, Genesis 17. 7. yet the Ishma^lites and Edomites descending from
Abraham, were discovenanted by not promising nor performing those duties of
Faith and obedience, which God required on the peoples part: when a Covenant
contains promises on Gods part, and duties also on man's, he does not take hold
of the Covenant that takes one part, and leaves another. Fourthly, To believe
what God promised in the Covenant for his part, and to promise in a private way
the duties of obedience on man's part, was not sufficient to make these
strangers members of the Church, but they must do it openly and in the view of
the Church, else the Church could have had no warrant to have admitted such
into their Fellowship, if their faith and obedience had not been visibly
professed, Exodus 12. 43. 48 2 Chronicles. 23. 19.

And in as much as the Covenant was mutual, when these strangers did manifest
their taking hold of the Covenant, they manifested and professed both Faith and
obedience, both that they believed what God promised, and that they would be
obedient to what he required; If any should have claimed Church Fellowship,
saying, I believe the promises, but would not bind himself to any duties of
Evangelicall obedience, this had been a taking hold of the Covenant by the
halves, a taking of one part of it in seeming and pretense, and a leaving of
another; but it would not have been sufficient to have brought a man into the
fellowship of the church: Such of the Congregation of Israel as would not come
to Jerusalem to enter into Covenant, were to be separated from the Church in
the days of Ezrya, Ezra 10. 8. And therefore such as being strangers should
refuse to enter into it, could not be admitted into the Church; So that the
taking hold of Gods Covenant, which is there required to make these strangers
members of the Church, is a believing in heart on the God of Israel, and an
open profession that they did believe, and likewise a promise of obedience or
subjection unto the God of Israel, and an open professing of such obedience and
subjection; and that is the joining in Covenant which we stand for, before a
man can be a member of a Church, even an open profession of Faith and of
Obedience.

A third Argument is taken from those Scriptures which show that men become
members by being added to the Church, Argu. 3.
or being joined to them, Act. 2. 47. and 5. 13. and 9. 26. If men become
members of the Church by being added or joined, then joying in Covenant (or
professing of subjection to the Gospel or Covenant of God) is that whereby a
man becomes a member of a Church: But the former is true, as appears by the
Scriptures forementioned, and therefore the latter is true also.

But all the doubt in this Argument will be concerning the consequence of the
Major Proposition; but that may be made good by this reason, and the
confirmation of it, viz. that a man cannot be added or joined to the Church by
any other means without this joining in Covenant. The truth of which Assertion
will appear by showing the insufficiency of all other means, without this
joining in Covenant, and that may be done in Answer to the Objections ensuing.

When men were added to the Church, Object. 1.
it may be, no more is meant but tha^ God did convert them and work Faith in
their hearts, and that converting of them was the adding of them to the Church.

This cannot be all; Answer.
for, first, Saul was converted and had faith wrought in his heart, and yet he
was not at the first received for a member of the Church at Jerusalem (though
he assayed to be joined unto them,) till they were better satisfied in his
spiritual estate by the testimony of Barnabas, Act. 9. 26, 27, 28. And those
strangers, Isa. 56. (as was said before) were joined to the Lord by being
converted, and having Faith wrought in their hearts, and yet they do lament it
with grief, that they were not joined as members to the visible Church: The
Lord has separated me from his people, say they, ver. 3. The old saying is
true concerning the visible Church, There are many wolves within, and many
sheep without. Secondly, Those that were joined were believers before they
joined; for it is said, diverse were added, ver. 14. Thirdly, Those that were
added to the Church, were added and joined to them by such an act as others
durst not put forth, Act. 5. 13. Of the rest durst no man join unto them, and
therefore it was not by the irresistible act of God in converting of them, but
by some volun^ary act of their own choice and consent; for Gods converting
grace depends not upon man's daring, or not daring to receive it. If to be
joined be no more but to be converted, then when it is said, Some durst not be
joined, the meaning should be, they durst not be converted, nor suffer Faith to
be wrought in them; which is gross Arminianisme, suspending the converting
grace of God upon the free will of the creature. Fourthly, And as this joining
which others durst not do, cannot be meant of being converted; So if it be
well considered, what the thing was wherein they durst not join, it may
appear that it was nothing else but this, that they durst not agree, and engage
themselves to be of their body and society; that is, they durst not join in
Covenant with them. For it cannot be meant of dwelling in the Town with them,
for this they both durst do and did: nor is it only of joining to hear the
Word in their assembly, for this also they durst do, and many did it in great
multitudes, so that many by hearing the Word became believers, and were added
to the Lord both of men and women, ver. 14. at this very time when it is said
of some they durst not join unto them: Nor is it of joining to them in
affection, or approbation of their way, for this they also durst do and did
express so much in magnifying and commending them, when yet they durst not
join unto them, ver. 13. Which magnifying of them does imply that they heard
their doctrine, and saw their practice, and approved it, and highly commended
them for the same: Wherefore seeing this joining, which some durst not do,
cannot be meant of being converted, nor of joining in habitation, nor of
joining in affection, nor in hearing the Word in their Assembly, nor of
approbation, and expressions that way, it remains that it must be meant of
joining in that near relation of Church Fellowship amongst them, so as to be
engaged by voluntary consent and agreement to be members of their Church.
Fifthly, If joining to the Church, were no more but to be converted, then he
that were converted were joined as a member of every visible Church throughout
the world, which were a great confusion of that Order, and distinction of
Churches, which the Lord has appointed.

Men may be joined to the Church, Obj. 2.
in hearty affection and love, and yet without any Covenant.

True, but this will not make them members of that Church, Answ.
for then Saul was member of the Church at Jerusalem, before he was joined a
member, for he was joined to them in hearty affection before, and therefore
assayed to join as a member; and so were they that durst not join, Act. 5.
13. yea then a man should be a member of many Churches, yea of all Christian
Churches in the world; for he is to love them, and bear hearty affection to
them all; The true members of the Churches in England are united in hearty
affection, to the Churches in Scotland, in Holland, in France, in New England,
etc. And yet they are not members of all these Churches, nor subject to their
censures as members are.

But the reason of that is because they do not dwell among them in the same
Town. Obj. 3.


Neither would habitation with them in the same Town, make a man a member of
the Church there, if there be no more then so. Suppose Saul to have dwelt in
the same house before his conversion in which he dwelt after, which is not
unpossible nor unlikely; yet we see he was no member of the Church at
Jerusalem, before his conversion, no nor of some time after, though he might
have dwelt in an house in the midst of the Christians, and Church Members
there. The members of the Dutch and French Churches in London, or other Towns
in England, are not members of the English ^Congregations or Churches, no more
then the English are of theirs, and yet they dwell promiscuously together in
the same S^recte of the same Town. Towne-dwelling would not make a man a
freeman of a Company in London, or some other Corporation; for many others
dwell in the Town with them; yea it may be in the same street, that are not
free of their Company, and so it is in this case.

But the reason why such as dwell in Town with the Church, Object. 4.
are not members thereof, may be, because they frequent not their Assemblies.

Idiots and Infidells might come into the public meetings among the
Corinthians, Answ.
1. Cor. 14. 23, 24, 25. yet Idiots and Infidells were not therefore members of
the Church. And Saul after his conversion might have come in among the Church
in time of public duties, and have seen and heard all that they had done: yet
this would not have made him of one body with them. Some Indians, Moors, and
other natural persons come into our meetings in New England, some of their
own accord, and others by the Command or Counsel of their Masters and
Governors, yet no man can say, that all these are hereby made Church Members.
Wherefore seeing neither conversion, nor loving affection, nor cohabitation,
nor coming into their meetings, does join a man as a member of the visible
Church (for some men have all these, and yet are not members, and others are
sometimes members of the visible Churches, and yet want some of these, are
hypocrites and want sound conversion) it remains therefore that as sound
conversion makes a man fit matter for a Church; So profession of his Faith, and
of his subjection to the Gospel, and the Churches approbation, and acceptance
of him (which is the sum of Church Covenant) is the formal cause that gives
him the being of a member.

But joining does not always signify joining in Covenant; Object. 5.
Philip joined to the Eunnuchs chariote, and dust to men's feet, Act. 8. 29.
and Luke 10, 11. and yet there was no Covenant, and therefore men may join to
the Church without any Covenant.

The word indeed may express any close joining, Answ.
whether natural, (as the branch is joined to the Vine, or an arm or other
member to the body) or artificial, as when two sticks were joined to become
one in Ezekiels hand, Ezekiel. 37. Or when Carpenters or Masons do join pieces
of stone or Timber together, to make one house, Neh. 4. 6. Ezr. 4. 12. but is
not only the force of the word that is stood upon. But when joining is used to
express such joining, wherein a man voluntarily takes on him a new relation,
there it always implies a Covenant, whether the relation be moral and civil,
or religious and Ecclesiastical: We speak of voluntary relation, for there
are natural relations, as between parents and children: and these need no
Covenant, there is no Covenant to make a man a Parent, or a child; There are
also violent relations, as between Conqueror and Captives, and in these there
is no Covenant neither; but others are voluntary, and these always imply a
Covenant, and are founded therein, whether they be moral and civil (as
between husband and wife, Pro. 2. 17. between Master and servants, Luke 15. 15.
between Prince and subject, between Partners in Trade, 2 Chro. 20. 35, 36, 37.
where the Covenant or agreement is, that men shall bare such a share of
charges, and receive such a share of profits:) or religious, as between
Minister and people, between the Church and the members: all these are done by
way of Covenant. A man cannot join himself to a woman as her husband, but by
way of Covenant: A man cannot join himself to another as a servant, or
apprentise, but by way of Covenant; And so may we say of all the rest* nor into
any body corporate, but by the same way and means. If men be united into a body
politic or incorporate, a man cannot be said to be joined to them by mere
hearty affection, unless withal he joins himself unto them by some
Contract or Covenant. Now of this nature is every particular Church, a body
incorporate, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ye are the body of Christ, etc. and has power to
cast out, 1 Cor. 2. 7* 8 as a body incorporate; and therefore he that will
join unto them, must do it by way of Covenant or Agreement; and so this
Answer to this Objection, may be a fourth Argument to prove the point in hand,
that joining in Covenant is that which makes a man, a member of a Church.

All voluntary relations, Argu. 4.
all relations which are neither natural nor violent, are entered into by way
of Covenant.

But he that joins into a Church as a member, or enters into a Church, does
take upon him such a relation; Therefore joining to a Church as a member, is by
way of Covenant.

A fifth Argument may be drawn from the power which all Churches, Argu. 5.
Officers and members, have over all their members in the Lord. If all
Churches, Officers, and members, have power in the Lord over all their members,
then joining in Covenant is necessary to make a man a member of a Church, but
the former is true, therefore the latter is true also.

The Assumption in this Argument, that all Churches have power over their
members, is proved from 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 13. where the Apostle reproves the
Corinthians for suffering the Incestuous man amongst them, and commands them to
deliver him to Sa^an, and cast him out from amongst them. Now this he would not
have done, if they had had no power over him, or if there had been any room
for them to say, we have nothing to do with him, we have no power over him.
And the same is prooved in other Scriptures also; as, Mat. 18. 17. Psalm. 149.
6. 7, 8, 9.

And the Consequence of the Major Proposition, viz. that then members do
engage themselves by Covenant, is proved by this reason; That Churches have no
power over such as have not engaged themselves by Covenant, and committed power
unto them, by professing to be subject to all the Ordinances of Christ amongst
them.

The truth whereof may appear by two Reasons:

First, Because all Christians have power and right, jure divino, to choose
their own Officers to whom they commit their souls, Act. 6. and 1. and 14 23.
where the word (...), imports choosing by Election: and so the word is used and
translated, 2 Cor. 8. 19. he was chosen by the Churches, etc. It is not
ministerial gifts that makes a man a Minister to every Church, nor investeth
him with spiritual power over them, nor though he dwell amongst them, unless
they call him, and he accept of that call: And as they have power to choose
their Officers, so likewise to choose their brethren according to God, Romans 14.
1. Now if they have power to choose their Officers and brethren, then none can
have power over them as Officers and brethren, without their own consent, and
whom they never chose, nor promised by any Covenant or Engagement to be subject
to the Lord.

Secondly, If the Church should exercise any Act of Church Power over such a
man as never entered into Covenant with them (suppose to Excommunicate him for
whoredom or drunkenness, or the like) the man might protest against their
Act, and their Sentence, as Coram non judice, and they could not justify their
proceedings, if indeed there have passed no Covenant or Engagement between him
and them. If he shall say, you have nothing to do to pass Sentence or Censure
upon me, I am none of your Church, but of another Church; Suppose in Holland,
in France, etc. and I am only here now for Merchandise sake, or upon some
other occasion: what shall they say to stop his mouth, if there never passed
any Covenant between him and them.

But Ministers have power over the people by the word of God, Object.
Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and not by men's engaging themselves
by Covenant.

But what is it that makes men Ministers to such a people, Answer.
Officers to such a Church, or makes them sheep of my flock? Is it not those
Scriptures that makes every man a Pastor, or Teacher, or Ruler to a people,
unless they call him to that Office; and then in so doing they Covenant and
Engage themselves to be subject to him in the Lord, and then those Scriptures
take hold on them. One might as well say, it is not the Covenanting of a wife
to her husband that gives him power over her, but the Word of God; For as the
Word of God commands people to obey their Ministers, so it commands wives to be
subject to their husbands, Ephesians. 5. 22. And yet all men know, a man cannot
take this woman for his wife but by Covenant. So that if she once makes her
self a wife by her own voluntary Covenant, then the word of God takes hold on
her, and binds her to do the duties of a wife: but if she, has made no
Covenant, the man has no power over her as her husband, neither is she his
wife; So if men once make themselves members of such a Church, sheep of such a
man's flock, by their own voluntary Covenant, then the wo^d of God takes hold
of them, and binds them to do the duties of members to their fellow-brethren,
and of people to their Pastors or Ministers. But if they never chose such a
man to be their Minister, nor Covenanted to be subject to him in the Lord, he
then can have no power over them as a Minister unto them, because they have
right to chose their own Ministers.

A sixth Argument may be taken from the distinction that is between members,
Argu. 6.
and not members. If there be by the word of God a distinction, between members
of the Church and such as are no members, then joining in Covenant is necessary
to the being of a member; but the former is true, as appears 1 Cor. 5. 12.
Some are within, and may be judged by the Church, and others are without, and
may not: and therefore the latter is true also. And the reason of the
Consequence is because there is nothing else without this joining in Covenant,
that can sufficiently distinguish them; It is not Faith and Grace in their
hearts, for some men are members of the visible Church, and yet have no Grace,
and others may have Grace, and yet be no members, and therefore this is not the
thing that does distinguish them, nor is it affection, nor cohabitation, nor
every approbation of the Word of God, and the ways of his Church, not coming
into their Assemblies to hear the Word; But these things were touched before,
and therefore may be here the more briefly passed over.

And so much shall suffice to have spoken of the second particular, concerning
the use of Church Covenant, tha^ ^t is by joining therein that a particular
person becomes a member of a Church.

But here it will be needful to remove sundry Objections, which may seem to
some to be of great weight against Church Covenant, that so by the removing of
them, the truth may be the more cleared, to fu^ler satisfaction, if it be the
will of God.

Church Covenant is a Term that is not found in S^ripture. Obj^ct. 1.


First, Answer.
So is Sacrament, Trinity, etc. and yet those terms may be lawfully used,
because the thing meant thereby is found.

Secondly, But seeing the Covenant is between the Lord and his Church, as the
two parties that are confederate, it is all one whether it be called the Lords
Covenant, or the Church Covenant: As when Mamre, Aver, and Eschol were
confederate with Abraham, Genesis 14. 13. might not one truly say, Abraham was
confederate with them? Relatives do mutually put and establish one another.

Thirdly, The Scripture allows both the Lords Covenant with the Church, Eze.
16. 8. and the peoples covenant or Saints covenant, or Churches Covenant with
him, Deuteronomy. 29. 12. Psalm. 50. 5. Ier. 50. 5.

Fourthly, There is good reason for both the words; both the Lords Covenant,
and the Church Covenant, because both are confederate; And for that of
Church Covenant, there is this reason also, viz. to distinguish it from other
Covenants, as a marriage-Covenant, Pro. 2. 17. and a brotherly Covenant, 1 Samuel
20. 8. The Church- Covenant being thus called not only because they are a
Church, or members thereof that make it, but also because they enter into it in
reference to Church Estate and Church-duties: The duties which they bind
themselves unto in this Covenant being such especially as concern a Church and
the members thereof.

But this Church Covenant puts some disparagement upon the Covenant of Grace,
Object. 2.
which every believer is already entered into with God, and seem to charge the
same with insufficiency; for every second Covenant does argue that the first
was not faultlesse, Heb. 8. 7.

1. A second Covenant does argue that the first was not faultlesse, where Answ.
the Covenants are contrary one to another, as the covenant of ^race, and the
covenant of works are, and so it is most true, that the bringing in of the free
Covenant of Grace did argue that righteousness and life could not be attained by
the Law, or Covenant of works; for if there had been a Law given which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law. Gal. 3. 21.
Romans 8. 3.

2. But if it be the same Covenant that is renewed or made again, though upon
a new occasion, no man can say that entering into the same the second time, or a
third, or a fourth, does disanull the first, or cast dispa^agement upon the
same. The covenant of works given to Adam was not blamed or saulted, because it
was renewed in Sinai The Covenant of Grace was first given to Adam in Paradise
after his fall, afterward to Abraham, then to the people of Israel under types
and shadows; And again after the coming of Christ in the flesh; yet none of
these does disanull the former, or argue the same to be ^aulty; and the reason
is, because it is still the same Covenant though renewed upon new occasions;
and in some particulars in some other manner. And the like we say concerning
Church Covenant, or the Covenant which a man makes when he enters into the
Church, viz. that it is not another Covenant contrary to the Covenant of Grace,
which every believer is brought into at his first conversion, but an open
profession of a man's subjection to that very Covenant, specially in the things
which concern Church estate, into which estate the man is now entering.

It is not lawful to make such a Covenant as the Church Covenant, Obj. 3.
because it is not in our power to keep it, and we do not know whether God will
give us power.

This ground is very true, Answ.
that no man has power of himself to any thing that good is, but all a man's
power and ability must come of God through Christ, 2. Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 2. 13.
Ioh. 15. 5. But the in^erence is not good, that therefore it should be
unlawful to ento into Church Covenant: for 1. By the same reason, all promises
are unlawful, and all covenants whatsoever; as the covenant of marriage, the
covenant of service, yea and the personal covenant o^ Grace, when a particular
soul promises faith and new obedience; for there is none of these, no not the
covenant of Marriage, which a man is able of himself to keep, as the adultery
of David and Bathsheba, among others, does plainly prove.

2. God has promised to give power to them that in self-denial seek it of
him, and trust to his promise for it. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Ier. 31. 33. Romans 6. 14.
Ier. 32. 40. The true inference therefore from this ground, from man's
disabilitie to perform were this, that therefore a man should not enter into
Church Covenant in his own strength, for that was Peter's fault in promising
not to deny Christ, but to die with him rather: but Church Covenant, as also
all other promises, should be entered into, in an humble looking up to Christ
Jesus for help and assistance to perform. Thou therefore my son, be strong
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 2. 1.

God disalloweth covenants of man's making (and so our Church Covenant) in those
words, Obj. 4.
But not by thy Covenant. Ezekiel. 16. 61.

God does not reprove them there for making Covenant, Answ.
for then he were contrary to himself, who elsewhere called them to do it,
Exodus 29. Deuteronomy. 29. and commended them for it, Psalm. 50. 5. Yea and in that
very place of Ezekiel. 16. acknowledges a Covenant between him and them, Ver.
60. 62. But the meaning is, he would do them good, but not for their good
keeping the Covenant of works, for they had very sinfully broken it, ver. 59.
but even as he says elsewhere, not for their sakes, or for their
righteousness, Ezekiel. 36. 32. Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5, 6. But what force is there in this
arguing, viz. If God will do us good, but not for our good keeping the covenant
of works, then it is not lawful to promise obedience to the covenant of Grace,
in such things as concern Church estate; All men may easily see that here is a
plain non sequitur.

This entering into Covenant may keep out many good men from joining to the
Churches, Obj. 5.
because they are not satisfied about it: and therefore it is better laid
aside.

It is not impossible, Answ.
but good men may for a time be unsatisfied about it, till they understand the
nature and use of it, and yet the thing be warrantable enough for all that in
the sight of God; the Tribes were troubled at the Altar set up upon the banks
of Jordan by the two Tribes and an half, till they understood the intent and
use of it, and for what purpose it was erected: and then they were satisfied.
Josh. 22. And the same may be said of Peter's eating with the Gentiles, which at
the first was very offensive to them of the circumcision, till they understood
what Peter had to say for his defense therein, and then they rested well
satisfied, Act. 11.

But if men understand what the Church Covenant is, there is no reason that
good men should be troubled at it; it being nothing else but a promise of
obedience unto the Gospel of Christ, or of such duties as the Gospel requires
of all Christians in Church Estate: For, will good men refuse to obey the
Gospel, or submit to the ordinances of Christ? or will they refuse to profess
and promise so much? If a man understand what it is, and what we mean by it,
and yet refuse to enter into it when he has opportunity thereto, such
refusing is no part of his goodness, but is to be reckoned amongst his
corruptions; It is ignorance at the best, and if not so, then it may be
perverseness of will, or some want of will to perform obedience to the
Gospel. And surely there is small hope that such would yield subjection and
obedience to the Gospel, who do refuse to profess or promise it.

But the Scripture, Obj. 6.
Act. 2. 41. tells of joining to the Church without any Covenant. For it was not
possible that 3000. should enter into covenant in one day.

Two things may be said in Answer to this Objection. Answ.


First, that 3000. were not so many, but that joining in Covenant might easily
be done by them all, in one day. For, 1. it was at Penticost, at which time of
the year the days were at the longest: And, 2. the Scripture tells us, that
David made a Covenant with all the Tribes of Israel in one day, 2. Sam. 5 1, 2,
3. The Articles of the covenant between David and the Tribes, and so between
this 3000. and the Lord might be openly declared, and they both the one and the
other might by some sign or other, express their consent thereunto in one day.

Secondly, as joining in Covenant is a thing that might be done, so it is more
then probable that indeed it was done, by those 3000. souls. For it is said,
ver. 41 that they gladly received the word, that is, they openly professed that
they did with all their hearts receive it, for this receiving of the Word is
noted as a condition, upon which they were admitted to baptism, and therefore
it was not only an inward receiving of it in their hearts, but also an open
professing that they did receive it; for an inward receiving of it in their
hearts, without an open professing thereof outwardly, would not have been
sufficient for the admitting of them unto Bapti^me. Now this Word which they
received was an exhortation to Repentance for sin, and to Faith in the
promise, ver. 38. 39. and to obedience in severing themselves from others, and
saving themselves from that untoward generation, ver. 40. And therefore when
they openly professed, that they gladly received this word, there was an open
professing of their Repentance for sin, ver. 40. of their Faith in the
promise, and of obedience to the Commandment, which is nothing else, but the
very sum of Church Covenant: yea, and further, their very preparation to this
repentance, faith and obedience, in that true compunction and sorrow of soul,
was also openly made manifest. ver. 37.

But yet there would not be such long narrations, of every one severally as now
are used, Reply.
when men do enter into Church Covenant, when each one makes a good long
speech, in the profession of his Faith and Repentance.

When the thing is certain, Answ.
as was showed before, that they did openly profess repentance, faith and
obedience, it is not difference in the length or largeness of their spe^ches
in expressing of themselves, that can make any difference in the thing: Majus
and minus non diversisicant speciem. And we deny not but they might be
briefer, because there was not such need they should be long in regard of some
difference between them and us, their time and ours: First there were the
Apostles present to hear their confessions, and to judge thereof, who were men
of very good discerning, and therefore briefer expressing of men's selves might
suffice; whereas the best Christians, yea the best Ministers amongst us are not
to be compared to the Apostles; and therefore as we need more time for study,
and for preparation for our Sermons then they did: so likewise we need more
time to hear, and try the soundness of men's repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet this we may add withal, that if the
Apostles and those primative Christians, men of such excellent discerning were
sometimes deceived, and could not always so discern, but that some Hypocrites
would creep into the Church: as the example of Ananias and Saphira does
witness; how much more need is there, that the Churches of God in these days
(being far inferior to them) should be very watchful and circumspect in
trying the spiritual estates of them that offer to come into the Church?

Secondly, their times also differed from ours: for their Christianity was a
matter of reproach and danger of excommunication, Ioh. 9. 22. of imprisonment,
Act. 4. 3. and 5. 18. and the like. And therefore to see men now to make open
profession of their faith in Christ Jesus, whose servants and disciples were so
hated, and who himself but a while before was crucified, this was not an
ordinary matter: and therefore in words, men might be the briefer when they
came to be received into the Church: But our times in New England do not
persecute Christ, and Christians, and Christian Churches, but countenance them,
and protect them; and therefore there is more need now to be more studious in
examination of men's estates when they offer themselves for Church members: when
the Jews were in favor, many of the people of the Land became Jews, Esth. 8.
17.

But why is there so little proof of this Church Covenant in the New
Testament? Obj. 7.


1. Suppose the New Testament said nothing of it, Answ.
yet it might have ground sufficient from the Scriptures of the old Testament;
for if it was Gods revealed will in those days, that a company should become
a Church, and particular persons become members of that Church by way of
Covenant, we may be sure it is so now likewise, unless covenanting were
peculiar to the Jewish Paedigogie; indeed if it had never been used in those
times, but were some new ordinance, peculiar to the days of the New Testament,
in such cases also a ground from the Scriptures of the New Testament were
necessary, as there is in all such things wherein there is any change or
variation, from what was used in those times before Christ, as that there should
not be National Churches, but congregationall, and not one visible Church, but
many, that there should be baptism, and the Lords Supper: these are matters
that are not found in the old Testament, nor were appointed to be used in those
days, and therefore we must have warrant for them in the New, and so we have.
But for the Covenant it is otherwise, it is no new ordinance peculiar to the
days of the Gospel, nor any Leviticall ordinance peculiar to the Jewish
Pedigogie; and therefore the Scriptures of the Old Testament that give warrant
for it, may be sufficient as has been showed before.

2. And yet there is not wanting good warrant for it, that it ought to be used,
in the days of the New Testament. For, 1. the Prophets do foretell it, Isa 56,
6, 7, and 44 5. and Ier. 50. 5. Ez^k, 20. 37. and in sundry other places, to
omit the rest at this time, because some of them have been spoken of before;
Only let those words of Isa. 44. 5. be well considered, and see if they do not
plainly hold forth that in the days of the New Testament, men should openly
profess their faith, and solemnly bind themselves by Covenant to be the Lords
people, one shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the
name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand, and surname himself
by the name of Israel. These words are so plain for open professing of faith
in the Lord, and open binding of men's selves by Covenant unto him, as we
conceive nothing need be more.

2. The Apost^es do sufficiently testify, that such a thing was practiced in
heir days, (...) how should we understand that fellowship in the Gospel in its
full latitude and breadth, Phil. 1. 5. if this combining into Church fellowship
be no part thereof; yea when it is said, they continued steadfastly, or as the
word (...), may well be translated, they strongly did cleave together, or hold
together in such a Fellowship, which was not preaching and hearing the doctrine
of the Apostles, nor Sacraments, no^ Prayer, but a thing distinct from all
these. If this combining themselves into a spiritual fellowship and society
of Church State be no part thereof, we know not how to understand it, nor what
that fellowship should mean; If Doctrine, and Sacraments, and Prayer had not
been particularly mentioned, in the same place, it might have been thought that
the Fellowship in which they so steadfastly clave together had been no more,
but their coming together to observe these said ordinances, and their communion
therein. But when all these are particularly mentioned, and Fellowship
mentioned among them, as a thing distinct from the rest, we may not confound it
with the rest. We might as well say, that by doctrine is meant Sacraments, and
by Sacraments is meant Prayer; as to say that by Fellowship is meant not^ing
else but the exercise of doctrine, and Sacraments, and Prayer. And if these as
they are distinctly named be distinct ordinances, and may not be confounded,
then Fellowship being named in the same manner imports something distinct from
them all, and may not be confounded with them, nor with any of them, no more
then the other may be confounded one with another. And if so, then as this
Fellowship may import, the communion of their gift and goods one for the help
of another, so it must first of all imply a combining of themselves into
Church State by mutual ag^eement, consent, or covenant.

Furthermore, when the Apostle writ^th, that by experience of the Corinthians
liberal contribution to the poor Saints, men glorified God for their
professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2. Cor. 9. 13. he plainly
imployes thereby, that the Corinthians had made a profession or promise of such
subjection to the Gospel as did comprehend this particular of distributing to
the necessity of the Saints, among other things. And their liberal
distribution which he there speaks of, was looked at as one point of their
real performance of that subjection to the Gospel, which they had before
professed, and promised. Now the Church Covenant is nothing else, but the
professing or promising of such subjection, and therefore this place is another
proof of Church Covenant. Besides, it has been showed before in Argument 3.
that those places which speak of being added to the Church, of joining, or
assaying to join unto the Church, Act. 2. 47. and 5 13. and 9 26. are not
expounded according to the full meaning of them, when they are understood of
any other joining, if joining in Covenant be left out. And therefore the
Scriptures of the New Testament do bear good witness unto Church Covenant,
though, as we said before, the Scriptures of the Old Testament might have been
sufficient if the New Testament had spoken nothing of it.

But Baptism makes men members of the visible Church, Obj. 8.
and therefore the Covenant is needl^sse.

This is answered in the Answer to the fourth of the 32. Answ.
Questions, where it is showed at large that Baptism ^s a seal of the
covenan^ between God and the Church, but neither makes the Church, nor members
of the Church, nor always so much as proves men to be members.

This Church Covenant is a late devise, and was not known in ancient time, Obj.
9.
and therefore is to be rejected.

First, Answ.
True Antiquity is that of the Scriptures. Now since Church Covenant is
warranted by the Scripture, as has been showed before in this discourse, it
cannot be charged to want true Antiquity. When the Papists are wont to charge
the doctrine of Protestants with Novelty, and such as was never heard of before
Luther, the Orthodoxe are wont to answer, that if the doctrine do not agree
with the Scripture, then let it be condemned for Noveltie; and if it do, it is
warranted by the best Antiquity, even the testimony of God himself who is the
Ancient of days: Our Faith, says Doctor White, is in all points the same that
is contained in the Scripture, and so consequently of the same Antiquity: and
therefore all they that say it came up but of late, must first prove it
contrary to the Word of God, or else hold their peace. White, Way, 44. 1. And
the same we say in this particular of the Church Covenant.

Secondly, And yet they that search the Stories and Writers of the times and
ages next after the Apostles, may find some testimony of Church Covenant in
those days: For instance, Iustine Martyr in his Apol. 2. makes mention of
three things which were required of all that were admitted into the Church as
members, (...), that is regeneration, and soundness in the Faith, and a
promise to walk in obedience to the Gospel. And generally this was the
practice of all those times, that never any man was admitted to Baptism, nor
his children neither, but they put him to answer three questions, Abrenuntios?
whereto he answered, Abrenuntio. Credis? whereto his answer was, Credo: and
Spondes? to which he answered, Spondeo. So that here was an open declaration of
his Repentance from dead works, and of the soundness of his Faith, in the two
first particulars, and an open binding himself by covenant or promise to walk
according to the Gospel, in the third. But much needs not to be said in this
point, unto them that do acknowledge Scripture Antiquity to be sufficient,
though after times should be found to swerve from the Rules and Patterns that
are therein contained.

If Church Covenant be so necessary, then all the Reformed Churches are to be
condemned as no Churches; Obj. 10.
for they have no such Covenant.

They that have known those Churches, not only by their writings, Answ.
and confessions of their faith, in Synods and otherwise; but also by living
amongst them, and being eyewitnesses of their Order, do report otherwise of
them, viz. that they are combined together by solemn Covenant with God and one
another. Zepperus, speaking of the manner, used in the reformed Churches, in
admitting the children of Church Members to the Lords Table, when they came to
age, and have been sufficiently catechized, and instructed in the doctrine of
Religion, tells us, that such children are admitted to the Lords table, by
public profession of Faith, and en^ring into Covenant. Cons^etum est, says
he, ut qui per aetate^i^que Doctrina Catechetica profectum ad sacram Coenam
primum a (...), fidei confessionem coram tota Ecclesia public edant p^r
parents aut qui parentum l^co sunt, jussu ministri, in Ecclesiae (...)
producti: quo^que in illa confessione, per Dei gratiam (...), ac, juxta illam,
vitam instituere, insuper etiam disciplinae Ecclesiasticae ultro ac sponte sua
subjicere sese velint, spondeant atque stipulentur, Polit. Eccles. lib. 1. Cap.
14. p. 158. that is, The manner is, that they who by reason of age and
proficiencie in the doctrine of Catechism are first admitted to the Lords
Supper, should publicly before the whole Church make confession of their
faith, being brought forth into the sight of the Church by their parents, or
them that are instead of parents, at the appointment of the Minister; and
likewise should promise and covenant by the grace of God to continue in that
Faith which they have confessed, and to lead their lives according to it; yea,
and moreover to subject themselves freely and willingly to the discipline of
the Church. These words we see are full and plain, that children are not in
those Churches received to the Lords Supper, without personal confession of
Faith, and entering into Covenant before; And if they took this course with
children come to age, there is as much reason, or more, that the same course
should be holden with men of years, when they are admitted members. And so the
same Zepperus, speaking of the consociation of Churches amongst themselves by
mutual confsederation, has these words, which as they may be applied to the
combining of many Churches, so may they be combining of many members of the
same Church, (...) illa (...), quam in Symbolo profit nunc Apostolico, nihil
aliud hic requirit, and vult, quam obligationem omnium Ecclesiae membrorum and
confoederationem, etc. that is, that communion of Saints which we profess in
the Creed, does require and mean nothing else but an obligation of all the
members of the Church, and a binding of them together by Covenant. Polit.
Eccles. li. 3 c. 8. p. 721.

To these testimonies of Z^pperus, those words may be added of Mr. Parker our
own countreyman, a man of singular note for learning and holiness, who also
himself lived sometimes beyond Sea in the reformed Churches, and there ended
his days, so that we may safely give the more credit to his testimony, he
having so good means fully to know the state and order of those Churches. Now
he speaks of a Solennis forma absque qua in Ecclesiae alicujus communionem
nullus rite recipitur: of a solemn form, without which no man is rightly
received into the communion of the Church, has these words. Hic mos ille est
reformatarum Ecclesiarum non solum in lapsis restituendis, sed in extra^eis,
imo quibuscunque recipiendis qui ad habitandum alicubi con^ident, etsi forte in
Ecclesia illius loci quo ante commorabantur, juxta hanc formam admissi prius
fuerant. Examinat Presbyterium, plebs consentit, quisque testes vitae suae
secum adfert, vel testimonia saltem: publicatur nomen cujusque competentis pro
concione, admonetur quisque siquid haebeat quod excipiat, ut denunciet
presbyteris. Si nihil contr^ adferatur, admittitur quidem, sed non nisi solerni
pactione cum Deo and cum E^clesia. Spondet vero Ecclesiae, se ambulaturum prout
sanctam illam communionem decet; Disciplinae illius Ecclesiae subjacere velle,
se fratribus illius communionis invigilaturum juxta Christi prae ceptum, Matthew
18. 17. ut pra-veniantur sanenturque seandala, and illi ad studium bonorum
operum provehantur. That is, This is the manner of the reformed Churches, not
only in restoring such as have fallen, but in admitting of strangers, yea of
all whoever they be, who do sit down in any place for habitation, though
perhaps they have been formerly admitted after the same manner in the Church
where they have forme^ly dwelt; The Presbytery does examine, the people do
consent, every man brings with him witnesses of his life, or at leastwise
testimonies: The name of each one that desires to be a member, is published in
the Assembly, every one is admonished if he have any exception against the
party, to bring it to the Presbytery. If nothing be brought against him, then
indeed he is admitted; but yet no otherwise then by a solemn covenant with God
and the Church; And to the Church he promises that he will walk as becomes
that holy Fellowship, that he will be subject to the discipline of that Church,
that he will watch over the brethren of that Communion, according to the
Command of Christ, Mat. 18. 17. that offenses may be prevented and healed, etc.
Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 16. 4. Page 171, 172. Much more he has to the same
purpose in that place, alleging sundry Canons and Decrees of Synods of
reformed Churches, wherein they have determined that none should be received
into their Churches, but by this way of solemn Covenant. And others that have
lived amongst them may have been eyewitnesses that this is their usual
practice.

But what shall be said of the Congregations in England, Obj. 11
if Churches must be combined by Covenant? Does not this doctrine blot out all
those Congregations out of the Catalogue of Churches? For what ever Covenant
may be found in the reformed Churches in other parts, yet it is plain that she
English have none.

Though we deny not but the Covenant in many of those Congregations is more
imp^^cite and not so plain as were to be desired; Answ.
(and what is amis^e in them, in their materials, or in want of explicit
combining of pure matter, or in any of their ways we will not take upon us to
defend) yet we hope we may say of them with Master Park^r, Polit. Eccl^s. lib
3. cap. 16 1. page 167. Non ab^st ea realis and substantialis (quanquam mag is
quam par erat implicita) coitio in foedus, ^aque voluntaria professio fidei
substantialis: qua (Deo gratia) essentiam Ecclesiae idque visibilis hacusque
sar^am tectam in Angli^ conservavis; That is, there wants not that real and
substantial coming together, (or agreeing in Covenant, though more implicate
then were meet) and that substantial profession of Faith, which (thanks be to
God) has preserved the essence of visible Churches in England unto this day.

The reasons why we are loath to say, that the Congregations in England are
utterly without a Covenant, are these:

First, Because there we^e many Christian Churches in England in the Apostles
time, or within a while after, as M^ster Fox shows at large, Act. and Mon.
lib. 2. beginning page 137 where he reports out of Gildas, that England
received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, under whom Christ
suffered, and that Joseph of Arima^hea was sent of Philip the Aposti^ from
France to England about the year of Christ 63. and remained in England all his
time, and so he with his fellows laid the first foundation of Christian Faith
among the Britain people, and other Preachers and Teachers coming afterward,
confirmed the same and increased it. Also the said Master Fox reports out of
Tertullian, that the Gospel was dispearsed abroad by the sound of the Apostles
into many Nations, and amongst the rest into Britain, yea into the wildest
places of Britain, which the Romans could never attain unto: and alleges
also out of Nic^phorus, that Simon Zelotes did spread the Gospel to the West
Ocean, and brought the same into the Isles of Britain: and sund^y other proofs
he there has for the same point. Now if the Gospel and Christian Religion were
brought into England in the Apostles times, and by their means, it is like that
the English Churches were then constituted by way of Covenant, because that was
the manner of constituting Churches in the Apostles time, as also in the times
before Christ, as has been showed from the Scripture before in this discourse.
And if Christian Congregations in England were in those times combined by
Covenant, then eternity of Gods Covenant is such, that it is not the
interposition of many corruptions that may arise in after times that can
disanull the same, except when men wil^ully break Covenant and reject the
offers of the Gospel through obstinacy, which we persuade our selves they are
not come unto: and consequently the Covenant remains which has preserved the
essence of Churches to this day; though the mixture of manifold corruptions,
have made the Covenant more implicit then were mee^e.

Secondly, Because there want no good Records (as may be seen in Seldens
History of Tithes) to prove that in former times in England it was free for men
to pay their Tithes and Oblations where themselves pleased: Now this paying of
Tithes was accounted as a duty of people to their Minister, or sheep to their
Pastor: and therefore seeing this was by their own voluntary agreement and
consent, their joining to the Church as members thereof, and to the Ministry
thereof as sheep of such a man's flock, was also by their own voluntary
agreement and consent: and this does imply a Covenant. It was not the precincts
of Parishes that did limit men in those days, but their own choice.

Thirdly, Those Questions and Answers ministered at Baptism, spoken of before,
(viz. Do st thou renounce? I do renounce: do thou believe? I do beleseve:
do thou promise? I do promise) as they were used in other places, so were
they also in England, and are unto this day, though not without the mixture of
sundry corruptions. Now this does imply a Covenant. And when the children came
to age, they were not to be admitted to the Lords Supper, before they had made
personal Confession of their own Faith, and ratified the Covenant which was
made at their Baptism by their Parents, which course indeed afterward did grow
into a Sacrament of Confirmation, but that was an abuse of a good Order.

If here it be said, that the Members of the Parishionall Assemblies are not
brought in by their own voluntary profession, but by the Authority and
Proclamation of the Prince, and therefore they have no such Covenant.

The Answer is, that the Christian Prince does but his duty when he does not
tolerate within his Dominions any open Idolatry, or the open worship of false
Gods by baptized persons, but suppresse^h the same: and likewise when he gives
free liberty to the exercise of all the Ordinances of true religion, according
to the mind of Christ, with countenance also and encouragement unto all those
whose hearts are willingly bent thereunto, Ezra. 1. 13 and 7 13. And therefore
this practice of his cannot overthrow the ^reenesse of men's joining in
Church Communion, because one dut^e cannot oppose nor contradict another. And
suppose that this course of the Magistrate should seem to be a forcing of some
to come in for members who were unfit, (in which case it were not justifiable)
yet this does not hinder the voluntary subjection of others, who with all their
hearts desired it. When the Israelites departed out of Egypt, there went a
mixed multitude with them* many going with them that were not Israelites
indeed, Exodus 12. And in the days of Morde^ay and Hesth^r, many of the people
of the lands became Jews, when the Jews were in favor and respect, Est. 8.
17. and so joined to them not of their own voluntary mind, nor of any sincere
heart toward God, but merely for the favor or fear of men; yet this forced
or feined joining of some could not hinder those that were Israelites indeed
from being Israelites, nor make the Jews to be no Jews, no Church Members.

And the same may be said in this case, Suppose the Magistrates Proclamation
should be a cause, or an occasion rather, of bringing some into the Church, who
came not of their own voluntary mind, but for fear, or for obteining favor,
yet this cannot hinder, but others might voluntarily and freely Covenant to be
subject to the Gospel of Christ: Such subjection and the promise of it being
the thing which themselves did heartily desire, though the Magistrate should
have said nothing in it.

If any shall hereupon infer, that if the Parishionall Assemblies be
Churches, then the members of them may be admitted to Church privileges in New
England, before they join to our Churches: Such one may find his Answer in
the Answer to the tenth of the thirty-two Questions; Whereunto we do refer
the Reader for this point. Only adding this, that this were contrary to the
judgment and practice of the Reformed Churches, who do not admit a man for
member without personal profession of his Faith, and joining in Covenant,
though he had formerly been a member of a Church in another place, as was
showed before out of Master Parker.

Lastly, If any say, that if these reasons prove the English Congregations to
have such a Covenant as proves them to be Churches, then why may not Rome, and
the Assemblies of Papists go for true Churches also? For some man may think
that the same things may be said for them that here in Answer to this eleventh
Objection are said for the Parishes in England: Such one must remember two
things: first, that we do not say simply, a Covenant makes a company a true
Church, but (as was said before) a Covenant to walk in such ways of worship
to God and edification of one another, as the Gospel of Christ requires. For
who doubts, but there may be an agreement among thieves, Pro. 1. A
confederation among Gods enemies, Psalm. 83. A conspiracy among the Arabians,
the Ammonites and Ashdodites, to hinder the building of Jerusalem, Neh. 4. 7,
8. And yet none of these are made true Churches by such kind of confederacies
or agreements. And so we may say of the Assemblies of Papists, especially
since the Counsel of Trent. If there be any agreement or confederacy among
them, it is not to walk in the ways of the Gospel, but in ways contrary to
the fundamental truths of the Gospel, as Idolat^y in worship, Heresy in
doctrine, and other Antichristian pollutions and corruptions: and therefore if
they combined in these things, such combinations will never prove them true
Churches. The Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. But the
Religion of Papists is so far from truth, that whosoever lives and believes
according to it, without repentance, cannot be saved. Witness their doctrine
in the point of vilifying the Scriptures, and in point of free will, and of
Justification by works, of the Popes Supremacy, of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
of worshipping of Images, etc. In regard of which, and such like, the Holy
Ghost says, that their Religion is a Sea, become as the blood of a dead man,
and every soul in that Sea dies, Rev. 16. 3. And therefore agreement in such
a Religion will never prove them to be true Churches; nor any Assemblies of
Arrians, Antitrinitaries, Anabaptists, or Famelists, supposing them also to be
combined by Covenant among themselves.

But now for the Assemblies in England, the case is far otherwise; for the
Doctrine of the Articles of Religion which they profess, and which they
promise to hold and observe (though some things are amiss in some of those
Articles, and though many persons live contrary in their lives) yet the
doctrine is such that whosoever believes, and lives according to it, shall
undoubtedly be saved, and many thousands have been saved therein* and therefore
Assemblies united by Covenant to observe this doctrine may be true Churches,
when the Assemblies of Papists and others may be false, although they also were
combined by Covenant: the reason of the difference rising from the difference
that is in the doctrine and Religion which they severally profess, and by
Covenant bind themselves to observe, the one being fundamentally corrupt, and
consequently pernicious: The other in the fundamental points Orthodoxall and
sound.

Secondly, It must be remembered also (which was intimated before) that if
fundamental corruptions be professed in with impenitency and obstinacy, then
God may disanull the Covenant on his part, and give a Bill of divorce to such a
people, Iere. 3. 8. Now experience and the Scripture also does witness of the
Jesuited and Tr^nt-Papists, that they repented not of the works of their
hands, of worshipping Devils, and Idols of Gold, etc. neither repented they
of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of
their thefts, Rev. 9. 20, 21.

But now for the Parish Assemblies in England, we hope that we may safely say,
they do not sin of obstinacy, but of ignorance, having not been convinced
(and many of them never having had means to be convinced) of the corruptions
that are amongst them, in respect of their constitution, and worship, and
Ministry, and so the Covenant remaining among them, may prove them to be
Churches, when it cannot stand the Papists in like stead, they being impenitent
and obstinate: Which we do not speak to justify the Parishes altogether, as
if there were not dangerous corruptions found in them, nay rather (the Lord be
merciful to the sins of his people) we may lament it with tears, that in
respect of their members and Ministry, in respect of their worship and
walkings, in many of those Assemblies there are found such apparent
corruptions, as are justly grievous to a godly soul, that is enlightened to
discern them, and greatly displeasing to the Lord, and indeed had need to be
repented of betime, least otherwise the Lord remove the Candlestick and
unchurch them, Rev. 2. 5. In a word, the corruptions remaining are just causes
of repentance and humiliation: but yet in as much as the Articles of Religion,
which they profess, contain such wholesome doctrine, that whosoever believes
and walks according thereunto, in sincerity, shall undoubtedly be saved, and
in as much as the corruptions are not persisted in with obstinacy, therefore
we deny not but they have the truth of Churches remaining.

But this opinion of Church Covenant, Obj. 12.
is holden by none but the Brownists, or those of the Separation, and therefore
it is not to be received.

This ground cannot be made good, Answ.
that none but they of the Separation are for Church Covenant, for all the
Reformed Churches generally, as was showed before in Answer to Objection the
tenth, are for it in their judgment and practice; and shall all they be
condemned for By Brownists and Separatists you are to understa^d those of the
rige^ Separation.
Brownists, or maintaining unlawful Separation from the Church? Also Master
Parker and Doctor Ames, men of our own Nation, famous for holiness and
learning, and moderation, both of them plead for Church Covenant, and yet
neither of them were Brownists, but bare witness against that riged
Separation. ^or Doctor Ames, his judgment of Church Covenant may be seen in
his Medulla, Theol lib. 1. cap. 32. 14, 15, 17. Fideles non constitunt
Ecclesiam particularem, quamvis simul forsan plures in eodem loco conveniant
aut vivant, nisi speciali vinculo intersese conju^guntur, etc. That is,
believers do not make a particular Church, though perhaps there be many of
them that meet together, and live in the same place, unless they be joined
together by some special bond amongst themselves: for so one Church would many
times be dissolved into many, and many Churches confounded into one. Now this
bond is a Covenant, either expressed or implicit, whereby believers do bind
themselves particularly to perform all such duties, both toward God and
mutually to one another, as pertain to the nature of a Church, and their
edification. And thereupon no man is rightly admitted into the Church, but by
confession of his Faith, and stipulation, or promise of obedience.

These words do plainly and fully show his judgment of Church - Covenant, to
be the very same that is held and practiced in New England at this day. And
that he was not for that severitie and regiditie of separation, may be cleared
from sundry of his works, wherein he plainly and fully bears witness against
the same, and namely, in his Fresh suite against Ceremonies, page 207. and in
his second Manuduction, wherein he purposely and at large deals in this
Argument of Separation. Sure it is Master Can in his Book, wherein he goes
about to prove the necessity of separation from the Non-Conformists
principles, does professedly and expressly oppose himself against Doctor Ames
in the point of Separation, which shows how far the good Doctor was from
favoring that way, when they most zealously therein do count him to be a
special opposite of theirs, as indeed he was. And for Master Parker, his
judgment of Church Covenant was heard before in part; where he so much
approves the practice of the Reformed Churches in this point. And much more
may be seen of his judgment herein, in the sixteenth Chap. of the third book
of his P^lit. Ecclesiastica. And yet in the same place, and likewise lib 1.
c^p. 13* 14. of the same Treatise he plentifully and plainly shows his dislike
of the ways of Separation, as is also acknowledged in an Admonition to the
Reader, prefixed before that Book, by ^. R. suo, suorumque nomine. So that
this Assertion appears to be untrue, wherein it is said, that none but
Brownists and Separatists do approve of Church Covenant.

As for the In^erence from this ground, that therefore ChurchCovenant should
not be received, because it is pleaded for and pract^^ed by the Separatists. We
Answer, that this will not follow, unless it could be proved, that the
Separatists hold no truth; or if they hold a truth we must not hold it, that
so it may appear we differ from them; Either of which, it were unreasonable
to affirm. If the Papists hold sundry Articles of Faith, as that there is a
unity of the Divine Essence, and Trinity of Persons, that Jesus Christ is God
and man, and that true Messiah that was promised, and the only Savior of the
world, and many such like, must we deny these things because they are holden
by the Papists? This were as unreasonable as to condemn the doctrine of the
Resurrection, because it was maintained by the Pharisees, Act. 23. 8. And so we
say of Church Covenant, holden and practiced by them of the Separation; as also
many other truths are maintained by them: No reason that truth should be
refused, because the Separatists maintain it. When Doctor Bancroft in a Sermon
at Pauls-Crosse, had avouched that the Superiority of Bishops above other
Ministers, is by Gods own Ordinance, and to make the contrary opinion odious,
affirmed that Aerius per^i^ting in it, was condemned for an Heretic by the
general consent of the whole Church, and that Martin and his Companions, do
maintain the same opinion of Aerius; What says learned Doctor Reinolds
hereunto, in a Letter to Sir Francis Knolls, who required him to show his
judgment herein: Touching Martin, says he, if any man behave himself
otherwise then in discretion and charity he ought, let the blame be laid where
the fault is, and defend him not; but if by the way he utter a truth, mingled
with whatsoever else, it is not reason that that which is of GOD should be
condemned for that which is of man: no more then the doctrine of the
Resurrection should be reproved, because it was maintained and held by the
Pharisees: Wherefore removing the odious name of Martin from that which is
sincerity and love, is to be dealt with, etc.

And the very same do we say to them that would make Church Covenant to be
odious, because it is held by those of the Separation, who are commonly called
Brownists: If men behave themselves otherwise then they ought, we defend them
not therein, but if they hold any truth mingled with whatsoever else, we would
not have that which is of God to be condemned, for that which is of man: truth
should not be refused, because of other corruptions that may be found in them
that hold it.

If you with them hold Church Covenant, Reply.
you justify them in all their Ways of separation and erroneous opinions.

Not so, Answ.
for many of them hold that there are no visible Christians that stand members
of the Parishes in England, and that it is not lawful to hold any private
Religious communion with such persons; and that the parishionall Assemblies are
none of them true Churches, and that it is not lawful to hear any of those
Ministers to preach the Word, none of which are justified at all by holding
Church Covenant, though they do hold the same; There is no such necessary and
inseparable connection between these opinions, and that of Church Covenant,
that he that holds this, must needs hold the other also.

But the time has been, Obje. 13.
when your selves did not hold Church Covenant, as now you do; when you were in
England you were not of this mind, and therefore no marvel if your change
since your coming to New England be suspected, and offensive. If you change
your judgment and practice in this manner, God knows whether you may come at
last, and therefore men may well be afraid of holding with you in this point,
which your selves did not hold when you lived in your native Country.

Some of us when we were in England, through the mercy of God, Answ.
did see the necessity of Church Covenant; and did also preach it to the
people amongst whom we ministered, though neither so soon nor so fully as were
meet, for which we have cause to be humbled, and to judge our selves before
the Lord.

But suppose we had never known nor practiced the same before our coming into
this country, yet if it be a truth of God, there is no reason why we should
shut our eyes against the light, when God holds it forth unto us, nor that
others should be offended at us for receiving the same. For by the same reason
men might still continue in their sins, and not make any progress in
knowledge and holiness, that so they may not seem unconstant, which were
contrary to the Scripture, wherein we are commanded nor to fashion our selves
according to the former lusts of our ignorance. 1. Pet. 1. 14. But to be
changed, Romans 12. 2. and renewed, Ephesians. 4. 23. and put off the old man, and put
on the new, Ephesians. 4. yea to grow in grace and holiness, 2. Pet. 3. 18. and be
stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. that our good works may be mo^e at the last,
then at the first, Revel. 2. 19. Sure it is, the Apostle tells the Corin^hians
and Ephesians, that the time had been when they were not the same men that now
they are when he wrote unto them; and yet he does not blame them for leaving
their former opinions or practice, but commends them for it, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
Ephesians. 2. 3. etc. And it is said of Apollos an eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scripture, that when he came to Ephesus the way of God was expounded unto him
more perfectly by Aquila and Priscilla, whereas before he was instructed in the
way of the Lord, knowing only the Baptism of John: yet this was no dispraise
at all to him, that now upon better information he would change his judgment
to the better, nor unto them that were the means thereof: Act. 18. 25, 26.
Nullus pudor est ad maliura transire.

The time has been, (and we may be humbled for it) when we lived without God
in the world, and some of us in many sinful courses: and shall any be
offended, because we are not still the same? and when God called us from the
ways of sin and death, to the Fellowship of his grace in Christ; yet some of
us lived a long time in conformity to the ceremonies imposed in our native
Country, and saw not the evil of them. But when God did open our eyes, and
let us see the unlawfulness thereof, we cannot see but it would have been a
withholding the truth in unrighteousness, and a great unthankfulness to God
for light revealed to us, if we should still have continued in that course
through an inordinate desire of seeming constant: and therefore it is not any
just cause of offense that we have changed our judgment and practice in those
things, when we once perceived the Word of God to disallow them.

Indeed it has been sometime objected against Mr. Cartwright, and others, that
desired the reformation of the Churches in England, in regard of Discipline and
Church Order, that they which stood so much for Reformation in Discipline, did
in after times add and alter some things, beyond what they saw at first, and
what themselves had formerly desired; and that therefore being so mutable, and
inconstant in their apprehensions, they were not to be regarded, nor hearkened
unto: to which Objection Mr. Parker makes full Answer in Eccles. lib. 2. ca.
36. p. 307. where he shows from the Scripture, and the testimony of Bishop
Jewel, Doctor Reinolds, and others, that in the Reformation of Religion God
brings not his servants into perfection in knowledge and zeal at the first,
but by degrees, so as they grow and make progress in these things in such
wise; that their good works are more at the last then at the first, as was said
of the Church of Thyatira, even as the man that had been blind, when Christ
restored him to his sight, could at the first but see men like trees walking,
and afterward saw every man clearly; and therefore it is no good arguing to say
these men have altered and corrected such things from what their apprehensions
were at first, and therefore they are not to be regarded.

Now if this be no good arguing against Mr. Cartwright, and those that in
England have been studious of Reformation (as indeed it is not) then it is no
good Argument against us in this matter of Church Covenant, to say we now hold
and practice otherwise then we have done in former time.

If any shall here reply, Reply.
that change from conformity to the ceremonies to Worship God more purely is
warranted by the Word, and therefore not blameworthy, and that the same may be
said of the case of Apollos, of the Corinthians, and Ephesians forementioned,
and of Cartwright, and the rest in his times.

We answer, Answ.
that this is true, and thereby it appears, that it is not simply the changing
a man's opinion or practice that can be counted blameworthy, or offensive, but
changing without warrant of the Word; and therefore in point of
Church Covenant, the issue must not be whether we or others have formerly known
and practiced it, but whether it have ground from Gods Word; For if it have (as
we hope have been proved before in this discourse) then the observing of it,
can be no cause of just offense unto others, nor imputation of inconstancy to
our selves, though in time past we had not had so much light as to discern the
necessity and use thereof.

The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, though he
be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary: and grant unto
all his Churches and servants, that the^^ love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, that they may discern the things that differ;
and approve the things that are excellent, and by his Spirit of truth be led
forward into all truth, till Antichrist be utterly consumed with the breath of
his mouth, and the brightness of his coming, and the holy City new Jerusalem
come down from God out of heaven, as a Bride adorned for her husband the Lamb,
the Lord Jesus, to whom be all glory of affiance and service for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

