OF THE OPENING OF RIVERS FOR NAVIGATION, The Benefit exemplified, By The Two
AVONS Of Salisbury and Bristol. WITH A Mediterranean Passage by Water for
BILLANDERS of Thirty Tun, between Bristol and London. With the Results.

LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, 1655.

To his Highness, OLIVER, Lord PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
ALthough this following Design be see forth both plain in speech, and
unpolished for eloquence (my Genius having not assumed the one, nor my
endeavors in Literature attained the other) not for want of desire, but
ability to perform it: Yet notwithstanding I beseech your Highness favor to
make the best Construction of it, which here I most humbly present to your
Highness, under whose wing I fly for protection and assistance, which
otherwise will be an Embryo or Abortive never to receive life, if not animated
by your powerful hand.

Wherefore in all humility I do make this Address unto your Highness, by the
great luster owned to your Name from all parts of Europe, your Conquest of the
Seas making your Highness receive famous and renowned Courtship from all
Princes; All Lands being ambitious of our friendship, in Contemplation of
divine Providence thus advancing you and your affairs: And as your Highness is
thus esteemed by all Foreign Nations for your happy archievements, so I the
humblest of your servants am desirous, by presenting this which is the first
Domestic service, to your Highness Consideration, to make you as popular at
home as you are abroad, that all may see your aims are no other than the true
advancement of the Public good of this people now under your Highness
Government; the continuance whereof shall have the daily prayers of him, that
as in duty bound, remains

July the 9. 1655. Your Highness, though unworthy, yet most humble and faithful
Servant, Francis Matthew.
If your Highness approve of this Overture presented, and be pleased to Command
my Attendance on the Lords of your Highness most Honorable Privy Council, I
shall be ready to give them further Satisfaction herein, for perfecting this
Design, and removing all difficulties.



Of the opening of Rivers for Navigation, etc.
IN these Papers we are not to reflect upon this Island, as capable of such
waterings as the flat Netherlands, whose benefits may seem to allure us to the
like industry; nevertheless Englands fair Valleys, and rich Inlets, through
which many noble Rivers insinuate themselves, might with the imitation of the
industrious Netherlanders be made in many places docible of Navigation, to the
inestimable comfort, satisfaction, ease, and profit of the public, especially
during the seven (which we call) winter-months, when waters abound in our
Rivers, and the Seacoasts so dangerous for Navigation.

The Objections of the difference of the Soil, must not deterr us from so
advantageous an enterprise, (...) terman will not think himself highly
advanced, to come out of a River into the Sea; out of a Billander to a man of
War, whose constant pay will be far greater, and whose employment will be of
much more credit, and carry with it more hope of preferment?

Hence also many thousands of Horse, now only used for Packs and Burdens,
would be spared, and so multiplied for Warlike service, and their feeding
employed upon improveable stocks.

The facility of Commerce from one place to another, and the cheapness of
transportation of Commodities without so much grinding and plowing up our
highways, which makes them now in so many places so impassable.

You shall see Western Wagons, which they call Plows, carry forty hundred
weight; insomuch as between Bristol and Marlborough, they have been enforced at
a Hill they call Bagdown-hill, to put twenty beasts, Horse and Oxen, to draw it
up: This great abuse by this means would be taken away, by keeping our
highways pleasant; and withal, by this transportation of Commodities by
River, the price of Commodities would fail.

The Imposition, though easy, laid upon every such Navigable passage, would,
as Rivers by degrees are opened, amount to a fair revenue, without any
grievance at all to the people, but rather with much comfort as it is embraced
in other Countries, where they cannot live without the help of these
Billanders, passing and repassing daily from Town to Town, from Market to
Market, and from Coast to Coast; these be only some few of so many benefits
which will result from the opening of Rivers.

General Observations upon all Rivers as they are thought fit to be made
Navigable.
To rise as high in opening the said Rivers as they shall be found feazable,
there to make a Wharf, Magazine, See Rastal a^ large in his Havens and Rivers
upon the 27 of Eliz.
or Warehouses for all such Commodities as are useful to those parts of the
Country, both for Trade in Merchandising, and Service in time of War, with far
greater expedition.

If any other River practiceable for Boats lie near the head, Let the head of
the Avon which falls down from Rugby to Warwick, and so into the Severne, be
examined with the Welland, which rises near to the head of the Avon, and
falls down to Stamford, and so through the Isle of Ely, into the Sea.
or side of the said River, and that the ground favor the opening of a still
River to be drawn between them, then to join them with Sasses, alias Locks, or
otherwise. But should the ground be repugnant, then a fair stone Cawsey, not
exceeding one little days journey for Horse, or Carts, to be raised between the
said Rivers; where the Navigation ends, a Wharf, or Magazine to be made as
aforesaid, if these Rivers reach from Sea to Sea, not otherwise.

By the like industry, many Mediterranean passages by water, with the help of
such Cawseys, would be found from one Sea to the other, and not to have the old
Channel of any River to be forsaken to gain a shorter passage.) For, as has
been said, Rivers are never out of their way; and upon these Navigable pasages,
our chief Manufactures should be set up for the Commodities of transportation.

Object. These great works always bring forth great difficulties, though the
benefit should be never so apparent.

Answ. Can any thing of this nature seem difficult to a State resolved to do
good to its people? Difficulties are the boundaries of narrow hearts, such
ought not to be the heart of a State, which should most rejoice in difficult
things, in the overcoming of which, so much honor is achieved.

A business well pondered and seriously resolved on, by a powerful Undertaker,
is carried like the world upon Atlas shoulders, without groaning.

Object. 2. Most of our Rivers in the Summer time will want water to carry a
Boat, even our Thames sometimes is so shallow, as our Barges are gravelled.

Answ. Such Rivers as shall be judged fit for Navigation must not be debarred
the Contribution which other Springs, Brooks, and Rivers would give them;
wherefore all such Streams, These expressly forbidden in Magna Charta, Cap. 2.
See Henr. primi, Cap. 12. Also Walsingham, in Edw. 3 And see John Davis in his
Irish Reports.
great or small, which would willingly fall into our said Rivers designed for
Navigation, ought to be free, and not to be bound up with Wears, Sluices, Pens
for Mills, and the like imprestures, which keep up, stop, and divert the Waters
from their natural Course, and fall into those Navigable Rivers.

Those Mills either the State should buy of the Owners of them, and erect for
every Water-mill three Horse-mills, for the necessity of the Country adjoining,
or so agree with the Owners of them, that they pulling up their Water-mills and
such apparent purprestures for the free Course of Waters should themselves set
up the said Horse-mills for the use of the Country in places more convenient,
then to go in some place a mile or two to a Water-mill, which asks a days
employment for a man and Horse.

And truly, if the consumption of our Timber hold on but some few years more,
there will be none left to build either Water-mill or Windmill, they requiring
the best and strongest Timber we have: so that of necessity we shall be driven
to set up these Horse-mills, which are built with our meanest Wood, our Oak
being little enough to maintain our Shipping, were it never so well preserved
hereafter.

The Avon of Bristol made Navigable as high as Malmsbury and Calne, with the
Profits for Transportation of Coals and other Commodities.
Which also may with facility produce a Mediterranean passage by water from
Bristol to London.

The Coal-pits in Kings-wood near Bristol, and if they suffice not those
Colliaries upon the Severn-side to furnish that Country so much destitute of
Fuel up to Malmsbury and Calne, in this manner may be looked upon: This River
made Navigable for Billanders flat-bottomed Boats of thirty tun, which draw
laden but three foot and an half of water. The work being feazable at a far
less Charge than the yearly Profit will come to, these Collyers are to be dealt
with to bring Coal either out of Kings-wood, or from the Severn, to a place
assigned them for wharfage, they affording the Newcastle Chaldron at the said
Wharfage for 10 s. 2 d.

Those Collyers in Wales, the State may take it into their own hands, giving
the Owners yearly more for them then they now make.

These Colliaries settled, These of Kingswood are upon the States own soil.
and the River of Bristol made Navigable, the State to license 300 of these
Billanders, each bearing thirty Chaldron (only London measure) and these to
bring Coal from the Wharf up the said River as high as Malmsbury and Calne,
paying 10 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron at the Wharf, and 5 s. for every such
Chaldron for the passage up the River, and sell them at Malmsbury and Calne for
18 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron.

The Owner or Merchant of the VVharf having for every such London Chaldron
delivered, These sold at 18 s. 2 d. London Chaldron.
10 s. 2 d. The State for the passage of every such Chaldron 5 s.

The Billander for his freight for every such Chaldron, 3 s.

The difference of Newcastle and London measure in the Chaldron, being a third
Coal, two Newcastle Chaldron making three of London: The surplus of measure
should be given to the State, to be landed near the said VVharfs, upon a VVharf
called the States Wharf.

The other VVharfs to be divided into six; Surplus of measure to belong to the
State.
every VVharf having his squadron of 50 Billanders, belonging to the Owners and
Merchants of the several VVharfs; which VVharfs may have their Names from the
Colors they shall bear.

These Wharfs to be kept by the Owners of the Coal which lies upon them, who
are to receive (as has been said) 10 s. 2 d. for every Chaldron given out,
London measure.

These Billanders are to sail up the River, every squadron by its self, having
each his Admiral, and Rear-Admiral, carrying their Flags of proper Colors,
none of the said squadron sailing before his Admiral, nor any behind his
Rear-Admiral; and this to prevent disorder as they pass through the Country.

They are so to discharge both the duties at the Wharf, and the duties for the
Passage, as to make no stay at all.

Every Admiral at the discharge of the duties for his whole squadron (for he is
to undertake it) is to receive a Ticket for his free passage through the River,
without which they are not to pass the Block-house or Fort for preserving the
States revenue.

These Wharfs aforesaid, are to have correspondent Wharfs at Malmsbury and
Calne, and to be regulated as the former, one Squadron not unlading at another
Wharf, where each Billander is to receive for its freight of 30 Chaldrons, 4 l.
10 s. every voyage; and two of these voyages may well be made in one month.

The Wharfs paying the Billanders their Salary, and keeping the Coals for all
such as fetch it there at 18 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron.

As concerning the Coal, before should be laid upon the States Wharf, being the
third Coal gained in the Nowcastle measure, that also is to have at Malmsbury
and Calne a Wharf called the States Wharf, corresponding to the former, where
that surplus of measure should be had and kept for the benefit of the State, in
thankfulness for that great charge in making the River thus Navigable, for the
benefit of the Country: And thereby the benefit of the Coal, and Passage,
comes to the State (the freight of the Billander only excepted.)

The groundwork being thus laid, the Profits are these:
l. s. d. Every Billanders freight with 30 London Chaldron for the Passage
only, These from Bristol to Malmsbury, and Calne, making two voyages every
(...) monthe, carry 126000 Chaldron.
Fruits to the State Every voyage -- 7 10 0 Every Squadron of 50 of these
Billanders fruits to the State every voyage -- 375 0 0 Every voyage of 300
Billanders for Passage only, fruits to the State -- 2250 0 0 Surplus of Measure
to the State alone: Every such Billander freight with the Surplus of Measure
upon the third Coal, fruits to the State, both for Coal and Passage -- 22 10 0
Every Squadren of 50 Billanders, every Carriage freight as aforesaid, fruits to
the State -- 1125 0 0 Every voyage of those 300 Billanders freight as
aforesaid, fruits to the State -- 6750 0 0

The Coal as they are first brought to the Wharfs should be so Ordered, as the
third Coal be duly carried to the Wharf of the State.

As to clear what has been said, If 20 Chaldron Newcastle measure be brought
from the Pits to the VVharfs, they are to be divided into 30 Chaldron London
measure, of which the State is to have 10 Chaldron laid upon its VVharf; and so
proportionable to all that are brought from the Pits to any VVharf, the third
Coal being always carried to the States Wharf. The Staple of Coal being thus
settled for all that Country about Malmsbury and Calne, and Coal being sold
there constantly for 18 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron to all that will fetch
them, that is, at the price of 6 d. the London Bushel; No question is to be
made, but that a marvelous great quantity will be thus vented, to the great
blessing of the people, who now pay about Calne and Malmsbury never under 12 d.
the Bushel, and commonly more, being carried by horse from Bristol: Should
50000 Chaldron only be thus yearly vented, it is a great Revenue, and would in
the very Profits to the State rise in this sole Commodity of Coal. unto --
20833 6 8 That is, for Passage -- 12500 0 0 And for the third Coal gained --
8333 6 8

And no doubt Bristol, so great a place of Traffic, would make use of this
River as high as Calne toward the transportation of their Merchandise from
Bristol to London, it being the worst and most hilly part of the way, and lies
full in the passage to London.

l. s. d. A Billander of 30 Tun, laden with Merchandise from Bristol to Calne,
taking but one Farthing per pound, fruits to the State every voyage 62 10 0

It may well make two voyages every Month.

This River being thus practiced as high as Malmsbury and Calne, should our
Seas be at any time infested with Enemy Fleets in such sort as with (...)
eminent danger, London and other parts of this Commonwealth, could not be
served with Coal from Newcastle and Sunderland;

How facile a thing it were from Malmsbury, lying upon the said River, to open
a passage for these Billanders of 30 Tun, which draw water but three foot and
half, laden into the River Isis, by Creeklade and Latchlade, and so into the
Thames, all that land-passage being not above 4 or 5 miles (inviting the
Undertaker) being very low, and practicable ground, most fit for the Design.

By this means there would be a Mediterranean passage from Bristol to London by
water;
Not only for the supply of much Coal in time of necessity, but for all other
Commodities brought into Bristol, which in time of Hostility London could not
otherwise enjoy, but by excessive Rates for Land-carriages or conveyances by
Sea: but by this passage once opened, all Commodities may be brought from
Bristol to London (even at one farthing per pound) we now paying all the
wintertime for carriage by Land between London and Bristol 4 s. per cent. and
so preserve our horses for the States Service.

The whole Charge of this Navigable Passage would be paid with the Profits of
one only year: And as for Coal for 2 s. more upon the London Chaldron for
freight, they also this way would be brought to London at 20 s. 2 d. the
Chaldron, London Chaldron. Howsoever great caution ought to be used, that
during times of Peace no Coal should be brought to London this way, to the end
our shipping, which is much employed in the transportation of that Commodity,
might still be kept up, for the safety, benefit, and honor of this State.

It were good that the 2 d. upon every Chaldron were paid toward the defraying
of the Salary of Officers upon the VVharf, and toward the Passage yearly at
Cardiff, the nearest Colliary to Bristol, that is upon the Severn, excellent
Scotish-Coals, which also would drive a great trade upon this passage, being
sold by the Tun.

This passage in time of Peace should be used for transportation of Merchandise
to London, and from London to Bristol, only from the first of October to the
first of April, partly not to obstruct our Navigation by Sea, all the
Summertime when the doubling of the Cape of Cornwall is not dangerous, nor our
Coasts so subject to storms; And partly by reason of the Avon, and Isis, and
the Thames it self in those winter-months will not want water, which in the
Summer they do: And for Coal, our Seas being not infested, none should pass
higher then Malmsbury and Calne, not to hinder, as has been said, our
Navigation, for that Commodity by Sea, which must still be endeavored to be
kept up to the full.

Now who should be the Undertaker of this great work but the State it self? it
being too great an expense for any private man or Corporation to lay out; and
of too great a Profit for them to receive, being effected.

Some endeavors have been used by that noble Patriot, Sir John Harrington, to
make this River Navigable between Bristol and the Bath, which work I have seen:
This to be observed well by by the Cities of Bath and Bristol, lest they labor
in vain.
but the Design being too narrow for this our great Proposal, it were in vain
to be again set upon, either by any private man, or the said two Towns, unless
they intended to make the River and their Sasses so large as the River to carry
Billanders of thirty Tun, and their Sasses to hold half a dozen of these
Billanders at once.

I went down to see Sir Joh. Harringtons intended Sass some two miles below the
Bath, and I found the Engineer to have much abused the noble Knight in his
work, making his Sass upon the very Dam of the River, which would have been a
perpetual and forcible enemy to his work. Besides, I found by measuring his
Sass, that it would contain but one only Boat, and that only of 8 Tun: which
narrow Design would no way have served to this our Mediterranean Passage; But
must have been again ripped up and destroyed: The Sass it self being to be
otherwise placed, and made far larger.

He who has seen the Sass, between Ipris and Vuerne in Flanders, will confess
it a noble work, and capable of Public Service (which this I spoke of no way
is) (...) much is the memory of that noble Knight to be honored, in showing
himself to his ability, a public man, laboring so much for the good of his
Country.

Many Sasses are to be made upon this River of Avon, it being so much a
fayling-water, insomuch it is now forced to be kept up with many Dams, every
one of which must have his Sass, but not upon the Dam, but upon the side of it,
as the Figure expresses.

The Proposer of this Paper has no other interest in this Design, than a true
Patriot ought to have a desire for the Public good, to see it effected, and by
it his Country served: And if he shall perceive it embraced, it will encourage
him to offer up to the Public service of his Country other improvements of
greater Consequence.

FINIS.
diagram of Sir John Harrington's proposed sasse (lock) on the River Avon Above
and below the Damme.

Thus the Sasse to go

The Auon.

The Damme.

Sir John Harringtons Sasse

The Auon.




