A DEFENSE Of the Protestant Christian Religion against POPERY: In Answer to a
Discourse of a Roman Catholic.

WHEREIN The Manifold Apostasies, Heresies, and Schisms of the Church of ROME,
as also, the Weakness of Her Pretensions from the Scriptures and the Fathers,
are briefly Laid open:

By an English Protestant.

Frederic. Secundus Germ. Imp. Roma diu titubans, longis Erroribus acta
Corruet, ac Mundi desinet esse Caput.
In Heresies long Chase, Rome stumbling shall
Lose the Worlds Headship, and to Ruin fall.
Printed in the YEAR, M.DC.LXXII.

Advertisements TO THE READER.
IT is thought needless to trouble the Reader with a Narrative of the
Transactions, or with Copies of the Letters that have passed about this Affair,
or with the Names of the Persons concerned therein; or lastly, with the Motives
and Providence which have invited in this juncture of time, to the publishing
this Defense of our Religion against Popery. The Romanists Discourse is
prefixed and published wholly and entirely by it self, over and beside what is
repeated of it in the Answer. To the Answer there be some Additions, for the
Readers further help, and for the further illustration of some things; a brief
intimation whereof, might be presumed sufficient to the Romanist himself, he
being one of their Learned men in Holy Orders amongst them. And whereas the
Author of this Answer and Defense, in a Letter to the person that called him to
this Work, did together with it, express his own Sentiments thereof, it is
judged convenient, instead of any further Preface, to communicate them out of
the said Letter, wherein he says: I Have received your Letter, and I have
perused Mr. K. his Discourse, which he challenges our Divines to Answer. And
whereas you have pitched upon me to do it, because (as your Letter Expresses)
being the Cause of God, you durst not Trust it in every hand: As I have reason
to acknowledge the great respect and value you are pleased to put upon me, so
withal I must needs own my own unworthiness and insufficiency for this, or any
other good word or work. It is free Grace I have been depending and looking up
unto for help, from whence alone I have had it; and it is the same free Grace
that must bless what is said, and bring it home with power. I have sent you
herewith an Answer to his Paper. The Civilities you have done to him (which I
see himself in his Letter to you does ingenuonsly acknowledge) may tend, I
hope, to let him see. That it is our Religion to do good to all, and that we
desire to do good Works, though not to be justified by them. Let me have a part
in your Remembrances at the Throne of Grace, to which I Recommend you and
yours; which is all, at present, from

Your most humble Servant in the Lord, S. M.
DVBLIN, July ult. 1670.



A Discourse OF A ROMAN CATHOLIC: Of the one, only, and singular only one
Catholic, and Roman Faith.
ONe Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is over all,
and through all, and in us all, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. Malac. 2.10. First I give thanks
to my God, through Jesus Christ for you all, for that your faith is manifested
in all the world, Romans 1.8. I desire also to see you, that I may impart unto
you of spiritual grace to confirm you, that is to say, to be together comforted
in you, which together is your faith and mine, ibid v. 11. and 12. That now we
may not be children, wavering up and down, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine in the wickedness of men, in deceit, to the circumvention of error,
Ephesians. 4.14. Be not carried with various and strange doctrines, for it is a
very good grace to settle the heart, Hebr. 13.9. Also I do not pray for them
only, but likewise for these which will believe through their word in me, that
all may be one, as your Father and I, and I in you, that also they in us may be
one, that the world may believe that you sent me, Joan. 17. ver. 20.
Now, I hope, it will not be deemed, but that the Church of Rome, was once a
most pure, excellent, flourishing, and Mother Church, ut supra, Romans 1.

This Church could not cease to be so, but she must fail either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism, Romans 16.17.

I. Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the Faith of Christ, but the very
name and title of Christianity; no man will say, that the Church of Rome had
ever such a fall, or fell thus. II. Heresy is an adhesion to some private and
singular Opinion or Error in Faith, contrary to the general and approved
Doctrine of the Church. III. If the Church of Rome did ever adhere to any
singular, or new Opinion, disagreeable to the common received Doctrine? First,
I pray satisfy me as to these particulars, viz. IV. By what general Council
was it ever condemned? V. Which of the Fathers ever wrote against Her? VI. Or
by what Authority was she ever Reproved? for it seems to me very incongruous,
that so great a Church should be condemned by every one that has a wind to
condemn Her. VII. Schism is a departure or division from the Unity of the
Church, whereby the band and communion held with some former Church, is broken
and dissolved. VIII. If ever the Church of Rome divided Her self by Schism,
from any other body of faithful Christians, or brake communion, or went forth
from the society of any elder Church, I pray satisfy your self and me to these
particulars. IX. First, Whose company did she leave? Secondly, from what body
did she go forth? X. Where was the true Church which she forsook? for it
appears not a little strange to me, That a Church should be accounted
Schismatical, when there cannot be assigned any other Church different from Her
(which from Age to Age since Christ's time, has continued visible) from whom
she departed, etc.


Conclusion. If the Catholic Roman Church was once the true Church, she still
remained so; and therefore they who have departed from Her, are departed from
the true Church, and so are out of the way, etc.

The usual color of believing more or less than the Church allows, is vain
and erroneous, inasmuch as that very Christ which stored Her with knowledge of
Gods revealed Truth, and with power to convey the same, has also endued Her
with inerrability to convey the same justly, without danger of miscarrying,
against Iguorance.

Mat. 13. 11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of heaven. Mat. 5.14.
Against darkness, you are the light of the world. John 14.16. Against error and
falsehood: I will send unto you the Spirit of truth, to remain with you for
ever. 1 Timothy 3. Against weakness: She is the pillar and ground of truth. Mat.
16.18. Hell gates shall not prevail against her; to make which good, Christ
called his eternal Father to his aid, prayed him, and was heard for his
reverence. Mat. 28.20. Behold I am with you all days to the end of the world.
Therefore if they charge the Catholic Roman Church with Error, they must say,
that either Christ was not of power to keep his Church from straying, or that
he wanted fidelity to make good his word.

Mat. 5.14. You are the light of the world. A City that is set on an hill
cannot be hid. Mat. 16.19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven. I pray name me the Church that was commonly counted the true
Christian Church, in which you remained, and from which you are not departed.

Mat. 16.18. The Church cannot fail being builded upon a Rock, nor needs no new
Masons to rebuild her again.

1 Timothy 4.1. St. Paul says, Certain will depart from the faith. They went from
us.

Whether did the Roman Church go from any other known Church, or did any other
go from her? Satisfy your self and me, in this, I pray you.

Testimonies of the Fathers, for the Sea of Rome.
THe Names of the Twelve Apostles are these, the first Simon, who is called
Peter, etc. In which place, Divine Epiphanius says, De Epiph. in Ancoratu.
That God knew the thoughts of hearts, knows also who is worthy to be placed
in the first place; he has chosen Peter, that he might be the Head of his
Diseiples.

St. Augustine says of Peter's Successors, De Aug. contra Epist. Parmenioni. L.
1. c. 2.
to the sitting in the Chair of the Roman Church, the whole Christian world is
subject.

Also Augustine elsewhere: Aug. Epist. 162.
In the Roman Church always flourished the Sovereignty of the Apostolical
Chair.

The same in another place, Number (says he) the Priests of that same seat of
St. Peter, and see which of the Fathers succeed him; for he is the Rock which
the proud gates of Hell do not overcome.

St. Ambrose, Rome (says he) has the principality of Apostolical Priesthood.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. Proving, That a true visible Church may fall away. CHAP. II. Of the
Nature and kinds of Apostasy, and of the Apostasies of the Church of Rome.
CHAP. III. Of the Nature of Heresy. CHAP. IV. Of the Heresies of the Church of
Rome, eight particulars instanced. CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Schism, and of the
Schisous of the Church of Rome, both within her self, and from other Churches.
CHAP. VI. Some places of Scripture for the inerrability of the Church of Rome,
answered. CHAP. VII. Of humane Testimonies for, and against the Church of Rome.
CHAP. VIII. An Appendix for the further illustration of some things which are
but briefly hinted in the former Chapters.
A DEFENSE Of the Protestant Christian Religion against POPERY: In Answer to a
Discourse, Entitled, [Of the one, only, and singular only one Catholic, and
Roman Faith.]
CHAP. I. Proving, That a true visible Church may fall away.
TO pass by the Rhetoric of the Title, and the aptness of the phrase of [
singular only one] as an emphatical addition to [ the one onely] and the
consistence between Roman, and Catholic, and between singular, and Catholic,
or universal. How, and in what respects of reason, and what senses may be
thought upon, wherein the same thing may be called both Roman and Catholic,
both singular and universal. The Discourse it self begins with unconuected
Quotations of several choice portions of Holy Scripture: And, indeed, so far as
there is a cordial adherence and subjection of heart unto that rule among
different parties and persuasions, it will, through the grace of Christ,
produce either union of Judgment, or at least union of Brotherly affection,
and forbearance of love; but what esteem the Church of Rome has for the Holy
Scriptures, is well known, She does not subject her (...) unto them: And though
you in this Discourse de Quote them, as your Writers sometimes do; yet, if you
be a true Roman Catholic, it is not with any intent to subject your Church
upto the Scripture, and to advance the Scriptures above your Church; but only
to deal with Heretics (as you call them) at their own Weapons; and to use the
Scripture as a steppingstone, whereby to mount up your Church into the Throne
of her pretended Supremacy and Inerrability, as one would use a stirrup to get
into the saddle; wherein, nevertheless, your means has an inconsistency with
your end, as will further appear, before we come to a close of this Debate:
Your Argumentation from the Scriptures you recite, begins thus.

DISCOURSE.
Now, I hope, it will not be deemed, but that the Church of Rome was once a
most pure, excellent, flourishing, and Mother Church, ut supra, Romans 1.

ANSWER.
It will not be denied, but is readily granted by us, That there was once a
True Church in Rome; that is, a Congregation of saithful men, wherein the pure
Word of God was Preached, and the Sacraments duly ministered, according to the
Ordinance of Christ, which is the description of the visible Church in the
Thirty nine Articles. Artic. 19.
And that this Church which was in Rome, might be instrumental (as Churches in
populous Cities often are) to propagate the Faith, and plant Churches in other
places, is not improbable: But that she had any superlative Purity, or any
motherly Power and Authority, over and above other Churches, is part of the
thing in Question between her and us.

The Church of Corinth, the Church of Ephesus, of Thessalenica, of Smyrna, of
Philadelphia, were once pure, flourishing Churches, as well as the Church of
Rome. What may be truly said of her, may be truly said of all other Gospel
Churches, in their first plantation and constitution by the Apostles; yet, it
does not follow, That ever they were Mother-Churches in your sense, or, that
because they were pure at first, that therefore they are so still; for visible
Churches may degenerate, and apostatize, though the Mystical Church, that is,
such as are in Christ by the spirit of saving Faith, cannot wholly fall off
from him, yet such as are in him only by external and visible profession may:
Jer. 2.21. I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; how then art
thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? How is the
faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of judgment, righteousness lodged
in it, but now murderers, Isa. 1.:21. Whereupon a Church thus forsaking God,
God may forsake them. He may discovenant and un-church a people, and give them
a Bill of Divorce, and withdraw the signs and tokens of his love and presence.
He may break the staff of beauty, and cut it asunder, that he may break the
Covenant he has made with all the people. He may also break the other staff
of bands and brotherhood between Judah and Israel, Zach. 11.10, 14. He may give
them a Bill of Divorce, Jer. 3.8. When for all the causes whereby backsliding
Israel committed Adultery, I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce;
yet her treacherous sister Judah, feared not. God may say unto a people
Le-ruhamab and Lo-ammi, I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; for
ye are not my people and I will not be your God, Hos. 1.6. Plead with your
mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband, Hos. 2.2. God
may remove the candlestick out of its place, Rev. 2.5.

You see in all these Scriptures, what the Lord has threatened and done to
other Churches in days of old; which, as it utterly overthrows any such
imagination, That a True Church cannot fall away; so it shows, That your Church
claims such a privilege, as never any Church enjoyed: Go to Shiloh, where I
set my name at first, Jer. 7.12, 14. Go to Jerusalem, and see what God has
done unto it for the wickedness of his people Israel: Never any Church enjoyed
such a privilege as yours pretends to, of Indefectibility and Impossibility
of losing their Church estate and privileges. It was Christ's own threatening to
the Jews, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof, Matthew. 21.43.

Yea, the Lord has denounced the like: Threatenings, and brandished the same
flaming Sword against the Church of Rome in particular, and that from this very
instance and example of the Jewish Church before mentioned, Kem. 11.17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22. And if some of the branches were broken off, and thou being, a wild
Olive tree were grassed in among them, Boast not against the branches; which
your Church does against all the Churches in the World, pretending to such
transcendent privileges and prerogatives above all other Sister-Churches: But
if thou boast, thou bear not the root, but the root thee. Thou will say, the
branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in: Well, because of
unbelief, they were broken off, and thou stand by faith. Be not high-minded,
but fear. This is written to Her, that says, She cannot err: For if God
spared not the natural branches, take heed lest be also spare not thee. Behold
therefore the goodness, and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but
toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also
shall be out off. You see he threatens Her with cutting off; And he has
executed these his righteous Threatenings, because She has not continued in his
goodness, therefore he has cut Her off, and given Her a bill of Divorce,
having declared Her in the Scriptures of Truth to be Babylon, and Her Head
Antichrist, even Babylan the Great, the Mother of Harlots, a monstrous Beast,
the principal object of all the vyals of his wrath. And her Head, a false
Prophet, a Star fullen from Heaven, a persecuting Horn, wearing out the Saints
of the most High, as it is written in these, and the like Scriptures: Daniel 7.
and Dan. cap. 11. verse. 36, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1 Timothy 4.1, etc. And it is the
chief scope of the Book of the Revelation, to discover and reveal Antichrist,
in every Chapter, from the sixth, to the twentieth. This is something that does
some way concern this great Apostasy; in all which Scriptures, both of the Old
and New Testament, She may read, as it were, the Letters of her Divorce: The
Lord, who was Her Husband, having published them, and left them upon Record to
all the Churches, that they may take notice that She is not his Wife, nor he
Her husband; and that they may do as is written, Revel. 18 4. Come out of her
my people, that ye be not partakers, of her sins, and that ye receive not of
bet plagues. And accordingly we, for our parts, in obedience to this command,
have protested against Her, and are come out from Her; and our defense must be
without shifts and subterfuges, by making good the charge against Her. What can
She say for Her self? How will She clear and vindicate Her self from all this
fin and shame? You attempt it under three Heads, of Apostasic, Haresie, and
Schism; and I must follow you in your own method, though it be none of the
best: But whether you took your Discourses hereof out of Fiat Lux, for there
they are verbatim, there is more than a mere coincidence of matter, or that
Fiat Lux had learned them privately from you, and then published them in Print,
suppressing your name, I leave it to him and you to dispute that point, and to
your infallible Judge to determine it, and judge between you: Both he and you
speak thus.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature and Kinds of Apostasy, and of the Apostasies of the
Church of Rome.
DISCOURSE.
This Church could not cease to be so, but She must fall either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism.

ANSWER.
THis Enumeration is very defective and confused, in that it makes Apostasy
one particular species, or kind of falling away, whereas Apostasy, and falling
away, is the same thing; the one being a Greek word, and the other English: for
Apostasy is contrary to the True Christian Religion, which is the tying of man
to God again (from re, and ligo) after his fall in the bonds of Faith and Love,
or obedience of Love. The Scripture everywhere makes these the two parts of
True Religion: 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have
heard of me, in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding
the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.

Hence therefore there be two ways of Apostasy, viz. either from the Faith of
the Gospel by fundamental ignorance, and heresy, and unbelief, or from
Gospel-obedience, which is as large as the rule thereof; of which David says,
Thy Commandments are exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. Therefore under this head
comes Idolatry, Superstition, Schism, Witchcraft, Perjury, Persecution,
Sedition, Murder, Whoredom, Theft, Equivocation, etc. Men may Apostatize, and
fa'l away from God, by making shipwreck of the faith, and by putting away a
good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. The Apostle speaks of some, who profess they know
God; but in werks they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate, Titus. 1.16.

But this kind of Apostasy by evil works, and scandalous sins, is omitted and
forgotten, which is another Error in your distribution; though it is that which
your Church, and Popes, are deeply guilty of, notwithstanding all your
boastings of your good works, and merits, and supererogations with God. The
sixth Trumpet instanceth in Idolatries, Murders, Sorceries, Fornications,
Thefts, as Sins that do abound among you, Revel. 9. ult. And all Histories bear
witness to it. The corruption of Life, as well as Doctrine, was so great,
before the Protestant Reformation; so many the offenses, abuses, and scandals;
and such the degenerated notoriety of them, that as it was the common desire of
Sober men in Luthers time, that there might be a free and general Council, in
order to a general Reformation of the Church, which all men observed to be
woefully degenerated: So there were Nine Select Cardinals and Prelates of your
own Church, C^sil. Delect. Card. and Praed. De Emendanda Ecclesia. Ann. 1538.
See the Appendix, cap. 8.
who did privately advise the Pope to Reform things amiss, in a Paper they
presented to him, he having asked their Advice; wherein they do attaque the
very Popes themselves, as the Heads of the Apostasy, and Fountains of
Corruption to the whole Church. Principium horum malorum vide fuisse, quod
nonnulli Pontifices tui Praedecessores prurientes auribus, etc. Wherein they do
their Popes no wrong, for they speak no worse of them, then your own Historians
represent them, nor then Pope Adrian the Sixth did acknowledge them to be. In
his Instructions to his Legate Cheregatus, and in his Letter to the Princes of
Germany, Assembled in the Imperial Diet at Norimberge, 1523. He says, S^imus
in hac sede aliquot jam annis multa abominanda fuisse, Fox's Acts and Mon. Vol.
2. page 78. Lampad. Mellif. Histor. Part. 3. page 425.
abusus in spiritualibus excessus in mandatis, and omnia denique in perversum
mutata -- Se quidem non ignorare quid Scriptura docet, nempe a Sacerdotibus
populi iniquitatis originem scaturire, -- and ab ipsocapite Pontificio malum
diffiuere in membra inferiora. There have been, says he, many years, many
Abominations in this See, Abuses in Spirituals, Excesses in Commands, and all
things perversely ordered. -- The Fountain of Iniquity has flowed from the
Priests to the people, as the Scripture says; and from the Pontificial Head,
the evil has flowed into the inferior members. Thus he, who, as you say,
could not err in judgment. If a man would choose a Religion on purpose for the
gratifying of his lusts, Sir Walter Raleigh says, He knows none like Popery.
You have so many ways to dispense with your Consciences, and to indulge
Sinners a licentious liberty to take their swinge in their lusts. Your last
swarm of Locusts, the Jesuits, have made it their business to corrupt all
Morality, as is to be seen at large, in the Book called, The Mystery of
Jesuitism.

Moreover, there is yet a third oversight in your Enumeration over and above
both the former; for as a Church which was once true and pure, may cease to be
so, by such backslidings as have been instanced on her part, so she may cease
to be at all by righteous and destroying Judgments on Gods part; which is also
the case of the Old Church of Rome, Providence having cut them off by the Sword
of the Goths and Vandals, and other Northern Nations, about 400 years after
Christ, as he did the ten Tribes by the Assyrians of old; and he has
substituted another people and language in their Land and place, viz. those we
call Italians, as he did the Samaritans in the Land of Israel: And as then, so
now, the Successors are worse, and further off from God, than their degenerate
Predecessors, whom they saw the Lord destroy and cut off before their eyes. Now
suppose the Samaritans of old had pleaded a Plea not unlike yours, viz. thus:
The Israelites were a true, famous, flourishing Church in the days of Moses,
and Joshuah; and in the days of David, and Solomon, therefore we Samaritans
are so now. The Answer is easy, You are neither of the same Religion, no, nor
yet so much as the same people; for they were Israelites, but ye Samaritans. So
here, What though there was in the days of Paul a Gospel Church of Romans at
Rome, though so far as appears not very great or numerous in those days; but
that ever there was such a Church of Samaritans or Italians there, a pure
Church there since the Roman people were cut off, and their Language ceased, to
be a Mother Tongue, and the Italian came in place, Hoe tibi incumbit
demonstrandum, prove this if you can. Alas, the True Church is dead, and gone
from thence above 1000 years ago, and a monstrons Beast with Ten crowned Horns
is risen up instead thereof: But you proceed to the first Head of your
Distribution, thus.

DISCOURSE.
Apostasy is not only a Renouncing of the Faith of Christ, but of the very
Name and Title of Christianity. No man will say, That the Church of Rome bad
ever such a fall, or fell thus.

ANSWER.
You thus restrain the word Apostasy to the grossest, and deepest degree
thereof, that so you may the better defend your Church from the guilt of this
sin: But there is no necessity so to restrain it; for there may be deep
Apostasy from God, under a name and outside profession of Religion. It is
written of the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3.1. Thou have a name that thou live,
but art dead. Neither the Scripture, nor the original signification of the
Greek word, (...), which signifies a falling away; nor the common and ordinary
use of it, requires that there be in it, a Renouncing of the very Name and
Title of Christianity. It is used in sundry places of Scripture, where no such
Restraint is intimated, as Acts. 21.21. (...), Thou teach the Jews to
forsake Moses. And concerning Antichrist, 1 Timothy 4.1. (...), Some shall
apostatize, or depart from the faith. And again, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. (...), except
there come a falling away first. And, ver. 7. This Apostasy is called, A
Mystery of Iniquity. Therefore it shall not be an open, total, professed
Apostasy, but partial, and palliated over with fair umbrages, and plausible
pretensions, else why is it called, A Mystery of Iniquity, and Mystical
Babylon? Nor do you indeed your own selves, always use the word Apostasy
only in that gross sense; for you scruple not to bestow the title of Apostate,
as well as Heretic, upon Luther, and the Protestant Churches; though neither
he, nor we, ever did, nor through grace, ever will Renounce the Name and Title
of Christianity.

Cyprian, warning the Saints, and people of God, in his time, to take heed of
spiritual and sitbtile Delusions, Cypr. De Vnitate Ecclefia.
open and professed persecution being not their only danger: He shows, how
Satan perceiving, that by the large diffusion, and spreading of Gospel Light,
Pagan Idolatry, and their Temples were much forsaken: Excogitavit novam
fraudem, ut sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo fallat Incautos: He has
bethought himself of a new deceit, whereby to mislead unwary Souls; under the
very Name, and Title of Christianity. Satan (says he) transforming himself
into an Angel of light, and suborning his Ministers, as Ministers of
righteousness, bringing night for day, Antichristum, sub vocabulo Christi.
Antichrist, under the name of Christ. The Church of Israel, in the time of her
Apostasy, did not Renounce the very Name and Title of Jehovah; but they did
worship, and swear by the Lord, and by Malcham too, Zephan. 1.5. So those
mungrel Samaritans, 2 Kings 17.33, 41. They professed, Ezra. 4.2. We seek your
God, as you do; as fair a pretension as any your Church can make: And in
Christ's time, they had some confused notions and expectations of the Messiah,
John 4.29. They had learned to say, our father Jacob, as well as you can say
Saint Peter, John. 4.12.

So in like manner the Church of Rome, though She has not Renounced the very
Name and Title of Christianity, yet She is deeply guilty of Apostasy from God,
diverse other ways, both in her Head and Members; She is, and may be called an
Apostate Church, as having fallen away from the Faith and Doctrine of the
Gospel, by fundamental Unbelief, Ignorance and Herefie, and from Gospel
obedience, by the most abominable profaneness of life, by the grossest kind of
sins, and scandals against all the Ten Commandments; concerning which, you
prudently forbear to say any thing, but concerning the former head, viz.
Apostasy from the Faith: Your Defense is this.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature of Heresy.
DISCOURSE.
Heresy is an adbesion to some private, and singular Opinion, or Error in
Faith, contrary to the general and approved Doctrine of the Church. If Rome did
ever adhere to any such Opinion, etc. By what General Council was it ever
condemned? Which of the Fathers ever wrote against Her? Or by what Authority
was She ever Reproved?

ANSWER.
This Description of Heresy, and the Queries grounded thereupon, as they are
not agreeable, either to the Scriptural, or Ecclesiastical sense, and use of
the Word; so they are indeed no better than a begging of the thing in question
between you and us: For you know we hold, That the Rule whereby to judge of
Heresy, is the Scripture, and not the Opinions of Churches, of Fathers, Mr.
Gales Idea of Jansenism Histor. and dogmat. Part. 2. Sect. 28. p. 157.
or Councils. Tertullian makes it the Badge of an Heretic to decline the
Scriptures; he says, They are Noctue and Lucifugae Scripturarum: Night Owls,
that do not love the light of that Sun; yea, some of your own Church, who are
the pars sanion thereof (if yet they be of you) have said, That it is an
Herefie to judge of Heresies, without the Word of God. So the Jansenists.

And the Reason why the generality of Papists, are so desirous to derline the
Scripture, is, because they are conscious to themselves, that it is against
them, as Mr. White has well observed (...) of Brisom, White 's way to the
Church, Sect. 7. Numb. 8.

Bristow Motiv. ult. Canus loc. lib. 3. cap. 3.

Confil. Episc. Bononi Congreg. Anno 1553. De stabilienda Roman. Eccles. Fol. 5.


who teaching his Scholar, how to deal with a Protestant, (...) (...) proud
Heretic out of his weak and false Castle of unely Scripturs, into the plain
field of Traditions, Miracles, Councils, and Fathers; and then, like Cowards,
They shall not stand. Another Papist says, There is more strength is confine
Heretics in Traditions, than in the Scriptures; yea, all Disputations with
them must be determined, by Traditions. Those Reverend Fathers of your Church,
that met at Bononia, by the Popes appointment, to consult of the means for
establishing of the Church of Rome (or healing the Wound of the Daughter of
Babel) in the counsel they gave to Pope Julius the Third, They do confess,
Certe vix umbram quandam retinemus in nostris Ecclesus ejus Doctrinae, and
Disciplinae quae Apostolorum temporibus floruerunt, and prorsus aliam
accersivimus. The truth is, we searce retain a shadow in our Churches of that
Doctrine and Discipline which flourished in the Apostles times, but we have
brought in altogether another. There was no mention, Fol. 2.
say they (for we may confess the Truth to your Holiness, but it must he kept
close) either of Popes or Cardinals in the Apostles times, nor of some years
after. There were no Monasteries, nor Priors, nor Abbots, much less were there
these Doctrines, these Laws, these Customs, no nor that Empire which now we
enjoy over several people and Nations. They say further, That the not studying
the Canon Law, and Sophistry, and Metaphysics, etc. Fol 5.
But learning the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, and examining Translations, by the
Greek and Hebrew verity, has been the cause and fountain of the late decay of
the Church of Rome, and of the deplorable state and condition of her Affairs at
this day. And finally, which they reserve to the last place, as the weightiest
of all their ghostly counsels, They advise, That as little as may be of the
Gospel, Fol. penult.
be read amongst the people in their vulgar Tongue: For, hic ille in summa est
liber, qui praeter caeteros hasce nobis tempestates acturbines conciliavit,
quibus, prope abrepti sumus. For this is in brief, That Book, which above all
others, has raised, and brought upon us these storms and whirlewinds, by which
we are almost carried away headlong: Thus speak they. It appears by all this,
wherefore it is that you love not the Scripture, even because it restifies
against you: For he that does evil, hates the light; and comes not to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved, John 3.16, 20.

As to the word Heresy, for your mistakes call upon me, to open it a little;
if we look at the notation of it, from (...), capio, eligo, so it signifies any
thing of choice, or option, as Galen, (...), and (...), the Methodical, and the
Empirical way of Physic; when applied to matters of Religion, it imports in
the largest signification, any Sect, or way of Religion that a man makes choice
of, whether true or false: So the Sect (...) of the Sadduces, Acts 5.17. the
Sect of the Pharisees, Acts 15.5. called the most exquisite Sect of our
Religion, Acts 26.5. the Sect of the Nazarens, Acts 24.5. the word is (...),
Herefie, in all these places. But it is frequently restrained by a Synecdothe,
to signify a false Religion, as some other words, ex gr. Tyrannus magnus, etc.
which are commonly taken in deteriorem partem: Thus Epiphanius seems to take
it in his Book of Eighty Heresies, where he numbers Barbarism, Seythism,
Stoicism, Platonism, etc. amongst Heresies. But it is commonly restrained yet
more by a further Synecdoche, to such Errors as overthrow the Foundation, and
are obstinately maintained, against Conviction, by persons pretending (in part)
to the True Religion; and so we do not call Pagans, Heretics, but Infidels.
This sense of the word seems to be grounded, on 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. and 2 Pet.
2.1. and Titus 3.10, 11. where the Apostles do distinguish of Doctrines,
comparing some to Hay and Stubble, yet retaining the true foundation: But there
is another sort, which they call, damnable Heresies, or Heresies of perdition,
Soul-destroying Heresies; the Assertors whereof, are subverted, or overturned,
(...), from off the true foundation; and self-condemned, (...), as sinning
against their own light. Now the written Word of God being the only Rule of
True Religion, hence nothing ought to be rejected under the Notion of Heresy,
but what the Scripture does condemn as such, viz. as false, and destructive
unto Souls, and dangerously intrenching upon the very Vitals, and Fundamentals
of Religion.

And if it be demanded of us, What are the Heresies of the Church of Rome, in
this last sense? This is a large Field: Popery, says Dr. Ames, Ames Cas. l. 5.
c. 4. de Haeres:
Non est una aliqua singularis Haeresis, sed quasi corpus quoddam ex variis
Haeresibus conflatum and productum. Sicut enim Mahumetismus est antecedentium
Haeres^^n mixtura, in Orient and Meridie; sic Papismus, quamvis alia specie
variarum Haerese^n sentina est in Occidente and Septentrione. Popery, is not
one single Heresy, but a Sink of many Heresies, a dead Sea, a Sodomitick Lake
of many poisonous and erroneous Opinions. Look, as Mahometism is a mixture of
former Heresies, in the Eastern and Southern Countries; so is Papism (though
under different pretensions) a Sink of many Heresies, in the Western and
Northern parts of the old Roman Empire. Take at present, for I would not leave
things at random, these few Instances of the Heresies your Church has fallen
into. It is easy, seeing you call us to it; it is easy, in the strength of
Christ, in the evidence of his Word and Spirit, to make good the Charge against
Her.

CHAP. IV. Of the Heresies of the Church of Rome, eight particulars instanced.
THe first grand Error of your Church, is this, Your Dethroning and Unlording
the Scripture. It is Christ's own phrase, Matthew. 15.6. and Mark 7.13. by way of
Reproof to your Predecessors, those ancient Papists, the Pharisees, (...),
Unlording the Word of God, through your Tradition. But to this written Word,
did Jesus Christ appeal, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think
to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. We are commanded,
to try the spirits, 1 John 4.1. even by the Rule laid down in that Scripture,
ver. 2. The Bereans are commended by the Holy Ghost, as Christians of the right
breed, (...), because they would not take the Apostles Doctrine upon trust, but
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many of
them believed, Acts 17 11, 12. But with you, it is a Nose of Wax, attramentary
Divinity, of no more Authority in it self, than Aesop's Fables, or Titus
Livius, but that your Church has christened it for Scripture; but yet She
tells us withal, That we must receive Her Traditions, Pari pietatis affectu,
and reverentia, Council. Trident. S ss. 4. Decret. 1.
with as much pious affection and reverence, as we receive the Scripture. So
your Tridentine Council. It is lamentable to consider, how many Bibles you have
burnt, and how many Christians you have burnt alive, for having Bibles, and
laboring to acquaint themselves therewith. In King Henry the Eighth's time,
those of you, who then had, the conduct of Affairs in England, did cause to be
put forth a public and authentic Instrument, for the abolishing, and
inhibiting of the Scriptures, wherein, ye thus express your selves, Da^ed. May
24. 1531.
That for as much as there is ingendered an Opinion in diverse of his Subjects,
that it is his Graces duty to cause the Scripture of God to be Translated into
the English Tongue, to be communicated unto the people. -- It appears, That
the having of the whole Scripture in English, is not necessary to christen men,
Fox, Acts and Mon. Vor. 2. E^it. 1641.
the divulging of the Scripture at this time in the English Tongue to be
committed to the people, considering such pestilent Books, and so evil
Opinions, as be now spread among them, should rather be to their further
confusion and destruction, than to the edification of their Souls. Thus you
said, and did your worst, but you could not hinder the Sun from rising, at its
appointed hour; nor frustrate the Oath of him, who swear, that (your) time
should be no longer, and he gave the book to his servants to prophecy again,
Rev. 10. ver. 6, 9, 11.

This wretched neglect, and contempt of the Scripture, is the (...), the very
corner stone of the Tower of Babel. We look upon it as the first and chief of
all your Heresies, and the source and fountain of all the rest: Ye do err, not
knowing the Scripture, Matt. 22.29. For there is a self-evidencing light and
majesty in the Scripture, it bears the stamp and impress of the Divine
Attributes upon it; which he that sees not, must needs be blind, as to other
Truths also: As he that cannot see the Sun, when it shines at Noonday, can see
nothing else; he that cannot hear the voice of Thunder, is not like to be
awakened, by a silent whisper.

2. The Authority, and Infallibility of your Church and Pope, as if they were
not men, but gods; for, humanum est errare: Let God be true, and every man a
liar, Romans 3.4. This is the great Idol that you set up against the Scripture,
and consequently against God himself; for the Scripture is God speaking to
Mankind: Hence it is written of Antichrist, that he exalts himself, above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God, sits in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 2 Theff. 2.4. He takes upon him
to dispense even with the Laws of God; therefore it is made the brand of a
Reprobate, to worship the Beast, Revel. 13.8. And the Lord denounces and
thunders forth damnation to them, Reve 14.9, 10, 11. The smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever; and their doom is just, for they make a god of
him; for, put case the Pope should err, and go to Hell, Bell. De summo Pontif.
lib. 4. cap. 5.
Bellarmine would fain make us believe, that we are bound in conscience to go
with him, for thus he speaks: Si Papa exraret praecipiendo vitia vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona and virtutes
malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare. If the Pope should err in
commanding Vices, and forbidding Virtues, the Church were bound to believe that
Vice is good, and that Virtue is evil, unless she would fin against her
Conscience. Here is sweet Catholic Doctrine, is it not? yet such stuff as
this, is of such value, with you, that the same Bellarmine says, Bell.
Praefatin li^res ^e Fortif.
Qua de re agitur, cum de primatu Pontificis agitur? brevissime dicam, de summa
rei Christianae; The Primacy of the Pope, says he, is the sum of Christian
Religion, he means Antichristian.

3. Your arrogant Attributions, to corrupted Free Will, in derogation to the
sovereignty and efficacy of converting and electing Grace, yea, to the utter
corrupting and undermining of sundry great Gospel Truths, as Election,
Regeneration, Assurance, Perseverance; your Free Will, is an Error that draws a
soul tail after it: But the Scripture says, We are not born again of the will
of man, but of his own will he begat us, John 1.13. James 1.18. So then, it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs; it is neither Free will, nor
good Works, but it is of God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. When thou wast in
thy blood, yea, when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, Live, Ezekiel.
16.6. Which is that that fills the hearts of his people, with such admiring and
adoring thoughts of the freedom, and sovereignty, and efficacy of his grace.
That gratia vorti-cordia, as Austin speaks, that wonderful heart-changing
grace, that slayes the enmity, subdues the heart, and turns the will; who was
before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy. --
Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and
glory, for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Unto him that has
loved us, and washed us from our sins, with his own blood, and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him be glory and dominion, for
ever and ever, Amen, Revel. 1.5.6. But he that thinks he is converted, and does
not sing his Hallelujahs and Songs of salvation, for it, to this King Eternal,
Immortal, Invisible, and to the Lamb that was slain, and to the power of his
Spirit, but to his own corrupted will: As he sets the Crown upon his own head,
and robs God of his glory, as if he were not Master, and sovereign disposer of
his own gifts and graces, so he does thereby give in evidence against himself,
that he never knew the grace of God in truth; The whole work of our salvation
is both begun and carried on, by free grace alone, from first to last; from the
foundation thereof, in election to the topstone of glorification, the Saints
cry grace, grace unto it, Zach. 4.7. That as sin has reigned unto death, even
so grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 5. ult.

4. Your Justification by the merit of good Works, to the infinite dishonor of
the grace and blood of Christ, and to the keeping of afflicted Consciences upon
the rack of everlasting perplexity and trouble: for Conscience once effectually
awakened, will never be pacified, but by the blood of Christ, for we are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
Romans 3.24. When you have done all those things that are commanded you, say we
are but unprofitable servants, and where then is merit? Luke 17.7, 8, 9, 10.
There is iniquity even in our holy things, Exodus 28.38. Our best Duties are in
part defiled, and mixed with sin. The very tears of Repentance need washing
with the blood of Christ. Therefore well did Austin pray, Lava Lachrymas meas
Domine. You can allow the righteousness of a mere man, or of a woman, of a
Monk, or a Nun, to be imputed and reckoned to another, as in your
Supererogations, and yet cavil at the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

This is a Truth of so great weight, that Luther called it, Articulus stantis
aut cadentis Ecclesiae, the very Crisis and chief Indication of the Churches
state, she stands or falls with this Truth. And as the Scripture describes the
Protestant Reformation by their standing upon the Sea of glass, as spiritual
Priests, washing themselves in the Righteousness of Christ, and making their
Robes white with the blood of the Lamb, whereof the molten Sea and Lavers of
the Temple were a Type, Revel. 4.6. and 7.14. and 15.2. So indeed it was upon
this grand Truth, and Principle of the Gospel, Dr. Grew of Justification.
Preface.
as Dr. Grew has well observed, That Luther, that Champion of the Lord, did
pitch the Field against you: And well he might, for the Apostle doubts not to
tell the Galathians when corrupted here, That Christ was become of none effect
to them, and that they were fullen from grace, and turned to another Gospel,
Galat. 5.4. and 1.6. Our Justification by the blood of Christ, and our
Regeneration by his Spirit, being the two main parts of those glad tidings of
the Gospel, by which it refreshes and gives rest to weary Souls. And therefore
to deny these, or to ascribe them to other causes, as to our own Wills or
Works, as it is to send distressed Souls to the Brooks of Teman in a day of
drought, and unto Waters that fail; so it is to reject at once, both the Blood
of the Covenant, and also the Spirit of the Covenant of Grace, and so to turn
both Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, as it were, out of Office: For, it is a
Truth as firm as the foundations of the Earth, and as immovable as the Pillars
of Heaven, that it is the peculiar work and glory, both of the blood of Christ,
to justify and reconcile, and of his Spirit to convert, and apply that
precious blood: And seeing the riches of his Free Grace appears, and shines
forth exceeding gloriously, in these influences of his blood and Spirit into
our salvation; therefore to detract from these, by founding it in our own Wills
or Works, is to eclipse the glory of his Grace. From all which, you may see the
danger of both these Errors of your Church, there being nothing wherein the
enmity of corrupt Nature against the Gospel, does more directly work out and
vent it self, like the venom of Asps, and as the poison of Dragons, then in
these delusions, of Conversion by your own Wills, and Justification by your own
Works.

5. A fifth pernicious Error of the Roman Church, is Idolatry, and Superstition
of all sorts, contrary to the very Letter of the Second Commandment: As
worshipping Images, praying to Saints and Angels, your Cake-Idol, or
Breaden-god; Your Sacrilege of the Cup in the Lords Supper; Your five
supernumerary Sacraments; Your Latin-Service; Your Superstitious, or Religious
Orders, as you call them; Your prohibition of of Meats and Marriage; Your Holy
Water, Relics, Pilgrimages, etc. As it were on every high Hill, and under
every green Tree, has that Idolatrous Church played the Harlot; whereby she
scandaliseth and hardens both Jews and Turks against the Gospel: Yea, she
has corrupted and intoxicated almost all the Churches in the world, with this
sin, and made all Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her Fornication,
for which the Holy Ghost brands her, as THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, Revel. 17.5. and
18.3. Yea, though she has seen the jealousy, and the fury of her Husband,
against her treacherous sister Judah, yet she fears not. I mean, the
desolations of the Eastern Churches, by those Instruments of his fury, those
Angels of his wrath, whom the Lord has let loose upon them, from about the
River Euphrates; the Turks, who have destroyed and subjugated a third part of
the Christian world for this sin, yet she repents not, being besotted, and
dead drunk with the poison of her own Fornications, and given up to a reprobate
sense; she has a heart that cannot repent of such a Church-destroying, such a
God-provoking sin, as was prophesied of her in the sixth Trumpet, Revel. 9.13.
-- 20. The Learned Raynolds has spoken very convictingly to you, concerning
this sin, in his Book, De Idololatria Romanae Ecclesiae: And so has Mede, of
the Apostasy of the latter Times.

6. All your seditious Principles against Kings and Magistrates, exempting your
Clergy, exalting your Pope above them. The number of those you thus exempt, as
sous of Belial from the yoke, has been estimated to amount in spacious Popish
Countries, to a very great proportion, even to an Hundred thousand able
fighting Men in one Nation; which brings to mind that expression of your own
Pope Gregory, That Antichrist has an Army of Priests to fight his Battles. Rex
superbiae prope est, and quod dici^nesas est, Greg. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
Sacerdotum praeparatus est exercitus qui cervici militant elatioms, etc. The
King of pride (says he) is at the door, and which is dreadful to be spoken,
there is an Army of Priests ready to fight under that neck of pride which
lifts up it self, etc. The fifth Trumpet proclaims, that he has a black
Guard of Scorpion-locusts, who know no other King but him whom the Holy Ghost
has named according to his Nature, Abaddon, and Apollyon, the great Destroyer,
the Son of Perdition, the Man of Sin, Revel. 9. ver. 3, 11. And as you thus rob
and spoil Kings of their Subjects, so you make Kings themselves Subjects to the
Pope, exalting his Throne with Lucifer, above the stars of God, Isa. 14.13. And
giving him such a barbarous power over them, that it is a wonderful and
unaccountable thing that ever any King or Magistrate should be a Papist; no
account can be given of it, but the strange corruption of Nature, neither their
Crowns, nor Lives, being secure, but merely at the Popes courtesy, upon the
principles of that Religion, which gives a foreign Priest power to depose
them, and give away their Kingdoms.

But the Apostle Peter, a great Apostle, and whom you pretend a kindness, and a
respect for, he exhorts us to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake; to the King as supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13. But not a word of the Popes
Supremacy. And the Apostle Paul, though an Apostle, yet did appeal unto Caesar,
as knowing that to be the supreme Tribunal on earth in subordination unto God,
for God alone is chief, and the Magistrates power subordinate unto Gods, Acts
25.10, 11. and 5.29. And he exhorts every soul, which includes the Pope, if
he has an humane soul, to be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. ver. 1. to
7. There may be passive obedience when men cannot act, therefore we whom you
call Heretics, have set it down as amongst the Articles of our Faith, that
Infidelity, or difference in Religion, does not make void the Magistrates just
and legal Authority, nor free the people from their obedience to him, from
which Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted, much less has the Pope any
power, or Jurisdiction over them in their Dominions, or over any of their
people, and least of all to deprive them of their Dominions or Lives, if he
shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon any other pretense whatsoever; yea,
some of your own have confessed, That from the beginning it was not so. (...)
Julio. 3^^ 2. B.
Quin omnes emnium Ecclesiarum Ministri, Romanae non minus quam caeterarum
ultro Regibus Principibus ac Magistratibus parebant. But all the Ministers of
all the Churches, yea, of the Church of Rome, as well as any other, were
willingly obedient unto Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. So those Bononian
Fathers of yours before mentioned. How, and by what means, Morney Mist. Iniq.
per totum: Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. pa. 1018.
and by what steps and degrees, the Pope rose from such mean beginnings, to
such an height of worldly power and grandeur, to tread upon the Necks of Kings
and Princes, Guiccardin has fully showed in his digression, toward the end of
the fourth Book of his Histories, which you have honestly stolen away out of
some Editions, but in some others it is restored. Morney also speaks fully to
it, as being a great part of his scope, and so does Mr. Fox.

7. Your sanguinary Spirit and Principles, toward such as differ from, and
testify against you: Wherein there is not only an evil in practice, but your
practice being justified as lawful by your principle, it is two sins conjoined,
it is both Murder and Heresy, and most remote from the Spirit of the Gospel,
which is a Spirit of love and sweetness; yea, it is a principal character of
Antiohrist, and mark of the Beast, Revel. 13.7. and 17.6. The Revelation often
mentions these two sins, the Sorceries and Fornications of your false Worship,
and your shedding innocent and precious blood, as the two grand procuring
causes of your Ruin: See Revel. 18.2. ult. and Revel. 19.2.

It is Ramus his Observation, that great Light, and faithful Martyr of Jesus
Christ, whom you slew, with Thirty thousand more, in your great Parisian
Massacre in the year 1572. P: Rami Commentar. de Religione Christiana. Lib. 4.
cap. 19. page 546.
It is his Observation and Lamentation, How that Julian the Apostate could
observe, and testify concerning the Christian Religion, in those primitive
times, That it came to be so largely diffused and propagated, by means of the
good turns and offices of love, which Christians did toward all men of what
Religion, or persuasion soever: But we, in these days (we Romanists) are of
such a spirit, that if our Neighbor do not consent, and concur, and run along
with us in every superstitious practice and opinion, we presently burn him
alive. Julianus Apostata ad Arsacium Cappadociae Pontificem scripsit,
Christianam Religionem tam late propagatam esse propter Christianorum erga
omnet cujusvis Religionis mortales beneficentiam. Nos vero, nisi de cujussibet
superstitionis opinione proximus noster consentiat, igne vivum protinus
exurimus. You have slain (as some compute) a greater number of Christians fince
the first setting up of your Inquisition, than there be Papists at this day in
the World. -- Quis talia fando
Temperet a Lachrymis?
Who that has either the grace of a Christian, or but the common bowels of a
man, can speak of such things, without bleeding Lamentations! Alstedins
observes, That in the space of Forty years, Alsted Encyclop. Chronol. cap. 8.
ad Annum 1540.
from the year 1540, there were Nine hundred thousand Martyrs in Europe. Should
we Travel into Foreign Affairs, and former Ages, I might tell you of your
bloody Croisadoes against Christians, instead of Turks, against the Waldenses,
and Abbingenses of old, as well of late, your Spanish Inquisitions, to which
King Philip the second, delivered up his own eldest Son and Heir Charles, to be
butchered and murdered by them, for suspicion of savouring the Low Country
Heretics. Your French Massacres, and Thyestaean Feasts and Nuptials, at which
you have drank more Blood, than Wine! The barbarous Spanish Butcheries in the
Netherlands: And with how much blood your Romish Faith was planted in the
West Indies, to the infinite scandal and dishonor of the Name of Christ, even
in the blood of Nineteen Millions of poor innocent Natives, as Acosta, the
Jesuit, a Bird of your Nest, as some have Noted, Relates the story. But to
come nearer home, there were near about Three hundred slain, and burnt alive in
England, in Queen Mary's time: And in the late Massacre and Rebellion here in
Ireland, there were about Three hundred thousand English Protestants murdered
by you, whereof above one half, above One hundred and fifty thousand in the
first six Months of that Rebellion, most perfidiously and treacherously, in a
time of Peace, without ever declaring War, and without any provocation given.

These be some of the Heresies, and false Doctrines of your Church; Rev. 17.3.5.
some of the Blasphemies written in the Forehead of Mystical Babylon, which she
owneth and maintains in an open and avowed manner.

8. But I have not here mentioned her consequential Errors, because they are
innumerable. For thus, there is no sound part in her, but from the sole of the
foot, even to the crown of the head, there is nothing but wounds, and bruises,
and putrefying sores. Thus, she is at defiance even with common sense and
reason; she will not believe the report of three senses, in the business of the
carnal presence: For as the Apostle calls it, This bread, this bread, this
bread, three times after the Consecration, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. So the eye
says it is bread, the taste, the touch say the same, she sees it, feels it,
and tastes it; but yet she believes there is no bread there, which is to lay
aside the use of reason, and to turn Sott and Sceptick. The madness of which
delusion, did so scandalize Averroes, the Arabian Philosopher, that when they
asked him upon his Deathbed, What Religion he dyed in? He gave this Answer,
Quia Christiani manducant Deum suum, and adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea
cum Philosophis: Because the Christians eat their God with their teeth, and
worship that which they eat, let my soul be with the Philosophers. But having
heard of the glorious Name and Fame of Christ, and Christianity, it had been
his Duty, and would have been his Happiness, to have made a through search into
the Fountain of that Religion, which is the Scriptures of Truth; and there he
might have found, that this abominable Idolatry, is no part at all of the
Christian Religion, but of the Antichristian Apostasy, of the Mother of
Harlots; yea, there is hardly any Article of the Christian Faith, which she
does not some way or other, by evident and unavoidable consequence, corrupt and
subvert: As for instance, she denies by consequence that Christ is come in the
flesh, which is one of the Characters of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3. She denies the
Reality of the Humane Nature of Christ, by her Transubstantiation; for she
leaves him only a Fantastic, or Imaginary body, having not the true Nature,
and dimensions of a body; yea, she does impugn and subvert, by true and sound
consequence of Reason, that great Fundamental, of One God: As was ingeniously
made out, by an English Gentleman, a Protestant, in discourse with a Roman
Catholic, thus; That is not the true Religion, that does not acknowledge One
God, but Popery does not acknowledge One God: For did you not pray to the
Virgin Mary this morning? The Roman Catholic replied, Yes: To which the
Protestant made this Return, And did not Five thousand pray to her at the same
time? The Papist answered, Yes, doubtless. From whence the Protestant inferred,
Then either you prayed like a Fool, or else she heard you all, and knows all
your hearts; but this is to make her a God.

These therefore, are some of the Roman Heresies; Her dethroning the Scripture;
The Popes Infallibility; Conversion by Free Will; Justification by Works;
Idolatry and Superstition; Her seditious Principles; Her sanguinary Principles;
Her consequential Errors: Yet this is but a general and brief induction of them.

But now do you ask, Who ever testified against her? Proh pudorem tuum!
Although if no man had, yet that is no sufficient evidence of her Innocence;
the cause does not depend upon this: But yet withal you know, if you know any
thing of the Histories of the Church, in former times, That the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, have been testified against, all along by
faithful men, whom God has raised up from Age to Age, to be the Witnesses of
his Truth; for the Lord gave his two Witnesses light, and grace, and power, to
prophecy in sackcloth 1260 days, Revel. 11.3. There was a Woman in the
Wilderness, when Antichrist was upon the Throne, Revel. 12.14. There were
Saints, whom the Beast did persecute and war against, during all the time of
his Reign, Revel. 13.7. Would you know their names (...) you may see some of
them, in diverse of our Divines, and Writers, who have taken the pains to
present you with Instances and Catalogues of some of the chief, and most
eminent. And common Reason will easily suggest unto you, That if there were so
many left upon Record, there must needs be many more, whose names, the
Histories of former times have not preserved, and delivered down to posterity:
But you may see a competent number of Witnesses against you, in the Centurists
of Magdeburg in Flacius Illyricus his Catalogus testium veritatis: Morney his
History of the Papacy, or Mystery of Iniquity. Fox his Book of Martyrs.
Raynolds his Conference with Heart. Sundry of our Expositors on the Revelation.
See Mr. Arthur Dent on Chap. 11. White's way to the Church. Usher against
Maloone: And of the Religion anciently professed by the Irish, and British, and
de statu and successione Eccles. Brittanicarum: Yea, your own Bellarmine gives
some account of those that have even from the primitive times, opposed and
impugned the Primacy of the Church of Rome, though he does it briefly, and
defectively enough; for he omits, besides other things, all the African Bishops
and Councils, Bell: Praefat. in libros de Pontif. This may suffice at present,
as to the Errors and Heresies of your Church. Your next endeavor, is to defend
her, from the charge of Schism: Let us proceed, in the strength and grace of
Christ, to consider that also.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Schism, and of the Schisms of the Church of Rome,
both within her self, and from other Churches.
DISCOURSE.
SChism is a departure or division from the Unity of the Church, whereby the
band and communion held with some former Church, is broken and dissolved. If
ever the Church of Rome divided Her self by Schism, from any other body of
faithful Christians, or broke communion, or went forth from the society of any
elder Church, I pray satisfy your self and me in these particulars. First,
Whose company did she leave? Secondly, From what body did she go forth? Where
was the true Church which she forsook? And the same thing is repeated again, a
second and a third time in your Paper.

ANSWER.
You do here again, as before, in your description of Apostasy and Heresy,
describe the thing amiss, that you may the better ward off the blow, and de^^^^
your Church; Not that we desire to strive with you about words, but as they do
involve erroneous, and undue apprehensions of things: Be it granted, That
Schism is a rent, or a breach of that Unity that Christ has appointed in his
Church; and so as Heresy denies the Faith, Schism destroys (...) of the
Gospel; but your description of it fails in (...).

I. There may be Schism in a Church within it self: The Apostle several times
uses this word, in this Epistle to the Corinthians, as 1 Cor. 1.10. and cap.
11.18. and cap. 12.25. I hear, says he, that, when you come together in the
Church, there be (...), divisions, or schisms among you: Though that any of
them did break off from the communion of the Church, does not appear; but there
were carnal contendings and strivings within, and among themselves, rending and
tearing one another, which the Apostle there calls Rents or Schisms.

II. There may be Schism from another Church, contemporary and coexistent, as
well as from a Church praeexistent. There is no necessity, that it must be only
from a former Elder Church; yea, an Elder Church may be guilty of Schism from a
younger, and from those that were her own Members, if she break the bond of
love and order with them, by her own corruptions, and persecutions. It is the
apostatizing, persecuting Church, that makes the rent, and is guilty of the
Schism, and not the Reforming party, who are driven out by them.

Now to apply these things a little to the Church of Rome she may be charged
with Schism upon all these Accounts: The plain truth is, she is the most
Schismatical Church in the World, both within her self, and in reference to
other Churches also a the evidence whereof is so notorious, that if I were a
Roman Catholic, I would tell you, That it was very unhappily, and unadvisedly
done of you, to mention this business of Schism, in a Paper of Dispute offered
by you to the Heretics.

For first, within her self. Her intestine Schisms and Divisions have been so
many, that it would make this Paper swell into a Volume, Bell: Praef. in Libr.
de Pontif.
to number them all up unto you. It is Bellarmines own concession, though he
labors also to cover this nakedness with a Fig leaf, That there were Schismata
gravissima and plurima ipsorum interase Romanorum Pontificum. Very grievous,
and very many Schisms, Voet. Disp. Vol. 2. Dis. 43. p.
even of the Popes of Rome amongst themselves. Voetius refers you to Mayer's
Book, of the Six and twenty Schisms of the Church and See of Rome; 689. Onuphr.
Roman. Pontif. and Cardinal. ad Annum Christi 1378.
but your own Onuphrius reckons up no less than Twenty nine Schisms in the
Church of Rome: And of the Twenty eighth in the time of Clement the seventh, he
says, it was Pessimum and diuturnum Schisma, omnisque Res-publica Christiana
divisa. A most wicked and long lasting Schism; for it lasted, as he says, no
less than One and fifty years together, and the whole Christian world was
divided by it; the French, Spaniards, and others, following Clement the
seventh; but Germany, Hungary, England, and part of Italy, followed Urban the
sixth. Moreover, Anno Christi circiter 897. etc.
to mention another instance among so many, the Schisms were so violent between
Pope Stephanus, and Pope Formosus, and their Successors, That they did nothing
but do, and undo; Ratify, and Rescind the Acts and Decrees of one another.
Stephanus, for his part, he Rescinds the Decrees of Formosus, and like a quiet,
and peaceable man, digs him up out of his Grave, cuts off his Fingers, etc. But
Pope Romanus, and Theodorus, and John the Tenth, disannulled the Acts of
Stephen, and approved Formosus: Yet after these, comes Sergius the third, who
digs up Formosus his dead body once more, cuts off his Head, casts it into
Tyber, Rescinds his Decrees. Now the Question is, Which of them shall we
believe? for, Bell. de Pontif. lib 4. cap. 12.
they were all infallible. Bellarmine determines, That Stephanus and Sergius
were in the Error, and so like an Heretic he takes upon him to judge the Pope:
And as you have Popes and Antipopes, so you have Councils against Councils; for
instance, V. Calvis. Chr^nol. ad annum: 1437.
your Councils of Constanoe and Basil have defined, That the Council is above
the Pope. Quod nisi est, quis unquam Romano Pontifici quamvis improbissimo
contradicerei? Which if it be not so, Who would ever gainsay the Pope, though
never so wicked, say they of Basil in their Bull, Jan. 17. 1438. But Pope Leo,
and the Council of Lateran, have determined the contrary. And here again, Bell.
de Conciliorum authoritate. lib. 2. cap. 19. and de Eceles. militante. lib. 3.
cap. 16.
Bellarmine takes upon him to determine between the dissenting Popes and
Councils, and plonounceth that of Basil, as soon as Antichrist was angry with
them, to be but Conciliabulum, etc. But, in the mean time, your boastings of a
Supreme, Infallible, Visible Judge amongst you, to end your Controversies, are
to much purpose, unless Bellarmine be he; but he is dead, and who succeeds him
in the Office, I cannot tell. And, I wonder, What became of your uninterrupted
Succession all this while, during all these Broils and Schisms? And where is
your P^^c^ and Unity among your selves? When Bellarmine almost upon every
Controversy, reports the contrary Opinions of your own Doctors, some of which
he condemns very severely. Voet. Disp. part. 2 inventar. Eccles. Roman. p. 689.
I have not told them how many they be, but Voetius says, He mentions no less
than Two hundred contrary Opinions amongst your own Writers, which your
Infallible Judge (as it seems) has not determined to this day. I might here
mention, as signal Instances thereof, The sharp Contests, and Digladiations
between your Dominicans and Franciscans, and Jesuits, about the power and
interests of Free Will, and Free Grace, and the influence thereof into man's
Conversion and Predestination; and about the immaculate Conception of the
blessed Virgin Mary, about which your Trent Council durst not give a clear
definitive sentence, but speaks ambiguously, like the Delphick Oracles of old:
As also the Contests between your French Sorbonists, and your Hildebrandine
Parasites of the Court of Rome, about the pragmatick Sanction of the Council of
Basil, the Liberties of the Gallican Church, the power of Popes, in reference
to Councils and Magistrates, etc. Nor, indeed, do I know any one point, wherein
you differ from the Protestants, wherein you are agreed amongst your selves:
Your very Council of Trent, though approved by the Pope, yet is rejected by the
French Papists unto this day. This is your peace and unity amongst your selves,
whereof you use to boast so much; Nothing, forsooth, but Mufick and Harmony,
made up of Discords.

Secondly, As to other Churches. There be Churches both elder and younger, and
contemporary with the Roman, and some of her own sounder Members, with all
which she has broke communion; And they are not fugitivi, but fugati; it is
not they, but she that has made the breach, because she does impose such
conditions of communion upon them, as they cannot lawfully submit unto; viz. To
receive all her Errors, and submit their Consciences to her, and her Head as
Infallible and Supreme.

If we look back to the first times of your Apostasy, there were first, all
the Churches and Christians, without the bounds of the Roman Empire, as in
India, Perfia, etc. Secondly, the Grecian Churches, which were one half of that
Empire, one Leg of Daniels Image, Dan. 2. which took the Alarm very early, and
refused the primacy of Rome, and stood upon their guard against her. Thirdly,
the African Churches did the same. Fourthly, All those suffering Churches and
Christians, that were oppressed under, and by the Papacy, as living within the
reach of the Popes power.

Or, if we consider the present state of things, at this day, and in this Age,
wherein we live, there be very many, with whom the Church of Rome, has broke
communion: As for instance, All the Christians in Asia, and Africa, except some
late Colonies of Papists: All the Grecian Churches in Europe: All those that
are under the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem,
Russia, and Muscovia. Also the Protesant Churches and Kingdoms, and many that
lie hid under the Dominions of Popish Princes, who sigh, and mourn, and groan
under the Abominations of the Papacy. Sir Edwin Sands, Sir E S. Europae
Speculum, or view of the state of Religion in Western parts, page 76. and 187.
who was a great Traveller, and a very intelligent person, his computation in
Q. Elizabeth's time, was, That about one half of the Popes Dominions, were
fallen from him, and become Protestants, five of the Ten horns have begun to
hate the Whore; And you know how that since those days, you have not been
gaining, but rather losing ground; insomuch, that when all Accounts are cast
up, both of those who were never subject to the Pope, and those who have shaken
off his yoke, it will be found, That the Church of Rome is not a third part of
the Christian world. All these Companies she has left, and gone out from all
these Bodies, and Societies of Christians; hence therefore:

1. It is a strange Question for you to ask, Whose Company she has left? For
you cannot but know, if you know any thing at all of these matters, that there
is a far greater number of Christians out of her Communion and Jurisdiction,
than are within it.

2. This renders her assuming and monopolizing to her self, the name and title
of the Catholic Church, in opposition to all other Churches out of her
Communion, not only false, but extremely vain, and (in plain terms) ridiculous:
For is she the whole Catholic Church, who is not a third part of it? Or
rather, is not this a piece of Schismatical pride and arrogance in her? the
very same with the Donatists of old, who did unchurch all others but
themselves, and so do you, which is not the Spirit of the Gospel, but rather an
evidence against you, that you have neither part nor lot in this matter, and
that your hearts are not right in the fight of God, which are so full of the
gall of bitterness, and sharp censoriousness. Ravn. 6. Concluso Concl, 5. pa.
687.
It further confirms that which has been long ago demonstrated unto you, by
that Learned Raynolds, That the Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, nor
yet a sound Member of the Catholic Church.

And so much for the Apostasies, Heresies, and Schisms of your Church; The next
thing in your paper is this:

CHAP. VI. Some places of Scripture for the Inerrability of the Church of Rome,
Answered.
DISCOURSE.
THe usual color of believing more or less, than the Church allows, is vain
and erroneous; inasmuch, as that very Christ, that stored her with knowledge of
Gods revealed Truth, and with power to convey the same, has also endued her
with Inerrability to convey the same justly, without danger of miscarrying,
against Ignorance. To you it is given to know the mysteries of heaven, Matt.
13.11. Against darkness; Ye are the light of the world, Matt. 5.14. Against
error and falsehood; I will send unto you the Spirit of truth, to remain with
you for ever, John 14.16. Against weakness; She is the pillar and ground of
truth, 1 Timothy 3. Hell-gates shall not prevail against her, Matt. 16.18, etc.

ANSWER.
Now to examine the Contexture of this Discourse, though something might be
said, both to the Grammar, and Logic of it, nor the soundness and sense of
those distinctions you seem to make between Ignorance and Darkness (for what is
moral Darkness, but Ignorance?) and Error and Falsehood, etc. Your Scope is, to
assert the Authority, and Inerrability of your Church, as the supreme Rule of
Faith and Obedience. But what you mean by the Church, whether Popes, or General
Councils, you say not, you know your Writers are divided about it. But to the
Scriptures you allege, we need not (as you say we must) but through the help
of his grace, we will not impeach either the power or faithfulness of Christ;
but there be three other things, which we may truly, and fitly say to you
concerning those Scriptures.

1. That you do not show particularly, where their pertinency lies, or how you
would apply them to the point you aim at, they being in their plain and genuine
sense, most remote from it.

2. That they do not prove Inerrability in those, to whom they were spoken and
intended; for they are as applicable to every other Church, yea, to every true
Believer, as to the Church of Rome: For every true Believer has the Spirit of
Grace and Truth dwelling in him, and is enlightened thereby, to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; but yet it does not follow, nor will you
affirm, That every true Believer, that every godly Man, and every godly Woman,
is infallible.

3. We answer, further, That these Promises and Scriptures were not given to
the Pope and Church of Rome, there is no pretense nor color for it. How ill
does it become you, who do deny the perseverance of true Believers, to claim to
your selves an interest in such promises, that the Spirit shall remain with you
for ever? It was never said to the Pope, Ye are the light of the world: For he
is indeed the Angel of Death, the Messenger and Instrument of Darkness; a Star
fallen from Heaven, who has opened the bottomless pit, and overspread the
whole face of the visible Church, with smoke and darkness, as was prophesied of
him, in the fifth Trumpet, Revel. 9.1. It was not said to the Pope, What ye
bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and to you it is given to know the
mysteries of Heaven: or that I will send the Spirit to you, to remain with you
for ever. It was not said to him, nor to the Roman Catholic visible Church.
You have been told so an Hundred times. You have been challenged an Hundred
times over, to prove your interest in these promises, if you can: And now
again, if you reply to this paper, what ever you pass by in silence, yet I pray
remember this, That you prove your interest in them, now once at last. And to
provoke you, if possible, thereunto, give me leave to tell you, That howsoever
you labor to put a good face upon the matter, yet there are not wanting
appearances and grounds of diffidence, even among your selves about it; for
Bellarmine numbers the alligation of the Apostolic See to Rome, in no higher
rank, than that of pious, and very probable Opinions. B^ll. de Romans Pontif.
lib. 4. cap. 4.
Quod non sit omnino de fide a Romana Ecclesia non posse separari Apostolicam
sedem patet, quia neque Scriptura, neque traditio habet sedem Apostolicam ita
fixam esse Romae, ut inde auferri non possit nibilominus tamen pia and
probabilissima est sententia. But if the Apostolic seat be removeable from
Rome, then by your own principles she may err and perish: Therefore, I say
again, prove your interest in any Scripture-promise, if you can.

Do it if you can (for instance) concerning that famous Text, upon which you
found your claim, Matt. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. This Text
belongs as much to Mahomet, as to the Pope; you would fain give it to the Pope,
but how many postulata must you beg without proof, before you can arrive at
such a conclusion? as,

1. That Peter was at Rome.

2. That he was there martyred, and marthered by the Romans.

3. That the murdering of an honest man, does give the Thief that did it, a
just right and title to all his Estates and Honors; Cartwr. on Matthew. 16.18.
or, as Mr. Cartwright speaks, That innocent blood, which polluteth other
places, should sanctify Rome; and that the Lord, who in revenge threw down
Jerusalem from her privileges, which she had above all the Cities in the
world, for spilling the blood of the Prophets, should in reward lift up the
head of Rome, above all other Cities, for shedding the blood of the Apostles:
Nay, rather, forasmuch as it was more drunken with the blood of Saints, under
the Government of the Emperors, than ever was any, and therein has justified,
her elder sister Jerusalem, therefore by the most just judgment of God, it is
become the Seat of Antichrist. Yea, by this Argument, as he also observes,
Jerusalem that killed our Savior Christ himself, gets the prize from her.

4. That Peter was Bishop of Rome, which was inconsistent with his Office of
Apostleship.

5. That he left a Successor in eodem gradu, in his Apostolical power and
office; that whereas the Commission was personal to the rest to determine with
themselves, he only of all the Twelve should hold the Apostleship, as it were,
in fee-simple, for himself, and his Successors for ever.

6. That the Bishop of Rome is this Successor, though Peter taught at Jerusalem
first, Cartwr. on Matthew 16.18.
afterward at Lidda, then at Joppa, afterward at Antioch, and likewise at
Caesarea, lastly, at Alexandria, before he came to Rome: And so the Apostolical
Authority is holden by the tenure of Burrow English, where the youngest
enjoys all, as Mr. Cartwright there observes.

Of all which suppositions, the two first are merely disputable and uncertain,
and can never be demonstrated, but the four last are most certainly and
indisputably salse. But yet all these we must believe, to the end we may
believe the Popes concernment in this promise made to Peter. And many a child
of God have you offered in the fire to Molech, for not believing these
Romances: But when will you go about to prove them? You know in your own
Consciences, that there is as much footing in the Scripture for the old Pagan
Theogonie, their Pedigrees and Fables of their Canonized Ancestors, and for the
Jewish Thalmudick, as for these Romantic Figments. Learned men have observed,
That there may be some dark footsteps of the true Scripture History of Adam,
investigated, and discerned in the old Heathenish Fable of Saturn; some
footsteps of the History of Cham and Cain in the Fables of Jupiter, of Noah in
Bacchus, of Moses and Joseph in Mercurius Trismegistus, of Joshuah and Sampson
in Hercules, etc. And truly there is no more of Peter the Apostle, in the Pope
of Rome; those being nothing else, but depravations of, and depraved
Traditions, and Additions to, the Truths and Sacred Histories of the Old
Testament, and so is Popery to the New. You reason from the promise made to
Peter, that the Church cannot fail, being builded upon a Rock; nor, needs no
new Masons, to re-build her again: But why do you not prove the Roman Synagogue
to be a Church? You know we deny it, otherwise then as the dead carcass, or
picture of a man, is called a man; She is Ecclesia malignantium, as Psalm. 26.5.
A Church of evil doers, but not a true Gospel Church, not a Spouse of Christ.
Though if she were, yet a true Church, when declining, or defective, may need
Instruments in the hand of Christ to Reform her; call them new Masons, or by
what other name of honor or contempt you please. Therefore, after the renewed
promulgation of the Gospel, in the tenth Chapter of the Revelations, Christ
does authorize and commissionate his servants to measure the Temple, and to
leave out the outer Court, Revel. 11.1, 2. which imports some further degree
of Reformation; but prove the Pope, and Church of Rome, to be at all concerned,
in what was said, to Peter, if you can.

Do it, if you can; concerning that other Scripture, so much abused by you, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church is the pillar and ground of Truth, because by the
Ministry of the Church, the Truth is published and propagated; Mr. Bedle 's
Letters to Wadsworth. cap. 8. p. 118.
as if a Law, or Proclamation of the King be set up, upon a pillar in the
Marketplace; or in allusion, as Mr. Bedle takes it, to the bases or pillars
that held up the Vail or Curtains in the Tabernacle: And whether you refer it
to Timothy as some, or to the Church as others, it comes much to one. Evident
it is, that the Apostle speaks it directly, either of Timothy, or of the Church
of Ephesus; and that it holds by a parity of reason, concerning all other
Gospel Ministers, and Gospel Churches, both the one, and the other, may be
called in a safe sense, the pillar and ground of truth. But what is this to the
Church of Rome? How ridiculous a reason were it (says Mr. Cartwright) for the
Apostle to exhort Timothy to walk circumspectly in the Church of Ephesus,
Cartwr. in locum.
because the Church of Rome is thepillar and stablement of truth? The Papists
(says Calvin) dum ad se transferunt hoc encomium, improbe faciunt, alienis se
plumis vestiendo. Nam ut evehatur Ecclesia supra tertium Coelum, nego id totum
ad eos ullomodo pertinere. Calvin in loc.
Quinetiam locum presentem adversus eos retorqueo: nam si Ecclesia columna est
veritatis, sequitur non esse apud eos Ecclesiam, ubi non modo sepulta jacet
veritas, sed horrendum in modum diruta and eversa sub pedibus calcatur. When
the Papists transfer this glory to themselves, they do wickedly, clothing
themselves with the feathers of other Birds: For, suppose the Church be
extolled, and lifted up above the Third Heavens, I deny, that any thing of all
this excellency belongs in the least to them; yea, further, I retort this place
against them: For, if the Church be the Pillar of Truth, then it follows, that
the Church is not amongst them, where the Truth does not only, lie buried, but
is torn down, and overthrown, and trampled under foot, in a fearful manner. An
hoc est vel aeuigma, vel cavillum? Paulus Ecclesiam non vult agnosci, nisi in
qua excelsa and conspicua stat Dei veritas in Papatu nihil tale apparet, sed
disiectio tantum and ruinae, ergo genuina Ecclesiae nota illic non extat. Is
there any difficulty, or any cavilling in this! Paul will not have any Church
acknowledged, but such as wherein the Truth of God stands on high, conspicuous
to the view of all men. But there is no such thing to be seen in the Papacy,
but the overthrow and ruins of the Truth; therefore there is no true note, or
mark of the Church to be found there.

The plain Truth is, That Apostate Church, and the Head thereof, that is
Babylon, and Antichrist, has no right to any one promise in the Book of God,
but stands directly under all the Threatenings and Curses written therein,
because they have both added thereto, and taken from it, Revel. 22.18, 19.
Indeed those Churches, and those Souls, have the best right to the promises,
that prize them most: Therefore the Protestant Churches have a better right to
them, than the Church of Rome. By the Protestant Churches, I intend, all that
do subject themselves to the Scripture, as the Rule of Faith and Life: And by
the Church of Rome, all those that suffer the Pope to have dominion over their
Faith; for we do not judge every Individual in the external communion of that
Church, but only such of them as have drunk down her deadly poison; What have
they to do with the promises? What have they to do with God, to take his
Covenant into their mouths? Who do believe in a man that can lie? and in a
Church of men, who may deceive, and be deceived? How much better and safer
would it be for your eternal peace, to cleave to the Scriptures, which are the
voice of God, and so to bottom and ground your Faith upon the truth and
faithfulness of him that cannot lie, then thus to ground it upon a man that
shall dye, and upon the sons of men, that shall be made as grass: For all flesh
is as grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower of grass; The grass
withers, and the flower thereof fades away, but the Word of the Lord
endures for ever. And this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you.

CHAP. VII. Of Humane Testimonies, for and against the Sea of Rome.
THat which remains of your Discourse, is partly Quotations, without so much as
attempting to prove your interest in them, of some parallel Texts with those
before answered; partly repetitions of those impertinent Queries, Whether did
the Roman Church go from any other known Church, etc? Answered also before,
under the Head of Schism, partly Humane Testimonies for the Sea of Rome, for so
you phrase it, the Body of your Discourse having run upon this expression, the
Church of Rome, the Title being the Roman Faith. To your Humane Testimonies, I
would humbly offer three things to your serious consideration, which, I
suppose, may suffice to all you say, or can say, from the Fathers, in whom you
seem to repose your greatest confidence, for the defense of your cause.

Consid. 1. That you know we do not own the Fathers, but the Scriptures only,
as the Supreme Judge of Controversies: Though we honor them, as blessed
Instruments in their Generation; yet we know they were but men, and not
Apostles infallibly, inspired and assisted by the Holy Ghost, Yea, we do
ingenuously acknowledge, That the darkness, and inadvertency of the Fathers in
some points, did contribute and make way for the rise and growth of Popery.
They had their hands so full of other work, partly from without, in all their
Conflicts, both with Jews and Pagans, both by writing and suffering, while the
Christian Princes also in the mean time, were not idle, but had their hands
full, in the Wars of Michael against the Dragon, against the persecuting Pagan
Emperors, during that fourth Century: And partly from within, by those
intestine mischiefs, which, through the malice and craft of Satan, were bred
within the Churches own bowels, such as Arrianism, with all the Errors and
Blasphemies accompanying and flowing from it, against the Person and Natures of
Christ, and against his blessed Spirit. As also Pelagianism, wretchedly
undermining the work of his Grace and Spirit, in the effectual application of
Christ, and his redeeming Love, to the Souls of his Elect. Donatism likewise at
the same time dreadfully disturbing the peace, and order, and fellowship of the
Gospel, by dischurching, and disbaptising all other Christians, and
re-baptising themselves, whilst othres in the mean time wereas much too large,
and loose, as they too rigid. The faithful Servants of Christ were thus
assaulted in those days on every side, over and beside the daily work of
Teaching and Governing their respective Flocks and Churches. All which, did so
severely call upon them for their deepest intentions and endeavors, that as it
rendered the work heavy upon the shoulders of the faithful Ministry in those
conflicting times, so, truly, to my narrow capacity, it is no wonder, if in the
mean time, the deep and subtle workings of the mystery of Iniquity in the
Papacy, did, in a great measure, escape their observation. And the rather, if
we consider the disadvantage they were under, both for want of Printing, and of
well regulated and formed Universities and Schools of the Prophets. The
Monastic Institutions at first (as some have thought) coming nearest, and
seeming to have had some glimpse and aim thereat; so that when all accounts are
cast up, assuredly it will be found, That we have more cause to acknowledge and
admire the grace and power of Christ, in acting and enabling his servants to
see so much, and go so far, in those dark and difficult times, then to stumble
at the dispensation of his Providence, because they did not see every thing.
Neither have you for your parts, either cause or color to offend at these
sentiments of ours concerning the Fathers, when your own Petavius can say,
Petav. Animadv. in Epiph. Haeres. 69 Arriano rum. p. 285.
Plerisque veterum patrum -- usu venit ut ante Errorum atque Haereseon --
Originem, quibus Christianae fidei capita singillatim oppugnabantur, nondum
satis illustrata ac patefacta rei veritate, quaedam suis scriptis asperserint,
quae cum orthodoxae fidei regula minime consentiant. It is a common thing
(says he) with most of the ancient Fathers, that before the rise of Errors and
Heresies, whereby the Articles of the Christian Faith were particularly
oppugned (the truth of the thing being not fully enough cleared and laid open)
they did intermingle some things in their Writings, which do not agree with the
rule of the Orthodox Faith. Thus he; yea, there is nothing more common with
your Writers, than to cry the Fathers either up or down, merely as may serve
their turn, and that sometimes in term; course enough. Patres quos se venerari
simulat, says Beza, concerning your Church, Palam tamen imperitis illudens
conculcat. Beza in 1 Timothy 3.15.


Consid. 2. You may do well to consider yet further, That the Fathers did bear
their Testimony so far as their Light served against the corruptions they saw
coming in; though in some things, which it pleased God in his unsearchable
wisdom to hide from them, they did run with the Cry, and say, as others said;
yet, in other things, they bear witness against you. And therefore it were
easy to retaliate, and requite you with as many Testimonies of the Ancients on
the other hand, against the Sea of Rome, as you have brought for it: You may
see a little handful of them in Calvin's Preface to his Institutions.

As to those speeches you quote, as sounding for you out of Epiphanius, Austin,
and Ambrose, you seem to understand their words in a deeper sense, than ever
they intended them; for what though the Ancients sometimes called Peter the
Chief, the First, the Head, the Prince of the Apostles, yet these, and such
like Metaphors, may be understood in such a modified sense, as to import no
more but only a precedence of order, and not a supremaof power; the former
whereof, is granted by our Divines to Peter, but will stand you in no stead;
and the latter you cannot prove, though if you could, yet this also would not
do your business; for, suppose Peter had been as great a King as Solomon, yet
what is this to the Pope, any more than to the Turk, or to the King of Spain?
But it will be difficult for you to evince, with cogency of demonstration, That
the preference the Fathers give him, does amount to any further or higher
power, than that of the Foreman of a Jury, or the Speaker of the House of
Parliament, or the Moderator of a Synod, who has a pre-eminence of Order, but
not of Power and Jurisdiction, above the rest of his Colleagues. What say you
to that of Jerome? Ut Plato Princeps Philosophorum, Hieron. 2. lib. advers.
Pelag.
ita Petrus Apostolorum fuit; As Plato was Prince of the Philosophers, so was
Peter of the Apostles: But Plato had no power of Government or Jurisdiction
over other Philosophers, but only an eminency of esteem and respect. I might
here also tell you, as to Epiphanius (but that I hasten to a close) that the
Testimony you allege, is not in his Anchoratus, but in his Panarium contra
Haereses. As also, what a Testimony he has born against you, concerning your
Idolatry; Vide infta Cap 8. Append.
and how slightly your own Writers, such as Canus, Baronius, Petavius, are
pleased to speak of him.

As to Austin, the first sentence you quote from him, as it does not occur in
the place you quote, where I have searched for it, so neither indeed do I
remember any such expression of his in any other place. The next, wherein he
speaks of Peter as the Rock, I wonder you would quote, when I presume you are
not ignorant, that he has put it among his Retractations, and given a sounder
exposition of the Rock concerning Christ himself. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Dixi de Apostolo Petro quod in illo tanquam in Petra fundata sit Ecclesia. Sed
scio me postea sic exposuisse, ut super hunc, intelligeretur quem confessus est
Petrus -- Non enim dictum est illi tu es Petra, sed tues Petrus. Petra autem
erat Christus. And again, Sermon. 13. in Matthew. p. 22. Edit. Lovan.
-- Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, id est super meipsum filium Dei vivi aedificabo
Ecclesium meam. Nam volentes homines aedificari super bomines, dicebant, ego
quidem sum Pauli, ego autem Apollo, ego vero Cephae. And that his Principatus
Apostolici Sacerdotis, Epis. 162.
and whatever other expression of his, may seem to carry a benign aspect
toward the Church of Rome, must be understood with some temper and allay, is
undeniably evident by the famous Testimonies, constantly born by him, and by
the rest of the African Bishops and Councils, against the Encroachments and
Usurpations, of that aspiring, and devouring See of Rome. Can. 22:
The Milevitan Council decreed, Ad Transmarina qui putaverit appellandum, a
nullo intra Africam in communionem suscipiatur. If any man shall appeal beyond
the Seas, let none in Africa receive him to communion. And in Cyprian's time,
upon occasion of Stephanus Bishop of Rome, his interposing on the behalf of
Basilides, and Martialis, who had been deposed for sacrificing to Idols,
Cyprian, and other Bishops in Council with him, decreed, Cypr. Epist. 55. Pamel.
Ut unius cujusque causa illic audiatur ubi est crimen admissum, and illic
agere causam suam, ubi and accusatores habere and testes sui criminis possit.
That every ones cause should be heard in the place of the Fact committed, and
there manage his cause -- where the Defendant may have both accusers and
witnesses face to face. So little understood they of the Popes Supremacy.

As to Ambrose, the Books you quote, De Vocatione Gentium, are generally
concluded, by all Learned men, both Papists and Protestants, to be none of his;
but some ascribe them to Eucherius Lugdunensis. Bellarmine to Prosper; yet
Vossius thinks they are none of Prospers, as differing from his principles, and
so thinks J. Latius of them, as differing from his style. Libros de Vocatione
Gentium (says Rivet) sentiunt fere omnes non esse Ambrosii. Riv. Crit. Sacr.
lib. 3. cap. 17. and lib. 4. cap. 18. Lat. lib. 2. de Semi Pelag. cap. 3.
Erasmo stilus videtur non abhorrere a phrasi Eucherii Lugdunensis. Bellarminus
and alii fere omnes eos asserunt Prospero, Obstare tamen, scribit clarissimus
Vessius, quod illius Authoris sententia non videtur quadrare cum doctrina
Prosperi. A Prosperi etiam stilo abludere judicavit vir eruditus Joh. Latius.
Moreover, seeing you mention Ambrose, you may remember his judgment was, That
Rome is Babylon, Apoc. 17. So much for this second Consideration, That the
Fathers did testify in part against you, and not so much for you, as you
pretend.

Considerat. 3. I pray consider in the third place, That there be many, even of
your own Writers, that testify against you in several things; for which, you
have put their Names, and their Books, into your honest Indices Expurgatorii,
and into your Index librorum prohibitorum, such as Stella, Masius Espencaeus,
Ferus, etc. But there be others left, who have escaped your Interpolations,
Expurgations, and Prohibitions, who testify against you to your faces. Let me
add but two or three signal Instances to what you have had already.

First, Greg. lib. 6. Epist. 30. Lib. 4. Epist. 38. Bellarm. de Pontif. lib. 2.
cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 13. Ribera in Apoc. 14.8. Tertoll. cont. Judae. cap.
9. Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 22. Hieron. de Spiritu sanct. Prolog. and
Ep. 151, in Algas Qu. 11. Ambros. in Apoc. 17.
You know how sharply Pope Gregory the first, inveighs against that proud,
swelling, smoky title of Universal Pastor, used and claimed by all his
Successors to this day. Ego autem fidenter dico, quia quisquis se universalem
vocat vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit, quia
superbiendo caeteris se praeponit. I speak it confidently (says he, and the
Pope, you say, cannot err) that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be
called by others, universal Bishop, or Pastor, is the Forerunner of
Antichrist, in his elation of mind, because he lifts up himself in pride above
others. And he says, That it is a profane Title, and that the King of pride
is at the door, and an Army of Priests ready to fight his Battles, with many
other such like expressions.

Secondly, I might here also tell you, how that Bellarmine and Ribera, both
Jesuits, and some others of the same Tribe, do confess and maintain, and that
according to the judgment of sundry of the Fathers, viz. Tertullian, Austin,
Jerome, Ambrose, That mystical Babylon in the Revelations, is Rome, and that she
is reserved and devoted to destruction, even to be burnt with fire. A
concession of more dangerous consequence, and importance to your cause and
interest, then to be evaded by Romances of an imaginary Antichrist of the Tribe
of Dan.

Thirdly, If you ask for Humane Testimonies against that Scorpion Doctrine of
Justification by the merit of your own Works, and Penances, and Satisfactions,
wherewith your Locusts use to sting and torment, and torture the Consciences of
men, worse then Death; and upon which, as was said before, that Champion of the
Lord, did pitch the Field against you; it is worth your noting, how Bellarmine
having wrestled, with his wit, in five Books against the truth of God, yet, at
last (God confounding him in his opposition to it) he confesses, Bell. de
Justif. lib, 5. cap. 7. prop. 3.
Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae,
Tutissimum est totam fiduciam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere. Because of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and the danger
of Vainglory, it is the safest way to put our whole trust in the mere mercy
and goodness of God. And it is so indeed: But then Bellarmine, why did you
dispute against it? against the inward workings and recoylings of your own
Conscience, which did whisper you in the ear, and told you, That this is the
best and safest way, Ex ore tuo serve nequam. I cannot but often think of this
passage of his, as one of the greatest triumphs in this kind, that ever truth
had, out of the mouth of such an impetuous Adversary; for magna est veritas,
and praevalebit. Surely these words of his do as well deserve to be blotted out
by an Index Expurgatorius, as those of Chrysostom, Index Expurg. Litera C.
Chrysostom. Index Expurg. Cardinal. Quirega in litera B. Biblia Roberti
Stephani.
Meritum nullum esse nisi quod a Christo confertur, which you have ordered to
be purged out of his works, and as well as those passages out of Robert
Stephens Table to his Bible, Credendo in Christum remittuntur peccata; and
Credens Christo non morietur in aeternum; fide purificantur corda; justificamur
fide in Christum. Our sins are forgiven, by believing in Christ; he that
believes in Christ, shall not dye eternally; our hearts are purified by says;
we are justified by says in Christ; of which your pious Index says, Deleantur
subjectae propositiones, tanquam suspectae. Let these propositions be blotted
out, as being suspicious; for, it seems, you suspect the very words of
Scripture, and the Gospel it self, whether it be true or no; but there is
nothing renders your Religion more suspicious, and more odious unto my heart,
then this your enmity unto the free grace of God, and against the Scripture, by
which it is revealed, which you are still venting upon all occasions. Matthew.
19.16.
Coelum gratis non accipiam, says Vega, I will not accept of heaven upon terms
of free grace. But when death appears, and stares upon you, some of you can
speak at another rate; so did Bellarmine, when he prayed upon his Deathbed,
Precor ut me Deus, Fuligatus in vita Bellar. referente. Dr. Grew of Justif.
page 91.169.
inter sanctos, and electos suos, non estimator meriti, sed veniae largitor
admittat. I pray, that God would receive me among his Saints, and chosen ones;
not upon the account of merit, but for the sake of his own pardoning grace and
mercy. So Stephen Gardener, when Dr. Day, Bishop of Chichester, came to see him
on his Deathbed, and began to comfort him with the words of Gods promises, and
with the free justification in the blood of Christ our Savior: Fox 's Acts and
Mon. Vol. 3. page 527. col. 2.
Gardener hearing that, What, my Lord, (quoth he) Will you open that Gap now,
then farewell altogether; To me, and such other in my case you may speak it;
but open this window to the people, then farewell altogether. Here were clear
convictions, but strange rebellion of spirit against them: And to leave this
head, Voet. Vol. 2. Disput 47. page 726.
Voetius has a large and learned Dispute with this Title, Vis veritatis in
ipso papatu crumpentis, de salute per solam Dei misericordiam in Christo.
Wherein he produces a cloud of Witnesses to this truth.

It was also in my thoughts to have noted something out of your own Writers
concerning the Popish Circle, I mean, the maze of unbelief, wherein they run
round, to prove the Scripture by the Church, and the Church back again by the
Scripture: Like men drunk, and giddy with the cup of the Wine of Astonishment,
and with the spirit of Delusion; it being just with God to smite them with a
vertiginous distemper of mind, that they shall never come to any consistence,
to any settlement in the Faith, who will not settle upon the true foundation,
and acquiesce in the Scriptures of Truth. For as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away
the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the holy One of Israel,
Isa. 5.24.

And, finally, seeing you call so much for Humane Testimonies, I had thought to
have offered some, which, I think, you will blush to read, out of your own
Writers, concerning the Veneration you give to your Popes, your Representative
Christ's, and Vice-gods; and yet withal, concerning the hideous profaneness of
their Lives, and their Errability, yea, their actual erring Errors, damnably,
and fundamentally destructive of the Faith, and all this out of your own
approved Authors, out of whom I have observed and collected a few things, but
these few are too many to be here inserted. The Subject is so copious, that it
requires an entire Tractate by it self, therefore must be deferred, till some
other occasion do present: And in the mean time, so long as Gregory's
praecursor Antichristi, and so long as Bellarmines Tulissimum est, remains upon
Record among men, you may shut your mouths, and cease your boastings of Humane
Testimonies.

I Have now, according to the measure of Light and Grace received, returned you
an Answer to your Paper, somewhat largely, I confess, being desired to answer
it to the full, but yet as briefly as I could; yea, omitting many things which
might have been, both truly and pertinently spoken. I find, that it has been
answered twice before by more Learned pens, which, as it renders this Labor of
mine less necessary, and, which I think might have been spared, had you not
called with such renewed importunities for an Answer; so it renders you the
more without excuse, for that now you have the Truth against one opposition
confirmed to you in the mouth of Three Witnesses. First, by Mr. Baxter, in his
Key for Catholics, printed Anno 1659, who received a great part of this your
paper, in a Manuscript sent from Wolverhampton to Sturbridge, and has inserted
it, and confuted it in his Book before mentioned, page 244. It has been
answered a second time by Dr. Owen, in his Animadversions on Fiat Lux, Cap. 2.
page 59, etc. and in his Vindication of his Animadversions, Cap. 4. page 48.
and deinceps. And yet now, after two Answers in print, you send the same words
again (such is the penury of your cause) in a Manuscript, to a person of Honor
in this Kingdom of Ireland, with a challenge to our Divines to answer it, which
has produced and drawn forth this third Answer to it, besides all that has
been written in former times, as also of late by Dr. Stillingfleete, Mr. Poole,
and others, though not to this individual paper, but upon occasion of other
oppositions, yet in defense of the same general Truth, and Cause of Christ
against Popery.

O that He, who alone is able, would vouchsafe to bless both those former, and
these present endeavors, so as to undeceive and open your eyes, and convince
you by his Spirit of the Vanity of Vanities, that is in these pretensions of
Supremacy, Inerrability, and Indefectibility in your Church and Pope. The Lord
awaken you out of these golden Dreams, before it be too late: Yea, I do believe
through grace, and am persuaded, That he will yet do it, by one means or other,
for such of you as do belong to the election of his grace: The same free and
sovereign grace that did pity, that did undeceive, and convince, and conquer
Paul, when in his full career of blind Zeal, and opposition, is able to
convince, and overpower you. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do. Now the Lord in mercy do it, That your Faith may not stand hereafter in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

CHAP. VIII. An APPENDIX for the further Illustration of some things, which are
but briefly hinted in the former Chapters.
IN Cap. 2. of Apostasy, and again, in Cap. 3. of Heresy, mention is made of
counsel given by Papists to the Pope. A Friend, to whom the Answer was
communicated in Manuscript, made some Inquiry about it, to whom a further
Account was sent; which because the same Inquiries are not unlikely to arise in
the studious Readers mind, is thought fit to be communicated.

I find there were two papers of Advice presented to the Pope in those days,
about the time of the Council of Trent, for the help and support of the then
declining Church of Rome; both which, give pregnant evidence against her, of
her corruption, and departure from Apostolical, and primitive purity. The first
to Pope Paul the Third, in the Year 1538. by Nine select Cardinals and
Prelates, viz. Cardinal Contarenus, Cardinal Peter Theatinus, afterward Pope
Paul the Fourth, Cardinal Sadolet, Cardinal Reginald Poole of England, etc. The
Title is, Consilium Delectorum Cardinalium and Praelatorum de emendanda
Ecclesia: This Novem-virale Concilium, was sent by Nicholaus Cardinalis
Capulanus, to a Prince in Germany, by whom it came to the hands of Luther, and
Sturmius, and by their means was made public. It is mentioned and quoted by
Espensaeus, a Popish Bishop, a Sorbenist, in his Commentaries on Titus 1. It
was extant in the Book of the Councils, Tom 3. Council. Edit. per Crab. Edit.
Colon. 1551. But in all other Editions, Pontificiorum furto and fraud
desideratur, says Mr. Crashaw, who Reprinted it London 1609.

These men do with something of Ingenuity acknowledge, and advise to a
Reformation of sundry enormous Abuses and Corruptions in the Church of Rome;
and they begin wisely and faithfully, at the fountain and Wellhead, telling
the Pope plainly, Principium horum malorum inde suisse quod nonnuili Pontifices
tui Praedecessores, prurientes auribus ut inquit Apostolus Paulus coacervarunt
sibi magistros ad desideria sua non ut ab eis discerent quod facere deberent,
Page 2.
sed ut eorum studio and calliditate inveniretur ratio qua liceret id quod
liberet. -- Ex hoc font sancte pater, tanquam ex equo Trojano, irrupere in
Ecclesiam Dei tot abusus tam and gravissimi morbi, quibus nune conspicim is eam
ad desperationem sere salutis laborasse. The beginning of these Eviis (say
they) has been, that some of the Popes your Predecessors, having itching ears,
as the Apostle Paul speaks, have heaped up unto themselves Teachers according
to their own desires; Not that they might learn from them what they ought to
do, but that by their study and craft a way might be found out whereby it might
be lawful to do what they list. From this fountain holy father, as from the
Trojan horse, have broke forth so many abuses into the Church of God, and such
grievous Diseases under which we now see her laboring almost unto desperation
of recovery. The Popes Infallibility, it seems, was no Article of their Faith.
Then they proceed to instance in sundry particulars, Page 5. and de^^ceps.
as Caralessenes, in the Ordination of Clergymen, putting men both ignorant and
vicious into Holy Orders, bestowing Benefices and Ecclesiastical promotions
upon them; Reservations of Pensions, changing and chopping of Livings,
Impropriations, Pluralities, Non-residences, Exemptions and Impediments laid
upon Bishops, in governing their Flocks, and punishing of Sinners. The great
degeneracy and corruptions of Religious Orders, Simony, and filthy Lucre, in
the exercise of the Keys. The scandals between Monks and Nuns. Vain Philosophy
in Schools, and Universities, teaching Impiety; whereas, say they, Ostenderent
infirmitatem luminis naturalis in Quaestionibus pertinentibus ad Deum: Page 12.
They ought to show the weakness of the light of Nature in disquisitions about
the things of God. They instance also Dispensations for Marriage within the
degrees forbidden, Page 16.
absolving Simoniacks: In hac etiam urbe meretrices ut matronae incedunt,
habitant etiam infignes aedes, corrigendus bic turpis abusus. In this City of
Rome (say they) Whores go up and down as honorably, as chaste Matrons; and
they dwell in sumptuous Houses, this shameful abuse ought to be Reformed. These
are some of the main Heads of their Advice. Tollantur (say they) obtestamur
sanctitatem tuam, Page 11.
per sanguinem Christi quo redemit sibi Ecclesiam suam eamque lavit eadem
sanguine, toliantur hae maculae. We do beseech and obtest your Holiness, by the
blood of Christ, wherewith he has redeemed his Church unto himself, washing it
with his own blood, we beseech you let these spots and blemishes be taken away.
But the Pope would reform nothing, but was like the deaf Adder, which stops
her ear: which will not hearken to the voice of the charmers, though they charm
never so wisely. We would have healed Babylon, but she could not be healed:
forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment
reaches unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies, Psalm. 58.4, 5. Jer.
51.9.

The other counsel was given to Pope Julius the Third, by three Bishops met at
Bononia. It is entitled, Consilium quorundam Episcoporum Bononiae
congregatorum: quod de ratione stabiliendae Romanae Ecclesiae. Julio. 3. Pont.
Mux. datum est. It is subscribed, Bononiae October. 20. Anno 1553. Sauctitatis
tuae servi and creaturae devotissimae. (Your Holinesses most devoted servants
and creatures) Vincentius de durantibus Epise. Thermularum Brixiensis. Aegidius
Falceta Episco. Caprulanus. Gerardus Busdagrus Episc. Thessalonicensis. It was
first published by Vergerius after his conversion. It is mentioned by Johannes
Wolphius, in his Memorabilia. And, lastly, Reprinted at London, out of Mr.
Crashaws Library, Anno 1613. These Advisers, like mere carnal Politicians, do
observe horrid Degeneraties and Abuses; but instead of counsels tending to
Reformation, they mend the matter so, as to make it much worse; their proposals
aiming at no other scope, but merely how their sins, and corrupt state, which
they love, and like so well, may be continued and preserved, and how Light and
Reformation may be kept out; some of their words being rendered in English, in
the Answer above, Chapter 3. But most of the Latin omitted, for Brevities sake;
I shall here subjoin it, with some more also of their own words, for the
Readers more ample satisfaction: Thus then they speak.

Cum nos multum ac diu cogitavissemus quisnam esset gravissimae hujus
controversiae status -- tandem hunc esse deprehendimus. Lutherani Symboli
Apostolorum Niceni and Athanasii articulos omnes recipient and confitentur.
Folio 1.
Atque id verissimum est. Neque enim inficiari oportet praesertim inter nos,
quod adeo verum esse omnes intelliginius. Itidem Lutherani negant velle se
aliam doctrinam admittere, praeter unicam illam, quae prophetas Christum and
Apostolos authors habet; optarentque ut paucissimis illis contenti essemus --
Et priscas Ecclesias imitaremur nec de recipiendis ullis traditionibus
cogitaremus, Folio 2.
quas non constat luce meridiana clariu^s fuisse a Domino nostro Jesu Christo,
and abipsis Apostolis dictatas atque institutas. Ita sentiunt adversarii
nostri. -- Nos contra seculi opinionem beatitudinis tuae volumus credi -- id
quod in Decreto tertiae Sessionis Concilium Tridentinum -- statuit; nempe
Christum atque ipsius Apostolos multo plura tum ad mores, tum ad fidem
pertinentia docuisse -- quam ea quae scripta sunt. Et tametsi hoc aperte
probare non possimus (nam plane fatemur inter nos -- tantum habemus conjecturas
quasdam) tamen confitemur esse verum quia sic tenet Romana Ecclesia. Hic est in
summa cardo totius controversiae, hinc tumultus illi, hinc illa contentio. --
Nam Apostolorum temporibus, ut verum tibi fateamur, sed silentio opus est, vel
aliquot annis post ipsos Apostolos, nulla vel papatus, vel Cardinalatus mentio
erat, nec amplissimos illos reditus Episcopatuum and Sacerdotiorum fuisse
constat, nec templa tantis sumptibus exstruebantur, nec erant Monasteria, nec
Priores, nec Abbates, multo vero minus hae doctrinae, hae leges, hae
consuetudines, sed neque imperium illud quod in Gentes, and Nationes hodie
obtinemus. Quin omnes omnium Ecclesiarum Ministri Romanae non minus quam
caeterarum, ultro Regibus, principibus, and magistratibus parebant. -- Nos Re
probe examinata comperimus hanc Ecclefiae gloriam, authoritatem and potentiam
tunc primum exortam esse, cum in ea sagaces and solertes Episcopi praeesse
caeperunt, qui per occasionem a Caesaribus contenderent, ut sua authoritate at
potentia primatum and summam in alias Ecclesias potestatem, penes hanc sedem
esse statuerent.

Praeterea Consilium nostrum esset, ut tua sanctitas Cardinalibus and Episcopis
praeciperet, ut Logicam, Sophisticam, Artemque Scholasticam and Metaphysicam,
Folio 5.
item decretales, sex Clementinas extravagantes, and regulas Cancellariae, in
sua quisque civitate legiae doceri public curent. Utinam legendis hujusmodi
libris homines ubique diligentius incubuissent. Neque enim res nostrae in
hujusmodi deploratissimum statum adductae essent. Sed hi contemptis melioribus
istis disciplinis Graecae and Hebraicae linguae operam dare, and mox Bibliorum
versionem ad Graecam and Hebraicam veritatem exigere examinareque ac Theologiae
and Antiquis Ecclesiae doctoribus studere caeperunt. Unde damna illa quae jam
sustinemus Omnia extitere. Quare danda erit opera ut studiis istiusmodi valere
jussis, Scholasticam artem and tuum jus Canonicum homines repetant quibus
Theologiae studia sepulta pene atque obruta fuisse olim constat. --
Decretalium, etc meminimus at non item Decreti, est enim perniciosus liber and
authoritatem tuam valde vehementer imminuit. Ita enim inquit Canon qui incipit
Transferunt 24. Q. 3. Immutant mendacio veritatem, qui aliud praedicant quam ab
Apostolis acceperunt. Hoc plane Lutheranum est axioma: Quid enim aliud quotidie
inculcant nostri adversarii, quam ne latum quidem unguem licere ab his rebus
quae Apostolis fuere in usu recedere? At quis est ex nostris qui non recedat
saepe quotidie? Certe vix umbram quandam retinemus in nostris Ecclesiis ejus
Doctrinae and Disciplinae quae Apostolorum temporibus sieut etiam initio
attigimus floruerunt and prorsus aliam accersivimus.

Denique quod inter omnia Consilia quae nos hoc tempore dare possumus, Folio
penult.
omnium gravissimum ad extremum reservavimus. Oculi hic aperiendi sunt, omnibus
nervis aduitendum erit ut quam minimum Evangelii poterit praesertim vulgari
lingua, in iis legatur civitatibus quae sub tua ditione and potestate sunt,
sufficiatque tantillum illud quod in missa legi solet, nec eo amplius cuiquam
mortalium legere liceat. Quamdiu enim pauculo illo homines contenti fuerunt
tamdiu res tuae ex sententia successere, eaedemque in contrarium labi caeperunt
ex quo ulterius legi vulgo usurpatum est. Hic ille in summa est liber qui
praeter caeteros hasce nobis tempestates ac turbines conciliavit quibus prope
abrepti sumus: Et sane siquis illum diligenter expendat, deinde quae in nostris
fieri Ecclesiis consueverunt singula ordine contempletur, videbit plurimum
inter se dissidere, and hanc doctrinam nostram ab illa prorsus diversam esse,
ac saepe contrariam etiam. Quod simulatque homines intelligant, a docto
scilicet aliquo adversariorum stimulati non ante clamandi finem faciunt, quam
rem plane omnem divulgaverint, nosque invisos omnibus reddiderint. Quare
occultandae pauculae illae chartulae, sed adhibita quadam cautione and
dilige^tia, ne ea res majores nobis turbas ac tumultus excitet. This last
Paragraph, let English ears hear it.

Last of all (say they) which we have reserved to the last place, as the
weightiest of all the counsels that we can give at this time. Your eyes are
here to be opened. You must endeavor, with all the power you have, that as
little as can be of the Gospel be read, especially in the vulgar tongue, in
those Cities which are within your power and jurisdiction, but let that little
which is wont to be read in the Mass suffice, and let it not be lawful for any
mortal man to read any more than that. For as long as men were content with
that little, your affairs succeeded according to your hearts desire; but they
began to decline, and go back, as soon as it came in use to read more of it.
This is in sum that Book, which above all others, has brought upon us these
storms and whirlewinds, wherewith we are almost carried away headlong. And
truly if any man shall diligently weigh that Book, and then consider distinctly
all those things which are wont to be done in our Churches, he will see that
they differ very much the one from the other, and that this Doctrine of ours is
altogether diverse from that, yea, and oftentimes directly contrary to it.
Which as soon as men understand, being stirred up by some Learned man amongst
the Adversaries, they make no end of clamoring, till they have laid open the
whole matter, and rendered us odious unto all. Wherefore those few sheets of
paper must be hid, and kept out of sight, but with some caution and diligence,
lest the very doing of this, should increase the storm, and bring yet greater
troubles and tumults upon us. This is their advice, with other things ejusdem
farinae, too many to be here Transcribed. Ghostly counsel, of ghostly Fathers.
Wherein, indeed, they state the Controversy between them and us aright,
namely, That their departure from the Scripture, and our adherence to it, is
that which has begun and bred the Quarrel, and made the breach between them
and us, and the name Protestant arise; then instead of trembling at his Word,
and humbling themselves to reform by that unerring Rule, they enter into open
Rebellion and Conspiracy against the Rule, to suppress it, and smother it, even
in the spiritual Language of those Rebels, Who say, Psalm 2.3. Let us break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us: For which, he that sits
in heaven, laughs at them, and the Lord has them in derision.

I find both these counsels mentioned by Pope Paul the 4th, and Pope Clement
the 8th, in their Index librorum prohibitorum, published by them in pursuance
of the Decrees of the Council of Trent. The former, in the letter L. under this
Title, Liber inscriptus, Consilium de emendanda Ecclesia: And so Pope Paul the
4th, prohibits and condemns the Book, and Council, subscribed by himself, when
he was Cardinal Peter Theatin: As the like change of judgment upon change of
interest is commonly observed in Aeneas Sylvius, when he came to be Pope Pius
the 2d. The latter counsel is mentioned in the letter C. under this Italian
Title, Consiglio d'alicuui Vescovi congregati in Bologna. The counsel of
certain Bishops met together in Bononia. This may suffice, as to a further
Account of this matter.

In Cap. 7. of humane Testimonies, mention is made of Epiphanius his Testimony
against Idolatry, and of the freedom of expression used by sundry Romanists
concerning him, whereof take this further account. Epiphanius his words are
these: Quando venissem ad villam, quae dicitur Anablatha -- Inveni ibi velum
pendens in foribus ejusdem Ecclesiae tinctum atque depinctum, Epiph. Operae.
tom. 2, Epist. ad Johan. Hierosol. page 317. Edit. Petav. 1622.
and habens imaginem quasi Christi vel sancti cujusdam, non enim satis memini
cujus imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra
authoritatem Scripturarum, hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud, and magis
dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci ut pauperem mortuum eo obvolverent, and
efferrent. -- Precor ut Jubeas -- in Ecclesia Christi ejusmodi vela quae contra
Religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi. As we were going to Bethel (says he)
when I came to a Village called Anablatha, I found there a Vail hanging in the
Church-door colored and painted, and having an Image in it, as it were of
Christ, or some Saint; for I do not well remember whose Image it was: Wherefore
when I saw this, that the Image of a man hung in the Church of Christ contrary
to the Authority of the Scriptures, I tore it in pieces. And, moreover, I
counseled the Keepers of that place, to wrap up the dead body of a poor man in
the said Vail, and so to carry him forth to be buried. And I do beseech you to
give order, that there be no such Vails hung up in the Church of Christ, which
are contrary to our Religion. Riv. Crit. Sacr. lib. 3. cap. 29. Waldens. Tom.
3. Lit. 19. Cap. 157. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 9. Salmeron Comment. in 1
John. cap. 5: Dis. 32. Sixth. Sinens. lib. 5. Annot. 247. Greg. Valent. de Idol.
lib. 2. cap. 7.


He writes this to John Bishop of Jerusalem, and the Epistle is Translated by
Jerome, a sign he liked it well; and so you have the Testimony of two Fathers
together, both Epiphanius and Jerome: A Testimony so full and clear, that your
Writers come forth against it one way, but fly seven. Some of them, as Rivet
notes, senslesly affirming, That he speaks it in regard of the
Anthropomorphites, so Tho. Waldensis, as Bellarmine reports. Others, with as
little sense, or reason, would have this passage to be supposititious, because,
forsooth, they know not how to shape an handsome Answer to it, so Bellarmine,
etc. But others of them, Heretick-like, say, That he did err, and that one
Swallow makes no Summer; and that they regard the practice of your Church, more
than the Authority of Epiphanius. Thus Salmeron, Sixtus Sinensis, Gregorius de
Valentia. But may you thus depress the Fathers below your Church? May you thus
advance your spurious Church above the Fathers, as the Pope does his Nephews,
above Kings and Princes? And may not we prefer the Scriptures above either you
or them? But when you have said what you please, and tried all the shifts you
can, yet this Testimony of Epiphanius is an undeniable evidence against you,
That the gross Idolatry of Image Worship, how fast soever it was then coming
in, yet had not generally prevailed in his time. Helvicus places him upon the
year of Christ, 376.

And seeing we are upon this, let us see a little further what your Writers say
of Epiphanius, beside their anger at him for this Testimony, what general
censure and character do they give of him? It may be a Divertisement here, not
unpleasant, Can. Loc. Theol lib. 11. p. 477. Rivet. Critic. lib. 3. cap. 28.
Baron ad ann. Christi 310. Sect. 15. an. 306. Sect. 45. an. 326. Sect. 4. and 8
an. 327. Sect. 7. ann. 338. Sect. 2. ann. 342. Sect. 50. ann. 306. Sect. 45.
ann. 310. Sect 16. Petav. Animadver. ad Epiph. lib. 1. tom. 1. ad Haeres
Samaritan. page 21. ad. Haeres. 20. Herodian. page 39. ad Haeres. Epicur. page
20.
nor unuseful, to see how they handle him, that so it may appear whether they
have any greater Reverence to the Fathers, than we. Melchior Canus says of
him, Nullos ille graves Authors sequi solet. Baronius is as rude as he, and
says, ab omni scopo veritatis abhorrere quod apud Epiphanium legitur falsum
item esse quod ait, etc. Rivet refers the Reader to eight or nine places,
wherein he shows his judgment freely concerning Epiphanius. But Petavius the
Jesuit equals, if not exceeds his Fellows, Permulta enim isthic falsa (says
he, false things) minimeque cohaerentia disputat. And again, Suspicamur it aque
multipliciter hallucinatum Epiphanium. And again, in another place, Totidem
paucis illis verbis a sanctissimo eruditissimoque viro Epiphanio peccata sunt.
Quorum admonere Lectorem^ officii est institutique nostri, excusare
humanitatis, dissimulare aut tueri velle, neque officii, neque humanitatis est.
So many Errors (says he) are here committed in so few words, by this holy, and
this learned Man Epiphanius; of which Errors, to give the Reader warning, is
both my Duty and Undertaking in these Animadversions. To excuse them, is a
piece of courtesy and respect; but to dissemble them, or to defend them, is no
part either of Duty or Courtesy. Thus he. A sober, and a well-tempered Speech*
and the more observable, because uttered by one that was so full of the gall of
bitterness, as this Petavius was. But such Animadversions, such Reproofs as
these, have these Writers of your own, thought fit to bestow upon Epiphanius.
And now, what if we should say, that he, as well as some other of the Ancients,
did hyperbolize, and exceed a little in his Encomiasticks of St. Peter; and
that his words and expressions are not so wary, and so well guarded, as they
might have been, in predicating the glories of that great Apostle. It appears
from all this, that we should say no worse of him, nor handle him more
unmannerly and irreverently, than your own Writers have done before us:

This may suffice, at present, for the further illustration of these matters.
As also, for the Vindication of the True Reformed Protestant Christian
Religion, in the purity of it, as contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, against the Roman Catholic Apostasy. The Lord bless what
has been said, for the reducing and bringing home his lost sheep, and for the
further establishment of Believers in their most Holy Faith.

FINIS.

