A DISPUTATION CONCERNING Church Members AND THEIR CHILDREN, IN ANSWER TO XXI.
QUESTIONS: Wherein the State of such Children when Adult, Together with their
Duty toward the Church, And the Churches Duty toward them is DISCUSSED.

BY AN ASSEMBLY of DIVINES meeting at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, June 4th. 1657.

Now Published by a Lover of Truth.

London, Printed by I. Hayes, for Samuel Thomson at the Bishops Head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

To the READER.
IT is justly accounted one of the glories of the English Nation, that God has
honored them with special light in some momentous Truths, above what he has
other Protestant Churches round about them. The morality of the Christian
Sabbath, deep and spiritual insight into those secret transactions between the
Lord and the souls of his elect at their first conversion, and also in their
after walking in communion with God, are usually observed as instances hereof.
And of the same kind, though perhaps in a lower rank, are those Truths about
the instituted Worship of God, which have been now for some years a
considerable part of those disquisitions, which do also at this day exercise
the most searching thoughts and ablest pens that are amongst us. And truly the
dealing of God in his Providence toward the people of this Land, in bringing
out the light and glory of these Truths, has been observable, and different
from the way that he has walked in to other Churches. For, whereas they rose
up from Antichristian apostasy in Doctrine and Discipline both at once,
together with his abominations in Faith, rejecting also his inventions in
Church Order, insomuch as neither the Head, the Pope, nor his Body in the
principal Members of it, the Archbishops and Bishops with the rest of that
Hierarchical frame, have at all been to be found exercising the usurpations of
the man of sin, in most of the Reformed Protestant Churches since the first day
of their rejecting Popery: In England it was far otherwise, the head of
Antichrist being indeed here cut off by Henry the eighth, who justled him from
his usurped supremacy within his Territories, but yet (as is observed of him)
he left his body, the Hierarchy, continuing; which for many years not only
stood, but exercised in a great measure, the authority of the Dragon, and made
an image of the Beast, and caused as many as would not worship it to be killed.
And in this the Lord had doubtless a design, more fully to lay open the
loathsomeness of the abominations of the mystery of iniquity in this part of
it; which by his infinite wisdom he effectually carried on all along, and has
in a good part accomplished in these days wherein we live. For even from the
first Reformation here begun, the Lord shone in upon the understandings of some
of his precious servants, with such an evidence of light in these things, as
overpowred their Consciences, and constrained them to bear a public testimony
against the remainders of Antichrist in the Land. Insomuch as from that time,
till the day of the downfall of all the Hierarchical brood, God never suffered
himself to be without his witnesses in this cause of his, whom he raised up,
and whose right hand he held, to plead, and preach, and pray, and weep, and
believe, and print, and contend, and resist, and suffer, for the institutions
of Christ, not only to silencing and reproach, but to banishment and blood it
self some of them. And verily the number of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, who
have had his testimony and kept the Word of the patience of the Saints in this
Land since the first Reformation, will be found not to be few, and their
sufferings neither few nor light, whenever that dying wish of judicious and
blessed Ames shall be accomplished as it deserves, viz. that a Martyrologie, in
this cause of Church Discipline under the Bishops, should be compiled and
published to the world. And hence it is come to pass, that amongst the English
Divines and Christians there is, as was said, more light in these points, and
in sundry of their Church Assemblies and administrations more purity, then is
so ordinarily to be met withal in others. Amongst all that have suffered for
and searched into these Truths, they of New England justly deserve, and will
have, a name and a glory, as long as the earth shall have any remembrance of an
English Nation; not only for their sufferings here under the iniquity of those
bloody Fathers of the Church (as they loved to be styled) the Bishops, though
they bore as great if not a greater share therein than most of their brethren
that stayed behind them. But more especially will after ages honor them, for
that great and high adventure of theirs, in transporting themselves, their
wives, and little ones, upon the rude waves of the vast Ocean, into a remote,
desolate and howling wilderness, and there encountering by Faith and patience,
with a world of temptations, and streights, and pressing wants, and
difficulties; and this, upon no other inducements, but that they might meet
with him whom their souls loved in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks, and
see him as they have there seen-him in his Sanctuary: An undertaking hardly to
be paralleled, unless perhaps by that of their Father Abraham from Ur of the
Caldees, or that of his seed from the Land of Egypt.

And these are the men, Christian Reader, who are the Authors of this
disputation now put into thy hands; which deserves esteem and acceptance
somewhat the rather on this account, because it comes from such as it does, and
is about such a Subject; even from men holy and learned, and is about that
which they have searched into, as seriously, impartially and unprejudicedly, as
any men are ever like to do in this world. Besides, that being themselves
Officers to Instituted Churches of Saints, and this work of theirs being nextly
and especially for the service of the Churches, they did therein lie under as
direct and full an influence of the Spirit of Christ, and were on all accounts
as completely wrapped within the promise for their guidance, as men can on this
side Heaven. Yea it is about those Truths which they have, and at this day do
suffer for; and therefore they are as likely as most others, to be the
instruments in the hand of Christ, by whom he will communicate further light in
these points: God is never behind hand with men, and as some special exercise
of any particular Grace strengthens and increases it, and establishes the
heart in it and with it; so, the obedience and faithfulness of his servants to
any truth of Christ, especially if in an eminent degree and manner, engages
God to make known more of his counsel and will in that truth to such persons,
and as under such an engagement the Lord looks upon himself. It is true indeed
the Civil Magistrates of that Jurisdiction of the English in New England that
lies upon the River Connectiquot, sent these Questions to the Magistrates of
the Massachusetts, and they mutually called together sundry of the ablest
Ministers of each Colony, and recommended to their search and considerations
these enquiries thus stated, thus framed: And this was the happy rise of this
Disputation; what is here thus tendered to the world, being the result and
product of the consultations and debates on this occasion had, which was by the
Elders met together agreed to, and accordingly presented, to the Magistrates of
the aforesaid Jurisdictions respectively. But nevertheless, it was especially
and nextly for the service of the Churches, the pious and careful Magistrates
being herein indeed nursing Fathers to them; for they finding doubts* and
perhaps some differences about these points, likely to arise and disquiet the
Churches, took this prudent and happy course, timely to bring forth such light,
as might be to universal satisfaction, before darkness had brought forth
difference in judgment and perhaps practice also, and that contentions, and
they such animosities and paroxysmes as would afterward more hardly be healed,
than prevented.

These Papers came some months ago to England, and it was then in his thoughts
that had them in his hands, to have made them public; but for some reasons
which then prevailed with him he forbore, yet has since given way thereto,
partly expecting, according to some intimation which he had from New England,
that the Magistrates there would have ordered the printing of them. But, not
hearing since that it is there done, he has given way to the desires of some
Friends here, who were acquainted with them, and with his having of them, that
they should now thus be made public; hoping withal, that what is done herein,
will not be unacceptable to those Reverend persons, that were the authors of
this Disputation. Especially considering, that God who forms the Spirit of man
within him, and in an especial manner guides the hearts and studies of his
servants, has of late set awork some of them in Old England also, to search
into these Questions, and communicate the issue of their enquiries to the world
in print; whence likewise many more, are awakened to desire and long, for
further light in these points about which the main part of this disputation is.
Thus we see, the same great and blessed Spirit, that dwells and works in the
hearts of all the Saints all the world over, has, in this also, wrought the
same work, on the hearts of the servants of Christ in Old England and in New:
From whence there arises (though not such as quite to take away all difference
in judgment, yet) a further oneness and agreement between them, than that of
blood and language, as men of the same Nation; or that of the common Faith, as
fellow-Saints and servants of the same Lord. Like as two needles of equal
weight, touched at once with the loadstone, will as they say, by a secret
Sympathy move alike and at once, though at many miles distance one from
another; so the hearts of the Saints in both Englands, as being touched with the
same Spirit, have moved together toward the same enquiries; although perhaps,
as in other points, they got the start of most of us here in England, being in
the light, and shaking of the dust of Babylon, before most of our Churches did;
so they may in this also, have had the same honor; there appearing in them a
study of the Questions resolved in this Disputation, before there was any
observeable discovery of such a search here amongst us; the wise God keeping
toward us both the like proportion still, so carrying on them and us, in an
even pace, toward the same end of light and glory, which he will bring us both
unto at last. And these Papers with the truths therein, having in themselves a
tendency to this happy end, the midwifeing of them by the press into the
public and common light, in compliance with the aforesaid providence (they
being likely otherwise to have lien hid in a private hand or two) cannot be
looked upon as at all injurious to those honored and reverend Elders that were
the Authors of them, much less to any others; for it is here done, (saving the
Errata of the press) with such faithfulness as cannot be impeached.

And this is the rather said, because perhaps the Reader may have been deceived
in some other Treatises, which have gone abroad, and generally been looked
upon, as the compilement of the Elders in New England; whereas they had but one
private person for their Author. So it is indeed in the 32 Questions, the
Answerer whereof was Mr. Richard Mather, and not any other Elder or Elders in
New England, who likewise is the Author of the discourse concerning
Church Covenant printed therewith, which latter he wrote for his private use in
his own Study, never intending, nor indeed consenting to its publication, nor
so much as knowing unto this day how the copy of it came abroad into those
hands by whom it is made public, save that he conjectures some procured a copy
of it from Mr. Cotton, to whom (such was their intimacy in his life time) he
communicated it, as he writes in a late Letter to a Son of his now in England
who it seems had enquired of him concerning those Treatises; and much less is
there any truth in that which is said in the Title page prefixed to the
Discourse of Church Covenant, as if it were sent over to Mr. Barnard Anno 1639;
Mr. Mather having neither acquaintance nor any intercourse by Letters with Mr.
Barnard.

Nor indeed, are these Papers, now in thy hands, the declared judgment of all
the Elders in New England, there being but about twenty called together by the
Magistrates to consult of these things, and declare their judgments in them,
and of those twenty, two or three met not with the rest. They are nevertheless
the genuine product of that Meeting of Elders which on the forementioned
occasion was held in the 4th Month 1657 at Boston in New England.

What entertainment they will meet with now they are abroad it is not for me to
say. They must now run the same hazard with other writings of this kind. Some
passages there are which I fear will be wrested by one kind of men or other to
serve their own hypothesis. It was in my thoughts, having some special
advantages for it, here to have inserted something as to those particulars for
the prevention of such an abuse. But I shall only say this* let but such
passages in this short tract as seem most to vary from what the Elders and
Churches of New England have been accounted to profess and practice, receive
an interpretation as they will bear, from their own declared judgment, either
in their platform of Church Discipline, or in other writings of their own, and
I doubt not but it will be found, they are not warped from their former Faith
and Order: Whatever some may think from this Treatise, or whatever Mr. Giles
Firmin has born the world in hand, in any of his late misrepresentations of
them; whom I rather choose to instance in, for that his reports of New England
have perhaps therefore found the more credit, because he above others is not
without advantages to know New England, and the ways of the Churches there,
better than it seems he does.

The design of these enquiries being to search out what course the Lord Christ
in his wisdom and faithfulness has appointed, for prevention of the
degenerating of Churches in successive generations, from their primitive
soundness and purity, and of the polluting and prostituting of his holy things
thereby; it is not altogether improbable, but some additional contribution of
light, may be brought forth by them to us here in England, in that great case
of ours, about the restoring of such of our Parishes as retain any thing of the
essence of a Church in them (and thence are capable of a reformation) to such a
measure of purity, as may take off the just distasts and dissatisfactions of
such, as are conscientiously tender of their Church Communion: The preservation
of Churches pure, and restoration of them when collapsed, meeting in the end,
do also run along together in the way thereto, and are to be accomplished by
the same rules. May this in any measure be the fruit of this Disputations
coming under the press, it will never repent any of those persons that have
had any hand therein; yea it will be their rejoicing and their glory in the day
of the Lord Jesus; and, that so it may, the blessing of Heaven be upon it.

A DISPUTATION CONCERNING Church Members AND THEIR CHILDREN IN ANSWER to 21
QUESTIONS.
Quest. 1. WHether any Children of confederate Parents be under their Parents
Covenant and members with them.

Answ. Some Children of confederate Parents are by means of their Parents
Covenanting, in Covenant also, and so Members of the Church by divine
Institution. For,

Arg. 1. They that are in that Covenant for substance which was made with
Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. they are in Covenant, and Members of the Church, by divine
Institution, because that Covenant does infer Church Membership, as being the
formal cause thereof; For 1. A people that are in that Covenant, are thereby
the visible People or Church of God, Genesis 17. 7. compared with Deuteronomy. 29. 12,
13. by this Covenant the Family of Abraham, and so afterward the People of
Israel, was made and established the visible Church of God. 2. Many were in
that Covenant, which never were in saving state of grace; Therefore that was
the external or Church Covenant, which God makes with his visible Church or
People. 3. Circumcision sealed that Covenant, which was the distinguishing mark
between those within and those without the Church.

But some children are in that Covenant for substance which was made with
Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. as appears by sundry Scriptures, which being rightly
considered, and compared, do infer the continuance of the substance of that
Covenant, whereby God is a God to his People and their seed, under the new
Testament, Acts 2. 39. Gal. 3. 14. with Genesis 28. 4. Romans 11. 16, 17. the
Churches of the Gentiles do partake of the root of covenanting Abraham and of
Olive or Church estate thereby: So 1 Cor. 7. 14. The word [Holy] as applied to
any sort of persons, and opposed to Gentile-uncleannesse is not in Scripture
used for less then a Faederall, or covenant-holinesse, but is often used in
that sense, as Ezr. 9. 2. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. 21. and 26. 19. and 28. 9.
Dan. 8. 24. and 12. 7. Romans 11. 16. and where a covenant or faederal estate is
asserted of children, what does it but refer us to that Ancient and never
revoked covenant, common to all Nations, whereof Abraham was the
Pattern-Father, Genesis 17. 5, 7. And if Gentile Proselytes of old, they and their
children shared in that covenant, surely Gentile believers now are not behind
them in the like privilege; For the Gentile confederate believer is also a
child of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7, 29. Romans 4. 11, 16.

Therefore he has that covenant of which Abraham was a pattern subject, made
with him, viz. That God will be his God, and the God of his seed, Luke 19. 9.

Arg. 2. Such children as are by Christ, affirmed to have a place and portion
in the Kingdom of Heaven, they have a place and portion in the visible Church,
and so consequently are members thereof. But so it is with some children, Math.
19. 14. Mark 10. 14. Luk 18. 16. The Proposition is evident, for the Kingdom
of heaven or of God is sundry times used to express the visible Church, or
Church estate, Math. 25. 1. and 21. 43. and 8. 12. And if the Disciples might
or should have known that those children were to be admitted to Christ upon
that ground, then the Kingdome-Interest of such children was a visible or
knowable and apparent thing.

If any should expound it of the Kingdom of Glory* yet that would infer the
same thing: For neither may the Church exclude those from her fellowship, who
by Christ his testimony are visible heirs of Glory, nor are any in ordinary
course heirs of the Kingdom of Glory, that are not of Gods visible Church, and
Kingdom of Grace here. And what is there spoken by Christ himself, as a
standing truth, and that under the term of the Kingdom of Heaven (a term in
special manner applied unto Gospel-Administration) cannot be doubted to
continue in force in the Christian Church of the new Testament.

Arg. 3. If no children be members of the visible Church, then was not the Lord
Jesus (when a child) a member of the visible Church, but none (we presume) will
venture to say so of Christ.

Arg. 4. If it were not so, no children might be Baptized: For Baptism being a
Church Ordinance, and a seal of being incorporated into the Church, 1 Cor. 12.
13. and succeeding circumcision, which was proper to the Church, none can be
subjects immediately capable thereof, but Church Members; Nor does the Power of
Officers, as such, extend further then to the Churches; as they cannot judge,
so they may not Baptize them that are without, or non-members.

Arg. 5. They that are some of the Disciples intended in Mat. 28. 19. are
Church Members. For as the term [Disciples] is ordinarily used for
Church Members, Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 5. and 9. 26. and 14. 22, 23, 27, 28, and 18.
27. and Verse. 22. with Chap. 21. 16. and 20. 7. So this sense thereof best
suits that place in Matthew 28. 19. because the Disciples there are the
immediate subjects of Baptism, and so of being called by God his name, the
wonted Title of Church Members, and because they are such as are subjected to
Christ's School, to Christ's Doctrine and Discipline, and to the authoritative
teaching of his Ministers, and observation of all things that shall be taught
by them, ver. 20.

But some children are some of the Disciples intended in Mat. 28. 19. For 1.
some children were some of those whom the Apostles in accomplishing that
commission, did Disciple, Acts 15. 20. Those whom the false Teachers would have
reduced, under the yoke of circumcision, they were some of those whom the
Apostles accounted Disciples, or whom the Apostles had Discipled: But some
children were some of those, whom the false Teachers would have reduced under
the yoke of circumcision, for they would have had both Gentile Parents and
children circumcised, after the manner of Moses. v. 1, 5. with Exodus 12. 48,
49. and Acts 21. 21. And that the Apostles took in children with Parents when
they were conversant in the work of Discipling, further appears from Acts 2.
39. and 16. 15, 31, 33. 1 Cor. 7. 14. 2. Some children are under the promised
teaching of God, Isa. 54. 13. And the Word there used is rendered Disciples,
Isa* 8. 16. 3. Some children do visibly belong to Christ, Mark. 10. 14. Josh.
22. 24, 25. Therefore are Disciples. Compare Mat. 10. 42. with Mark 9. 41. 4.
When Christ says, Disciple all Nations, he bids gather the Gentiles into like
covenant and Church Estate (for the substance thereof) which had been the
portion of the Jews. Therefore he bids Disciple some children.

Arg. 6. They that are subjects of the Lords visible Spiritual Kingdom,
servants and children of the Lords Family, they are Members of the Church,
which is called the Lords Kingdom, and House and Family in the Scripture: But
so are some children, Ezekiel. 37. 25, 26, 27. It is David's, i. e. Christ's
Spiritual-Gospel-Kingdom, that he there speaks of; and that in reference unto
visible Sanctuary or Church Estate. That some children are the Lords Servants,
see, Lev. 25. 39, 41, 42. And that, not by common right of Creation only, or
designment unto some particular service; but of special Redemption and
conservation, there spoken of. And surely both childrens capacity so to be, and
the Lords Grace and Favor so to accept them, was not greater then, than now.
That they are children, sons and daughters of God, see Romans 9. 4, 26. Genesis 6.
2. Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. and 23. 37. And how were these children the Lords children
properly and merely upon the account of internal and spiritual regeneration?
For that was not found in many of the children spoken of in the places
mentioned, nor yet only by Creation, for so others were Gods children as well
as the children of the Jews, and so the daughters of men were his daughters as
well as the other were his sons, Genesis 6. 2. Therefore they are said to be Gods
children, because of their Covenant, and Church relation unto him, which was
common to all the children of the Church, and to none other, and so, Ezekiel. 16*
8. shows, being compared with verse 20, 21.

Arg. 7. If no children be members of the visible Church, then we have no
well-grounded hope according to ordinary course of dispensation, of the
salvation of any dying Infants: And the reason is, because salvation pertains
to the Church, Isa. 45. 17. Ephesians. 2. 12. and 5. 23, 26. Ioh. 4. 22. Act. 2. 27.
Luke 19. 9. Those that are without the visible Kingdom of God, are visibly in
the Kingdom of Satan; for he is the God of the world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And to him
are men delivered, when they are cast out of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1.
20. So if children live and die out of the visible Church, they live and die
out of Gods visible Kingdom, and visibly in the Kingdom of Satan: And then what
visible ground of hope (according to ordinary course) of their salvation? But
to account the estate of all that die children, so hopeless and forlorn, is
contrary to the tender and rich mercy of the Lord, and to the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, and to Godly Parents most uncomfortable.

Arg. 8. If some children were Members of the Church of God in the old
Testament, then some children are Members of the Church of God in the days of
the new Testament: But some children were Members of the Church in the time of
the old Testament; which though a Truth, that we know not how any can deny, yet
we may briefly evince and confirm thus; That children then were in Covenant, is
expressly witnessed, Genesis 17. 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12, 15. And that they were in
such a Covenant, or so in Covenant, as to be Members of the Church that then
was, appears, because 1. They were in the same Covenant that their Parents or
elder persons were in, and whereby they were constituted Members of the Church,
Genesis 17. 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 14, 15. and 27. 9. and 26. 18. Ier. 23. 11.
Acts 7. 38. 2. They were subjects of a Church-Ordinance, never regularly
applied to any out of the Church, viz. Circumcision, Romans 3. 1, 2. They were
Israelites, (i. e. In other words, Members of the Church of Israel) to whom
pertained. Church privileges, Rom 9. 4. They were children of the Kingdom, and
such as were capable of being cast out of Church estate, therefore in it, Mat.
8. 12. Romans 11. 20. Ier. 7. 15. 2 King. 17. 20. 5. They were visibly the Lords
people by Covenant, even as the rest of the people were the Lords people, Ezekiel.
16. 8, 20, 21. 6. They were children of the House of Israel, as opposed to
dogs, i. e. Persons out of the Church, Mat. 15. 24, 26. In a word, as often as
they are said or implied to be a part of the holy seed, of the holy people, of
the Lords people, of Israel, of the Circumcision, of those whom God redeemed
out of the Land of Egypt, to make them his peculiar treasure, of the
inheritance and congregati- of the Lord, etc. So often are they showed to be
Members of the Church.

But all the Question will be about the consequence of the Proposition, and
that may be cleared thus.

1. If the Church of the old Testament and the Church of the Gentiles under the
new Testament, be for kind essentially the same, then if children were Members
of that Church, they are also Members of these: For if they be the same
essentially, and the same for kind, then they have the same Covenant or general
From: Therefore that Covenant which takes in the seed or children, Genesis 17. 7.
Therefore the seed or children are in and of the one Church as well as the
other. But that the Church State then and now, was and is essentially the same,
is evident, because it is the same Kingdom of God, and not another; which is
taken from them, and given to us, Mat. 21. 43. and 8. 11, 12. One and the same
sheepfold for kind, under one and the same shepherd, in which were the Jews
first, and the Gentiles afterward, John 10. 16. The Gentiles are fellow heirs
with the Jews of the same body, and partakers of the same promise, Ephesians. 3 6. We
are in the same root and Olive, from which some of them were broken off, in
which the Godly Jews not broken off, did still continue, and into which the
rest shall be grafted in again in time, Romans 11. 17, 18, 24. The conversion of
the Gentiles is expressed in such a manner, as to be by coming in to the Jews,
and joining with them, as Iaphet must dwell in the Tents of Shem, Genesis 9. 27.
And not that Shems Tents must be destroyed, and other kind of Tents built for
Iaphet to inhabit: All which do show that the Church then and now, is not
essentially (though sundry ways accidentally) differing, but the same.

2. Again, If the consequence be not good, then it will follow that such Jews
as were brought in by the Gospel into Church Estate, were great losers by
embracing the Gospel; and the children losers by their Parents Faith, inasmuch
as though in the former state, the children were Members with the Parents, yet
now in the Gospel-estate, the children by this assertion are all left out. Yea,
then the children of those Jews, Acts 2. Which before the Sermon, when their
Parents wanted Faith, were in the covenant and Church State with their Parents,
are now after the Sermon, when their Parents are become believers, cast out or
fallen out of the Church. A strange and harsh Doctrine, that the Faith of the
Parents should set the children further off from God, and from his Church and
covenant, than they were before.

3. Then also when the Jews shall be converted in the latter days of the new
Testament, the Parents must be Members of the Church, but not the children, and
so they shall be in a worse condition than formerly, as not having their
children in the Church with them, as formerly it was. But besides the
harshnesse of such a conclusion, see the contrary, in Ier. 30. 20. Isa. 61. 9.
and 59. 21. and 65. 23. Ezekiel. 37. 25, 26.

4. Although it be true that the Lord has made difference between the
Administration of his covenant and Grace to his people in these days, from
that which was in former times, yet as these differences are not in the essence
of the Church Estate, but in accidentals and in degree, so where any alteration
is made, it is still for our advantage and greater benefit; and therefore our
covenant is called a better covenant, and established upon better promises,
Heb. 7. 22. and 8. 6. And from this it is that the burden of ceremonies which
lay on them, is now taken off; the darkness of Types and Shadows is now
removed, and liberty is now given to worship the Father every where; whereas
they were for many things tied only to Jerusalem; and every congregation of
Saints is now a Church entire within it self, whereas then no single
congregation had such Church Power and entirenesse of Jurisdiction; but all
their congregations had dependence on Jerusalem, and all made up but one
National Church. In these things and some others that might be named, there is
alteration made, but still it is an alteration for the better and for our
advantage. But now for the Particular in Question, If children were then
Members of the Church, and now be not, here is an alteration made for the
worser, and not for the better, not for our advantage but for our loss (for so
it is, to have all our children put out of covenant and Church, and from all
the privileges thereof, Josh. 22. 24, 25. Ephesians. 2. 12. Psalm. 87. 3. Mat. 15.
26.) And therefore such a change may not be admitted. For Christ by his coming
did not worsen the condition (not of the whole Church, but not) of any one
person upon Earth, nor yet of any age or condition or sort of persons, Luke 2.
10. And surely the child in minority (as the Church of old was, Gal. 4. 1, 2.)
has not a greater or larger place in the house, nor is in better condition in
respect of privileges, than the heir that is full of age. And who can think
that a place in Gods House which is promised as so great a Benefit, in Isa. 56.
5, 7. And accounted such a Glory, Advantage, etc. Romans 3. 1, 2. and 9. 4.
Should be no more but a part of that bondage and tutorage which belongs to
children under age? Hence also add a fifth Argument to prove the consequence
above mentioned.

5. If children were once Church Members and do not continue to be
Church Members still, then their Membership must have been repealed by the
Lord, who alone could make such an alteration: And if any should affirm that
the Lord has done it, it lies upon them to prove it; and to show when or
where such an alteration was made, or such a repeal may be found. But in the
mean time, though it be less needful to prove the negative, when as the
affirmative (in such a case as this) cannot be showed, yet let these
considerations amongst others that might be named for that purpose be duly
weighed.

1. If the Lord had made such an alteration, (that now under the new Testament
no children should be Members of the Church) then in all likelihood Christ or
his Apostles would have made mention of it: Witness their Faithfulness: And
how else should we know that the Lord had appointed any such alteration? but
now Christ and his Apostles in stead of mentioning any such thing, do confirm
the contrary, Mark 10. 13, 14, 16. Acts 2. 39. 1 Cor. 7. 14. And hence the
Apostles writing Epistles to Churches, do sometimes expressly and directly apply
their speeches unto children, Ephesians. 6. 1. Col. 3. 20. Which seems to imply that
they accounted children to be parts and members of the Churches unto whom they
sent those Epistles.

2. If the Apostles had taught any such alteration, surely the Jews who raised
Objections and controversies about matters of far lesser moment, and who did so
stumble at taking away the particular Rite of circumcision (for though they had
Member-ship and Baptism allowed to their children, yet that would not satisfy
them, without the Rite of circumcision also, Acts 16. 3. and 15. 1. and 21.
21.) And considering also how they had been from age to age wonted to this
covenant and Church Estate of their children; Sure'y we say, they would have
made a remarkable stand at this, if the Apostles had taught or practiced this
discovenanting or unmembring of all their children, and the Apostles would have
needed both by preaching and writing to have bestowed much pains to have
quieted them in this point: But of any such thing there is a deep and total
silence in all the new Testament.

Quest. 2. Whether all children of whatever years or conditions be so, as, 1.
Absent children never brought to the Church. 2. Born before their Parents
Covenanting. 3. Incorrigible of seven, ten, or twelve years old. 4. Such as
desire not to be admitted with their Parents, of such an age.

Ans. Only such children as are in their minority, covenant with their
Parents; therefore not all children of whatsoever years and conditions. We do
not hereby exclude such as being defective in their intellectuals, are as
children in respect of their incapacity. That adult children are to covenant in
their own persons, see Ans* to Quest. 6th. 2. Children in their minority,
though absent, covenant in their Parents, and are Members with them, Dout. 29.
14, 15. 3. Children born before their Parents covenanting, yet if in their
minority when their Parents enter into covenant, do covenant with them and are
Church Members, Genesis 17. 25. The whole household of Lydia, the Jailor and others
were baptized, therefore some children in minority which were born before,
except we shall deny so much as one child in minority then alive in all those
houses. 4. There is no sufficient reason (at least ordinarily) to conclude a
child of seven, ten, or twelve years old to be incorrigible, because a child at
the ages mentioned is infans in foro Ecclesie, i. e. He has no voice nor is
capable of being heard in a Church way, therefore not incorrigible as to the
Church. Their obstinacy at the years mentioned is not capital: By Gods Law,
Deuteronomy. 21. 18. There is still place for hope, Prove. 19. 18. and 22. 15. 5. Their
desiring or not desiring in their own persons during the ages forementioned, is
not to be attended as the ground of proceeding in this case, because the ground
thereof is the covenant founded upon Divine Institution, and in-depending upon
such childrens desires.

Quest. 3. Till what age shall they enter into Covenant with their Parents,
whether sixteen, twenty one, or sixty?

Ans. As long as in respect of age or capacity they cannot according to
ordinary account, be supposed able to act in a matter of this nature for
themselves, so long they shall enter in by means of their Parents covenant,
because whilst they are children and in their minority, they are not otherwise
capable of covenanting: When adult, they are to covenant in their own persons.
If a precise and certain age may here be prescribed, surely it is safe to go,
at least so far, as may answer the example, Genesis 17. 25. Where Ishmael is
admitted to the Seal by his Fathers covenant at thirteen years of age. Howbeit,
the bounding of adult and in-adult age, depending upon the judgment of
prudence, much is to be left unto the discretion of Officers and Churches in
this case.

Quest. 4. What Discipline a child is subject to* from seven to sixteen years
old?

Ans 1. Church Discipline is taken either more largely for the act of a
Churchmember dispensed to a Churchmember as such, by way of Spiritual watch,
rebuke, etc. Luke 17. 3, 4. Mat. 18. 15. Or more strictly, for the act of the
whole Church, dispensed by a Member thereof; as in case of public rebuke,
admonition, excommunication, Mat. 18. 17. 2 Cor. 2. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 20. In the
first sense, children in their minority, are subject to Church Discipline
immediately, but not in the second.

2. It is the Duty of the Elders and Church to call upon Parents to bring up
their children in the narture and admonition of the Lord, and to see as much as
in them lies, that it be effectually done, Ephesians. 6. 4. Officers and Churches
respect vely succeed Apostles in matters of ordinary practice.

3. Besides their subjection to Ecclesiastical Discipline, they are also
subject to civil Discipline respectively according to their capacity, whether
Domestical, Scholasticall, or Magistraticall.

Quest. 5. Whether a Father may twice Covenant for his Children in Minority in
several Churches?

Ans. 1. When a Parent is called to remove from one Church to another, he is
also called to enter into covenant in that Church to which he removes, Paul was
first baptized and in communion at Damascus, Act. 9. 29. Afterward removed
unto Jerusalem, and joined to the Church there, v. 26. This, the very nature of
order calls for, because otherwise he can neither do all the duties, nor
enjoy all the privileges of a Member, in the one Church or in the other; not
in the former, because now he dwells not with them; nor in the other, because
though dwelling amongst them, he joyneth not with them in covenant.

2. When the Parent thus removing, enters into covenant, his children then in
minority covenant in him: The child and the power of Government over the child,
must go together, Prove. 29. 15.

3. Hence it is the duty of Churches when they give Letters dimissory unto
Parents, to insert the dismission of the children then in minority with them.

4. Adult children yet under the power of the Parents and removing with them,
are to give their personal consent unto this translation of their Membership,
and so to be orderly dismissed and received with their Parents, otherwise they
remain Members of the Church of which they were before.

Quest. 6. Whether the end of a Deputy Covenant, be not to supply personal
incapacity, or whether Children ripe for personal Covenanting in regard of
age, should Covenant by a Deputy, as others that are unable thereunto?

Ans. 1. Children in their minority, whose immediate Parents are in
Church Covenant, do covenant in their Parents; see the proof hereof in answer
to Question 1.

2. Children adult ought to covenant in their own Persons. To covenant in our
own persons according to the sense of this Question, is nothing else but an
orderly and Church profession of our Faith, or a personal public and solemn
avouching of God, in an Ecclesiastical way, to be our God, according to the
covenant of his Grace, the great duty of the people of God throughout all
generations, both in the times of the Law and Gospel: Pregnant and Illustrious
examples whereof we have, in the time of Moses, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18, 19. and 29.
10, 11, etc. And of Joshua, Josh. 24. 18, 27. Of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. Of
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32. So Ier. 50 5. A considerable part of which
Prophecy (for it extends it self also to the ages after Christ) we have
accomplished Nehem 9. ult. and 10. 28, 29. The Priests and Levites and many
others there named, and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, every
one that had knowledge, and that had understanding, did cleave unto their
Brethren, their Nobles, and entered into a covenant and an Oath, to walk in Gods
Law; so of the times under the Law.

Concerning the times under the Gospel, in Isa. 62. 5. and 41. 3, 4, 5. We read
of the seed and offspring of Jacob and Israel, that when they should be sprung
and grown up ( h. e. become adults) they should both by word and writing, by
saying and subscribing with their hands, engage themselves unto the Lord. It is
a part of instituted Gospel Worship. The same reason which called the Fathers
to confession before, calls the son also when adult. It went for good reason
among the Jews; He is of age, he shall speak for himself, Ioh. 9. 21. What more
meet than that the confession of our Faith should be made with our own mouths
when we are able? God avoucheth them in the same day when they avouch him. It
is a special engagement of the adult person, to perform his covenant, Psalm.
119. 106. I have sworn and will perform.

Lastly, It is a duty (compared with others) especially commended in the
Scriptures, from the subject thereof, viz. A Believer, Romans 10. 10. Every
believer is a confessor. From the matter, the greatest Truth, i. e. The
Doctrine of Christ Jesus, Heb. 3. 1. The Apostle of our confession. From the
manner (others not being excluded, as we are called thereunto, 1 Pet. 3. 15.)
In a Church way, Mat. 16. 16, 19. Paul, 2 Cor. 9. 13. in a special manner
commends the subjection of the obedience of the Church astipulation of the
Corinthians: From its excellency, a good Profession, 1 Timothy 6. 12. A good
confession, v. 13. Its giving glory unto God, 2 Cor. 9. 13. Its victorious
exemplarinesse in respect of men, Rev. 12. 11. The blessing upon the sincere
performance thereof, Heb. 11. 13, 16. Mat. 10. 32. With the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

Quest. 7. Whether as large Qualifications be not required of a Members child
to the participation of the Lords Supper, and the privileges of votes and
censures, as were requirable of his Parents at their first entrance?

Ans. The holding forth of Faith and Repentance with an ability to examine
themselves, by way of confession, to the judgment of Charity, See the platform
of Church Discipline, cap* 12.. 7.
were all requirable in the Parent for admission into the Church to full
communion, and the same is requisite for the regular admission of the Parents
child being grown adult, unto his full communion with the Church.

For the clearing of this Proposition two things are to be proved. 1. That they
are to have Faith and Repentance. 2. That this Faith and Repentance must appear
to others.

First, They are to have Faith and Repentance. 1. Because Examination is the
duty, and Faith and Repentance are the matter of their Examination, without
both the being and exercise of which, they cannot come worthily to the Lords
Supper, which is the end of their examination. 2. From the end of the Lords
Supper, which is instituted, not for regeneration, but for nourishment and
confirmation. It Is a Supper and a Seal.

That their Faith and Repentance ought to appear to others, is manifest thus;
The Officers ought to be wise and faithful stewards, now to such it belongs not
only to dispense a portion in reason, but to see also that those to whom it is
dispensed, are meet to receive their portion, Luke 12. 42. 1 Cor. 4. 2. The
Lords Supper cannot regularly be administered to any receiver, concerning whom
personally, according to Truth, in the judgment of charity, the Minister cannot
say, Take and eat, this is the body of the Lord Jesus which was given for you:
But this the Minister cannot say with good Conscience to any one upon his mere
having of Faith and Repentance without a visible holding forth of the same to
others in their own persons, because both the exercise of reason and the
exercise of Grace are requisite to the taking and eating here required. As this
proves the assertion concerning the Officers, so 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. proves
the same concerning the whole body, because in a regular celebration of the
Lords Supper, the whole Church does judge all the partakers thereof to have
spiritual communion with Christ crucified, and one with another as one body in
him. It is the duty of the Church and Officers respectively (as the keepers of
the holy things) so to discern between the holy and profane, the clean and the
unclean, as that the Sacrament may only be administered unto worthy receivers,
Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8, 23. But this cannot be, except the premised essential
requisites be made appear to them in judgment of Charity. Concerning the power
of voting, it is not rational that they should exercise a Church Power as to
the administration of Church-Ordinances, which voting implies, who themselves
are unfit for all Ordinances. They who are thus unfit will abuse the Ordinances
themselves, and admit and retain unworthy Officers and Members, and discourage
the worthy, and therefore power in the hands of such is not for edification,
but for destruction, contrary to the mind of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 8.

Quest. 8. Whether by Covenant seed, is meant the seed of immediate Parents
only, or of remote also?

Ans. The Gospel by Covenant seed, intends only the seed of immediate Parents
in Church Covenant, as appears from 1 Cor. 7. 14. The Parents there spoken of
are immediate Parents, their Progenitors were Heathens. The Gospel extends not
the external Covenant beyond the immediate Parents: If neither of the immediate
Parents be in Covenant, their children are unclean; see the Text. The next
Parent may bring in his seed, though his Progenitors be unbelievers; and the
next Parents may cut off their seed, though the progenitors be believers;
witness the instances of Ishmael and Esau, Ier. 9. 25, 26. Ezekiel. 32. 29. Psalm.
83. 6. Mal. 1. 4. Genesis 21. 10. Otherwise there can no generation be given,
where the Covenant Interest of posterity can expediently be bounded: Depinge
ubi sistam, Show us where we shall make our stand. The contrary exposes the
Churches to inevitable and intolerable impurities.

Quest. 9. Whether adopted Children and bond servants be Covenant-seed?

Ans. Adopted children and Infant-servants, regularly and absolutely subjected
to the Government and dispose of such heads of Families as are in
Church Covenant, though they cannot be said to be their natural seed, yet in
regard the Scriptures (according to the judgment of many Godly Learned) extend
to them the same Covenant privileges with their natural seed, we judge not any
Churches who are like-minded with them, for their practice herein: All which
notwithstanding, yet we desire at present to leave this Question without all
prejudice on our parts to after free disquisition.

Quest. 10. Whether the child admitted by his Fathers Covenant, be also a
Deputy for his seed, without or before personal Covenanting, or without and
before like personal qualifications in kind, as his Father was to enjoy when he
became a Deputy?

Ans. The meaning of this Question in other terms we conceive to be this;
whether the child of a person joined in Church Covenant by means of his or her
immediate Parents Covenant, though such a Parent be not admitted to, nor
qualified for full communion, nor have covenanted in their own person, whether
we say, the child of such a person is to be baptized: Whereunto we answer, in
these following propositions.

Propos. 1. Infants either of whose immediate Parents are in Church Covenant,
do confaederate with their Parents, and are therefore Church Members with them.
See Ans. to Quest. 1.

Propos. 2. It is the duty of those Infants when grown up to years of
discretion, though not yet fit for the Lords Supper, to own the Covenant they
made with their Parents, by entering thereinto in their own persons, and it is
the duty of the Church to call upon them for the performance thereof; as
appears by Scripture examples of persons both called to, and entering into
Covenant, many of whom could not be looked upon as personally Gracious, and
therefore not fit for all Ordinances and full communion, Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 14. 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32. Where it is mentioned as the performance of
a duty whereto they stand obliged by the Covenant made in their Infancy.

Propos. 3. Being accordingly called thereunto, if after Church-admonition and
other due means with patience used, See the platform of Discipline, cap. 12.. 7.
they shall refuse the performance of this great duty, or in case they shall
(notwithstanding like means applied) any otherwise continue scandalous, it is
the part of the Church to proceed with them to the censure of excommunication,
because the Facts mentioned deserve excommunication, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. Mat. 18.
17. 2 Cor. 5. 11. 2 These. 3. 6, 14. And the persons are Church Members, being
confederate with their Parents; and the Church as the matter requires,
administreth Discipline to the Members thereof, without respect of persons,
according to their capacity, 1 Cor. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 21. Add hereunto the
instance of those who are separated from the Congregation, for their
non-observance of that Covenant, Ezr. 10. 3, 7, 8. Together with the examples
of Cain, Ishmael, and Esau, not a little contributing to the truth of this
assertion, by way of proportion.

Propos. 4. In case they understand the grounds of Religion, are not
scandalous, and solemnly own the Covenant in their own persons, wherein they
give up both themselves and their children unto the Lord, and desire Baptism
for them, we (with due reverence to any Godly Learned that may dissent) see not
sufficient cause to deny Baptism unto their children, these reasons for the
affirmative being proposed to consideration.

1. Church Members without offense and not baptized, are to be baptized.

The children in Question are Church Members without offense and not baptized.

Therefore the children in Question are to be baptized.

2. Children in the covenant of Abraham, as to the substance thereof, i. e. To
whom the promise made to Abraham, as to the substance thereof does belong, are
to be baptized.

The children in Question are children in the covenant of Abraham, as to the
substance thereof.

Therefore the children in Question are to be baptized.

3. Children in the same estate with those children under the Law, unto whom
the seal of the righteousness of Faith, because in that estate was by
Institution Divine to be applied, the Precept for so doing not repealed, and
the reason for so doing still remaining are to be baptized.

But the children in Question are children in the same estate ( viz. regularly
in Church Covenant) with those children under the Law, unto whom the seal of
the righteousness of Faith, because in that estate was by Institution Divine
to be applied, the Precept for so doing not repealed, and the reason for so
doing still remaining.

Therefore the children in Question are to be baptized.

4. Either the children in question are to be baptized, or the Gospel
dispensation forbids the application of the seal unto children regularly in
Church Covenant, unto whom the Mosaical dispensation commanded it to be applied.

But the Gospel despensation forbids not the application of the seal unto
children regularly in Church Covenant, unto whom the Mosaical dispensation
commanded it to be applied.

Therefore the children in question are to be baptized.

The contrary opinion infers that the Gospel bereaveth the children mentioned
(at least in a considerable degree) of their glory, advantage, mercy, blessing,
and that in this respect it casts reproach, yea brings disadvantage, a
judgment, a curse upon them, Josh. 5. 9. Romans 3. 1, 2. and 9. 4, 5. This seems
to be a less Evangelicall Tenent, the nature of the Gospel being to enlarge
and better, not to contract and diminish the external dispensation of Grace.

5. Children unto whom the Gospel testifies both the promise and baptism by
virtue of that promise, to belong, ought to be baptized.

The children in question are children unto whom the Gospel testifies both the
promise and baptism by virtue of that to promise, to belong, Acts 2. 39.

Therefore the children in Question ought to be baptized.

Obj. The Parent though a Churchmember, owning the Covenant in his own person,
and qualified according to the premises, is not admitted to full communion,
therefore the child ought not to be baptized.

Ans. The Church-act only, and not any other act (much less defect) of the
Parent is by Divine Institution, accounted to the child. The membership of the
child is a distinct membership, from the membership of the Parent. In case the
Parents membership cease by death or censure, the membership of the child
remains still. The membership of the child is the same in kind with, and not
inferior to the membership of the Parent. Membership is a Relation, and
therefore admits not of magis and minus, more or less: Members are better or
worse, and communion is more or less; but membership admits not of degrees.
Benjamin an Infant, but of an hour old, is as truly a son as Reuben, a man of
twenty two years of age. The child is baptized by virtue of his own membership,
and not by virtue of his Parents membership. The Parents death is not with us
an obstacle of the Child's Baptism.

Propos. 5. The same may be said concerning the children of such persons in
question, who being dead or necessarily absent, either did or do give the
Churches cause in judgment of charity, to look at them as thus qualified, and
such, as had they been called thereunto would so acted: For in Charity that is
here done interpretatively, which is mentioned in the fourth Proposition
expressly.

Propos. 6. Though the persons forementioned own the Covenant according to the
premises, yet before they are admitted to full communion ( i. e. To the Lords
Supper and voting) they must so hold forth their Faith and Repentance, unto the
judgment of Charity by way of confession in the congregation, as it may appear
unto the Church, that they are able to examine themselves and to discern the
Lords body. See the proof hereof in Ans. to Quest. 7th.

Quest. 11. Whether children begotten by an excommunicate person are to be
baptized, he so remaining?

Ans. We cannot for the present answer the following Arguments for the
Negative. 1. Persons excommunicate are not members, and the promise made to the
seed, belongs (under the Gospel) only to the seed of immediate Parents in
Covenant. 2. Excommunicate Parents are to be looked at in Church account as
Heathens and Publicans, now the Church ought not to baptize the children of
those which she is to account as Heathens and Publicans, because their children
are unclean, 1 Cor. 7. 14. 3. To baptize the children of the excommunicate, is
to have Church Communion with the excommunicate: But those that we are
forbidden to have civil communion with, 1 Cor. 5. 11. We are much more
forbidden to have Church Communion with.

Quest. 12. Whether a Child born of a justly censurable person, yet not
actually excommunicate, be to be baptized?

Ans. We answer affirmatively. 1. Because the child is a Churchmember by
virtue of his covenanting with his Parents. 2. Because the foundation of the
covenant membership of the child, is Divine Institution, which imputes the
Covenant Act only, and not any other Act of the Parents to the child.

Quest. 13. Whether a Members Child's unfitness for seals, disableth not his
seed for Membership or Baptism?

Ans. This question agreeing in scope with Quest. 10. We refer thither for
Answer thereunto.

Quest. 14. Whether a Members Child be censurable for any thing but scandalous
actions, and not also for ignorance and inexperience?

Ans. A Members child (like as it is with all other members) is censurable only
for scandalous sins, Mat. 18. 15, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Consequently for ignorance
and inexperience when scandalous, for all ignorance and inexperience though
blameable, is not scandalous, Romans 14. 1. Heb 5. 12. Luke 9. 55.

Quest. 15. Whether a Members Child must only examine himself, and may not be
examined by others, of his fitness for seals?

Ans. It is a duty of a Members child to examine himself, and yet he is also
subject to the examination of others.

1. Because the Elders are to give an account, which necessarily presupposes
that God has given them power in some respects to take an account, Heb. 13.
17. Acts 8. 37.

2. It pertains to them to see that the holy things be not defiled, by the
access of any unclean and unworthy person, Ezekiel. 44. 23. Mal. 1. 6, 7, 9. and
2. 1.

3. To teach by question and answer in the most profitable way, for the
instruction and edification of the younger sort, and is commended occasionally,
to the practice of the Churches, Gal. 6. 6.

Quest. 16. Whether only Officers must examine in private or else public
before the Church?

Ans. Concerning their examination by the Elders in private, the former reasons
conclude affirmatively, whereunto may be added occasionally that James and the
Elders contrive and prepare in private, for the more orderly and quiet
transactions of things in public, Acts 21. 22, 23. It Is spiritual wisdom by
preparing the stones beforehand, to prevent after noise in the building, 1 Kin.
7. 6.

Public examination we also conceive to be regular, edification or due
satisfaction of the Church calling thereunto, yet always orderly, that is, by
approbation of the Presbytery, and the immediate proposal of the questions by
them, to the examinate, Rev. 2. 2. 1 Cor. 14. 40.

Quest. 17. Whether the same grown Members Child must not be examined of his
Charitable experience* before Baptism, as well as before the Lords Supper?

Ans. We think the Elders do well to take an account of children, concerning
the Principles of Religion according to their capacity, before they be
baptized. If the children spoken of in the question, be yet in their minority,
their right unto Baptism being founded consequently upon the Covenant made in
their Parents; this Examination is to be looked at as conducing to the better
application, but not to the being of their Baptism. But if they be adult, they
are to give an account of their Faith and Repentance, in their own persons,
before they be baptized, Acts 8. 36, 37. Mat* 3. 6. See Ans. to Quest 6th.

Quest. 18. Whether baptized Children sent away from the Church for settlement,
and not intending return, are continually to be accounted Members?

Ans. Baptized children though locally removed from the Church unto which they
belong, are to be accounted Members, until dismission, death or, censure
dissolve that Relation, because Christ the Institutor of this Relation, only
by these ways dissolveth the same.

Quest. 19. Whether Historical Faith and a blameless life fit a Members Child
for all Ordinances* and Privileges, and he must be examined only about them?

Ans. Not only historical Faith, i. e. The mere knowledge of the fundamental
Doctrine of Faith and a blameless life, but also such an holding forth of
Faith and Repentance, as unto judgment of Charity shows an ability to examine
themselves and to discern the Lords body, is requisite to fit a Members child
for all Ordinances and Privileges, and his blameless life notwithstanding, a
Members child is to be examined concerning the other qualifications.

That both the having and holding forth of Faith and Repentance, are requisite
to fit for all Ordinances, see Ans. to Quest. 7th.

That a mere Historical Faith and every blameless life is not sufficient to
hold forth these qualifications, appears;

1. An Historical Faith as merely such, is insufficient, Iam. 2. 19.

2. A blameless life is either taken for such a conformity of the external man
to the Letter, as exempts from censure, Mat. 19. 20. Phil. 3. 6. Or for such a
conformity of the whole man as in judgment of Charity commends a person to the
Conscience of the beholder, as in measure spiritual, Phil. 1. 10. and 2. 15.

A blameless life in the first sense is not sufficient to qualify for all
Ordinances, but for our fitness thereunto, the Rule calls for a blameless
life in the second sense, Matthew. 3. 8, 9. James 2. 21. Besides the holding
forth of Faith and Repentance according to the Premises.

Quest. 20. Whether if a Churchmember barely say, it repents me, though
seventy times seven times following he relapse into the same gross evils, as
lying, slander, oppression, etc. He be to be forgiven, and not censured?

Ans. Though we always acknowledge that the Holy One of Israel is not to be
limited by man or Angel, as to the dispensation of his Grace, yet so far as we
remember the Scriptures, seventy times seven times, i. e. 490* relapses into
the same gross sin, and repentance is an instance not extant there. Without
the fruits meet for repentance, we are not called to forgive, Mat. 3. 8. Luke
17. 3.

Notwithstanding a Brother offends seventy times seven times, that is, many
times, a definite number being put for an indefinite, yet whilst God enables
him to repent, it is our duty to forgive. It Is not the number of offenses, but
the holding forth of repentance in the offender, that is the measure of our
forgiveness, Mat. 18. 22. As God for Christ's sake forgave us* so ought we to
forgive one another, Ephesians. 4. 32.

To say in words, I repent, and to gainsay it in deeds, is according to
Scripture, not to repent, yea, rather to continue in impenitency, Tit. 1. 16.
Iam. 2. 18, 26.

An ingenuous and solemn profession of repentance, nothing appearing to the
contrary, is to be accepted as true repentance in the judgment of Charity, Luke
17. 3. 1 Cor. 13. 7.

Quest. 21. Whether a Member under offense and not censured, or not with the
highest Censure, can authoritatively be denied the Lords Supper or other
Church Priviledges?

Ans. 1. None but the Church can Authoritatively deny to the Member his access
unto the Lords Supper, because the power thereof is only delegated to that
subject, Mat. 18. 17.

2. The Church cannot deny unto a Member his access unto the Lords Supper,
until she has regularly judged him to be an offender.

3. The censure of admonition is the first act whereby a Church does judicially
declare a Member to be an offender; therefore till the censure of admonition be
past, a Member cannot Authoritatively be denied communion in the Lords Supper,
or other Church Priviledges, because of offense.

4. After the sentence of Admonition is past, the offender now admonished, may
be (yea thereby is) Authoritatively denied to come unto the Lords Supper, and
to vote in the Church, because he is judicially unclean, Lev. 22. 3, 4. and 7.
20, 21. Mat. 5. 23, 24. Though he be not yet Censured with the Censure of
Excommunication.

5. All which notwithstanding, there are cases wherein a Brother apparently
discerned to be in a condition rendering him (should he so proceed to the Lords
Supper) an unworthy Communicant, may and ought regularly to be advised to
forbear, and it is his duty to hearken thereunto.

6. Yet two things are here carefully to be attended.

1. That Brethren be not many Masters, taking upon them to advise and to
admonish others to abstain without cause, or before the time, Iam. 3. 1.

2. That none forbear to come worthily, which is their duty, because to their
private apprehension, another is supposed (at least) to come unworthily, which
is their sin.

7. In case the Church shall see cause to advise a Member to forbear, and he
shall refuse to hearken thereunto, his refusal being also a violation of Church
Order, adds contumacy to his offense, and thereby ripens the Offender for
Censure.

19 4th. 1657. Boston. N. E.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 1. read Act. 15. 10. p. 6. l. 23. r. Act. 2. 47. p. 14. l. 7. r. 2
Cor. 2. 6. l. 26. r. Act. 9. 19. p. 18. l. 5. for reason r. season. p. 23. l.
30. for Church-act r. Covenant-act. p. 24. l. 19, 20. r. would have so* p. 26.
l. 20. for in r. is.


