March 2.

Matters of great Note and Consequence.

1 Diverse Questions upon his Majesty's last Answer concerning the Militia
Resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament to be of dangerous consequence.

2 A true relation of the Strange and untimely deaths which has successively
befalen all the Nobility and others, which have been the possessors of
Shirborne Castle, in Dorset-shire since that it was unlawfully usurped and
taken from the Church by King Stephen in Anno Dom. 1100.

Which Castle is now in the possession of George Lord Digby, and how the case
stands with him I leave to the Courteous Reader to Censure.

Whereunto is added, certain Articles of High Treason against the said Lord
Digby.

London, Printed for George Thompson

1641.

THat this answer of his Majesty is a denial to the (...) of both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the (...).

Resolved, That those that advised his Majesty to give this answer, are
enemies to the (...), and mischievous Projectors against the defense of the
Kingdom.

Resolved, that this denial is of that dangerous consequence, that if his
Majesty shall persist in it; It will hazard the peace and (...) of all his
Kingdoms, unless some speedy remedy be applied by the wisdom and authority
of both Houses of Parliament.

Resolved, that such parts of this Kingdom as have put themselves into a
Posture of defense against the common danger, has done nothing but what is
(...), and (...) approved by the house.

Resolved, that if his Majesty shall remove into any remote parts from his
Parliament, it will be a great hazard to the Kingdom; and a great prejudice to
the Proceedings (...) the Parliament.

Resolved, that these houses holds it necessary, (...) his (...) may be
desired, that the Prince may come unto Saint James, (...) foam other convenient
place about London, and there to continue.

Resolved, that the Lords be desired to join with this house in an humble
request unto his Majesty; that he will be pleased to reside (...) His
Parliament; that both houses may have convenience of access unto him upon all
occasions.

Resolved, that the Lords be moved to join with this house in some (...),
(...) find who were the (...) that gave his Majesty this advice, that they may
be removed from his Majesty, and brought to condign punishment.

Resolved, that no Charter can be granted by the King, to create a (...) in any
Corporation, (...) the Militia of that place, without consent of Parliament.

Resol. That the Lords shall be moved to (...) this (...)

Resolved, that the (...) shall be (...) Committee that may ioyn with a
Committee of a proportionable number of this house; to consider, and prepare
what is (...) to (...), or upon any thing else that may arise upon this answer
of his (...) concerning the (...), and concerning the Prince.

A True relation of the unfortunate and untimely deaths of all the Nobillity
and others, which ever since King Stephens time have possessed Shirborne Castle.
OSmond Earl of Dorset, a Norman by birth, and a great favorite of the
Conquerours, had Sherborne given him by the conqueror, amongst diverse other
advancements afterward, upon the Vacancie of the Sea of Salisbury, Osmund,
forsaking the temporal authority, and being in great grace with the King,
became Bishop of that See, and got the Castle of Sherborne to be annexed to
that Bishopprick, setting a curse upon them that did go about to pluck the
same from that godly and pious use, it being really given to the Church. This
Bishop was a man of that great integrity and holiness, that he was canonized
at Rome, and set down in our Almanac for a Saint. This Castle, with the land
thereunto apper^aining, continued in the Bishops until the time of King
Stephen; at which time one Roger being Bishop of Salisbury (who reedisied both
the Castle of Sherborne, and the Castle of the (...), commonly called the Vize)
being well known to be a Bishop of great wealth; the said King wanting Money
for many purposes, but especially for the compassing of a Marriage between
Eustace his only Son, and Constantia the French Kings sister, seized upon
the wealth of the said Bishop in the Castle of the Devices, and took away the
Castle of Sherborne from the Bishopprick, and kept it in his own hands. Not
long after, the right heir to the Crown, Maude the Empress, and Henry fifth
Empress her son invaded England with such power, as that King Stephen was
driven by composition to make Henry fifth Empress heir apparent to the Crown,
and d^sinherit Eustace his own natural Son as appears by the records after
that time, while the said Castle continued in (...) Crown, great and many
troubles arose to the King; sometimes the Father was divided against the Son;
sometimes the Son against the Father; the (...) of this kingdom against the
King, and the King against the Barrons: from the King this Castle was granted
to some of the Noble race of the Mountaculs, and while (...) had it, two of
them lost their heads successively one after the other, as appears by the
records, and in the time of King Edward the (...) one Robert Wynill being
Bishop of (...), brought a writ of right against William Muntacule Earl of
(...) for the said Castle, (...) he proceeded so far, as that their
Champions were entered (...) to try the (...) for it. But the King took up the
matter, and ordered the Bishop to give a sum of Money to the (...), which was
done accordingly, and the Castle restored to the Bishopprick.

The said (...) continued (...), until the time of King (...) (...) sixth, all
which time the Duke (...) Somerset got (...) lease thereof, who granted the
same (...) Sir John Horsey, the best of his ability that ever was of that name
in those parts; after which, within half a year the Duke of Somerset lost his
head, as appears by the records, and Sir John (...) declined in his estate
until he became so extreordinary poor that he was outlawed for ten pounds.
King Edward dying, and Nicolas Heath Archbishop of York being Lord Chancellor
of England, Capon Bishop of Sarum exhibited a Bill in (...) against the said
Sir John Horsey, showing that the lease which he had made to the Duke was by
(...) and threats, and for fear of his life; upon which Bill the Lord
Chancellor releived him, and decreed the Castle for the Bishop. After that it
continued in the Bishopprick, until about the thirry three of (...) Elizabeth.
At which time Sir Walter (...) got it into his (...), wh ch also lost his head,
as appears by the records, and by reason of his attainder it came again to the
Crown, and so from the Kings most (...) Majesty unto the most noble and
hopeful Prince Henry, who held it not full a year, and so returned to the
Crown, and thence shortly after it came to the Earl of (...); with whom how
the case then stood, let them to whom it appertains judge. Since his
attainder it was granted to Sir John Digby ViceChamberlaine to the King, now
Earl of Bristoll a man of great merit, and the said Earl of Bristoll after
the said castle was a short space in his (...) settled the same on his eldest
son, the now Lord George Digby in whose possession the same now really is,
and in what case he now stands, I leave to determine of the curtious reader
(...) these several Articles following.

All which may be a warning unto those sacrilegions persons who think all
things well (...), which they can get from the Church, but let them take (...)
of these things least that worse then they do not fall upon them.

Articles of Impeachment against the Lord George Digby, by the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, in maintenance of their accusation whereby he
stands accused with High Treason in the Names of all the Commons in England.
1. THat the said Georg Lord Digby, in or about the month of January 1641.
maliciously and traitorously endeavored to persuade his Majesty to leavie
forces against his Liege Subjects within this Kingdom, and the said Lord Digby
did in or about the same month, actually levy forces within this Realm, to
the terror of his Majesty's Subjects.

2. That the said Lord Digby, and about the said month of January, and at
other times (...), maliciously, and traitorously, labor to raise a jelosie and
discention between the King and his people, and to possess his Majesty that
he could not live with safety of his person amongst them, and did thereupon
traitorously endeavor to persuade his Majesty to betake himself to some place
of strength for his defense.

3. That the said Lord Digby, in or about the same month of January, and at
other times, did maliciously and traitorously endeavor to stir up ielousies
and discensions between the King and his Parliament: and to that end and
purpose, did the same month of (...), wickedly advise the framing of certain
false and scandalous Articles of high Treason against the L. Kimbolton, Denzil
Hollis Esquior, Sir Arther (...) Barronet, John Hamden, John Pym, and Master
Stroud Esquiors And (...) persuade his Majesty accompanied with diverse
Soldier, and others in warlike manner to come in person into the House of
Cemmons sitting in Parliament, to demand the said Members of the said House, to
the apparent endangering of his Majesty's person, and the high violation of the
privileges, and being of Parliaments.

All which matters were done, by the said George Lord Digby, traitorously and
wickedly to alienate the hearts of his (...) Liege People from his (...), and
set division between them, and stir up war within this Kingdom.

FINIS.

