IRENICUM: OR AN ESSAY FOR UNION. WHEREIN Are Humbly Tendered some proposals in
order to some nearer Union amongst the Godly of different Judgments.

By Mr. SAMUEL MATHER, Lately Pastor of a Church of Christ in Dublin.

Quia conjungi possunt voluntates hominum in bono, quamvis omni ex part non
habent sensus consentientes circa illa quae, pertinent ad bonum quod appetunt,
idcirco dissensio opinionum circa illa quae minus sunt necessaria, quamvis
perfectionem concordiae impediat, ipsi tamen concordiae non repugnat, Philip.
3.15, 16. Ames. Cas. Conse. lib. 5. Cap. 29. These. 4.

Necessarium est studium concordiae. 1. ratione charitatis a qua fluit, and
quam fovet, promovet and implet. 2. ratione Justitiae cujus impedimenta
removet. 3. ratione felicitatis tam communis quam privatae, quae unitis viribus
concordium bonorum facilius procuratur Idem Eod. Cap.

Opinionum varietas and opinantium unitas non sunt (...) Mr. Boroughs of Heart
divisions.

-- Siquid novisti rectius istis.
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
London, Printed by Thomas Snowden. 1680.

IRENICUM: OR AN ESSAY for UNION. WHEREIN Are humbly tendered some Proposals in
order to a Nearer Union amongst those of Different Judgments.
THose who have appeared studious of reformation in these Nations, have been
unhappily subdivided into three Forms or Parties, Commonly known by the names
of Presbyterians, Independents, and Anti-paedo-Baptists. Under each of which
there be some who are judged by those that differ from them, to be truly Godly,
and to have the root of the matter in them, as holding Christ the Head under
these various Forms. Who being not yet united into one mind and Judgment, by
conviction of error and mistake in those things wherein they differ, which
nevertheless as we have seen through the Free Grace of Christ, some instances
of already, so we may hope for in some further measure, when those better times
shall come, whereof the Lord has said that he will give his People one heart,
and one way: Mean while it may not be amiss, to try how near we can come
together, supposing each party to remain unconvinced of any error in their way.

Now in order to this end it will be requisite to Consider concerning these
three Judgments.

First how far they agree. And then,

Wherein they differ. And then,

To make some proposals in order to some nearer and closer Union amongst them.
Unto which Method we are led not out of any desire or delight to revive the
mention of our differences, which we could wish had been prevented, or could
now be buried in everlasting silence and oblivion: But because they are so
public that they cannot be hid, and because we are persuaded that a great part
of our divisions has arisen from misunderstandings of one another, and we
cannot well proceed, or not with any great clearness and evidence of light, but
rather as men groping in the dark to propound means and ways of Union, nor can
we pass any just and well grounded Judgment upon what is propounded, if we do
not in some measure understand and rightly apprehend the true State of the
Controversies; therefore let us consider one another to provoke unto Love and
to good Works.

The Agreements.
First Then, for the Agreements, they may be referred to four General Heads.

First, We do agree in the Fundamentals of Doctrine, in the Articles of the
Christian Faith, as also in the Rules of a Christian Life; that this is so does
appear as by other Evidences, so by Comparing together the several Confessions
of Faith. That of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster was approved and
accepted in the same words both by the Church of Scotland in the year 1647. And
so far as concerns matters of Faith or Doctrine, by the Churches of New England
also, as they have declared in the Preface to their Platform of Discipline,
Published in the Year 1648. As also by the great Parliament of England, in the
same Year 1648. And finally by the Congregational Churches in England in their
general meeting at the Savoy Anno 1658. And the Confession of the Churches of
the Anti-paedo-Baptists in London Published ( circiter) 1650. Though not in the
same Form of Words, yet upon perusal of it, we cannot say there is any
fundamental difference appearing as to the substance of the matter of Doctrine,
held forth therein.

If any objection be made concerning any particular Persons, as to fundamental
unsoundness and Corruption of Judgment, or looseness and unholiness of
Conversation. The Answer is, that there be some, yea, we hope many under each
of these denominations, unto whom God of his Grace has given the Spirit of a
sound mind, and a Conversation adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior. But
men of Corrupt minds not holding the Head, but holding damnable Heresies that
are Devoratoria salutis, are not included nor intended in these Proposals, no
more than men of profane lives. If there be any Persons or Societies either
under these or any other Forms or ways of profession whatsoever, who do not
agree in the fundamentals of the Christian Faith, or do not live Christian
lives, doubtless the Lord does not call his People to unite with such, but to
bear witness against them.

2. This agreement in Faith and Holiness infers and carries along with it all
the Duties of Charity and Christian Love, as Sympathy and Compassion toward
the Saints in all their Sufferings and Afflictions, to relieve their wants and
streights, etc. duties to be performed toward all, even to Enemies and the
worst of men, when their necessities call for it, but more especially toward
the Household of Faith, even to all the Saints, though differing, though erring
in some lesser thing. Hither belongs a candid construction of all their actions
and notions, interpreting every thing to the best sense, not taking an estimate
of any whole party of Professors from some few inconsiderable Individuals, nor
calculating the whole from the personal miscarriages of some, bearing with the
infirmities of the weak, forbearing and avoiding unbrotherly and provoking
terms and words, with many other things of the like nature, all which are the
necessary effects and fruits of Cordial and Christian Love.

3. As to the matters of God's Worship: There is an Agreement so far as
concerns the main Acts of natural Worship in the first Commandment viz. Prayer,
Preaching, and hearing the Word, as also in the special time of public
Worship, the Christian Sabbath, for we all observe that day, and there is no
scruple made of joining together in Prayer and Preaching, and hearing one
another, which accordingly is ordinarily practiced amongst us in this City.
Which as it is some further step toward Love and Union, so we have cause also
to acknowledge it to the Lord, as a considerable Advance and increase of Light
shining forth upon us in these present times, for it was a thing much scrupled
in the former Age before the late Reformation by some whose Name and Sect has
disappeared, being worn out by the further progress of the Light and Work of
Christ amongst us.

4. As to matters of Institution and Church-Worship, in the Second Commandment,
here indeed it is that the difference lies, but yet there be some General
Agreements even here also, at least in the Fundamentals of Worship. Instance
may be given in Four Uniting Principles sufficient for a safe and well grounded
Union.

1. We all agree that the Scripture is the Rule as in all other matters of
Faith and Life, so likewise in the matters of God's Worship.

2. That the Lord has appointed a Ministry in his Church, who are bound by
their Office to Preach the Word, and to administer the Seals and Censures in
his name.

That the Lord's Supper ought not to be administered promiscuously unto all,
Confessi. Faith. Cap. 30. of the Lord's Supper, propos. 4.
but All Ignorant and ungodly Persons, as they are unfit to enjoy Communion
with Christ, so they are unworthy of the Lord's Table, and cannot without great
sin against him, whilst they remain such, partake of these Holy Mysteries, or
be admitted thereunto: This is a Truth of so great weight and evidence, that
both Presbyterians and Independents have thought fit to insert it, in their
Confession of Faith. And it is concluded in that Article of the Creed, the
Communion of Saints. Yea the Episcopal Party has born witness to it: See the
39 Articles. Art. 27.
For they do affirm that the Visible Church is a Congregation of Faithful Men
(therefore not of debauched Persons) where the Word of Christ is duly
Preached, and the Sacraments be rightly Ministered. And at the ordination of
Ministers they require a promise of them to exercise the Discipline of Christ.
In the form of ordering Priests as Deacons.
And if it be required what this Discipline is, they thus express their notion
of it. In the primitive Church (say they,) there was a godly Discipline, Books
of Com. Prayer, Comminat against sinners.
that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners, were
put to open penance and punished in this World that their Souls might be saved
in the day of the Lord; and that others admonished by their example might be
the more afraid to offend. In the stead whereof, until the said Discipline may
be restored again, (which thing is much to be wished) it is thought good that
in your presence be read the General Sentences of God's cursing against
impenitent sinners, and that ye should answer to every Sentence, Amen.

Yet further they order Ministers thus to act in the admission of Persons to
the Lord's Supper. Rubric before the Communion.
If any (say they) be an open and notorious evil Liver, so that the
Congregation by him is offended, or have done any wrong to his Neighbors by
word or deed, the Curate having knowledge thereof, shall call him and advertise
him in any wise not to presume to come to the Lord's Table, until he have
openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended his former naughty
life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were
offended. The same order shall the Curate use with those betwixt whom he
perceives malice and hatred to reign, not suffering them to be partakers of
the Lord's Table until he know them to be reconciled. The Minister ought to
admit the penitent Person to the Holy Communion, and not him that is obstinate.
Thus fully, thus expressly do even Episcopal men own and bear witness to this
Truth.

4. There is this further Agreement, that the Ceremonies and other Episcopal
Inventions in the worship of God are sinful and unlawful. Upon this Account,
and in the Testimony of this truth, it is that we are all fellow sufferers and
Brethren in Affliction at this day, under the Prelates who by their violence
against us for the Truth and Testimony of these times, as well as by their
Compliance with Rome and other evils, but chiefly by their Assiduity, in that
good work of silencing Godly Ministers and imposing upon tender Consciences, do
manifestly declare what Interest and what Spirit they are of, and how incapable
and unwilling to unite with us.

There may be personal Love and Honor, due to some Individuals amongst them,
especially to some who lived in former darker times before the day broke out
upon them, and were endued with another and a better spirit than usually
appears and looks out in that form, Even the Spirit of a sound mind, and a
good life, and brotherly love and tenderness toward tender Consciences: There
is Christian Love and esteem due to such, as personally and individually
considered, and we should be willing and ready to receive and unite with them
in the Lord. As neither do we judge every Individual in the external Communion
of the Church of Rome: But of the whole Bulk and body of them in their present
Interest and Constitution, as also of the form it self as Complexly considered
with all that is involved in the Bowels of it, there is not the same Reason.

But thus far in these four particulars at least, there seems to be a general
Concurrence and Consent amongst the whole reforming Party, even in the matters
of instituted Worship.

Secondly, And as for those Inquiries, what shall then be done for Union with
such whose way of Worship does exclude the Scripture and the Ministry, and who
make promiscuous administrations and Superstitious Ceremonies, the condition of
their Communion, Besides what has been already hinted, we say further,

That the Scripture and the Ministry are things too precious to be parted with,
for Union with any sort of men whatsoever, and the same we must needs say
concerning the Christian Sabbath before mentioned. Moreover Communion with
Scandalous Persons, and Conformity to the Ceremonies and Superstitious
Vanities, are such hard conditions of Church Communion as cannot with a safe
Conscience be accepted of. Therefore we humbly judge that the best expression
of our Love to men of such Principles, and the best way and means for Union
with them is this, to labor to reduce them and bring them off from the error
of their way, and the rather, for that it is attended and accompanied usually
with looseness and prophanness, which whilst they do persist and continue in,
and that in a day of so clear Gospel Light, and Liberty, as through Grace these
Nations have enjoyed, it may well become all the People of God to say, O my
Soul come not thou into their secret, and unto their Assembly, my glory be not
thou united.

We have therefore omitted in this Essay for Union amongst those People of God,
all such dead and blasted forms, out of which God is gone, and which are but
streams and rivulets as it were of that dead Sea, that Sea of Blood the Fish
whereof dies. Rev. 8.8, 9. and Chap. 16.3. Not of that Crystal Sea. Rev. 4.6.
Lively Images of the Beast. Rev. 13.14, 15. Those names of men, and not of
God's appointing. Rev. 11.13. Plants which our Heavenly Father never Planted in
his Church. Mat. 15.13. And which therefore in times and places of Reformation
have been plucked up, and cast forth, to the rejoicing of the upright in heart.

Thus much for the Agreements amongst the Reforming Parties.

The Differences.
Now for the matters in Difference, we mean still amongst those that seem to
have their faces Sion ward, and to be studious of Reformation. Truly to
consider what they are, may even make us ashamed of our divisions, that ever so
great offenses and distances in affection should arise from so small
differences in opinion.

And First, between the Ptesbyterians, and Independents.

There be some Controversies sprung up between them of such a nature, as we do
not judge it necessary to the present purpose, and scope of this paper largely
to insist thereon. Whereof we may instance in three sorts, or kinds of
Questions.

1. Those which seem to be rather Speculative, and in Logical terms than
practical, which, unless Satan and Corruption have the managing of them, are
not likely much to obstruct or stand in the way of this so much desired Union.
As, for instance, that acute Question concerning the Universal Visible Church,
which though the right notion of it gives a light and influence into the whole
business of Church Discipline, and there is some discrepancy in the notions and
apprehensions of Godly Learned Men about it, yet while the denying of the
Universal Visible Church, is not improved to the denying of Communion of
Churches, nor yet the asserting of it improved to the denying of particular
Churches, so as to make Godly People lie among the pots, and live at a loose
end, as Lambs in a large place, under no particular Pastoral charge, under no
special oversight and inspection for their souls: whilst both sides do
acknowledge both in their judgment and practice, not only the Universal
invisible Church, about which there is no Controversy, but also particular
Churches, and Communion of Churches, not only spiritual and mystical Communion
by the same Spirit of Faith and Love, dwelling and working in them all, but
also Visible Communion in the ordinances and outward dispensations of his
Grace, all this may well suffice unto brotherly Love and Union. There is also
some further dispute about this word (Church) about the Application of it to a
whole Nation. Where Christianity has obtained a Civil sanction and
establishment in the Laws of the Land, as in those we call Christian States or
Kingdoms, but if such a Kingdom be called a National Church, the matter is not
great, if withal it be remembered and acknowledged, that Christ has not tied
his Ordinances under the New Testament to any one place, as of old to the
Temple, but has appointed them to be dispensed in the several Congregations,
and Assemblies of his people. These and other such like Questions, though they
may and ought to be enquired and searched into, for every Apex of truth is
precious, the least Jota thereof is not to be despised, as the very filings and
dust of Gold is precious, yet being rather in terms and notions, and not so
directly Practical, and Theological, as there is no just reason, so we hope in
the Lord there is no great danger, they should discompose and disunite the
Spirits of Godly learned and sober men, who are acted and influenced by the
Spirit and grace of Christ in their debates and disquisitions.

2. Those things also are not of present Consideration, which are the Judgment
rather of particular Persons, than of the whole Party. As to give some few
instances of many: Ordination of Pastors at large, and before Election ad
Ministerium vagum or sine titulo, which our Brethren of Scotland, as well as of
New England do not approve, though nevertheless they that do, if in all other
things without exception, must be owned and numbered amongst the Lord's faithful
Ministers, because they Minister to him and to his People in the Gospel of his
Son. Moreover it is granted by all that it is no way fit, men should send
themselves and run upon their own heads into the Ministry, but that they go
forth unto that work by the judgment and encouragement of Godly Faithful
Ministers of more ability and experience than themselves, For the Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; who if they solemnly seek the Lord in
prayer with them and for them, there can be no hurt in that. And if withal they
lay their hands upon them, this cannot be matter of much offense to any. So
that in the Issue all the difference remaining as to this point, is not about
their passing through ministerial Trial and approbation, but only about
impowring them to Baptize and Administer the Sacraments in an unfixed way
without any special relation to a particular flock or charge; for to Preach the
Gospel, if they do attend upon that work as their particular Calling is
generally granted to be lawful, and is ordinarily practiced without offense,
and to the good of Souls, by those we call Lecturers: Hither also not
impertinently as not being the unanimous Judgment of any whole party, may be
referred, the reasonings which have made so great a noise about Parish
Precincts, which though some perhaps do religiously observe, and bind up
themselves unto, yet there be others under every form, who make no scruple to
transgress them. For not only the Independents and the Presbyterians, but the
very Papists, and Prelate-Protestants have thought it lawful in the late times
to receive those of their way from all the Parishes round about, who likewise
have made no scruple to attend upon their ministry, and Communicate in the
ordinances with them in their own way, when most of the public places were in
other hands. Whereby it may seem that no sort or sect of Christians at this
day, in these Nations, do judge themselves necessarily involved in
Church Communion by their habitation. However a Church, according to the
Scripture being a Spiritual Body or Society, and the limits being part of the
Essence or Constitution of such a Body, that therefore they must be Spiritual
and of the same nature, and not merely humane as, is the division of Parishes
is a notion which has so great an appearance of Spiritual reason, that there
must needs be a great measure of brotherly kindness and indulgence due to such
as act upon it, if in all other things they walk without offense. Hither also
lastly may be referred, and so let them be dismissed and forgotten whatever
unbrotherly reproaches and changes of Schism or Antichristianisme, etc. may
have been used by some particular men of harsh and violent Spirits, but not
approved by others of the same judgment, being men of wiser and cooler Spirits.

3. A Third sort of Questions not to be now insisted on is, the unhappy
differences that have fallen out about State-matters, the effects whereof we
feel at this day, which are and must be left quietly and peaceably with the
Lord, and wherein perhaps we may all stand in some need of pardon and
forgiveness, not only from God, but from one another. But the debate and
discussion of all such things, and how to accommodate them, may be waved for
the present, as either not very momentous, or not seasonable, or not likely to
be much conducing to the present scope, which is healing and reuniting the
Spirits of good men.

We find then the remaining differences which seem to require a present and
more particular consideration, consist chiefly in three Things.

1. That from whence they have their respective denominations is about Classes
and Synods. The Presbyterians conceiving as it is expressed by the Provincial
Assembly of London, Jus div. C. 14. P. 240.
That Jesus Christ has laid down in his word a pattern of a Synod, yea of a
Juridical Synod consisting of Governing Officers of diverse Presbyterial
Churches. The Congregational Men on the contrary hold, Ames Bradshaw, Eng. Pur.
C. 2. Th. 3.
that Jesus Christ has not subjected any Church or Congregation of his to any
other superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction than unto that which is within
itself, so that if a whole Church of Congregation shall err in any matters of
Faith or Religion, no other Church or Spiritual Church Officers, have by any
warrant from the Word of God, power to censure, punish or control the same,
but only to Counsel and advise them.

Now that this difference may not appear greater than indeed it is, we may do
well to consider the Concessions on both sides.

For First we find that our Brethren of the Presbytery on the one side grant
that a Church in an Island, Prove. Ass. Land. Jus. div. C. 15. P. 251.
or in a Pagan Country where it cannot conveniently associate, must not be
denied intireness of Jurisdiction within itself. The Congregational Brethren on
the other side grant the lawfulness and usefulness of Synods in the Church of
God, See the Apologetical narrat.
and the accountableness of particular Congregations thereunto. The absolute
unaccountableness whereof they do, even with detesting expressions disclaim. So
that when things are thoroughly examined, all the difference remaining as to
this head seems to be only about the best way for regulation of Synods. For
the Congregational men would have them to be Elective and occasional, not
standing and permanent, and to go no further than the first remove beyond the
particular Congregation, but the subordination of Synods one unto another in
greater and lesser Assemblies they stick at. And toward an erring Church they
would not have them to put forth a formal act of Censure or excommunication,
but only a sentence of non-Communion, whereby the difference is reduced to a
very narrow point, surely not wide enough to be a just Cause for breach of Love
and distance of affection amongst Brethren.

Yea so near do these two Forms come together, and so narrow is the parting
point that some of the Presbyterian judgment have said, Mr. Marshal, Sermon. on
Romans 12.4.
They grant that which does tantamount, and they differ but in some lesser
things, and this disagreement (say they) shall not hinder us from any Christian
accord with them in affection. Prove. ass. Jus div. minist. preface.


The Independents reciprocally profess themselves to be for a tender
Presbytery. And that such is that of the Churches in New England: Mr. H. P.
advice prope fin.
And so desirous of Union with their Brethren and so loath to differ, that some
of the first who have appeared in that cause do approve and close with him; Mr.
R. M. Ans. to Mr. C. H.
they answer, in drawing down the differences to the narrowest compass, and
they write as do others generally of the same Judgment, in a moderate and
Brotherly style.

2. There is much Controversy also concerning the (...) or first subject of
the Power of the Keys, (...)
with the several proportions of power belonging respectively to the
Presbytery, and to the Fraternity. A Subject worthy of deepest search, and
which accordingly has exercised the thoughts and pens of many. But we hope in
the Lord that this difference upon a severe Consideration of it, will not be
found so great, nor so difficult to be accommodated as may seem: for if there
be, but a practical avoiding of the rocks and extremes on both hands, both of
the Ecclesiastical Anarchy and confusion on the one hand, and of Ecclesiastical
Tyranny and oppression on the other: If the Authority of the Eldership be
secured that it be not devoured and swallowed up, by the Liberty of the
Brotherhood, nor yet the Liberties of the Brethren by the power of the Elders,
this is the substance of the matter, and in this we all agree:

For First it is agreed and granted by the Independents, that Christ has
placed the ruling power in the hands of his Officers only, and that the People
are not the Rulers, but only the Ruled. For to make them all Rulers, and the
Elders Ciphers, this is not the order of the Gospel which says Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves. Hebrews 13.17. And we beseech
you Brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you; and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and
be at peace among your selves. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Therefore to cast aside the
fear and reverence of them and their Authority, and so to give them but a
painted power and empty titles, and to make them Rulers in name, but not in
deed, this is such a Violation of Gospel order and casting off the Yoke of
Christ, as must needs break the Churches peace, and open a gap to all
contention and confusion. Any such exorbitant Independency of Carnal Liberty,
and contentious confusion, our Brethren of the Congregational way, do neither
plead for, nor practice, but disavow and disclaim.

And yet withal Secondly, it is agreed and granted by the Presbyterians, that
the People are not to behave themselves as mere idle spectators, and persons
altogether unconcerned in Church matters, but that they ought some way to
Concur and consent at least in matters of chief weight and moment, as in the
constituting of Officers, and in the receiving and ejecting of members, and
consequently that they are to be acquainted with such transactions, to the end
that if they have any thing to object or allege, they may bring it in to the
Elders to judge thereof. Thus much is granted and practiced amongst our
Brethren of the Presbytery. So that if both these be put together, it will
appear that here is some good measure of practical Agreements, for which we are
to bless God and to pray, that it may be further improved, though there may be
some notional difference.

He that shall peruse and compare together Mr. Cotton of New England, his
Treatise of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and Mr. Gillaspy of Scotland,
his dispute against English Popish Ceremonies, will find them both of one heart
and mind, as to this signal instance of the Peoples power and privilege, viz.
the Right they have to Elect and choose their own Ministers. And it is a Truth
so clearly asserted in the Scriptures of Truth, for they choose Deacons, Acts
6. And in the choice of an Apostle they went very far, Acts 1.23. And they
chose Elders by suffrage in every Church, Acts 14.23. (...) cum per juffragia
creassent. Beza. And it is so abundantly and so constantly witnessed by the
Saints and Martyrs, and by all our Protestant Divines against the Papists, and
by our Brethren and Fathers, the old Puritan Non-conformists in all their Books
and writings against the Prelates, and sealed with their manifold and faithful
sufferings, that now in this height of Gospel light to relinquish it, would be
a very retrograde motion in the work of Reformation, and bring the Sun as it
were Ten degrees backward. And if any shall require and insist upon the
relinquishment of it, we must ingeniously confess unto them, that we are loath
to purchase our Union with them at such a Price. We must confess it upon his
Account, who has purchased the Liberties of his people with his own blood, and
whose Royal Authority, and whose infinite wisdom has thought fit to ordain in
his last Will and Testament; therefore the People may not, must not be utterly
excluded, we cannot, we dare not yield thereunto, howsoever their Concurrence
may be manifested and expressed, whether by lifting up of hands, or by silence,
or by other ways of voting, either more explicitly, or more implicitly,
according to the various Circumstances, of Persons, Places and Times, which may
admit of some variety, and so far as the Rule admits of any Latitude, we would
not be too severe and narrow. In the testimony before quoted out of the 39
Articles, and the Book of Common Prayer, which are owned and subscribed even by
the Episcopal men, and by all the Conforming Clergy, there is reiterated and
express mention of the Congregation as interested and concerned in Church
Affairs, both in the Seclusion of Impenitent Sinners, as Persons by whom the
Congregation is offended, and in the open declaration of their repentance, that
so the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, and they readmitted.

From all that has been said as to this head, we hope, we may come to this
result, that if we could but understand one another, there needs no further
expedient, for the composing and reconciling of this Controversy.

3. There is also some difference about the subject of Baptism, and the extent
as to the external dispensation of the Covenant of Grace sealed by it. The
Presbyterians conceiving that it belongs to all that profess the Protestant
Christian Religion, and to their Children. The Independents restraining it
only, to such Parents as besides their profession of the Christian Faith walk
without offense, and so are judged worthy of the Lords Supper, and to their
Children. The Anti-paedo baptists restraining it, yet further to the Exclusion
of all Infants, as from the Covenant, so likewise from the Seal thereof, as
belonging in their judgments, only to persons grown up to years of discretion
upon their own personal profession of the Faith. And indeed this difference
though not so much debated and written of as the former about Classical
subordinations and Church Power, yet being a matter of daily practice, does
incur more into the observation and understandings of the Common People. The
distance being very conspicuous between this threefold Judgment and practice
of Baptising almost all the Children in the Nation, and none at all, and none
but such whole Parents are accepted as Godly unto full Communion.

Here then be three several ways, the distance whereof is in some measure
understood. But yet in the help of Christ, let us try how near they may be
brought together, reducing the differences to the narrowest point we can.

First Then, they that are counted largest, are not for Baptismal
administrations absolutely Universal, but they require a profession of the true
Christian Faith at least. Moreover the Independents, who are counted somewhat
narrow in this matter, yet they do not monopolize and impropriate Baptism to
themselves, as though it belonged only to those of their way: But they do
profess and affirm, that if the Parents be such whose hearts God has touched,
though they walk not with us, if they be by other Saints and Ministers with
whom they walk, Judged Godly, and found worthy of the Lord's Supper for
themselves: They do acknowledge such Parents, under what Form soever, to be
worthy also of that Blessed privilege of Baptism for their Children.

But as to the Third opinion, that of the Anti-paedo-Baptists, here indeed lies
the greatest difficulty, because it is thought by many, that in the true and
unconstrained Consequences of it, it draws very deep, beside all the Prejudices
that have arisen as to that Form, upon other pretensions and occurrences, that
have happened both at home, and abroad, too many to be here enumerated. And that
it is indeed a matter of deeper Comprehension in all the Influences and
Concernments of it, than we can wade into at this time, we must ingenuously
confess to our dissenting Friends, but yet notwithstanding we must acknowledge
also our want of light, and ability to evince and demonstrate any of these
three Judgments, to be in its own nature, if singly considered, and by itself,
a fundamental error. Therefore we humbly Judge that it is a duty incumbent on
us in the Spirit of Gospel Love to bear with one another in it, till it please
the Father of Lights, out of his Free Grace and mercy to shine in upon us, and
upon our differing Brethren with further and more Convicting light.

But here be some other Questions concerning this great and Blessed ordinance
of Baptism, wherein both the other Forms do fully agree in one and the same
mind and Judgment against the Anti-paedo-Baptists. And concerning the manner of
Administration which these conceive, ought to be by dipping or plunging the
Body under water. Confess. Anab. prop. 39.
The Presbyterians and Independents on the contrary hold that, dipping of the
Person into the water is not necessary, Confess. Faith Cap. of Baptism propos.
3.
but Baptism is rightly administered by pouring or sprinkling water upon the
Person. Also concerning the Administrator, the Anti-paedo-Baptists hold that it
may be done by Disciples, being men able to Preach the Gospel. Confess. Anab.
prop. 31.
But the Presbyterians, and Independents concur that it does belong peculiarly
to the Office of the Ministry, and ought not to be dispensed, but by a Minister
of the Gospel lawfully Called.

As for such as make Baptism in their way the very Essence and Form of the
Church, this is indeed to un-church all others beside themselves, R. L. of
Gospel separation.
and so puts a Bar upon Church Union with them, as being no Churches; But the
severity of this dis-uniting principle, as we cannot find it expressly asserted
in their Confession of Faith before mentioned, H. L. of Baptism.
so we know some of that way who do disown it, and affirm that Baptism does not
enter the definition of a Church, but they make Union and Communion with Christ
the foundation of Church Communion, which as it is a more Scriptural, so it is
a more Brotherly, and a more uniting principle.

These therefore are the main things in difference, and under dispute amongst
the three Forms, omitting only some few things which either seem to be of
Lesser moment, or cannot well be affixed to any of the three Forms or Parties,
as the Judgment of the whole Party, or else are employed and included in these
which have been mentioned.

Proposals.
And now having seen and taken this short survey of the Controversies agitated
amongst professors under these several Forms, we may with the more clearness
proceed to consider, whether there might not be some nearer closure and Union
than yet has been, and that without intrenching upon the different persuasions
of each party. Doubtless there may, if our Spirits be not at a greater distance
than our Principles.

Supposing both the Agreements, and the Differences to be truly, and rightly
stated, as to the main things in this which has been said, as we suppose all
that understand them will readily acknowledge, and the Agreements being so
great and many, and the differences so few, that which we have to propose upon
the whole is this.

Quaery.
Whether Union in so many great Truths, which in the Light and Grace of Christ,
and in the Conduct of his Word and Spirit we have attained to, be not a
sufficient foundation for three things more.

1. For a mutual owning and giving the right hand of Fellowship to each other
as true Churches and Ministers of Jesus Christ, in whom something of his grace
and presence does appear, notwithstanding those lesser differences before
mentioned.

2. And consequently to concern our selves in the Affairs of one another, so
far as to give mutual Advice and Assistance as occasion may require. And,

3. To receive the Approved Members of each others Congregations to occasion
all Communion in the Lords Supper.

Answer.
We humbly conceive with submission to better Judgments, that these Queries may
be answered in the Affirmative. And that the greatness of the Agreements, and
the smallness of the differences before evinced by such a particular Induction,
is a Basis and a ground work firm enough, whereon to demonstrate not only the
possibility, but the necessity of our Uniting. Whereunto these Motives beside
many others may persuade.

1. It cannot be denied, but that such as agree in all those great principles
of Truth before mentioned, if also their Lives and Conversations be without
offense are visible Saints, or Godly Persons in the Judgment of rational
Charity. And certainly it is the duty of Saints to unite and come as near
together as they can, and to receive one another, as Christ also received us to
the Glory of God, Romans 15.7. Corrupt Associations and mixtures of Professors
with Men visibly wicked and ungodly, the Scripture every where testifies
against. But the Persons of whom we treat, are to humane Judgment, and to
outward appearance, Saints, yea, Confessors and fellow sufferers in the cause
of Christ, than which there cannot be a greater Indearment.

2. If ever there be a time and season for it, wherein the Lord calls his
people to it, to study Union and lamenting their former distances and offenses,
to seek peace and pursue it, surely it is at such a time, when he has brought
them all into a suffering Condition together, under the pressures and yoaks of
men upon upon their Consciences. It is time then to lay aside their mutual
animosities, and to learn that Golden Rule, Romans 14.3. Let not him that eats,
despise him which eats not, and let not him which eats not Judge him that
eats, for God has received him. A Golden Rule of Christian Love, the sense
whereof may be thus rendered in the Aspect, it bears to the disputations of
our Times. Let not him that depends in the way of Classical subordination,
despise him that depends not, and let not him that depends not Judge him
that depends, for God has received him.

3. There is no selling Truth to purchase peace. There is no such dead fly in
the Ointment. There is no silencing or suppressing of any Truth of God by these
Proposals, nor any tendency we hope to skepticism, or personal Indifferency in
the things of his House and Worship, whereunto that good principle of
tenderness and moderation toward Brethren of differing Judgments, has been by
some either unskilfully, or perversely misimproved. Which Form soever has the
mind of Christ, and the Truth on their side, here is nothing does so far
entrench upon them, but that they may freely hold it forth, they may retain and
practice that wherein they differ, according to their present Convictions,
notwithstanding this degree of Union, and so neither is any truth suppressed,
nor any ones Conscience imposed upon.

4. Yea, if we could thus far unite, as it would conduce through the Grace of
Christ to a further increase of Love, so likewise to the further discovery and
clearing up of the Truth in those things wherein we differ, by virtue of that
promise, Phil. 3.15, 16. If in anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you, nevertheless whereto we have attained, let us walk
by the same rule, let us mind the same things.

5. It would in some measure remove that great stumbling block from before the
blind profane world, who pretend to take offense at our divisions, looking
upon them in the multiplying Glasses of their own enmity, and so accounting
every difference in Religion to be a different Religion. But who knows how
Convincing this might be to them, according to the Lord's prayer for his
Disciples, John. 17.21, 23. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that
thou have sent me. Doubtless it will Convince such as belong to the Election of
his Grace, so as to bring them in, and the rest will be left the more without
excuse. And finally it will rejoice them that Pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
and be pleasing unto him whose name is called upon us, and who has so often
Commanded us To love one another.

FINIS.

