Profit, Convenience, and Pleasure, to the whole Nation.

Being a short Rational Discourse, lately presented to His Majesty, Concerning
the Highways of ENGLAND: Their Badness, the Causes thereof, the Reasons of
those Causes, the impossibility of ever having them Well-mended according to
the Old way of mending.

But may most certainly be done, and for ever so maintained (according to This
New way) substantially, and with very much Ease.

And so, That in the very depth of Winter there shall not be much Dirt, no
Deep-Cart-rutts, or High-ridges; no Holes, or Uneven Places; nor so much as a
loose Stone (the very worst of Evils both to Man and Horse) in any of the
Horse-Tracts.

Nor shall any Person have cause to be once put out of his way in any hundred
of miles Riding.

To mend Highways, lo Here the way is shown;
No better way than This, shall e're be known:
A Firm and Certain way, of no great Cost;
In all ways else their Labor's wholly lost.
The Old way never could do it, 'twas mere Deceit,
As may be proved; it was a very Cheat.
Printed for a Public good in the Year 1675.

THE PREFACE TO THE KING.
My Gracious Sovereign,
I Am no Courtier, know not how to Mode,
But Bluntly thus contrive for Public good:
And though I Am well-nigh Deaf, and well-nigh Blind,
And Old, and very Simple in my kind;
Yet shift I daily make for to contrive
Something of Good to others whilst I live.
And several Works I have already writ,
But none to Public view are Published yet;
Nor shall be, till I Have tried how This will be
Accepted by Your Sacred Majesty.
Which is a Product of my working Brain,
And glad should be, it might not be in vain.
Now if Your Majesty will take n'offence,
Nor judge my real Zeal, bold Impudence,
But graciously will pardon my rude Form,
I doubt not but the Matter will inform
Your Majesty of That will please you well,
Which is a way, All other ways excel,
In mending Your Highways, throughout Your Land,
And is a way, None yet do understand.
Great shame it is, 'twas never known before,
So plain it is,
as is a Great wide door:
The way of doing is the only Thing,
And chiefty with it does the Profit bring.
But now I Will cease my Rhiming, and proceed in Prose,
And to Your Majesty this easy Thing disclose.
Yet deeply Imploring,

That it would please Your Majesty graciously to pardon this my most Humble
Presumption, proceeding from my Sincere Duty to Your Majesty, and a real Desire
of doing a Public Benefit, (knowing no better way.)

Not that I think my self (in the least) wiser than other men; But that
observing, as in all Ages of the world, it has been the Happy-good-hap of some
particular Persons, to hit upon the Rightness of some particular Things:

So now, I humbly conceive, it is no less Mine in this particular Affair, of
the right and most absolute way of Ordering, and Mending Your Majesty's
Highways, and a perpetual keeping them so.

As I shall endeavor to make plain in this following little Book, which I most
submissively Present to Your Majesty's wise Consideration.

Ever praying for Your Majesty, and humbly devoting my self in all boundy Duty,
and affectionate Service, whilst I am in true fervency and zeal,

Your Majesty's most Loyal, and most Loving Subject, Thomas Mace. One of the
Clarks of Trinity-Colledge Chapel in Cambridge.

If when you Read, Objections chance t'arise,
And This or That seem doubtful in your eyes,
Have but the patience for to Read it out,
All Doubts are answered clearly without doubt.
The Order of the Work, In three CONSIDERATIONS.
FIrst, High-Roads might be reduced unto Two Coach or Cart-Tracts, allowing
convenient space between; which (if those two might be certainly and
continually kept firm and good) would be sufficient for all services and
occasions of Travel whatever.

Secondly, those two Tracts be drawn so straight as the Situation of the Ground
will afford all along, for several good Reasons.

Thirdly, I most humbly conceive, two Tracts are perfectly completed) there
were a Law made for Travelers to some such purpose as this: viz.

That all Travelers either with Coach, Wagon, The Law for Travelers.
Wain, Cart, or Horse, coming to the City of London, shall keep in the
Right Hand Tract coming.

And in their going from the City of London, shall likewise keep the Right Hand
Tract going, viz. the contrary.

The Benefits and Conveniences of these three Considerations will be infinite,
and unconceivable, till Time and Experience shall make them plain.

I will only give a glance at some few, for brevities sake, in each particular,
thus:

First, The benefit of the first Consideration.
If all Highways were reduced only unto two Coach or Cart-Tracts, doubtless
then there would be an unimaginable great deal of Ground saved; which is now
spoiled and trampled down in all wide Roads, where Coaches and Carts take
liberty to pick and choose for their best advantages. This is no small
Consideration, if well weighed.

Besides, such sprawling and straggling of Coaches and Carts utterly confound
the Road in all wide places; so that it is not only unpleasurable, but extreme
perplexive and cumbersome both to themselves, and all Horse-Travellers. The
which will be quite taken away, and many conveniences met withal, by this
Reducement.

Secondly, The benefit of the second Consideration.
If again the Ways shall be regulated, as to be brought into straight-lines,
(only so far as they are capable of) I do believe, that in one hundred miles
Riding, the Traveller shall save at least the Riding of Ten miles, in many
places. Which will be a very considerable advantage to a weary Traveller.

Thirdly, The benefit of the third Consideration.
If there were a smart Law made, to keep all irregular and troublesome persons
in an orderly way of Civility in their Travel; And also, That their Punishment
might be almost so quick and sure, as their Assront, and Injury given: then
without all question, innumerable Controversies, Quarrellings, and
Disturbances, which in that nature are daily committed in contesting for the
way (which too often proves mortal, or of very bad consequence to many) must
needs cease.

Besides, A second great benefit by this Law.
there is another very great benefit by this Law, which is, That no man should
be pestered by giving the way (sometimes) to hundreds of Pack-horses, Panniers,
Whifflers, Coaches, Wagons, Wains, Carts, or whatsoever others, which
continually are very grievous to weary and laden Travelers; but more
especially near the City, and upon a Market Day, a man having traveled a long
and tedious Journey, his Horse wellnigh spent, shall sometimes be compelled to
cross out of his way twenty times in one miles Riding, by the irregularity, and
peevish crossness of suchlike Whifflers and Market-women: Yea although their
Panniers be clearly empty, they will stoutly contend for the way with weary
Travelers, be they never so many, or almost of what Quality soever.

Who if by such a Law were ordered all of them to keep in one Tract or way, No
inconvenience for Travelers to keep one Tract.
(which they might so well do, as not, and no inconvenience to any one of them
in the least) I say, what an inestimable benefit might all Travelers enjoy by
such a Law? which could be prejudicial to no man, nor to the least occasion of
Post-hast-business, but an assured furtherance.

For if the ways were but thus kept certainly firm, clean, and good; if any
man had a mind to Travel faster than that person which is just before him, how
readily and safely might he step out of the way, and pass him by; and so as
readily step into the Tract again at pleasure, without the least danger of deep
Cart-rutts, or such unreasonable high Ridges, which now are not possible (in
many places) to be passed over, without manifest danger both to Man and Horse.

Nay I have often known many Travelers,
and my self very often, to have been necessitated to stand stock-still behind
a standing Cart or Wagon, in most beastly and unsufferable deep wet ways, to
the great endangering of our Horses, and neglect of important Business: Nor
durst we adventure to stir, (for most imminent danger of those deep Rutts, and
unreasonable high Ridges) till it has pleased Good Mr. Carter to Jog on, which
we have taken very kindly.

The great necessity therefore of such a Law, The great necessity for such a
Law.
I do conceive will be most desirable and grateful to all Travelers, who
shall thus be assured to Travel in peace, safety and quietness; so that in his
never-so-long a Journey, he shall not once be disturbed or put out of his way.

Besides many other pleasures and conveniences, which I shall forbear to
mention, but leave them to Travelers to discourse upon, when this most happy
Day shall show it self; that then the Highwayes, and the Law for Travelers,
shall make all This (and much more) complete, grateful, and satisfactory.

The Order of the Law.
And as to the Order of this Law of Travelers, The Law of Travelers.
if any Person shall happen to be in the contrary way, it shall be his part to
go out of it, and give way to his opposite, or otherwise he may be compelled.

But if any person shall be quarrelsome, and oppose, or force any other
Traveller (who is in his Right-hand-lawfull way) out of it, or injure him upon
that account:

Then that Person so opposed, forced, hindered, or grieved, (upon just complaint
and proof made to the next Justice of Peace, Constable, or Head-Officer of the
very next Town) shall have his Case immediately heard, and adjudged according
to the truth of the Evidence; And that the Person so offending shall
immediately forfeit, and be compelled to pay, so much to the party grieved or
injured, and so much to the Poor of that Parish where the case is tried: Or for
want of such payment, his Horse may be distrained upon till such payment be
made.

This, or something to this purpose, This Law cannot be too strict.
cannot be thought too hard for such Uncivil, Refractory, and Rude Ruffian-like
Rake-shames, who too often make it their business and boast, thus to disturb
and abuse honest, quiet, and weary Travelers; which is so great an injury, and
an occasion to stir up, and inflame the Spirits of men, so grossly abused, that
many times most desperate mischiess immediately ensue: But by virtue of some
such Law, all These and many more Inconveniences would be prevented, and all
Travelers enjoy tranquillity and much pleasure.

Thus much concerning the Law for Travelers.

Lastly, The Conclusion of the first Preparation.
As to the more easy effecting of the business, it cannot but be thought much
more feasible, Why but two Tracts.
to maintain only two Tracts, which shall constantly lie straight, and as it
were in a line, than to mend and maintain ways which lie cross, intricate and
confounded, as most of our ways throughout England do.

In the mending of which there is such strange irregularity, by the common
Menders, that they (in a manner) lose the greatest part of their Gravel or
Stones; now laying one load here, and then another quite cross five or six
Cart-wayes aside, and in a contrary Tract; whereas if there were but only two
Cart-Tracks, they might with far less trouble and cost, but infinitely more
easily and effectually be mended, and most certainly be for ever maintained;
and with a reasonable Charge: As here following most plainly I shall make
appear.

The manner and means by which This so needful and profitable Work may most
certainly be effected, with much ease, and no great cost.
In all Humility showing,

THat Your Majesty's Highways are not only unpleasant, cumbersome, and
grievous; The mischievous dangers which attend the badness of our Highways.
but also very dangerous to the Lives and Limbs both of Men and Horses, is too
obvious and apparent to all Travelers.

And in that it has been, and is still judged impossible to have them bettered,
and to continue them so, is still the greater grief.

The Consideration of which, has been an occasion unto me to exercise my
Thoughts so far upon the matter, as thus to conclude, and affirm the contrary:
viz.

That it is not impossible,
but very feasible and easy, both to have them well mended, and to continue
them so for ever.

Yet I must needs say, that according to the old, common, and general way of
mending them, it is absolutely impossible, yea although there were an hundred
times the cost and pains bestowed on them, as is yearly bestowed.

My Reason is This; because the Matter ( viz. the cost and pains) is not so
much considerable, as the Manner and Order of doing it.

The way of doing is the only Thing,

Which here presents it self unto the King.
Now as to a more particular Explanation, it is to be considered, what, and how
many Causes there are of the badness of Highways: And they are chiefly four.

First, The four chief impediments to Highways.
Mire, Slime, or Dirt. 2dly. Deep Cart-rutts, with their High-ridges. 3dly.
Vnevennesses and Holes. 4thly. and lastly, Loose-Stones.
These four things being rectified, the Ways must needs be Good.

The first thing therefore to be done, (which was ever neglected by the old
way) is to cleanse the ways thoroughly from Dirt, before any Gravel or Stones
be laid on.

Likewise all the Cart-rutts to be cut down, and carried quite away; they being
only the Slime, Grease, or (as I may better say) the very Oil expressed, by the
continual grinding and squeezing of the Cart-wheels,
which (according to the old way of mending) were seldom or never taken away,
The old ill way of mending the Ways.
but only beat down and put into those Deep holes, and Cart-rutts; which with
some small sprinkling of Gravel, in some places only, or a few Stones, or base
ill-favored Rubbish: And all this (very disorderly and confusedly) was the
principal and constant way of mending the Highways. And thus were they
concluded to be well mended; but indeed were made worse thereby.

For so soon as a great glut of Rain comes, the Cart-wheels having made way for
its reception, in stead of being hard and firm ground, (which it ought to be)
it becomes a Quag, or a Bog. And this is one main cause of the badness of our
Highways, in reference to the two first Inconveniences, viz. Mire, Slime, or
Dirt, with deep Cart-rutts and ridges.

Now if these two were first rectified, as I have declared, viz. taken quite
away, the other two might with much ease be amended, as here I shall declare.

For Example.

First, then, The best manner of mending them.
Let it be supposed that the Ways are thus prepared, so that there were
neither Dirt, nor the Slime or Grease of the Cart-wheels; and that I might
plainly see all those deep holes, and unevennesses; I would not doubt but very
well to mend them all, both tolerably and sufficiently, without the cost of one
load of Stones or Gravel; only by this means, viz.

Let but my Laborers cut down with their Mattocks, all those adjoining
unevennesses, (which are good Stones and Gravel in most places, only ill laid)
and fill up those Holes with the same. Note well.


Thus only shall the Ways be ten times better than they were, and firm enough
for present and future use, if they might be always so kept clean.

For the Ways, if the Dirt were taken off, would in a great measure mend
themselves, with a very little looking to.

Yet I would not be mistaken, as if I did intend no other mending but This; No.
This is but to show how (without the cost of any new Gravel or Stones,
etc.) the Ways may be made far better than they are, or ever will be, by all
the labor and cost they usually bestow upon them time after time.

But now after this thorough cleansing (and not before) I would have all those
Hollownesses filled up with the best Gravel or Stones that possibly can be got
for that purpose; and where there is urgent need, some Wood, but not much.

For still I believe, (by the way which I shall direct for the constant care in
looking after the Ways, when they are once truly mended) if there were neither
Wood, Stones, nor Gravel, but only good hard Earth, A seeming impossibility.
(nay Plowed Lands themselves) the Ways could not possibly be very bad at all;
no not in the depth of Winter.

It Is only want of Diligence and Care,
Which causes Ways to be out of Repair;
And as they are daily gulled, by daily wearing,
So must be daily filled, by good repairing.
This is the only way, no way but This;
And thus a Fool may mend all what is amiss,
With ease, when once he is showed but how; he will then
Become as wise in This, as wiser men.
However This may seem a Riddle, and impossible; yet I doubt not but plainly to
make it appear most true and feasible, when I come to give my Directions for
their perpetual maintenance, which very suddenly I shall fall upon.

There is one thing more very considerable in This work, Care taken to round
the Ways.
which is the rounding and heightning the Ways in all places where possibly
they may be so ordered, the better to keep off the water, which is the Great
Corrupter of all Highwayes.

And to this purpose, And to turn all Dreins.
Care ought to be taken to divert all Dreins, which usually issue down upon
Highways, and to find them some other passage, if possible.

Many other Curiosities and Circumstances there are, as to the complete and
exact performance in This Work, too tedious here to be inserted: But they must
be left to the wit and discretion of the Ingenuous Undertaker, in the time of
the Operation, as need shall require.

Thus far toward mending: Now for maintaining. The certain way to keep and
maintain the Highways firm and good for ever.
I Will first suppose, That the Ways are thus regulated, cleansed, and firmly
once mended, according to the Order prescribed: And that two days have passed
since this work was done.

Now in these two days time, The first cause of the ruin of the Ways.
there are pretty deep Cart-rutts made again, but in twice two days, much more
deep, and in a week or fortnights time, so deep, and with high Ridges, that it
will occasion a Horse to stumble in going across.

This is the first beginning, and the chiefest cause of the ruin of all
Highways.

How easily might this be mended, The Remedy quick and easy.
if there were appointed but a Laboring man daily to look after them; so far
as he might well walk in one day, and back again, with his Shovel, or Rake in
his hand, and only be careful but to turn those little Ridges into the
Cart-rutts again, and the work were done.

And then again the next day, and so day after day, all the year throughout: In
which work, he should not suffer so much as one loose Stone to lie or continue
in either of the Horse-Tracks, nor any the least unevenness to occasion a Horse
to stumble or fall; and in this posture might one man keep his 5, 6, 7, 8, or
10 miles firm, perfect and good all the year long.

The Order of the Day-man, and his Constant Work.
First, The Day-mans work.
having his station or allotment given him, how far, or how many miles he is to
take into his Charge and Care, (which may, and must be more or less, according
to the goodness or badness of the Nature of the Ground) I say, he having once
settled, and entered upon his undertaking, he shall then every working day, be
up and upon the Highways at working time, Summer and Winter, His Implements
or Tools.
either with Mattock, Shovel, Rake, Scoop, Wood-bill, Wheel-barrow, or what
other Tool or Implements may be thought needful for such a Work.

And thus shall he walk and work from morning to night.

First, he shall work half his station one way, for two or three days, forwards
and backwards, and perform whatever may be most needful for his days-work
there.

Then the next two or three days, he shall do the like to his other half
station, the other way.

So that once in a weeks time, shall his whole allotment be constantly amended:
And I suppose one Man may look after ten miles very well, in most ordinary good
Soyls.

So that by this Rule, One hundred miles kept well by ten men.
ten Men shall constantly keep one hundred of miles perfect and firm the whole
year; which cannot be esteemed a great Charge.

Here may be an Objection:

But suppose it may be objected thus, Objection.
(and truly) That in some Grounds, one man cannot possibly manage ten miles, by
reason of the badness of the Soil, etc.

I answer thus: Answer.
Then let him (notwithstanding) manage so far as he can, in this manner:
Although it be but five miles, viz. his two miles and a half one way in two or
three days, and his two miles and a half the other way next two or three days,
more or less, as shall be found by experience fit.

And if quite through the Land the work would require such a Charge as this,
viz. one Day-man for every five miles, what could that signify?

Nothing, in reference to so great a Benefit to all Travelers, and a general
good to the whole Nation, as I shall declare: Therefore ought not to be repined
at.

Yet I am very confident, that in most places, (and but very few excepted) that
one Man may very well keep ten miles tollerably well, in almost the worst
Soyls; Yet it must be granted, that those worst Grounds can never be kept so
sprucely fine (or Garden-like) as may those other Sandy or Gravelly Soyls.

However, it may most easily be conceived, that the constant attendance of a
continual Dayman, must necessarily keep the very worst of ways so, that they
shall absolutely be free from those gross and common annoyances, and most
grievous inconveniences, which we find by daily and woeful experience.

Therefore, I say, let the Cost be what it will, That should not deterr us from
putting it into practice or trial. Yet I believe I am much about the matter in
respect of the Charge.

I am likewise very confident, Concerning the Cost or Charge.
that after the first thorough cleansing and amending, the ordinary Statutable
yearly Charge, viz. every man's six days work, etc. will suffice; together with
those other Provisions already designed and allowed to that purpose.

Yet if I be a little out in This, I hope I shall be excused when it shall be
considered, that I am not out in the grand Cast of the design.

But at the first there must be some way found out, for more than an ordinary
Charge, to have them once firmly done: And after that, these constant Laboring
men shall keep them ever so, at a small expense.

The Conclusion and very Life of the Business.
BUt first, The Lise of the business.
I would have no more common Overseers employed in This Work: For, By their
Great wisdoms, and their Oversight,
They never could see to mend the Ways aright.


Therefore it is most necessary, What is the most necessary thing to confirm
this Work.
that for every hundred or two hundred miles, (more or less, as may be thought
fit) there be one Surveyor-General; some Active-trusty-honest man, who should
constantly be on Horseback himself, or his most faithful Trustees, riding
upon his station, day after day,
to see that these Day-men-Labourers truly acted their parts, according to
their orders given.

And in case of neglect of their parts, in any these least punctilio's, viz. as
to suffer any deep Dirt to lie in the Horse-Track, loose Stone, (the great
undoer of Horses, and most constant occasion of Falls) uneven-little-knubs, or
any Holes or Cartrutts unamended, or any other neglect;

Then he shall have power (at his discretion) to punish such Laborers, either
by stopping some part of their Wages, or by putting them out of that so
constant, good, and very easy Employment, and to elect others into their
places.

Which thing will cause them to be daily careful and diligent; How the work
may, or it may not be done.
And without such an exact-continual-daily-constant-strictness, and such
severity, by such faithful and choice persons, (who will not take an Office
for any end so much, as to be active, and to see their business well performed)
the Work will not be done: But otherwise it may, with the greatest ease and
pleasure imaginable.

Thus only may the Business be well done;
And if not Thus, Pray let it still alone.
Yet is not the Contriver so sillily conceited, as to think the Work must
necessarily be done just so, in this manner in every Punctilio, as he has
directed unto; or that nothing can be added whereby it may be better done; No;
For he knows there are diverse other particulars to be thought upon and added
necessarily depending, which doubtless will be found out and appear reasonable,
etc. if ever This which he has Thus hinted toward shall come to be thought fit
to be taken notice of, as a way feasible and likely to take effect, although
with some Addition or Alteration.

And he shall much rejoice that any thing may be added which may be more
advantageous to the Work, which doubtless will and may easily be done,
according to That old Latin saying, Facile est inventis addere. But this he
only shall be bold to say, (viz)
There never will be found a surer way
To have the Ways kept Firm, when once they are mended,
Than Thus to have them Daily well attended.


AN Abbreviation of the WORK, Being an Encouragement thereunto.
FIrst, let the Ways be regularly brought
To Artificial form, and truly wrought;
So that we can suppose them firmly mended,
And in all needful points, the Work well ended,
That not a Stone's amiss; but all complete,
All lying smooth, round, fine, and wondrous neat.
Then comes a Gang of heavy-loaden Wains,
Of Carts, and Wagons, spoiling all our pains;
And with their piercing Grinders, cause them then
To be impressed with Furrows deep again:
( As well they may; for yet they are but soft,
Being newly stirred, and lightly laid aloft)
And let them lie but Thus, one month or twain,
The Ways must needs be deeply Gulled again.
But let them lie still, as they used to do
The Year throughout, and none to look thereto,
How must They not needs be unsufferable,
As now they are, and judged irrepairable?
'Nor is it possible, sans daily care,
'To keep Highways in daily good repair.
'But let my Day-man come; he will do the deed,

'Only with Spade, or Rake, mend all with speed:
'Rake in the Ridges, make the Cart-wayes plain,
'The Work is done; the Ways are good again.
Is This not easy? who can it deny?
No Wise man sure, who can Right Reason 'spie.
I therefore say, let there a Day-man be
Provided for one mile, or two, or three,
Or four, or many more, if need require,
And pay him well; ( for he I deserve his hire:)
Then he shall work so to your hearts content,
That for his wages sure you will not repent:
Except you be some Hog-herd, The Argument.
or some Miser,
Or else some Fondling, or one scarcely wiser.
For what wise man would ever be offended
To see the Ways thus constantly well mended?
Or would repine for paying somewhat more
Than usually he used to pay before?
What is the Money to so great a good?
Naught, Naught, if 'twere but rightly understood,
And well considered on; none would repine
To have their Ways thus pleasant, The pleasure.
trim, and fine:
Not so much as one little Stone to lie
Loose in your Tract, to make you tread awry;
Or cause your Horse to stumble, trip, or fall,
To lame his feet, or cause him have Wind-gall.
Such Stones are greatest enemies to Horses, The greatest mischief to Horses.

Whether in Drawing, Traveling, or Courses:
By them are desperate Falls; more Horses lamed,
Then can by All things else in Travel named;
These all shall be removed, day after day,
And ( as they happen daily) put away.
Now do but fancy all things thus amended,
All Difficults in Travels sure are ended;
'And thus with little Cost, but prudent Care,
'The Highways may be made firm, smooth, and fair.
Then after This, The Law.
there would be made a Law,
To keep all boisterous-Russians in some Awe;
And likewise in such good Decorum keep
All Travelers, that whosoever will, may sleep
Even as he Rides: For he need not doubt
The least Disturbance from the Common Rout,
Nor of that Custom old; of the never so many
Who may him meet, he will not be forced by any
Out of his Track: But if he so should be
By any hot-brained Youth uncivillie,
He may soon cool his courage, if he please,
And to his ponderous Purse give ready ease.
It Is only back to the next Town for to Ride,
He Will there have Law and Justice (quick) on's side,
Which presently shall punish this bold Blade,
And make him pay your Damage, (as it is said
Above) and something to the Poor to boot;
Or else his Horse distrain'd: Then he on foot
Must trudge; or on his Hobbyhorse may Ride,
With his Long-dingle-dangle by his side.
And thus to see him in this stately sort,
Will doubtless make good laughing, merry sport.
Nor can this sure be thought too smart a Law,
To keep such dangerous Rake-shames thus in awe.
Therefore,
It Is very needful some such Law should be
Made firm for Travelers Security.
A short glance of the Conveniences, Profits, and Pleasures of this Work,
mentioning only some few.
THe Conveniences, Pleasures, and Profits of such a Work as this, arising to
the whole Nation, must certainly be very many, and not easily apprehended, but
by experience, and consideration thereupon; I will only hint some few. As first,

The great pleasure and content which all Travelers must needs take by such
cleanly, The Travelers pleasure and content.
smooth, straight, delightful, and undistur'd Ways, both Summer and Winter,
Day or Night, without fear or danger, etc.

An ordinary Horse shall carry a man further than one of a far better price.

All Tradesmen and others shall have their Commodities carried at a far easier
price. The Carriages of all Commodities must needs be cheaper.


Most Commodities therefore must needs be cheaper.

Men may Ride Post safely so well by Night as by Day, Men may Ride safely in
the dark.
which in Summer time is to be chosen. Hire of Posthorses, Hackneys, and
Coaches cheaper.


Posthorses and Hackneys may well be afforded at easier Rates; so likewise
Coaches.

The great destruction in laming Horses, Preservation of Horses, therefore
cheaper.
must needs be prevented: Horses therefore undoubtedly be cheaper.

Much Ground will be saved by this means; Much ground saved.
And the length of all Long Journeys shortened. Long Journeys shortened.


Lastly, Much Corn saved from spoiling.
There will be very much Corn saved from daily spoiling, which now cannot well
be avoided.

But the vast Benefit of the Travelers Law will be so superabundantly
satisfactory and contentive, The unexpressible benefit to all Travelers.
that the Good thereof cannot be expressed.

T'le therefore cease, only not cease to pray
That I may live to see This happy Day:
Not that I do desire so much to Live,
As that Assistance to it I might give
Before I dye, with all my wit and skill,
Though it be small; yet wants not great good will,
Nor Diligence, nor Care, nor faithful Trust,
And therein should be found exactly just.
Not that I care an Officer to be,
More than to give Directions, and to see
That such a Work as This should no ways fail,
If by my strictest care I could prevail:
For without Care, and daily Diligence, Note.

All Labor's lost, all Cost, though vast, expense. Note.

Yet by my constant Day-man may be done;

But otherwise, It Is not worth thinking on.
There Is only One Thing yet worth thinking on;

To put This Work in Execution.

And if (by what has been Thus premised) so much notice may be taken of This
Contrivance, by such Persons in Authority as may probably promote the Work, and
set it on foot; the Contriver does not doubt but also (farther than he has yet
expressed himself in this little Book) to add Assistance toward it, by
finding out, or prompting unto a ready way, how to procure and raise a
considerable sum of Money toward the necessary expense thereof; without
offering the least wrong, or violence to any Person, or his Purse.

For Money must be spent in the first Attempt, because the Ways are so grossly
foul and bad; although afterward an easy yearly Charge will undoubtedly serve
toward their maintenance for ever.

And if (for an Experiment) a trial might be made only for any
one-half-hundred-miles, with a matter of 50 or 60 choice Laboring men; the
Contriver would freely give his assistance to the Work, gratis, by beginning
it, and putting them into the way, and setting a pattern. And if This may be as
freely accepted of, as it is freely offered, there can (sure) be no hurt done
at all.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT.
TO all Ingenuous Persons, Lovers of Art, who may please to take notice, That
there is in the Press, and coming forth, a large New-Book in Folio, (made by
the same Author) tending to the Advancement of Music in General; wherein he
has done an unusual piece of Kindness to all the Lovers and Learners of That
Art: in freely communicating his long Experience in the said Art, in sundry and
very many particulars.

The Title and Matter of the Book, is as follows: viz.

A Remembrancer, of the Best Practical Music (both Divine and Civil) that has
been known ever to have been in the World. Divided into Three Parts.

The First, or Divine Part,

Shows the necessity of Singing Psalms well, in Parochial-Churches, or not to
Sing at all.

Directing unto Two certain and infallible ways, both how they may be well
Sung, and how they may be so continued for ever; to the great illustration of
the Church Service, and the Glory of God, (the generality being wholly ignorant
thereof.)

The Second, or Civil Part,

Treats of the Noble Lute, (ever esteemed the Best of Instruments, but through
its former difficulties almost quite laid aside) yet certainly now made easy;
and all its occult, and lockt-up secrets plainly laid open, (never before
discovered) whereby it is made so easy and pleasant, as any Instrument of
worth known in the World.

Giving the true Reasons of all its former difficulties, and also why now it
must of necessity be easy, by undeniable Arguments.

Likewise showing the difference betwixt the French-Lute, and the Theorboe;
Directing the most ample way of Playing off the Note (or a Thorough-Bass) upon
the Theorboe. And both amplified with diverse Suits of Lone-Lessons, fit for all
Capacities.

Showing a General way for procuring Invention in Young Students or Composers;
or playing voluntarily or ex tempore upon it, or any other Instrument.

With two pretty Devices; The one Teaching any Person (Ingenuous) (whether
skillful or not skillful in the Art) how to translate Lessons from one Tuning
to another.

The other an indubitable way how to know which is the best Tuning upon any
Instrument: Both done by Example.

In the Third Part,

The Generous Viol in its Rightest Use is treated upon, with something in That
Respect more Curious, than has been ever yet handled by any; with very many
Things worthy of Note, too tedious here to insert: Being the Product of his
more than fifty years Experience and Practice in This Noble and Divine Art,
very shortly to come forth.

Here follows some few necessary Reasons, for this his Advertising
Publication.

The First Reason is,

In that he conceives he may do both himself a convenience by it, and many
worthy Persons a kindness, in letting them know there is such a Book in coming
forth; which doubtless will be acceptable and beneficial to all who make
Singing of Psalms a piece of their Divine Service, and would gladly do it after
the best manner; and especially to Those who have Harmonious Souls, and are
Tinctured with Tractabilities in Nature to the love of solid Divine, and
sober-civil Music.

The Second Reason is,

Out of a great Respect he has to very many eminent and obliging worthy
Persons, (to the number of between Two and Three hundred) who have already so
far encouraged toward the Printing of This Work, as that they have each of
them Subscribed their Names to take a Copy of the said Book, so soon as it
shall be Printed and Delivered unto them, at the Price of 12 s.

The Third Reason.

Now upon This very last Consideration he begins to conceive, both what a vast
Trouble it will be, for himself to Deliver Those Books to each particular
Person, (some of them living more then 200 miles asunder) and likewise, what a
long time it must needs be before They can All be served with the said Book,
after it is Printed:

Therefore,

Upon these Two Considerations chiefly it is, that he thus declares, and makes
it his humble and earnest Request, to all Those his loving Friends and Honored
Subscribers, that They will be pleased (...) consider These two so very great
Inconveniences; And also add so much Favor unto their former Kindness done
unto him, as to Receive Their Books at some one of these five following
nominated Places, viz. London, Cambridge, Norwich, Nottingham, York.

At each of which Places he will contrive to lay so many Books as may serve All
those who have thereunto Subscribed; And likewise procure a certain Friend in
each Place both to Deliver out the Books, and also to Receive the Money for
them for his Use: viz.

At York,

His Beloved Brother Mr. Henry Mace, the Sub-Chantor of the Cathedral there.

At Nottingham,

His Honored and worthy good Friend Mr. Will. Graves, Master of Arts, and one
of the Aldermen of that City.

At Cambridge,

Himself, or his Wife, at his House in St. Buttolph's Parish near
Queens-Colledge.

At Norwich,

His kind Cousin Mr. Tho. Mace, living in Cunsford-street, a Merchant of that
City.

At London,

His loving Friend Mr. James Heart, one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Royal
Chapel, at his House in Three-Faulcon-Court in Fleet Street, near the
White-Horse-Inne, between Fetter-lane and Shoe-lane.

And in Conclusion he further adds,

That if any Person be desirous of the said Book, upon the same first-presixed
Price of 12 s. and shall so signify His, or Her mind in two or three lines,
subscribing their Name, to the Author, or to any of the abovesaid Persons, at
York, Nottingham, Cambridge, Norwich, or London; or to any other Friends of
His, (several of which they may meet withal in diverse parts of England, who
out of kindness to the Author and the Work do take Subscription Names for Him;)
in This Respect, I say, any Persons thus doing, (before the Book be finished
and come forth) may be assured to have Books Reserved for them, at the same
Price.

But after it is once out, and all his Subscribers served, the Price will be
raised higher, (he not intending to Print very many of them.)

The Book he hopes may be finished by the latter end of August at the farthest;
and will be delivered in Sheets.

But if any Persons (living remote from Book-Binders) have a desire their Books
should be Bound either by London or by Cambridge Binders, if they so signify
their minds to the Author, and in what manner, and with what cost they desire
to bestow, they shall have them made ready with what convenient speed may be.

The Author also desires, that all Letters directed to Him may be sent to
London, (and left at Mr. Nath. Thompson's, his Printer, in New-street between
Fetter-lane and Shoe-lane) where he does intend to stay (God willing) till his
Book be completely Finished.

The Persons Subscribing are desired, (together with their Names) to set down
their Titles, their places of Abode, and Country. Because (at the present) he
does intend to Print all their Names in two or three Pages by themselves; with
an Epistle expressing his Thankfulness unto them, both for their generous and
free Favor done unto him in This particular, and also in that thereby they
have become worthy and noble Benefactors to the Public.

For without such Their Encouragement, he was dissuaded by good Friends from
adventuring so great an Expense and Trouble (in these hard Times) as he already
has been at, and is still further like to be.

Lastly, The Author desires this one piece of kindness from all Friends and
Lovers of his Art, (because he has not Printed many of these little Pamphlets,
and so is in doubt that Intelligence may not come time enough to all such
Persons as are or may be concerned in This Musick-Work) that they will be
pleased to communicate the Business from one to another, as occasion may serve:
By the which means, This his Design may happily take such effect, as he has
intended it for. And for all which Favors he shall for ever be Obliged, whilst
he bears the Name of

Thomas Mace.

FINIS.

