AN ANSWER TO THE Switch for the Snake.

A Book so called.

Discovering the Weakness of the Switch, which the Leading Quakers (of the
Second Days Meeting in LONDON for Government) have lately (as I am told,) given
into the Hands of each Parliament Man.

Vice is Nourished, and gets Life by Covering it, says a Heathen Author; even
so it is with Errors in Religion.

Humbly shewi^g, that it is Impossible, that the Pens now in ^ontroversie,
against us Quakers, should be put a stop to, before there is an O^der given
forth, (from the second Days Meeting) for the Reformation of our Numerous
Preachers in the Country.

And also a Book of Retractions of all the Errors in our Friends Printed Books,
be Published, with an Appendix and Postscript.

By William Mather, a lover of (the well meaning Persons, especially among)
that People.

Prove. XXVII. 6. Faithful are the Wounds of a Friend: But the Kisses of an
Enemy are deceitful. Printed in the Year 1700.

AN ANSWER TO THE Switch for the Snake, etc.
Note that the Figures on the left Hand Margin, Direct to the Book, called the
SWITCH.

IS not the Soul without beginning, C. Fox, Great Mystery, P. 90. 229. P. 273
comimg from God, infinite in it self?

It is not horrid Blasphemy, to say the Soul is Part of God is a Part of God.

Answer, If the Soul is without beginning, and is a Part of God, then not
Created, contrary to Gen, 1.

Are not ye [the Ministers] in the Presumption, and usurpt Authority,

Answer, To be sure it is great Presumption, in too many Ignorant Preachers,
(in this Age) that pretend they have the same immediate Revelation, as the
Apostles had; Yea, even the same degree; for says G. Fox, ( in the same Book,
P. 213. to his opposer) Thou can not know Scripture, but by the same degree
of the Spirit the Prophets and the Apostles had.

And says he, They are Conjurers and Diviners, and their teaching is from
Conjuration, which is not spoken from the Mouth of the Lord; and that he that
has the same Spirit, that raised Jesus Christ, is equal with God. See P. 7.
and 8. in Saul's Errand, etc.

Answer, by this Doctrine, every Man is equal with God, for do not you, J. W.
and G. W. hold, that every Man has a measure of that Spirit.

But, if all Preachers are Conjurers, that Preach not from the Mouth of the
Lord, then that Name must needs belong to G. Fox, in the first place, (as
above) is manifest, because his Doctrines differ from Scripture.

Next, Joseph Clark, mentioned in or about, P. 81. in the defense of the Snake,
(a Book so called,) but I do not reckon him a real Conjurer (though he is one,
according to G. Fox's Sense) because he was so very much mistaken, by his
vision, that so much strengthened him, to bear his Testimony against Tyths, for
he told me, he saw the Priest that sued him, and those belonging to him, Melt
in his sight to nothing, adding, I care not, if the Jailer or the Bayliffe get
my Money, but for the Priest he shall never have any thing of mine, for John
Field, one of the second days meeting in LONDON, told me, he could put me in a
way, the Priest should never get any of my Goods.

In Brief, a little before the Assizes (at Bedford) Joseph expecting a Trial
for Tyths, John sent him down a Copy of the Bill that the Priest had put in
against him, with a Letter from John (which Joseph got me to Read) wherein he
named Joseph's Counceller to Plead for him, and that he had paid him 10 s. and
advised Joseph to give him 10 s. more at the Assizes, and also Joseph went up
to London, to take Advice of John about it.

About two Days before the Assize, Joseph came to my House, and desired me to
make him a Writing, to secure his Goods from the Priest; if upon Trial, the
Priest should cast him.

My answer was, (I very well remember,) viz. What do thou come to me, to
secure thy Goods, did not John Field promise to do that for thee? Well, says
he, it is now too late, I would have thee do it for me: then I told him, it
could not be done, except he did quit himself of the possession of his Goods,
and Assign his right to some Person or other.

This he would not believe, until he got me to go with him to a Lawyer, and
there he agreed to bring the Lease of his Farm, to the Lawyer, (which was one
day before the Assizes) but his Lease he left at home, and did ride to one of
his Brothers to be an Arbitrator on his side to agree it, and then it was given
out, that Joseph did not agree with the Priest, it was his Brother. And I being
with him after the agreement, he said to me, he could now pay Tyths as well as
other Taxes: the Priest (who being reputed a very moderate Man, and well spoken
of by some Quakers) sent his Son to School to me some time after this
agreement, and the Young Man said to me, That Joseph was as good a Man as they
had in the Town, for the Payment of Tyths.

But since these things, Joseph went to a Monthly Meeting, to Ampthel, to
Answer for himself upon suspicion, of being a long Practiser of a very foul
Sin, I am ashamed to name it; the diverse Witnesses, were very free to tell it
in private, and somewhat became public, viz. To the Elders of that meeting,
that when he went from home, he must have a Man lie in Bed with him, and that
he used to Kiss, and get upon such Men as he lay with, and made them Sweat; and
I heard two Men say, that with him, they had such a Nights Lodging as they
never had in their Lives, adding, they would never Lie with him more.

Now Joseph being Examined, of some of these Actions, could give no better
Answer than this, (as I am told) It was only love to the Creature,) so the
Meeting could do no less than bid him give over Preaching in Meetings, his
Answer was, I must obey God rather than Man. This Joseph continues to Preach in
his own House (and People come to hear him) every other first Day, as I am told.

Reader, bare with me (for I desire a Reformation,) and I am the Larger upon
this, because the Ruling Elders and Preachers, have Written Laws, which they
call Prescriptions, which some held are to keep all out of miscarriages, or to
that purpose; when Alas! They have lost their Power (if ever they had any) to
silence the Young Nonsensical Preachers, yet such Elders will sometimes in
private to others, call them half handed Preachers, and wish they would be
silent.

Now a little more of the said Joseph, once before, he was to Dine at my House,
and had sat down, said, amongst other words, O God thou have Written thy Law,
in our Hearts, as with the point of a Diadem, (i. e. a Kings Crown.) And when
(...) begins to Preach, he says, this and this springs, or arises in my Heart;
(that is) what comes next to his Tongues end; and because he Thunders out his
Words so fast, the Ignorant hearers conclude it comes from the Life and Power
of God; (this is darkness it self.)

Thus too many well meaning Souls have been strongly deluded, by heaping up
unto themselves such Ignorant Preachers (having Itching Ears, as the Apostle
says, (2 Timothy 4.3.) that they cannot endure sound Doctrine, when they (o^ some
of (...)) hear G. Keith Preach it, as lately near Bedford, and to manifest
their drink of (...), Doctrine, one of them, a Woman Preacher, stood up,
reflecting against George, amongst other Words, as near as I and others present
could remember, she Preached against the Wisdom of the World, and Priests and
Professors Knowledge, that profits not, And that it was not needful that Christ
should Live in Heaven, or Dye on Earth, but that he should Live and Rule in us,
etc. Likewise she that reflected lately, said t^ one of her Neighbors (as I am
credibly informed,) that what she spoke in Meetings, was only that which did
arise from within, and that she had not read a Chapter in the Bible this three
Years.

Therefore such Ignorant Preachers have got such a way of tuning out the words
that comes next to their Tongues end, that so Charms the fancies of some of
the hearers, that they conclude the words that so spring out of their Mouths,
are (...) good News from Heaven, agreeable to G. Fox, who says, viz. The^^
(...) none (...) Glory and a Heaven, but within them, Gre. Mist. p. 214.

But who so blind, as to believe that their singing Preachings come immediately
from Heaven, or Gods Holy Spirit, when they so seldom mind, or meditate in the
Holy Scriptures, which were given forth from Gods Spirit.

Therefore it is my Faith, that if such Preachers, as are Ignorant of the
F^^^^mental Doctrines of Christianity, were silenced, and that in Country
M^eeting (...) Religious Worship, (a sound preacher being absent,) One in the
Meeting, after (...) time of silently waiting upon God to grow in Grace, did
read a Chapter or two in the Bible to Meditate upon; or a Sermon and Prayer (in
the fear of God) in the Family Devotions of that honest Man Theophilus
Dorrington, the People would soon shake off their Ignorance, by the help of
Grace and Holy Scriptures.

Object. But if some conceited Ignorant Preachers should say to me, thus: Th^^
would bring us back again into Egypt to the Priests, we will not so much as
look into their Writings, their Babylonish Ware, for one of our Teachers has
told us, they are Merchants of Babylon, successors of Simon and E^^mas the
Sorcerers, Acts 8. and 13. And further, he Prophesied about 40 Years ag^^, that
their downf^ll was near, for says he in P. 19. The Wrath of God Almighty, is
(...) to be trod, in which you are to be cast, for the Lord has spoken it, and
he will not repent, a trebble Portion of the Plagues of God Almighty, are you
to have above all others, etc. R. Crane's strict account of the Merchants of
Babylon, Printed in 1660.

Answer, By the false Prophecy of R. C. we may learn, that blind Zeal and
Malice does excite some to Curse in the Name of the Lord, as G. W. has done G.
K. These dreadful Curses were to de^^r us Ignorant Quakers from so much as
opening to read a Priests Book, fearing ^^^i^ Cheats would be discovered.

But notwithstanding our Teachers fiery Zeal against the Priests (as they call
them in derision,) the soundest Doctrine of Christianity had been lost in this
Nation (th^^ too many of them do not Live up to their Doctrine,) had not some of
the best of them, explained them according to the Holy Scriptures, (which is so
little minded by too many;) Witness Dr. Fowlers Design of Christianity, Dr.
Scotts Works, but more especially his Fifth and last Vol. of the Christians
Life, which I recommend to my Reader to buy them, if he can spare Money.

I say, the Family Devotions above mentioned, may be very useful, (to
unprejudiced minds) to be used, in our Religious Meetings in the Country.

And also in Families, every Evening, where the Master of the Family has not
the Gift of utterance (as many have not.) Heart Prayer is in use at all times,
which (...) our own Souls; but Prayers read in the Families, in Words suitable
to the Divine Majesty ought to be in such Words, as may excite the Hearers to
stand in awe of their Creator, by fearing to Sin against so good a God, that
gives us all good things.

But the Prayers as we Quakers use to hear (it is said) comes immediately from
Gods Spirit, which is impossible, for if they did, there would be a begging of
God Pardon for their Sins, and the Sins of the Members of the Meeting.

That we should so long be Enemies to Forms of Prayer, (is to be wondered at)
when our dear Savior made one for us, When you Pray, says he, say, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. Luke 11.2. and this we never use in our Meetings, nor
in Families, and indeed most of us use no Prayer in their Families, that Wrath
we must expect, without Repentance, according to Jere. 10 25. Pour out thy fury
upon the Heathen, and the Families that call not on thy Name.

Will. Pens (...) Apology. P. 146.
was properly the Son of God, we utterly deny.

Answer, If this be true, Nathaniel was mistaken, who said, Thou art the Son of
God, John 1.49. Also Simon Peter, who said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the
l^^ing God, Matt. 16.16. as likewise was the voice out of the Cloud, which
said, This i^ my Beloved Son, Matt. 17.5.

Your Imagined God beyond the Stars, C. At^inso^^ Sword of the Lord draws P. 5.
and your Carnal Christ (which you would make apppear through your Heathenish
Philosophy) is utterly denied. That Christ is God and Man, in one Person, is a
Lie.

Answer, Did you ever hear that any Minister professing Christianity, did go
about to make Christ appear through Heathenish Philosophy? and to your denying
that Christ is God and Man, Read Isa. 9.6. Jo. 1.14. and 20.28. Heb. 2.14,
(...) 8.3. 1 Timothy 3.16. Ph. 2.5, 6, 7. Romans 9.5. 1. Jo. 5.20. with many others,
that prove he is.

Does not the Name of Christ, belong to the whole Body, and to every Member?
Isaac Penington to Professors, P. 27.
Christ is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 12 10. nor is he ashamed, to
give them the Name Christ, together with him, Heb. 2.11.

Answer, I do not yet read in the Scriptures that Jesus called any of his
followers Christ.

Question, Ed. Burrows Works, P. 149.
(to a Quaker) Is that very Man [Jesus] with that very Body within you, Answer,
the very Christ of God, is within us, we dare not deny him.

The Sufferings of the People of God (Quakers) in this Age, is greater
sufferings, and more unjust than in the Days of Christ, F. B. 273.
what was done to Christ, or the Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law, and in
great part, by the due executing of a Law.

Answer, Surely, this must be a great mistake in Ed. Burrows, for (...) Quak^^
(...) I can hear of) had his Hands and Feet N^^^^ to a Tree o^ a Cross, and
there hang till Death, as the hard Hearted Romans did, by the Jews procurement
(of ha^der Hearts) Crucify our ever Blessed Savior; and also we read, that
three of his followers suffered so, as Phillip, Andrew and Simon, and that John
was thrown into a T^n of Scalding Oil, and by the Power of Jesus Christ, took
no hurt; and likewise Mark the Evangelist (it is said) had a Rope tied about his
Neck, and was drawn through the Streets of Alexandria until his Flesh was re^^
in (...).

They that are false, Preach Christ without, William Smiths Primer, P. 8.
and bid People believe in him,

But if we make but a small amendment, (say you in P. 220) of the word, only
and then read it thus;

They that are false, Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him
[only] as he is in Heaven: (very good.)

Then George Whitehead, now that you have found out the way of amendments, thou
may do well to follow on to the end, that none may Write more against it.

As First, begin in P. 65. in thy Truth defending the Quakers, and there use
the word (only) as,

That Faith in Christ without Men, is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine.

And so it greatly behooves th^^ to do, ^^^ing thou have given such a large
Testimony to Christ without us, in P. 544 in the Switch, contrary to what thou
have formerly Printed, and yet in all thy large Confession, thou do not own
him now to be in Heaven without us, in the true nature of Man, and in the true
and re^^ Body wherein he suffered, that he will come again in that Body without
us, to Judge the Quick and the Dead at the last Day.

And if thou will (by the help of Divine Grace) make a Book of Retractions, of
all things that is contrary to the Doctrines of Christ Jesus in Holy Scripture,
in thi^^ and other Friends Books, (and get the Members of the second Days
Meeting in London to sign it,) it will (as I may say) take the Weapons out of
the Hands of all those tha^ say, The Quakers hold damnable Errors.

I am not without hope, but that thou may be an Instrument in this good
work, which if thou lives to see it accomplished, thou will leave a (...)
behind thee; for thou m^^t needs acknowledge thou art subject to (...) w^ll as
Samuel, Eliab and Elijah, who, you say, in P. 497. were, viz. Good Men (...)
s^nne true Prophets, also have been mistaken in some things, and have had their
weakness and failings, Sam. 16.16. 1 Kings 18.18. Romans 11.3, 4.

And further, in P. 229. That we have always readily offered, and submitted our
words and writings, to the Testimony of Holy Scripture, etc.

If this you really intend, then do you choose three or four of the learned
Quakers, to meet with such a number of the soberest Ministers of the Church of
England seeing you acknowledge their Creed is Orthodox) to help to make a Book
of Retractions.

But, if you still hold, that none can rightly judge of Doctrines, whether they
are according to Scripture, or no, without the same degree of Gods Spirit, as
the Prophets and the Apostles had, the Controversy will not end, except you
will acknowledge you have it in that degree.

The good Physician (says one) will try the Apothecaries Drugs, ere he make
use of them for his Patients Body: And shall we not try the ingredients of that
Religion (by the Holy Scriptures) which is accounted the Physic of our Souls?
If the Gold be pure, why fears it the Touchstone?

Therefore be not backward to come to the Test, and for your Assistance take
(those above) and if you see some failings in them, judge not, that they are
not accepted of God, for small failings, not be so uncharitable, as E. B. seems
to be, in P. 32. of his works, and P. 73. in the Switch, viz. That God does not
accept of any, where there is any failing, etc.

I have more Charity for our Ancient friend Isaac Pennington (above mentioned)
that he was accepted of God though he had failings; for after he had Writ Queries
that strengthened some Men in the keeping on their Hats in Prayer time,
retracted it, saying, viz. God knows (says he) I did not willingly mistake:
Nay, truly the Power was upon me, when I wrote those Queries, but I did not
understand the signification thereof; Jud. and the Jews, P. 69.

Therefore we have no need to boast, that we have a Spirit given us, beyond all
our forefathers, Gre. Mist. P. 89.

In Brief, a Man that does but once tell you, G. W. etc. of your mistakes, that
they might be amended, had need have the same Armor of Grace in his Heart, as
little David had, when he encountered Great Goliath, yea, as bold as David's
Worthies were, who ventured their Lives, to fetch Water from the Philistians
Camp; to be sure you will scoff at him at a high rate, Wound or Kill him, as
you account that Crisp, Bug, Keith, etc. are Dead to the Life of Truth, for
opposing your Errors: Wounded them, it is true you have, for which God will
Judge you; for every one of them at first only desired, that you might bring
your deeds to the Light, viz. to be tried by Scriptures; but instead of
Answering their Christian desires (for your good) you fall upon them, and wound
them and made them grieve.

By this it further appears, you are no followers of the good Samaritan, he did
heal where he had not wounded, you wound, and seek to make the wound bigger:
the Blessed Jesus, you take not for an example, he went about doing good to his
very Enemies, being Reviled, Reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.23. Oh! How did his
Lamb like Nature Weep, when he turned his Face toward hard hearted Jerusalem,
and thought of the miseries that were coming upon those his fierce Enemies.

But you seek not to bind up the Wounds you have made in your Brethren, seek
not to win them in a Spirit of meekness, but like rough Esau, contend with them
fiercely, and rejoice if any ill befalls them, doing what in you lies to starve
them, by hindering their Trading. Your own Consciences will tell you (if not
feared) this is truth.

You are not come into the Patience of a Christian, as David was in, when
Shimei cursed him bitterly. Oh! how patiently David bore it, being sensible
there was some Cause in himself, that God did permit Shimei to curse him so
often before his mighty Warriors.

Consider this, you fierce dispisers of all those who desire your Reformation
in Doctrine and Practice. You know where this cursed thing is, that causes all
this disturbance; you still hide it; but out it must come, and be beaten to
powder.

What! do you think people are blind? Do not you say, They all have Light from
the same Fountain of Light with you? Did not God give them this Light to know
Truth from Error by?

Your making New Creeds, or Articles of Faith (according as your Opposers
desire you) will not do; they cannot believe you are sincere until you retract
those Errors in your Books, printed before your late Creeds.

And if some of the Authors are dead, what then? you that have recommended
their Works, by Epistles to them, must retract them; It Is no shame to do it, it
has been often done for good men after death, by the Survivers in
Christianity. It Is a Princely thing (says a Worthy Author) to acknowledge an
Error, and to forsake it. And this I have been a Quaker above 40 years, I took
it well when any one saw a fault in me, and told me of it.

Is it not a fault in the Members of Two Meetings in Wickham in
Buckinghamshire, not to love one another? and is it not a great Fault that the
Preachers in both Meetings, in pretending they both preach from the utterance
of God^s Spirit, yet preach contrary to one another.

To conclude, As to this my Loving Testimony to the Truth, I am sure that thou
George Whitehead will not hate and scoff me (as thou have done thy Opposer, in
the Switch) if God's Grace is thy Guide. Oh! therefore George, Arise in the
Authority of the Divine Grace, (that thy Name may be had in worthy Remembrance,
when thy Body is in a Grave:)

And like good Josiah, labor to get every thing removed (out of our Spiritual
Israel, so called) that in any thing is contrary to Christ's inward and
Spiritual Grace, and his Divine Precepts, in holy Scripture; that Jeremiah's
Prophecy may be fulfilled in us, viz. All that see them shall acknowledge
them, that they are the Seed which the Lord has blessed, Isa. 61.^9. Men
seeing our Innocent, Patient, Meek, Quiet, Humble, Blameless and Inoffensive
Lives and Conversation, to the Glory of God for ever.

This in Truth is the real desire of my heart, for the People called Quakers in
general: God knows I lie not, because so many of them are come so far out of
the Wilderness (of this wicked World's Vanities) even to the very borders of
Canaan (a resting place in God's Grace).

It pi^ies my Soul. that any such Innocent Souls should fall short of that
rest, by hearkening to the Preachings of the Lifeless Preachers
(abovementioned) who are Taught to preach neither by Grace nor Holy
Scriptures, but what comes next into their Imaginations (which is a Rock) that
many Souls have been split upon.

Bedford, Nov. 25. 1699. I am a Lover of the Souls of all Men, W. M.

An Appendix.
BY way of Appeal to the most serious amongst the People called Quakers (that
by Grace and Holy Scriptures) they may consider (in the fear of the Lord)
Whether some of our confident Teachers, were not the cause of the many
Imprisonments, etc. we endured (I cannot number mine) in the time of K. C. II.
who in the first year of that Kings Reign, viz. 1660, the suffering Clergy of
the Church of England, being just coming out of the suffering they endured in
Olivers time, etc. that one of our Teachers should Salute them in the following
manner, in his Book called, A strict account of Babylons Merchants, etc. By
Richard Crane, Printed for Thomas Simons at the Bull and Mouth, etc.

Go to (says R. Crane) ye Merchants of Babylon, who are now in this day
bringing forth, and exposing to sale your old Cankered, Rusty, and Moth-eaten
Ware. Rage not, neither be angry, if you be brought to your Rule which you say
is the Scripture.

And though you gather some heat from the Sun, [ K. C. II.] that is newly arisen,
and from it receive some small Vigor, and like the Insects, and the Reptilia of
the Earth, who creep out of their holes at the Suns warmth, by which they are
vivified yet know such are not Permanent, but the withdrawing of the Suns heat
from them, soon return to their holes, and some Perish; you may take this as a
Figure.

For there is a cup prepared for you, being mixed with Plagues, Woes, Miseries,
Sorrows, Torments, and Eternal Burnings, which you shall not pass, for you are
found from the Lord God worthy, and a trebble portion is to be given unto you.

Being Ignorant of the Soul, or what it is, your Cure, is you know not what, or
to what, and so truly Physicians worth nothing. -- Your Medicine, which you
pretend to cure Souls with, I would ask whether it be a Simple, or a Compound,
being made up of so many Fragments of diverse sorts, therefore a Compound.

As the first Ingredient in your Composition, so much cried up, is your Prayer,
called Common; Which W. Tomlingson the same year 1660. in his word of
Information, compares to the Whore^ cup, mentioned in the Revelations.

R. Farnsworth, 2 years after that, in his Plea to the Bishops, Labors to
prove out of the Common Prayer, that the Quakers agree with it in Principle,
Doctrine and Practice.

Also Fra. Lea, in his Looking Glass for Episcopal People, 1674. writes ten
approved Prayers out of the Common Prayer Book, to show how the Quakers agree
with it, so deserve Liberty of Conscience, that all may come out of Error, the
Quakers have long prayed for, (says he) Even so do now the opposers of the
Quakers Error, and that J. ^ield (above named) will prove they are all of one
mind and heart; as be used to say they were, then let him Reconcile his Brother
Preachers sayings above.


and indeed so it is, I hardly know any thing more Common, except Cursing and
Swearing.

In some things you parallel Simon and Elimas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.8, 23 --
you are even discovered and known to be as you are, viz. Antichrists,
Deceivers, Sorcerers, and Ravening Wolves -- Flames, Flames, Flames of Fire, is
prepared by the Lord to consume you as dry stubble. In the Light of the Eternal
God I have beheld you, and all your Actions, and take them altogether, and Rake
the Pit of confusion, and bind up your self in a bundle. -- If I should
parallel you with Salvage Beasts, I could not truly do it, I think, be they
never so fierce -- but Men of Prey, such as you are, is quite out of kind, and
not to be paralleled by any thing that draws breath.

-- Oh! Full of all Subtly, Children generated of the seed of deceit, brought
forth out of the Womb of Wickedness, and nourished up at the Breasts of
Witchcraft, The true Light certainly did not move this Man to Rage at this rate.
and rocked in the Cradle of Idleness, Woe is me, for the day which I see is
coming upon you from the Lord, and all them that you have made drunk, by
putting your bottle of Poison to their Noses, who have drunk deep, and so are
become one in Nature with you, it had been better (...) never been born, it had
been better for you, that you had been strangled in your Mothers Wombs, and
still births had been presented to them, than Living Children into their Arms.
Oh! What shall I say concerning you? Gods everlasting decree is sealed against
you, burnings, burnings, burnings, with unqu^^^^able fire, is your portion from
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth.

Your Organs, your Singing-Men, and Boys with Surplice, Tippits, Sc^^^^^ Long
Garments and Girdles, with your invented Prayer called Common, with your
Preaching, and the best of your Sacrifices, enters into the ears of the Eternal
God -- (Nay) you are highly mistaken, a pure God must have pure praise, God
praises God Mark this well.
; his praise and worship for ever and ever, is from thee to thee: now if you
cannot read this let your Mouths forever be stopped; Cease your Invented
Instruments for Worship, for an Evil Savor does your Sacrifices send forth,
even a loathing to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth.

But the God which you Imagine, let him be Worshipped according to your
Imaginations and Inventions, and think not to mock the Eternal God, by your
Devices -- the Jews knew him not, who came in the Figure or Flesh. -- Oh! I
have seen Eternity, I have seen Eternity, and a dreadful day is VERY NEAR at
hand to be revealed; Oh! The overflowing scourge; Oh! The Besome of
Destruction. Oh! The Plagues and Vengeance that is to be poured upon the Wicked
in this Nation, both Priest and People; Howl, Howl, Hireling Priests of all
orders, for the Winepress of the wrath of God Almighty is EVEN NEAR to be trod,
into which you are to be cast; for the Lord God has spoken it, and he will not
repent, a trebble portion, a trebble portion of the Plagues of God Almighty,
you are to have above all others, [Thus far R. Crane.]

Observe, Christian Reader, what Astonishing things are these, which this man
pretends came through him from God Almighty. Oh, Blasphemous! to father all their
Malice upon the Merciful God.

But we Poor Ignorant Quakers were made so blind to believe, because of their
sufferings, that such were true Prophets sent of God, in this Age, pretending
they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, need not study or meditate what to
preach (as Paul advised Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.15.) As if they were Conjurers that
took a Text of Sctipture to begin a Sermon, See p. 7. in G. Fox Saul's Errant.

And that they needed neither Scriptures nor Books, as a means to help their
Preachers, and that they may be good Ministers without the help of the
Scripture, (as the above named Joseph Clark, pleaded with G. Keith in my house)
for they had all revealed in them, that they were to preach and declare, and by
the same Spirit Young Boys and Girls Preach now, and have a long time from the
Imaginations of their Brains, or what comes next to the Tongues end, for if
this Spirit was of God, it would allow the Holy Scriptures to be sometimes read
in their Religious Meetings, because we are certain the Scriptures were given
forth by God's Spirit.

Indeed, their first Preachings won many of us to become good moral Heathens,
expecting Salvation only by obeying the Light within us: And John Bunyan, art
thou finding fault (says G.F.) because Men wear no Hatbands, and eat and drink
Bread and Water, and cast by their Pride? G. Mist. p. 211. And since have taken
up Pride again.
when alas! Salvation comes by a Saving Faith in Jesus of Nazareth, as he died
for our sins, (now at God's Right Hand) making Intercession for sinners, that
all men might have a day to repent in; for from him comes all the Grace, that
all men have, to teach them to deny ungodliness, Titus 2.11.

This Erring Spirit taught us not to make Christ Jesus (as he is in Heaven) the
object of our faith; but has taught us that Jesus of Nazareth appeared in the
World for a short time, called a Figure (by R. C. as above) and when he
disappeared in the World, is no more.

But know, ye Neglecters of Meditating, or Reading the Scriptures in your
Meetings, 1 Timothy 4.15. That all Men shall be Judged at the Last Day, by that
MAN Christ Jesus, Acts 17.31.

Object. If some Quakers say, That I highly commend the Prayers made by some of
the Church of England; and do not their Books want Retractions (in some things)
as well as our Books?

Ans. It Is true, I do commend their Prayers, and so does Fr. Lee, one of your
Teachers, in his Looking-Glass. More thereof will follow.

And what in their Books is needful to be retracted, they will not be so hardly
brought to do it as you are, nor cover them so long as you have done, and as
the Preaching Elders have done near me, who now confess, They knew there were
Errors in our Friends Books before their Controversy with G. K. The more is
their shame to cover Transgressions so long (from us Hearers) to keep in favor
with those that cover Errors by Sophistry in their New Books.

Dr. Scott (that excellent Penman) did commit an Error in a book written in
his younger years, called, The Christian Life, 1st Vol. which I hope will be
retracted, viz. in p. 282, etc. He seems to encourage Christians in their
Warfare, to Mirth, Festivities and Raileries of Fancy, etc. which Christ
condemns, Mat. 12.36. But for his 5th Vol. of the Christian Life, I know not
many better books, except the Bible.

And likewise it is to be hoped (now that God has given more Light) the Church
of England will by the help of the Inward and Spiritual Grace, remove those
Offenses that have kept out so many Dissenters from coming in into them; for if
they do not come in (as one) into the Truth as it is in Jesus, O then, good
God, when will the Kingdoms of this World become our Lord Christ's?

Luther, and other our first Reformers from Popery, had more Light from God
than the Papists had or have: B. Latimer, Martyr, had more Light from God a
little before he died, than he had when he thought he could not be damned if he
had been in a Friar's Coul, Act. and Mon. p. 1325. So that I trust in God he
will be pleased to illuminate many of the Church of England's Ministers, that
they will see very great need to win all people to come to them; which no doubt
will soon be accomplished, after once their Lives and Conversation agree with
their Doctrines. For it is a worthy saying of a Son of that Church, viz When we
have used all the Arguments, and the best Vindication of our selves, and of our
Church, it is Holiness of Life is the best and most prevalent Apology.

Now follows the Ten approved Prayers (the abovenamed Fr. Lee) collected out
of the Common Prayer, I hope for a good End.

Almighty God, which show to all Men that be in Error, the Light of thy
Truth, to the Intent that they may return into the way of Righteousness, etc.
Lord, from whom all good things do come, grant us thy humble Servants, that by
the holy Inspiration we may think those things that be good, etc. Almighty God,
unto whom all Hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no Secrets are
hid, cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the Inspiration of thy holy Spirit,
etc. That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them
Grace to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth. That it may please thee to
give to all thy people increase of Grace to hear meekly thy Word and to receive
it with pure Affection, and to bring sorth the Fruits of the Spirit. That it
may please thee to bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred and are
deceived. That it may please thee to defend and provide for the Fatherless
Children and Widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed. That it may please
thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and to turn their
Hearts. Grant us, O Lord, to learn to love our Enemies, by the Example of thy
Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for his Persecutors, etc. Almighty God, by whose
Providence thy Servant John Baptist was wonderfully b^rn, and sent to prepare
the way of thy Son our Savior, by preaching Repentance; make us so to follow
his Doctrine and holy Life, that we may truly repent, according to his
preaching, and after his Example, constantly speak the Truth, boldly rebuke
VICE, and patiently suffer for the Truth, etc.
Since it has pleased God, by his Grace to convince me, That Baptism with
Water and the Lords Supper are to continue in the Church until Christ's coming
again in the same Body in which he ascended, to Judge the World; by which I was
stirred in Spirit to search the holy Scriptures, and therein came to understand
and believe, That the Holy Ghost was (if I may so speak) scattered, or poured
upon the Apostles, Acts 2. 3. seeming to the Eye like Cloven Tongues, or as
flames of fire will so seem by the like figure, I do believe Water was
sprinkled, or cast upon those 3000 (young and old) that were converted by
Peter's Sermon, and so baptized the same day, and not plunged over Head and
Ears in Water (as some think) ver. 41. The same may be understood of the Jailer
and his Family, who were converted, and baptized with Water at midnight, Chapter
16.33.

And also since it has pleased God to further enlighten me through consenting
unto his Commands in H. Scripture, I am enabled to make a full discovery, how
Satan has beguiled such a number of our young Preachers, which was by
hearkening to those Ancient Preachers, that made them believe there is but one
^ight in all Men.

As First, They mistaking that Text, John 1.9. That was the true Light which
enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World. From thence supposing, That
all Men were enlightened with a Light of Christ Jesus, from their Mothers Wombs,
sufficient to Salvation, as particularly G. Fox, in p. 20. Gr. Mist. says, --
Where there is Life in an Infant, there is Light. And in p. 42. disapproves his
Adversary for saying, That no Man by that Native Light inherent in him, had
power to believe, etc. And to the same purpose see p. 15. in W. Pen's Primitive
Christianity.

2. Thus it appears they own but one Light that we were born with. This Light,
or Understanding, tho it be called, The Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27. which
reproves for some sins, yet is but a dim Light to see spiritual things by; but
when it shall please God to Lighten this Candle by the Influence of his Divine
Grace, and H. Scriptures, then the Soul is Light in the Lord.

3. So that our young Preachers (laying aside the Light of the H. Scriptures)
and Preaching only this common Light in Mankind, must needs Preach false
Doctrine, and other confused stuff; so that it has led too many of them to
think the H. Scriptures are no help to make a Minister, and has so exalted
them, that they think they have the same Degree of Immediate Revelation as the
Apostles had; see p. 213. Gr. Mist. But they may wait long enough before they
attain to that Degree of God's Spirit the Apostles had: For those Discoveries
the Apostles had, were to confirm a belief in peoples hearts of the miraculous
Birth, Sufferings, etc. of our blessed Redeemer. And Mortal Man (whose heart is
deceitful) must no more expect that God will so far trust them with such a
large measure of heavenly Treasure as he did the Apostles, the Prophecy of
Joel being fullfilled in them. Yet God in mercy now gives (to all the sincere
believers in his only Son Jesus of Nazareth) such a measure of his Divine
Grace, as will both deliver and preserve them from the evil of the World, and
bring them to eternal Life and Salvation, Titus 2.11.

4. We the hearers of such Preachers, that have so long preached from their own
Spirit (without the H. Scriptures) over whom Satan can get advantage to
Transform Himself as an Angel of Light, by which way he gets the Name, of an
Angel of Light; we must needs, I say, by hearing such Preachers be enticed not
to endure sound Doctrine. But if I should write of the diverse Confusions, this
Spirit has led us to this 40 Years past, it would make a large Book: and this
I know by Experience, that where this Spitit Rules, they cannot with any Love
read any of the Good Doctrines written in the Books of any Minister of the
Church of England, though it be Dr. Goodmans Penitent Pardoned -- or Dr. Scots
Christian Life. Vol. 5th. but for this my Book, they will warn as many as they
can, not to read it, for fear of Infection. O Lord open their Eyes, etc. for
thou know I have Love for them; For one of them has given this Good Council
to them all, viz. The best way to recover the deceived is to discover the
deceiver.

5. Now to get clear out of Babylonish Confusion, I do advise all amongst them
that fear the Lord, to whom this may come, yea and all Dissenters, (so called)
to come and hear sound Doctrine, from such as have studied, or thorougly
meditated in the H. Scriptures, for too many dissenters want Christian Love to
each other, and it is apparent that some of their Preachers strive more to
increase the Number of their Hearers (for outward gain) than to excel one
another in a Christian Life.

Now, I appeal to every honest Impartial Reader, whether the Preachers of the
Church of England have not more Christian Charity to the Dissenters in General,
than they have to one another, for too many of the Dissenters are for the
straightening each others Liberties in many things, while the Church of England
grants them all Liberty of Conscience, yea, and most Christianly invites them
to come into Communion with them for a Reformation of manners, and to help them
to rebuke Vices boldly, and help each other in their Christian Warfare, which
to do would be the Joy of Christendom, stop the mouths of Atheists, yea, and it
would be to the Honor and Glory of Him, whom we call our Lord and Master, from
whom we take the Name Christian, He who Dyed, Rose, and Ascended, to win us to
Love him and one another: How does the Church of England entreat you to be
Reconciled, to come and Worship God together, to hear the foundest Doctrine
Preached, to pay nothing therefore, but what our Kings and Parliament
Established by Law before we were born; and their Condescending Love to us is
so much, that they will not impose any thing upon us against Good Conscience,
and that, if you do not think good to be with them at their Fasts, or Feasts,
etc. you may stay at home at such times, they most Christianly concluding thus,
viz.

God direct you, and us all. To his Grace I Commend you, and the Inffuences of
his Blessed Spirit, to show you what great things it is to do in your Power for
him and his Church, and give you a Heart to do them, that it be not laid to
your Charge.

Ob. But, if some Pharisaical Quaker should object, saying, This man would have
us meet with such sinners, as from 7. to 70; Cry Lord have Mercy upon us
miserable sinners, when he knows, he cannot say that he ever heard us this 40
Years, Pray in our Meetings to God for Pardon of sin, but has often heard us,
thank God for his presence in Meettings.

Answer, The more are you like to the Pharisees who was not for Meeting, Eating
or Drinking with sinners, they thought themselves so Holy, but our Blessed
Savior chose rather to meet with them, than the most Zealous Pharisee -- Then
drew near unto him, all the Publicans and sinners for to hear him, and the
Scribes and Pharisees Murmured, saying, This Man receives sinners, etc. Mat.
9.10, 11,

Ob. But if you further object: That such poor and insufficient Ministers are
placed in many Churches (so called, though they mean the People to be the Church)
which rather drive Men, than give them Tolerable Encouragement to attend their
Ministry on hopes of Improvement.

Answer, The same may be objected against the greatest number of the Preaching
Quakers, being much more insufficient: The Bishops cannot hinder their
Institution, (in many places) but some are sensible of the great easiness of
some in their Admission into Orders, by Symony, etc. which the Laws are very
strict against, when known. Therefore until things be so amended that none
shall be admitted to Preach, whose Lives and Conversation becomes not
Christianity, You have Liberty to hear what Minister you please, though not of
your Parish, that there may be no separation wholly.

Oh! Let our Prayers be as David's, viz. to understand our Errors. Psa. 19.20.

The Testimony of J. W. an Eminent Quaker in Bedfordshire, (having perused the
Switch for the Snake, which he put into my hand, December 9. 1699.) not
doubting but that J. R. another Eminent Quaker there, is of the same mind, viz.

Books of Controversy about Religion, written by the Dictates of selfish
Wisdom, that lead to Envy and Evading Quibbles, of which England now too much
abounds, are or as little benefit for the Promotion of True Religion, and
building up that Holy Faith in Peoples Hearts (...) works by Love; as the
confounding of Languages helped forward the Building of Babels Tower, as may be
seen in Genesis 11. Upon which I have seen this following Observation made, ( viz.)

Bring me (quoth he) a Trowel Quickly quick,
One brings him up a Hammer, hew this Brick;
Another bids, and th^^ they cleave a Tree,
Make fast this Rope, and then they let it flee;
One calls for Planks another Mortar lacks,
They bring the first a ^^^ne; the last an Ax;
One would have (...), and him a spade they give;
Another asks a (...), and gets a Sive;
Thus Crosly Crossed, they p^^^e and rail in vain,
What one has made, another spoils again;
This makes them leave their work, and like mad fools,
Scatter their stuff, and tumble down their tools.
Even so, O Lord, if it stands with thy blessed will, hasten the day of
scattering all envious stuff of Contention, that the Instruments thereof may
cast down their Tools, and the People that fear thee, and desire to live at
Peace, may say as thy Holy Prophet Isaiah, in his 46. Chap. 1, 2. ver. says,
and hear thy voice, as in the third and fourth verses thereof.

J. W.

FINIS.

