A P^NDARIQUE ELEGY Upon the death of the R. R. Father in God JEREMY, Late
Lord Bishop of Down, Connor, and Dromore.

By Le. Mathews A. M. a sacr. domest.

Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet, 1667.

TO THE MEMORY Of the most Venerable Doctor JEREMY TAILOR, Lord Bishop of
DOWN; etc.
Stanza. I.
HAppy the man! whom fate permits to stay
In the abodes of old eternity;
Careless what it is to live, and what to dye,
Or what is a doing in mortality;
Well satisfied only to be,
To dwell in an immortal ray,
Hid in the light of that long lasting day.
But happier he! if'tis his doom
From Natures silent tyring room,
To enter on our busy Stage, the world;
Who not by fortune hither hurled.
An empty place to fill,
Or to make up the Cities bill,
Or stand a mute, or gaze amongst the crowd,
And do ingloricus things and vile,
And idly laugh and prate a while,
Till out of breath wrapped in a common shroud,
I^ laid with unknown bones, and has no fame allowed;
But he who bravely speaks and bravely does,
And throughout all the various Scenes
Worthy and fit himself demeans;
Whether his part the Prince or Peasant shows,
For that the Drammatist and not he chose:
He does deserve the applause of all,
Thrice happy him! may the spectators call,
When the worlds almighty Poet bids the curtain fall.
II.
Such was the man whom all admired,
Whom ^ame, and Heaven's sweet breath inspired,
Whose funeral voice made others live,
And Immortality did often give;
And yet though such he were;
Though thus the mighty man has done
The mighty man (alas!) is gone:
He, he is gone and left us here
To doubt if heaven can such another send,
Or what for us it does intend,
For all our joys and hopes are frighted flown
Ere since the whole Church heard by a catholic groan
The Doctors gone.
III.
Open great volumn of Fame, open wide,
Written fair and full on every side;
To all the world his story show,
Though all the learned world already know
But Fame, be elegant like him;
Be quaint, be copious, and not obscure;
And Book unsullied be and trim;
Have a large character; but specially be sure without, within
No blot, no stain be seen,
For this to latest ages must endure.
IV.
He was the man, so pure, so innocent,
So careless of forbidden fruit,
Richly supplied with Natures own recruit;
So masculine his soul, and so content
To be but man; so little bent
To vice, that you might call
Him one not bruised by Adams fall.
Iv'e never but with admiration seen
His generous looks, his glorious mien,
They made me think of heaven, and of the Saints above.
So Angels live, and smile, and love;
And one might guess as soon, that they
Had ancient scores to pay,
And smelt our Grandsires moldy clay.
V.
So vast his knowledge, he
Had tasted often of each allowed tree,
On all their sweets had daily fed
The Bird of Paradise, he kindly bred
A gaulless Dove within the Serpents head:
The Cherubs bowed, and sheathed their swords;
For's tongue had all the charms of words,
All that language and wit affords,
And new and fitter names did wear;
And's lucky pen (as if a pencil 'twere)
Made gold, by guilding it, more golden to appear.
Ye, wisdoms Sons with him there is lost
A Vatican of learned things, which cost
A Treasury of precious time; but grieve ye most
For undiscovered Arts and Sciences,
And what is excellent in those or these;
What never was, what never shall be found,
With him lie buried under ground.
VI.
Had he been where the Lycaonian throng
Thought those two Prelates Gods in humane shape;
He scarcely could escape
Their worship, and a canonizing Song;
Jove for his presence, Mercury for his tongue.
Had he been thine, fond Rome, the had gloried more
In him then all thy wondrous Saints before;
His birth had famous been and great,
His life a golden legend should repeat;
The Hero dead had sainted bin; and soon
His Relics miracles must have done,
Whilst his the Rubric names did far outshine;
Yet though thy native, he had not been thine;
Strong prejudice his freeborn soul
Custom and interest were never able to control:
Could my weak voice make Fames trump louder sound,
I Would speak thy praise the Universe around;
Great Saint! thy humblest votary;
A thousand hymns I would bestow,
Alas! ten thousand would not do:
Too big the subject, and too strait the Poetry,
For all that can be bravely said is due to thee.
VII.
Often have I thought, and still admired,
Religion's Sons in blacks ^tti^d
Black, natures mou^ning veil; a hew
More d^smal far than cypress or the yew!
Black! that checks the ^oying beams of light:
Black! the mantle of forsaken night:
Canonick habit of a Tragedy!
Misfortunes dress! Deaths livery!
There was of yore (and, yet there scarce could be)
Religion's darling, an illustrious he,
bright Saint, like thee;
Whose face did shine
When thou did preach God's Law, like thine,
Who lighted the bewildred host
With a dark Lanthorn, a cloud and flaming post,
Till in Mount Neboes vale their guide and light they lost;
For some such loss as theirs or ours, I guess
The mystic train of men profess
An art of death, and ghostly things do talk,
And ever since in mourning gravely walk.
VIII.
Such was the mitred man
Our great Diocesan,
Whose Crosier awed our murmuring land,
As he those tribes with a miraculous Wand;
Whose eye not dim, but natures heat entire;
The sacrifice on the altar did expire:
His sacred fever, his ardent love
Heaved him to Heaven, and to those flames above;
Jehovah sucked, and kissed his soul away,
As Rabbis of Isreal's Prophet say:
Or as the Tishbite in his fiery coach
Rode up toth' Gate, and Heavens bright palace did approach:
Strange was his death, and strange his grave!
And our great Prophet too ascended so;
O had he left his mantle here below!
A harder thing then Shaphats Son we crave,
A double portion of thy spirit may thy Successors have.
IX.
How poor, how short a thing is all
The time which here we living call!
Scarce, is our race begun,
Ere half our race is run;
The noble prize how very few have won?
With Tim's quick wings to death we fly
As swiftly as the hours; and you and I,
Reader and all must dye.
Stay serious thought, prithee stay;
See how apt it is to flee away!
When the undiscerned hand does snatch us hence,
For what goood deed expect we recompense?
When we are tumbled into dust,
What can Fame say, if it be true and just?
We must like common people die,
Nothing but vulgar in our Elegy;
There Is nothing of our own
To be by future ages known;
Our memories amongst undistinguisht beasts are thrown.
X.
Thy fate, blessed soul, cannot be such,
Whom none could prize, whom none could praise too much:
My Beads I Will bid before thy venerable shrine,
Who like the Stars, to which the art gone, did shine:
I fear my rhimes, my love
So ill expressed, may libels prove;
For what is set too high, no man can reach,
But in thy style, none ought of thee to preach;
To read the Text again is the best gloss;
Thy glorious Works can praise thee most; thy name
Shall be preserved by the spicy breath of Fame!
Support and ornament oth' Christian Cross!
The Churches Doctor! the Catholic loss!
XI.
But though the Doctors dead,
Though from the Fane the Oracle is fled,
The Temple still is hallowed;
His sacred ashes still are there;
I Will humbly pay a figh, a tear:
Rest holy clay,
Slumber till the judgment day;
Devout cinders! contrite dust!
Mild heart! free from cank'ring rust!
Learned brain! eloquent tongue!
Charms of the attentive throng!
Bright cheerful looks! which never
Envy or grief, anger or fear,
Though they have tried a thousand times and mo^e,
Could make you pale before!
Pious breaths! you will sigh no more, but sleep:
Rest closed eyes! no more you will weep:
Rest facred clay,
Slumber till the judgment day!
Thus I said, and as I said,
The awful Relick made me bow my head,
What was in life so great, is something great when dead.
XII.
His soul from golden Fetters free,
Rapt to its own dear liberty,
To highest Heaven knew all the ways,
For there't had been ten thousand times in prayer and praise,
Wrapped in a commendatory prayer,
A mouthful of artic late Air,
-- Air rarifyed with hearty zeal
was its first vehicle;
A nimble Cherub quickly flies
From the best wardrope in the skies;
For soon the news had filled th^se starry rooms,
The Prelat comes;
The welcome guest is quickly clothed upon
With A bes of pure etherial lawne;
Subtle as Angels joy, and fine
As is the breath divine:
Clad in that Robe of white,
Of soft and never withering light,
He gently passes through
A long admiring row
Of sainted Ghosts to martyr Charle's wa^n
Come, Tailor, come;
Here Is Hammond, there is Sanderson:
The lesser Angels all make room,
And they embrace -- ill natured men! in vain
Ye kept these three from the entreating Sovereign:
Enter bright Soul this general Convention,
This Quire of Priests; hither's thy translation,
Bishop Elect! there shortly will be given
To thee a Diocese in the large Hierarchy of Heaven.
FINIS,

