THE RENDING CHURCHMEMBER Regularly called Back, TO CHRIST, and to his CHURCH.

OR, A Sober Answer to certain Questions of a Company of discontented and
Covenant-deserting Brethren.

IN Which are laid down clear Grounds of solid conviction, That whosoever does
wilfully neglect either to come to Christ and his true Combinational Church, or
to continue with both, is not as yet in a capacity to observe any one of ten
remarkable Gospel-Rules, or to partake of any one of ten precious Promises.

Published, I. For the awakning of sleepy sinners. II. For the witholding of
tottering Saints. III. For the winning of wretched backsliders.


By Marmaduke Matthews, lately a Teaching-Elder of the Church of Maldon in
New England.

JER. 8 5. Wherefore is this people sliden back, with perpetual backsliding,
etc. JOH. 6.66, 67. From that time, many of his Disciples went back, and walked
no more with him, and Jesus said, Will ye also go away, etc. JER. 6.8. Be thou
instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, etc. London, Printed by
A. M. for Simon Miller at the Star i^ Pa^ls Churchyard 1659.

THE PREFACE TO THE Religious READER.
It Is an undeniable Truth, that experience (which is commonly called the
Mistress of Fools, as well as the Axioms and Maxims of Philosophers) does
make it manifest, that the corruption of the best, (whether of Persons or
things, Saints or Angels) is not the best, but the worst corruption. And that
there may be the greatest abuse, of that which might be of the greatest use. As
the sweetest Wines, through neglect of well-looking to, does become the sourest
Vinegar; so through the wiles of Satan, the wickedness of sinners, and the
weakness of the Saints, the very grace of God, is often turned to wantonness.
And every one of the Gospel Privileges, and gracious Ordinances of
Congregational Churches, do produce diverse uncomfortable and unchristian
contentions, among inconsiderate and ill-catechized Professors of Godliness: As
the cause and occasion of the Composing of this present reconciling Treatise
does clearly declare.

It Is remarkable, that the very first rise and reason of those
Church-divisions, that threaten Church-desolation, is without dispute the raw
and unripe entrance, or rather the rude and rash rushing of Church-observers
into Church Estate, before they have been ashamed of, sorrowful for, and
separated from, their Personal and Parental abominations; little considering or
laying to heart, that such a sensible condition is loudly called for at their
hands; and that from him; who is the Churches Head, as a necessary
antecedent-qualification to a complete Church Communion: as it is made known,
Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Show this House to the House of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their wickedness: -- And if they be ashamed, -- show them the form
of the House. And Chap. 44.7, 9. Ye have brought into my Sanctuary, strangers
uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to pollute my House. And
verse the 19th, Thus said the Lord, uncircumcised in heart, or uncircumcised in
flesh, shall not enter into my Sanctuary.

Next to this unwise and unwarrantable entrance unto Church fellowship, it is
not difficult for to discern, that inconsiderate and uncircumspect combining,
and covenanting with a Church of Saints, to watch one over another, and to walk
one with another by Gospel-Rule, does become in the conclusion a cruel snare to
the souls and consciences of such Combiners; who (by reason of the remote
distance of their several dwellings, being too many members very many miles
from their public Meeting house) do impose upon themselves an utter
impossibility of keeping that Covenant which they had bound their souls for to
keep, in coming ordinarily to Public worship on Lords Days, in one place,
according to the Pattern; in 1 Cor. 14.23. When the whole Church are come
together in one place, etc.

Certainly they cannot come together (without notorious inconveniency) every
Sabbath day in one place, at morning Sacrifice, and evening Incense; I mean, at
forenoon and afternoon Instituted worship, who are so far from co-habiting in
one Corporation, that they have not their abode in one County. And by necessary
consequence, they must fall headlongly on one of the fierce horns of this
fearful Dilemma; Either to be wanting in public, or to be wronging in
private. If they carefully observe their watch, and keep their Covenant with
their fellow members abroad, then they must carelessly and cruelly neglect their
watch, and break their Covenant with their own Families at home.

When Professors are found thus to fail both in their Ingresse to, and
Progress* in Church Fellowship, it is no wonder at all, if their Egresse
therefrom be answerable; namely, injurious and scandalous to Brethren within,
and to Neighbors without, by their hateful and horrible rejection of the
heavenly Oracles, from being the Rule, Square, and Touchstone of their
language, lives, and actions. As strong fences are made to restrain the
extravagant wanderings of brutish Annimals; so the Sacred Scriptures are
appointed to curb and bridle the wild and wanton wits and spirits of the unruly
reasonable creatures. When the Children of disobedience make bold to tread
these fences down, who knows where or when they will stay or stand? When
violent Torrents bear away and break down the withstanding banks and dammes,
who can tell at what time or place they will make a stop? When spiritual
Passengers venture to spread the sails of their affections to the wind of
their own wills, can they expect to Anchor any where this side the brink of
the bottomless pit? For the preventing of the Shipwreck, of whose Faith and
good Conscience, and for the further provoking of praying Persons, to Petition
that God would persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem; and cause the two
sticks of Joseph and Judah, to become one in the hand of David our King; that
they (speaking a pure language, and leading a pious life) may be in a capacity
to serve the Lord with own shoulder, and own consent; is his aims in these
endeavoures, who would be among those few that follow the Lord fully; and is

unfeignedly thy fellow servants MARMADUKE MATTHEWS.
From my Study in Swansey the 12th instant of the 10th Month, 1658.
Dearly Beloved Dissenting Brethren, Grace, Truth, and Peace, be manifested
more and more to you, in you, and by you, and may God the Giver thereof be
pleased to say, Amen.
It Is so, that perceiving you (at least some of you) to be in some good measure
informed by him who teaches his obedient Hearers to profit; how to argue a
point in Controversy, according to Gods Sacred Oracles; I often did, and do
(through grace) find my heart stirred up to be praising the Lord, and to be
petitioning for you; knowing that to discourse Argumetatively, is such a
commendable course, as I both approve of very much, and practice not a little;
because I observe it to be a thing of good report amongst the eminentest of the
Saints, long before there were any Records of humane Learning in the world; as
it plainly appears by what is openly professed of the Patriarch Job, as well in
his calling upon God, as in his contending with men, in Job. 23.4. I would
plead my cause before him, and fill my mouth with Arguments. So Job the 13. and
16. Now hear my disputation, and give ear to the Arguments of my lips. Whose
guise (by this it seems) was to fill his mouth with Arguments, to own the
forciblenesse of right reasoning; and withal, to abhor such arguing, as
being well weighed, would be found wanting: as you cannot choose but know, if
you can tell what is extant in his Book on that account.

Besides that, (which is more then that) Religious creatures are commissioned
to reason in their Requests with their Creator; as he is pleased to inform us
by the mouth of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 1.18. Come let us reason together,
says the Lord. So Chap. 43.26. Plead with me, etc. And to render a reason of
their hope of happiness, and of Heaven, to such of their neighbors as are
dissatisfied with their behavior, by the Ministry of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet.
Chap. 3.13. Be ready to give an Answer always to every man, that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and reverence.

In spite then of all contradiction, it must be confessed, that carnal and
careless Gallio will rise up in judgment, and condemn all such Gospellers, as
are regardlesse of reason or rule; as you have or may read, Acts 18.14, 17. As
Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, if it were a matter
of wrong, or an evil deed; O ye Jews, I would according to reason maintain you
-- But Gallio cared nothing for these things, etc.

Although the Qustions which came from you, were not particularly directed to
me, any more then to another man; yet, being persuaded, that it is some part of
that duty I owe to my faithful Creator, and fellow creatures, to endeavor the
reducing of such souls, as I discern to be gone after Satan, through his
subtilty, their simplicity, and their ignorance of the Scriptures; which (as we
are informed by the Lords own mouth) is the main inlet to monstrous errors:
as it is revealed to us, Mat. 22.29. Jesus answered, and said, Ye do err not
knowing the Scriptures; neither the power of God. I conceived it not
inconvenient (but Christian) to return to them (and so to you) this affirmative
and infallible Answer; which is, That all persons, that would be esteemed
Members of any reformed Church, are to be orderly Saints: witness what is
written in 1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the Author of confusion, but of Peace, as
in all the Churches of the Saints. And the 40 Verse, Let all things be done
decently and in order, etc.

The whole sum and substance of which Questions, (and what may be Christianly
deduced therefrom, concerning your deserting the Society of your
fellow servants) may be gathered and wound up into this one Argument.

THAT Church and company of Gospel Professors, which does not consist of
circumspect walkers, and orderly Saints, is to be deserted and separated from,
as unclean.

BUT the Church and Company of Gospel Professors, which is at A, does not
consist of circumspect walkers, and regular Saints.

THEREFORE the Church or Company of Gospel Professors which is at A, is to be
deserted and separated from, as unclean.

In which Argument, the Proposition or first part is such a piece of truth as
is impregnable, and undeniable, because it is agreeable to Scripture-rules;
according to which every Gospel-speaker is enjoined to speak, and every
peaceable walker is warranted to walk: as it is most evident in Exodus 23 13. And
in all things that I have said unto you, be circumspect, and make no mention of
the names of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. So Gal.
6.16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy:
and upon the Israel of God. And 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak
according to the Oracles of God.

That such Church Members as are disorderly walkers or irregular livers, are to
be deserted and separated from, is such an expression as is above the reach of
any rational contradiction; yea, it is such a pregnant position, as I cannot
choose but readily subscribe unto, not only by a downright affirmation, That it
is so; but also by a five-fold confirmation, That it should not be otherwise.
Whereof

The first is in Acts 19.9. When diverse were hardened and believed not, but
spoke evil of that Way before the multitude, he departed from them, and
separated the Disciples. The second, is in 1 Cor. 5.9, 11, 13. I wrote to you
in an Epistle not to company with fornicators, or with the covetous, or a
drunkard, with such a one not to eat. -- Therefore put away from among your
selves that wicked person. The third, is in 2 Cor. 6 17. Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you. The fourth, is in 2 These. 3.6, 14. Now we
commaad you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
from every Brother that walks disorderly. The fifth and last, is in 2 Timoth.
Chap 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 verses. And this know also, that perilous times shall come
in the last days; for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, and
lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof: from such turn away.
Only let it be diligently observed, that he that would be found in the number
of Christ's faithful Servants, is to have an eye both to the matter which he is
to act in, and also to the manner of his actings. In respect of the first, the
Master requires his Servant to do THIS, namely, what he does command; and in
respect of the second, to do it THUS, namely, as it is commanded. THE ONE is no
more then the body or outside of acceptable service, but the OTHER is the soul
and inside of the same.

That nothing be done in Christ's Name, save only such a particular, for which
there is an express Command, is the first, and Essential part of a
Church Members employment: as it is apparent to any that is verst in Scripture,
Zach. 7.7. Should ye not hear the words of the Lord, which the Lord had cried
unto you by the mouths of the former Prophets, etc. So Luke 5 5 At thy
Command, Lord I Will let down the net, etc.

And that it may be performed in no other way, then as it is commanded, is the
other and best half thereof: as is testified in Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not
of Faith, is sin.

Unless there be a joint concurrence of these several parts in a Professors
performances, the work is so far from being a good work, as that it does not
(at all) excel that punishing of vice which was performed by Jehu (mentioned 2
King 10 16. And he said, Come and see my zeal for the Lord. But in Hos. 1.4.
it is counted cruelty, I will avenge the blood of Jezrel upon the House of
Jehu.) or that provoking to virtue, which was expressed by Judas, and such as
he, in Mat. 7.22 Many will say, Lord, Lord, have we not in thy Name cast out
Devils, and by thy Name done many great works, etc.

In short, it is such an abominable Sacrifice, as is the shedding of man's
blood, if the blessed God be worthy to be believed in what he says in Isaiah
1.15. When ye make many Prayers, I will not hear, -- your hands are full of
blood. And Chap. 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is, as if he he slew a man, he that
sacrifizeth a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that offers an oblation,
as if he offered swines blood; he that burns Incense, as if he blesses an
Idol. Yea, they have chose their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations.

As it is a truth that none dare deny, that separation from profane sinners
(though professing Saints) is such a service for the MATTER of it, as Christ
does command; as it is to be seen by what is already shown.

So it is no falsehood to affirm, That such a separation for the MANNER thereof,
is not a Christian or commendable separation, ^f it be not carried on according
to Scripture Precepts or Patterns: as it is most clear by what is expressly
required by the Almighty himself in several places: as Act 7.44. and Heb. 8.5.
See that thou do all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount.
And 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order.

And wast never observed by any of you, that though Vzza, and Vzziah, did
observe a right ORDINANCE, in the carriage of the Ark, and offering of Incense;
yet, the one was destroyed, and the other disgraced, and degraded, for the mere
miscarriage that was manifested thereabouts, in not observing a right ORDER; as
all may see in that terrible-treble Looking glass that is left for
Church-Ministers, for Court-Magistrates, and for Church Members to look upon,
in 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The Lord our God made a breach upon us, because we sought
him not after the due order. And 2. Chron. 26.16. But when Vzziah was strong,
his heart was lifted up to his destruction; for he transgrest against the Lord
his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord, to burn Incense on the Alter of
Incense. So Chap 30.18, 20. For a multitude of the people even many of Ephraim
and Manasseth, Izz^char and Zebulon, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they
eat the Passover otherwis^ then 'twas written. But Hezekiah praye^ for them,
saying, The good Lord pardon every one. -- And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah
and healed the people.

Or can it be but confessed and acknowledged by all of you, that the only
Orthodox Order, in making of separation from Church Communion, is, That it may
not be, till after the first and second Admonition be administered, and that by
such (...) power as is superior to to the party offending; except you
disapprove (which God forbid) of what Christ does prescribe* Mat. 18.15, 16,
17. If thy Brothers sha^^ trespass against thee, go and tell him his faul^
between thee and him alone, and if he he^^ thee, thou have gained him. So Joh.
8.17. It Is also written in your Law, that the Testimony of two witnesses is
true. So 2 Cor. 13.1. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word
be establ^shed. And Tit. 3.10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second Admonition, reject.

And for the Assumption (which is the second part of the Argument, which by
your Questions you seem to urge) it is utterly destitute of any proof; whether
you mean the whole body of the Congregational* Church, whereof ye are Members,
and which was for a long time owned (as by others, so especially) by your
selves, to be one of those reformed Churches of Christendom, which in
Scripture Language, are called Queens, as in Cant. 6.8. There are threescore
Queens, and fourscore Concubins, and Virgins without number.

And therefore know it, and that not so much from the Pen of a dying man, as
from the Spirit of the living God, That no Queen (or such a Church) is by
deffamation, or any other way, to be defiled by any person, upon pain of
dreadful destruction to the defiler: witness what is on Record on that
account, 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God
destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. That is to say,
the Church of Corinth.

Or whether you would be understood by your writing, to point at some of the
particular Members of that Political body; it is very apparent (I think) that
orderly proof of any disorderly practice among them was never yet produced.

Is it not rational and regular, that they should have a fair and open trial,
together with a clear conviction, that the accused ones are barren branches,
Joh. 15. and 26* Twice dead trees, Jud. 12. Rotten Members, Gal. 5.12. Choking
thorns, Mat. 13.22. Or wallowing swine, 2 Pet. 2.22. before they can with any
good grounds, good conscience, or according to Christ, be disfranchized of
their Citizens freedom, deprived of their Church Priviledges; much less
dismembered from the body, supplanted from the Vineyard, rooted from the Field,
drived from the Fold, and Flock to which they do relate, and belong: least of
all is the whole Body, Field, or Fold, to be deserted, but both the one and the
other is to be participated with, in what is of good report; and faithfully and
frequently provoked to what is good, by all such of their fellow, members, as
would not be esteemed wilful villifiers of Christ's blood, disobeyers of his
directions, despisers and despiters of his holy Spirit. From all which, the
good Lord deliver us, least otherwise we might perish with the Apostates, which
you read are indicted, arrained, and threatened to be executed, in Heb. Chap. 10
25, 26, 27, 28, 29 verses. Not forsaking the assembling our selves together, as
the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye
see the day approaching; for if we sin wilfully after that we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice, but a certain
direful looking for of vengeance, and fiery indignation which devoures the
Adversaries. -- Of how much more sore punishment suppose ye shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted
the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has
done despite to the Spirit of grace.

Therefore the Conclusion (which is the last part of the Argument, which was
urged concerning Church Members qualification, and Communion) concludes nothing
more then this one thing, viz That the charity of some old, and sundry young
Professors of Christianity is so little, that it is scarce visible to ordinary
eyes; and that Christianity it self, is less legible in their lives, who walk
so quite contrary to Christ's Church ways: as it is mavelous plain by this one
eminent particular, which is such a piece of inaequity (that I say not
iniquity) that if my heart were not very bad, it would wish that it might even
weep tears of blood to think thereupon, knowing by experience, that such of
your Church-neighbours, as have but so much humanity or civil honesty as was in
the former Pharisees, the contemners of Christ, who did not, do not, dare not,
(for their very necks) take from the worst of their foes, as much as will
amount to the value of thirteenpence halfpenny, contrary to the Laws of the
Land.

Yet, not a few (as I have been faithfully informed) of the Church Members that
have left the Church with you, who had publicly bound their souls (if not
explicitly yet) implicitly by a Curse, and by an Oath, to be Covenant-keepers
with Christ and with his Church, in the presence of God, Angels, and men (as
you cannot choose but acknowledge and confess, in case you have any more then
ordinary acquaintance with the Name and Nature of a Church Covenant: as it is
held out for our Information and Imitation, in Deuteronomy. 29.12. That thou should
enter inter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, which the
Lord thy God makes with thee. So Ezekiel 20.37. I will bring you into the bond of
the Covenant. Also Jer. 50.5. They shall ask the way in Zion, with their faces
thither-ward, saying, Come let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual
Covenant that shall not be forgotten. And Neh. 10.29. They clave to enter into
a Curse, and into an Oath to walk in Gods Law, etc.) Who notwithstanding all
their such Bonds and Obligations, make no bones of bereaving, I know not how
may of their best friends and Brethren in fellowship, of their good Names,
which are rated above riches or Inheritance, and that in the judgment of the
Eldest Son of wisdom. Prove. 22.1. A good Name is rather to be chosen then
great riches.

When I am given to understand, that you (in conformity to the counsel of the
wonderful Counselor, Joh. 8.46. Which of you convinces me of sin. So Mat.
7 5. Thou Hippocrite, first cast out the beam from thine own eye* and then
shall thou clearly see the mote in thy Brothers. And Gal 6.1. If a man be
overtaken, restore him in the spirit of meekness.)

I say, when I am given to understand, that you in conformity to these
Scripture Rules, do study and strive to restore such of your Covenant-Brethren,
as you conceive to be Covenant-breakers; by convincing them solidly, that this
or that PRACTICE, is a regulary condemned sin, and that this or that PERSON
among them, is a regulary accused sinner; then (Christ asisting me) I shall
desire and endeavor openly to appear to be one that is engaged to approve of,
and to plead for such a Christian proceeding.

In the mean time, I beseech you to bear with me for my taking so much
boldness, as (out of my inward loyalty to my glorious Savior, and out of my
unfeigned love to your precious souls) to bear witness that ye are (as yet) so
far from being very regular walkers, as that as long as ye continue either
against Church Covenant, or out of Church Communion, so long you cannot be
groundedly conceived to be in a capacity to keep any one of ten remarkable
Rules of Christ, which we are commanded to keep as heedfully as we should the
Apple of our eye, Prove 7.2. And for the presumptuous breaking of the least of
them, we should expose our selves, to be not only very contemptible persons,
but also, which is far worse, to be found notorious guilty ones, and lawless
livers: as it is to be seen by what is testified in Mat 5.19. Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so,
he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. So James 2.10. He that
keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point, he is guilty of all.

And least I should seem to slander you, (or any other) by affirming, That such
Professors of Christianity, as knowingly refuse, either to come into
Church Covenant, or to continue in Church Communion, are (as yet) not in a
capacity to obey any one of ten very remarkable Commands, which all that would
be blessed, and regular walkers are found to walk by; consider seriously how I
confirm that Affirmation. Oh, that you were but half so well pleased to peruse
and ponder upon them, as I am willing to take the pains to point them out, and
to pen them for you!

1. The first, is about the avouching of the God of Christ, and of the Church,
to be your God in Covenant, by your presence and profession in the public
Congregation: according to the commendable pattern, in Deuteronomy 26 17, etc. Thou
have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways; and he
has avouched thee, etc. So Isaiah 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, and
another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe
with his own had to the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. Also
Jerem. 50.5. Ezekiel. 20. and the 37. Acts 2.46, 47. Romans 12.1. and 2 Cor. 8 5.
etc.

Is It possible for any person to discharge that public duty, that does
ordinarily decline the public Meeting Place?

2. The second, is that which binds Believers to be admitting such as be in the
Faith, into Church Fellowship; in conformity to Christ's command, in Romans 14.1,
3. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful disputation, for
God has received him.

Where Christ does enjoin this service, what Christian dares omit the same,
either to neglect to offer his own self to Christ and to the Church, or to be
absent when he should be present at the receiving of others that Christ has
received? Only such a one as domineering Diotrephes dares to do so. Joh 9 10. I
wro^e to the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence among
them, receives us not, etc.

3. The third is concerning the Electing of Church Officers, by lifting up of
the hand, as often as occasion requires, viz. of TEACHERS, PASTORS, RULERS, and
DEACONS; in immitation of those circumspest Walkers, recorded Acts 1.23. And
they appointed two. etc. So Act. 6.3. Wherefore fore Brethren, look ye out
among you, etc. And verse 5. The saying pleased the multitude, and they chose
Stephen. And Chap. 14.23. (According to the Queens translation) And when they
had ordained them Elders by Election in EVERY Church, and prayed and fasted,
they commended them to the Lord in whom they believed. So 1 Timothy 3.10 Let these
also be first proved, then let them use the Office of a Deacon.

Are they capable to have a lifted up hand in the Church Officers Election, who
have no heart to continue in Church-ordered Communion?

4. The fourth, is that which does declare a Christians duty to be duly
edifying some Church of Christ by his personal presence, Prayers, and pains:
as it is clearly manifest by what is written in 1 Cor. 14.1. Follow after
charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy. And
verse 12. Seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. So Ephesians. 2.
verse the 19, 20, 21, 22. Ye are fellow-Citizens with the Saints, built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Cornerstone, in whom all building is fitly framed, and growth together
unto an holy Temple. In whom ye are also builded togethe for an habitation of
God through the Spirit. So 1 Pet. 2 5. Ye also, as living stones, are built up
a spiritual house; an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifice
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And Jud. 20. Building up your selves on your
most holy Faith, praying in the holy Spirit.

Are they in a capacity to conform to these commands, who do not close with,
and conjoyn in the Church Covenant? You know that they are far from being
Church-edifiers who are Church defamers, much more Church-despisers, which I
trust you are not; or at leastwise, you should abhor to be.

5. The fifth, is that which exhorts and necessitates a Christian to be
informing the Church in their solemn Meetings, of the obstinacy of an offending
Church Member; in order to that memorable instruction, M^t. 18 17. But if he
shall neglect to hear them then tell it to the Church.

Can any be commissioned to be a witness as upon Oath, against wrongful
walking, who is himself an Alien or an unworthy and unwarrantable walker?

6. The sixth, is that which fairly and fully institutes Christ's
Covenant-servants, to be spiritual Judges of such souls as are either to be
excommunicated from Church-consociation, or else to be absolved from
Church-excommunication: as it appears by what is extent, Psalm 149 8. To bind
their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with sletters. So 1 Cor 5.12. Do you
not judge them that are within. So 2 Cor. 10.6. Having in readiness to revenge
all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled, etc. And Chap. 2.6.
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment.

Is It possible that such a person should be in a capacity to partake of such
high honor, as has not a nail or Name in Christ's house, no more then
Sanballat the Horonite, or Tobiah the Ammonite, noted with a black coal, in
Neh. 2.19.20. But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the Ammonite, and
Geshem the Arabian heard it, the laughed us to scorn, and despised us, etc.

7. The seventh, is that which goades and spurs faithful Parents to offer
their Infants to fellowship with the Church, in the first Seal of the Covenant
of Grace, which does seal their grafting into Christ, as it appears by many
memorable prescriptions and Praedictions, as Cant. 1.8. Feed thy Kids by the
Tents of the Shepherds. So Chap. 47. Thy teeth are like a flock of Sheep,
whereof every one brings forth twins. And Chap. the 6. and 5 The same words.
So Isaiah the 49.22. They shall bring thy Sons in their arms, any thy daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders. And Chap. 59 21. My Spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed. Mark. 10.14, 15. But Jesus said, Suffer little Children to come unto me,
for of such is the Kingdom of God. And Act. 15.10. Now certain arose, saying,
That 'twas needful to circumcise. But Peter said unto them, Why tempt ye God
to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples. Note that Children of eight days
old, are here called Disciples of Christ, and it is granted by all, that
Disciples of Christ may be baptized.

Are not the Infants of Believers, to be accounted believing Infants, seeing he
styles them so, who spoke as never man spoke? Is there not a passive, as well
as an active Faith? I^ not the first before the second, in all Christ's Flock;
yea, in young Infants, as well as in old folks? Has he not told and taught
you, that it is by such a Faith as is in Believers Infants (which is a passive
Faith) that the Kingdom of God is received? If it be a truth, that the least
Child is a rational creature, as well as the eldest man, though not in respect
of the act or exercise, yet in regard of the habit and root of reason, which is
a reasonable Spirit.

Is It not as true, that the least child of the Covenant of Grace, is to be
acknowledged a Christian, and a gracious child, although not for, or from any
act or exercise of grace of Christianity, yet for and from the root and ground
thereof, which is the gracious spirit of Christ?

If he emboldneth to bring such Babes to himself, who dares withhold them from
him? Or are they in a capacity to present their seed to the Church, who absent
themselves from the same?

8. The eighth, is that which helps feeble and forgetful Saints to increase in
heavenly-mindednesse, and in holiness, by eating often of Christ body by
Faith, at the Love-Feast of the Lord's Supper, which is the Seal that Seals
their growth in grace; to which end it is ordained to be used and observed, Luke
22.19. And he took the bread, and gave thanks and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying, This is my body which was given for you, this do in remembrance
of me: Likewise also the Cup, saying, This is the Cup of the New Testament in
my blood, which is shed for you. So Joh. 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And 1 Cor. 11. the 24,
25, 26 verses, After the same manner, he took the Cup saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood; this do yet as often as ye drink it. So verse 26.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, etc.

Can such persons be deemed fit guests, at such Church-Feasts, which have not
admittance and abode in Church Fellowship? And how can the eat often at the
Lords Table, who do not eat once in a year, or in their life time?

9. The ninth, is that which interests Christ's Members in voting about sending
of Church-Messengers, and in writing of Church-Letters; which in such cases
ought to be conformed unto, by all conformable Christians: as most evidently
appears by what way practiced, Act. 13.22, 23. Then it pleased the Apostles and
Elders, with the WHOLE Church, to send chosen men of their own company to
Antioch, and wrote Letters after this manner, etc. So 2 Cor. 3.1. Need we (as
others) Epistles of commendation.

Can one be a chuser of Church-Messengers, that is not himself chosen to be a
Churchmember?

Or has he a vote in writting of Church-Letters, who has no name in Christ's
Church-Book of life, which is the honor of holy ones? Isa. 4.3. He that is
left in Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even
every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem. And Rev. 22.19. And if
any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall
take his part out of the Book of life, and out of the holy City, and out from
the things that are written in this Book.

10. The tenth and last, is that which knocks loudly at the gates of godly
hearts, to be weekly contributing, and openly bringing their Tribute, royal
rent, and spiritual Subsides, to the Lord of their soil and souls, on the Lords
day, as they are directed to do, who would be deemed free Members of a reformed
Church, in the Scriptures of truth. Deuteronomy. 16.10, 16, And thou shall keep the
Feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God, with a Tribute of a free will-offering of
thy hand which thou shall give to the Lord thy God, according as he has
blessed thee. And verse 16. They shall not appear before the Lord empty. Also 1
Cor. 16.1, 2. Let every one upon the first day of the week, lay by him in store
as God has prospered him. And verse. the 1? As I have given order to the
Churches of Gallatia, so do you.

Is not Jesus Christ the King of the blessed Gentiles, as well as of the
believing Jews? And is not he as worthy of Subsidy as of Sovereignty? Or are
those persons likely to present him with voluntary contribution, that do not
list themselves among his skirmishing and contending Soldiers, or sworn
Subjects in his visible Camp and Kingdom?

As it is proved that none but such believing Christians, as come under the bond
of the Covenant, amongst Church Members, are in an uncondemnable posture, or as
yet in a capacity to observe and keep, either every one, or any one of those
ten aforementioned remarkable Gospel Precepts; so it is as plain, that all
those Persons, which are not completely come to that promotion, together with
such Professors of godliness, as do not firmly continue, and persevere in that
place; cannot warrantably (without presumption) make use of, as to apply to
themselves, any one of ten merciful and memorable Gospel Promises: although
there case and condition should never so much require, or their souls desire
the same.

They are these: (1.) The Promise of a Place among excelling Saints. (2.) Of
pardon of sin under Seal. (3.) A princely prizing of Christians as Christians
(4.) Prosperity of Spirit (5) Freedom from fear. (6.) A New Name. (7) Childrens
good education. (8.) Spiritual Joy. (9.) Outward goods. (10 and lastly,) A
Promise of a true title to Divine Teachers, and reformed Pastors.

The first whereof, is the Promise of a place amongst Saints that excel in
virtue, such as Christ does profess his delight is in: as it is shown in that
golden prophetic Psalm, Psalm. 16.3. concerning which happiness he has past
his Royal Word in both his Testaments, namely, in Isaiah 56.3, etc. Let not the
son of the stranger, that has joined himself to the Lord, say, The Lord has
separated me from his people: nor let the Eunuch say, I am a dry tree: For thus
says the Lord to the Eunuchs that keep my Sabboths, and choose the things that
please me, and take hold on my Covenant, even unto them will I give in mine
House, and within my walls a Place, etc.

Is the preferring to such a place such a Privilege, and appertaining to such
contrite-hearted persons, as do so take hold on Christ, who is the sum and
substance, as w^ll as the Surety of the Covenant of Grace, as that they both
make and keep Cov^n^^^ with God among his holy and Household Servants, then
(tell me, I pray) what evil else, or less then downright exclusion, or
direful keeping out, and staying off, from coming to Christ's Church-Camp, can
be the expectation of careless wretches, and unclean waiters among
Church-neighbours? according to that awkening and wounding Commination, Rev.
21.27. There shall not enter into it ( i. e. the reformed Church) any thing
that defiles, nor any thing that works abomination, or makes a lie.

And what, save disconsolate excommunication from Communion and continuance in
Christ's spiritual Kingdom, will be the Portion of unconstant and unconscionable
walkers therein? If Christ's own mouth may be credited, which does manifest as
much, Mat 8.11, etc. Many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Is It no grief to
non-comers to any Church of Christ, that they have no place there? Or is it no
disgrace to non-continuers in Church Communion, that the red Dragon, and
rending Devil, has with his fawning tail, or fro^^^^^ teeth, drawn or dragged
them thence?

2. The second, is the Promise of pardon under Seal, or a feeling assurance of
forgiveness of sins; which is sweetly spoken of in several Scriptures: as
Isaiah 33.20, 24. Look upon Zion, the City of our Solemnities, their eyes shall
see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, and the Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick;
the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their iniquities. Of which
special favor Christ himself speaks very fully, Mat. 26.26, etc. And as they
were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, etc. And he took the cup -- and
gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.

Is such an unfeigned assurance ordinarily found in any souls, save only in
such as have a name or a nail in Christ's spiritual House, whereof his loyal and
visibly holy Household Servants are the lively stones? Would you (O my friends)
have Christ to give you a full and free forgiveness of all your former sins,
while you sinfully and wilfully withhold or withdraw your personal presence
from the Lords soul-feasting Supper? Can ye possibly receive Christ's sealed
pardon, and withal keep your selves out of the reach of Christ's sealing
appointments? Can you procure under his hand, a non-obstante, or toleration for
your absence from his House, and nonappearance at his door posts? Far be it
from you to confound the Ordinances of the Lord, with the Lord of Ordinances,
and to say, That the creating-Ruler, and his created Rules, are not to be
distinguished, but are the same. I do beseech you for his sake, whose your
souls are, let that be the frantic conception (if they will needs have and
hold it) only of those deplorable Objects of pity; I mean, the These
creatures, when they came first swarming from the North, were called Quakers.
CONFOUNDERS; and of such unreasonable fellows as have no Faith, or are worse
then Infidels in forsaking the Faith which they profess to have. God forbid
that you should be any of that sort or sect, that dare apply the sacred
Institution of that settling and confirming Seal, the Lords Supper unto
themselves; before they be set and seated in the Lords House, and have it
regularly, with the allowance, and by the hands of the Stewards of his House;
whose Office it is to give their fellow servants their several Portions in due
seasons. For I presuppose that ye dare not say, That any ought to administer
these Mysterious things, save only they that are solemnly called thereunto, as
was Aaron, Heb. 5.4.

3. The third, is that which promises a princely prizing of Christians as
Christians, and acceptance to ones person and performances; although he were
the Offspring of infamous Ancestors: as it is apparent by what is prophesied
Isaiah 56.4, 5, 6 verses, Let not the son of the stranger, which is joined to
the Lord, say, The Lord has separated me utterly from his people: nor let the
Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree: For thus says the Lord, to the Eunuchs
that keep my Sabboths, and choose the thing that pleases me, and take hold on
my Covenant, even unto them will I give a Name, better then the Name of Sons
and Daughters, and make them joyful in the House of Prayer, etc.

If joyful admittance and acceptance be a privilege that pertains to all
those persons that take hold on Christ, who is the Surety of the better
Covenant, by making and keeping it with God, and marching to the holy Mountain
of his Meeting House: as is expressly mentioned in Ezekiel. 20 37. And I will
cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the
Covenant. And the 40 verse, I will choose you out from among the Rebels, in the
high Mountain of Israel, says the Lord God then shall the House of Israel, and
all the Land serve me, there will I accept them.

What then, but disacknowledgement, disregard, and exclusion from coming within
Christ's gates, can be the expectation of those persons, that have so long
neglected Christ's House, or else have behaved themselves badly there? What else
can they think to have, then non-acceptance of their persons and performances?
What other complement can their ears expect to hear from Christ's most sacred
mouth, then a Verily, verily, I know you not? Mat. 25.11. What other Ceremony
can they imagine they shall be received with, then a Depart from me ye cursed,
Mat. 25.41. And what greater acceptance can they look for at the Servants
hands, then that which they had of the Master? Surely, Christ's retinue and
attendance may not respect those whom their Lord and Master does disrespect?

4. The fourth, is that which assures Prosperity of the soul, and a
flourishing estate, whereof the ancient Saints did use to sing in the Psalm for
the Sabbath. Psalm. 92.12, 13. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree,
and shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon: Such as be planted in the House of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God.

Have the forsakers of Gods House and Gospel-Institutions, any grounded hope
that they shall graciously flourish? Who need to fear their flourishing, if not
such forsakers? Who for such acts, are esteemed inveterate enemies, as Psalm.
74.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thine Adversaries rore in the midst of thy Congregation, and
set up banners for signs. -- But now they break down the Carved work thereof,
with axes and hammers: They have cast thy Sanctuary into the fire, and rast it
to the ground, and have destil'd thy dwelling place, and said, Let us destroy
them altogether, they have burned all the Sinagogues of God in the Land. And
Psalm. 83.2. Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession.

Yea also, for their unwillingnesse to be ruled by Christ's Institutions, are to
be openly slain before Christ's own eyes: as is most evident in Luke 19.27.
Moreover those mine enaemies, that would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither, and sl^y them before me.

5. The fifth, is that which warrants purifying of souls from slavish fear,
dread of death, and is as Flaggons of Wine of consolation, to conscientious
walkers in Christ Church-waies: as is promised in Isaiah 25.6. And in this
mountain (to wit, the Church) shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a
Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of
marrow, of Wine on the Lees well refined. He will destroy in this Mountain, the
face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all
Nations, and swallow up death in victory. So Heb. 12.18. For ye are not come
into the Mount, that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto
blackness, darkness, and tempest. -- So terrible was the sight, that Moses
said, I was exceedingly afraid, and quak't. But we are come to mount Zion, and
unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and an innumerable
company of Angels: To the general Assembly, and Church of the first born which
are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just
men made perfect: And to Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant, and
to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.

Is It probable that they shall partake of such a peculiar mercy of God, who
will not appear in the open Mount of public Means of Grace?

Is this Wine, or any part of all this provision, promised to, or prepared for,
persons that will not be persuaded to wait at the door-posts of the House of
Wisdom?

Do we dare to believe, that they have as yet attained unto either blessed
bolduesse, or any other endless benefit, by the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, who do not endeavor nor desire to Covenant with, or conform to the
obedient members of the Church of the first born.

6. The sixth, is that which assures a Christian that he has a claim to an
admirable Apellation, or New Name, Isa. 62.2. And the Gentiles shall see thy
righteousness, and all Kings thy glory. -- And thou shall be called by a new
Name: Thou shall also be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal
Diadem in the hand of thy God. It shall be no more said unto thee, Forsaken,
nor to thy Land, Desolate: but thou shall be called Hepzibah, and thy Land
Beulah, for the Lord delights in thee. So Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes, will I
make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out. And I will
write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God, which is
the New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven, and I will write upon him a
New Name.

Can any have an approved Interest in Christ's Name or Nature, that care not (by
converting and confirming grace)* to be knit to Christ himselef, and his
Congregational Church in a Conjugell Covenant? Without conversie, they will be
made known to be vile and notoriously vicious Citizens, who have no Name in any
visible City, as were those graceless companions that are condemned in the
Gospel of Luke, 19.14.

7. The seventh, is that which assures converted Parents must evidently of the
hopeful Education, and heavenly Election of their Children: as it is apparently
promised in Isa. 65 19 22. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my
people; and the voice of crying shall be no more hoard: f^^ as the days of the
tree are the days of my people, and mine Elect shall enjoy in old age the work
of their hand; they are the s^^^ of the blessed of the Lord, and their buds
with them.

Who can affirm, that those Infants d^ relate to Christ's Elect Flock, whose
Father have relinquish't Christ's Fould? and do love to live out of it. Shall
not the sins of such Parents be visited upon their children, when his
sanctifying Spirit that is in his Covenant-Servants, shall rest in their seed,
and seeds seed, from generation to generation? according to what is recorded,
Isa. 44.34. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy
Offspring, and they shall spring as among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse. So Chap. 54.13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the
Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy Children. And Chap 59.20. The
Redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn from transgression in Jacob.
-- For this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon
thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord.

But if the Mother live a Jezallells life, will not Christ kill her Children
with death? and cause ALL the Churches thereabouts, to know, that he himself
has been the searcher for the foul offenses of such Mothers or Fathers, as are
Church desi^ers: as it is threatened in Rev. 2.22, 23.

8. The eighth, is that whereby God is engaged to free from forrow, and to fill
with Joy, the souls of his Covenant-Servants, in Church Fellowship: as it is to
be seen in express terms, Isa 65 13, 14, 17, 18, 19. Beh^^^, my S^rvants
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: they shall sing for joy of h^^^^* but
ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit. Be glad and
rejoice for ever, in that which I create; for behold, I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a j^y, and the voice of we^pin^ ^^all be no more
heard, nor the voice of crying etc.

Have they either Rule or Reason to rejoice, that refuse to relate to the
heavenly Jerusalem, or to spend their whole time in his spiritual Temple, with
the eminent triumphers, mentioned in Revel. 7.9 10, 15, 17. After this, I
beheld a great multitude which no man could number, of all Nations, and
Kindred, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb,
clothed with White Robes, and Palms in their hands, crying with a loud voice,
Salvation to our God. Therefore they are before the Throne of God, and serve
him day and night, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. So Chap.
12.12. Rejoice therefore ye Heavens, and ye that dwell therein.

Who besides notorious flatterers, dare affirm that they are heavenly
Christians; or persuaded with Japhet, to dwell in the Tents of Sh^m with
Christ, who dare affront and disobey his Combinational Churches? May they be
said to be regular rejoycers in the King of Saints, who refuse either to walk
with, or work among his conformable Subjects? Truly those, and only those
children of men that dare give the lie to God, will stand to such an Assertion.

9. The ninth, is that which lays down a ground of hope, for to enjoy a
considerable quantity of outward goods, and earthly comforts: as it is found,
affirmed, and confirmed, Psalm. 23. the 1, 5, 6, verses, The Lord is my
Sheapherd, I shall not want. -- Thou preparest a Table before me, thou
anointest my head with oil; my Cup runs over. Surely goodness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the House of the
Lord for ever. So Isa. 65.21. They shall build Houses, and inhabit them; they
shall plant Vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof -- They shall not build, and
another inhabit, they shall not Plant and another eat. And Ezekiel. the 34.25, 26.
They shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, and I will
make them, and the places round about them, blessing, and will cause the shower
to come down in his season: there shall be showers of blessing.

Though sometimes the best of the Lords Covenant Servants, as Elias, and Paul,
may be brought to a very low ebb for the things of this life, yet was there
ever any want of food convenient, or any other necessary good, to such as were
faithful dwellers, that is to say, weldoers, in the House of God?

Although the Dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth, does often fall out
to be the share of an Esau, who falls away from Christ's little Flock in Isacc's
Family, for to live alone as an out cast Cain in in Mount Seir, or the Land of
Nod, which is the place of Vagrants; yet is it not easy to observe, that that
large cut, that is so carved to him and his, is such an unsatisfied
superfluity, as does but fatten them for the day of slaughter? And such persons
prosperity, is an usual fore runner of sore perdition: as it appears Psalm. 73
12. Prove. 1.32.

Does God at any time shower down his true blessings, but about the blessed
Sheapherds Tents, where his tame and tractable Sheep and Lambs have their abode?

Can you show, that any persons are so persued with such devouring distresses,
such perplexing poverty, such fearful Afflictions, as unthankful Church
Members, and evil Church-neighbours are? It being but the fearful fulfilling
of what was fiercely foretold in Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou servedst not the
Lord thy God with joyfulnesse of heart, for the abundance of all things, thou
shall serve thine enemies, in hunger, thirst, and nakedness, and in want of
all things. So Isa. 8 21, 22 When they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their King, and their God. They shall look to the earth,
and behold trouble and darkness, dimnesse of anguish. So Jer. 12.13, 14. They
have sown Wheat, but shall reap thorns, and put themselves to pain, but shall
not profit, because of the fierce anger of the Lord; And they shall be ashamed
of your revenues. Thus says the Lord God against his evil NEIGHBOVRS.

10. The tenth and last of those Gospel-Promises, which persons that are out of
Church Covenant, are not in a capacity to close with, or to take comfort from,
is, the Promise of an undoubted title to Divine Teachers, and an unfeigned
propriety to reformed and reforming Pastors: of which singular mercy solemn
mention is made in both Testaments, as in Isa. 30.20. Thy Teachers shall not be
removed any more into a corner, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. So Jer.
3.15. I will give you Pastors according to my own heart, who shall feed you
with understanding and knowledge. And 1 Cor. 3.5, 9, 22. Who is Paul, and who
is Apollo, but Ministers by Whom ye believed? -- For we are Laborers together
with God, ye are Gods Husbandry, ye are Gods Building. -- Whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So Heb.
13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch over your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief, for that is, not profitable for you.

Is It probable that their souls shall be preserved from going astray after
Satan, who unthankfully refusing to attend on the teaching of public
Teachers, do reject Gods ordinary means of preservation? Are they not to this
day running on in Apostasy, who are not related to any Pastors?

Or is it any wonder, that they dare so wretchedly to wrest the Sacred
Scriptures, and to wallow in open sins, who will have no Church Officers to
watch over their souls.

NOW I appeal to any professing person, that is endued either with conscience
or common sense, whether it be not a known duty, which is due to Christ, from
all those creatures, who would be accounted Christians, both to obey these Ten
memorable Precepts, and also to embrace these Ten merciful Promises that are
pointed at in this present Paper; and whether any one of all the children of
Adam, is in a capacity to answer his expectation in any measure (in an ordinary
manner) that is not either in very deed, or at least, in desire and endeavor
both converted to Christ, and also in Covenant with some one or other of his
Congregational Churches.

Thus not doubting any thing at all, but that every one of you, that is well
gathered to Christ, and well grounded on Christ, will be very willing to be
guided and governed by Christ. This labor, and these lines of love, are left
with you all, and all of you with the Lord, by him who is

Yours to be commanded in any service that shall be according to Christ,
MARMADUKE MATTHWS.
ANd now let me implore and request every one of you, to be so far tender of
Gods not to be stained Honor, and that glorious Profession you have taken upon
you, as to eschew both the Name and Nature of a RENDING CHURCHMEMBER, its
repute as well as the reallity, Resolving, by Gods assistance, for the future,
to be rebuilding, not rending Christ's growing Temple; and in the first place,
to suffer your selves to be REGULARLY RECAL'D, and in the interim, to join both
heart and band, in sending up unanimous Ejaculations, to petition his Divine
Majesty, that himself will be pleased to condescend so low, as to bow the
Heavens, and to put unto these uncomfortable beginnings, a comfortable



END.

