AN HEART-MELTING EXHORTATION TOGETHER with a Cordial CONSOLATION. Presented
in a Letter from New England, to their dear Countrymen of Lancashire. Which
may as well concern all others in these suffering times. By RICHARD MATHE^
Teacher of the Church at Dorchester and WILLIAM TOMPSON Pastor of the Church at
Brain^^y in New England.

HEBREWS ^.13. Exhort one another daily whilst (...) is called to day.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5 14. Comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for I Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in
Pauls-Church yard, near the little North door. 1650.

To all those that profess the name and true Religion of JESUS CHRIST in
Lancashire; specially to the Inhabitants of Toxteth near Liverpool, of Newton,
Winwick, Eccleston n^^r Croston* of Much-Woolton, and the places thereabouts.
Richard Mather and William Tompson wish mercy and grace, truth and peace, from
God the Father, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
Christian Countrymen, and dear friends,
THat which the Apostle Paul professes of himself concerning the nation of the
Jews, Romans 10.1
that his hearts desire and prayer unto God for them was, that they might be
saved: the same may we profess of our selves concerning you. And because at
thus many hundred and some thousand miles distance, we cannot make known our
true and great desire after you^ salvation by word of mouth, therefore we are
willing to testify the same by a few lines in writing, humbly desiring that
for that purpose a word or two of Christian exhortation in this way of a
Letter, may not be unwelcome to any of you, but graciously blessed by the God
of heaven unto you all, to those good ends which we intend therein.

Indeed we could have wished (had it been the will of God) that as we were born
amongst you, and for some years have been Preachers of the everlasting Gospel
in your coasts (though the weakest for such a work, and the most unworthy of
thousands we do acknowledge) so we might also have continued to live and to die
together. For your Christian communion as long as we could enjoy the same,
whether in public assemblies or private families was very dear unto us: and to
this day in our conferences one with the other, we do often revive the
remembrance thereof with much comfort of heart. And when the iniquity of the
times was grown to such an height, that amongst others, far more eminent
lights, our selves also must be put under a bushel, and might not be permitted
in any public employment, to seek the salvation of your souls; yet God knows,
and many amongst you, we doubt not, do remember how we could not leave your
Congregations, nor depart out of your coasts, without much inward affection of
heart and many tears, because you were dear unto us. And when that saying of
the Apostle, Act. 20.25. did come into our minds (as it came into our minds
very often) you will scarcely believe how our hearts were affected at the
remembrance thereof; considering with how little variation those words of his
unto those Ephesians might be applied to our condition and yours at that time,
when we did plainly perceive that most of you amongst whom we had gone
preaching the Kingdom of God, in all likelihood should see our faces no more:
which was unto us no small grief; Nevertheless though we thus speak concerning
our hearty affection toward you (which was and is as much as we pretend, and
very cordial in Christ Jesus) yet we would not be so understood, as if we were
weary of our present place and portion; For we do not remember that since our
coming into this country (and the one of us has been here above the space of
ten years, and the other not much less then nine) that of all this time we have
had one repenting thought of this transmigration of ours. True it is, we were
most unwilling you may be sure to turn our backs upon our dear native country,
and upon your selves in many respects. But those things which the wisdom and
will of God had determined before, concerning our transportation into these
Western parts of the world, he has thus fulfilled: and blessed be his Name for
the same; For whatever others say or think of New England, we for our parts
must both think and say as long as we have a day to live, that great was the
goodness of our God, that ever he was pleased to bring us hither. For
considering what light of truth does here plenteously and clearly shine forth,
what Churches are here gathered and planted, with what liberty* and purity the
Ordinances of Christ Jesus are here administered, by what Magistrates civil
justice is here dispensed, and the Commonwealth governed, how holiness and
righteousness is countenanced and encouraged, and all known impiety and
iniquity prosecuted to condign punishment, both in Church and Commonwealth, in
a word, considering what means of grace and glory are here plentifully
afforded, and peaceably enjoied, we must therefore needs say, that if it be not
our own fault, however it go with others, and however it has been with us in
times past, we may now be happy and blessed in Christ Jesus, both in this and
in another world.

And indeed we cannot but stand amazed at the free grace of God, and wonder
with great admiration at that wise, and gracious, and holy dispensation of
divine providence, whereby it comes to pass that such unworthy ones as we be,
must be here in a land of peace, to enjoy the many good blessings of God, both
for earth and heaven in quiet habitations, when in the mean time it fares full
ill, God knows, with the land of our Nativity, and with many thousands therein
far better then our selves, whom the Lord has left after all their other
pressures, under which they have formerly groaned, now at last, to see the most
doleful days that they have ever seen in England, because that
formerly-flourishing Kingdom is now woefully at war within it self, and that
sore plague of the devouring sword (as sore an one as any of the four, which
are thus called by the holy Ghost, Ezekiel. 14.21.) has already devoured much
English flesh, and drunk much English blood; many hundreds and thousands of all
ranks and degrees, both great and small, since these wars begun, having
already lost their lives, and ended their daiet in these grievous National
calamities, and (God knows) how many more may shortly do the like, because for
ought we can hear the wrath of the Lord is not yet turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still. In regard whereof we may take up the complaint of the
Prophet, and say, Jer. 9.1.
Oh that our heads were water, and our eyes were fountains of tears, that we
might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of our people. For
indeed we desire to bewail the sorrows, distractions and distresses of that
dear country where we were born, and wish we had hearts to do it more
compassionately and effectually then these dull and dry spirits of ours can yet
attain unto; though we hope it is not our distance for the space of three
thousand miles from that land, nor our absence from thence for the space of
nine or ten years, nor all the water that in all this time has flown in this
great Atlantic Ocean between England and us, that has or ever shall wash away
the thought and remembrance of England, and of Gods people therein out of our
hearts, but that we shall prefer the comfort, peace, and prosperity of it and
them, before our chief joys.

And being thus minded, we hope you will give us leave out of that hearty
affection and good will which we bear unto our Nation, and more abundantly to
you-ward, to commend unto you our dear countrymen a few words of Christian
counsel and advice, concerning some things which we deem conducible to your
eternal comfort and salvation, which we so heartily long after: and which
advice is none other but the very same which we would wish to be given to
ourselves, if our soul were in your souls stead.

You have seen (right dearly beloved) how the great Judge of the world, and
King of the Nations, by a sore and long continuing warrre, for the space of
seven or eight and twenty years together, or thereabouts, has been afflicting
the Germane Nation for their sins: and how of late time he has brought the
like judgment even to your doors, in that distressed if not destroyed Kingdom
of Ireland: and now you plainly see also that he will bear with England no
longer, but they also must drink of the same cup of blood, whereof others have
so deeply drunk before. In which and other Kingdoms and countries that might
be named, the dispensation of the Almighty is and has been such, as if he were
resolved by fire and by sword to plead with all flesh, Isa. 66.16.
and that the slain of the Lord shall be many. And we doubt not but many of you
do well know the saying that is written, Isa. 26.9.
That when the judgments of God are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world
shall learn righteousness. Yea truly, though his judgments were not upon our
selves, but only upon others, yet he would have us learn righteousness
thereby, or otherwise it will be an aggravation of our iniquity and
impenitency, and a provocation of the Lords greater displeasure; As it was
against Judah, When the Lord saw that for all the causes whereby backsliding
Israel committed adultery, Jer 3.8.
and he had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce, yet her treacherous
sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also. And Belshazzar is
sharply reproved and plagued by the Lord, because he had not learned
righteousness by all the judgments which had befallen Nebuchadnezzar his
father, whereof he his son was not ignorant. Thy father Nebuchadnezzar (says
the Prophet) when his heart was lifted up, Dan. 5.20, 21, 22.
and his mind hardened in pride, was deposed from his Kingly Throne, and they
took his glory from him, and he was driven from the sons of men, and turned
out among wild beasts, and thou his son ( O Belshazzar) have not humbled
thine heart, though thou knew all this. Whereby we see it is very much
displeasing to the Lord, and dangerous unto our selves, if we see and know the
Judgments of God upon others because of their sins, and do not humble our
selves, and turn from our iniquities, and fear before him that is so dreadful
and holy a God, and terrible, though righteous in his doings unto the sinful
sons of men. But if the calamities upon others should thus strike all our
hearts with a holy fear in regard of our selves, how much more ought this fruit
to be found in us, when the Judgments of God do fall upon our own backs?
Surely at such a time the Lord considers what courses he has taken with a
people for their amendment, and is not a little displeased if his corrections
upon them be in vain: as you may read at large, Am. 4.6. etc. I have sent
famine amongst you (says the Lord) and yet you have not turned unto me: I have
sent drought amongst you, and yet you have not turned unto me: I have sent
blasting and mildew, I have sent pestilence amongst you, after the manner of
Egypt, and other judgments more there mentioned, and yet ye have not turned
unto me. So that the Lord takes an account what corrections he has corrected
men withal, and what amendment has been wrought thereby, and if it be
otherwise he is very much displeased that men should be so incorrigible, yea,
in such case the Lord will either pursue such persons and people with more and
sorer judgments, yea, Lev. 26.21. etc.
seven times and seven times more judgments, and one seven after another. till
their uncircumcised hearts be humbled; or else he will utterly leave them, and
give them up, as those whose case is incurable, and their condition desperate.
For so we read, Isa. 1.5. Wherefore should you be smitten any more? for ye
fall away more and more: which condition is exceeding fearful and lamentable:
But by all this you may see that when the judgments of the Lord are in the
Earth, whether upon our selves or others, they that see them, or feel them, or
hear tell of them, ought to learn righteousness thereby, or otherwise it is
like to be worse for them. Since therefore you have known the judgments of God
which he has brought upon Germany for many years together, and upon Ireland
and England of late times: God would be very angry if you should remain
impenitent, unhumbled, and unreformed, though you have known all this.
Wherefore (Dear friends) we beseech you, Let our advice and counsel be
acceptable to you, which yet is not our counsel but the Lords, Lam. 3.4
That every man would now search and try his ways, and turn again to the Lord.
Let every man now call himself unto a strict examination, for all the course of
his life, and smite upon his thigh, Jer. 8.6. and 31.19
and say, What have I done; yea, let every man now learn to be vile in his own
eyes, Job. 40.4
to abhor himself, Job. 42.6.
and to repent in dust and ashes; judging himself before the Lord with sorrow
and shame for all his abominations, and pouring out from a broken and contrite
heart, free, full and plain confessions of the same; yea, now let every man cry
mightily unto God, Jon. 3.8.
for mercy and forgiveness in the blood of the Redeemer Christ Jesus, and turn
to the Lord from all the evil that is in his heart or hands, that so all the
judgments of God that are in the Earth, may not be in vain unto you, and your
sin and misery increased thereby, but that by them your iniquity may be
purged, Isa. 17 9.
and this may be the sweet and blessed fruit thereof, even the taking away of
your sin.

But when the Jews were exhorted by the Prophet Malachy to turn unto the Lord,
with a promise that he would then return unto them, they made him this answer,
Mal. 3. 7.
wherein should we return? plainly declaring thereby, that they knew but little
that was amiss in themselves, whereof they should repent, or wherein they had
need to be reformed. And therefore lest there should be any soul amongst you,
that should entertain this exhortation of ours in the like manner, and be or
pretend to be ignorant whereof they should repent, give us leave therefore as
the Prophet must, Isa. 58.1.
Show the people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, and
another Prophet is bidden to Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations. Eze.
16.2.
Give us leave (we beseech you) after their example, to instance in some
principal sins which were very common in Lancashire when we were there, and
which we fear are much continued in that country unto this very day, and
therefore had need to be repented of.

1 John 2.16.
the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, and so
have spent their days as if there had been nothing else for them to do, or to
look after, but to eat and to drink, ^o sleep and to play, to build and to
plant, to buy and to sell, to marry and to give in marriage, and the like; but
with as much irregiousnesse and profaneness of heart in all these things, and
with as much neglect of the glory of God, and the salvation of their souls, and
the means thereof, as if there had been no God to be served or acknowledged, or
as if themselves had had no souls to be saved. It is but too apparent, (the
Lord knows) how the glorious and holy Name of God has been impiously profaned
and blasphemed in that County by multitudes of vain and wicked Oaths, in the
mouths of Gentlemen and mean men too, yea, and very children; how the holy
Sabbaths of God which he has commanded to be sanctified for ever, and for that
end has bid us remember the same, have been greatly profaned and polluted,
not only by neglect of public and private worship, whereby the same should
have been sanctified, but also by the contrary profane and impious practices
in stead thereof, such as are carding, dicing, drinking, bowling, bear-baiting,
shooting, piping, dancing at greens, ales, may-poles, and such like. And when
the license for sports and recreations upon the Sabbath, came forth from
Houghton-Tower, (to the lasting shame and infamy of the place and County where
such an unhappy birth was brought forth) oh how gladly was the same entertained
and embraced by multitudes of people in that Country! and how proudly did they
bear up themselves upon the authority of the same, to the confronting and
defiance of the faithful Ministers of God, that would not, nor could not
consent to such prophanations, but by authority of the 4th Commandment of God
did bear witness against the same. It is also a further testimony of this
spirit of profaneness that now we are speaking of, that duties of Religion
have been so exceedingly neglected in private families, children and servants
being not at all instructed and catechized, yea, many families having not a
Bible in them, morning and evening prayer being never used, nor any blessing
upon the creatures desired of God, when men have gone unto their meals, all
directly contrary to the express word of God, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7* Ephesians. 6, 4. 1 Timothy
4.4, 5. and the commended examples of David. Psalm. 101. Josh. 24.15. Act. 10.2.
Genesis 18.19. Joh. 8.39.
Ioshuah, Cornelius, Abraham, and such like servants of God. But if the saying
of Christ our Savior be true, as it cannot but be most true, that they that
are the children of Abraham will do the works of Abraham, surely, then the
neglect of family duties (for the practice whereof Abraham is so much
commended) does testify to the faces of many people that they are no children
of Abraham, neither children of his flesh, nor children of his faith; and whose
children they then are you may all judge; yea, such has been the impiety of
many persons, that such as have made some conscience of Gods holy Name, and
service, and Sabbaths, and have showed any care to walk with God in the way
that is called holy, them they have greatly hated, despised, derided,
slandered, and other ways evil entreated and persecuted, and all because they
seemed to be more holy then themselves.

Wherefore to make an end of this particular, If there be any soul among you,
whether man or woman, whether young or old, whether great or small, that stands
culpable of this profaneness and ungodliness, and that is a despiser and
hater, or so much as a careless neglecter of God, and the holy things of God,
careless of Gods word and the knowledge of it, of his Sabbaths and the
sanctifying thereof, and of the Christian duties of Gods holy worship in
public Assemblies, and in private families, yea, careless of walking with God
in holiness for his own particular, but walks in his own lusts of swearing,
whoredom, drunkenness, or any other. Let such an one be exhorted to repent;
yea, as he tendreth his own eternal comfort be earnestly entreated to repent;
yea, charged and commanded in the name of God the father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, to repent of all this his wickedness and turn unto the Lord. For the
word is gone out of Gods mouth, and shall not be recalled, Heb. 11.14.
but must stand for ever: that without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
except it be as a Judge against all such ungodly sinners, but never see God to
his comfort in this or in another world. Psalm. 50.^2.
Oh consider this therefore all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces,
and there be no deliverer: yea, consider it seriously and believe it of a
truth, for the Lord has spoken it, Gal. 5.20, 21. 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
that neither whoremongers nor adulterers, nor drunkards, nor any that walk in
such ways and works of the flesh, shall have any inheritance in the kingdom
of God. Be assured of it, for the day is coming when you will find it most
true, that where there is no holy knowledge of God in the mind, no change of
the heart from its former profaneness and uncleanness, and no purity and
sanctity of the affections and desires, no reformation and sanctification of
the life and conversation, such a man so continuing is most certainly a man of
death, prepared against the day of slaughter, and shall immediately drop down
without all hope of recovery into hell, as soon as death shall strike him to
the ground. Oh then whosoever you are that read or hear these words, humble
your selves for all your iniquities, Joel 2.12.13.
and turn unto the Lord, with fasting and weeping and with mourning: For he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great goodness, and repents of
the evil: cast away all your transgressions, Eze. 18.30.
and so iniquity shall not be your ruin, for the Lord has said and sworn,
that as he lives he takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather
that he turn from his way and live; Ez^k. 33.11.
turn you, turn you, wherefore will you die? The very Angels of heaven will be
glad at the day of your conversion. But if you harden your hearts, and refuse
to hearken to the gracious call of the Lord, your damnation is just, your blood
will be upon your own heads: you have been warned and warned again and again,
by many worthy Ministers and messengers of God, that have preached in your
Congregations; and amongst others you have been warned heretofore by us in
preaching, and now by us in writing.

But besides this sin of profaneness any feeling of their need of Christ,
any high prizing of him, any earnest longing for him, any true relying or
resting on him. That it is incident to professors to offend in this kind, is
plain, by that which is written of the Pharisees, that they trusted in
themselves, that they were righteous, and despised others, and accordingly one
of them is brought in boasting of himself before God, Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12.
that he was not like other men, he was no extortioner, no adulterer, no unjust
person, nor like that Publican, but he fasted twice a week; he gave tithes of
all that he possessed, and the like. And it is said of the nation of the Jews
generally, Romans 10 3
that they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, did not subject themselves to the
righteousness of God. Which place does also show the dangerous condition of
all such justitiaries in this respect, that being so full of their own
righteousness, they submit not themselves to the righteousness of God, nor
unto Christ Jesus who is the end of the Law, for righteousness to every one
that believes. But of this you may be sure, that whatever a man's righteousness
may be, unless he were one that had never sinned, he has nothing in him that
is of any worth for the present justification of his person, nor for the
everlasting salvation of his soul. For the text is plain, that in Gods sight
there is no flesh living that can be justified. Psalm. 143.2. And therefore such
holy men as David, Daniel, Nehemiah, Paul, and others, durst not stand to be
tried and justified that way ( Psalm. 143.2. Dan. 9.18. Neh. 13.22. Phil. 3.9.)
but have been glad to fly for this matter only to the free mercy and grace of
God, and the righteousness of Christ Jesus which is by faith, and you will
find that it will be best for you to do the like.

It may be you will say, We have no need to be told of this, for we are not
Papists to hold justification by works, but do believe that justification is by
faith only without the works of the Law. Nevertheless we cannot think it
needless for men to be put in mind of this matter, I partly because there are
many (the Lord knows) in that dear country of ours, who discover themselves to
be deeply tainted with this as well as other points of Popery; and partly
because this Popery, this pride and self-love is natural to all the sons of
men, being a part of that original sin which is common to all as well as to
those that make direct profession of popery; and therefore your selves, unless
you were free from all original corruption, are in danger of this relying upon
self-righteousnesse as well as Papists; nay we fear (be it spoken without
offense) that there are sundry amongst you that do so rely indeed, and though
they be not outwardly culpable in respect of popery and profaneness, but
profess a stricter and purer way, yet in very truth are in no better condition
to Godward then others are as being utterly without part and portion in Christ
Jesus. For the manifesting whereof, we hope you will easily grant, that whoever
has no more religion in him, but what might have been attained if Christ had
never been, such an one, whatever relgion he may seem to have, is certainly
without Christ, and in a state of death unto this day. And that so it is with
many professors may appear by this; that trouble of conscience for sin, and
reformation of life, after that troubler is all the religion that is found in
many professors; for let a man attain to these two, to be stung in conscience
for his sin, and afterward to take up a stricter course of life in the
practice of good duties, as prayer in his family, frequenting of Sermons,
conversing with Christians, and such like* and how many are there that hereupon
would account themselves and be accounted by others to be right good
Christians, and in a most blessed condition? Whenas the truth is, all that is
here mentioned, is no more then might be wrought by the Law though Christ Jesus
had never come into the world. For a serious consideration of the curses of the
Law being threatened might produce the one, and the serious consideration of the
duties of the Law being pressed and urged might produce the other; but both the
one and the other without Christ, and consequently both the one and the other
without salvation, since there is no salvation without Christ.

Wherefore (dear friends) in the bowels of Jesus Christ we do beseech you,
examine your selves whether it be thus with you or with any of you; ask your
selves this Question, whether any Evangelicall and saving work of grace and
faith in Christ be yet wrought in your souls; or whether all that yet you have
had experience of, do amount to no more but legal affrightment and legal
amendment? And if upon examination, any soul amongst you shall find his
condition to be no better then this that here we are speaking of, in the name
of God, let such a soul be deeply humbled and repent in dust and ashes, for
this amongst all his other sins, that he has prized Christ no more, thinking
himself to be rich and increased in goods, and to have need of nothing, because
of legal duties and ^^mmon graces, not knowing how through want of Christ
Jesus in his soul, he has all this while been miserable, and wretched, and
blind, and poor, and naked. And let a man consider with himself, (and the Lord
grant that he may consider it seriously) that it is not all this humiliation
and reformation that can make satisfaction to the justice of God for any one,
though but the least of all his manifold transgressions, nor justify his
person in the sight of God; and therefore if he die in this condition, (which
God forbid) he will certainly die accursed, and notwithstanding all his
glorious profession of religion, his good estimation amongst others, or the
good opinion that he has or has had of himself, he will at death
everlastingly perish from the glorious and saving presence of God; because it
is a most infallible and divine truth that must stand for ever, and all flesh
shall find it so; that he that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son has not life, 1 John 5.12. It were therefore much to be desired,
that there were in men such an heart as was in the Apostle Paul, who having
many legal privileges, and having been zealous of legal duties, so that in
respect of the righteousness of the Law he was blawelesse, yet counted all
these things loss for Christ's sake, for whom he suffered the loss of all, and
did judge them to be dung that he might win Christ, and might be found in
him, not having (...) own righteousness which (...) the Law, ^ut that which
(...) by the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God by faith.
Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. An excellent lesson, and worthy to be learned by
every Christian, yea, a lesson that must be learned in some measure of truth by
all those that must be saved; For Christ himself prescribes it as the first
particular to him that would be his disciple, that " he must deny himself, Mat.
16.24. And by a man's self that must be denied, he means this
self-righteousnesse as well as other things. For sure it is, that if ever a man
must be saved he must be saved by Christ, because there is not salvation in any
other. Act. 4.12. and if by Christ, then ^ man must believe in Christ for
without faith a man can have no union nor communion with Christ nor ever please
God. Ephesians. 3.17. Heb. 11.6* And if a man have faith in Christ, then Christ must
be precious in his sight, for unto them that have faith he is precious. 1 Pet.
2.6. And if Christ be precous in any man's sight then he must loath himself in
his own sight, and not only cast away all the practice o^ wickedness, but all
trust and confidence in the filthy rag^ of his own righteousness, Isa. 64.6.
that so selling all that ever he has, he may buy that most precious Pearl, the
Lord Jesus Christ, and his righteousness, Matthew. 13.45. A Pearl of such
inestimable worth and value, that he is most unspeakably happy that ^ath it,
and of such absolute necessity, that they are most wretched and accursed who
^ive and die without it.

Lastly, to name no more particulars, This is another, viz. that the authority
and will of Christ Jesus in Church-administrations, has been no more
acknowledged and regarded. For since he is the only King and Lord and Lawgiver
to his Church, Psalm. 2.^6. Jam. 4.12. therefore his Church, and all things in
his Church ought to be established and ordered according unto his appointment,
or if it be otherwise, his royal authority is injured thereby. Now if his
appointment in these matters were observed, then Churches for the quality of
their matter should consist of none but Saints, and visible believers, Isa.
60.21. Ezekiel. 44.7, 9. Zach. 14. ult. Ephesians. 1.1. and for the quantity thereof,
no greater number but one Congregation. 1 Cor. 14.23. Then functions and
offices of ministry which are not from heaven, but from men, Mat. 21.25.
should not be tolerated in his Church, nor any of those functions and offices
be wanting which the Lord Jesus has appointed and ordained. Ephesians. 4.11. Phil.
1.1. 1 Timothy 5.17. Then none should be chosen or received unto any office in the
Church, but such as are qualified with gifts for their places. 1 Timothy 3.2, 3.
etc. nor should their entrance into their places be without the choice and free
consent of the Church, Act. 1.23. and 6.3, 5. and 14.23. and when they are
entered, they should execute their places with all diligence and faithfulness.
1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Timothy 5.17. and the worship which in these Churches should be
performed, should not be by the precepts and canons of men, but according to
the will and word of God, with discipline administered according to the rule of
Christ^ Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. In all which particulars (the Lord knows) there
has been great swerving from the appointment of Christ, both in your Country,
and in other places of England: in that profane and vile men have been allowed
for members of the Church, and the signs and seals of the body and blood of
Christ profanely administered to such whom the Scripture calls dogs and
swine* Matthew 7.6. Also, in that besides the Congregationall Church appointed by
Christ, there have been Diocesan and Provincial Churches, which he appointed
not, and Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Deans, Chancellors, and many more
functions and offices in the Church, which were all invented and devised by
men; and Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, which he himself appointed,
greatly neglected and out of use. Many have been admitted to the ministry,
which have been altogether unfit for any such weighty and sacred emploiments,
and obtruded upon the Congregations by Patrons and Prelates, and when they have
been in their places, have been most negligent and unfaithful therein, not
minding the glory of God, nor the salvation of the peoples souls; and
Ecclesiastical Discipline has been administered by Officers and Laws, and
Canons and Courts, and worship performed by Service Book and Ceremonies, in
many particulars: of all which it may be truly said, they are things which the
Lord never commanded, nor did they ever come into his heart, as Jer. 7.31.

But here it may be some man may say, Object.
If things have been amiss in these particulars, what is that to us? we hope
it is not our fault. Answ.
Such an one we would pray to consider that in many particulars the people have
been willing enough, yea, too willing of these corruptions that have been
invented and imposed by others; as when the Prophets prophesied falsely, and the
Priests did bear rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so. Jer.
5.31. And where it has been so that the people have been willing of these
corruptions, there the people have reason to be humbled for them, though the
things were first invented and imposed by others. But say it had been against
their minds that such corruptions have been practiced, yet it should greatly
grieve a godly heart to see such injury done to Christ Jesus, a^ that other
laws besides his, and other Lords besid^s him should have dominion over the
people of God* Isa. 26.13. and such injury done unto the Church of Christ, a^
that by means of these usurpations and impositions of men, she should be
bereaved of a great part of that spiritual liberty which was purchased for her
by the price of his precious blood; and lastly, it should grieve every
Christian heart, in regard that many a soul (God knows) has been endangered to
everlasting perdition, as by the rest of the corruptions forementioned, so
especially by that dumb and unfaithful Ministry which has been set over many
a Congregation, the Lord having said that where vision fails, there the people
perish; and if the blind lead the blind, both must fall into the ditch, Pro.
29.18. Mat. 15.14.

Unless therefore you will say (which we hope you do abhor to think) that
though the corruptions brought in by the Prelacy and Hierarchy, have been the
destruction of the souls of thousands, and have been most injurious to Christ
Jesus your Lord and ours, and to his Church which he so dearly bought, yet all
this is nothing to you, you have no reason to be affected with these things,
unless (we say) you will thus carelessly pass over these matters of this high
concernment and importance, we know not how you can satisfy your consciences
in the sight of God, without a serious and deep lamenting and bewailing of the
forementioned corruptions in Church-administrations, as well as any other
iniquities of the land. For sure it is, many have heretofore been deeply guilty
of sin in these things, and our dear Country of Lancashire has had her part
in this guilt as well as other places; yea, and ourselves (the Lord be
merciful to us in regard of this and the rest of our sins) have not been free
when we lived amongst you from a great deal of ignorance and guilt in this
kind. In regard whereof we are now the more desirous to provoke our selves and
our Christian acquaintance and friends to a serious repentance for these
things; willing also by this means if it were the will of God to make some
supply of our defectivenesse in exhortations of this kind in times past, when
(as we must needs acknowledge) we fell a great deal short of duty herein; but
being now and long ago convinced of the evil of the things aforementioned, we
think it our duty both to lay the same deeply to heart, and to provoke our
acquaintance to do the like. Wherefore we beseech you, let it not seem a small
thing unto any of you, that there have been such corruptions in the house of
God, and the administrations therein. But let every soul seriously learn to be
ashamed in the sight of God, that men have set their posts by Gods posts, and
their thresholds by Gods thresholds. Eze. 43.8. that is to say, their own
inventions by Gods institutions. And if men be once ashamed of these things as
well as of other their sins, then the Lord has promised in this Scripture,
Eze. 43.11. to show them the pattern of his house, the goings out thereof, and
the comings in thereof, and all the Laws and Ordinances thereof. But there is
no hope that men should ever come to see the beauty and comely order of a pure
Church, and the holy things of God therein, unless they be humbled and ashamed
of their own iniquities and abominations, as in other things, so also in this
particular of mixing the devices of men with the holy institutions of God,
which we heartily wish all the servants of God seriously to consider and to lay
to heart.

Nevertheless, we do acknowledge that your condition stands in need of
consolation as well as exhortation, though we thus speak; For we have heard of
sad and doleful things that have befallen that Country as well as other parts
of the Kingdom, by means of the bloody distempers of war wherewith the Lord
has afflicted the land. It has been reported to us by printed Currantoes and
by letters, that many bloody battles have been fought in your coasts, that many
of your Towns have been besieged and taken, many houses in Lancaster and
elsewhere burnt to the ground, many men robbed and plundered of their estates,
many fain to fly from their houses and habitations for fear of the enemy, and
glad to wander they and theirs for succor and relief where they could find
the same amongst strangers, that much blood has been shed at the battle at
Houghton Common, at the taking of Liverpool, of Bolton, and other places in the
Country, and such as have escaped with life have been forced to endure and
undergo much hardship and misery, though their lives have been given them for
a prey. In regard of all which we confess you have need of cordials and
comforts, and oh that we had the skill to minister the same unto you in such
sort as might be for the refreshing of your disconsolate hearts. But the best
is, he that counts the wanderings of his people, and puts all their tears
into his bottle, he is able to comfort the comfortless among you, that have
suffered for his sake, and will effectually do it in due time. In the mean
season be entreated (dear Brethren, all you children of affliction) to stay
your hearts a little from sorrow, and refrain your voice from weeping and your
eyes from tears, while we propound to your consideration such grounds of
consolation as we find in the blessed book of the Scriptures of God, and which
have been sanctified and blessed unto us through his grace, for the bringing of
our hearts to some measure of quiet contentation and comfort in the saddest
hours of affliction that have befallen us in the passages of our pilgrimage,
from our first times until this day. Which grounds of consolation we trust the
Lord may be graciously pleased to bless in like sort unto your souls.

First of all, All our afflictions in this world do not happen by chance, or
merely by the will of devils or men, but they are all such as our heavenly
father has appointed us unto; and as our Savior sometimes said Shall we not
of the cup that our Father has mixed for us? Joh. 18.11.

2. He that sometimes said, I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my
people that is in Egypt, Exodus 3.7. he is still the same allseeing and
allsufficient God, and so beholds and observes all the sufferings of his
servants, and all the injurious and outrageous dealings of their enemies, Psa.
10.14 17.

3. Nor does he only see our sufferings and no more but so, but also (such is
his goodness) he does sympathise with us in the same: so that our Lord and
Redeemer in all our afflictions is afflicted with us, and accounts our
sufferings as his own. Isa. 63.9. Zach. 2.8. Act. 9.4, 5. Col. 1.24.

4 Our heavenly father like a good Physician does never afflict his children
willingly nor gives them bitter potions to drink, but as it were by constraint
and being necessitated thereunto, when they in regard of some spiritual
distemper or corruption do stand in need thereof. Lam. 3.27. 1 Pet. 1.6.

5. And to show how unwilling he is of the sorrows of his servants, he says he
is angry but a little against them, but for their enemies that are so fierce
and handle his servants so severely, he professes to be sore displeased with
them for this dealing of theirs, and for their eager mind to help forward
their affliction, which he counts a going beyond their Commission. Zach. 1.15.

6. The power of the malignant enemies of Gods servants is so limited by the
Lord, that not the most malicious of men, nor yet any of all the devils in hell
can go one jot beyond his leave and commission, who as he has set bounds to
the sea, saying thus far shall thou go, but no further, and here shall stay thy
proud waves. Job. 38.11. Even so in like sort does he restrain the rage and
tumult of the wicked against his servants. Psa 65.7.

7. The afflictions of the godly are always so ordered by the Lord, that for
measure they shall not be immoderate, nor more then they are able to bear,
Jerem. 30.11. 1 Cor. 10 13. nor shall they in the issue do them any hurt, but
great good, both in purging out their sin and corruption that they may be
partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. Isa. 1, 25. Joh. 15 2. and in
conforming them to Christ, Romans 8.29. and to the blessed Prophets, Apostles and
Martyrs that have been before them.

8. The Lord does not love his children ever a whit the less because they are
afflicted, Heb. 12.6, 7. Rev. 3.19. but on the contrary is many times then
nearest unto you, when they are in greatest tribulation, and then affords unto
them the most of his gracious presence, the most mighty support, most rich
supply of patience and long-sufferance and other graces, and the sweetest
glimpses and apprehensions of heavenly glory, with the most lively expectations
of future blessedness, 2 Cor. 1.5. and 4.16. God was never nearer to the three
Princes, Dan. 3. then when they were in the furnace, nor to Daniel and
Ezechiel, and John in glorious vision of God, then when they were in captivity
and banishment, nor unto Steven, then when the stones came thickest about his
head.

9. This is the common way in which all have gone that have gone to heaven, and
why should we expect to be singularly privileged above all the rest of the
Saints, and not rather be content to bear these things with patience, the same
afflictions being accomplished in our brethren that are in the world, 1 Pet. 5
9.

10. All the sufferings of this life are but for a moment, for yet a little
while, and he that shall come to work our perfect deliverance, he will surely
come, and will not tarry, 2 Cor. 4.17. Heb. 10.37. And sure it is, that if our
lives were the longest that ever any were, and that of all this time we should
never see good day, yet all this in respect of eternity were such a nothing,
that that eternal weight of glory will abundantly recompense us for the same.
Romans 8.18.

These and such like Arguments of consolation against all the sufferings of the
Saints in this world, we doubt not but many amongst you have been long ago
taught of God to consider. Nevertheless our unfeigned love to your souls has
moved us in this manner to revive the remembrance of them at this time, though
you do already know them, and be established in the present truth.

And besides these considerations aforementioned, which are more general, and
appliable to all afflictions and troubles, whatsoever the Saints may be
exercised withal in this life; there are sundry things in the ground and cause
of your present sufferings, as also in respect of the condition of your enemies
by whom you suffer, that may also be grounds of consolation to every sincere
and Christian heart.

As first of all, because the war wherein you have been engaged, and by means
whereof you have suffered so great things, was not (as we conceive) offensive
and voluntary, but merely defensive and taken up upon necessity, because
otherwise it could not have been avoided, but your estates, your wives, your
children, your liberty, your laws, yea, your very lives, and (that which ought
to be dearer then your lives) the true Religion of Christ Jesus, these must all
have been prostituted to the pleasure of Papists and other profane and impious
people, the sworn servants of Antichrist, and bloody enemies of God and of the
Kingdom; And therefore if Nehemiah spoke to good purpose when he bad the
rulers and people of Judah to remember the Lord which is great and terrible,
and to fight for their brethren, their sons and their daughters, their wives
and their houses, Neh. 4.14 your selves we doubt not may have comfort in your
fightings, whatever you may hazard or loose therein, because you have as many
relations and interests to fight for, and of as precious importance and
concernment as any that Nehemiah does there mention, and some of a great deal
more, so that if any ask why you would engage your selves in this war, the
events whereof have been to many so sad, such may satisfy themselves if they
will but consider what matters you had lying as it were at stake: and you may
well answer in the words of David for the satisfaction of your own and others
consciences, " Was there not a cause? 1 Samuel 17.29.

2. And doubtless it is a great comfort in sufferings when they that suffer can
say unto God, Psa. 44.^^
for thy sake O God these things are come upon us; In which case the Church
Psalm. 44.22 does greatly comfort themselves, and our Savior in this respect
does comfort his disciples, both pronouncing them to be blessed when they so
suffer, and commanding them thereupon to rejoice and to be exceeding glad,
Matthew. 5.11, 12. Now inasmuch as your sufferings are sufferings for that
doctrine, that worship and that government of the Church, which is prescribed
in the Scripture, against Popery and Prelacy and other corrupt inventions of
men, we therefore do esteem the cause of them to be no other but the very
cause of God, and of his Christ: and so you may well claim a share in those
consolations which belong to those who suffer for the cause of God and for
righteousness sake.

3. Nor is that nothing which is so often mentioned in the Scripture, that the
blood of Gods servants does cry for vengeance against their enemies* Genesis 4.10.
Rev. 6.10. In which respect you may be assured that he that says the death of
the Saints is precious in his sight, Psalm. 116.15. will not suffer the blood
which you or yours have shed or shall shed for his cause (the cause you have
now in hand) to be always unrevenged, but will surely find a time to render
tribulation to them that trouble you in his ways, 2 These. 1.6. For their
tumult and outrage and blasphemy is already come up into his ears, Isa. 37.29.
so that he will doubtless avenge your cause, yea, and avenge it speedily, Luke
18.7, 8.

4. Your brethrens blood that is already poured out in this cause, you cannot
tell how much good it may have done, and will do, nor what good your selves
may do by your constancy. But this you know how the Apostle says, the things
that were done to him, did turn to the furtherance of the Gospel. Phil. 1.12.
and the old saying, that the blood of Martyrs has been the seed of the Church,
has been abundantly verified in our land, and in Lancashire, as well as in
other parts. For who knows not what a multitude of professors have been brought
forth in the Kingdom and in our County by means of the sufferings of the
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days? Was not blessed Bradford born in Manchester? and
George Marsh in the Parish of Dean near Bolton? and Ieffery Hurst in Leigh? and
does not he that knows these places well know, that profession of the truth,
and power of godliness has abounded in these and the places thereabouts, much
more then in ma^ny other places? And why may we not look at this as one part of
the precious fruit of the suffering of the Saints aforementioned, who received
their birth and first being in those places? And if we should mention reverend
Bourn, wise Gosnall grave Midgeley, both the father and the son, and should
say that Manchester has no^ fared the worse for the first, nor Bolton for the
second, nor Rachdale and Leigh for the two last, we should not be vain in so
saying. For we think it is clear that where these or other of the Lords
Prophets have suffered any thing for his sake, and in any measure of truth have
stood up for reformation, there God has blessed the Country round about, so
that there has not any where been found more profession and power of Religion
then in those parts. And if your own present sufferings may produce the like
effect (as why may it not?) we trust you will not so much sorrow for the
bitterness of the things you suffer, as rejoice and be glad for the happy and
sweet fruit thereof.

5. Rome is now ready to be ruined, and the time of her destruction now posteth
on apace. For the beast now receiving a wound and deadly blow in the downfall
of the Prelacy and other corruptions depending thereon, does therefore thus lay
about him and bestirre himself in killing the servants of Jesus, Rev. 11.7. as
it has been the manner of Satan to show forth the greatest wrath, when he
knows he has the shortest time, Revel. 12.12. Therefore (dear brethren) be
patient for a while, a very little while, for it will not be long before the
storm be over, and then we shall have glorious days: For Babylon being once
fallen whose fall is not far off, new Jerusalem will then come down from
heaven as a Bride prepared for her husband. Rev. 19.7. Which times you may be
assured will be very glorious: for the report and vision of them was so joyful
to John, that transported therewith he could not contain himself, but falls down
to worship the Angel that revealed unto him these things. Rev. 19, 10. and
22.9. which though it was his infirmity, yet it argues the great felicity of
those times, the tidings whereof did so transport the spirit of so great and
holy an Apostle.

6. But though the time of your sufferings shall be but short, yet your
recompense for the same shall be lasting and large. For though neither you nor
your children should live to see the happy days that are a coming and drawing
on, but that you should be taken away in the battle, whilst you are fighting
for and with the Lamb against the beast and his adherents, yet of this you may
be assured that so many of you (and we hope they are not a few) as have known
the Lord Jesus in truth and in sincerity, shall no sooner end your days in
this world, but you shall be taken away to heaven, to the fruition of eternal
rest and peace, where you shall experimentally find it made good unto your
souls, that your light affliction which is but for a moment, will work for you
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And in the
mean time, if God continue your lives, he is able (the earth being his and the
fullness thereof, Psa. 24.1.) to give you an abundant recompense even in
outward matters, for all the losses that you have or may sustain for his name,
2 Chro. 25.9. However, that same hundredfold in spiritual and internal
blessings, which our Savior has promised in such case, Mar. 10.30. that same
you shall be sure to receive in this life, besides eternal life in the world to
come. And for your children or friends that have already lost their lives in
this cause, or may lose the same hereafter, he would have you besides other
considerations to be comforted in this, that you shall see them again at the
latter day, when you and they shall for ever be with the Lord.

Wherefore to draw to an end, since your war wherein you have been engaged and
wherein you have suffered such things, has been merely defensive and
necessary, because you could not avoid it, and since the cause for which you
contend is not your own, but the cause of Jesus Christ, since your sufferings
are so precious in the sight of God, that he will surely take vengeance on your
enemies, since your present pressures and troubles and constancy therein may be
profitable to posterity many a day hereafter, and that the time of your
sufferings must be but short, and then be followed with happy times that will
ensue in this world, and afterward be rewarded with eternal glory in another:
We beseech you therefore dear Brethren and friends, put away now all base and
unworthy sorrows and fears, and quit your selves valiantly like men, and be
strong, 1 Cor. 16.13. Heb. 12.12 Phil. 1.28
lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees. In nothing fear your
adversaries, which is unto them a token of perdition, and to you of salvation,
and that of God; but sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your
fear, Isa 8.13.
and let him be your dread. If you have been plundered and robbed of your
estates or a great part thereof, you know the Christian Hebrews took such
things not only patiently but also joyfully, knowing that they had in heaven a
better and an enduring substance: Heb. 10.34.
and your selves shall do well to be like minded to them therein. If you have
lost your dear friends in these broyls and battles wherewith the kingdom and
your Country has been embroiled: if any woman have lost her dear husband, any
husband his dear wife, any father his child, any child his father, any friend
or brother his brother or friend; Consider whether you could ever loose them in
a better quarrel, or for a better cause: Christ Jesus and his Gospel and
Ordinances are su^e better then a thousand, either husbands or wives, either
fathers, or children, or other friends: and he knows but little the worth of
Christ and of the things of Christ, that does not esteem them ten thousand
times better then all the world besides: and indeed as our Savior says, He
that loves these things better then him, is not worthy of him. If you should be
stripped of your estates and friends, and afterward of your lives also, you
know our dear Savior laid down his life for you, and therefore it is but
equal, if you give all that is dear unto you, and even your very lives for
him. If you lose any thing for him and his cause, you shall be no losers in the
end, but by that time all accounts are cast up, you shall find you have an
hundredfold for all your losses whatever they be or can be, we mean as our
Savior does, M^^. 10.^9, 30.
even an hundred fold in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting.
Should you forsake the truth for fear of affliction, which God forbid, you
might then peradventure for a time preserve your estates, and liberties, and
lives, (and yet that may be a question too) but suppose the best, you should
nevertheless have a very losing bargain of it in the end, and should show your
selves to be penny-wise therein and pound-foolish. For our Saviors words must
stand, and all flesh shall find them most infallibly true, M^r. 8.35.
that he that shall save his life shall lose it, and he that shall lose his
life for his sake and the Gospels, shall save it. Many of you have been
professors of the truth for these many years, it is fit therefore that by this
time you should be grown up to some good measure of heavenly-mindednesse, and
living by faith even then when sense and reason, and all creature comforts
shall fail. Look not therefore on things that are seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.
but on things that are not seen, for the things that are seen are temporal,
but the things that are not seen are eternal. Learn now by faith to see him
that is invisible, and thereby to endure all that may befall you, Heb. 11.27.
as Moses sometimes did by that means. Buy the truth but sell it not, Rather
sell all that you have for the buying thereof: for the merchandise thereof is
better then silver, Pro 23.23
and the gain thereof, then fine gold. The Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
grace of Christ therein is such a treasure and such a pearl that he deals like
a wise man that shall purchase the same, Mat. 13.46.
though with the loss or sale of all that he has. For Popery (we trust) you
so far do see the vanity and loathsomenesse thereof, that you will never
decline nor turn aside thereto: but take heed of Arminianism, Familism, and all
other erroneous doctrines, of which these days are so fruitful: especially
take heed of the leaven of the Anabaptists: which (if we be not mistaken) is so
dangerous and pernicious, and yet withal so contagious, and apt to spread in
these days, that we scarce know any other, of which Christians had so much
need to take heed, and to be advertised and exhorted so to do. It is but too
manifest that many of all sorts are now a days hankering and leaning that way,
and it is therefore a testimony of our love, and so we hope you will take it,
that we advise you to beware lest you also or any of you be plucked away with
that or any other error, and fall from your own stedfastness. Love one another,
and cleave together in firmness of Christian and cordial affection. The enemies
of the truth are not so weak, nor you so strong, that there can be any need of
your dissentions and divisions for the weakening of your selves or the
strengthening of them. 2 Pet. 3.17.
Divide and impera. Divide them and make your selves Masters of them all, is
one of Machiavels principles, and a most perilous one it is. It will be your
wisdom to take heed lest the Jesuits should practice the same design amongst
you, whether among your military Commanders or otherwise, your safety and
strength under God does in great part consist in your unity and agreement among
your selves; Believe the truth when it is held forth unto you either in books
and private discourse, or specially in the public Ministry, and receive it in
the love of it, 2. These. 2.11.
that you may not be deluded with lies. Content not yourselvs with literal
knowledge in the brain and head, but chiefly look after spirituality and
sincerity of heart, and manifest and show forth the same by the power of
godliness in all your conversation. What upon sober and serious consideration
you shall find your selves shall have most need of another day, whether the
day of death or the day of judgment, or any other day of deep distress, of
that (if you be wise) do you chiefly make your choice now: and what will be
most uncomfortable then, do you now abandon; And to apply this general, the
day is coming and not far off neither, when the favor of God through Christ
Jesus, true interest to his special love, as reconciled through the blood of
his son, with the amiable and sweet light of his countenance, will be of more
worth to the soul, and yield more satisfaction to the heart, then all that this
world can afford, from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof. Yea,
the day is coming when these things will all be miserable comforters and
physicians of no value, but those other will then be found to be of such
absolute alsufficiency to the soul, as that he shall be most happy for ever
that has them, and of such necessity that he shall be most wretched and
accursed that shall live and die without them. Wherefore we beseech you,
consider wisely what now you have to do, and now with Mary make choice of the
better part, which will never be taken from you. Choose the Lord God in Christ
for your portion, and the lot of your inheritance; choose not any way of sin,
or errors, or creatures for your God, for they are no Gods: but now make a
choice (and the Lord direct you so to do) that you may have the comfort of the
same hereafter, and for evermore.

We do not think our selves to be the only Prophets, nor that we only are able
to give a word of counsel or comfort to our countrymen: we trust we are so far
conscious to our own weakness, that such arrogant apprehensions are far from
us. Nor do we doubt but Lancashire is blessed of God with many faithful and
able Watchmen, who are continually blowing the trumpet in your streets, and
imparting the message of the Lord amongst you, much more suteably to your
condition, then we at so many miles distance can possibly do, of whom we have
no other thoughts but that the meanest of them might add much unto either of
us. But because we dearly love our Country, though we live not in it,
therefore we think it meet to seek the weal thereof in the best manner we are
able, and we hope we may be allowed so to do. We also consider, that sometimes
the God of heaven may give as great a blessing to weaker means, as to those
that are more excellent and eminent, that so himself and not the means, may
have all the glory. Finally, we are both of us well stricken in years, and
posting on apace toward our dissolution, and never like to see your faces, nor
you to see ours in this world, and therefore we are willing to do this office
of love unto your souls, conceiving it may be the last that we can do unto you
in this kind before we die: and glad we should be if you may have the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the things that concern your own peace in remembrance after
our decease. Upon these and such like considerations we have adventured to do
as here you see, hoping our sincere and loving intentions will be accepted in
good part. For which we desire no other recompense at your hands, but the
benefit of your prayers on our behalf, and this we do most affectionately
request from you. Finally Brethren farewell: and the God of all grace who has
called us to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 5.10, 11.
after that you have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish strengthen,
settle you: to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. Fear none of
those things which possibly you may yet suffer, Rev. ^.10.
but be you faithful unto the death, and the Lord has promised he will give
unto you a Crown of life. To his grace we commend you all in our best desires,
and so rest,

Desirous of your eternal comfort in Christ Jesus, RICHARD MATHER, WILLIAM
TOMPSON*
Dorchester in New England, the last of December, 1649.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
UNderstand dear Friends and Countrymen, and any to whom this ensuing Letter
may be presented, that the Authors who writ the same, did intend it only as a
small Remembrance of that Christian love that ought to flow and abound in all
that are members of that mystical body, according to that Heb. 3.13. so
especially it ought to manifest it self betwixt Ministers and people; and
though these Friends that now write are so distant that they cannot speak to
those to whom they write, as sometime they have done, yet they cannot forget
those bowels of love as here is expressed and once did more fully declare to be
in them when they dwelt among you; and though it come so late to your hands,
the reason was, the place being so remote, and the way of conveyance so
difficult, being it was intended to be Printed that so the more might enjoy it:
The Press at that time being full of other employment (which was in the Year
1645.) it was cast by so long, that at last the Authors thought it out of
season, and so sent for it home again to N. E. till now this Year, some Friends
understanding and seeing o^ it, encouraged the Authors to put it forth still,
which they (willing to show their love to their Countrymen) condescended unto:
And therefore let it not seem to thee as an Almanac out of date, but well
weigh and consider it, and what thou find in it that concerns thee in any
kind, make use of it to the glory of God and thine own good, for that is it
which the Authors wish and desire, as their preachings formerly, and Letters
now express, that the Name of God may be glorified in you, and you in him.

FINIS.

