Machiavil's Advice TO HIS SON.
Newly Translated out of Italian into English Verse.
By R. L. Esquire
COME hither Son, and learn thy Fathers Lore,
It is not now as has been heretofore:
For in my Youth no Man would read to me,
That now in Age I can deliver thee.
If thou would be a Man of much esteem,
Be not the same whatever so thou seem;
Speak fair to all, be Courteous, Gentle, Kind,
But let the World know nothing of thy mind.
Let slip no time may be for thy avail,
But trust no Friend, for faith begins to fail.
Refuse no gift to fill thy Coffers full,
The wisest Poor-man passes for a Gull.
Be temperate in Effect, sober in talk,
And often make a Solitary walk.
Fickle conceits commit to memory,
For written lines may lie in jeopardy.
Affect no follies, do no quarrels move;
And if thou love, thy self fail not to love.
Have Ears for all Men, but confer with few,
And count fair words to be but as a show.
Follow the Time, find Humors, flatter pride,
And praise the Groom, but only please the Bride.
Promise enough but not perform too much,
But with thy Betters evermore keep touch.
Strive not with great ones, meddle not with small,
For trifles trouble not thy self withal.
Frequent the Church, make show of great Devotion;
And be not bashful to receive Promotion.
Look big at Beggars; wear thine own Clothes neat,
And spend not too much Money on thy Meat.
Break Jests on Cowards, but take heed of Knaves,
And love no Bawds, for they are beastly Slaves.
Be perfect in Arithmetick's close Art,
In all accounts to make a saving part.
Stand not to stare upon a Peacocks Tail,
Who if he see his Legs will stoop his Sail.
When Jack daws chatter, let their Language go,
Better be silent than to prattle so.
Observe the Lion, do not stir the Bear,
And love the Wolf, but only for his Hair.
Learn of the Ass to bear, the Dog to wait,
And of the Ape to counterfeit conceit.
Catch not at Flies, they are but Swallows Food,
But love the Meat that nourishes the Blood.
Feed like the Wolf on blood whilst it is warm,
He is a Fool that feels another harm.
Yet seem as kind as she that seems to cry,
To see him sick that she could wish to dye.
Take heed of Interest, hell, mortgage no Land:
And from Assurance ever keep thy hand.
Take no Man's word, for Coin is hard to get,
It is a Custom now to pay no debt.
Learn to get Riches by the Beggars Purse,
The Fox fares best, when Geese begin to curse.
Work all the week for profit every way,
But keep thy Conscience for the Holy Day.
Pry into Trades, to Traffic, Train, and Trick,
And live not by the Dead, but by the quick.
And if thou be a Courtier, know thy Place;
But do not starve for only show of Grace:
But let thy Profit answer thy Expense,
Lest Want do prove a woeful Patience:
And thou do prove the Proverb often told,
A careless Courtier young, a Beggar old.
If that thou be a Scholar, and can Preach,
And know how the Vulgar sort to Teach;
Let never Conscience at thy Profit knock,
But sheer thy Sheep, and Fleece another Flock,
For be thou poor, what e're thy Preaching be,
Thy Parish will not care a Pin for thee.
If that thou be a Soldier, serve for Fame;
But let thy Golden Pay maintain the same:
For he that spends more than he gets by Fight,
Shall be a Beggar, though he be a Knight:
If thou a Lawyer be, then know the right:
But keep thy Client in a coming plight.
For how can thou a hearty pleading hold,
If that thy Tongue be not well tip'd with Gold?
And rich attired thou shall have room to stand,
And plead the Cause, what e're thou have in hand.
But barely clad, and come in poor array,
Thou may perhaps have hearing at Doomsday.
For though the Law be right, and Judge be just*
Yet with the Rich the Beggar may not thrust.
If thou a Merchant be, then know thy Trade,
And of thy Wars what reckoning will be made.
And be not Lavish in a lewd expense:
Lest Bankrupt prove a bad experience.
If that thou be a Crafts-man, know thy pains,
And let no Alehouse eat out all thy gains.
For if expense above thy getting go,
Thou will be quickly in the Beggars row.
What says the crafty Clown in clouted Shoes.
Time was ordained to get and not to lose.
What though the Poor lie starving in the Ditch,
It is the Dearth of Corn makes Farmers rich.
Wear not thy Shoes too short, nor Cloak too long;
Use thy Friends well, but do thy self no wrong.
Abandon Fools, make much of rising Wits;
But favor most that most thy profit fits.
Sit not up late unless it be for gain,
For want of sleep is hurtful to the Brain.
Come not at Brawls, no quarrels see thou make,
In a whole Skin it is best thy sleep to take.
Go not to Sea, whilst thou may live at Land,
Lest scaping Rocks thou fall upon a Sand.
Be sociable in every Company;
But have no hand in any Villainy.
Converse with Strangers, and learn Languages,
Sound their Estates, but not their Carriages.
Know their Diversities of Wares, their worth and prices,
But trouble not thy self with vain devises.
Aim still at profit, how so e're it grow,
Make the Wind serve thee whereso e're it blow.
For it is this Wealth, this Profit, and this Gain;
That dies the Color evermore in Grain.
Learn the Physicians and the Lawyers Fee,
And for thy Profit speak as fair as he.
Promise the one good speed, the other health.
In any course it is good to gather Wealth.
Learn all Diseases, and their several Cures,
And care not what the Patients Heart endures.
But give him one day grief, another ease,
Not as his Patience but his Purse does please.
Learn Cards and Dice and any cheating Play,
That may bring in thy Profit any way.
Learn how to stop a Card, or cog a Dye;
But shift it cleanly from the Gamesters Eye.
At Ruff and Trump, note how the Dealer rubs,
There is no Pack without the Knave of Clubs.
Dandle the Child, grow inward with the Nurse,
And think no Slavery base that fills the Purse.
Laugh with the Leacher at Maidens bashfulness;
And with the chaste at fleshly filthiness:
And with the Spend-thrift at the Misers Bags,
And with the Miser at the Beggars Rags.
Learn all Religions, be of every Sect;
But chiefly to thy Profit have respect.
In sum, of what Estate so e're thou be,
Learn to be rich, for that will hold with thee.
Persuade a Slave he is a Gentleman,
Though he be crept out of the Dripping-pan.
It is no matter, if his Purse can bear it,
His Rascal Pride will never blush to hear it.
Persuade a Clown that he is half a Knight,
And that his Wealth deserves the Place aright:
And his Maid Marrian, with her VVainscot-Face,
Might be a Lady, but for want of Grace:
And make her think that she is half a Queen,
And scarce on Earth is such another seen;
For Virtue, Beauty, Wit, Shape and Feature;
Though Heaven knows she is no such kind of Creature.
Thus if thou her applaud, it is no matter;
He is a Fool, for Profit, cannot flatter.
Commend a Soldier when he is in Crowns,
And swear a Knight must govern over Clowns.
In many Battles, how he Honor won,
Although, poor Coward, still away he run.
But yet thy Flattery be sure so to frame,
That thine may be the gain, though his the Fame.
Commend the Lawyer, and his Studies reading;
Admire his Judgment, and extol his Pleading.
But flatter so that if he get a Fee,
Thou may have on it a share as well as he.
Follow a Bishop with a world of praise,
And make him as the Load-star of thy Days;
Admire him, and extol him to the Skies,
But so that thou may get a Benefice,
A Vicaridge Cure, a Clark-ship, or some such
As will return thee profit small or much.
Commend the Merchant, honor his Adventure,
Who gets his Wealth by Danger, not Indenture;
Commend his Trade, his Traffic and his Truth,
The honor of his Age and toil of Youth;
But yet with all be sure to flatter so,
That to thy Purse no Price of Money grow*
But on his Board thy Trencher may be laid,
Or borrowed Money never to be paid.
And tell what lack ye, that he lacks no Wit.
But for his Head that he deserves to fit
On higher Seats than the Church-Warden's Stools:
For he has more Wit than a thousand Fools*
But yet in feeding of his idle Vain,
Be sure to pick out some old privy gain.
A Rapier, Dagger, Stockings, Boots or Shoes,
Something does well, though Beggars must not choose.
Tell Mistress Minkins, she that keeps the Shop,
She is a Ship that bears a gallant Top;
She is a Lady for her lovely Face,
And that her Countenance has a Princely Grace.
Her Eyes Divine, commanding thy Devotions,
Though they in Truth do watch each others motions.
Tell her, her Breath perfumes the very Air,
Though it be naught but Powder in her Hair.
Then bite the Lip, and wink, and hang the Head,
And give a sigh, as if thy Heart were dead:
And show strange Passions of Affections sense,
That she may pity, love Sir Reverence.
But let the issue of this cunning be,
That from her Purse some Profit come to thee.
A piece of Satin, Fustian, or some Stuff,
A ^alling Band, or a three-double Ruff,
A Hat or Shirt, a Cloak cloth or a Ring;
Knives, Purses, Gloves, or some such pretty thing:
For somewhat has some savor, it is the gain
That still Invention gives the sweetest vain.
Why tell a Cobbler he is half a King,
When on his Patches he can sit and sing,
And knock his Last, and whet his cutting Knife,
There is no Kingdom to a merry Life:
But yet in telling of thy idle Tale,
Be sure at last to get a Pot of Ale.
For this same Nothing brings no World about,
Better Play small Games then be quite shut out.
If that thy Wife be fair, and thou be poor,
Let her stand like a Picture at thy Door;
Where though she do but pick her Fingers ends,
Fair Eyes, fond looks will gain a World of Friends:
Play at bo-peeps, see me, and see me not,
It comes off well, that is so closely got.
And evermore, I say, well fare the event,
That pays the Charges of the House and Rent.
But if thy Wife be old, thy Daughter young,
And fair of Face, or fluent of her Tongue;
If by her Suitors Silver may be had,
Bear with small faults, the good will help the b^d.
If thy Maidservants be kind-hearted Wenches,
And closely make kind bargains on thy Benches:
If by their plasures may thy Profit grow,
VVink at a VVanton; who has not been so?
Make love to Twenty Wenches in a day,
But let no Eyelids lead thy Heart away.
But when thou find'st good store of Lands and Gold,
Then lay in close to purchase a Freehold,
And be not squeamish at a nice conceit,
That may persuade thee from a pleasing bait:
Though she be Toothless, and Six-score years old,
She makes up all defects that has but Gold.
Get all contentment that the world can give,
For after Death who knows how we live?
Come not within the Verdict of a Jury,
Nor yet approach a Tyrant in his Fury;
Plot for a Pudding, or a piece of Sowse;
The Cat would never watch but for a Mouse;
The Fox would never hunt but for his Prey,
And workmen but for gain would play all day.
It is this Wealth, this Profit, and this Gain,
That makes the Labourer sing away his pain.
If thou be Rich, and hat'st another Pride,
That he may go afoot, and thou may ride,
Find means to feed his swelling humor so,
That high conceit may above compass go:
Till Fortune's frowns do so his folly check,
That malcontent do after break his Neck.
Then lay in for his Lands, his Goods, his Place:
But still be sure to keep thy self in Grace,
And make no Conscience to attend on him,
To keep the Door where Devils dance within;
Find a Rich Heir, and note his Disposition,
How he is given to Baseness or Ambition;
And with thy Lending lay his Land aboard,
That he may be thy Slave, and thou his Lord.
If that thy Friend do lack a little Wit,
And in his humor have an idle fit
To take a Wife, and use thee for his Woing,
Speak for thy Friend, but for thy self be doing.
For every Friend is to his Friend a Debtor,
To love him as himself, but that no better.
But for thy self, if thou have got a Wife,
Make show to love her dearly as thy Life;
Though for thy quiet thou could be content
A little charge were at her Burial spent;
And let that charge be of thy Grief the Ground,
For many Wives are better lost than found.
But if thou run into the second Matching,
Be sure take heed, for fear of Cunny-catching;
Who in their hold will undermine so fast,
They Will leave their Lordship like the Land of Waste:
Suspect thy Wit, be weary of thy Will,
And learn to spare, but never learn to spill.
Part with no Coin but upon good Condition,
With humble Countenance shadow thy Ambition,
Creep, crouch, and kneel, until thou be aloft,
But then fit fast for fear thou fall not soft;
Be Rich, I say, (my Boy) be Rich and wise,
Gold is a precious Metal for the Eyes;
Gold is a Cordial to a drooping Heart,
Infusing Virtue into every Part;
Gold brings Wisdom, Courage, and does raise
The Spirits, and renews the old Man's days.
Why, Rich Men have much Money and gay Geer,
In goodly Houses, and most dainty Cheer;
Fair Wives, fair Pictures, Plays and Morrice-Dances,
And many Cheats that come by many Chances:
Fine Civet Boxes, sweet Perfumes and Waters,
And Twenty other suchlike kind of Matters:
While the Poor Man that pines for want of Friends,
May sit and sigh, and pick his Fingers ends,
And every Morning wash his Face with Tears,
And wipe his blubbered Cheeks with shriveled Hairs.
And walk abroad for sorrows Recreation,
Or starve himself, or feed on Contemplation,
Make Curt'sie to the Shadow of a Lord,
And all to get a look, or half a Word;
Blush and fall back when gay folk come in Place,
And start to look a Lady in the Face.
If thou talk to the Air, where no Man hears thee,
Or plod'st alone where no Man will come near thee,
And choose recording of a heavy care,
Thou may feed long upon a hungry fare;
Till some good Knight or learned Gentleman,
That will not be a Machevillian,
But can make uses of afflicted Brains,
And gather profit from their toiling Pains,
May hap to Grace thee with a Countenance,
Give thee a Blew-Coat with a Cognizance;
An old cast Doublet, or a pair of Boots,
Feed thee with Brown-Bread, small Beer, Herbs and Roots,
And now and then perhaps a piece of Meat,
That scarce a Man would give a Dog to Eat:
Or after happily some good Service done,
Make thee a Tutor to his youngest Son.
Laugh at these Fools, and speak in scorn of pelf,
Yet care for nothing but to enrich thy self.
For those do say that do of wise things Treat,
If thou be Rich, thou quickly will it be Great.
Think no Man wise but he that gathers Wealth,
And keeps a Diet that preserves the Health.
Travel with ease, take heed of taking Cold;
What makes more cheerful than full Bags of Gold?
Commit no secrets to thy second self,
For never yet was Ape but played the Elfe.
Set Snares for Woodcocks, Pitfals for small Birds,
And catch a Fool with nothing but fair Words.
Kill not a Fly, and let a Flea alone,
That sucks the Blood, but never hurts the Bone.
'File not thy Fingers with a filthy Slut,
And ride not often on a gall'd-back Cut.
Fear not a Shadow, but avoid a Danger,
And do not keep a Jade at Rack and Manger.
Dissuade no Princes from their choice of Pleasure,
Nor a Rich Miser from his love of Treasure:
If he be Rich, whatever-so he be,
Seem in thy humor to be just as he;
If he be Poor, then let him beg alone,
It is a Trade that few grow rich upon.
Learn to know Kingdoms, Nations, and their Natures,
Their Laws, their Judgments, Male and Female Creatures;
But in all Notes, note chiefly this of all,
How thou may rise whoever hap to fall.
For whatsoever honest minds surmise,
To increase Wealth is best of Policies.
Be rich therefore, I say, be rich my Son,
For Wealth will sway the World when all is done.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. Burrel, 1681.


