A MISSIVE OF CONSOLATION: SENT FROM FLANDERS, TO THE CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND.

LUC. 21.19. In patientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras. 1 COR. 1.18.
Verbum crucis pereuntibus quidem stultitia est: iis autem qui salvi fiunt, id
est, nobis, Dei virtus est. AT LOUAIN, Permissu Superiorum. An. 1647.

A preface to the Reader.
AFter Nehemias had informed himself of the men of Juda, that came from his
country, of the state of his brethren remaining in the land, 2 Esd. 1, 2.
and heard that the remnant left in the Province were in great affliction and
reproach, he mourned and lamented their case with so sensible an affection, as
the sad tincture of his heart had so much discolored his face, that it seemed
to have an unsuitable dye to his office of Cup Bearer, in the King Artaxerxes
his presence, though God designed the drawing great light upon his nation, from
out the darkness of his looks.

This allusion me thinks may be well fitted to this Mission of my thoughts into
my country; for upon the relations of some of our refugi at brethren, coming
out of our country, of the great affliction and reproach which the remainder of
them groan under, and of the demolishment of the walls of spiritual
Jerusalem, I may without affectation, avow the having wept and mourned many
days in the sight of my Master, and I may own the honor of being a
Cup Bearer to such a King, as is Sovereign of all our suffering brethren, and
he needed not the symptoms of my face, for the indication of my heart, but
knew my sorrows to import a solicitation of relief for my distressed country;
and so of his own first gracious motion, proposed the sending me into the land,
with a greater Commission then I durst have pretended, which is, the bringing
this his Maendat of consolation and provision from him, to repair the Temples
of the holy Ghost, which may be shaken by the battery of this persecution; for
humane Nature in extreme pressures, is very apt to call out with J^b, what is
my strength that I can sustain it, or what is my end that I should do
^patiently? but I hope in God, all such questions will find satisfactory
anwsers, from our compassionate Prince of peace, in the contents of my
Commission; concerning which, I may say sincerely, my mind did at first make to
our great King, rather the answer of Moses, then the suit of Nehemias, for I
was much more inclined upon the first suggestion to me of this Mission, to
answer I beseech thee Lord, Exodus 4.14.
to send whom thou will send, then to propound unto the King, the sending of me
unto my Nation upon this great design, but when I had my own ruminations,
turned into an order, from such a mouth I ought to account, as an Organ of Gods
voice to me, Exodus 4.14.
me thought I heard this Command, Go on and I will be in thy mouth, and will
teach thee what thou shall speak, so that it is the hand of Obedience, that
has moved my pen into the motion of a ready writer.

Nevertheless, after this Injunction issued by the spiritual Court, unto
which I defer all my own conceptions, I put in this plea, for a suspension
of the Order, which may be as pertinently imparted unto you, in respect of your
reading, as it was suggested by me, in regard of my writing this Treatise; this
it was, that God had long ago set open a Granary of this spiritual food, by
the hands of a charitable Joseph, in the time of the first famine, that came
upon the land in this kind, and this Magazine, entitled an Epistle of Comfort,
stands open and accessible to the whole people, and contains sufficient
provisions, respectively to the exigences of all conditions; so as this Missive
of Consolation, which seems but an overlay of the same Metal, might rather
seem an exuberancy of Zeal, then an exhibition of a requisite supply.

To this my demurre, I have been answered, that the spiritual appetite of
sick man, which is your present estate, must be treated, as the corporeal,
which is not excited by familiar, though the best diet: novelty in these cases
is often requisite to introduce nourishment; to which reason I did acquiesce,
considering indeed that if Authors had not still the curious infirmity of
Readers, to justify their labor, in melting and casting of old matter into
new forms and figures to attract curiosity to lecture, even the best spirits
of our days, needed not sail out of their studies, to venture upon new
discoveryes, since the whole intellectual Globe of Christianity has been long
since inhabited, and perfectly cultivated, by the plantations of excellent
Authors: But the nature of man considered, I may rather feaxe the finding too
many sick fancies in these evil days, longing for variety of comfort, then
doubt that this new transfiguration of it should prove redundant to your minds,
as already filled with the precepts of Catholic Consolation. Wherefore I may
hope the newness of this work may reconcile you to the prejudices of some
noveltyes you may meet in it, as the strangeness of some words, and the
errors of a strange Press; but since these thoughts are addressed to such as
are not likely to prosecute the rigor of the law against them, for having
taken their character beyond sea, and returning into England, to assist their
countrymen by their faculties, I need not much seek protection for the
illegal and questionable points of the impression.

And surely considering a strange tongue, put into the mouth of the Press, a
little stammering may be tolerated, specially, when the Errata's you will
find here, are of a much more dispensable kind, then those we find in your
Country Presses; so that even the errors you shall meet in these leafes, may
serve toward the design of this work, of recommending patience to you, while
the errors of English Presses minister unto you provocations, and as I had
some pain, to make this foreign Mouth speak English, so if I have taken some
liberty in making English speak sometimes foreign Language, I may be allowed
this license, in compensation of the other part of my constraint, especially
when I may pretend to the courtesy of a stranger, in this point, of excusing
some Outlandish accent in my tongue, having been nursed with many several
milks, and sucked but little at the breasts of my Mother; but for that milk,
which I have drawn from the breast of my spiritual Mother, the Roman
Catholic Church, I hope in God there is none of that, turned or sowered by
any novelty passing through my pen; for this matter can have no so ill
recommendation as novelty, and variety in this kind were a very superfluous
present to you in these times; wherefore I humbly refer every line, drawn by my
pen, to the rule of the most holy measures, of the Catholic Church, and
account this religious deference, as the salt of the Sacrifice, which is no
less requisite then the frankincense, to give it an odor of sweetness.

I shall therefore send my part of this work, justified with this protestation
of the Prophet Jeremy, Jere. 17.16. I am not troubled following thee the
Pastor, and the day of man I have not desired thou know.
ego non sum turbatus, to pastorem sequens, and diem hominis non desideravitu
scis; for they who have given all their days to God, are ill advised, if they
pretend any part of the assignment of their exchange, in the night of this Age,
or in the vapors of the breaths of Men, and those of our function, that affect
much a return of human praise, from the offices of their vocation, may be said
to burn their own fingers while they are lighting the Candlestick of the
Temple; therefore my address of this Missive shall be

Non nobis Domine non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. An Introduction to the
following Discourse.
WHen Saint Paul (our Christian Hercules) had enumerated so many of his private
labors, 2 Cor. 11.13. Nothing beyond.
as one might have thought a non plus ultra might have been set up upon them,
he seems as it were to slight all those so excellent works, and to esteem all
personal pressures, Those things which are external. Who is weak and I am not
weak? who is scandalized and I am not burnt?
but as the outworks of charity; and so quitting ea quae extrinsecus sunt,
when he will glory in the strength of his charity, he sets it out in his
care and solicitude for the Churches distresses, and so makes Quis infirmatur,
and ego non infirmor? quis scandalizatur, and ego non uror? the vertical point
of the Pyramide of his suffering, and acting charity, which remains as an
entire monument of his glory, after the ruin of all theirs, whose persecutions
erected it, and raised it to that sublimity of virtue.

And if our Charities have such an analogy with S. Paul's, as our vocations
have, and our zeal bear as much similitude to his, as the face of our present
times does to his days, our part, which seems off from the public stage of
persecution, may be admitted as the most sorrowful and distressing of all
other; for surely all exterior burdens are lighter to our senses, then an
interior solicitude in a public concernment is to our spirit, especially when
it is in relation to the passions of the Church of Christ.

And this is our case, Solicitude of the Church. Cant. 8.
who have solicitudinem Ecclesiae impressed upon our spirit, in an indelible
character; so as there is none of your brethrens weaknesses, that does not make
an impression, as the Spouses seal upon our heart, and upon our arm. And it
may be, the larger our prison is, the straiter the pressure of it proves unto
us, as it is a restraint upon the exercise of our functions, in consolating and
ministering personally to you, in this your fiery trial.

Wherefore our hearts being exempt from this separation, they take fire at the
flame you are in, and profess, that none of you are scandalized, with whom
they do not burn; insomuch, that the sparkles of that furnace you are in, fly
even through the sea upon us. For every report of a fresh vexation fallen upon
you, raises and sharpneth the ardour of our fellow-feeling of your
tribulations; Cant. 8.7. Many waters cannot quench charity, nor shall floods
overwhelm it.
so that we may say with the Spouse, Aquae multae non potuerunt extinguere
charitatem, nec flumina obruent illam, since the fire of your temptations and
trials in England, passes over seas, and burns us in Flanders, and there is
no matter so apt to take and entertain this flame, as our holy unction.

Desiring therefore much to write you some news for your comfort, in these
times wherein the want of Priests among you is none of your least afflictions,
I will tell you, there is none of you which have not a kind of character of
Priesthood upon you, being all obliged to offer up spiritual hoasts of
resignation and self-relinquishment, and to lay all your natural senses and
apprehensions of your sufferings upon the Altar of the Cross, in adoration of
Gods design upon you; and thus in conformity to Christ, you are to become your
selves both the Priests, and the oblations. For whiles your hearts offer up
your selves and your substances to Gods holy judgments, your souls exercise a
kind of office of Priesthood upon your bodies and goods, which are the
material part of the oblation; and by this consecrating of your sufferings,
they who would exterminate Priesthood in England, shall consecrate as many of
these Priests, as they lay their persecuting hand upon; and as they despoile
you of your fortunes, 1 Pet. 2.6.
they furnish you with the fatter victimes, in the function of this your holy
Priesthood, of offering up these spiritual hoasts, acceptable to God by JESUS
CHRIST. Take therefore this order from the Psalmist, Psalm. 4. Sacrifice ye the
sacrifice of justice, and hope in our Lord.
Sacrificate sacrificium justitiae, and sperate in Domine; and by this your
meritorious exercise of Catholic Religion, you shall find, I hope, less want
of the Ministry of our real Priesthood among you, which may be thus supplied,
even by your own necessities, while you make of all your deprivements, matter
of sanctification, by your faithful acceptance of them; and by this
disposition, you enter into those holy Orders of Sacrificers, which Saint Paul
gave the Primitive Christians in your cases, while you exhibit your bodies a
living host, holy, Romans 12.1
pleasing to God.

Nor does this kind of spiritual sacrificature, claim a less precedent then
even the Son of God; for these were part of the daily Sacrifices he offered
his Father while he was upon the earth, his privations, incommodities, and
destitutions, his not having so much as a house to put his head in, was in this
kind his daily evening sacrifice, and these his quotidian sufferances, did
continually mediate and interpeale for our remissions. You may therefore now be
said to be successors of this Priesthood of Christ's life, which is, as I may
say, a third kind of Priesthood Christ instituted by his life, differing from
the old of Aaron, and that of the order of Melchisedec; for it is an offering
up to God, the want of bread and wine, for a sacrifice of selfe-resignation.
For why may not Christ's hunger and thirst, and his other wants and exigencies
be fitly said to have instituted this holy order of self-sacrificing and
offering up all our temporal distresses to Gods pleasure, in conformity to
this quotidian oblation of Christ's life? so as those of you, who are not called
to that sacerdotall function which Christ exercised in his death, when he was
both Priest and Sacrifice, (somewhat like whereunto many of us, have happily by
the grace of God, been admitted by Martyrdom) seem all called to this holy
order, consecrated by his life, of relinquishing all temporalities, and
offering up your daily distresses, as sacrifices to the glory of God and his
Church.

And we, who in all humility may say, 2 Cor. 5.20 We are Legates for Christ.
Pro Christo Legation^ fungimur, being suspended by the violences of these
times, from the execution of our commission, ought by all the means feisable,
seek to transport our discharges to you; and since we cannot import our duties
in specie, I have desired by Gods motion, to make thus over to you, some little
parcel of our debt.

Saint Paul, when he was poorer then we, gloryed, that being needy he enriched
many, and having nothing he possessed all things, and the wealth he transmitted
by his letter to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.
was this coin of the stamp of the holy Spirit, much patience in tribulations,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in prisons; these were the revenues
of the Primitive Christians, who let out all their estates to their persecutors
for this Rent (Saint Paul was so well paid in) of superabundo gaudio in omni
tribulatione. I do abound exceedingly in joy in all our tribulation.
We then (who are Saint Paul's heirs in his office, though not of his personal
estate of grace) may likewise lawfully aspire to that benediction of enriching
others, while we our selves are needy and indigent.

To make then a convenient present for you in these your necessities, I may
open the tombs of the Martyrs, and Primitive Christians, where so much of this
spiritual treasure is enclosed, and draw out from their rich lives and
examples a plentiful support for your virtues, in all the oppressions of your
fortunes; for Gods providence is such toward the relief of his necessitous
children, as all the wealth which the vessels of election had in them when
they were temporally cast away, is not lost, but rather reserved expressly for
the succeeding exigences of other times, descending upon the stream of the
Churches traditions. And thus out of the wrecks of Martyrs, the chains of
Confessors, and the Testaments of the Fathers, the Church makes a vast
treasure of persuasion, and exemplarity; which duly considered, I may our of
this blessed store, present you with sufficient exhortations to patience and
longanimity in your present practices of true Christianity.

I is the nature of man, in any private affliction, presently to look over the
single table book of his own conscience, to try, if by the collation of his
actions with his sufferings, he can make a congruous connection of the sense of
Gods justice out of his faults, and his penalty put together. And in common
calamities, we straightwayes resort to all the Church and State-Books, that lie
open to our memory, and revolve them studiously, to make this coherence between
the occasion and the imposition which lies upon the public; And when we find
nothing satisfactory upon this inquest, then by busy retrospection into the
Annals and records of times, we set our thoughts to find out a coherence in the
present sentence of God, with the precedent irritation, and (though a long
Parenthesis might seem to break off the references between the one and the
other) we study to make a connection of the sense of the antecedent causes, with
the emergent consequences, and we are so fond, to satisfy our reason in this
(which seems a propriety belonging to it) as we are apt to admit great
incongruities, in the collations of times, to make good our sorting of causes
to their effects, thereby to join any probable coherence between our
provocations, and our punishments, because it is some recreation to the pride
of man, even in the time of his penance, to be able, as he presumes, to read
the handwriting on the wall (though it be his own sentence) after the
weighing of Gods provocation.

But there are some, Psalm. 38. O Lord illuminate my darkness, that I may know
what is wanting to me.
who (it may be) do sincerely make this enquiry with the Psalmist, of Domine
illumina tenebras meas, ut sciam quid desit mihi; and such a search sometimes
finds case in the disquisition of the reasons of Gods judgments, when it
enquireth not into the equity of them, but pleads for some light, to
facilitate a correspondency to Gods design upon us; but when it is curiosity
that rangeth to retrive the order and connection of causes to events, then
commonly this agitation proves the most laborious part of their perplexity,
when they are so earnest in the Pharisees Quousque animam nostram tollu? dic
nobis palam; this desiring God to speak plainer to us, is a familiar
unmannerlynesse in our nature. And thus we intricate our minds the more, by
this turning and winding our thoughts about, in this maze of co-ordination of
causes and consequences in the changes of times, and dazzle our selves very
commonly in that inaccessible light, where Gods providence resides inseparable
from his essence.

And I may well presume there are of both these sorts of solicitudes amongst
you, and that some with a reverend zeal to Gods justice, mixed with a natural
desire of some refrigeration in the ardours of these times, do call with the
holiest of Kings, Psalm. 88.47. How long O Lord? Job. 10.2. Tell me who thou
judge me so.
Usque quo Domine? and others, in some more humane impatience and estuation of
spirit, do cry out with Job, Indica mihi, cur me ita judicas.

The message sent to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna in this same exigence,
may be well divided into an answer, to both these interrogations. To the first,
which may be an humble solicitation of relief, this part seems to belong,
Dicit primus, and novissimus, scio tribulationem tuam, Apoc. 2.9. I know thy
tribulation and thy poverty, but thou art rich. Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer, be faithful until death, and I will give thee the crown of
life.
and pau pertatem tuam, sed dives es; because patience and conformity to Gods
order, in all his imposures on us, is a more real treasure, then any we can
be despoiled of, by the worlds pillaging. And to the last, which may be a more
anxious petition, this other part seems to be a pertinent reference, Nihil
horum time as quae passurus es: esto fidelis usque ad mortem, and dabo tibi
coronam vitae. This may silence curiosity, in the demand of the cause, or the
limits of our affliction; since it sets the term of our fidelity in
suffering, no nearer then the end of our life; so as being enjoined not to seek
an exemption until our death, we should enquire no more why we suffer, then
why we live. In conformity to this principle, God has been pleased to suggest
to me the presenting you this animadversion, which may solve the difficulties
of many controverted points in our weak nature concerning affliction, namely,
that you are to state your case, as entered into 3. Covenants of sufferance, out
of any of which, I hope in God, there is not any of you would agree to be
ejected, even upon this contract, of being raised from Joseph's chain up to his
chariot and dominion in Egypt. The first is, as you are men; the second, as
you are Christians; and the third, as you are Catholics.

A MISSIVE OF CONSOLATION.
CHAP. I. Of the Covenant of Suffering, as Men, the Sons of Adam.
TO the first Covenant of sufferance you know we all give our voice, by a
natural instinct, before we have scarce enjoyed so much as light for it; and
our eyes may be said to set their mark to it, before we are able to set our
hands to this article of eating in the sweat of our brows: for our eyes pay
their sweat, which is their tears, for what we taste, even before we be able
to receive bread for it; and as we grow into a state to set our hands to the
Covenant of labor, we know there is scarce any thing we relish much, that does
not cost us sweat and contention; nay we are of such a constitution, that we
can have no kind of delectation, the which some want and suffering must not
precede, to affect us with the gust of it. So as we are sentenced to pay a
great Fine of Pain beforehand for all those fleeting and transitory pleasures,
which at best do but run over our senses, and so pass away, and leave them
again in their drouth and privation. And most commonly, the advance of all our
pain and passion, renders us nothing of what they negotiate. So as a man,
when he looks upon himself in the best reflexes his temporary wishes can
make him, shall find this brand and stigmate of Adam upon his forehead, Genesis
3.10. Thou shall eat in the sweat of thy brows.
In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane. And this is a mark which God stamped upon
Adam, of another kind of signification then that he set upon Cain, for this
directs all things that occur to man in this life, to strike him, and wound
his temporal estate in some kind or other; insomuch, as all the creatures do
in their several manners execute this sentence upon the sons of Adam, not
allowing themselves to be enjoyed by them, without stinging them in some sort,
either with the anxietie of their appetite to them, preceding fruition, or the
distaste of satiety following it, or with the vexation of a deprivement of
them, during the ardour of their affections to them. So as we may well say,
that every thing we find now, assaults our felicity in this life, in some sort
to kill it, and to revive to us the memory of our Covenant of sufferance we
entered into as soon as we entered into light. For which reason, the a
Ecclesiasticus 40.1 Great travel is created to all men, and a heavy yoke upon
the children of Adam, from the day of their coming forth of their mothers
womb, until the day of their burying in the mother of all; their cogitations,
and fears of the heart, imagination of things to come, and the day of their
ending, from him that sits upon the glorious seat, unto him that is humbled
in earth and ashes.
Wiseman proclaims elegantly the tenor of it, saying, Occupatio magna creata
est omnibus hominibus, jugum grave super filios Adam, a die exitus de ventre
matris, (...).
usque in diem sepulturae in matrem omnium, cogitationes little, and timores
cordis, adinventio expectationis, and dies finitionis: a residente super sedem
gloriosam, usque ad humiliatum in terra and, cinere.

Neither need we look back upon the defaced images of all conditions, in the
dead prints of story, we have such living figures of them before our eyes, as
must needs imprint upon our thoughts a lively character of the deplorable state
of all mortals: Whereby out of the ruins of those houses, whereof you lament
the demolishments, you may pick up some materials, to build in your minds this
frame, of the instable constructure of the greatest strengths of humane
happiness; Eccles. 10. I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes walking
on the ground as servants.
and thus your friends may in their fall some way support your virtue, and your
patience, when you consider how incident it is to the vicissitudes of this
world, to expose unto us that changeable Scene, whereof Solomon reports this
to us, Vidi servos in equis, and principes ambulantes super terram quasi
servos. And in such capital Letters as these you may now read the articles of
the Covenant of sufferance, which man is engaged in, whereof Job makes a
manifest, is signed even by all the Princes of the earth, for we find this
under their hands, in all records of them, in some part of their lives, Job
14.1. Man born of a woman and living a short time, is replenish^d with many
miseries.
Homo natus ex muliere vivens brevi tempore, repletur multis miseriis. In so
much, as after man by sin had made misery for himself in this life, it
seems a mercy of God, to have joined death with it, before which, even the
light of nature is sufficient to show the Philosophers, that none can be
counted happy. And in order to this proof, we may remarke, that he who first
abused death by employing it to make sin, was thought worthy of no less a
punishment then the protraction of life, which he had made so afflicting by his
fearing to dye; and thus he was made his own torturer, by the ignorance of the
evil of life, and of the good of death, which he had so much demcrited the
knowing of, for his brothers goodness, was thought worthy to be quickly
relieved by death, and his malice, was adjudged to the pain of apprehending
it, and to the supplice of a long life. With good cause then may this be well
reflected on, that the first virtuous and godly man was quickly removed out of
this hedge of thorns his father had set, and re-conveyed toward Paradise; and
the first impious murderer, was sentenced to live in the pungencie and
asperity of these pricks and briars of the earth. But yet such is Gods Wisdom,
as he can extract medicines out of all the Brambles and thistles our earth is
overrun with, and minister them to our infirmity; for he applies even those
griefs and sorrows which sin introduced to the expulsion of sin it self.
So as this is an operation, worthy of Gods invention, by the labor and
exercising of the body to enlarge the freedom of the soul, even by this
unfortifying of her prison, in which she is kept the closer, the stronger the
dolectation of our senses grows upon us. Therefore the distancing of the
conveniencie of the flesh, dilateth the commodities and freedom of the spirit;
so as it is a divine artifice, which God uses, by hanging weights of
sufferings and pressures upon our senses, to wind up rather then to clo^ our
spirits, which are the motions, and resorts of the whole frame; and in
probation of this experiment, David says, Psalm. 4.1. In tribulation thou have
enlarged me.
In tribulatione dilatasti me.

And it is most observable, that God ministered this receipt (drawn out of
thorns) to all those sons of Adam, whose minds he meant to purge, and
clarify; For all the holy Patriarks, took this detersive potion of bitterness
and affliction in this life; and it deserves our attention, to note, how the
nearer the time drew to the manifestation of the Son of God, (who was designed
the man of sorrow) the passions of Gods children grew the bitterer, and the
sharper. For the Patriarks were exercised by diverse mortifications, which were
not capital, they staid upon the distresses of their life: some of the
Prophets as they approached to this fulness of the time of passion, tasted, by
anticipation, of the cup of death, in which they were all but sigures of
Christ's cup-beares, as Esaias, Jeremy, Zachary, and others, and so those
sufferings, which in time were the least distant from Christ (as those we find
recorded in the Maccabees) came also the nearest to the horror, 2 Match. 7.
and acerbity of the passions of Christ and Christians, for they went not
straight to death, but turned about, to take a compass of tortures, to make
death bitter to those they could not make it terrible; as you may read in the
execution of the mother, and her seven children; The very dawning of the day of
passion, which was coming on, gave them this light of fortitude.

It seems this weight of sufferance, and sorrow was all ways in so natural
a motion upon the children of God, that it moved the faster, the nearer it came
to the center, The man of sorrow, who being the Son of God by nature, was the
center of all the sons by grace and adoption; and therefore all the bloody
sacrifices of the law of nature, and ceremonial, tended and pointed to him, as
their last term and direction; in order whereunto S. Paulinus sticks not to
say, that Christ from the beginning of all ages suffers, and triumphs in all
the Churches persecutions; in Abel, he is killed by a brother; in Noah, he is
derided by a son; in Abraham, he is a pilgrim; in Isaac, a victime; and in
Jacob, a servant; in Joseph, he is sold; in Moses, left a derelict; in the
Prophets, he is stoned, starved, and vilified; so as all the lines of holy
passions, drawn from the circumference of all ages, tend, and resort to this
center of the man of sorrow, the Lamb of God, slain from the beginning of the
World.

These evidences may prove unto us clearly enough the first bond, or Covenant
of sufferances, we are entered into as men; (and even in that notion we seem to
be implicit Christians, since he who suffered sufficiently for all, makes all
virtuous affliction referrable to him;) It had been very easy for me to have
exhibited a more precise manifest of this our first designation to sufferings,
under the notion of men, there are so many excellent draughts of it stamped by
the moralists, or naturalists of all ages; but I chose to deflect a little from
the letter of the text, that I might make the inferences, rather strongly
useful, then critically uniforme; and therefore as I have already stepped
beyond the out-court of the Gentiles, into part of the Temple, I will not call
back to Philosophy, to borrow any demonstrations of this Principle, wherein the
proofs are so accumulate, as all sects of Philosophers which differ so much,
concerning the point of the good of man's life, concur in the confession of the
multiplicity of the ills thereof. But I shall not, as I said, walk aside into
the gardens, and flowery beds of the Gentiles, because I conceive it more proper
for your state, to have some wholesome confection to take, then a nosegay of the
flowers of Philosophy, to smell to only, in these unhealthful times; for the
the large contemplation of miseries of human nature, is not a receipt direct,
and expreffe enough, for your present exigencies, for that is but as it were a
good air of meditation, that may be sufficient for such as are but in light
ordinary indispositions of fortune, but your distempers require some more
forceable application of comfort, by taking into your minds, the strongest
obligations to patience, and longanimity. I will therefore pass on, Jab 14.22.
His flesh while he lives shall have sorrow, and his soul shall mourn upon
himself
to the other two assignments of suffering, which are upon you, as Christians,
and as Catholics, and leave this our single humanity sealed with Jobs
signature, Caro ejus, dum vivet, dolebit, and anima ejus super semetipso
lugebit.

CHAP. II. of the Covenant of suffering as Christians, the sons of Christ.
What we have said of our first obligation, may well extenuate all we are
bound to suffer by the second. For when we behold the infelicity of our
condition, as we are men, we may well wonder more, that we were preferred to be
Christians, then that we are continued to be sufferers. For sure, if God had
consulted with Adam, after he saw his own nakedness, Mat. 8.8. Lord I am not
worthy that thou should come under my roof, but only say the word and I
shall be healed.
and the annexure of all the miseries thereunto, whether he should have bowed
the heavens, and have come down, to repair this his ruinous condition, by
investing his miserable humane nature, he would have answered with the humble
Centurion, Domine non sum dignus ut intres sub tectum meum, sed tantum dic
verbo and sanabor, seeing he, who made all by one word could have redintegrated
Adam, with a word, remaining in the simplicity of his divine nature, without
the Word being made flesh; and being as it were, unmade himself (as the
Apostle warrants us to say) by taking that flesh upon him, which was become, as
it were, man's prison, so far was it from being worthy to be the receptacle of
God.

When we consider then, how God chose this way of commiferating our nature, not
to purge it, by his power, but even by the very infirmity thereof, by taking
the passiblenesse of it upon him, we cannot deny, the suffering part to be the
most beneficial property of it, since God made use of that only for the
restoration of it; wherefore, the feeling that portion of humane nature upon
us, which is the most ennobled by Gods election, and preference, cannot rightly
be accounted a prejudiced condition; whereupon we may conclude, that the
blessing of being Christians, may easily reconcile us to the obligation of
being sufferers; for what can be the reason why Christ, when by his pains he
took away the sting of sin, would not also take off the points of sufferings
in this life, which are but thorns of that plant, but because his passions had
infused such a quality into our pains, as might produce this strange effect in
our nature, to make our root the less capable of bearing fruit, by the
excrescence, and growth of these springs out of it. For temporal affliction
springs cut of sin, as out of the root thereof, and nothing dries up, and
infecundateth so much the radical, fructifying vigor of this root, as the
springing up of temporal miseries and distresses; so as the fruit of sin
which is death, is killed the soonest by the fertility of sufferings in this
life.

Since Christ has then by the virtue of his Crown of thorns imparted this
faculty to the asperities of our life, of taking off the growth, as his did the
guilt of sin, we need not wonder, why he has left all these temporal
bitternesses upon our nature, which he himself took, expressly to taste of in
our nature; so as we may be said to become the more Christians, the more we are
called to be Patients. Which Position we shall find the more clearly
demonstrated to us, the farther we advance into the Principles of Christianity.

S. Paul, when he wrote to the Romans, in those times, when in a parallel of
your cases, the Christians were partly immured up in prisons, and partly
expelled to the adjoining fields, thought (it seems) to sweeten their
condition to them, by representing, that Mortification and Sufferance was their
calling and profession. For he asks them, as of a notorious thing, Whether
they knew not this to be the Constitution of Christianity, saying, Romans 6.3.
Are you ignorant that all we who are baptized in Christ Jesus in his death, we
are baptized?
An ignoratis quicunque baptizati sumus in Christo Jesu, in morte ejus
baptizati sumus? Intimating, that our first incorporation into the body of
Christ, is in effect an expiration to this world, and a translation by the
virtue of the death of Christ, into such a sort of life, as he had pattern'd to
us, by the inception, progress, and consummation of his life. And the Apostle
presses thus the proof of this assertion, Romans 6.4. For we are buried
together with him in baptism into death.
Consepulti enim sumus cum illo per baptismum in mortem, to evince this
position, that our mundanity is drowned and buried in our Christening, and that
the life of Christ, which was a continued part of mortification, is to be (as
it were) our breath and animation. And while we are in this spiritual manner
buried in the life of Christ, that is, covered and enclosed with indignities
and oppressions, we are acting that part we took upon us in Baptism, where we
listed our selves into that Militia, which was erected by him, who killed death
by dying, and has left the same Discipline to all his Soldiers, to destroy
death by dying to the world; Mortifications therefore must needs be the proper
duties of that service a Christian is upon, and his pay is conditioned rather
upon his suffering, then his acting, as the Apostle proceeds to testify, For
if we become complanted to the similitude of his death, we shall be also of his
resurrection.
Si enim complantati facti sumus similitudini mortis ejus, simul resurrectionis
erimus; so as in a Christians case, the wages of death is life, for if he die
here by a privation of the carnal life of this world, he performs the
condition of his life everlasting. For which reason S. Paul, who was the great
Commander of the Gentiles in this militancy, (where by this kind of dying,
death is swallowed up in victory) has left us his Discipline in Quotidie
morior, 1 Cor. 15. I die daily.
and he gives us those orders, to be the followers of him, as he was of
Christ, whom he began not to follow until he was overthrown in the command he
had in this world, and was (as it were) resuscitated by the same hand that had
killed him. We may remember, he was revived by what is distructive to this
life, by being almost famished, and illuminated by this worlds darkness, and
restored to corporal light, only to see how much he was to suffer for that
name, for which all the sufferings he had in his head were to be employed, but
in a manner far differing from his design, for they were signed to be
enjoyed by himself, not to be dispensed to others by his hand; so as this
seems the gratification of his Christianity, the having all that treasure of
crosses he had prepared for other Christians, appropriated to his own use,
whereof he grew so sensible, as in gratitude to this his preference, he
returned his Superabundo gaudio in omni tribulatione.

But let us look upon his Master, I do exceedingly abound in joy in all our
tribulation.
and ours, Christ Jesus, in his own time of tribulation, and we may represent
him to our selves, in the first instant of his conception, accepting this order
from his Father, which he gave to his follower S. Paul, of Ostendam illi quanta
oporteat eum pro nomine meopati, Act. 9.15. I will show him how great things he
must suffer for my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of
Israel.
ut portet nomen meum coram gentibus, and regibus, and filiis Israel. In which
Commission he labored three and thirty years, wherein, all we are acquainted
with of his life, is either laborious, or incommodious, or in extremity
dolorous and painful. It seems the holy Ghost did not think any thing worthy
to stand upon record for CHRIST, that was not eminently suffering, and
therefore passed over in silence those parts of his life, which we may suppose
to have been the least distressefull. If we look upon his way, that is drawn
out to us from his Cradle to his Cross, we shall find, that temporal honor
and ease were so inconsistent with Gods design upon him, as he never had any
proffers of them, that did not speedily procure him some sharper vexation. The
Star that proclaimed him King at his birth, presently proved his proscription
to death; and that the law of suffering might seem enacted in his first step
into the world, it was put in execution upon innocent babes, whose blood, as S.
Augustine says, made the first tincture of Christian martyrdom, so that the
cries of the mothers and the infants followed close the voices of the Angels
that glorified him. When the people thought of making him King, it put him
presently to fly alone into the mountains. When the evil spirits proclaimed
him the Son of God, the Pharisees doubled their spies upon him to traduce him,
and sharpened their wits to ensnare him, by captious questions. His entering into
Jerusalem with the acclamations of Hosanna, hastened the persecutions of his
enemies, and within few days the voices of the same Jerusalem, strained higher
in the Pharisees air of Crucifige: whereby we may conclude, that he had so
entirely assigned himself to sufferances, and passions in this life, as he did
not think it a sufficient discharge, to accept the injuries of his maligners,
without converting all the dutiful offices of his adherents into seed of
affliction.

This was the uneven and painful way wherein Christ chose to pass through
this life, who is the way, the truth, and the life of Christians; and since one
drop of his blood, had been a price sufficient for our redemption, shall not
the effusion of it all, and the immensity of his griefs and labors be
sufficient for our example? It being especially notified unto us by the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.23
That he suffered for us, to leave us an example, that we might follow his
steps, wherein this print of sorrow seems unto me one of the most admirable
marks of it, that he suffered not so much by his passion as by his compassion.
He felt the torments of the Martyrs, the miseries of the Confessors, and the
distresses and desolations of his Church, which he foresaw in all ages, more
then the persons themselves who are under them can do. Vere labores, and
dolores nostros ipse tulit, He truly bore all our labors and our griefs.
All the anxieties, and contristations that now oppress you, were in a sharper
degree pressing upon his heart, and since he was content to aggravate all his
sufferings by taking on him the sense of your grievances, may not you very
easily alleviate all your heavinesses by taking into your mind the resentment
of sufferings, which were designed for your succor in your tentations, by the
reflection upon his precedent? so that his example, is not a simple injunction
on you to suffer, but a conferment of an ability to sustain it, and a means
to improve, and ameliorate your state in your coinheritance with him. For the
Apostle enforces this Doctrine with this energy of, 2 Timothy 2.12 A faithful
saying, for if we be dead with him, we shall live also together; if we
sustain, we shall also reign together.
Fidelis sermo, si commortui sumus and convivemus, si sustinebimus and
conregnabimus.

This deserves well our contemplation, that the fullness of the Divinity did
inhabit in Christ, and the clear vision of God did always illuminate him,
notwithstanding this, it was so miraculously disposed by God, that the
affluence of joy springing from the Deity, should not overflow his body, and
possess the inferior portions of his soul, that there might be left room for
pain and anguish; the which was manifest in his Passion, insomuch as
stupendous miracles were requisite for an admittance of so much sorrow into
his most sacred mind; if God were pleased thus to multiply miracles, that
affliction might have access to his beloved Son, in whom he was so well
pleased, shall we, with whom he has so much cause to be displeased, wonder at
any calamity, or tribulation whereby he is pleased to correct us, especially
when it is a mark of our filiation, and fraternity with Christ? We who cannot
be exempt from sufferings without a miracle, as we are sons of Adam, shall we
be astonished at any imposition, under this notion of Brothers, nay even
members of Christ? In which respect S. Bernard says excellently, That delicate
and tender members are not decent and becoming a head stuck full of thorns.
Therefore the pressures and pungencies of this life, make the symmetry and
proportion of the body of Christianity to the Head, Christ Jesus; who since he
did not so much as speak one idle word, all his praises and beatifications of
the poor and the afflicted must needs verify the good of adversity. Mat. 5.
And surely Christ did much less do any idle deed, and if the exemplary life
of his labors and onerations had not been directed to our conformity therein,
there might seem some supervacuousnesse and redundancy in his continual
hardness and asperity of life. Would God have afflicted his only Son so,
Romans 8.
if it were indifferent to do, or not to do as he did? or that it did not
concern those whom he had fore-known and predestined to be conformable to
the image of his Son, in this point, that he might be the firstborn of many
Brethren? Our fraternity therefore is derived to us by this similitude. Our
sins might have been effaced not only by a drop of Christ's blood, but even
by a drop of his sweat; wherefore this seems one of the chief reasons that
did induce the atrocity of his passion, and the austerity of his life, the
necessity of such a pattern for our imitation, since our nature was grown so
degenerous and effeminate, as no less then Gods participation of all the sorts
of grievances and injuries thereof would serve to form in us a cheerful
disposition to the sufferings and infelicities of this life. God therefore did
not intend to vex us, when he placed our salvation in difficulties, and in our
natures aversions, for to sweeten the bitterness of this strong necessity,
which was to work upon our nature, to purge us from the love of this world, he
was so gracious, as to infuse the company of Christ into this receipt, that the
taste of his society might make more pleasant to us the ill savor and acerbity
of the remedy. Well therefore may we say, A greater then Elisha is here, who
has mended these waters by but tasting of them, and has left neither death
nor barrenness in them, for they are become rather waters springing up to life
everlasting.

And we may observe, that in conformity to Gods method with his Son, Christ
continued the same style to his Mother, for she, whom all generations were to
call Blessed, was not allowed any of what this world calls Blessings, for She,
who had borne the Redeemer of the whole world, was not able to go to the
highest rate of the Temple, for his Redemption, her poor estate did not reach
to pay so much as a Lamb for the Son of God, and the Lamb who was to take
away the sins of the world, had not so much as a Lamb for his ransom. The
lowest price that was set for any of the Children of Israel, was the rate her
low condition was taxed at. None was set at less then a pair of pigeons or a
pair of turtles, and the Mother of God was in this inferior form of the
daughters of men. This may serve to sweeten the bitterest waters of poverty.
When we ponder this, that Christ would not allow his Mother to taste of any
other spring; and though he would not let her taste of the sowrenes of the
forbidden fruit, yet he fed her more then any other, with these bitter leaves
which grew out of the same root, that is, though he was pleased to exempt her
from sin, yet he would not dispense with her in sufferings, which we know are
but the productions of sin; and so, she whom we may suppose to have been
excepted out of the rule of sinners, was exalted above any in the state of
sufferers. And this seems to be very consonant, that as she was Mother to the
Man of sorrow, and of no sin, so she should be a bearer of all griefs,
without any guiltiness. But howsoever this point is accorded by all parties,
Luke 2.29, 35.
that being the purest of all creatures, she was nevertheless the greatest of
all patients. When she came to redeem her own Redeemer by the legal ransom,
and was to enter into possession of her Son, we may note, that the joys that
were presaged her, by Simeon, in him were very dark and mystical, but her own
sorrows very clear and manifest. For this mystery of her having a light to the
revelation of the Gentiles in her arms, and the glory of thy people Israel,
was hard to be understood of one that was in the lowest rank of the people; but
this part was easy to be conceived, of his being a mark of contradiction, and
that a sword should pierce through her own soul.

Nature it self evidenceth the miseries which mothers are liable to from
children, and thus she had here her sorrows and her sufferings writ to her in
the common Alphabet of nature, and her joys and consolations cyphered out
only to her in the figures and characters of grace, which are so hard to be
decyphered, though it may be she had the key of them. But howsoever, her faith
was to be exercised by a tedious, and very sudden trial in affliction. She
quickly found the sword in her soul, for we may easily conceive what a wound
her sudden flight into Egypt was, how many fears, distresses, and anxieties
pierced her tender heart in that laborious flight. And sure the sword of Herod
that parted so many mothers and children, pierced her soul even while she
possessed her child: she may well be judged to have out-suffered any of them in
their own losses, for she had the grief of being the occasion of them all upon
her heart, so as the sword that was drawn directly against her soul, though
the stroke did not light upon it, as it was aimed, yet it may be thought to
have wounded her in a sharper manner, then it did any it fell bloodily upon;
for her exquisite charity must needs feel all their anguishes and passions who
were thus afflicted, as personating her.

Thus we see, how she began her possession of her Son, with the sorrows of a
multitude of mothers inflicted on her. And if we look upon her being
dispossessed of her Son, there we shall see the sword piercing her soul in so
horrid a manner, as the pains which all the daughters of Jerusalem ever had,
in the birth or death of their children, were but shadows of her torture.
Whereupon S. Bernard says, Neither tongue can express, nor heart conceive the
dolours wherewith the holy bowels of this Mother were excruciated. Now Blessed
Virgin you pay with rigorous interest that pain which Nature was not allowed to
exact of you, in your delivery; the pangs which you felt not in the birth of
your Son, are infinitely replicated upon you at his death. When we consider the
Mother of Christ, standing by the Cross, and seeing her Son under those nails,
thorns, and scourges, and all the other tortures, the picture whereof is enough
to wound any Christian heart, with what hand can we hope to touch this doleful
figure of the Blessed Virgin, to give it a lively resemblance? I will therefore
leave it veyled, with this reason upon it, Par nulla figura dolori; the not
being pourtraictable, being the nearest similitude can be made of this figure
of disconsolation. That which reports most to our purpose, is, that by the
not being able to comprehend the immensity of the sufferings, of the Mother of
God, we may be the less apt to apprehend any extremity in our own; when she,
who had at least no actual sin to expiate, had so much sorrow to exercise her
virtue, how shall we (who have so much sin to satisfy for) wonder at any
sufferings, whereof we have so much need to sanctify us? There is then no
reason, why we should fear to be mistaken, in taking crosses for commodities,
indignities for honors, poverty for treasure, since the eternal Wisdom, and
divine understanding has councelled this acceptance of them, not only by his
advise, but by his Mothers president, and his own personal investure of them.
He who is both the supreme goodness, and the supreme power, chose by those low
humbled means to redeem us, and by the same we must perfect our salvation, the
work must be finished by the same instruments by which it was begun.

Christ told his Disciples, there were many mansions in his Fathers house, but
never gave them notice of any other way to any of them, but this of the crosses
and miseries of this world: And surely as he said of the mansions, so may we
say of the marches to them, if there had been another passage, he would have
told it them. This narrow way, and strait gate, is all the direction we find,
either by his life, his doctrine, or his death. Mat. 11.12 The kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it away.
Regnum coelorum vim patitur, and violenti capiunt illud, is the word, or Matte
belonging to the Arms of the Gospel; and as Christ said, No body ascends
into heaven, but he that descended out of heaven; therefore he vouchsafed to
come down, to live out this way, which he imprinted upon his sacred humanity.
So that now, this way lies so fairly marked out, by the prints of his steps in
his return to his eternal mansion, as no body that looks up to heaven can
miss the seeing of it, though it be not the via lactea of the Poets, The
milkie way. The bloody way.
but the via sanguinea of the Prophets and the Apostles. It is traced out more
fairly in the firmament of a Christian, which is the Gospel, then the other is
in the material sky. The life of Christ is such a sequence and connection of
bright and shining sufferings, as show our souls as intelligibly the way to
heaven, as those stars do our eyes that sensible track in the firmament. We
may cast our eye upon this Galaxie, or constellation of humility, and
depression in Christ's life, we shall see it illustrious and shining in an
humiliation under all sorts of creatures. He humbled himself to the Angels, he
vouchsafed to receive comfort of an Angel, as if his necessity, not humility,
had required it. When he was hungry, he was pleased to take food, as alms
from the Angels, when he could have turned stones into bread. He humbled
himself to man, and woman, remaining obedient to his Mother, and to Joseph. He
subjected himself to Impious Princes, to Herod, Caesar, Caiphas, and Pilate by
undergoing their burdens, and their judgments. He submitted himself to vile,
and infamous servants, as to Malchus, and to his torturers, deriders, and
others. He yielded himself even to inanimate creatures, suffering heat and
cold to strike upon him, and by iron, wood, thorns, and reeds, he endured to be
violated, and offended; nay he subjected himself to his greatest enemy the
Devil himself, when he suffered him to carry him up to the pinnacle of the
Temple; so there is no creature from the sublimest to the meanest, from the
best to the worst, to whom Christ did not humiliate himself.

And thus you see, this arche of humiliation set as it were on another bow, in
the clouds of his humanity for a sign of this Covenant of sufferances, wherein
I have suggested to you your engagement; and this bow of his Covenant, is so
extended as it makes a perfect circle, it reaches from the sphere of
angelical, to that of inanimate substances, to both which we see, Christ did
submit himself, and so his subjection touches the highest, and the lowest
point of his own creatures. Which consideration of his ineffable humility must
needs assure us, of that admirable effect it has produced, of converting
crosses into the nourishment of his body left upon earth, and so to bring that,
which separated his soul, and his body, now to be the means of reuniting the
body to the head. For the Cross is left in his Church, to conjoyne and
consociate the members unto their suffering head Christ Jesus; and we may well
add, that this Divine sign of the Cross set in the Heaven of his Person so
conspicuously, remains as a sensible mark of his promise to the Church, of
never being drowned in any inundation of crosses falling on her.

Looking up therefore to the heavenly object of Christ's sufferings, we may be
comforted, by our similitude, and we may rejoice at our security, which this
Covenant recapitulateth to us, as often as we contemplate it, insomuch as there
is none of you, who groan under any pressure, or tremble under any oppression,
Heb. 12.2.
that looking up upon the anthor, and finisher of our faith Christ Jesus, may
not see him bearing the same cross with joy, despising the confusion of it.
Whether you sweat under your burdens, or whether you bleed under the edge of
these times, you shall find your persecution both civil and sanguinary
patternd to you in the person even of God and Man, Christ Jesus, who has not
left so much as your fears, and terrors out of the exemplar of his passions;
Mar. 14.33. He began to be heavy, and to fear.
his Caepit taedere, and pavere was designed purposely as a cordial in your
fits of fainting; and if there were any point in your afflictions, which were
not exemplifide to you in Christ's passions, that circumstance ought to prove to
you, a sufficient consolation, in that you had some suffering to offer to
Christ of your own, besides the copye, and pourtraicture of his. But alas, all
that we can imagine in our own pains, wherein there is imitation of his, is
that which we may better blush at, then boast of, for it is only the guilt of
deserving more then we can endure in this life; this is simply ours in our
afflictions, wherein we find no resemblance in the figure of Christ's
sufferings, which part of our cases, may make us offer up to Christ a thankful
alacrity in all temporal penalties inflicted on us, for having taken off from
us, the burden we could not remove by any sufferings, and having left us only
such pressures, as may aleviate the weight of that intolerable gravation, which
is the guilt of sin: for our crosses in this life by the virtue of the Cross
of Christ (whereof our heaviest are but chippes, or shavings) do not only
keep our sins lower, but also weigh against the temporal penalty of those,
which are in the scale.

It may admit a question, whether it be a more precious Christian exercise, to
do good, or to endure evils; That state is certainly the best in which both
are conjoined, when suffering many grievances, we act as many good as we are
able; yet God has provided matter of meriting in both conditions severally:
let them then who have nothing left to give to God, by way of actions, rejoice
in the faculty of sorrows, which furnish them meritorious offerings in all
their necessities. When King David extols the dignity of man, he raises it
upon this ground, that God had made him but a little lower then Angels. Psalm.
8.
But in this respect, we may say, that God has advantaged him above them, by
furnishing him with more instruments of meriting then they have, by having
coupled a body to this spirit, in which he may suffer for Christ, when many
other capacities of expressing, his gratitude are suspended. For man has not
only all the several powers of his mind, but also the senses of his body
given him, as organs of meriting, by carrying the Cross upon them. With this
corporeal furniture, man is enriched above Angels; so as man may even out of
the greatest infirmities of his constitution, extract matter of glorification.
This virtue has been imparted to the vility of flesh and blood, since God
vouchsafed to be invested in it, our flesh received this privilege not only of
being admitted into heaven, but of contributing to the soul's degrees of
glory, by the proportions of the bodies fufferings, and as S. Paul says, Romans
8.13.
It is no wonder that God, having given his own Son to human nature, should
have given all these other prerogatives with him.

Out of this state of our mortality, the Saints shall rise as high, as they
should have done from the state of innocence and immortality, which shows, that
they are equally sanctified in the brevity and shortness of their life now, to
what they should have attained in many ages, if they had remained immortal.
The multitude of sorrows and crosses, by the grace of Christ, countervaileth
and compensateth the numerousnesse of the years of our service. Our Redeemer
has left this compendious way of meriting, by the necessities and molestations
of our flesh, the which he would not expunge in it, that he might present his
Father the children of his most precious passions, as much purified in a little
time, as they should have been in the efflux of many ages. He who raised above
the highest heaven, the heaviness of our earth upon this Engine of the Cross,
has left it us, to wind up the easilyer our terrestrial qualities upon the
same machine. This was the means which S. Paul made use of, in all his
elevations up to the third heaven: Christo confixus sum cruci, Gal. 2.20. With
Christ I am nailed to the Cross.
carried him up to that sublimity; and he kept himself so close nailed to the
Cross all his life, as when he was weak he was strongest, and never esteemed
his raptures so much as his revilings and ignominies. He professes to glory
willingly in nothing but in his humiliations, Libenter gloriabor in
infirmitatibus meis, 2 Cor. 12. Gladly will I glory in my infirmities, in
contumelies, in necessities, in distresses for Christ, etc.
in contumeliis, in necessitatibus, in angustiis pro Christo, propter quod
placeo mihi in infirmitatibus meis, in persecutionibus, because he found power
was perfected in infirmity. Whereby we are convinced, that those who are called
to Christianity, are assigned to all sorts of crucifying.

All the iniquity of a Christian consists either in doing what Christ did
not, or in refusing to do what he did, and none can excuse themselves, by an
incapacity of imitating Christ in that, wherein he has been pleased to state
Christian profession; for every one may be poor, and patient, and mortified,
but every one is not qualified to attain to riches, honor, or learning. This
is the wisdom and love of God, to have those things made the best
contributions to our eternal felicity, which may not only be reached by every
one, but can even scarce be missed by any, which are the afflictions and
adversities of this life; wherefore those, who it may be would not have had the
zeal to affect a similitude to Christ, in these hard touches of Gods hand, must
not be so ungrateful, as to repugne to this operation of God upon them, or be
ashamed and confused to see this figure of deformity, in the worlds eye,
impresed upon them, in poverty, infamy, destitutions of friends, reproaches of
enemies, and all other assimilations to Christ, but rather acknowledge a mercy
of God, who having called them to these trials as Christians, whereunto they
have answered but ill in other times, that now he vouchsafes himself to place
them in the society of the passions of Christ, remembering what the great Doctor
in this worlds miseries, and the others felicities, remonstrates to us, 2 Cor.
1.7.
That in the same measure you are partakers of the passions, 1 Pet. 4.1. Christ
therefore having suffered in the flesh, be you also armed with the same
cogitation.
you shall be of the consolations of Christ.

With good reason then I may urge this to you in S. Peter's name, Christo igitur
passo in carne, and vos eadem cogitatione armemini. Which must not be only to
suffer all patiently from your enemies, but even to be disposed to suffer for
your enemies, if Gods glory should propose it to you. O! shall not this lover
of you, and benefactor of his enemies, be able to heap coals upon your hearts,
to inflame them with a desire of this imitation? Put then, I beseech you, the
sad heart of Jesus, as a signet upon your hearts, that he may find you
according to his heart. You need not be disheartened to find your persons and
estates become according to the hearts of your enemies, since you know,
Tradidit eos in desideria cordis eorum, 1. Romans 24. God has delivered them up
into the desires of their own heart.
proves often an unhappy prevalence, and you, looking upon all your
deprivations and passivenesse under the notion of Christians, have this lesson
given you from that naked body on the Cross, whereof you are members, who did
but pity those that were dividing his clothes, and casting lots for his upper
garment, (which was a figure of his Church) and the action no ill figure of
these times in the regard of casting lots; and Christ, when there was nothing
left to extenuate their guiltiness but ignorance, pleaded that for them to his
Father, in Dimitte illis, Luke 23.34. Forgive them for they know not what they
do.
non enim sciunt quid faciunt, and sought thus to cover their nakedness, who
had so profanely exposed and violated his; and sure, Nesciunt quae faciunt, is
a proper plea for your charity, to make now in defense of your afflictors; it
is writ upon the face of most of their actions, and we may well use the
Prophets Quis scit si convertatur, Jonas. 3.9. Who knows if God will convert,
and forgive.
and ignoscat Deus? Who knows whether Gods mercy does not design another
work, then that which they think they set their hands to? and so they may be
doing, they know not what, in the best sense we can understand it: S. Gregor.
Moral. lib. 6. Ca. 13.14.
for as S. Gregory says pertinently to this purpose, God who is just and
merciful in his disposure of humane actions, accords some things as he is
gracious, and permits some as he is angry; and the things he does but
permit, he tolerateth them so, as he turns them to the use of his counsel
and purposes. Whereby it is effected, in a wonderful manner, that what is
acted without Gods will, is not done against it; for while ill deeds are
converted to good uses, even those things bear arms for his design, that
militate and repugne against it; and we may well say, not by way of Prediction,
but of Prayer, Who knows whether the Spirit of God may not be pleased to move
upon the face of those waters which now cover our land, and out of this abyss
and Chaos, extract light and clarity. But as Saint Peter said, to consolate and
confirm the Christians in their persecutions, you have a sure word of
Prophecy to rest upon, Jo. 16.33.
in all your agitations, the eternal Word it self prophesying that his
members should have all sorts of pressures and crosses in this world. To which
you shall do best to attend, as unto a light shining in a dark place, Act.
15.15
till the day dawne again; and looking upon the verification of this
Prophecy, To our Lord was his own work known from the beginning of the
world. Luke 9.
in all ages we may rest upon S. Paul's ground, for the re-edifying of the
tabernacle of David, and repayring the breaches thereof, and setting it up so,
as the residue of men may seek after the Lord. Notum a seculo est Domino opue
suum. Leaving therefore the knowledge of times and seasons to his providence,
as the prerogative thereof, we must husband our properties of Christians, which
is, to take up the cross daily, and to follow Christ. This is the inheritance
of a Christian, the Passion of Christ, the which he may improve to himself, by
the culture of Meditation, and must take heed of venturing to plough up the
ground of Gods Providence, and sowing it with his own Reason, that it may
bear him satisfaction of the causes of his sufferings, or the Churches
persecutions. For this is a labor he is forbid to sweat in, for which reason,
this sweat of his brain shall not afford him bread. Our Father in this case
only gives a stone to him that asks him this bread, to feed his scruple, or
his curiosity; whereas a Christian, by an humble acquiescence simply to Gods
inscrutable order and providence in all events, may turn even stones into
bread, his afflictions into spiritual aliments, and draw oil out of the rocks
he is cast upon: while he studieth not to solve Gods riddles, the intricacies
of his Providence, he shall have Sampsons riddle explained, and applied to him,
Judge. 4 4.
for Out of the eater shall come forth meat, and out of the strong shall issue
sweetness. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah has infused honey into the teeth of
all these Lions he lets loose upon his Church, and a resigned patient shall
taste more the honey, then he shall feel the teeth of the beast that
quartereth him. They therefore who will find the suavity of persecution, must
suck it out of Christ's Passion, where it lies ready made, and not amuse
themselves to work it out of the order of Gods providence, wherein it rests
implicated in the folds of many mysteries, and our curiosity in seeking it,
will return us rather Saul's anxiety upon his enquiry of Samuels ghost, then
Sampsons sweetness in the Lions jaws, which he found when he looked not for
it. And out of S. Paul's mouth, who was once a raging Lion, till he was killed
by him, of whom Sampson was a figure, we may take this honey to dulcifie all
those bitternesses of our lives, 2 Cor. 4.18. Our tribulation which presently
is momentanie and light, works above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of
glory in us.
Quod in praesenti est momentantum, and leve tribulationis nostrae supra modum
in sublimitate aeternum gloriae pondus operatur in nobis.

HAving thus seen and considered Gods hand and manner in the figure of his
dearly beloved Son upon the Cross, by which he conveyed him to his Coronation,
let us now consider also Christ's method in ordering his Church, after he
professes that all power is given him both in heaven and earth, so as the
sufferings of the Body, to such an Head, must needs be by order, not infirmity.
For after he had suffered sufficiently for more worlds then he shed drops of
blood, and for as many ages as worlds, he might well have allowed the members
of his body all joy and felicity for the rest of those few Ages this world was
to subsist. But he who was Wisdom it self, chose another method, as he told
his dearest friends, Ego dispone vobis, sicut disposuit mihi Pater meus regnum.
He copyed his Fathers hand upon himself, in his drawing and figuring his
Church upon earth, Lu. 22.29. I dispose to you as my Father disposed to me a
kingdom.
so as after his glorious body was enthroned at the right hand of God, he left
his mystical body hanging as it were upon the cross in Calvary for some Ages,
wounded by the lances of the Gentiles, and vilified by the scorns of the
Jews. In this posture it hung, exposed many years a scandal to the eyes of
the one, and folly to the understandings of the other, insomuch as the extreme
passions of this body, might well have extorted out of flesh and blood, a Deus
meus, ut quid dereliquisti me? The afflictions were so intolerable, as no
body, that had not a God for the head of it, Mat. 27. My God, why have thou
forsaken me?
could have grown and prospered in so bleeding an infancy. It seems Gods
unsearchable Wisdom, designed Christ's mystical body to be formed on the face
of the earth, as his natural body was in the womb of the Virgin, in the
composition whereof, there was only the Spirit of God, working upon the pure
blood of the Virgin, and in like manner, the virtue of the holy Ghost came upon
the blood of the Martyrs, forming and animating the Primitive Church. For in
those times we find the virtue of the Spirit working most upon blood, to form
and procreate the body of the Church. And thus by the admirable virtue of
Christ's Passion, it seemed not an effusion, but rather a transfusion of all the
blood was drawn, conveying it into other veins, and the same spirits seemed
to be carried in it, into other bodies, which successively making the same use
of it, might make one think, it had been the very same blood infused into other
veyns, which like channels rather then owners of it poured it out again so
freely; and in this way of generation, the Saints and Martyrs procreated the
descent of the family of Christ, for above three hundred years. The Apostles
seemed to pour out their blood into the veins of their Disciples and
Successors, and they in like manner to transfuse theirs into those descended
from them, and by this successive transmission, the Progeny of the Church was
deduced through the Primitive Persecutions. This was the operation of that one
heart, Act. 4.32.
and one soul, the Apostle says was then in the multitude of the Believers.
And indeed, the records of those times may well make one reflect on the
doctrine of Pythagor as, in his transmigration of souls; for in those times
the spirit of acting and suffering which was transmitted from one to another,
seemed so much the same, as one might fay there was a transmigration of the
souls of the first Martyrs into the surviving issue of their spirit. Herod is
said to have suspected, that the soul of S. John Baptist had passed into
Christ, when he said, Mat. 14.1 This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the
dead, and therefore virtues work in him.
Hic est Joannes Baptista, ipse surrexit a mortuis, ideo virtutes operantur in
eo. The doctrine of transition of souls from one body to another was much
followed in those times. But we may well in a pious and sober sense, say, that
the soul of S. Peter seemed transmigrated into his successors for many years,
for the same spirit of fervor, in watering with their blood the Rock whereon
Christ had planted his Church, possessed above thirty Popes successively after
S. Peter; and so all their bodies seemed to be cast as a mold of earth upon
that rock, whereupon the faith of the Roman Church did spring; the plants
whereof, even all acknowledge their Churches to be, who have now severed
themselves from that radical communion, and forgetting the benefits of those
Joseph's, who sed them in the famine of their Faganisme, are now laying burdens
on their children.

In this manner, the Primitive Church was nourished in her cradle; instead of
having milk given her to make blood of, she sucked blood, and made milk of it,
by the which she has nursed the succeeding times; for in all the Churches
following persecutions the faithful have been sustained and refreshed by that
milk, which the blood of those times did make for them, for their examples
descending with their doctrines, has confirmed and strengthened as well as
alimented all their future progeny. It is an admirable evincement of the truth
of Christian Religion, to remark, that as it was founded upon a supernatural
conjunction of a body that might suffer, to a person that was impassible; so it
was propagated by the destruction of those bodies, which were the organs of
tradition of it to posterity, for the wounds of the Apostles and the Martyrs
seemed but so many more mouths, opened to speak out louder the mysteries of
the Gospel, and to prove those verities by daring to dye for them, which were
not to be demonstrated by the cloquence of any living men or Angels; and thus
the tongues of the Martyrs spoke more plainly the mysteries of their faith,
when they were torn out of their mouths by their tortures, then while they
were tutoring their Disciples. Whereupon Tertullian says to the Persecutors,
Exquisitior quaeque iniquitas vestra, illecebra magis est sectae; the more
exquisite their iniquity grew, the more efficacious allurement it proved to
Christian Religion. For, as he explains it, every one being struck with wonder
at the virtue and patience of the sufferers, began to think that worthy the
enquiring into, which men thought so much better worth then their lives; and
these reflections converted more then the best verbal expressions, to such
auditors, as thought life not to be equivalenced by any compensation. Wherefore
Saint Cyprian, who was one of the brightest mirrors of these reflections,
says, The Heathen were wont to conclude, that it deserved to be studied, and
fully penetrated, that persuasion which could induce a man to suffer so much,
and to dye so willingly. And this Lecture of the bodies of the Martyrs,
convinced more then the books of the Fathers; it wrought more upon flesh and
blood, to see as it were the whole body set to their faith, then the single
hand; as we saw in Malta, the Vipers teeth moved them more then S. Paul's
tongue; and in like manner, this wrought those present effects frequently upon
multitudes, the considering the minds of Christians, shaking off the stings of
tortures, which hung upon their bodies, the peace of their souls remaining
inviolated, and unoffended by them. And those admirable effects of such causes
as were naturally opposite to them, were demonstrations of this dictate of
Saint John, You are of God, 1^ Joh. 4.
and overcome the world, because greater is he that is in you, then he that is
in the world, whereof he was one of the most egregious marks, being preserved
for a spectator, after he had been himself a patient in the scene of
Martyrdom: for being condemned to suffer at Rome in a caldron of scalding
oil, he came out of it more refreshed then the Emperor out of his baths of
precious ointments; he rested in it, with little less case then he had done in
the bosom of his Master. For Martyrdom may well be termed the bosom of
Christ, as it is the nearest part of his body, joining to the suffering head
upon the Cross, and as it is the nearest access toward a conjunction with
the glorified head in heaven. And thus the Martyrs did daily verify this
position, That he that was in them, was greater then the world; for they who
had subdued the world, could not suppress Christianity. Christ chose to
triumph over the tyranny and power of the Emperors of the world, before he
would vouchsafe to be served by them, to evidence this for his glory, that it
was not his necessity that required, but his grace that admitted Kings to be
nursing-fathers, and Queens to be nursing-mothers to his mystical body upon
earth.

This also deserves our animadversion, that soon after the Church came to
suck at those breasts, she fell into fits of Convulsion, interior Heresies,
which endangered, her more then all the exterior wounds of Persecution she had
received. Whereby appears, that the milk of Princes was not so healthful for
her, as the blood of Martyrs. For even in Constantine the Great his time, who
was the first Princely Foster-father of the Church, Arianisme began to breed in
her, The denying the Divinity of Christ.
and this disease in his time, notwithstanding all his cures and remedies
administered, lay still so neasted in her, as presently after his death, the
corruption broke out into desperate convulsions, and the very breast of her
temporal nursing father, was cancer'd with this Heresy. For the second son
of Constantine, named Constantius, to whom, in the partition of the Empire, the
East was assigned, revolted professedly to Arianisme, and in a few years this
poison had so spread by his diffusion, as the leprosy had overrun almost all
the Eastern Churches, insomuch as Christianity seemed more endangered by this
canker in the breast of an Emperor professing to nurse it, then it had been by
all those raging Lions that sought to devour it: So much more dangerous was
it, to part Christ's Divinity from the Church, then to have the whole world
united against her, while that was acknowledged, and relied upon for the
support. This peril sprang out of Prosperity, when the Emperors of the East,
seemed to think their Religion supported strongly enough without the Divinity
of Christ, whereas Rome, which was then fallen away in all temporal
diminution, maintained the entire profession of Christian faith, against all
the gates of hell, which the Emperors under pretense of being watchmen upon
the tower, had opened against her, and for many years, S. Peter's bark floated
as it were in an Ocean of Arianisme, which had covered the Eastern, and had
broke in upon many parts of the Western Empire. It were too long a work, to
make a journall of the voyage of S. Peter's bark through all those ages, in
which it has been exposed to the storms of diverse persecutions, and the
sands of innumerable heresies it has passed over with safety. That which
respects most my purpose, is to clucidate to you, how temporal adversity,
and tribulation have always contributed to the purity of the Doctrine and
manners of the Catholic Church, for I do not mean to touch any Controversy,
but in defense of those, you may unjustly account your adversaries, which are
the crosses and afflictions of these times, and to dispute for the use, and
benefit of them, against your diffidence, and irresolution, in this hour of
your examination; which I hope, by the grace of God, may be effected in some
degree by this suggestion to you, of those Covenants and obligations of
suffering, wherein you are engaged, which I may urge to you in the terms of
the mirror of sufferers S. Paul, 1 These. 3.2
I have sent this to you, and exhort you for your faith that no man be moved in
these tribulations, for your selves know that we are appointed to this.

Me thinks this should lenify, and disasperate all the sense of our
afflictions, to reflect, how under these two notions of the Sons of Adam, and
the Brothers of Christ, we are designed to sufferings. For as men, the holy
spirit tells us, Job 5.7.
Man is born to labor, and the bird to flight, insomuch as we should wonder no
more at our troubles, then at our nature. Wherefore S. Gregory upon Jobs
scraping his soars with a piece of a broken pot, says, He made clean one dirt
with another; for the holy man reflected from whence that was taken which he
wore, and with a fragment of one piece of clay he scrapes another broken
vessel, so as considering himself in that fragment of clay, in the cleansing
and extersion of his sores, he did also dress and medicine his mind. And this
is a ready refreshment, which we have always by us, when we are upon our
dunghill, to wipe and cleanse the corruption of our sores, with this
recogitation of the vility of our nature, which is as naturally liable to this
breaking out into ulcers of miseries and tribulations, as earthen pots are to
be broken. Therefore we may learn of Job to take off the putrefaction, and
ordure from our sores, which is murmur, and repining, with this recollection,
that we suffer it in order to our nature, and so reluctance to this condition,
may, in this respect, seem more unnatural then resignation.

And for the other Covenant as Christians, what can be more positive then S.
Paul's exhorting distressed Christians not to be moved, 2 Cor. 4.8. In all
things we suffer tribulation, but are not in distress; always bearing about
the mortification of Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our
bodies.
as knowing they are appointed to tribulations; And in order to a discharge of
this obligation, he exhibiteth to us the state of a Christian, In omnibus
tribulationem patimur, sed non angustiamur, semper mortificationem Jesu in
corpore nostro circumferentes, ut vita Jesu manifestetur in corporibus nostris.
So as we see, a Christian is to copy, and manifest the life of Jesus; and we
cannot render it so easy to be known by any way, as by having his most
notorious marks visibly upon it, which are Crosses: for we cannot possibly
draw the figure so resembling in sanctity as in suffering, (for our bodies are
helps to us in this similitude, as impediments in the other.) We must then
seek to finish this feature of Jesus, as exactly as we can, since in this
respect we must be all Jesuits as well as Christians; and thus these times may
co^duce to the making you all Jesuits, according to this order of S. Paul. And
if you enter piously into this society of Jesus, you will not fear how you
stay here, or when you remove from the society of men; for if you have the
figure of Jesus stamped upon you, in any pressure whatsoever, or cut out in
you, by the sharpest violences, you shall rise from the want of bread, up to
that nuptial feast, in which your present nakedness shall pass for your
Wedding garment, and from the bar of men you shall be called up to the throne it
self, where the Crucified sits to condemn all that appear not with that
impression on them.

This belief of a Christian's being pressed to serve under the Cross, was so
received in the Primitive times, as S. Ignatius, who lived in the age of the
Apostles, when he was first bound, professed that then he began first to be a
Christian; and S. Augustine in conformity to this opinion tells one, That if
he had not yet been entered by any tribulation, he had not begun to be a
Christian; and Saint Martin was so imbued with this Doctrine, as when the
Devil appeared to him in a glorious form, suggesting to him that it was an
apparition of Christ, Christ does not appear to his servants in this life, but
on the Cross.
he answered, Christus non nisi in cruce apparet suis in hac vita, intimating,
that a Christian must not understand felicity in this life, to be a proper
image to represent Christ to his servants. And it refers to this, what is
recorded of Christ's apparition to S. Peter, when he was stying out of Prison in
Rome, by much persuasion of the Christians a little before his Mar tyrdome. For
Christ met him with a sad afflicted countenance, and being asked by S. Peter
whither he was going? He answered, To be crucified again: by which the Apostle
understood his Masters order, and obeyed it cheer fully, returning back to the
Prison, and soon after to the Cross, which was annexed to his Commission of
Pasce oves meas, Feed my sheep. Follow me
in this Schedule of Sequere me. So as Christ's bequeathements to his dearest
friends upon earth, are but several crosses in the procession of this life,
through our valley of tears. The hatred of the people, the malice of the
Magistrates, imprisonments, and flagellations, were the only Legacies you know
Christ left his Disciples, and in this he made them his heirs, first in this
world, giving them all he dyed possessed of, so as the more you share in this
his temporal estate, you are the truer heirs of this his Testament, which was
writ in his martial hand, but signed and sealed by his eternal: for the Hand
of his Deity is set to all the Donations of Glory, which he made in his
Testament, to the performers of his Will, by a cheerful acceptance of these
his affignements in this world. Whereupon S. Augustine advises us, not to
consider what pain we have under the rod, but what part we have in the Will.
And for this cause, the Apostles were not styled by Christ, Mat. 5.10
blessed in their power over Devils, or the grace to raise the dead, but in
their subjection to sufferings; he annexeth a beatitude to this estate of their
being cursed, persecuted, and vituperated, with all sorts of injuries, to this
condition he assigns joy and exultation expressly, Be glad, and rejoice, for
your reward is great in heaven. Mat. 5.
Gaudete and exultate, quia merces vestra copiosa est in coelis.

And we may note, that of the eight states of Beatitude which Christ exhibiteth
in the Gospel, four of them consist directly in suffering, and that those also
that are somewhat referred to action, (which are the being merciful, and the
being peace makers) are made half also of passive matter. For there must be
misery and troubles, for the subjects of mercy and pacification. And for that
of spiritual hunger and thirst, it is set after poverty and mournning, as if
they had got us this good appetite; and the other of purity of heart, comes in
as it were after the souls having been strained through those pressures, as
though this passing of it, were requisite to bring the heart to this
cleanness, and depuration; and when we consider Christ's life, how he walked
himself in this narrow way to this beatitude, we cannot reply against this
order of following him through many tribulations into his Kingdom, for if
Christ suffered so much that he might justly give us his glory, what ought not
we to do and suffer that we may receive it? It must needs be then a great
folly, to imagine we can attain this glory without pains, when even God
labored and suffered so much that he might dispose of it. For Christ himself
tells us, Joh 5.23, 27.
That the Father has given all judgment to the Son, and produces this as
the reason, Because he is the Son of man, that is, for having merited it by
the labors and passions of this humane life; and S. Paul explaineth this
clearly, where he says, Ph l. 27.
Christ humbled himself made obedient to death, even the death of the cross,
for the which thing God has exalted him. So that here Christ's power is
referred to his purchase of it by his passions. Therefore a Christian that
repineth at any affliction in this life, seems to forget what he owes the
Cross for his redemption from misery, and to what he was sealed by it, when it
was laid upon him in water, to engage him even before he could bear it in a
heavyer matter, and to oblige him to serve under all those crosses of fire or
water this life should pass through, for after this comes a stronger baptism
of fire in the trials of a Christian.

Those who are not Christened with the sign of the Cross, may have some
pretense, not to understand the use or obligations of it; but you, on whose
heads it has been laid in Baptism, and pressed (as it were) into them by
Confirmation, can have no color to mis-conceive the use of Crosses; and since
it is a defense against evil spirits, the making but the sign, or figure of
the Cross, with our hand, it must needs be of greater efficacy against both
the world and the devil, the having of them made upon us by the hand of God,
who chastises every child he receives, and so crosses his children always
either to expel some evil spirit, or to mark a lodging for the better
reception of his holy mission into it. In this sign thou shall overcome.
Look up therefore to heaven, and you shall see In hoc signo vinces engraven
upon all your Crosses.

I will close up this proof of your second covenant as Christians, with this
advise to you, how in all the shipwracks of your lives or fortunes in this
storm, you may save your selves by a right use of the Cross. The Fathers do
usually call the Cross, Tabulam naufragii, that plank whereon humane nature
was saved, when all her goods were cast away, and you must take the manner of
saving your selves by your crosses, from that conception of making them planks
to bear you up; and you know the same piece of wood, lying upon you, will sink
you, which would carry you if you lay upon it. In like manner, if the weight of
your present crosses lie upon the sensitive part of your souls, and you
consider them merely as sensible oppressions and gravations in this world,
flesh and blood will be dejected, and sunk by them; when that feels all the
charge upon it, the mind may easily be cast down by the heaviness of the
senses; but if you lay your minds upon your crosses, that is, extend your
thoughts orderly upon the meditation of the Cross of Christ, from which all
yours derive a virtue and efficacy to work upon you, the image of the Son of
God, laying your minds in this posture upon your crosses, they will bear up
your hearts instead of sinking them; and thus this storm shall but drown your
worldly and earthly affections, and your crosses in this posture under your
minds, shall carry and land you in the land of the living. Wherefore I beseech
you to cast your thoughts in this posture upon the Cross of Christ, 2 Cor. 13.
For although he was crucified of infirmity, yet he lives by the power of God,
for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by the power of God.
resting upon it with confidence, that it will support you; and rest your minds
upon your own crosses, as conceiving them to be rather carriages of your
souls to spiritual aspirings, then material onerations upon your bodies, and
then you may easily apply to your selves this comfort of S. Paul out of the
crucifixion of Christ, Nam etsicrucifixus ex infirmitate, sed vivit ex virtute
Dei, nam and nos infirmi sumus in illo, sed vivemus cum eo ex virtute Dei.

CHAP. III. Of the Covenant of suffering as Catholics, the Champions or true
Church of Christ.
IN my preceding discourse, having (I hope in God) sufficiently proved this
your second bond of sufferance by the two irrecusable witnesses of Christ's
life, and his death, I shall proceed to put the third in suit against any
reluctant and querulous humor which flesh and blood may breed in you to plead
against your spiritual conformity to your temporal condition; that in poverty
of spirit you may be suited to the penury of your fortunes, when you consider
seriously your selves bound by this triple cord to crosses and adversities in
this life. The third of your Covenants I proposed to you, was, the being
Catholics, which notion seems to be like the wheel in the middle of a
wheel in EZekiels Vision, for the Catholic Church is contained within the
greater circle of Christianity as a lesser sphere within a larger: and we may
properly say that the spirit of life is in this smaller wheel; for the being a
Christian in the large acception of it, will admit many stations of Religions,
without the enclosure of the Catholic Church, wherein the Symbol of the
Apostles incircleth the true Christian Faith; and because this term,
Catholic, is now the notionall distinction of your true Religion, from all
other, whose sects are comprehended in the amplitude of the term (Christian)
it will not be impertinent to explain unto you in a few words the Churches
sense of this denomination, Catholic.

We know the first followers of Christ, were called Disciples; It seems
Christ's humility would not admit so much honor in his life, as the faming of
his name by this celebration of it, which men affect especially to set upon the
front of their intellectual edifices: for Christ all his life endured the
meannesse of his earthly habitation to be branded upon his Disciples who were
called Nazareans, or Galileans, rather then the gloriousness of his office to
be charactered upon them. For his surname of Christ, which is Anointed, has a
reference to the highest dignities of the world; so as it was long after his
death, before he admitted his followers to that honorable name of Christians,
for you know it was at Antioch that the Disciples began first to be named
Christians, and he who never sleeps, was early up sowing tares, for Simon
Magus, Act. 11.26
who was his first seedsman, sowed even in the same furrows the Apostles were
plowing, and his followers wore the badge of his name, and many other Heresies
sprang presently up, all which covered themselves with this large cloak of
Christian; in so much as the name of Christian was justly odious in that
apprehension the Gentiles had of it. For the Heresies that were clothed with
that upper garment, were in their own nakedness, foul and execrable in all
sorts of pollutions. For those we call now Simoneans, and Gnostics, and
Ebionites, and many other, which by the Authors of their Sects are now
stigmatized, in those times were all involved in the latitude of Christians.
Whereupon before the death of all the Apostles, this denomination of Catholic
was peculiarly affected to the sincere and orthodox Christians, which surname
we take from our Mother the Catholic Church, notified so for the single, and
only Church of Christ by the Apostles Creed; and in the sequence of ages, as
the tares grew up in the large field of Christianity, the pure and sound part
of the Church assigned this as a special and specificall difference between
the Heretics and the legitimate Christians, and so it has been accepted ever
since as a notional discernment between them.

The word, Catholic, signifies literally, Universal, and was meant to
signify that faith to be only sincerely Christian, which was universally and
unanimously promulgated by the Apostles, and conserved by the general conseat
and fidelities of their disciples, and so transmitted by all the concurrent
testimonies of that age to the next succeeding it. So as the Church is not
called Catholic for the actual extention of it into all nations, but as the
major part in respect of all Christian societies, or in reference to the
promise of this expansion over the whole world. So that it has always been
one of the visible marks of the Church, the being the greatest society of
Christians of any one communion. And as all sects came out of the true Church
she retains still the name of the whole, as the body of the tree does after
many branches are torn off from it. So as the Catholic Church neither is, nor
ever was a comprehender of all the sects of Christians, but a compriser of a
greater portion of them, then any other profession which was separate from her;
and this majority the Catholic Church has had in all Christian ages. When we
say then the Roman Catholic Church, we do not mean to exclude all Churches
from being Catholic besides the local Church of Rome, but as that is the
head, and spring of Catholic communion, by way of dignity and preference above
all other particular Churches, we give Rome that single appellation, as the
head of all other Churches, or by reason of the derivation of the Catholic
faith from her to the rest of the Churches of the world, as being the Chair of
S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, who was constituted head of the
Universal Church, and as the same authority and prerogative is descended upon
his successors the Bishops of Rome, in these respects, in regard no Church is
accounted, nor is Catholic, that does not adhere to her communion, we style
the particular Roman, the Catholic Church.

For if we speak formally and expressly, the Catholic Church signifies the
body of all particular Churches united in communion with the Universal, and by
way of participation any particular Church may be called Catholic as it
partakes with the entire body. In this respect the Church of England before the
separation was a Catholic Church, and so are all Churches which remain united
to the Catholic Communion. So as when you hear it objected that Roman and
Catholic seem as incompatible as particular and Universal, you may satisfy
your selves, that Rome does not claim the title in that contradictory sense,
to say that the single and local Church of Rome is the Universal Church, but
that Rome is the head of the Universal Church, in which all particular ones
are to be accounted Catholic (in this sense of orthodox, and true Churches) as
they are united to that head. If the Protestants acknowledged any one
particular Church to be the head of their communion, that Church might be said
to be the Universal Protestant Church by way of eminency; and in this sense
the Roman Church is styled the Universal or Catholic Church. I have said this
as falling within the verge of the word Catholic, without intending to pass
further then the frontispice of the Church to read to you this inscription only
of Catholic, which is often misunderstood by those who will allow Universal
Religion, but no Catholic.

And, I hope, the signification of this your surname may minister great
assurance to you, when you consider that you suffer under that title and
notion, which has always been the discernment of true Christian Religion. For
S. Irenaeus (one of the Primitive Fathers of the Church) marketh, that none of
the sects of those ages did ever arogat this title of Catholics. Psalm. 90.
With a shield his truth shall encompasse thee, a thousand shall fall on thy
side, and ten thousand on thy righthand, but to thee it shall not approach.
It seems it has been preserved miraculously among the insolences of all
various errors, which never durst lay violent hands upon this lovely intemerat
virgin name of Catholic; the protection of the Psalmist has been verifide
upon this name, Scuto circumdabit te veritas, and cadent a latere tuo mill,
and december mill a dextris tuis, ad te autem non appropinquabit, for of all the
swarms of waspes and hornets which have flown out of the Church in all ages,
never any did so much as taint this name by their hiving themselves in it.
There has always descended upon the projectours of Babel this design of, Let
us make to our selves a name.
Faciamus nobis nomen; they have always affected the celebration of their own
name, that have set up for themselves any new sect, and their master has paid
them that vanity, for laboring in his high way, to allow the stamp of their
own names to be set upon the coin, whereof he is the Prince, and the Father.
This privilege the devil has allowed to all Arch-hereticks, and has
communicated so much of his prerogative as to leave their names impressed as a
signature upon their errors; but none have been permitted to vitiate the name
of Catholic by an imposition thereof upon any sophisticated Religion.

It is not my work now to exhibit to you the proofs of the legitimate
genealogy of your Religion from the true ancient Catholic stock, I believe
these very times may read to you the evidences of your antiquity by the
aversion which all novelty declares against it, I purpose only to convince the
controversies of humane nature in the point of sufferings, not to handle any
contention in matter of faith, believing you have more need of help against
the fingers of Pursivants, then against the arms of Pulpits, and this
reflection may serve you to confute the arguments of your flesh and blood
against patience in all your persecutions, in that you suffer under that notion
which only can sanctify the sufferings of any persecuted Christians. Conclude
then your selves happy in these times, since you are in a capacity of making
treasure of all your tribulations, when others, who it may be are under as
heavy a temporal yoke as you, drawing not in the same carriage of the
Catholic faith, will find the weight, even in this world, more intolerable.

They are much more to be lamented to whom we cannot apply S. John's comfort to
the distressed Catholics of his days, when he says, Apoc. 1.9. I your
brother, and partaker in tribulation, and the kingdom, and patience in Jesus
Christ.
Ego frater vester, and particeps in tribulatione, and in regno, and patientia
in JESU CHRISTO. For it is a deplorable sight to see our kindred, and friends
out of that state, which (as S. Paul says) Operatur tolerantiam earundem
passionum quas and nos patimur. 2 Cor. 1.6. Which works the toleration of the
same passions which we also suffer.
For which cause one of our greatest prayers ought to be, that as they are
partakers of the passion, so they may be also of the consolations; for Saint
Austin says, One may carry all things with him out of the Catholic Church but
charity, as baptism, the sacraments, and the resolution of suffering. But we
know how little comfort S. Paul gives to those who have all the material
parts of Christianity, and want the formal, and animating spirit thereof which
is Charity. 1 Cor. 13.
How much then ought you to praise God in all your Covenants of sufferings, to
see your selves comprised in the infallible Covenant and contract of reward
which is passed to his Catholic Church; Rejoice and be exceeding glad.
wherefore I may properly say to you, Gaudete and exultate, because you are
under the best notion of the afflicted in these times, when sufferings are so
universal, and the cause of them so little Catholic.

Upon those words of the Apostle S. Paul, Col. l.24. I accomplish those things
that want of the passions of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the
Church
Adimpleoea quae desunt passionum Christi in carne mea pro corpore ejus quod
est Ecclesia, S. Augustine asks how there can any thing be said to be wanting
to his passions who was God and Man, and taking vinegar for his last taste of
this world, declared giving up the Ghost that all things were consummate that
had been written of him; and answers the question thus, that all the passions
were completed that belonged to the head, there remained the sufferings of the
body, which is the Church, to render it suitable to the head, and the Apostle as
a principal member of that body might well say he was to fill up his share of
what was required thereof. So as it is not the insufficiency of Christ's
passions that needs a supplement of his Churches pressures, but the order of
God, who has designed the application of Christ's passions and merits to his
Church by this her conformity to his passive peregrination through this world.

And may we not say, that to unite his Church the more firmly to him, he has
left her fastened to the Cross upon earth, that this his body might seem to be
so much his own, as it might appear rather his natural body crucified, then
only a mystical signification thereof? For his passions being continually
iterated upon real flesh and blood, which have the honor to be called the
Temples of the holy Ghost, they may seem to have a more then ordinary
representation of the passive body of Christ. For if all the sacrificed bodies
of the Synagogue, and all the blood of irrational creatures effused in the
Temple, were figures of his natural body, why may not those sacrificed bodies
which are themselves Temples of God, well be said now to be an admirable manner
of somewhat more then representing Christ's living body? Therefore it seems
that Christ, to have a continual view of the glory of his suffering body, has
lest his Church in a bleeding posture, to present God his Father with a
perpetual show not only of a picture, or image, but as it were a real
exhibition of himself suffering in his Church; and no sight propitiateth God to
the sons of men so much, as this of seeing them as it were acting the sons of
God, under this notion of hoasts and sacrifices. In the quotidian unbloody
sacrifice of his now impassible body, the offering is of more dignity, but the
object seems not so affecting, and moving compassion, as the torn and
wounded figure of his Churches tribulations, the body whereof seems to be
designed to bleed continually for a lively memorial of Christ's merits in the
sight of God, and for a solicitor of an effusion of fresh graces, upon the
necessities of this body, until the bleeding and the beatify'd body be both
united into one conformity of glory.

This is the order God seems to have settled in the continuation of his
Churches sufferings, the which attract succors convenient at the same time,
that it may remain a perfect image of Christ's body, always grieving, and
always glorying, in a compliance with the design of God, and in the
proclamation of the triumph of Christ, who when he led captivity captive, gave
these gifts unto men, whom he left to triumph by the same Arms wherewith he
had overcome, which are Crosses, Sufferances, and Passions. Which consideration
may easily induce us to acquiesce to the order of the sufferances of the
Catholic Church, since the pressures thereof are not only continued memories
or imitations of that object which is so pleasing to God, the passions of
Christ, but even accomplishments of what was wanting of his passions,
(according to the meaning of S. Paul before related) which was the finishing
and consummating the effect of his sufferings, by rendering the body so fit for
the head, as Christ may have glory by the perfection of this work, as well as
the Church beatitude by this suitable incorporation.

Since S. Paul says, Heb. 2.10.
That it became God to consummate the Author of our salvation by his passion,
we must needs conclude it necessary, that we who are to be the matter which is
to be saved, and glorified, should be purged and perfected by the same manner;
and we may well say, that to answer to the single bloody sacrifice of such a
head, the perpetual sanguinary immolation of the body, during to the end of
the world, is but a decent conformity. With good reason therefore, as the head
of the Catholic Church was once victimated and offered up in blood to the
glory of his head, a 1. Cor. 11.4.
who is God, it is but just that the body should be continually immolated, as a
bleeding host to the glory of his head, who is Christ. Whereupon Saint Paul
expressing the proper state of the Church, 2. Cor. 4.11.
says, We that live are always delivered unto death for JESUS, that the life
of JESUS may be manifested in our mortal flesh; so as the Church seems
appointed a durable sacrifice to manifest and set forth the life of Christ to
his Father and himself. And upon this ground, the Church may be said to be in
some degree to Christ, what he is to his Father, that is, as he is the mirror
which reflects to the Father his eternal life and being, so the Church in her
passions reflecteth to Christ his own mortal life and existence. Which figure
of Christ upon earth, when the Father contemplateth, Heb. 1.3.
and at the same time sees him to be the brightness of his glory, and the
figure of his own substance, this must needs propitiate God infinitely to that
body, which represents to him such an honor he has received from the head
thereof, who being equal with him, did thus admirably subject himself for the
exaltation of his glory. Does not then the suffering Church rememorate to God
continually the highest point of all his glory? For the holocausting or
incineration of infinite worlds, in honor of the Majesty of God, would not
have been an oblation equivalent to the least drop of blood drawn from the
person of Christ; and therefore Christ's design in leaving his mystical body
in a suffering posture, is one of the highest strains of his divine
providence, both in order to the honoring of his Father, Ephesians. 4.13.
and the purifying of his Church, till The body and the head meet in the
perfect man, in the age of the fullness of Christ.

It then we review the state of the Church, even since the Empire of the world
undertook her protection and repose, we shall find her still continuing an
image of the life of Christ, who we know had diverse intermixtures in his course
through this world; sometimes he was in want and hunger in the desert;
sometimes declared in the glory of his miracles, feeding multitudes, and curing
all diseases; and again, sometimes we find him withdrawing and hiding himself
from the fury of the people; and then at other times we behold him in authority
and magistracy, expelling the prophaners of the Temple, and casting out the
evil spirits out of the images of God, and converting them into the temples of
the Holy Ghost. These vicissitudes we find also in the state of his Church,
sometimes prospering, spreading, and feeding those multitudes which suddenly
after have risen against her, and forced many of her members to fly out of
their reach into deserts and more dispeopled places; in some times again she
has propagated miraculously, and established her doctrine and her jurisdiction
among many unbeleeving nations in a wonderful felicity, and in sequence of
time has been banished and eliminated out of these dominions. These
alternative mutations are evident in the progress of her dispersion through
the world, and we know she shall extend her self at last to the ends of the
world, and if not cover the face, yet leave some of her marks upon the whole
face of the earth. We see her now as it were shipped away almost quite from
Africa, where she was so firmly planted many ages before America was so much as
known to be in the world, and now she spreads there to a good growth, while
her plantation in Africa lies waste and desolate, and the good seed which is
fallen in that ground seems to answer for the semination of those tares which
the Enemy has cast into these territories of Christianity. And we may note,
that all the ancient heresies which so much infested the Church in former ages,
are now almost eradicated according to the fate of them. Sap. 4.3.
Spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, and the new ones which are now so
flowerd, and full blown, will shed and fall away, like Tulips, which commonly
vary their colors every year somewhat, till the root it self in a few
years leaves bearing; and these varieties of vexations will successively
spring up to the Church; out of the ruins of some errors, new will be erected;
and thus she shall be exercised to the end of the world, till the man of sin,
Antichrist, shall come to purge her by a general conflagration, as it were of
the whole world in the flames of his blasphemy, which shall be the last
perfecting fire of tribulation, shall reduce the Church to the finenesse of
that gold which must pave the heavenly Jerusalem.

This is Christ's method and designation of the manner of his Churches passage
through this world up to him, in whom since there can be neither impotency nor
severity to this his body, for the Apostle tells us, Ephe. 5.29.
He nourishes and cherishes it as a man does his own flesh, we must resolve
that this order is in reference to the presenting his Father with a continual
intuition of his suffering body, whereby he is the most eminently honored,
Ephe. 5.27. Not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it may be
holy, and unspotted.
and to refine this body to the most perfect degree of purity, which this
local separation from the head can admit of, to reduce it at last to that
glorious estate, Non habentem maculam, aut rugam, aut aliquid hujusmodi, sed ut
sit sancta, and immaculata. Wherefore I may properly say to you as members of
this suffering body, 1. Pet. 4.12.
from S. Peter's mouth, Think it not strange in the fervor which is to you for
tentation, as though some new thing happened unto you, for all that you are
exposed to is in consequence of that order wherein Christ conducts his Church
through this transitory world.

TO clucidate farther this position, That God is propitiated by the sight of
Christ's suffering body, we may make this animadversion upon the constitution of
the Catholic Church, That soon after the issue of blood was stenched, so as
the bodies of the Martyrs did no longer afford that object of passions, the
Holy Ghost (who had charge to preserve the Church in the most acceptable
condition to God) presently infused a spirit of voluntary mortifications and
sufferings into the Church, whereby many holy persons were divinely inspired to
congregate bodies and societies of sufferers, which should be united by a vow
of perpetual afflicting and exercising their bodies, and making themselves
lively images of Jesus Christ crucified by the rules of selfe-abnegation, and
exhibition of a life entirely sacrificed in the toleration of all sorts of
austerities. This spirit wrought upon both sexes, and has produced those
admirable orders of mortified, and crucified Christians, which are so eminent
in the Catholic Church; so that the strongest powers of flesh and blood have
been subdued by the weakest portions of it; Virgins in the succeeding times
have been as sanctified by their civil death, and spiritual mortification, as
they were by the violent destruction of their lives, and consecration of their
bodies in martyrdom, to this ministry of the Churches sufferings, which were
wanting to the passions of Christ; and so this order of selfe-sacrificing,
seems to have succeeded in the Church, to the vacancie of the Martyrs,
whereby God has this spectacle continued to him, in the passions of the body
of Christ, in bodies and societies expressly set apart from the world for that
intendment, which are all the religious orders of the Catholic Church, whose
lives are nailed to the Cross by many vows of austerity, penance, and
self-crucifixion; and these make such a propitiating sacrifice of their lives
to God, as we may be assured he smells it as an odor of sweetness, since he
breaths down such a suavity and savor upon all their most asperous
regularities, which are of so ill an odor to nature, as the holy Spirit must
needs incense and perfume them to make them tolerable. And surely the purity of
these living hoasts does mediate powerfully for Gods patience and longanimity,
which he affords to many multitudes of such members of Christ's body, as do
rather crucify again to themselves the Son of God, as the Apostle says,
Heb. 6.6.
then exhibit themselves images of Christ crucified.

And thus Christ is so infinitely merciful, as he suspendeth the justice of
his Father against those, in whom he still seems to suffer, by presenting to
him that part of his Church, which suffers in him, whereby God has still
various remonstrances set before his eyes of the passions of Christ, to
ingratiate his Church to him in these later ages, wherein God has been pleased
to take the sweet savor of his Church, more from the Altar of odours and
incense within the veyle of the Sanctuary, then from that of bloody sacrifices;
that is, from the consecration of the religious orders of his Church, which do
as it were evaporate their lives in a continual fume of self-consumption, by
the fire of mortification. In this estate the Church may say, Psalm. 39.
Sacrifice and oblation thou would not, but ears thou have perfected to me.
Sacrificium and oblationem noluisti, aures autem perficisti mihi: For God has
been pleased to perfect the ears of his Church, in the attention to his
Evangelicall counsels of chastity, and relinquishment of all to take up the
Cross. And this is remarkable for evincement of the single legitimation of the
Catholic Church, that no other communion of Christians have their ears so
much as opened to the counsels of Christ.

It is strange, that they who have their ears open to nothing but the letter
of the Word, should be so deal to those so literal words as recommend these
Evangelicall counsels; 1 Cor. 1.18 The word of the Cross.
but as it is Verbum Crucis, we may fear it seems stultitia to them; but to
the Catholic Church, The power of God.
it is Virtus Dei. For sure it must be a singular operation of the Spirit of
God, to dispose the corruption of our flesh and blood to vow it self to such a
lasting martyrdom, in which, as out of an ingot, or wedge of gold, the Wire is
hammered, and drawn out by continual macerations and percussions upon the
flesh; and as the matter may be said to endure more by being wrought and drawn
out into small Wyers, then when a piece of gold is stamped and coined at one
blow upon it; so those bodies which are extenuated, and filed away by lingering
mortifications, and macerating austerities, may be truly said to have a more
painful kind of Martyrdom, while they are thus wrought as it were into the
image of Christ, then those who have it marked and impres'd upon their bodies
all at one incision; which is the case of Martyrs, that at one blow have Christ
stamped upon them; the others are long under the Press, whilst (as the Apostle
says) Christ is formed in them. Gal. 4.19.
And these are such as according to the advice of Saint Paul, do exhibit their
bodies a living host, holy and pleasing to God, (which he calls A reasonable
service) to wit, a spiritual and rational offering of soul and body, by
internal purity, accompanied with extinction as it were of the life of the
flesh, by vigilancie, abstinence, and attention to divine offices.

And surely there are many of these unbloody sacrifices, which are no less
acceptable to God, then the victims of the Martyrs. For certainly it is a
harder work to keep our blood continually from running the course of nature in
our veins, then it is at once to pour it out of them. The first is a
continual combat, and an uncertain victory, for the enemy who is overcome
every day, is still equally to be feared. The last though it be a sharper
conflict, yet it is a present dispatch, and a perpetual extinction of all
enmity. Wherefore S. Chrysostom says, He admireth more Joseph remaining
unscorched in the flames of such a solicitation, then the three children
coming with no scent of fire out of the furnace; and S. Bernard says, he
accounts a chaste soul not only to be celestial by origin, but even heaven it
self by similitude. And thus Christ who has carried our nature into heaven
above that of Angels, has left it a capacity even on earth to become
Angelical. So we may say now that Christ in his Catholic Church presents
his Father with Crucified Angels, to represent to him his passion, for the
Virgins who crucify their flesh with all the vices, and concupiscences of it,
may well be said to be Angelical Crucifixes. And thus the wisdom of the Holy
Ghost, has as it were varied the manner of Martyrs in the Church, and
subrogated crucified lives to officiate in the place of the sanguinary victims
of the Primitive ages, to make the same representation. Whereupon, as Christ
did leave the unbloody sacrifice of himself, to commemorat, and apply the
virtue of his passion, so it seems the unbloody obligations of the religious
bodies of his Church, were instituted by the Holy Ghost to continue that part,
which was acted in the victims of the Martyrs, which was a representation of
the passions of Christ to God the Father, whereby a continual influence of fresh
graces is impetrated for the support of the Catholic Church in all her
pressures; Ephesians 5.32. This is a great Sacrament in Christ. and in his Church.
so as we may say with the Apostle, Sacramentum hoc magnum est in Christo, and
in Ecclesia.

All this tends to illustrate to you, how the Church is designed by her head
Christ Jesus to remain a suffering body in this world, to the end, you who by
Christ's great mercies are members of it, may not be tempted by the infirmity of
nature to reply with Gedeon to the Angels of the Church, Judge. 6.13.
If our Lord be with us, why have those evils apprehended us? but rather in an
holy assurance that God cannot be removed from us but by our own diffidences,
let us answer with Eli to the message of ruin to our houses, 1 Reg. 3.18
It is our Lord, let him do what is good in his eyes.

It is observable, how to that Church of God, to which no temporal sufferings
were medicinally appointed, there was no reward but temporal felicity
manifestly proposed: for as all the sacrifices of the temple were but figures
of the blood of the Church of Christ, so all their promises were but dark
shadows of heaven, the which is as much cleerer, and better exposed to us, as
the sufferings of men are worthyer then those of beasts; and it was but just,
that they who had but water appointed for most of their purgations, instead of
the fire of Christian discipline, and mortification, should have but earth
measured out to the^ for their possessions, when the others who had all sorts
of afflictions prescribed to them, had heaven fairly laid open to their
expectations. And so there is more difference between the joys, and glories
that are proposed to Christians, in the sight of God, and the tasting the
grapes and figs of Canaan, conditioned with the children of Israel, then there
is between the being but aspersed with blood from the hand of a Priest, and the
being our selves the bloody sacrifices.

All our sufferings are then compensated by that measure of joy, running over
into our bosoms, which is a promise of becoming Gods, while the acquisitions
proposed to our elder brothers, were but the prosperities of men. Wherefore we
may note, that until the Cross had opened the gates of heaven, God did not
make that, the key, wherewith his children were so precisely ordained to unlock
them. For the ancient Patriarks who were to stay long without the doors were
not set to forge this key out of the fire of tribulation, with so much sweat
and labor, as those who were presently to be let in upon the perfecting of
their work prescribed in the Gospel. And so we may observe a far differing
order in the promulgation of the Law, and of the Gospel. For to the Generals
of the Law, there was given a promise of great temporal victories, triumphs,
and subjugations of their enemies, but we know the Champions of the Gospel had
very different Commissions, which consisted in all temporal sufferings,
defeatures and distresses. These were the articles which Christ pend for their
instructions, That they should fly before their enemies from place to place, be
taken, scorned, scourged and vilified under all worldly indignities; In the
world you shall have distress. John 16.33.
In mundo pressura^ habebitis, is one of the last orders Christ gives his
Commanders, so that we may see S. Peter, and S. Paul, diversely equipaged for
their expeditions to what Moses and Josuah were for their enterprises. And yet
the conquest of the first, was to extend to the whole earth, and the victories
of the last but to a molehill in respect of the other. So much more virtue
Christ's person has conferd upon crosses and sufferings, then God did allow to
temporal prosperity.

Upon this foundation, Christ, to raise this point of afflictions which is
annexed to his Church, as high as nature can carry it, exalts it by a revolt of
nature it self against all innate inclinations, advertising his Church, that
even their fathers, brothers, and friends, shall deliver them up to
persecutions. And I pray God you have the next following mark of the Disciples
of Christ as evidently upon you as you have these, which is, Luk 21.17, 19.
In your patience you shall possess your souls. This is the only shield
Christ has given his Church to cover her in all those showers of fiery darts
which are to fall upon her. He has left her patience, and permitted the world
to furnish her with passions, as necessaries for the exer ise thereof. So then
as you are members of the Catholic Church, you must stock your best
possession, and resolve to live upon that in all your other sequestrations,
which is, the possessing your souls in patience. For indeed, no body can
possess his soul, (that is, remain master of it) but by this security, for
without this hold of our minds, the world has power to alienate them by all
casualties and violences that invade them; and this is the reason why Christ,
who considers nothing in his Church but souls, having left this safeguard
for them, has exposed all the rest to the injuries of the world, as not worthy
his protection; so as having a sufficient power given us to maintain the
possession of our souls, we need not fear any dispoyling of such things, of
which, the deprivement may improve that possession, more then the fruition; for
the burning of our houses, and the consumption of all our temporalties, make
such ashes, as are the best soyling can be cast upon our earth for the bearing
of patience; and so we may fructify this possession of our souls, even by the
perishment of our fortunes; since I may then say with the Apostle, Heb. 10.36
Patience is necessary for you, that you may receive the promise of possessing
your souls. I may assure you consequently, that you may improve the best part
of your estates, as Catholics, in all your sentences, and sequestrations under
that notion, for you have the best treasure of the Church to undamage you,
which is the conformity to Christ's sufferings, which are better then
indulgences granted out of the redundant treasures of his passions, for these
do but deduct from temporary pains, and the other do improve eternal glory.

All you therefore who are suffering under the predicament of Catholics, have
no worse a cause to claim that disposition of you, which S. Heb. 10.34
Paul commends in the Church of his days, in those great fights of affliction
she sustained, when the Christians took with joy the spoil of their goods,
knowing that they had a better and a permanent substance, since the same
permanent assignment is made to you for all your privations, and in some
respect your portions are mended since that day, though the purchase cost you
not so dear as it did the then persecuted Catholics, for the accidental
beatitude of heaven is augmented since those days by the addition of many
millions of glorified souls, every one of which is some increase of joy
mutually to each beatify'd soul, by a participation reflected from one
another joys, and so the number of the blessed souls, in this regard, as it
rises, raises the glory of heaven. Wherefore it may now be better challenged
of you this rejoicing in your traffic for heaven, with the loss of your
goods, since you give less for it then the tortured Primitive Christians, and
have more in it.

For this consideration then, you who (as the Apostle says) have access
through your faith into this grace wherein you stand, Romans 5.4.
and glory in hope of the glory of the sons of God, ought also to glory in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation works patience, by which Christ has
ordained you shall possess your souls. And it may well be, that those who
spoil and dispossess you of your houses and lands, do restore your souls to
you, which were too much possessed by them, and thus you may be re-estated in
the best part of your selves, which peradventure was sequestered by your own
estates. For you know this was the case of the young man in the Gospel, whose
soul was under the seizure of his own possessions, which did put a worse
restraint upon him, then is upon any of your persons, when he had nothing to
hold him from following Christ, but the bands of his own abundances, the which
proved both sequestration, and imprisonment of his soul. Whereupon Christ
asks, Mar. 3.37
What permutation shall a man give for his own soul? since there is nothing a
condign exchange for the possession of our souls, you may chance be much
beholding to those who have given you your own souls at so low a rate as that
which they have taken from you.

The great builder of Magazines had his soul sequestered the same night his
Works were finished; and it may be many of your souls have been restored to you
the same day your houses have been plundered, and your lands sequestered, for
the next degree of leaving all to follow Christ, is the having all taken from
you for his sake; and there are many vocations which do not admit the
relinquishing of all temporalties, but there is none dispensed with, in point
of a cheerful acceptance of the loss of all for Christ: so that to repine at
any privation for Gods sake, is not only below the perfection, but without the
obligation of Christianity. ^ Cor. 6.6.
Catholics therefore must put on this armor of righteousness, either on the
right hand, or on the left; some by a voluntary disseisure of all, which
answers to the right hand as being Christian perfection, but all must wear it
on the left hand at least, as a shield in the warfare of this life, which
relates to a patient submission unto all the violences of this world, which
dispoyle and expropriate us of such temporalities, as we might possess for the
service of God, according to the several necessities of our callings; the
which when they are extorted from us by the injustice of the world, we must
account as called for by God, to some other use, and so we may say of our
goods, as S. Paul does of our lives, Romans 14.8.
Whether we live, we live to our Lord, and whether we die, we die to our Lord.
If our goods continue in our hands, they are consecrated to God; and if they be
torn from us, they are still offered up to him by our acceptance of his will,
unto which, our obedience is our sacrifice; so that we ought to say always of
our Fortunes, Whether they live, or dye, they are still our Lords.

In conformity to this, Saint Paul describes to us the state of true suffering
Catholics, By honor and dishonor, 2 Cor. 6.8.
by infamy and good fame, as seducers, and as true, as they that are unknown,
and known, as dying, behold we live, as chastned, and not killed, as
sorrowful, but always rejoicing, as needy, but enriching many, as having
nothing, and possessing all things. These times afford you without asking the
one half of these properties of Saints; and you must be humble suitors by your
prayers, that God (by the intercession of the Apostles, and others whom he has
been pleased to make thus completely Saints) would vouchsafe you the grace of
the other half of these qualities, which the world cannot give you, that you
may say with S. Romans 8.37 In all these things we overcome, because of him that
has loved us.
Paul, In his omnibus super amus propter eum qui dilexit nos.

Among all the figures which the Fathers have found in the bush that flamed,
and did not burn, this seems one of the most apposite, The state of the
Catholic Church; for she has always been in the fire of tribulation, which
has illustrated, and purified, rather then at all consumed her. The Spirit of
God residing in her, has given that quality to her fire, which the Fathers say
was in that of the bush, which became more fresh and verdant in the midst of
the flame; and they who look upon the Church in all ages, shall find both
inflammation and verdure conjoined in her perpetual passions, and her
propagations. It was the same fire, that which came down upon the heads of the
Apostles, and that which flamed in the bush. Wherefore it is not strange they
should both have those correspondent qualities of ardencie without combustion.
When you see therefore the Church on fire, you need not fear the consumption,
knowing that God is in the flame. And the holy Spirit, to intimate to us, that
the Church is of proof against all elements, Psa. 45.5.
tells us by the Psalmist in prediction of her estate, The violence of the
river makes the city of God joyful, the Highest has sanctified his
tabernacle, the very torrents that break in upon her shall water and fecundate
her.

Whereupon I may fitly say to you in all your exigencies in the name of our
Pastor bonus, Fear not little Flock, for it has pleased your Father to give
you a Kingdom, out of which the whole multitude of Churches, and states that
are now set up against you, cannot banish you. Remember that he who sent the
dearest of his flock as sheep among Wolves, could have sent them as whelps of
the Lion of Juda, to have destroyed all those beasts he exposed them to, but as
they were members of the Lamb, not of the Lion; that is, of his humanity, not
of his Divinity. So he chose to make them suitable first, to his infirmer
portion, before he would assimilate them to his triumphing condition. He could
have sent S. Paul to Rome in greater triumph then Nero, but he was better
pleased to send him thither in chains, and S. Paul charged with his fetters,
glories as in his proper throne, remembering so much his being raised up
together, Ephesians. 2.6.
and made to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, as he seems to mind
little his present depression in his chains, wherein he boasts as in the seal
of his Commission and Legatship. Ephesians. 6.20.
This was the order of Christ upon his choicest ministers; so as you need not
wonder at any temporary distresses you are reduced to as members of that
Church, whose being exempted from error, overpayeth her being exposed to
affliction; for sure the burdens of the Israelites are much to be preferred
before the darkness of the land, out of which, they were excepted. How much
more then are they to be pittyed who are making such Churches as have need of
temporal arms for their subsistence, then are those, who are suffering in
such a Church as no human violence can demolish? For Christ having left unto it
his passions, has also promised the presence of his person unto the
consummation of the World. Mat. 28.20.


I will conclude this point of the Covenant of suffering as Catholics, with
this clear evincement of it by S. Paul's testimony, who says, 1 Cor. 15.19 If
in this life only we be hoping in Christ, we are more miserable then all men.
Si in hac vita tantum in Christ sperantes sumus, miserabiliores sumus omnibus
hominibus, so as our portion in this life seems to be decreed so constantly
miserable, as we are not allowed to flatter our selves with the hopes of
felicity in this world. Justly therefore, where the Apostle bids us Be
rejoicing in hope, Romans 12.12
he joyneth to it, the being patient in tribulation, knowing all our hope must
rise out of sufferances, as they are the ligaments, and connections of the body
to a crucified head. Wherefore I will desire you for your comfort, as well as
your conviction in this point, to cast your thoughts upon the Cross, and
consider only the last miracle which Christ was pleased his body should exhibit
to us, after his soul was departed from it. You may note how out of that wound
which Longinus the Soldier gave him, after he was dead, there issued the two
greatest mysteries of the Church, to oblige us to believe that much more the
head himself never wounds or permits to be offended any of the members of
his living body upon earth, but upon some special reason, which always
resulteth to the good of that part he strikes, unless the part it self prove
the impediment by some miscarriage in the state of cure.

Wherefore that portion of his body amongst you, which is now bleeding under
his hand, need fear nothing but their own ill diet, and irregularity in their
hurts; for they may prove so healthful to you, as they may convert even the
diseases of your natural bodies, into a good constitution of your souls; and
the regiment of your selves in this case is prescribed by S. Paul, 1. Cor.
16.13. Watch ye, stand in the faith, do manfully, and be strengthened.
upon occasion of the same infirmity in his time, Vigilate, state in fide,
viriliter agite, and confortamini. This prescript contains a direction to
your three constitutions of Sufferers; Do manfully, relates to you as you are
men; Be strengthened, belongs to you as Christians; Watch and stand in the
faith, respects you as Catholics; and if you apply these remedies
respectively to your infirmities, even every one of these your three, Vae, Vae,
Vae's upon earth, shall afford you a Sanctus in heaven; and so as Men,
Christians, and Catholics, weeping here, you may attain to the singing
eternally of Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, in heaven.

CHAP. IV. Of the manner of discharging these duties of Sufferings.
WE may observe, that Christ spoke neither so frequently, nor so clearly of any
one thing to his Disciples, as of the sufferings and passions he was to
undergo; and yet they never understood him in them. They were always either
in such fear, or such wonder concerning them, as they never durst ask the
question for the explication of their perplexities. They quickly sought the
explication of all his Parables, Mar. 9.31.
that seemed referred either to his power or his promises; but in this point of
his disparagements, and his passions, they seemed so little desirous of an
illumination, as when he was ready to be seized according to his prediction,
and upon the point of separation from them, he is feign to reproach them that
they were dejected only, not desirous to be informed whither he was going, John
15.5.6.
whereupon depended all their reperations. The apprehension of sufferance and
passion se^meth to have such a quality as is reported of the Torpedo, for it
often stupifies, and benummeth our nature so, as it leaves not so much as even
curiosity stirring in it toward an inquisition of relief.

In like manner there may be many who have heard much of our exposure to
sufferings and afflictions in this life, and yet remain little enlightened in
the right conception of them; and which is worse, little inquisitive of that
method, whereby we must extract benefit and utility out of them. Wherefore it
is requisite to exhibit as fair a copy of that method as I can let forth to
their comprehensions, that they may not be dismayed by this Onus Domini, Jer.
23. The burden of the Lord.
nor be deluded by this supposition, that they are all the spiritual children
of Abraham, who have this mark of the Covenant of sufferances upon their
bodies, or their fortunes; for it is not this moral circumcision, or
uncircumcision, that intitles us to the promises, but the spiritual signature
of Christ upon the heart; it is not the exterior infliction of misery, that
qualifies us for the reward proposed, nor a present immunity and quiet, that
ejects us out of the society of Christ's passions; it is the interior
disposition in both cases, that constituteth the rightful title to
remuneration. In those who are actually exercised under their crosses, it is
the patient, and pious resignation which intitleth them to the conditions of
the Covenant; and in those who are in a present suspension, or truce, enjoying
a serene convenience, it is the preparation and disposure of their hearts, to
accept humbly all orders of God, in how sharp a style soever they shall be
issued against their persons, or estates. This frame of the mind, is their
evidence before the eyes of God, of their right to the contract of suffering
members of Christ. Job's disposition in his quotidian sacrifices, was no worse
an odor to God, then the suavity of his patience, fuming up from that mean
altar, whereon he lay offering up his ashes. The material part of affliction,
does not sanctify, no more then the same part in alms, or charity, does
expiate: they are both but Egena elementa, Gal. 4.9. Barren elements.
of themselves; the heart, and the spirit wherewith they are designed,
animateth and enliveneth them.

Wherefore we may say of sufferings, that which Christ said of a case not much
unlike to this, Mar. 7.15
That no affliction which goes into a man does actually sanctify him, but it
is the spirit of sufferance which resideth in him, that must render him holy,
for out of the heart only good intentions, and humble conformities do issue;
so as the external crosses that fall upon the man, do not formally purify
him, it is what comes out of the heart, as the emissions of humility, patience,
and charity, which his heart sends forth to meet, and embrace all Gods
pleasures, which can only hallow, and sanctify the man. Therefore I may very
fitly say, if any man has ears to hear let him hear, that you may not prove
so unhappy, as to bear the weight, and heat of the day, and to forfeit at last
your hire, for though God says He chastises every child he receives, he does
not say, He receives every one that he chastises.

S. James therefore when he proposes to his distressed countrymen, The
esteeming it all joy, their falling into various trialls and temptations,
coupleth this reason with his proposition, James 1.2.
Knowing that the probation of your faith works patience. So that the benefit
must be derived from the effect of tribulation, which is the producing of
patience, the which does not naturally spring out of misery, for this is but
the matter, or the subject whereon this virtue is exercised, not the spirit, or
form of this holy disposition. For which reason the Apostle compleateth his
advise, by proceeding to direct them, how to compass this necessary adjunction
to the matter of their afflictions, to render them subjects of joy, saying, If
any of you want wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives it to all men
abundantly. So as this joy, is a spirit extracted out of patience, not inherent
in the matter of passion; and patience is a virtue too celestial to be educed
as it were ex traduce, by the material body of affliction. It is infused by
the holy spirit, which S. Paul confirms, when he says, Romans 5.
that Tribulation works patience, showing the reason of this operation in the
next words, after the sequence of many good productions, derived from one
another, he sets this for the effective cause of all, because The charity of
God is powered forth in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Romans 5.5.
So as it is the spirit of God, moving upon these Waters, which divides the
light from the darkness, not the Chaos it self, that actively produces these
two lights of patience and hope, although the troubles and confusions of this
world, may be the elements, out of which the spirit may extract them. For
sufferings seem to be to patience, that, which matter, is to the artificer;
for though the art be seated in the mind, yet it cannot be actuated, and
expres'd, but by some matter that supports it; so patience, though it be a
spiritual disposition inherent in the soul, cannot be exercised but upon some
passion, and contrariety, which is the subject that renders it visible, and
discernable; for the Theory of this virtue can no more assure us of our
abilities in it, then the study of all the Geometrical rules of Sculpture,
can ascertain a Statuary of his sufficiency, until he has experimented it
upon either stone and brass, or wax, or clay at least; some matter is
requisite, to reflect to him the sight of his notions formed and reduced to
their last term, which is a visible exhibition of them. So there must be some
afflictions, though not the severest, yet some at least of a softer quality,
which must minister some matter of contrariety and vexation, to be as the
ground, and subject, exposing to our selves the work of our patience upon it.

Wherefore as joy in tribulations must be derived from Patience, so this virtue
must be acquired by Prayer. They who look lower then God for patience, do
commonly look also lower then heaven for the order of their afflictions, and so
fall short both in the knowledge of the nature of their evils, and their
remedies. For they who rely on nature, or moral reason for their cure, may
well be judged to impute their malady to Fortune; Whereupon S. James gives
this further advise, to that of our petitioning, and postulating of wisdom,
James 6.
that We must ask in faith, without any doubting or haesitation; not tossing
in an irresolution of referring our crosses to the eye of Providence, or to the
blindness of Fortune. Such a wavering aestuation of spirit the Apostle says,
must not expect to receive any thing. Our prayer therefore must be as fixed in
the belief of Gods special providence in all contingencies, as it is in the
confession of a God, for the one involveth the other; and then we shall find
such a joy in patience, as our reason it self shall witness to be divine, as
being beyond her reach so much, as she must avow it to be Digitus Dei.
Wherefore I beseech you to beware of the fluctuation of these times, between
the strength of moral reason, and the rest of faith; for there is nothing so
injurious to reason, as under the pretense of exalting it, to raise it out of
the own sphere of activity, exacting such effects of Reason, as are not to be
found lower then the orb of grace. For they who assign themselves peace and
repose in all tribulations, out of the stock of Phylosophie, prejudice Reason
much by their over-promising for it. For Moral Phylosophie at the highest, is
but as it were a Meteor suspended in the air, between the earth of a mere
sensual, 1 Cor. 15. The first man of earth earthly; The second man from heaven
heavenly.
and the firmament of a spiritual man. It is not so much raised above the man,
who is de terra terrenus, as it is below him, who is de coelo coelestis;
wherefore all the sweet-sounding and harmonious tongues of the Philosophers,
are but sounding brass, or tinkling cymbals, when they come to be used,
without the charity infused by the fiery tongues of Sion. We shall find the
hollownesse of such tongues which raised their noise to our ears, very light,
when we take them into our hands to weigh against the heaviness and gravations
of sad crosses and oppressions.

Methinks many of the Heathen Philosophers, supposed in their prescripts
concerning the minds insensiblenesse in all the passions, and pressures of the
body, that the body had but such a coexistence of place with the mind, as we
say those bodies of air have with the Angels that assume them, in which those
spirits are only as movers in a moveable subject, not at all united, or
affected, th^^ matter appears about them, which is not informed by them, but
assumed by them, to expose them to our sight, and so is only moved by them
without any connection to them. So sure their suppositions, that the mind may
remain unconcerned in all the sufferances and tortures of the flesh, require
that our bodies should be but such ayery matter, rather moved only, then
informed by our souls. For that apathie, the Stoics propose in all the bodies
distresses, cannot hold in that connection our souls and bodies have with one
another; and so whosoever shall rely upon their conclusions, shall find their
conceits ayery and vacuous, and their own bodies too solid, and too closely
conjoined to their souls, not to be affected with the burdens and pressures of
it. Wherefore our faith teaches us, to resort to a higher Principle residing
in our soul, and yet is no part of it, which is the Holy spirit of God,
infused by his grace, whereby we are instructed in the incapacities, and
deficiencies of our own nature; and the detection of our minds inability, in
her own single power, proves her enforcement, nay inablement, to resent all
the bodies grievances, and yet to bear them without distraction or reluctance;
and this discernment of that obnoxious state the soul is exposed unto, shows
her, That as she can do nothing of her self but suffer, and complain, so in
virtue of that supplementall aid, she can rejoice in tribulations, and
profess, Phil. 4.14. I can do all things in him that strengthens me.
Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat.

Whereupon we must be possessed of this principle, that peace of mind does not
spring up in affliction, as the plants did in Paradise, Genes. 2.
without either rain or culture. Patience which is the dew of heaven, must be
drawn from thence; and this, as it is attracted only by the means Elias used
to open heaven; so likely, it holds this analogy with his small cloud he could
scarce discern at first, which by degrees, came to a fullness equal to the
necessities is was desired for. In like manner, we must not look our prayer
should in an instant produce an effusion of patience and comfort upon us; at
first, it begins to show us some little visible token of Gods conversion
toward us, and so by a sequence of more appearance of his grace, we come by
these paces, into that full measure of patience, which the Psalmist
acknowedgeth, in secundum multitudinem dolorum meorum in cord meo, Psalm.
93.19. According to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, thy consolations
have made my soul joyful.
consolationes tuae laetificaverunt animam meam. And the holy Psalmist, who is
the King of patience, and of prayer, has left the Church his treasures in both
of them, out of which she extracts most of her public prayer. And certainly
whosoever shall follow this method in prayer, of patience, perseverance, and
expecting our Lord, shall find the same fruits springing out of tribulation;
and God has preserved for us, David's confections, to minister to all our
distresses, the which we may take at all hours, out of the divine custodiary
of the Psalms, which are prognostiks of all our diseases, and a ready
confection of remedies we may repair to in all occasions and emergencies.

With good reason, I would therefore humbly advise all in their several
necessities, to resort thither, both for a pattern of prayer, and a precedent
of the rare effects of it. There every suffering condition may find this
advise, Exultent, Psalm. 39. Let all that seek thee rejoice, and be glad upon
thee.
and laetentur omnes qui quaerunt te. The very seeking of God in sincerity, is
the first breaking of the light of gladness, through any cloud that hangs over
us. And this day opens farther, upon all those who advance in the fervor of
prayer, until at last they come to this meridionall point of Laetati sumus pro
diebus quibus nos humiliasti, Psalm. 89. We have rejoiced for the days wherein
thou have humbled us, the years wherein we have seen evils.
annis quibus vidimus mala. Not only days shall pass away lightly, with all
the weight of their evils upon them, but even years of persecutions set upon
this carriage of consolation, shall roll away as fast as days. When prayer
has atracted the spirit of patience, we know then from whence we receive it,
and so look always upon him for this provision in tentations, that we may
support them, and are not anxiously studious how to fence with the world, and
put by the injuries, and injustices of the times; which unquiet, and
distracting solicitude in our defense, proves often the sharpest vexation, as
it is more internal then other violences, whereas if we were resting with the
Psalmist under the covering of the wings of Prayer, Truth should compass us as
a shield, and we should not be afraid of the fear in the night, Psalm. 90.
or the arrowe flying in the day, of business walking in darkness, or of the
midday devil. Here are exemptions from the prejudices of all sorts of
persecutions, Psalm. 61. But yet my soul be thou subject to God, because my
patience is from him.
which these times will adapt easily enough without any cleerer application;
but all is comprised in this disposition, of replying to our natures in all her
refractory motions, Veruntamen Deo subjecta esto anima mea, quoniam ab ipso
patientia mea.

CHAP. V. Of the dignity and use of Patience.
YOu having been presented in the precedent Chapter, with this expedient of
Prayer, as the spiritual arm which must reach down Patience to you, I believe
it may be now conducent to the calming and sedations of your spirits, to expose
unto you a little the beauty, and dignity of Patience, which is the only
pleasing figure these times can set before you.

The paternall care and tenderness of God has provided for the preservation
of our feeble and fainting nature an admirable medicament, which is Patience;
in order whereunto, he disigned by intervals several egregious documents and
patterns of men, which (like knots upon a weak reed that confirm and
strengthen it) might support, and fortifiye the frail substance of humane
nature by example; until even the image of the invisible God, Coloss. 1.
and the firstborn of all creatures, nay the Creator himself of all things,
was to come in the fulness of time, to take this reed of our humanity into
his hand, and to make of it a scepter of Patience, with which he would exercise
his dominion over passion, and death it self. In the mean time, lest the
world should want some marks to guide it self by, in misery, he sent before
him diverse precursors of his Patience; and his first Commissary, was set out in
the very morning of the world; this was Abel, who has left to innocence the
right and inheritance of suffering, and of patience: Adam was the Founder of
Passion, and Abel of Patience, the remedy is exhibited so near to the
mischief; sufferings were the inventions of sin, and the salve of them the
prescript of innocence; for which cause, as their own peculiar right and
propriety, Patience is not only dearer to them, but more abundant in the
innocent, then in any other. And the holy Ghost has staid longer upon the
finished copy of another picture of Patience, then upon any one subject in all
the draughts of his pencil; for Job has more time allowed upon him, then any
one image of this holy hand, before the Original of all patience exhibits
himself; whose becoming passible, is so much above our comprehension, as it
leaves no wonder in his patience; and his vouchsafing to suffer, makes, in
some respect, impatience now rather a prodigious thing, then a natural, in his
members. For if we consider our selves participants of the divine nature, it
may seem strange the humane should be predominant in us. For which reason,
Christ seems to suppose he had imparted this power and dominion to the divine
portion in us; for when he had left his dearest members upon earth, with a
sentence of all manner of sufferings upon them, he tells them nevertheless,
that He leaves them his peace. Indeed it is far different, as he says, from
that the world gives; for his peace is to overcome come the world by patience:
and so the holy Ghost, in whom Christ promised as much as himself, when he
removed from his distressed friends, showed the virtue of his Commission of
Comforter, in nothing so eminently, as in Patience, which he conferred upon
Sufferers. Surely even the power of working Miracles, seemed not so great a
gift, as this faculty of Patience; for the Apostles and Martyrs found less
controversy in the virtue of their divine manner of suffering, then they did
in the prodigious part of their actions: these were often imputed to the power
of the devil, but the astonishing part of their meekness, equanimity, and
patience, the devil himself knew not how to calumniate; his pride would not
allow him to own such expressions of power; and so that temper of passivenesse
was accepted as divine, often, when the thunder and lightning of the other side
of their Commission, passed for diabolical.

Patience then seems a property, which God does not allow the devil so much
as to counterfeit the possession of; He is permitted to transfigure himself
into an Angel of light, rather then into the form of a resigned contented
sufferer, as being an unalienable prerogative of Christ, and the most dangerous
delusion, whereby he could work upon the spirits of men; and therefore this is
the special difference between the suggestions of good and evil spirits to
us, when they come both clothed in pious supervestures, that the hand of the
proud spirit leaves always some elation, disquiet, or impatience in us to vent
and divulge the virtues and graces he seems to dispense; but the sincere
inspiration of the holy spirit, always calmeth, and stilleth any emotion or
impatience in the possession of his graces, and leaves no heat or glowing in
our hearts, that solliciteth us to evaporate that spirit of joy and peace by
which they are solaced, but humbly and patiently to enclose them within the
humility of our own breasts. And thus true Christians by the virtue of their
Comforter, cording to Christ's advice, possess their souls in patience, which
gives them so inviolable a possession of their minds, as the devil can
neither distraine them by the power of his ministers injuries, nor distract
them by the paintings of his own artifices.

Wherefore God does punish the devil, by allowing him the exercising of the
patience of his Saints, as S. Gregory says, Holy Job was more Satan's
torturer, then Satan was the others tempter* for Jobs felicity was not
repealed by God, but only translated out of prosperity into adversity, which is
the mother tongue of the Saints. Patience is so unintelligible even to the
devils subtilty, as if he could conceive it, he might quench his flames with
it, but God in punishment of his first strange impatience, in not resting
quieted with his condition, has made eternal impatience the fuel of his
tortures; and on the contrary, Patience which induces an equality in the
Saints, in all their various vexations of this life, is a kind of image of the
state of their beatitude, while in all their external commotions, they retain
a smooth, and even composure of mind, which is a kind of image of eternity,
that is always the same; and in relation to this, S. Paul states the highest
virtue of the glory of Christ, in this, Coloss. 1.2.
of remaining in all patience, and longanimity with joy; so as that work, which
all the voluptuary arts are long about, and after much labor make but a little
joy, and quickly loses it again, patience finisheth in a moment, and
converteth all into delight and satisfaction, and treasureth it up as an
eternal provision: nay patience is so powerful, as it can turn into pleasure,
all those occurrences which sensuality must run away from, to save her petty
joys. All sorts of injuries of fortune, or of time, are presently translated
by this virtue into nourishment and delectation; for patience, as Tertullian
says, has God answerable for all she lays up in his hand; if she deposite an
injury in his hand, he is her revenger; if a loss, he is her reimburser; if a
sickness, he is her mediciner; if death, he is her reviver. What a freedom
does God allow Patience, to make him her debtor of all she commits to his
trust? And thus we see, unless we can find somewhat that God cannot convert
into joy, there is nothing that does not return that profit to Patience.

The Philosophers commended Patience highly, because they accounted suffering,
an evil, which that did assuage and mitigate; but a Christian may in regard
that it is good for him to suffer, esteem Patience as the best of his virtues,
because it keeps him the longest in that which is so good for him. Fortitude,
or active courage, runs through difficulties with all the haste it can;
Patience goes on leisurely, and enjoyes the good of suffering, and on it begets
mortification, and humility, which are the legitimate issue of a regenerate
man; and by this constant assuefaction and inurement to sufferings, some become
by degrees (as it were) impassible, and lovers of trialls, for as fire does no
longer burn ashes, the which receiving no hurt from it, do seem to love the
fire, and to cherish and conserve it, so one that is consummated in Patience,
comes often to a state of being no more diminished by afflictions, then ashes
are by fire, and to desire rather to keep alive the fire of his tribulations,
then to exstinguish it; for perfect Patience does not decline suffering, but
suppresses immoderate sorrow, which is the best office, for it is so provident,
as not to deduct at all from the matter of our meriting, but only to mitigate
the molesting part of our affliction; and thus contriveth our advantages so
well, as we may enjoy the deserving portion of our troubles, and not be
desolated or oppressed by the sorrowful property of them.

We see also Christ's method, in carrying them who were to convert the world
through all sorts of tortures, that their Patience might be a meritorious
miracle, which was a better quality, then their powers of speaking all tongues,
casting out of devils, or curing all diseases. Their patience in their own
wounds, was a more advantageous grace, then their gifts of cures upon all
maladies, for by that they improved their own souls, and by this, they did but
repair the bodies of others; they were but organs to pass these miracles into
the world, but they were owners of the other divine quality. And the residence
of the Holy Ghost in them, may be said to be expressed by their Patience; and
by their other miracles, only a transition of him through them. Whereupon S.
Chrysostom says, that to suffer patiently, is a greater gift then to raise the
dead; for indeed we are but debtors to God for this, and we have Christ our
debtor for the other; and it may be, there will be as many pearls even in
number, hanging upon the crowns of the Apostles, and Martyrs, depending on
their Patience, as on their powers. S. Justin Martyr (one of the greatest
lights of the primitive times) confesses that the stupendous equality and
constancy of the Christians in all their pressures, convinced him of a divine
inspiration thereof; and Antiquity testifies infinite numbers of conversions,
upon the same persuasion. Before Christ dignified Patience, and rendered it so
meritorious, the Heathens were so disposed to honor it, by the light of
nature, as this transcendency of it in Christians, easily prevayled with them,
to seek an author of it, even above all that they had before accepted for
their gods, of whom they had no records, but of their delights, and volupties.

The Philosophers extol Patience so much, as they set it even above Fate, to
which they subjected their gods. One of them says very elegantly, O admirable
power of patience! Other virtues do in some measure seem to contend against
Fate, Patience only seems to expugnat it; for those things which Fate has
decreed immutable, and necessary, Patience in some manner changes, turning
what was necessary, into the being voluntary; and as he that does ill,
perverteth his own goods into evils, so he who suffers evils, well,
converteth them into goods, because by a virtuous tolerating of evils, he
himself becomes good. What shall Christians then say in honor of Patience,
when the true author of Fate, (to whom nothing could be a necessity) was
pleased to subject himself to a necessity of patience? For his humane state
may be said to oblige him to it, as it is inseparable from sufferings; and he
chose even the most passive incidents to that nature, as poverty, pain, and
ignominy, and by all these onerations designed the exalting of this virtue of
Patience. Wherefore as the Heathens said, it was a spectacle worthy of God, a
patient man wrestling with Fortune, we may say much more, that it is a
declaration of our partaking of the divine nature, our patient submission to
the injuries of Fortune, since in nothing we exhibit a cleerer testimony of
Christ's communication of this dignity to us, then in this of suffering in a
temper of patience above our nature.

And it is not only the excellency of this virtue, which recommendeth it to
Christians, but the necessity of it, for the subsistence of all other virtues,
for Patience does that office to all the other, as moisture does to the earth,
which compacteth and consolidateth the parts thereof, which otherwise would
moulder away, and be inconsistent; and so all good dispositions of the mind,
must needs scatter and dissipate quickly, if they were not united and combined
together by patience; the wind of temptations that blows so continually upon
them, must needs disperse them, if they had not this compression of patience,
to hold them fastened together. For which cause, S. Paul tells the Christians
in this case of their probation, Patience is necessary for you, Heb. 10.36.
that doing the will of God, you may receive the promise; for patience is the
next disposition toward perseverance, to which all the promises are annexed,
for final perseverance is but a line of Christian patience, drawn to the end
of our life: Faith, Hope, and Charity, cannot persevere without this basis of
patience, to sustain them in this valley of tears, wherein we are now
sojourners. Insomuch that Tertullian accommodateth to patience, that sequence
of virtues which S. Paul assigns to charity, 1 Cor. 13.
and says, Love is not elated, nor froward, and suffers all, by this quality
of being patient. Chap. 8.9. I purposed therefore to bring her to me to live
together, knowing that she will communicate with me of good things, and will be
a comfort of my cogitation, and tediousnes.
Much may be said of patience, but sure nothing more sublime then this of
Tertullian, who investeth her with all the rights of Charity in this life.
Which considered, I cannot be said improperly to commend patience to your
conditions, in these considerations of the Wiseman, Proposui ergo hanc adducere
mihi ad convivendum, quoniam mecum communicabit de bonis, and erit allocutio
cogitationis and taedii mihi. She may be so good company to you, as you may
neither want your friends, nor your fortunes.

CHAP. VI. Perfect Patience defined; imperfect consolated, and directed.
NOw I have set up to you, Patience, as a kind of brazen serpent, to cure all
the stingings you are exposed unto, I must desire you to understand clearly the
integrall constitution of this virtue; for I ascribe so much efficacy to it,
supposing the Patience I handle, to be an habit, or disposition in herent in
our wills, which receives humbly, and bears uncomplainingly, all sorts of
temporal grievances and passions, in order to a conformity to the will of God,
and our similitude to Jesus Christ: or as S. Augustine says, True Patience
ordains us to endure all kinds of evils of pain, to avoid all manner of
ills of guilt. These definitions do not admit either a lame, or a pyde
Patience, to enter into this high form of efficacy, that is, if it be
peccant, either in progress and continuation, or imperfect in the integrity
that is required in it, of submitting to all sorts and degrees of sufferances,
as coming all from one providence. If we have any exception against any of
this Jury of Gods choosing to try us by, it is a sign our patience is but
spotted, and party-colored; or if it be intermitting, and by fits only, this
betrayeth the unsoundnesse of it. Wherefore we must endeavor to reertifie our
nature in these two deficiencies, to which it is very liable. The first is, of
having refractory intervals, in which we let in impatience, and murmur, to
detract at least from the entireness of this virtue, and suffer our senses to
speak too freely against that which offends them. The other is, of our
aptness to make motions to God, for some special exceptions in our
tribulations, resigning our selves but partially to his design upon us; and
likely this deprecation is of the present cross that is upon us, believing we
could place any other to sit lighter upon us, if that were removed, with which
we are actually charged; and thus we are commonly tempted, instead of suing for
patience to God, to desire his patience in our repugnancies, and that he would
change his mind rather then ours. This is a familiar irregularity in our
natures, in the point of our sins, as well as of our sufferings; there are but
few, but would relinquish all other, upon condition to have some one bosom sin
dispensed with; and so in our afflictions, there are very few, that have not
some bosom sorrow, that they would compound for the being exempted from, and
offer a resignation to all the rest. But this is that he sitation, or
stammering, as I may say, in out patience, which is a great impediment in our
conversation with God.

I do not censure the first motions, or the propensions of our nature to such
eases and discharges for such a fault as should distract or scandalize any body
with their own imperfection in this kind; for as S. James says, In mult is
offendimus omnes; Jam. 3.3. In many things we offend all; if any offend not, in
word, this is a perfect man.
si quis in verbo non offendit, hic perfectus est. These inclinations to ease,
are (as we may say) lapsus linguae, non mentis, but such trips and faltrings as
are hardly fully to be redressed: therefore this animadversion, is intended
only for advise, to every one that finds these knots and stonds in their
patience, to endeavor to work them out faithfully by Prayer, and not to stop,
or hang willingly upon them. But the interruption or discontinuance of our
patience, and breaking out into fits of intemperate complaints, is much more to
be precautioned and marked for reformation. For according to S. Augustines
similitude, this is not only to strike out of tune, but even to break the
instrument. For he compares Patience to a Lute, and tribulations to the
strings, which while they are well touched, make music; and so whilst
patience praises God, and gives thanks in tribulations, it yields a sweet
melody to the ears of God; but when we fall into querulousnesse, and murmur,
we break the Lute. When therefore we are so far advanced toward victory, as
the having our senses disarmed by affliction, (the pleasures of which are our
enemies sharpest instruments) we must watch, that he forge not new arms out
of our pains, which God has given us as armor against his shafts; and when he
has scarce any art left to wound us by sensuality, through the hardness of
our conditions, then he tempts us by the weight of our armor, to bring us to
throw it off by impatience and repining: which indeed is to cast off the
defensive armor, that God gives the Spirit against the devil and the flesh.
When the tempter has nothing left but pain whereby to provoke us unto
offenses, one would think he were not to be feared, since all impatience is but
a new pain, which is proposed to us, let us therefore consider that
consequence, when we are solicited to unquietness and reluctation.

When we suffer by the violence and injustice of our enemies, the Devil would
get nothing by this negotiation, if we should bear it patiently, and
virtuously, for he would lose as much on the one side, as he had got on the
other. What he had gained upon those he had made his officers, and emissaries
of iniquity and injustice, he would lose as much by the sufferers improvement
and sanctification, and so his malice would be unprofitable unto him; therefore
when he has prevailed with the one part, to act his suggestions upon the
innocent, then he turns to the other passive side, and labors to excite
there, murmur, fury, or impatience, that his trade may render him profit on
both sides, a great prize by the malice he imports into the hearts of his
factors, and may have some gain also exported to him, out of the minds of the
patients. We know when Satan had set the Sabaeans, and the Chaldaeans aworke
against Job, he left no art unessayed to infuse the fire of murmur and
impatience into his breast, and he took the subtilest way; for he got fully into
that half of him, that lay in his bosom; and though he did not kindle any
spark of rebellion in his own holy breast, yet we may say his heart was a
little overheated in the ardors of that fiery furnace he lay so long in, for
his breath savoreth a little of some distemper which he found in it. By which
we are not warranted to let our tongues loose, when they press, and strain to
break from us, to run after some provocation to murmur, and complaint, but
rather warned to be exactly vigilant in all such motions, since he, whom God
chose for his Champion, as having not his like upon the earth, had such words
shaken out of him in his storm, as we may believe he resented more their having
escaped him, then he did all the violations he had suffered from his adversary,
for he never wished any thing recalled but his words. Job 30.34.35.


This then may justly be a forceable motive to us, to set a watch over our
lips, when God has set such a guard over our heart, as affliction,
especially in a good cause. Let us not then, when there is no fault in the
cause, make one in the calamity by our impatience, since we ought rather to
render double praises, both for our affliction, and our innocence. When we are
punished for crimes, we ought to have patience; and when we suffer innocently,
we may well add gladness to it; and we find a good cause producing this
effect, in the Macedonians, when they were in your cases; whom the holy Ghost
has left upon record as a precedent for you, 1 Cor. 8.2.
In much experience of tribulation they had abundance of joy; and their very
deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their simplicity. All this treasure of
virtue issued out of the mine of Patience and long animity, which makes by the
power of grace even the duration of the pain an antidote against impatience.

But by exhibiting unto you this high mystery of Patience, which is, as I may
say, a sacred confirmation of all virtue, I do not intend to discourage those,
who are but yet initiated, and catechized in this mystery; for this ultimate
perfection of rejoicing in tribulation, is not a precept that claims our
performance, but a council that shows the excellency we may aspire unto;
which the grace of Christ has set within our reach, to exercise that virtue,
which though it seem supernatural, is but suitable to the members of such an
head. Those therefore, who find not in their natures this finished
disposition, need not perplexe themselves with any scruple of faultiness, for
if they are but in this temper, of sincerely and humbly demanding of God that
grace, which is requisite for the discharge of their duties in these cases of
tentations, though they find for the present some aversion and remtencie in
their minds against their miseries, they may safely conclude, that God will
minister and suppeditate grace sufficient for their support, from falling into
any direct sedition, so long as they feel a sound and rectified desire to
advance in the state of perfect abnegation. Let them not disquiet themselves,
with their distances from the top of the mountain, so long as they are
faithfully climbing. In this case, the indulgence of Christ is very applicable,
when he says, Those that are not against him, are with him. So long as we
find not our will joined with our weakness, against this self-denial, we shall
not be charged with disloyalty.

There was a great cloud of infirmity in that fathers faith, when he began with
Christ, Man. 9.21. If thou can any thing help us. I do believe, Lord, help
my incredulity.
in Si quid potes, adjuvanos; yet as soon as he was advanced to Credo Domine,
adjuva incredulitatem meam, his suit was granted. In like manner, when we begin
with much imperfection, we must not distract our selves in apprehensions of our
faintness, but proceed sincerely to I desire, O Lord, a perfect conformity to
all thy orders, help my inconformity. This prayer constantly pursued, will
certainly obtain the expulsion of that spirit which casts us often into fire
and water, into several distempers in our afflictions. Let us remember Christ's
lesson in this case, All things are possible to him that believes.
Omnia possibilia sunt credenti; if we aspire faithfully to this perfection, we
shall quickly find we have no dangerous enemies left, when we have once
undertaken ingenuously our own reduction. We must not expect to taste suddenly
the good relish of mortification. The first fruits of Canaan were held to be
unclean, to figure to us, that there is always some impurity in our first
thoughts, and designs of a spiritual conformity; we must expect such a
progression in this perfection of Christianity, as Isaac made in the digging of
his Wells in the Land of Promise. The first water he called contention, the
second enlargement, and at the last he came to that he called abundance, when
all strife and difficulty was ceased. So we shall in the beginning of our
digging for this refreshing water of Patience, find the inhabitants of our
earth (our sensitive appetities) raise great opposition, and in our pursuance
and progress we shall meet with less contradiction, Job. 7.38. Out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water.
and more enlargement of our spirits, and at the last after a faithful
prosecution we come to that abundance of water, which Christ promises, Flumina
de ventre ejus fluent aquae vivae; which is not only acquiescence, but joy and
exultation in all pressures and distresses. This is the method of our advance
in spiritual graces, as the Psalmist designeth to us, Psalm. 87. They shall go
from virtue into virtue.
Ibunt de virtute in virtutem.

Wherefore we must not be dismayed and relaxed, when at first we encounter
difficulty and contestation in our senses, against patience and conformity, but
remember how gracious and indulgent God is to a little tender virtue, that has
but the quality of sincerenesse; Apoc. 3.8. Behold, I have given before thee a
door opened, which no man can shut, because thou have a little power, and have
kept my word, an^ have not denied my name.
as the holy Spirit intimates by the Angel in the Revelation, saying, Ecce
dedi coram te estium apertum quod nemo potest claudere, quia modicam habes
virtutem, servasti verbum meum, and non negasti nomen meum. So as here we see,
God, to a little disposition, opens a large passage toward plenitude and
consummation. When therefore we find our hearts set to keep Gods Word, and
that in the first inchoation of our virtue, we do but accept afflictions in
his name, he that is Sanctus, The holy one, and the true one.
and Verax, will open that door of perfection which the violence of the whole
world shall not be able to shut any more against us. Wherefore in all our
straits and coarctations, either of our spirits, or of our fortunes, let us
remember how the holy Spirit calls to us, Dilata us tuum, and implebo illud.
Psalm 8.11. Dilate thy mouth, and I will fill it.
As long as we do not contract and shrink our hearts in a perverse chagrin,
we need not fear the finding them yield, and give a little at first in the
pressures of affliction; and though we never arrive at this last station of
perfect Patience, of joying in tenrations, there are many mansions in heaven,
which answer the several promotions upon earth; Non omnes Apostoli, 1 These.
5.14. Not all Apostles, not all Prophets.
non omnes Prophetae; the Angel promises their reward, Timentibus nomen tuum,
pusillis, and magnis; so long as we acknowledge our own minority, we may hope
for our portion among the little ones. Apocal. 13 To them that fear thy name,
little and great.
This I say only by S. Paul's warrant of Co^solumini pufillanimes, suscepite
infirmos, for I persuade every one to this holy ambition of ascending as high
even as the steps of persecution can raise them; and there is no ladder so good
as this of the Cross, to scale by; and in our invitation to the nuptial
supper of the Lamb, it is not humility, but rather pusillanimity, to aim to
sit down but in the lowest place; they who point no higher, design to stay too
near the door, and so may more easilyer fall short of that, then they who
aspire to the place of those who have left all for Christ, which is the throne
of judging nations.

With good cause then, I humbly advise every ones aspiring to the supremest
pitch of patience and resignation; And I have warrant to discharge every one
from dejection and confusednesse in this case of imperfection, when they do
loyally and ingenuously enterprise a proficiency in this virtue. Phil 3.15. Let
us as many as are perfect be thus minded, and if you be any otherwise minded,
this also God will reveal to you.
And for this reason the Apostle when he advises perfection, yet admits
infirmity to an expectance of Gods perfecting thereof, saying, Quicunque ergo
perfecti sumus hoc sentiamus, and si quid aliter sapitis, and hoc vobis Deus
revelabit. They who are not already stated in the occomplishment of this
virtue, may hope for a further improvement by the compassion of God to
ingenuous addresses.

Gods indulgence to the incompleatnesse of our Patience must therefore be taken
hold on, only as a stay to keep us from falling into dejection, and is not to
be used as a rest, whereon to lean the wrynesse and bent of our perverted
nature; for so we may insensibly in duce an habit of crookedness and petulancy
into our own dispositions.

Let us therefore have this direction of S. James always in our design at
least, Let patience have a perfect work, James 1.
that you may be perfect, and entire, failing in nothing. By this we may rest
assured of the perfection which is contained in Patience, since the Apostle
ascribes this integrity, and indeficiency to it in all things; So that when we
are possessed of this compleatment of Patience, then we are instated in a
fortune, which is so unobnoxious to the distresses of any want, that all
privations administer to us the end of all possessions, which is joy and
satisfaction. This has always been the state of the Saints, 1 Cor. 6.10.
by which having nothing they were possessing all things. For out of this
treasury, they who lose parents, children, houses, Mar. 10 30
and Lands, for the Gospel, have their assignment for the hundredfold now in
this time. And, in confirmation of this truth, we find by experience, that
there is no condition so perfect in this world, that has not often need of
Patience, to make it tolerable; and they who have perfect Patience, never want
any other possession to make their conditions acceptable. All which duly
pondered, I shall not need say more in recommendation of this excellent virtue;
but it is requisite to close up this point with the recalling to your memory
that our only addresses to this plenipotentiary consolation, is a constant
re-search of it by prayer. 2 These. 1. Our Lord direct your hearts in the
charity of God, and patience of Christ.
In that order therefore I shall leave it to you with this petition of S. Paul
for the Thessalonians upon the same occasion, Dominus dirigat corda vestrain
charitate Dei, and patientia Christi.

CHAP. 7. Of the great benefits may be extracted out of affliction.
AS I have produced your obligation to suffer, signed as you are men, sealed as
you are Christians with the signet of the Cross, witnessed and delivered as
you are Catholics, in the Sacrament of Confirmation, (wherein you deliver your
consent as your own deed, whereof the chief officers of the Church are
witnesses) I have also suggested to you the most expedient means of losing
nothing by this engagement, which is, to procure Patience to be given you for
your counter-security from God, to whom you stand bound in this contract of
suffering. This is a celestial manner of negotiating, the demanding of him to
whom the Indenture is made, the means of discharging it; but this is the
method of God, and worthy of himself, to require nothing of his creatures, but
what they may be furnished with first from him, for but asking it. I have
therefore proposed patience for your discharge, and Prayer for your acquisition
of patience; and since Prayer may accommodate you with what you have most need
of, your necessities may be said to provide against themselves, for commonly
they are infallible furnishers of Prayer.

And having thus brought you out of the Hospital into the Temple, desiring you
to raise your thoughts out of the infirm and wounded part of your condition, to
the contemplation of your being imitators, or rather types and figures of that
glorified body, which chose this way you are now passing in, to enter into
glory, I may hope the having disposed your taste, for the good relish of this
chalice of Mount Calvary, whereof you are now to take your part; And this
draught you are making, has more of the cup which Christ promised his
Disciples should pledge him in, then the Sacrament of the Novellists has of
the cup of the last Supper, since they receive it but as a bare figure, and
simple commemoration of the blood of Christ; so as you may comfort your selves,
that even in the interdiction of your Religion, there appears as good an
image of the passion of Christ, as in the highest exercise of theirs. For even
the unbloudy part of your sufferings, are signs, images and symboles of the
passion of Christ, and they challenge no more, even for the honor of their
Sacrament. Well then may this serve you, to answer that common reproach of your
wanting half the Sacrament, that it ill becomes them to object this, who
themselves want it all, having taken both from Clergy and Laity that reality,
wherein consists all the virtue and efficacy of it. But this has intervened
as a Parenthesis of offensive Arms, in this contexture of defensive, which is
the work I have only taken in hand. I will therefore reconnect this thread of
my discourse, to that web I have my pen upon, which is, The extracting of
benefits out of afflictions.

Many things have usurped the glorious title of goods, by the power of common
fame, (which in our natural bodies is a conspiracy of the multitude of our
senses against our soul) whereby the received felicity of the world, is placed
in things so perilous, and obnoxious, as they are really the less goods, the
more they are reputed so. Which easily appears, in the testing and trial of
all those flecting fruitions which our cupidities pursue, as riches, honors,
pleasures, and the like, the duration whereof is likely the less, the more the
desire proves solicitous thereof. The prejudging of our senses, induces this
so unsafe opinion, for their ruling and injuring of us is coetaneous with us,
and our reason is not of the same age, which is the cause, why our senses
anticipate the apprehension of good and evil; insomuch as our reason being
much later called in to advise us, can hardly confute this preoccupation, even
by a demonstration of the abusivenesse of such received fallaeies. For Man, as
if he studied nothing but to elude the sentence is upon him, seems to set his
heart upon nothing, but the eating of his bread without any sweat, and the
meeting with no thorns upon the earth. So far are our senses from acquiescing
to the sentence of God, as even the society of God himself in labors and
crosses, does hardly convince us of the benedictions contained therein, albeit
he has not only read this lesson upon them, but has personally infused that
quality into them. And shall our faith assent to so high a mystery, seeming so
contrary to our reason, and shall we not credit this assertion, of the good of
sufferings, because it is averse to our senses? Shall we believe, that under
the sordid and despicable veyle of flesh and blood, the Creator of heaven and
earth was covered, and shall we not easily accord, that under the dark and
obscure covers and cases of temporary miseries and afflictions, there remain
real glories and benedictions? since as the first is clearly De fide, the
second cannot reasonably be denied to be Proximam fidei.

Me thinks this sense of Crosses, should easily be accepted by Catholics, who
are imbued with the belief of so high mysteries, when they believe, that which
appears Bread in the blessed Eucharist, to be really the glorious body of the
Son of God, there should be little difficulty, to allow those sufferances,
which seem ills to our senses, to be really such goods as they are asserted by
our faith; for surely, if they have but near so much patience, to make this
conversion, as they must have faith to believe the other, all crosses and
adversities in this life, are really converted into blessings, while they
remain under unhappy and unlikely apparencies, after such a manner as the body
of Christ is truly present in the holy Sacrament, though covered from our
senses under the veyles of no way resembling species.

Since God then covers and retecteth the greatest blessing he can confer
upon his Church, (it being even his own Son) under so improbable appearances,
we may easily believe his corrections, though they are overcast with never so
unlikely outsides, to have an interior goodness, and benediction, according
to his word, especially, since we are sensibly convinced of this verity by
frequent experiments in our selves and others, but in the other sublime
mystery, our faith is always put to strain up to it, and that never
descends to a manifestation to our reason. Besides, most of the things of
this world, which seem to us never so veritable, and sincere, are but veyles
and cases of somewhat else then is extant in their superficies. For we see the
substances and essential forms of nothing, only the figure, color, and other
accidents of all things sensible; and so the colors and shapes of evils in
this life, cover and infold eternal goods, and the specious figures and
appearances of pleasures, Psalm. 11.8. It is good for me that thou have humbled
me. Luke 16. I am tormented in this flame.
shadow over to us everlasting miseries. Whereupon many come to confess with
the Psalmist, Bonum mihi quia humiliasti me, and too many to complain with the
rioter in the Gospel, Crucior in hac flamma, for having wanted the gentler fire
of this life, Thou did receive good things in thy life time. Job. 21. They
lean their dates in mirth, and in a moment they go down to hell.
and having had too much of Recepisti bona in vita tua. For, alas, how many
does this sentence of the holy Spirit surprise, Ducunt in bonis dies suos, and
in puncto ad inferna descendunt!

Although prosperity in this life be not formally an evil, yet as there are
many aliments, which are in themselves sound, and harmless, yet unhealthfull
respectively to several constitutions; so the felicities of this life, find
very few such constitutions as can digest them, and convert them into the
increase of the body, unto the edifying it self in charity. This is the
advance and growth which is expected from the members of Christ, Ephesians. 4.6.
the augmenting in charity; whereof we may too truly say at least, Job 2 8. It
is lately found in the land of them that live pleasantly
Raro invenitur in terra suaviter viventium. Wherefore holy Saint Bernard upon
the rich man's being cast into flames, and the reason being given him, that he
had received good things in this life, infers from thence, That the blessing of
suffering must be greater in this world, then that of fruitions; and argues it
thus, That the Divine judgment did not cast Man out of the garden of pleasure,
to allow him by humane invention to contrive another Paradise for himself, out
of the earth, but left him with a sentence of being borne to labor; and so if
he decline travail and pains, as he avoideth what he was borne to in this
world, so he shall be excluded from what he was designed to in the next. In
which consideration, S. Gregory says, A man who passes carelessly on, crowned
with roses through this life, is like a Prisoner carried through pleasant
fields, and delightful gardens, who being amused with the agreeable objects in
his passage, forgets what he is, and whither he is going. So dangerous a
conveyance is worldly felicity, as the Devil dares trust that, even alone,
without any provocation, but even plenty it self to bring us to him. For the
adherence to the commodities of the earth, quickly raises such a damp and
indevotion in our spi its, as there needs no crying sins to mend our pace. This
very stillness, stupefaction, and spirituasi Lethargy which we sleep our
selves into, in the love of this world, is one of the safest ways the Devil
can wish us into. We may therefore fitly say of the state of many men's
prosperities, that which S. Basil said elegantly upon the cleernesse of the
sky in a great drouth producing a famine, that It was a sad serenity, in which
the very fairness and purity was a punishment. So the smoothe, and
undisturbed felicity of many fortunes, proves an unhappy calm, occasioning a
great sterility in all spiritual productions. Our love to Christ thrives best,
in such a mould as his to us was planted in; which we know was an abundance of
all sorts of passions; and such a soil is so much more proper for our faith
and charity to prosper in, as the same temptations which master us in felicity,
are defeated by us in adversity; as S. Gregory notes in Jobs trial, saying,
that Man who was overthrown in Paradise, overcame upon a dunghill; there the
Serpent overcame him by a woman, here he vanquisheth both the Serpent and the
woman.

So as we may say, That sufferings seem to render even our decayed nature,
stronger then felicity could preserve our entire. For Adam was ruined by the
same attaques, which Job repulsed. Scarce any thing can endeare the virtue of
affliction, or raise the obnoxiousnesse of prosperity above this instance. And
surely, although there were not so much facilitation toward our being
perverted in temporal happiness, yet methinks this defect which is so
notorious in it, should discredit the affectation thereof; for it is evident,
that we cannot have so good a trial of our loves to God, whilst we are under
his sensible caresses, as under his severe corrections. We see Satan had so
much color for that argument, that in prosperity there can be no trial
whether a man love God or no, as he presses it even to God himself in Jobs
case, asking, Does Job fear God for naught? alleging that Gods benefits did
not admit of a total proba^tion of that servant whom God himself commends.
Therefore he puts God to the trial and examination of his love, when it
has nothing but pure duty, and no temporal interest to feed it; and it
seems God allowed this as a good argument, when he changed his condition into
that which was the properest for the examination of his love, and might prove
an irrefragable evincement of his sanctity. For a patient acquiescence, and a
faithful praising God in affliction, does not only silence even Satan
himself in his office of accuser, but sets us so much out of his command,
as to render us his impeachers and accusers before the throne of God. For there
cannot be a higher charge against his contumacie in his beatitude, then man's
returning praises to God in his miseries.

You may see then that Affliction does not only furnish us with arms
defensive against our enemy, but also ministers offensive arms in Gods cause
against his Rebel: for nothing wounds Lucifer deeper with this point of his
ingratitude, then a Lazarus playing the Angel, finging Gods praises in all his
sores and provocations. And it seems very equitable, that they who are to
possess the estates of the delinquent Angels, should serve God thus here on
earth, against them whose confiscations are assigned to them. And in order to
this, we may observe, how God has always employed his dearest followers in
this service, to shame and confound the Devils first impatient pride, by their
equanimity and calmnes of Spirit in all their pressures and desolations, making
the praises of the scourger, as S. Augustine says, the plaster of their
wounds. For which cause, holy Judith, when she undertaketh to comfort her
brethren in a desperate extremity, suggesteth to the Priests, to represent to
the people, that their fathers had always been tempted, to try whether they
did sincerely love God; and bids them remember how Abraham was ^^proved by
many temptations, and so made the friend of God; and Isaac, Jacob and Moses
passed the same way of probation. And concludes with this inforcement of the
virtue of afflictions, Judith 8.2. All that have pleased God through many
tribulations have passed faithful.
Omnes qui placuerunt Deo per multas tribulationes transiverunt fideles.

We may remark also that among all the Patriarks and Prophets, who had the
honor to be types of Christ, we find but one exempted out of the list of his
precursors in diverse passions, and afflictions; and Solomon only passing
through the smooth delicious alleyes of this world, fell so dangerously, as the
holy Ghost has not set him up again before us; whereby we may conclude, that
God intended the leaving of Solomon's case undecided, as a terrible admonition
to us, of the perilous estate of prosperity, since so great an organ of the
holy Ghost, is not manifestly restored to his place, where all the rest are
evidently fixed, following the suffering Lamb, whom they had the honor to
precede, and to prefigure. So as although we may hope well of Solomon, we may
safely condemn continual prosperity, as a formidable seducer, since worldly
felicity leaves us in suspense of the salvation of Solomon, and affliction
gives us great hopes of the reconciliation of Manasses.

And it may well be observed, that the first Angel which is recorded in
scripture to have been sent to the earth, was upon the occasion of an extreme
distress; Genesis 16.12.
which was to Agar flying in the desert; and the Angel gives this testimony of
the reason of his mission, Because the Lord had heard the voice of her
affliction; so as Agars being in misery, brings her to be honored by the
ministry of an Angel, sooner then Sara's being mistress, and in authority;
and so distress had quickly obtained pardon for undutifulnesse. Wherefore all
they who have faults to expiate, may be glad to have sufferings for
intercessors, for they speak in virtue of that blood, which calls for better
things then that of Abel; they mediate reconciliation, and deprecate revenge.
And therefore we find God vouchsafe to say, Cum ipso sum in tribulatione; I am
with him in tribulation.
and his presence is often so manifested in tribulation, as they who had scarce
heard of him before, come to know him, and acknowledge him in that appearance.
Which made S. Bernard to say very elegantly, D^n. 3.93.
that God appeared so visibly in the tribulation of his children in the fiery
furnace, that even the heathens themselves confessed he was there, affirming
that the fourth was like the Son of God: so that it seems, God will permit
the devil to pass for a God, with them who are in the power and dominion of
the world, rather then reveal himself to that presumption, and chooses to
enlighten the blind of Babylon, only by the fire of affliction. And for that
end, he preferred the furnace, for his Temple to appear in, before all the
sumptuous edifices of Babylon. In like manner, when God resolved to show
himself to Nabuchodonosar, he would not vouchsafe to come into his palaces,
but carried him out into the fields, and laid him as low as the grass that fed
him, and then in this posture of being nearer a beast then a King, vouchsafed
to visit him, to show him how much more he esteemed misery and confusion, then
temporal glory and magnificence. And thus we see, how man in honor, becomes
like the beast that perishes; and man in dishonor, being reduced even to the
likeness of a beast, recovereth and restores the image of God in him self,
which his other condition had almost obliterated.

Nay affliction is so proper to finish and perfect Gods image in us, as Daniel
had that given him for an improvement of his sanctity, which he had by order
from God, prescribed Nabuchodonosar for expiation of his impiety. He for having
destroyed those Idols, which the other had adored, was sent among the beasts
for a reward; the lions den is given as it were for a recompense of his
service, against both the spiritual, and material dragon; and devout Toby was
brought into darkness and the shadow of death, Tob. 12.14
as a gratification of all his pious familiarities with the dead; for when the
Angel remembers him of his own merits in these offices, he tells him, that
Because he was acceptable to God, is was necessary that tentation should prove
him. So as the tribulation of this world, seems the penny conditioned for in
this life, and due as wages to the travail in Gods service. And indeed the
weight, and heat of this day, or rather moment of this life, may well be
accounted our best salary in it, since the Apostle tells us, that Light and
momentary tribulation works in us exceedingly above measure an eternal
weight of glory; 2 Cor. 4.17.
and so God who knows how the crowns are to be given out by weight,
according to that we bring in of crosses, marked by Gods stamp upon them, he
may well load us here, in that order, to the elevating of us, by his justice,
as well as his mercy.

Whereupon all the Saints, the liker they grow to the image of Christ under
Gods hand, discern the cleerlyer this design of God, and so rejoice in their
tribulations, proportionately to the light they receive, by these openings of
their own mudde walls, wherein they are immured; and so by Gods making as it
were through lights in their bodies, the soul comes to have the clearer
prospect on all sides of her, whereby she discerns, that God in this work of
breaking down the matter of carnal appetites, which are like walls about us,
removes but dust, and brings in light; and therefore we see, how the Martyrs
rejoice while these windows, as I may say, and through lights, were beating out
in their bodies; while they were made transparent with wounds, the soul had
the more light given her; and so they looked upon their enemies, as set awork
to break down their prison, always paying them their prayers for their labor.
And we need not look back into story, for such lights as these, whereby to read
the joy of sufferings, for I may say of these examples, as Moses said of his
precepts, They are not beyond the sea, Deuteronomy. 30.12.
that you may pretend, and say, which of us can pass over the sea, and bring
them to us, that we may fulfill them in work? For such patterns are near you
in your own sight; you need not travel into the remote regions of Antiquity,
for such precedents of hearts rejoicing, while these doors of their breasts
are breaking open, to set them at liberty. God has provided for you the lights
of the Primitive times, as well as he has permitted you to remain long in the
same necessities. You can therefore have no excuse in being ignorant of the
good of sufferings, since you have both the matter abundantly among you, and
the manner excellently patternd out before your eyes.

It is well said of one, that we may wonder that all the stones under the feet
of the reprobate, do not turn into roses, for some solace to them now, in
regard of what they are to suffer. And therefore we need not wonder, if all
things under the feet of the elect, do turn into thorns to punish them for
their sins, since their transitory pains augment so much their eternal
blessedness. Well then, and fitly may I say unto you in this your state of
trial, 2 Cor. 13.5
Know you not your selves, that Christ Jesus is in you, unless perhaps you be
reprobate? For now you have that work in hand, of interpretation of the word of
God, the word of the Cross, wherein you your selves are best expositors,
whether you find in your hearts, an humble understanding of the will of God
upon you in these siftings and cribrations, unto which the enemy has now
subjected you. If you find this humble and patient conformity, you may rightly
conclude you have the right sense of the word of the Cross.

Me thinks I may say now to you, that you have as a mercy afforded to your
offenses, your book given you, and if you can read in it, your present
burnings in the hands are far from being brands of infamy, The stigmats of
Christ.
they are rather stigmata Christi, which are the characters in which your names
are written in the Book of Life. Your chief study therefore now must be, to
read currantly Gods hand in this your book which you are put unto, and by a
right understanding of Gods mercy in this volume of your crosses, you make it
such an one as was given to Ezechiel, Ezekiel. 3.3.
you may find it even as honey in your mouth. Upon this ground, Saint
Augustine was wont often to ask his heart this question, Is the word of the
Cross foolishness to thee? 1 Cor. 1.18.
He knew, that was the infallible trial of this adherence to the will of God,
the accounting the Cross the wisdom of God, and consequently the best mark of
his predestination. There may be many glorious external shows of piety and
sanctity (which may be like the gift of Tongues Saint Paul speaks of, 1 Cor.
14.14.
where the Spirit prays, but the understanding is without fruit) that may
draw the eyes of the world upon the appearancies, but not the eyes of God upon
the interior disposition; but a patient, and virtuous exemplarity in suffering
is like prophesying in a known tongue, it both bettereth our selves, and
edifyeth the Church of God. Wherefore I may properly desire you, now you are,
Ver. 4. 1 Cor. 14.39. Therefore brethren be earnest to Prophecy.
as I may say, prohibited to speak with Tongues, (as this answers to a
public exhibition of your devotions) Itaque fratres amulamini prophetare, that
is, to endeavor to edify the Church of God by your patience, longanimity, and
suavity in the holy Ghost.

Gods mercies are so much above all his works, that even all his justices in
this life are mercies, as we may perceive in many things which to us seem
severities, and are truly indulgencies in Gods Order; as many times when he
finds a dumb, and a deaf soul, so possessed by the world, as he will
neither hear, nor answer to the ordinary voice of Gods Ministers, then God in
mercy lays violent hands upon him, and, as I may say, puts his fingers into
his ears, Mar. 7.33.
as Christ did to the man in this case, as it were to force them open by some
stronger operation then the ordinary ministry of his Churches medicines and
applications, and in this case, the fire God applies, is not rigor, but
medicinal compassion.

Besides, there is commonly a special divine authority in Tribulation, wherein
the holy Ghost breathes himself out more efficaciously then by the Prophets, or
by the holy Scriptures: for we often resist the Word of God, and slight the
admonition of the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, when afflictions though
they speak in a sharper, and more unpleasant style to us, yet take our ears,
and bring us to answer more promptly, speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

Whereupon the Psalmist expresses thus both the nature of man, and the virtue
of tribulation, Psalm. 15.4. Their infirmities were multiplied, afterward they
made haste.
Multiplicatae sunt infirmitates little, postea acceler averunt. So as God
oftentimes lameth us, to make us mend our pace toward him; and the maimes
given us by Gods hand, prove like Jacobs lamenesse, which made him the fitter
for his journey. And as it has been aptly accommodated to the credit of
affliction, that Jacob was flying, and sunk with labor to the earth, with his
head upon the stones, when God first appeared unto him, and set his soul upon
that ladder which reached to heaven, while his body lay prostrate upon the
earth, so we may well add this, that as soon as we wake out of the sleep
which the pleasures of our senses cast us into, we shall confess concerning
crosses, and tribulations, as Jacob did after his dream, Vere dominus est in
loco isto, Gen 28.16 Indeed our Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.
and ego nesciebam. For though we tremble at first, and find the place
terrible, yet we may truly say, Non est hic aliud nisi domus Dei, and porta
coeli, This is no other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven.
for the holy spirit seems to set this inscription (of the gate of heaven)
upon tribulation, advising us, that by many tribulations we must enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.

I have presented you with this draught of your own states, that you may see,
you are now in the elements of the Saints of both Testaments. Wherefore the
Apostle tells the Christians in your conditions, Behold, Act. 14.21
now is the time acceptable, now is the day of salvation. But you must remember
also, what Christ said to those that are in this day. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Work while you have light, lest the night overtake you. For the day it self
will but give you light, not legs to carry you on your journey. You must not
lie down under your burdens, as if afflictions were vessels you had under
you, which will carry you on though you walk backward and forward in them,
between murmur, desire of revenge, and some intervals of conformity and
resignation to Gods pleasure. This tossing, and estuation of spirit is a leake
may endanger you, if it be not stopped. Necessarily therefore I must often
rememorate this unto you, that if you have faith to believe crosses to be the
treasures of Christ, you must negotiat with the talents you are trusted with;
for if you bury them in enmities, maledictions of your enemies, repinings, and
diffidences of Gods providence, you will give so ill an account, as you may
chance after all your sufferings, to be remitted thither for your rewards,
where affliction produces nothing but curses and desperations. For it may be
fitly said of Tribulations, They are the good odor of Christ, 2 Cor. 1.
but to some the odor of death unto death, but to others the odor of life
unto life. Of which party that you may prove, you must act this lesson of Saint
Paul, Colos. 1.11.2.
to walk worthy of God in all patience and longanimity with joy, giving thanks
to God and the Father who has made us worthy unto the lot of the Saints in
light.

CHAP. VIII. Answers and Resolutions to some subtle Temptations.
AFter the chief Priests, Scribes, Mar. 12.
and Elders had laid before Christ Jesus all the stones of offense and scandal
their wits could pick out of the Law, or the Prophets, all which he converted
into touch-stones of his wisdom and humility, and so rendered all these
trials, attests of his purity and sincerity in these excellent graces; then
they excogitated a more subtle temptation for him; which was, to tempt him by
his own perfections. For then they sent to him some of the Pharisees, Ibid. 12.
and of the Herodians, who were to work upon his tenderness, and compassion of
the public, to ensnare him by his benignity, and charity to others; and to
that purpose they moved him in a point of commiseration to his Country, asking
him with a Preface of his praises, whether they might not ease themselves of
the public tribute? And this they thought a likely way to ensnare his
goodness, when all their other projects could not infirm his virtue: In like
manner our subtilest enemy may have found many of you answering, and
corresponding faithfully in all his examinations of you, in your own particular
sorrows, losses, and distresses, and finding you thus armed in your own
persons with JOB's Dominus dedit, Job. 1.21. Our Lord gave, and our Lord has
taken away.
Dominus abstulit, he is very likely to attempt you by your own graces of
piety, and tenderness of others, and devotion to your Countries redemption
from error, or a present apprehension of a total extirpation of those few
seeds are still dispersedly left in it of Catholic Religion. And this
tentation may well be presented you with praises of your own virtues, and
pressed more upon your devotion, as a solicitude properly affected to the love
of your Religion. This is so fine, and soft an insinuation of motions to
disquiet and discordance from Gods order, as you may very easily be slid into
it, upon this so smoothe, and fair suggestion thereof, as a practice of
virtuous duty. I shall therefore endeavor to detect unto you the danger of
this so subtle illaqueation, and insnarement, in this net may be made of your
own pieties. For when Satan stands among the sons of God, he is in the most
dangerous position for the children of men, that is, when in the shape of some
virtue he introduces a temptation.

First then we must lay this for groundwork of all our peace of spirit, a
firm immovable persuasion of the divine providence in all occurrencies. This
rock the devil does not attempt to batter in the minds of sober, and pious
persons, but works to undermine it by arguments, and consequences. When any
thing occurreth incongruent to our reason, concerning the government of such
affairs as seem properly to appertain to Gods interest, as the miscariage,
and adversity of Gods cause and his Churches periclitation, in these advantages
the serpent has over our weak and dim power of reasoning, he always inforceth
this subtilty upon us, That Gods hand cannot be in matters so opposite to his
goodness. To which our faith answers easily enough, when it is awake; but
when our minds are in that state the Psalmist confesses even his to have been
reduced unto, Psalm. 118 28. My soul has slumberd for tediousness.
of Dormitavit anima mea prae taedio, when our spirits are grown drowsy and
heavy under the burden of their encumbrances, then he presses this point upon
us, when the vivacity of our faith is a little relaxed; Psalm. 72. But my feet
were almost moved, my steps almost slipped seeing the peace of sinners.
and by watching this opportunity we know the tempter has shaken even the
greatest Saints, as we know David himself avoweth in Mei autem pene moti sunt
pedes, pene effusi sunt gressus mei, pacem peccatorum videns. So as this is a
temptation to be precautioned by the best advises can be provided. For what the
enemy aims at in the first place, is not to subvert directly our faith, but
to supplant our peace, and quiet of spirit; and when he has raised this mist
in our discoursing faculty, then all the images are set before us, seem to
have far different proportions from the realities themselves.

One of the most safe admonitions therefore is to watch upon our pronenesse to
passion, either in grief, anger, or enmity; for an intemperance in any of
these, upon the several occasions which respect each of them, does first cloud
that serenity of mind, which should keep the light of Gods providence clear to
our apprehension, and then insensibly we sink into chagrins and dissavours of
Gods present judgments. Therefore let us always check the first motions to
any excess of sorrow, though the occasion be never so legitimate as even for
the persecution of the Church; in that case, we must seek to repress any
immoderate resentment of it, though the color seem such, as admits of no
over-doing in it; yet all extremities, even of zeal in this exigence, weaken
and enfeeble our Reason, and so leave us worse armed against our opponent, who
always seeks to deduce some reason of repining, and disrespect to Gods
order, out of this argument of Gods unconcernment in the safety of his
children. Therefore in all provocations to grief, we must attend the
preserving of our spirits as little overcast by sadness as we possibly can,
for in this obscurity the enemy sows what we feel growing up before we see
it cast into us. For which cause, let this be a general receipt for all
emergencies in matter of disconsolation, to oppose studiously the first motions
toward any inordinate sorrow or resentment.

That I may then give you some particular satisfaction in this case of yours,
which may seem so devout a disquiet, in order to the Churches sufferings, I
must desire you to lay this in your minds as a deep and immovable foundation,
That the verity of the Church is not questioned by the vicissitude of states
into which she is translated. You may consider that your faith tells you, the
roots of the Church are growing in a rock, and are watered, and kept alive by a
supernatural irrigation, with the dew of heaven; so as no storm can loosen
them, nor no heat penetrate so far as to offend them. The particular branches
of this stem may wither, or be removed according to the intemperance of the
places they are planted in, as we see that many single shafts and bodies of
particular Churches, which are but sprigs in respect of the Universal, are now
eradicated even in the first ground they were planted, as we see in the
desolation and barrennes of Mount Sion it self, and the land of Canaan, which
we may call the garden of Eden, where the tree of life first sprang up, and
where the Church seemed to all humane reason, rooted so deep, as nothing but
the dissolution of the world could evert it, and yet we see it so extirpated
out of that place, as there are only some few fruits (of those roots which S.
Peter left fixed at Rome) now visible in that Country, which are, as we may
say, gathered in these parts, and transported thither. For most of the
Christian Religion now exercised in the holy Land, is but in the societies of
some few of the Religious Orders of the Church of Rome, which are but as it
were granaries of the bread of life, not seminaries, or fields, in which there
is a natural provision for a succession of Christianity, being there are few,
or almost no secular families of Christians in the Country. And on the other
side of the Globe, in the West Indies, the Antipodes to the Holy Land, being
then the patrimony of the Prince of darkness: those parts which sat so long
in darkness, and the shadow of death, have now seen the great light, and have
it shining on a candlestick, while Jerusalem it self sits mourning in
darkness. These are the inextricable folds wherein God wraps up his
providence, The searcher into majesty shall be oppressed by glory.
which they who will attempt to deplicate by their reason, shall find the
verification of Scrutator majestatis opprimetur a gloria.

Let this then be our rest, (to keep us either from sinking into diffidence of
Gods vigilance over us, or from sliding into a curious inquisition into his
order of conducting us) the concluding, That God is wiser, juster, and more
merciful then we can imagine; and remaining assured of our being incorporated
in the true Church, we may answer all our perplexities concerning it, that God
has obliged himself to conserve and propagate it; which he must needs
perform better then we can design. And in this conclusion let us calm all
our anxieties, taking this result of the Psalmist as an opiate to ^llay the
fames of all our distempers, Psalm. 118.52 I have b^n mindful of thy judgments
from everlasting, O Lord, and was comforted.
Memor fui judicio rum tuorum a saeculo Domine, and consolatus sum.

In cases of public concernments, wherein the acts of Providence are irregular
according to our known Laws of Gods justice, the very unintelligiblenesse of
the order of such events, speaks plain enough to us, Gods meaning to address
these hand-writings to our faith, not to our reason, and we must receive them
with this admiration of the Psalmist, Psalm. 91. Thy cogitations are made very
profound, O Lord.
Nimis profunda facta sunt cogitatioms tuae Domine! The thunder, and lightning
of Mount Sinai, was not set out to be studied by the natural reason of
Meteors. The words of the tables were directed to their understandings to
conceive the equity of them, but the forbidding the approach of any beast near
the mountain, was left as a mystery of which the people were not to argue the
justice. And we are yet but in a little more elevated state of illumination,
wherein our reason carries us to the curtains of the tabernacle, our faith is
to pass into the veil, and there to reverence that cloud, wherein the divine
providence resideth, whereof the particular acts, are very often almost as high
mysteries, Psalm 65.5. Come and see the works of God, terrible in counsels over
the sons of men.
as any our religion imposes on our faith, whereunto the Psalmist summons only
our admiration, with Venite, and videte opera Dei, terribilis in Consiliis
super filiis hominum. And for this reason, when God shows the Prophet
Ezechiel an heap of dried bones, and asked him if he thought those bones could
return to life, he answered wisely, Lord thon know; Ezekiel. 37.
though such a reanimation seemed never so improbable to him, yet he suspended
his conclusion, and referred it to Gods design, and providence, knowing Gods
will and his power to be equally omnipotent.

And this figure of the deliverance of the children of Israel from their
captivity, may afford an apposite instruction for your present conditions; for
though Catholic religion seem in England now, but a dead carcass, reduced to
arifyed and dried bones, yet when your pious solicitudes question your reason,
whether it can conceive how these exsiccated and macerated bones can be
revived? your faith must answer as the Prophet did, Our Lord knows; this
restoration is as easy to him, as impossible to us; and though we cannot
prescribe a time, yet we may safely persuade every one to be confident, that in
Gods fullness of time this reanimation is designed. So that I may without
presumption, repeat to you this promise of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 37.5
Thus says the Lord to these bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter into
you, and you shall live, I will lay sinews on you, and make flesh grow upon
you, and cover you with skin, and put breath into you that you may live, and
you shall know that I am the Lord. This I am sure is proper at least for a
Prayer, which you are all obliged to make; the answer whereof we must expect
with fidelity, and it may be your children may gather the fruits of the prayers
you plant now for them, more likely then your selves. But we must not abate of
our fervor, by the little appearance we see of an answer to our Petition, for
as S. Augustine tells us, It is more grace to pray resignedly, then to be heard
presently. It is no great matter to be heard, says he, the Devils were heard
when they were sent into the swine, and Satan obtained Jobs affliction. Set
not therefore your hearts upon any thing so much, as upon Gods pleasure, to
whom all the sequence of time, is but as a present moment to us; so as all
things happen in this appointed time, which cannot always concur with ours;
therefore I beseech you be not too urgent with Usque quo Domine? How long O
Lord?
even in the Churches behalf, to such a degree as may savor of impatience,
and haste to be served, for that always discredits the suitor to God, and does
not at all advance the suit. Be resolved then, I beseech you, to move God with
your affiance, and reference of your selves to his time, and draw up this
answer for all your charges in these times, Psa. 18.42 I shall answer a word to
them that upbraid me, because I have hoped in thy words.
Respondebo exprobrantibus mihi verbum, quiae speravi in sermonibus tuis.

There is one particular consolation I may fitly suggest to you, in order to
your hoping for Gods mercy to the distressed Church of our Nation, which is,
that no other Christians have the blood of Martyrs offered by the hands of
their brothers to intercede and mediate for mercy to their nation; and though
in some respects there be much of the blood of Abel in them, as they are acts
of the hands of brothers, yet in order to the interceding for the preservation,
and advance of Catholic Religion, their blood speaks in the same voice of
that of Christ, it calls for mercy, not revenge even upon the shedders of it.
So that when you are shaken with an apprehension of the extinguishment of that
little light is left in our nation, Judges 13 23.
let your faith answer confidently with the wife of Manoah, If the Lord would
have destroyed us, he would not have taken of our hands such holocausts; The
memory of which, you ought to offer up daily, not only as interpellations for
your own comforts in your necessities, but even for the necessities of your
persecutors, whose wants are far more important then yours. Therefore in all
your private trepidations respecting your selves, and in this public
earthquake referring to your Religion, Heb. 20.23
fix your selves upon this center of the Apostle, Let us hold the confession of
your hope undeclining, (for he is faithful that has promised) and let us
consider one another unto the provocation of charity; and when your hearts are
in this conformity, 2 Cor. 7.6.
though you be in the same Apostles case, Your flesh having no rest, but
suffering all tribulation of combats without, and fears within, God who
comforts the humble shall comfort you.

Accept this therefore I beseech you as a provisionall advise, against the
yielding to any violent melancholy, even upon the most pious occasions, for
that motion is always to be suspected, that proposes discomposure to your
spirits, upon any warrant; for at the best it is but Gods hand counterfeited,
by him who transfigureth himself easily into an Angel of light; And when we
admit a dejection and consternation upon any incitement, Psalm. 4.18. In peace
in the selfsame will I sleep and rest, because thou Lord have singularly settled
me in hope.
the devil has his matter softened to his hand at least, to work upon. So that
we must in such temptations repair to David's couch to rest upon, concluding,
In pace in idipsum dormiam, and requiescam, quia tu Dominus singulariter in spe
constituisti me.

But I may with probability expect to be asked, whether this calm of spirit in
all public calamities, and private vexations, imports so dead a stillness, as
shall admit of no emotion, or resentment in the distresses of the Church, the
gravations of our friends, and all the pressures whereunto we our selves are
subjected?

To this I can readily answer, that I do not propose this Stociall apathy, or
insensiblenesse, in all accidents; for I know the passions of sorrow, and fear,
are not only inherencies in our infirm nature, but even injanctions, and
ordinations of grace in many occasions. We know Christ Jesus wept for his
friend; which few drops (showred from heaven, upon the ocean of this salt
water, with which our earth is surrounded) were defigned to sweeten, and
sanctify those waters, by the effusion of Christ's Communion, into such
expressions of our compatency, and simpathy with our brother. So that tears
may, upon many occasions, savor more of the grace of the second Adam, then of
the nature of the first. And for that cause we are councelled by the Apostle To
weep with them that weep; Romans 12 15
for our eyes do as it were afford currents, which carry our charities
easilyer to their effects, then any other conveyances, as they sooner infuse a
credit to our affections, then our reason can send it by discourse. For as they
are sensible pledges of our communion with our neighbor in his grievance, they
give him the readiest security of our loves; and so this water above the nature
of all other, retains and exposes the impression, and signature of what is
impressed upon it, which is our charity, and so our tears are taken by our
neighbors as seals of our fraternall dilection.

With good reason then in public exigencies, and in private occasions of just
lamentations, such sensible expressions of our consociation, and concernment in
the cause, are often requisite, for the efficacy of our charity addressed to
others. For as Saint Gregory says, No body can consolate a mourner that does
not show some concerdancy whith his mind; and our heart must be first
softened, that it may be congruous to the intendred heart of the afflicted, and
thus fasten it self to the necessity it is to work upon. Iron is best
conjoined to Iron if they be both melted together in one fire. The appearance
then of this simpathy is often manifestly necessary for the rendering our
offices of charity beneficial. Wherefore S. Paul does often leave the print of
his tears upon his epistles, as the best seals of his cordial dilection. And
those passions of greef, and fear which Christ was pleased voluntarily to
raise in the inferior part of his mind (which passions yet never went higher
then his reason aimed them) were all intended, to consolate us in our passions,
to qualify and mitigate our sense of the infirmity of ours, and to propose to
us, an endeavor of moderating the inordinatnesse thereof, that we may according
to his council, aim at a similitude of that holiness, to which we cannot
project an equality; and his precept imports no further duty.

And when Christ confessed, that his soul was troubled, Joh. 12.27
he both allows and instructs our troubled souls, which uses S. Augustine
does excellently derive from these words, addressing himself to Christ, and
saying, Lord you command my soul to follow, but I see your soul troubled.
What foundation shall I seek, if the rock it self sink? But I perceive your
misericordiousnesse, O Lord; for you are troubled by the election of your love
and charity to consolate, and support the infirm, from bending toward
desperation. To this end our head took upon him the senses and affections of
his members, and as he does excite us to high aspirings, he does sympathize
with us in low imbecilities. So we may suppose Christ, as he does, speaking
thus unto us, You have heard the voice of my fortitude calling to you, and you
have heard the voice of your own infirmity speaking in me; I minister force
that you may run, nor do I retard or excuse you from making haste, but owning
your timidity, I level the path of your ascensions.

Hence is clearly collected, that a moderate grief delivered in decent
expressions, and proportioned to the importance of either public or private
occasions, is not only always pertinent, but very often meritorious; and S.
Gregory shows, how holy Job complied with both these duties of grieving, and
not transgressing; Blessed Job kept his Mind in an excellent equality, that he
might neither seem insensible of the hand of the corrector, nor incensed
against the judgment of his sufferings. Therefore when he had lost all his
substance, and his children, it is said, he rose, and tore his garments, shavea
his head, and falling to the ground he adored. Joh 20.
His rending his robe, and his shaving, and falling to the ground, declared
that he was sensible of the pains; and what is joined, that he adored,
manifests, that in all his sorrow he did not seek to reclaim or retract the
judgment of his senteneer. Therefore he was not moved, lest he might offend by
an excess of resentment, nor unmoved lest he might seem to slight the
corrector by insensiblenesse. But as there are two precepts of charity, the
love of God, and the love of our neighbor, to the end that he might perform
the dilection of his neighbor, he did exhibit mourning, and sorrow for his
children; and lest he might trespass against the love of God, even among his
sighs he rendered his adoration; and as he fell under the blow, so he adored in
the fall, and thus completed the offices of a son of man, and a child of God.

Surely these words of S. Gregory do fully regulate your case, that you may
sorrow and grieve in order to the expressing a sense of your chastisements, and
paying the duty of traternall charity. But you must always join the
worshipping of God, by an humble and cheerful conformity to his final
design^s, even upon the public, as well as upon your personal sentences. And
being settled in this disposition, Psalm. 65. My mouth has spoken in my
tribulation, holocausts with marrow will I offer thee.
you are in that state in which the Psalmists heart was settled, when he said,
Locutum est os meum in tribulatione mea, holocausta medullata offeram tibi;
wherein is the good odor of all offerings. For in this feeling of our own
stripes, and our fellow-feeling of the stripes of others, and our sacrificing
of both to the love of God, we fulfill the two precepts of love, which contain
discharges of all the rest.

Now we have admitted sorrow, with such due restrictions as the Apostle
allows it contributary to salvation, being, 1 Cor. 7.10
A sorrow according to God, which works penance unto salvation: there is
another question, very oovious in these conjunctures, which requires a solid
resolution, as, how far we are obliged to conform our wills to the declared
will of God in public judgments, and in cases of the prevalence of injustice,
and violence over right and equity? This case is thus regulated in Divinity; We
know the Will is, or ought to be carried to the object thereof, according to
what is proposed by Reason; and it happens often, that the same thing may be
diversely confidered by Reason; so that which in some respect is good, in
another may be ill; therefore when our will defireth any thing, as it has the
nature of good, our defire is licite and rectified; and if another desires the
contrary in the same thing, as it has in his sense the nature of a good, that
opposite Will is also good and approvable. As the will of a Judge is just, when
he voteth the death of a Malefactor; and the desire of the wife, or son of the
condemned, which opposes the other, as they apprehend the husbands life under
the notion of a good, is also lawful and virtuous. The Judge governs his
will by the common good of Justice, and the wife by the private of her family,
and so both their wills are ordered respectively to their several reasons. Now
it is the good of the whole Universe, that is primarily in the apprehension and
conception of God, who is the Maker, P^eserver, and Ruler thereof, whereupon
all that he wills is in order to the common good, which is his own goodness,
and that is it which is the good of the Universe: But the nature of the
creature is to apprehend good as it is particular, and proportionate to her
nature; and there are matters which have the nature of particular goods, which
do not hold so in an universal respect, and the same holds convertibly:
Whereby it comes to pass, that some will is good, desiring a thing in order to
a particular good, which God does not will, because man wishes according to
the light he has, and his own apprehension, which cannot extend to the
discernment how the particular he wishes, concordeth, or discordeth with the
universal benefit which he is obliged to prefer, as far as he is informed
only: So that to constitute a rectifyed will, in the desire of a particular
good, the private may be wished materially, but the common and divine good must
be intended formally, that is, the thing we desire, may be affected as the
matter of it is a good to us; and the end of our affecting it must be as we
conceive it good and agreeable to the common order of God upon the world.

Therefore the will of man is obliged, to be conformable to that of God, in the
thing he wishes, in this respect, of referring it to the fulfilling of the
universal design of his Creator: But he is not commanded to annex his will
to every particular matter wherein Gods will is declared, because he is not
informed how that special course conduces to the common good; so as he may
wish the accomplishment of Gods purposes, by those ways, notified to his
reason to be most equitable and consonant to the divine goodness. And because
we cannot judge how the ruin of a good cause, does contribute to the common
good, we may well dissent in that particular marter, and yet still remain
resigned to the Universal Providence. In this order many of the Saints have
deprecated even Gods revealed judgments to them, as Abraham in the case of
Sodom, and it is evident, and frequent in all the Prophets, when they appeal
from Gods severity declared, to his mercy which they solicited; and some so
vehemently even after many prohibitions, as God is feign to silence them; as
Samuel in the case of Saul, and Jeremy in the behalf of the captived people,
and many the like material inconformities we find in the Saints. But this kind
of discrepancy is better called a Velleity, or wishing that Gods order were
otherwise, then a dissenting from it: and this incomplete concurrence with the
Divine will, is dispensed with in this our imperfect light, which we receive
but through a dim glass; and till we come to be above all sense of sorrow, we
shall never be exempted from a defective perspection through the causes of all
calamities in this world; and so there is no more conformity exacted of us,
then there is illumination imparted. The blessed, who see many present acts,
and the sequences of the Divine providence, in that light which shows all
satisfaction at first sight, have their wills as entirely united, as their
understandings consummately informed; Wherefore if we have a rectifide sense of
the defective adherence of our wills to God, even that resentment may be very
supplymentall to the deficiency of our present condition.

It seems clear therefore that in all common calamities, wherein the
violations of justice are manifest, our wills may safelyer be, as I have
explained, unconformable to Gods will declared in those grievances, remaining
in a confession of our incapacity, to conceive the reference they have to his
glory) then our wills may be concurrent with Gods, moved by the presumption of
our understanding, upon the concluding it self rationally satisfied with the
causes of such events. For this adherence is upon a worse ground, then the
other suspension, in regard it rests upon Reason more then upon Faith. So
they who are conformed to Gods pleasures, as they suppose themselves informed
of the equity of them, may be better said to adhere to their own sufficiency,
Psalm. 138. Thy knowledge is become marvailous of me, it is made great and I
cannot reach to it.
then to Gods sentence. Therefore in all temptations of inspection, and prying
into the causes of various successes, let us quickly break off all such
consults, with this of the Psalmist, Mirabilis facta est scientia tua ex me,
confortata est and non potero ad eam; and in such a disposition even our sorrow
may be acceptable, when our self-fufficiency on the other side is much more
unconformable to the will God, though it produce an acquiescence to the present
occurrencies. We ought then with great care and vigilance to oppose this
propension in our nature, to retrive satisfactory causes in all our crosses and
exigencies. For this is a crooked line from the first point, and so distorts
our thoughts the more, the farther they are extended in it.

All these premises well weighed, will afford us clearly this conclusion, that
in public adversities, and private afflictions, our will may seem to differ
from Gods, in the matter of present calamities, as in the prevailing of
injustice, or the detriments we suffer by our enemies, so our wills be
conjoined with the divine will, in the reason of our desiring what we do, that
is, when we wish that difference, only, as we conceive it more conducent to
Gods glory. And so the very rise of our discordancy, is from the stock of a
final conformity; Jer. 17 4. I am not troubled, and the days of man I have
not desired thouknowest.
and in this disposition of our infirm nature, we may say with the Prophet, in
all our imperfect adherence, Et ego non sum turbatus, and diem hominis non
desideravi tu scis. When our desires are not referd to any human projects, but
directed to the Vniversail accomplishment of Gods orders, Psalm. 106. The just
shall see and shall rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth, who is wise
and will keep these things, and will understand the mercies of our Lord?
they fall not under the notion of desiring the days of man, but of God. And
so I will pertinently, as I conceive, close up this point with the Psalmist,
who after having given much council, and consolation to the afflicted, makes
up, and seals all with Videbunt justi, and latabuntur, and omnis iniquitas
opilabit os suum, quis sapiens and custodiet haec? and intelliget misericordias
Domini?

CHAP. IX. Advises of the readyest way to consolation in all afflictions.
WHen Christ Jesus was much less believed, then he is now by you, and did but
command blind Bartimaeus to be called to him, Marc. 10.49.
they who were sent for him, advised him to be of good comfort, only upon this
motive of his being called, as if Christ's taking but notice of him, had been
sufficient security even for the miracle he wanted. May not I then very justly
counsel you, to take comfort, and bringing you a more consolatory message,
which contains not only a call, but a contract for your reliefes, the which
is specified in this voice of Christ addressed to you, Mat. 11.28.
Come ye to me all that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh you; take
my yoke upon you, and you shall find rest to your souls. If the blind man then
cast off his garment, and came leaping to his single call, you may well put off
all coverings of darkness and disconsolation from your hearts, and come
cheerfully not only to this vocation, but to this covenant, which is as a
counter-security given you by God, to save you harmless in all your
engagements in the three Covenants of sufferance, wherein I have showed you
your obligations. For here is rest to your souls passed by contract to you, by
the word of Truth it self; and when you are possessed of this peace, and case
of your hearts, they shall feel the retrenchment of your worldly
accommodations, little more, then our bodies do the abscission of some
excrescent portions: For faithful hearts are as little damnified by any such
rescinding or diminution of the conveniences of this life, as bodies by loss
of hair. Therefore as the remedy of all, consists in the assecution of this
promise of Christ, so the only means of compassing it, is the resorting to
him for it, in that manner prescribed by his call, you may all think your
selves nominated in this Proclamation of grace, as you are qualified with the
conditions specified, of being in labor and under burdens; and yet you may
easily mistake, what loads you are called to bring first to be discharged of;
your temporal gravations that lie upon you, may go near to hasten you too
much, in your starting forward into this course of relief, without looking
out, and laying uppermost that burden which must be first removed, before you
can hope for this lightning and exoneration which is proposed unto you. And
indeed these times, without a particular prevention by the grace of God, are
likely to tempt many, to come to Christ with their first suit, as he did in the
Gospel, that came with his first motion of complaining on his brothers
detention of his inheritance, and desiring Christ to right him in that
oppression; Luke 12.18.
this was the heaviest burden whereof he was sensible, of some unjust
sequestration lying upon him. But we know Christ's answer cleereth this case to
us, that his call does not summon such pressures to come in for ease in the
first place. The greedy man who had constituted Christ for his temporal Judge,
made himself a Delinquent, in what he was a Judge of, and found him no Judgel,
in what he would have had him one. And so shall all those, who come to Christ
to commence their first suit about any temporal damages, find this plea cast
out rather then admitted, and their burdens will but grow the heavier, by this
earnestness to be discharged of them; they will be but like weights taken off
from their backs, and laid upon their heads, where they will more annoy them.

It most imports us then to be rightly resolved, of what burden we ought
first to seek our discharge; for it is one of so strange a nature, as the
increase of the weight diminishes always the feeling and sensiblenesse of the
carryer. And this insensiblenesse, as it augmenteth, does likewise aggravate
the weight, so as there is a great peril, to leave never so little of this
matter, that hides it self by the same degrees it heightens in us. These
qualities are so little sortable to the temporal burdens of crosses and
afflictions, as they cannot be conceived to be the grievances we must first
complain of. Nothing but sin is to be found counter-marked with these notes
upon it. That then is the burden you are first advised to bring in to be
delivered of; this weight which the world commonly labors and sweateth most
to charge it self with; and yet it is truly so strangely onerous, as even God
and Man Christ Jesus, did sweat blood under the weight thereof, although he
carried but the lighter half of it, the pain only, not the pollution. This
is then the first oneration, whereof you must intend the demission and
deliverance. For they who begin with calling to Christ for alleviation of
temporal burdens, or solicit him to transpose their loads upon their
enemies, setting these articles of ease and animosity before all the rest in
their Petitions, do (me thinks) as if the Leper in the Gospel should have sued
to Christ, to have given him clothes to cover him only. For when we have the
uncleanness of any foul sin upon us, to intend any thing, before the
deliverie from that, is but to beg a covering, or palliation of our distress.
And we know, temporal commodities do often hide and clothe the leprosy of
sin, but seldom contribute to the emundation; and they who lift up their hands
in the first place, to draw down vengeance, even from him to whom it belongs,
do (me thinks) as if the robbed and wounded Traveller in S. Luke, should have
desired the good Samaritan to have followed the thieves to apprehend them, and
deliver them to justice, before he had thought of dressing his own wound; it
is but such a preposterous application, to pursue even Gods enemies, while we
have our own sins crying out, and endangering our souls, and crying for revenge
against us, under the same notion we prosecute our enemies.

We must all then retain this principle, that the first exoneration we must
design, is, to be this of the burden of our sins; and when we are delivered
from them, our crosses will prove rather our carriages then our burdens; for
as death is formidable in this face and aspect of the wages of sin, (and that
countenance may justly fright us) but when we look upon it as a debt only, we
must pay nature before we can pass to eternal life; in this view, it seems
rather officious, then offensive to us; in like manner, when our afflictions
and crosses are charged upon us as wages of our iniquities, still growing in
us, as in the cases of Pharaoh, and Antiochus, then they have an intolerable
heaviness in them; but when they are considered but as fees and duties we must
pay in our passage through this miserable life, unto a blisfull perpetuity, and
that all the Saints have paid them in their pilgrimage, then they appear rather
serviceable then formidable unto us: So hereupon I may say, that when our
sins are heaped and accumulated on our crosses, pressing and holding them
upon us, then the charge is unsufferably grievous; but when our sufferings are
imposed and charged upon our sins, and that they press our faults so hard
upon our consciences, as the pressure of our offenses grows intolerable, and
so forces us to come creeping humbly under our load, to this promise of
relief which Christ exhibiteth to all such laborers, and loaded souls, then
our affliction proves an happy surcharge, that has sunk through our hearts,
that other sad portage of our sins, which before peradventure did not disease
us, and then the heaviness of our crosses which remains, will comparatively
with the other we are released of, seem very easy, and portable; as one that
should rise from being bedrid with the Palsy, or Sciatica, after he were
cured, would find a little charge to carry his blankets upon his back. There is
such an analogy, between the weight of sin and of sufferance, as between
these two different heavinesses; And sure the Paralitike, who went back charged
with his bed upon him, found less heaviness, then when he was carried upon his
bed. So when affliction, that we find has partly contributed to our
spiritual rising, and recovering out of our bedridden habits of sin, remains
upon us, we carry it so lightly, as we handle it rather as a benefit then a
burden. Then we find sensibly, the verity of this assertion, of Jugum meum
suave est, Mat. 11.30 My yoke is sweet and my burden light. Jere. 48.11.
and onus meum leve. When we have found rest for our souls, all other
agitations are but (as the Prophet says) pouring us out from vessel into
vessel, to purge us of our dregs, and faeces which we should settle in again
it may be, if we were let stand.

And to evidence this principle that we must first begin our addresses to God
with the Prodigals Pater peccavi, before we sue for casting off our rags, and
being apparelled with conveniences, we may consider, how God does not account
himself so much as spoken to by us even in all our clamours, until, Jerem.
Thren.
as the Prophet says, the cloud be removed that intercepted our prayer from
passing. For David affirms this experience, saying, Because I held my peace
my bones are as it were waxen old, while I cried all the day. So as you see,
all David's clamours are but as dumnesse to the ears of God, so long as his
sin sleeps within his breast, though his throat grow hoarse, he does but as
it were strain to cry out under water, while his iniquity like waters are gone
over his head. Hereby, we see, that all vociferation while our sins are quiet
and tacent in our affections, is no more audible, then silence; and on the
contrary we may note that God accounted Moses to have made a loud exclamation,
when we find he was silent; his heart being not obstructed with sin, uttered
a voice which penetrated the heavens while his tongue had no part in the
conveyance of it. Exodus 14.
And Moses removed the whole red Sea, more easily with this silence, Psalm. 3.
then David could draw back those few drops of iniquity, he had drunk in; all
the ejaculations of his voice did not pierce the cloud, until his sighs had
broken through it, and then after his heart had once struck upon that key of
confession of his fin, in this note of I have made my sin known unto thee, and
mine iniquity I have not hid, then every whisper of his to God is audible, for
we find him professing this also, Psalm. 55.10. In what day soever I shall
invocate thee, lo I have known that thou art my God.
In quacunque die invocavero te, ecce cognovi quia Deus meus es. So as here we
see the diverse effects of Prayer, while our sins cry the louder for our
silencing them, no other vociferation is made but theirs, which we do not
utter; and when they have first lifted up their voice, through the organ of our
voluntary proclamation of them, and a sorrowful invocation of mercy, then every
breathing, and smallest inspiration of our souls in prayer, is a tone loud
enough to reach heaven. Then as David avoucheth, we shall find him our God at
all hours we seek him, and discern the reasons, why we are then heard, and why
we were not before regarded; which are these two David gives us, of the first
he says, If I have beheld iniquity in my heart, our Lord will not hear; and
of this other, in case of having purged this impurity by our penitence, Our
Lord is near to all that invocate him in truth, Psalm. 65.
he will do the will of all them that fear him, and he will hear their
prayer, and save them.

Whereupon we may observe, that the Prophets in all public calamities, did
exhort the people in the first place to purify their hearts and their hands,
by a discharge of their sins, before they presumed to lift them up to heaven
for receipts of temporal degravations. For when the people wonder that their
Fasts and Humiliations are not regarded, Esaias 58.3.
the Evangel call Prophet Esaias disabuseth them in that point, and informs
them, why their offerings were so unsavory, because God smelt their own wills
in them, that is the deliverance from those secular pressures that lay upon
them, not the demission of those spiritual burdens which were inherent in
them. Wherefore the Prophet orders them, to begin by dissolving the bands of
impiety, and loosening the bundles that over-load. When they have exonerated
themselves of those weights which are offensive to God, then their own
spiritual lightning and refreshment follows in a due order and procession. God
tells the distressed people by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 15.9.
If thou will separate the precious thing from the vile, thou shall be as my
mouth; and when we come to be as Gods mouth, there is no fear of our being not
heard by him; but while our mouths are liker the feet then the head of the
Statua in Daniels Vision, Dan. 2.33.
consisting of iron, and clay, and not of gold, that is, while either revenge
against our enemies, or reparation in our earthly damages, take up the first
places in our prayers, and not the purer ore of charity toward God and our
neighbor, this sordid composure of our petitions, does not answer that
separation, which God conditioneth for an admittance to such a neerenesse as
secureth our audiency.

S. Chrysostom remarketh, that the holy Magdalene was the first that came to
Christ to seek pardon and grace; others sought health and sensible solaces in
their first addresses, but she even in her first choice, elected the best part,
and upon her kissing of our Saviors feet, B. Pet^us Dam^anus
one of the Fathers raises an excellent instruction, That the two feet of
Christ, do mystically signify Mercy and Judgment, both which must be kissed
in order, for the fixing upon the one alone, may produce a temerarious
secur^ty, and on the other single, may suggest a timorous despair. And in
conformity to this method, I may propose to you such another in your prayers,
to lay them always first at the feet of Christ, before you raise them up to
his hands; that is, to direct your requests first to the pursuit of mercy, and
remission of your sins, before you commit to them the solici^ing of any other
solace, or benefit; and when your prayers have ascended by these regular
gradations to the hands of Christ, 1 Ep. S. Joh. 3.22. If our heart do not
reprehend us, we have confidence toward God.
having first opened your hearts in a sincere confession of your sins, you
may with far more confidence expect the opening of his hands, in answer to your
necessities, by this warrant of the beloved Apostle, Si cor no strum non
reprehenderit, nos fiduciam habemus ad Deum. This is then the first attention,
whereunto we must addict our minds in all emergencies of public or peculiar
calamities, to purge our souls by a faithful perquisition of our lives past,
and by a profound sorrow for all our faulty actions, or frail omissions; we
must first sue for the washing and cleansing of our hearts, before we propose
to God the wiping away the tears from our eyes; and in this order we may hope
to attain to that safe posture, wherein the Spouse proclaims her security,
Cant. 8.3.
having Christ's left hand under our head, and his right hand embracing us, that
is, by S. Gregory's exposition, to have his left hand holding and sustaining
our head, so as to preserve that from growing dizzie or confused in all the
agitations and circumvolutions of this world, and his right hand embracing and
cherishing our hearts, with the delicious promises of eternal rest and
stability.

This is then the soundest advise I can present you, respecting your readyest
consolation, to intend primarily the casting out of every small mote out of
that eye, (which our Savior means, when he says, Luk 11.34.
If it be simple the whole body shall be lightsome) before you sue for the
casting off those beams, which may chance to lie heavier upon your carnal
eyes, then the other; for sensible afflictions do commonly weigh more in our
degenerated nature, then spiritual onerations; and yet there is truly so much
difference between these two burdens, as they who are discharged of the
malignity of the last, feel little the gravity of the former; and they who
remain charged with their sins, and have their sufferings sequestered upon
their Petition, are to be feared as sunk into that depth of Gods displeasure,
where they are nearer stupefaction then degravation; for it may be God takes
off his hand, in the sense he said to the Prophet Esaias, Why should I strike you
any more? Esaias 5.
This release is the unhappiest of all impositions. Let none then account
themselves gratified by the relaxation of their sensible taxes, while they are
conscious of any gross immunditie, which the waters o^ affliction have but run
over, and not removed; for in that case, what is left is the misery, and what
is taken off was the mercy misunderstood.

But though we ought not to recurre to Christ's promise of ease and refection,
assigning it first to the redress of our temporal grievances, yet
subordinately we may hope for their alleviation. And certainly we shall find,
though not an immediate, yet a consequent deliverance from their incommodities,
for all weights are easy, or grievous, by the proportions of strength, and
ability are found in the bearer, so that to add such a degree of force and
capacity as may make a great mass, an easy carriage may be truly said to be
a lightning and discharging of the bearer. And in this manner, we are always
relaxed in our sufferings, when we are disburthend of our sins; for Christ
gives always upon our casting off our crimes, a proportion of strength,
commensurate to that weight we are to bear in all sorts of tentations, so as
being furnished with this ability, adequate to our charge, we may well be
concluded eased, by this extenuation of our burdens; for being thus entered
into Christ's yoke, we find that gentle, and our carriage very portable: God
does then give virtue, and vexation concomitantly as the Apostle affirms, God
is faithful, 1 Cor. 10.13
who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but will make
also with temptation, issue, that you may be able to sustein. So that I may
safely promise in Christ's name, what he did to his Disciples, when they were
entering into the lists of persecutions, that all these signs shall follow all
those, who do entirely strip and divest themselves of the pressures and
encumbrances of their conscience, They shall take serpents in their hands
without offense, Mar. 16.27
and though they drink poison it shall not hurt them, though they remain
incircled with the thorns and stings of affliction, they shall not feel any
noxious sharpness, or asperity in them, and they shall drink of the cup of
sorrow, without any aversion, or nauseousnesse, but shall rather cheerfully
pledge Christ in it, saying in conformity to him, shall not we drink of the Cup
which our Head has given us? And this cup which the Psalmist calls the Wine
of compunction, shall then have a much better relish then that of Babylon,
which we have eased our hearts of. For as the Holy spirit says, Pro. 27.7.
A soul that hungereth takes all bitterness for sweet, and such souls
Christ calls blessed in their hungering, and thirsting; and yours, after this
pious motion, and exercise, in resorting to this call of Christ, and unloading
themselves, of all their spiritual onerations, will certainly get this good
appetite, which our Savior calls a blessed hunger, and shall be satisfied with
present peace, and tranquillity of spirit, and an hopeful expectation in a
future blessedness. The sooner then, and the sharplyer we deplore our sins,
the readier and greater deduction we make from all our other sorrows, according
to the assertion of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.10.
The sorrow that is according to God, works penance unto salvation, that is
stable. Upon which words S. Chrysostom says excellently, sorrow is given us
not to grieve for any thing we cannot remedy, and so it is only a receipt for
the cure of sin, for it augmenteth all other evils whereunto it is applied,
and recovereth us only out of that extremest of all mischiefs. Therefore
sorrow was only made for sin, out of which it was first extracted, and so
like a moath corrodeth and consumes the matter that produced it. And this holy
corrosive, is so powerful, as it will eat away not only all the dead flesh
whereunto it is applied, but even take out, and obliterate the foulest brands
can have been impressed upon our hearts.

Therefore if any for fear of a little burning in the hand, in the heat of
these times, has chosen rather to stigmatize his heart with the mark of
apostasy, let not even such a desperate character, doubt of an effaceing by the
virtue of sincere contrition, for as soon as it is rightly applied, the
operation is unquestionable. Let not then any such, set Caines stamp upon this
his first brand, for could Judas have applied this corrosive, he needed not
have used his cord to suppress the noisome stenches of his conscience. This
receipt would have broken his heart so happily, as to have kept his bowels
from bursting; for we know that a broken and contrite heart, repayres even all
her own breaches. If in these evil days then, there should be any that has
done worse then the disciple, that left his mantle, and fled naked to save
himself, for if any to save their clothes, and coverings of conveniencyes,
should have left Christ, and have joined with the party armed against him, yet
even he is called by this voice of Come all ye that labor, to come back, and
unload himself of this unfaithful pusillanimity. No weight that sorrow can
bring in, can be too much for him to take off who carries all things by the
power of his word, and whose mercy is above all his works, and consequently
must needs be far above all ours. Wherefore Despair seems miserably to vie
against the superiority of Gods mercy; in this accursed dejection there is this
derogating contention, whereas faithful sorrow has always an obliging
confidence. He therefore that cannot find in his heart to give so much as
sorrow toward the redemption of his sins, ought not to expect so much as
pity even in their eternal vindication.

Wherefore in this particular prescript of Consolation, I may aptly say with
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.10 2 Cor. 2.
Who is it can make me glad, but he that is made sorry by me? For the efficacy
of all I can minister unto you, depends upon your orderly application of this
godly sorrow for your sins, which may reconcile you to the man of sorrow, who
under that notion, was the mediator between God offended, and man condemned,
and so admits not even his own merits to mediate peace between God, and
man, after his offending him, without the intervention of this sorrow of man;
so that this house is as much better then that of feasting, as reparation of a
house is better then ruining, in so much, that though you have no other house
left to put your heads in, this of penitence (which it may be the ruins of
your other have built up for you) may prove such a receptacle of peace, and
rest, (when your sins are rased, and demolished) as you shall confess in
comparing the change of houses, that Your bricks are fallen down, Esaias 9.10.
and you have built with square stones, and have by the hands of this holy
contrition, converted your ruinous tenement into reedified temples, from whence
all the devout fighes, are breathed up as an odor of perfume unto heaven; and
as the fire which was to light the odours upon the table of Incense, was to be
brought from the Altar of the bloody Sacrifices, so the incense of our prayers,
and petitions must be kindled first by the ardency of our sorrow, and
contrition for our sins, (which answer to the outward, and first Altar.) From
thence the fire of all our zeal must be first taken, that is, all our
petitions must take their rise from our penitency, and when they are offered up
in this order, they do often impetrate more then they solicit, for they
obtain not only spiritual acquiescence, but even temporal refreshments. We
must remember then, that this holy sorrow is a kind of spiritual Baptism,
which is the first gate of the Church triumphant, through which all our
requests must pass up to the altar; so that we shall do well to set this
inscription of the Psalmist upon this portall of contrition, Psalm. 117.20. Open
ye the gates of justice to me, being entered into them I will confess to our
Lord, this is the gate of our Lord, the just shall enter into it.
Aperite mihi portas justitiae, ingressus in eas confitebor Domino, haec porta
Domini, justi intrabunt in eam.

Besides the obligation of this method which I have remonstrated to you, there
is a satisfaction resulting thereout, which may be very agreeable to many, who
may be tempted to perplex themselves in search and investigation of the causes
and irritations that have moved God to these severe examinations of you. For
when you recollect your comportments in the former times of more serenity, if
in the audit of your consciences, you find these old debts of an abuse, and
insensiblenesse of that calm, you need study no farther the matter of these
meteors, which was then exhaled out of the fatness of your earth. Let every
one therefore turn over his own records, and consider respectively to his
condition, what mundanities, what riots and excesses some can charge themselves
withal; others with what avarice, worldly wisdom, and over temporizing they
can impeach themselves; others of what indevotion, tepidity or scandal they
can endict themselves; and they who find themselves standing convicted of these
recusancies and inconformities to the Laws and Statutes of Catholic Religion,
let them not wonder to see these heavy fines set upon them; for even the
lightest of these misdemeanors, deserves a higher amercement then all your
temporalities can be extended unto. And truly I am afraid, upon what I have
heard of these latter times, of moderation and indulgence, that it may be too
truly said as the Prophet Esaias did, Esa. 26.15 Thou have been favorable to the
Nation O Lord, thou have been favorable to the Nation, wast thou glorified?
in no unlike occasion, Indulsisti genti Domine, indulsisti genti nunquid
glorificatus es? And if you find your selves liable to this impeachment, you
need enquire no farther for a cause of this judgment. It is a harder task of
the two, the giving a reason of Gods trusting you with this second mercy, as I
may well term it, of paternall correction, after your having abused your first
trust of the indulgence and benignity: so that while you examine your
consciences, you may not only find a reason of your present afflictions, but
that reason may disclose to you this secret, of their being such graces, as you
wanted most. For surely if these infirmities, (which I may well call a
spiritual scurvy) were growing upon you, ease, repose, and stillness would
have much advanced this disease, and now this revolution, and exercise, (joined
with the grace of him that ministers them) is very like to stay, and cure this
surreptitious infirmity which creeps in likely into the softness and
convenience of life; and God knows when to work upon our nature with Simples,
and Benedicta, (as Physicians say) and when to use Mineralls. And we find by
experience, that this kind of steel is the proper key to this sort of
obstructions and opilations in our minds, of slacknesse, desidiousnesse, and
indevotion. Therefore you may well apprehend, the hardness of your present
conditions to be ministered to you, as remedies of some indispositions, breeding
by the softer qualities of other times. I beseech you therefore to conceive
your selves in a course of Physic, wherein nothing but your own ill diet can
render it inefficacious, as I hope I have before competently remonstrated unto
you.

Upon these reflections I hope in God you will confess with the Psalmist, Lord
thou have not dealt with us according to our iniquities, Psalm. 102.10.
and not fall under the censure of S. Ambrose upon the persecuted Catholics of
his time, who complains, that Vidi multos humiliatos, sed paucos humiles; that
he had seen many humiliated, but few made humble. But we confidently trust of
you better things, and nearer salvation, although we speak thus, and that you
will resolve with S. Paul, Phil. 1.19.
That these things shall fall out unto your salvation, by the subministration
of the spirit of Jesus Christ; and determining to rectify all your former
bendings and deflections from the straightness of your Religion, every one of
you may make his Catholic Protestation, Phil. 1.20.
Now Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death,
acknowledging to God this great toleration, how that after your having been
unfaithful in the menaging of his indulgencies, he would be pleased to give
you occasions, to redeem that forfeited time, by a virtuous correspondency to
his present design upon you, in exhibiting patterns of constancy, longanimity,
and fervor, in all your tentations, in order to the magnifying of the grace of
Christ, appropriated to the Catholic Church; to the doctrines whereof, you may
peradventure sooner reconciliate your enemies, by your practical virtues of
Patience, meekness, and charity, then we by all our rational evincements.
These your Apostolical traditions, of joy in tribulation, longanimity, suavity
in the holy Ghost, sincere dilection of enemies, may work upon those, that are
never so averse and repugnant to tradition. Therefore as I told you before, you
were all become Priests in one respect, so now I may say to you, in this
relation, you are now made Doctors to promulgate the Catholic Faith, by the
persuasions of your uncontroverted virtues. For me thinks what S. Paul says,
in comparison between the speaking with tongues, and prophesying, may be not
unfitly applied to your practical parts, and our speculative reasons toward
the conversion of the unlearned, 1 Cor. 14.27.
and unbeleevers: For they who hearing the arguments of the School, may be so
incapable of them, as they may account them madness, when they see all you
Catholics humbly and cheerfully accepting all your crosses, rejoicing in your
prisons, singing Gods praises in the midst of the furnace, wherein not so much
as the garments of your minds, your exterior graciousnesse and composure are
tainted by the flames, and that your zeal and charity to your country and your
enemies are only the more inflamed, in this your fiery trial; these
evidences, whereof the illiterate are capable, may convince them so, as falling
on their faces they may adore God, and not their private spirits, pronouncing
that God is in you indeed.

This is truly that sort of practical reason which S. 1 Pet. 3.15
Peter says every one should have ready to satisfy those that ask a reason
of that hope which is in you; not the arguing and fencing with that sword of
the Spirit, which is so hard to weild, even for the strongest hands; and so we
see, how unhappily the children of this age cut and wound themselves when they
are so bold with it. You are not set by the providence of God, so dangerous a
task as to wrestle with all arguments may be set upon you, (the Church has
her proper champions for that exercise) your part is to exhibit demonstrations
of the virtue of your faith, by the practices of the verities you receive from
a sure hand, (your Catholic Mother the pillar and strength of truth:) That as
the Prince of the Apostles advises his Disciples in your conditions, 1 Pet.
8.9.
you may be all of one mind, lovers of fraternity, modest, humble, not rendering
evil for evil, nor curse for curse; but contrariwise blessing, that in that
which they speak ill of you, they may be confounded which calumniate your good
conversation in CHRIST. This practical part of your Religion is that which
falls within every one of your capacities; this is the good fight you are to
fight, wherein you are not disarmed by being manacled. For me thinks I may say
as Seneca did of Seaevola, That he was happyer in suffering, then he could have
been in acting; as it is a more admirable thing to overcome an enemy by
suffering the loss of our hand, then by that of striking with it. So this your
suffering estate may prove more successful to you then that desperate design
of some few acting many years ago, which no good English Catholics do
justify; for by your patience and equanimity, charity for your Country, in
all your losses and sufferances, you may perhaps overcome, that is, sweeten and
mitigate the fierceness of your enemies, by the most admirable, and most
Christian way that can be projected. And thus proving your selves innocent of
those combustions wherewith you are charged, you may become holy incendiaries
of true zeal and charity in your Country, by these virtues shining and flaming
in your sufferances.

In the close of this proposition to you, I must recall to your memory, that
as by these evidences of your solid virtue you may adorn the doctrine of our
Savior God in all things, so there is no access unto these holy dispositions,
but through the entry whereunto I have directed you, of humble, and sincere
sorrow, and contrition for your sins, whereof I shall not now need to enlarge
any advises, since it is a subject well handled by every body, though the
precepts are seldom well observed, even with the help of affliction to enforce
them. Therefore I must close up this point, presenting you with part of the
three childrens prayer, upon the occasion of their trial in Babylon, which may
be apposite in many circumstances to your conditions, in regard of the terrors
and comminations you are now exposed unto, Dan. 3.
Because O Lord we are diminished more then all nations, and are abused in all
the land this day for our sins, and there is not at this time nor sacrifice
nor oblation, that we may find thy mercy, but in a contrite mind, and spirit of
humility let us be received, so let our sacrifice be made in thy sight this
day, that is may please thee.

CHAP. X. Instructions in the duties of fraternall dilection.
SUpposing you now purified by this Christian ablution of sincere penitence,
having had, as the Apostle says, your hearts aspersed with this cleansing
water, I will lead you to the Altar of Christ, to make your oblation of Charity
to your brethren, as well as to those who are but your half brothers, being of
a diverse mother, as to those who have their uterine fraternity with you, as
children of the Catholic Church. And because there are two principal articles
of your present examination, your behavior concerning the domestikes of faith,
and your discharge of the duties of your faith, relating to the aliens of
Israel, I conceive it very pertinent to my subject, the endeavoring by the
grace of God, to present you some brief animadversions in these two Christian
offices; and your present conditions, facilitate your compliance with the
first, as they bring impediments to the correspondency with the later of them;
for the association in sufferings, conducteth to the straightning of the bands
of Charity, between persons thus combined; but the pressures of afflictions do
naturally loosen and relax our minds, in those ties, whereby Religion
conjoyneth our Charity to our enemies; so that this unfortified part of our
nature, requires a strong guard of Grace to defend it, against our spiritual
enemy, when he stormeth it by the injuries of our own brothers, and headeth
his fiery darts, with the asperity of our own former friends. When the great
Maligner of our nature, brings in such enemies for the embraces of our
charity, we had need have our breasts well stored with those flames which many
waters cannot extinguish, when streams even of our own blood, Cant. 8.
are thus powered out in enmities upon them; and it requires surely much of that
love, which is stronger then death, to return love to that animosity against
us, which is so much stronger then nature in friends, and brothers. In this
case, it must needs be specially requisite, that you who are thus assailed, by
these most powerful temptations, should be furnished with the armor of God,
Ephesians. 6.
for no less then the shield of the Catholic Faith, to which is coupled the
helmet of salvation, can be of proof against these fiery darts, whereof there
are now vollyes flying against you.

As touching the first of these two duties, I may say as Saint Paul says to
the Thessalonians in the like occasion, concerning the charity of the
fraternity, We have no need to write to you, 1 These. 4.9
for your selves have learned of God to love one another. The remissness of our
vitiated nature in this precept, is commonly quickened, and invigorated by the
same degrees, that a common persecution is strained upon us; wherefore I may
trust even Vox populi, in these times to preach fervor to you in this
practice. It will be then more requisite for me, to insist upon what the
Apostle proceeds to recommend in the same place, That you walk honestly
toward them that are without. I shall then only stay to set up some few
lights before the shrine of this sort of Charity, referred to your friends, and
fellow citizens of the Saints, Ephesians. 2.16.
and domestikes of God, and proceed to the saying of the office more amply of
the other part of Charity, the dilection of enemies. But indeed both these
duties are but diverse branches, which have a continuity and unity in the same
shaft, before they part, and break themselves into these two several arms, of
acting for friends, and affecting of enemies, and so we cannot touch the one,
without some report, and relation to the other. For these two exercises, are
but lower and higher boughs, growing upon the same shaft of the charity of God
powered forth in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us.

Heaven is the orb of man's joy, and earth the element of his misery, and love
is both the conveyance of man to heaven, and the consummation of his joy there;
and the holy Ghost contriveth the raising of this our conducting love, very
often, out of our consortings in the miseries of this life; for society in
suffering here, exalts mutual love, as communion in joys, there, does
heighten reciprocal charity, which is some accession to the bliss of heaven.
And in order to this, we see that the bleeding of the mystical body of Christ,
has always offered a kind of spiritual cement to unite and compact the
parts thereof. Whereupon the holy Ghost, who has this commission to produce an
union in the mystical body of Christ, John 17.21, 23.
resembling that of the Blessed Trinity, (whereof he is the union) as he
performs this effectively by love, so he raises this love very often
instrumentally by persecution. For we know in those times, when opposition to
this tender body was most fierce, this union was so firm, and indissoluble, as
the holy Spirit seems to glory in this operation, as having wrought this
similitude of unity so perfectly, as he pronounces The multitude of believers
to have had one heart, Act. 4.32.
and one soul; so that here was that similitude accomplished in them, which
Christ asked thus of his Father, for the believers in him, Job. 17.22
that They may be one as we also are one. For this seems a good resemblance
of that union is in the Blessed Trinity, wherein there is distinction of
Persons, and unity of Essence, since here, the multitude consisting of diverse
persons, were all one heart, and one soul. This simplicity, and unanimity
slakned, even in those times, by the same degrees that the pressures which lay
upon this arch of the Church, were lightened, and removed. But in all times we
find that a common persecution has in some measure straitened and combined
the minds consorted in that band of Religion, which is the cause of their
pressure, and gravation. So as we cannot doubt but these times have in a good
proportion closed, and compacted more your hearts in a mutual zeal, and
charity toward one another; which unity of spirit is very suitable with the
uniformity of your Religion, and no violence can suppress a free exercise of
this act thereof. And as this sort of communication to one another
necessities, is a means left you still to exercise your charities, so I hope in
God, you are very faithful, and active in this commerce with one another, and
that both sorts drive a greater trade of charity in your several faculties
then ever.

Those who have been in the office of giving material alms, do now I hope
endeavor to compensate the losses of the poor, Pro. 19.17 He lends to our
Lord that has mercy on the poor, and he will repay him the like.
who are Gods receivers, by proving themselves, the devouter, and better
beggars of God, relief for the common distresses, and they who have received
much from others upon Gods tickets, do I hope now bring them in to God more
fervently then ever, showing him what they have received upon his account, and
so may be earnest solicitors, for the payment of that Interest, which they do
witness to be due upon this contract of the holy Spirit, Faeneratur Domino qui
miseretur pauperi, and vicissitudinem suam reddet ei; and thus both parties,
may still commerce for their several accommodations, those who have been Gods
creditors, in the sense aforesaid, may seem more sensible of the suspension of
this quality, then of their personal deprivements, and may most zealously
intercede for the supplying of that office by some other means; and those who
are miserably distituted now by the obstruction of this conduit of relief, may
be so gratefully zealous, as to intend more the bringing into God the accounts
due to such ministers of his, as stand now suspended, then their own private
suppeditations, and both shall by this means, hold their proper parts in this
consort of charity, the one shall forget their good works before God, and the
other shall remember him of them.

Thus spiritual good works, may still multiply among you, while the one part
of you sorroweth most for the intermission of the practical ministry of them,
and the other feels more their religious gratitude to their distressed
benefactors, then their private grievances. And this kind of weeping, in your
widows, and showing the coats and garments which the Dorcases were wont to
make them, Act. 9.59.
who are now dead to that function, is one of the likelyest means to obtain
their resuscitation, and re-instating in that condition. For as the Wiseman
says, It is an easy thing for God to accommodate the poor. James 5.11.
Facile est Dec honestare pauperem, and the Apostle S. James proposes Jobs
temporal resurrection and restoration as an object of comfort to faithful
expecters of Gods time; and therefore these two duties faithfully performed by
both your conditions, may make the highest poverty amongst you abound unto the
riches of simplicity, the which may also intercede so powerfully for the other
part, as it may prove such an Angelical mediation as is spoken of in Job, Job
33.23.
If there shall be an Angel speaking for him, one of thousands to declare man's
equity, he shall have mercy on him, and shall say, Deliver him, that he descend
not into corruption, I have found wherein I may be propitious to him; the voice
of the poor, bringing in these testimonies of their former equities for your
Jobs, (whom their friends do not know sitting in the ashes of their consumed
fortunes) these I say that have not made the eyes of the widow expect, nor
have eaten their morsel alone, such bills and evidences brought in to Christ,
as debts wherewith he has charged his person, may perhaps procure Jobs latter
days, for such who have passed thorough his first estate, and are now sitting
in his second translation. But in all cases, these notes of the hands of the
poor shall be sure assignments for that better and permanent substance which
the Apostle says is their inheritance, Heb. 10.
of those who have sustained a great fight of passions, and have had compassion
on them that were in bonds, and have taken the spoil of their goods with joy.
For which reason this mutual commerce of spiritual charity, is that I now
recommend unto you, for the exercise of fraternall dilection; that while you
cannot turnish the Altar without the veyle, with the fat of your flocks, you
may the more largely serve the table of Incense, with these odours of internal
charity.

What I have said in way of direction to these interior acts of charity, is to
extenuate the pains of those Tobiasses, who it may be are now reduced, from
being almoners to be their own almes-men, having scarce left for their support
that which was heretofore their waste, that ran over, and fed their brothers.
But I do not intend this as a dispensation to any, who have yet any thing left
which they may prudently deny themselves, in contribution to the releife of
such, who have no portion of subsistence. For now every one should square his
mind, by the new model of these times, and the same clay that the potter has
been pleased to turn from a larger into a lesser vessel, must attend to his
present form, and not reflect upon his other measure, and design his charity
upon his proportion of selfe-denyall, not upon his present possessions,
estimated with the requisites of his former condition: and thus, every one
should now be the best husband of the state of poverty, to improve that to the
highest rent of merit it may be raised unto, which is to be done by straining
somewhat, even upon their incommodities, to minister to the more pressing
necessities; so that every one should now tax their own state of suffering,
with some voluntary imposition, laying upon it the privation of some part of
what is remaining in their power, offering it up to the common necessity; and
thus every crumme, given out of your own crumbs, will be no less a Pacifike
offering, then heretofore your whole cakes of fine flower covered with oil,
which were then (it may be) the crumbs of your tables; and by this ingenious way
of manageing the fortune of poverty, you may make out of it, the complete
benefit of all your former fortunes, for thus, you give still all you ever had
to dispose of. For you prove manifestly, that you would still distribute what
you had done formerly, when you give what you cannot well spare. So that before
God you appear offering more then ever, when you must rob your nature to be
able to give any thing. And thus you exercise two singular virtues in one act,
Charity, and mortification; and if alms and fasting in their own nature, are
so acceptable to God, how much must they be endeared, by this supererogatory
circumstance, when we are feign to impose fasting on our selves to raise alms
for others? I humbly therefore recommend this excellent economy to all such,
as have yet a stock capable of this improvement. And though this may seem
somewhat asperous to nature, to press her thorns farther into her, yet this
may be sweetened, when it is considered, that we are members of that head, who
trod much harder upon all the thorns he felt then was precisely requisite; when
we ponder, how he that was richer then we can conceive, made himself poor,
that by his poverty we might be rich, can it seem rigorous, when we are
involuntarily made poor, willingly to make our selves a little poorer, that by
this our poverty he may be somewhat more accommodated? For we know, the
nakedness we cover, and the hunger we stay, never so little, is all referred
to his solacing; and he tastes much better a little that we take out of our own
mouths, to give him, then much more of the leavings of our satiety. Every cup
of cold water taken from our own thirst, and given to his, is turned into the
best wine of the feast, by another manner, then that of Cana, for here Christ's
receiving it, makes the conversion, and every one shall see this kind of
Charity, acknowledged in that best species, wherein Christ shall own the
having received his refreshment.

Upon this reflection, let none omit this conjuncture of acquiring that merit,
with a little, which in the fullness of his fortune he could not have had for a
great deal more; for to suffer himself, in the act of giving to others, in
other times of plenty, would have cost him much more, and no circumstance can
more enrich practical charity, then an intermixture in it of our proper
patiency, or self-distressing and incommodation. We know Christ's judgment
upon the Widows donative, given out of the abundance of her heart, and the
penury of her substance; and Gods remuneration to the Widow of Sarepta, who
did not consult her own wants, when the Prophet stood in need of part of her
substance; and we may from hence derive a good inference, for the esteem of
this sort of charity, wherein acting and suffering are conjoined, since God was
pleased to be served by it, for the relief of his dearest friend upon earth,
Elias, rather then to employ still his own immediate hand, in the first
miracle of feeding him in the torrent of Carith. 2 King. 3.17.
For God could have furnished water there still, as easily as bread and flesh
before the torrent was dried, therefore he seemed to have transported Elias
expressly, to give an occasion for the acting of this disposition in the Widow
of Sarepta, as thinking this virtue worthy the sharing with the miracle of his
preserving the Prophet, and so he joined his reward of this charity, in
commission with his love to Elias, making the charitable Widow partner in the
benefit of this second miracle, of multiplying the flower and the oil for both
their sustenances. So as we may say, Gods love seemed equally divided here,
between this charity of the widows heart, and the admirable sanctity of the
Prophet.

May I not then safely recommend to you this way, of making the best of your
estate of sufferings, by retrenching somewhat that is left in your power, to
offer still to God upon his Altars, of your more distressed brothers? And these
cares of corn offered up as first fruits, even out of the gleanings you now
live upon, will certainly have the virtue of that grain of wheat, which falling
into the earth brings forth very much fruit; for though I cannot make you the
promise which Elias did to the Widow, yet I may assure you as S. Paul did this
kind of fidelity, Heb. 6.10.
God is not unjust that he should forget your work and love which you have
showed in his name, which have ministered unto the Saints, and do minister. Let
every one then that has any competent stock left whereon to make this
assessement, lay some little tax upon it, toward the succor of the common
indigency. You have models before you of weekly meals, upon worse occasions,
and this surcharge of incommodity rated by your own will has most affinity
with the dispositions of Christ, who endured because he would have it so, as
the Apostle says, Oblatus est quia ipse voluit; So that I may fitly say as
Saint Paul did to the Corinthians in this same persuasion, 2 Cor. 8.
I speak not as commanding, for it may be this solicitude is without the
obligatory precept of charity, therefore as he says in this point, I give
council. 2 Cor. 10.^
For this is profitable for you who have begun not only to do, but to be
willing; whereby it may be inferd, that the willingness in this act of
charity, over-prizeth the material value of it; wherefore a little now taken
by your own wills, even from your necessities, to give to other greater
exigencies, out valueth a great deal overflowing from your former
replenishments.

I beseech you then hearken to this advise of the Apostle of growing rich in
good works, 1 Timothy 6.9.
for your present conditions do not disable you, since the abatements in
weight are made up in the species of your charities, which are all refined
gold, when they are thus drawn out of the fire of your necessities, and so you
may now make with a little, as much friendship toward your being received into
the eternal Tabernacles, as when you had more of the Mammon of iniquity to
make a greater number of friends. And thus while you are freed from all the
temptations of riches, you are possessed of their greatest advantages. Old
Tobyas saw this light in all his darkness, and poverty, Toby. 4.8.
when he counseled his son, As thou shall be able, so be merciful, if thou
have much, give abundantly, if thou have little, study to impart also a little
willingly, for thou do treasure up to thy self a good reward in the day of
necessity. And they who think seriously on that great day of necessity, will
think little of their momentany incommodities, but in contemplation of
providing their part in that day, will easily offer with Saint Peter, John 13.
not only their feet, but even their hands, and their heads to the will of
their master; they will not only disperse faithfully what they can spare
conveniently, but also deny their own wants somewhat of their demands, to
supply greater necessities which call to them in the person of one much
worthyer then themselves, one from whom they have received themselves, and from
whom they expect himself for retribution; O, how blessed a thing is charity,
that has no less then God for the subject it works upon in time; and no
less then the becoming like God for the salary in eternity!

CHAP. XI. Of the dilection of enemies.
THis last tincture whereinto we have now infused the mind, is very near the
color of the more perfect dye of Charity, ingrained in the love of enemies.
For this disposition exercises it self upon our friends, in a respect,
wherein they have sometincture of enemies; as th^irs, when the acting of our
charity requires such a crossing and offending our selves as to strain our
own sufferings upon our selves. Then our fellow sufferers, who demand this
selfe-distressing, are in this regard adversaries to our nature, that repugneth
against incommodity, whereby our friends in this case, may be said to be
proposed to our love with some color of enemies upon them. So that they who
overcome their nature, in this averseness to offend, or incommodate themselves,
in preference of the ease of their fellows, are well advanced toward the
loving of such direct enemies, as do violently impose sufferings and
prejudices upon them. For they are already half way, being arrived at the
loving them, who are the occasion of some sufferings, and inconveniences unto
them, and so the other moiety is the easilyer reached, which is but the loving
all that contribute to their injuries, and offenses.

And such, who are thus rectified in the sense of the matter of sufferings, are
well prepared to advantage themselves by all the manners of them; for having
their senses exercised, as the Apostle says, in the discernment of good and
evil, they will facilely accommodate themselves to the measure of evils,
whereby they are to be exercised, being persuaded that the proportions of
spiritual goods, are raised to them by the same degrees, that the difficulties
of their performances are heightened against them; so when they are to strain
their charity up to the love of all enemies, and maligners, they do not
deliberate so much upon the pleadings, and redargutions of their nature in this
case, but resolve upon the express precept of the author, and Judge of nature,
who makes this love of enemies, a necessary concomitancy with all our good
offices to friends, to form that complete sum of Charity, which we are to
account to him, we owe our redemption, paid in this species of Charity to
enemies; and if even when we were his enemies Christ reconciled us to God by
his dying for us, Romans 5.10.
we may well be reconciled to this kind of love, to which we owe our eternal
life.

Considering then our obligation to this sort of love, we may say, our
uncomplyance with the love of enemies, falls under the same vice as our
unworthiness to friends; for it must needs be an high ingratitude, not to
correspond with that quality, whereunto we owe our redemption, which is the
love of enemies; and it was not severity, but even excessive charity to us,
that imposed this love upon us, for it was ordained by Christ rather to
assimilate us to himself, then to sentence us to a penalty. And to clear this
point to us, he has set this love under such a relation, as may justly make it
agreeable, even to our nature, our enemies being proposed to us as
fellow members of his body, for it is under that notion, he enjoyneth us the
loving them, not in the respect of their being enemies.

So that when our reason examineth this injunction, we may find, that this
excellent virtue has not so much as an ill aspect, to avert us from it. For
when we look upon Man as the image of God on the one side, or as the copy of
Christ on the other, either of these sides of the medall, are lovely objects in
Christians, who have this double signature of God upon them, and so cannot be
prospects of aversion on either of their sides, for this color of enemies, is
but as it were an over-lay of colly upon a statue, which does not alter the
form, and this ill coloring is cast upon the figure of man, by the hand of
the enemy of his nature; the which foul cover we are not required to love, for
as men offend and injure one another, they are the devils engines in that
respect, not Gods images, and therefore simply as enemies they are not
presented to our love, for so they are ills, which God cannot recommend to us,
but the vitiating of our nature does not efface the character of God in it, and
that is the object of our love in all men. So what we are obliged to love, has
the impression of good, and amiable upon it, if our passion do not stay upon
the superficial deformity, appearing in our enemies, which exterior
supervesture is the devils artifice, not the work of God; therefore our minds
looking upward to God, pierce this veyle of private injuries, and look through
it either on the image of God, or upon the figure of Jesus Christ, in which
they see the injuries they themselves have done him born with love; and
moreover, they find this charity of suffering patiently the same provocations
reflecting to them a new love from Christ; And thus there remains nothing
unlovely in his view of enemies.

After all these considerations, how deplorable is it, that there are so many
Christians, of whom we may say in the point of this precept of loving enemies,
as the Apostle says of the Jews, in respect of the Gospel unto this present
day, when this commandment is read, 2 Cor. 3.14.
a veil is put upon their hearts, for a great part of Christians are as
studious to find evasions out of the unpleasing sense of this precept, as the
Scribes and Doctors of the Law were unfaithful in the explication of the
commandment of loving our neighbors as our selves, and out of which this
position of Christ is naturally deduceable. And yet the depraved natures of the
Scribes, would extend the love designed by God to all his images, no farther
then the twelve Tribes; nay within this circle they made a second
circumscription of their loves within the tormes of mutual friendship,
teaching that their loves were not obliged to go further, then to a
correspondency to them that affected them, and against others that provoke
their passions, they let them loose upon them; in this prevaricating sense of
Gods commandment, Mat. 5.4.
our Savior we know found the people, when he reproacheth them the being
misled by this license apprehended, of hating their enemies; wherein he
rectifieth them, commanding them in express terms to love their enemies, and
to do good to those that hate them.

Therefore Christians, who have not this latitude of the term of Neighbor, to
shift senses in, (being positively restrained, and coupled as it were in this
bond of love with enemies, by a formal command of their Lawgiver.) Since the
subject whereon they are to act this charity cannot be mistaken, are very
studious, to mitigate to their vicious nature, the displeasing part of this
order, by restraining this love in the proportions, whereof, they cannot
dispute the adjudgment to the persons, and therefore many are very inquisitive
in the kind, and the quantity of love assigned unto enemies; so as now a days
they, who are as willing to justify themselves as the Lawyer in the Gospel,
Luke 10.30
and cannot ask the Church this question, who are we to love? since the case
is so plainly ruled, as the very Samaritans are not excluded, now they put her
this case, how much are we to love our enemies, and what exterior testimonies
are we obliged to render of our Charity?

The rule of forgiving enemies, is so much exempted from dispute among
Christians, as they dare not claim of God any discharge of their sins, but
by the measures of their own compliances in this duty. Our Lords Prayer, has
set this condition upon all our petitions for mercy, to ask our reconciliation
to him only in the same degrees we are conformable to this order, of our
releasing the debts of our offenders. You then who sue to God still in the
Lords Prayer, cannot be undisciplined in the preciseness of this duty of
forgiving enemies. Those who make little use of this form of prayer, may have
more excuse for their pretermitting this observance, and so are likely to give
you the more occasion to remember this duty, wherein your faithful discharge
will provide you a better condition, then any have that are so truly unhappy,
as to furnish you with the matter of this excellent practice, wherein these
times afford you the means of exercifing this fidelity in the suptemest degree,
which is in the forgiving of friends, and kindred. And in this case holy King
David testifies the difficulty, and consequently meritoriousnesse of the act,
when he faith, If myenemy had spoken ill of me I would verily have born it, but
when his guide, and his familiar was the tempation, he professes, that was the
greatest stresse of weather his charity could be put to steer her course in:
and as this case was figurative in David, so we know it was accomplished by
Christ upon the provocation of the man typified in the Psalms, in these words,
Of him who had walked in the house of God with consent, and how did Christ
behave himself to this man? He received him with a strange benignity, treating
him still with the terms of familiarity, and love, Mat. 26. Friend wherefore
art thou come?
Amice ad quid venisti? That even under that notion of a perfidious friend,
which is the most demeriting irritation of our nature, he might exhibit to us a
pattern of this perfection, of forgiving injuries.

But alas! too many are proner to follow David after the letter in this case,
then the Son of David after the Spirit, and apter to take these words from
David's mouth, Psalm. 4.16.
Let death come upon them, and let them get down quick into hell, then to draw
their copy from Christ's mouth, of meeting with a kiss, and receiving Judas
with Friend, Wherefore art thou come? Whereupon it will not be alien from our
subject, to clear David of those suspicions of animosity, of which he may be
indicted upon the letter of his expressions in this and diverse other encounters
with his enemies. For in this case, the blind and the lame do often resort to
this City of David to take sanctuary in his precedent, for many intemperate
asperities in these occasions.

Wherefore to vindicate David in these imputations, we must understand all the
literal imprecations we meet in his mouth, in one of these three manners:
First, that his maledictions in some places are by way of prediction of what
shall happen to his enemies, not in order of his prosecution against them,
Psalm. 9.18.
as when he says, Let sinners be turned into hell, here he denounces as a
Prophet that sinners shall have this judgment, and does not solicit this
sentence against them, upon his provocations. In a second manner, they may be
conceived as wishes, but so as the desire is not referred to the pain of the
persons, but to the justice of the punisher; Psa. 57.11
as when he says, The just shall rejoice when he shall see revenge, he shall
wash his hands in the blood of a sinner; this appetency of revenge is in order
simply to the honor of Gods justice, for God himself does not delight in the
destruction of the wicked, but in the exercise of his justice; Or in a third
sense, these wishes and optatives of evils may be assigned, and directed to
the removing, and suppressing of the crimes only, that the persons may be
preserved, and the faults abolished.

In one of these three senses, all David's vehement insectations of sinners are
to be accepted, and none of them afford any patronage of personal malevolence,
or animosity against enemies; not under the pretense even of fighting under
Gods Colors, and wounding them in this quarrel; For David being sincerely
comprehended, suggesteth to us no countenance of any private malignity. Saint
Augustine, (unto some who it seems sought to extenuate the foulness of those
sins in themselves, wherein they had truly David's precedent) answers, that
they who are bold to sin, because David did, do that which David did not,
that is, sin by precedent, or seek to palliate his offense by example. I may
then well say, that they do much more perversely, that wrest, and bend David
into a patronage of any rancour, or virulency to his enemies; for they must be
guilty of traducing him, as well as of transgressing the precept, when they,
upon misconstruction vouch his authority for this license of maligning enemies.
I shall request then every one in all their desires, or prayers, respecting
their enemies, to follow this unquestionable precedent of David in Non nobis,
Psa. 113.9. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory.
Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo ^a gloriam, and so you may glorify God as
well in your suffering charitably under your enemies, as in executing Gods
judgment upon his enemies, when that shall be ordainded you, as the active
part of your militancy for him.

Having given you this key to all the Psalmists imprecations, (which may be
said to be the harder ciphers, the plainer they seem in the letter and
alphabet of ordinary curses and maledictions) I will cast back upon the two
queres, which may perplex many well affected sufferers, which are, What degrees
of interior love we are obliged to afford our enemies? Secondly, what actual
evidences we are bound to exhibit of this charity?

To give a solution to the first question, we may consider our love to enemies
in three respects; the first is, as they are simply enemies, and we are not
called to love them in this regard, for this were rather repugnant then
consonant to charity, to love any thing in that respect wherein it is an evil,
which the enmity it self of our enemies always may be reputed. The second
notion under which we may contemplate them, is, in the nature of men, images of
God, or members of Christ, and in this consideration, we are bound in pain of
the breach of charity, to love all our enemies, and to serve them with all the
offices that appertain to this acception of them, that is, not to exclude our
enemies out of those benevolences spiritual or temporal, we afford to the
general of our neighbors. The third manner may be, to consider enemies in this
respect, of being moved with a particular affection to them, to such a degree
as in reference to the love we owe God, we attain to surmount and overcome the
aversion of our nature, and to be touched with a sensible kindness even to our
adversaries.

This excellent degree of charity is rather of perfection then of express
obligation; thus much is only of necessity required, that we prepare our
minds, in case our enemies necessity should demand such an expression of our
love, to render them this testimony of it. But the actual conferring of this
kind of love upon an enemy, for Gods sake, without the point of this necessity,
belongs to perfection, not precisely to the precept of Charity. What we are
then absolutely bound unto in the behalf of our enemies, is, to remit entirely
all their offenses, and violations of us, never to pursue any reprisall or
retaliation upon them, in reference to our offenses, and to comprise them in
all our general charities distributed to our brethren, either in spiritual
succors, or material supplies, so as not to exclude any never so ill affected
to us, not so much as by our wishes, out of any common benefit, which we
dispense to our brethren, either in alms, or in any other accommodations
whatsoever. These are the bands we are engaged in to our enemies by precept,
which relates to the interior disposition of our minds to wards them; and so
resolves the first demand.

The second concerning what exterior ministeries we are obliged to afford our
enemies, is partly determined in this discussion of the first. But for more
elucidation, we may proceed to deliver it to your further explicated. The
particular benefits, and kindnesses then, with which we pleasure friends, as
all sorts of solaces, and gratifications, which are the commerces of
friendship, are not due to enemies, but in cases where their necessities and
exigences require such correspondencies; as when our enemy hungreth or
thirsts, then the feeding and refreshing him is obligatory; and this rule
holds in all other distresses of our enemies, consisting with the charity we
owe our selves. But beyond these cases of necessity, to strain the course of
charity to pleasure, and accommodate our enemies, is passing into the upper
region of perfection, which indeed is truly evangelicall. The other, in respect
of this, may be termed but legal performances, remaining in the infirm and
barren element of absolute obligation; for the bare defiring not to be overcome
by evil, savoureth somewhat of the apprehending Christ but as ansterus home,
Luke 19.12. An austere man.
and proposing to bring in as much only as will just serve for a discharge;
but the industry to overcome evil with good, Loved much.
relisheth much of the fervent Magdalens Multum dilexit; and the forgiveness
of many of our injuries to God is assigned thereunto. 1 Pet. 4.8. Charity
covers the multitude of sins.
For in this exercise of it we may justly say, Charitas operit multitudinem
pecatorum.

Having showed you the measure of the Sanctuary, which you are obliged to
complete, I do not mean to countenance the giving no corollary, or surplus,
but rather to solicit you all to press down the measure, and give it running
over into the bosoms of your enemies, for in the same measure, the charity of
God poured forth into your hearts by the holy Ghost, shall be meated to you.
This spiritual Manna of charity differs much from the material, in these
properties, that if we do not fill our Gomer, what we have gathered of it is
so far from becoming our just proportion, as all we have provided, corrupts
and putrifieth, and all we lay in above the precepted measure multiplyeth and
bettereth all our provision. For if we render any less then our precise
obligation in this duty, all we present is of no acceptance, and what we offer
above our debt, augmenteth and sanctifies all the rest.

Whereupon I must beseech you to remember, that the love of enemies is not
performed after the manner of gathering Manna in the Law, but after that, of
managing the talent in the Gospel. For it does not hold in this charity, 2 Cor.
8.15
that he who has much abounds not, and he that has little wants not, but
this other rule is verified herein, that to every one that has shall be given,
and he shall abound, and from him that has not, that also which he has shall
be taken from him, since any deficiency in the precepted part of this charity,
which I have delivered you, invalidates all the rest of our performances. The
least grain of malice to any one enemy, voideth all our acquittances in this
obligation; and every grain of love given above measure, proves an increase
of our stock, 1 Cor. 13.7 Heb 6.9. We confidently trust of you my best beloved
better things, and nearer to salvation, although we speak thus.
as it is seed of new grace, which is the root of that excellent charity which
suffers all, believes all, hops all, and sustaineth all.

Whereupon in order to that charity I owe you, I will put on S. Paul's
confidence of his Countrymen, and say, Confidimus de vobis dilectissimi
meliora, and viciniora saluti tametsi ita loquimur. I will believe that you do
play the good husbands in that stock you have now in your hands, of not only
forgiving, but loving enemies. For the ruins of your houses, and the
destroying of your woods, afford you matter to make these coaies of charity,
which I hope you heap upon the heads of your enemies, in continual prayers for
their resipiscency, and in a preparative disposure of your minds, to render
good for evil to the extent of your abilities, unto all their occasions.

These are the coals of fire, the Apostle says we should cast upon the heads
of our enemies, Romans 13.1
not in order to the aggravation of their faults, as some understand it, but
referred sincerely to the kindling of their charity to God, and us. And this
virtue blazing among you, is the most probable way to extinguish the flame of
your persecution; for this ardent Charity may by the mercy of God fire your
neighbors houses; and if the love of enemies take hold of them, you will
partake of the operation of this virtue. And thus you may convince them of your
undeserving the name of enemies, by doing them the offices of friends, in this
cummunicating to them so excellent a virtue as charity to enemies; and while
you thus benefit your selves, by your oppressions, if you infect your
adversaries with Charity, you may introduce into the nation, the good
husbanding also of prosperity, which economy has been little practiced
hitherto in all her secular advantages.

For alas! how truly may it be applied to our nation what God reproacheth by
the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 57 12 Because I am holding my peace, and as it were not
seeing and thou haft forgotten me.
Quia ego tacens, and quasi non videns, and mei oblita es. Wherefore it will be
an enterprise worthy your religion, to endeavor by the fervor of your
Charities, to satisfy in some degree for the oblivions of your brethren; and
thus in honor of the Catholic doctrine of Satisfaction; you may render it
beneficial even to the enemies thereof, while your abundance of Charity in
this present time supplieth their want, your virtues defigning to appease God,
2 Cor. 8.
as much as you fear their violences may incense him against the nation. So
that if one part be liable to the exprobration of the Prophet, in forgetting
God by the abuse of prosperity, the other may have this claim of the Psalmist
to intercede for both, At the voice of the upbraider, Psalm. 43.17, 18.
and the reproacher, at the face of the enemy, and persecutor, all these
things have come upon us, neither have we forgotten thee, and our heart has
not revolted backward.

When we find our loves then starting, or flying backward in the incounters of
our enemies, let us remember this military discipline and rule, That there is
less danger in fighting, then in flying; for very often we overcome evil, by
contending with good against it; and when we fly to evil, to bring that into
the field against our enemies, though we master a Foreign, we raise a
Domestique enemy, which is the more desperate mischief; for even the success
of revenge kindles those passions in our hearts, which demand (...) less
their slavery for their pay, malice, anger, and intemperancy, remaining instead
of auxiliaries to our enmity, owners of our hearts.

So that though it were in your power to overcome vice by vice, it were both
the nobler and the safer way to vanquish it by virtue, and to employ rather
love, which is sure to be faithful, and to preserve an intrinsike peace, then
to trust hatred, which is very uncertain of any success in offending others,
and always sure of injuring our selves. Christ Jesus, who had revenge more in
his power, then his enemies had their provocations, would not countenance it by
taking the least grain of it in all his life. He seemed nearer being angry with
his friends, that but proposed any resentment, then with the strangers for
their irritations. The sons of thunder were reproached of being strangers to
his spirit, more then the Samaritans for being exercisers of his patience. So
as in this case, Christ seems to have provided a cautionary instruction for
us, against any eager promptitude in revenge, under the color of his quarrel,
because the edge of our own nature, is so apt to be set upon the weapons we
pretend to whet in his cause, when we are in a sharp prosecution of our
enemies. The sword is commonly that of our own spirit, and the sheath only the
Word of God, for we cover familiarly our private animosities with Gods
assignations, when indeed we rather take God for our second in our own
differences, then combat sincerely for his designs.

This is a pravity so cleaving to our nature, as we may note, that Christ's
Disciples, who had heard so many inculcations of this design of Christ to
suffer, and submit himself to all sorts of offenses and violations, did never
comprehend his meaning in this matter, and never answered him any thing upon
this discourse, but as soon as he did but touch upon what sounded like a
purpose of vindication and revenge, Luke 22.
as when he had signified to them the approach of his danger, and given them
but a little hint of arming themselves, they presently answered as if they had
been clear sighted in this proposition, Behold here are two swords. The
Cross, and scourges, whereof he had so often acquainted them, did not so much
as awake their curiosities, and having never spoken before of any offensive
weapons, or instruments he would employ, our nature was as quick in the
acceptance at the first notice of this resolution of revenge, as it had been
heavy in conceiving the frequent intimations of yielding unto the offenses of
enemies and persecutors: but we see they understood Christ's meaning as little
in this point, as in the other; for Christ came not to follow the vitiated
nature of man, that dictateth with the Scribes, Mat. 5.
Thou shall love thy friend, and hate thine enemy; but to make man partaker of
the divine nature, the which f^rnishes the just and unjust with the same sun
for light, and the same clouds for refreshment; nay he gave his own Son,
universally for the whole world, even for those he knew would be so unworthy of
him, as not to accept him.

Whereupon this Son of God, this self-sacrificer for his enemies, has good
right to impose exact duties upon us, in reference to our enemies, the which
are more his enemies, in the very act of being ours. So as in this order to us,
he shows the way to this benignity, since his command of these succors for
them, manifests his indulgence to them, enjoining his friends (those that are
conformable to the perfection of his Father) these three good offices for his
enemies and theirs, (which are all in order to the reclaiming them, and
reducing them to a redamancy of him) Benedicite, benefacite, and orate. These
three invitations he appoints toward the resipiscence of enemies; he will
have them invited by our heart, by our mouth, and by our hand, by being beloved
with the first, blessed by the second, and benefited by the last. And in all
these acts of charity, Christ Jesus has exhibited his life and his death as a
mirror of reflection, to cast back these rays of love upon our hearts, as the
Prince of the Apostles expressly intimates to us, urging our vocation to these
duties in this respect, 1 Pet. 2.21.
because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example that you may follow
his steps, who when he was reviled did not revile, when he suffered he
threatened not.

So as those who think this a hard saying, and go back upon it, are, if they
consider it aright, guided by their enemies, as much as they are led aside from
the steps of Christ, and are made in effect, followers of their maligners,
rather then of their maker. For when they are drawn by the example of those
that leave Christ to follow their passions, they seem to credit even those
whom they hate, more then Christ whom they pretend to love. These incongruities
are found in the passion of hatred, the deferring more to the example of those
we profess to disaffect, then even to the pattern of him we pretend to adore.

Those then who will not follow Christ in these paces of his love to enemies,
must know they follow the enemy of their nature, and their own accuser, and
he that insisteth upon the footsteps of Christ, avoideth such a leader, as he
ought to take this course, if it were for nothing but to fly from such a guide,
and takes such a guide as he ought to follow, though he had no ill to avoid.
How much the more then is he obliged to this course, when both these are
coupled, to follow the best, and to fly the worst, to incline to God, and to
decline Satan? So as by a just hatred to this unalterable enemy, we may well
reconcile our selves to all convertible adversaries.

For this reason Christ Jesus loved us, not for any good that invited his
Charity, but for the goodness whereof our nature was susceptible; which
capacity in us, was sufficient for Gods innate goodness, to diffuse it self
into the loving us; and for this reason, God seems to have enjoined all those
that we injure and offend, to love us, that our nature might not be withdrawn
from evil, by this most powerful attractive of undeserved love, which gives a
most natural cause of re-affecting, even to the worst natures, the being first
beloved, so undeservedly; in proof whereof, it was said of S. Athanasius, (the
great touchstone of this sort of love) that he was Percutientibus adamas, and
dissidentibus magnes; by being an adamant to his offenders, he became a
lodestone to his dissenters; and thus remaining unmoved with injuries, he
removed heresies, copying well his Master, who cured greater wounds by bearing
of lesser; to which imitation you may addict all your charities to your enemies.

But abstracting from this effect, who can account this precept rigorous, when
every modest soul may conclude, there is more remitted to him then exacted of
him, by this general injunction to all men, to forgive, and love one another,
since it were arrogance to believe himself less peccable then others, and so
likelyer to be sinned against, then himself to sin against his brother.
Humility then will easily show us, we have rather a good bargain then an
unequal burden in this command of Love your enemies, Mat. 7.44
do good to them that hate you, pray for them that persecute you, that you may
be children of your Fathern who is in heaven; since you have this mark upon you
of your legitimation, the being under the correction of your Father, I beseech
you to endeavor the producing this other completing note thereof, the
dilection of your brothers.

There is a memorable precedent of this sort of charity, in S. Gregory
Nazianzen being Bishop of Constantinople, who allayed the heat of his Catholic
flock in a high provocation, and in a fair convenience for revenge upon their
enemies, the Arrians, who in the time of Valence an Arrian Emperor, had
bitterly prosecuted the Catholics, and upon his death, and the succession of
Theodosius a Catholic Prince, the people designed to put the law of
retaliation in force against their enemies; to which intention their holy
Bishop opposes himself in these terms, It is not this, my dear flock, that
CHRIST requires. nor what the Gospel teaches us; let this be our revenge, to
solicit their salvations, who very probably have furthered ours by their
injuries: therefore let us knowingly confer benefits on them, who unawares by
their malevolence have contributed to our benedictions. But if your minds do
so estuate with anger, as they cannot be turned to this benevolence, do at
least the next best to this, refer your revenge to Christ, reserve it for the
future Tribunal, since the Lord says, Revenge is his, and he will retribute.
And this exhortation did so prevail upon the people, as they resigned their
animosities, and did acquiesce unto his temper; and I may expect your
acceptance of this proposition, for I hope you are as good Catholics as they;
and I am sure you want half of their temptation, which is a present commodity
for revenge, that is not the weakest part for the provocation.

Wherefore it may be easier for you to retain the quality of Lambs, when you
have no capacity of playing the Lions. And to dispose you toward the
compliance with this condition of Lambs, in your minds you may recogitate with
what nature our Savior chose to qualify his Disciples, who were to work upon
perverse adversaries, he sent them, as he says, Mat. 10.16.
as sheep among wolves. Upon which words, S. Chrysostom says elegantly, Let
them be ashamed who like wolves prosecute their adversaries, when they may
behold troops of wolves overcome by a few sheep. And truly so long as we are
sheep, we easily get the better of our enemies; but when we pass into the
nature of wolves, then we are overthrown by them; for then we have no longer
the protection and succor of our Pastor, who does not feed and patronize
wolves, but sheep. I pray remember then, that while you suffer like your
Pastor, you overcome by his victory, and when your angers and hatreds will
assault your enemies, you quit Christ, who is much stronger then your adverse
party, and undertake of your selves, who are much the weaker side; and thus you
wave the privileges of Catholics, to defend your selves by the infirmities of
men.

If you will then secure to your selves an admirable reparation of all the
violences and injuries of your enemies, you must remit them all from your
hearts, and offer up to God not only your continual prayer, but even all the
merit of your religious sufferings, to mediate their conversion; and if you
prevail for any, you draw out of the good you do them, incomparably more
advantage then from any wish that could succeed against them; for if you bring
an enemy to heaven, he gives you eternal satisfaction, for all his joy shall
be set upon your crown, as an enrichment of it, and that improvement of your
glory shall also be an addition to his joy.

These then are designs fit for the members of Christ Jesus, and the temples
of the holy Ghost, to raise our enemies up to our own joys, and to exalt our
joys by this elevation of our enemies. This was the method of Christ Jesus our
head, Phil. 2.9.
by humbling himself, and preferring his enemies, he heightened himself, 1 John 3.
as the Apostle tells us, For the which thing God has also exalted him, and
has given him a name which is above all names. And all these actions were
designed by Jesus, for the converting enemies into friends; and they who
pretend to be made like him, when they see him, must procure to look like him
now upon their enemies, that having sanctified themselves, as he is holy, and
being translated from death to life by this love of our brother, 1 These. 4.17.
we may be thought worthy to sit together with him in heavenly places, when his
enemies are his footstool, when the destruction of enemies affords a joy
perfecting our charity; and until then, we must endeavor to accomplish our
charity, by procuring to our utmost power the lessening of the number of these
enemies, that remaining in charity in this life, we may be admitted into that
region of love, where life everlasting is in eternal charity, and where we
shall never see an enemy enter, nor a friend depart. Wherefore I will hope in
God that you endeavor by your charity to bring your present enemies into that
eternal tabernacle; and by this course, though you should fail of drawing
your brothers, they cannot of carrying you unto more elevated mansions in your
Fathers house.

CHAP. XII. Motives of joy to all sorts of Religious Sufferers.
HAving giving you this Evangelicall safe convoy through your en^mies quarters,
Romans 12.20.
by showing you how the danger of this passage consists in your acting, not
enduring hostility, (since Saint Paul's precept agrees with Elishahs practice
in this point of not striking, but setting bread and water before enemies
blinded with their: passions) now at the end of this narrow way, I shall
endeavor to show you how the issue thereof, opens into the spacious place
the Psalmist says his feet were put into, which is spiritual joy,
tranquillity, and enlargment of heart. For upon faithful compliances with these
duties I have discoursed, I may present respectively to each of your
conditions, this Evangelicall congratulation of Gaudete and exultate, Mat.
5.12. Be glad and rejoice for your reward is great in heaven.
quia merces vestra copiosa est in coelis.

To those that contested the procession of Christ's Doctrine from God, he
proposes this clear decision of the question, the observing first the will of
God, whereby they should discern the verity of his asseveration, If any, John
7.17.
says he, will do the will of him, he shall understand of the Doctrine
whether it be of God. And I may in like manner boldly put this doctrine of the
blessedness of affliction upon the same trial, affirming that whosoever shall
do the will of God, Iam. 1.11.
shall evidently perceive this to be a principle of Divine verity, Blessed is
the man that suffers tentation. Wherefore upon supposition of your
conformities to the rules of Catholic doctrine which have been delivered you
in the manner of your sufferings, it is that I adjudge unto you this
assignation of Christ, Mat. 5.10 Blessed are they who suffer persecution for
justice, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
of Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter justitiam, quia ipsorum est
regnum coelorum.

So that you may convert all the Ordinances, that dipossesse you of your
transitory tenures in your country, into evidences to entitle you to this
Kingdom, and make your enemies your best Stewards of your estates, and
consequently, you may be accounted the only blessed party in this conjuncture;
What an advantage is it for those who are in this pious pain of the Psalmist,
of What shall I return to our Lord for all he has bestowed? to have God
vouchsafe, as I may say, to serve himself, and take from them that which is
made more worthy of him by his taking, then it could have been by their
giving. For even in the sacrifice to God of all their estates, they might
peradventure have been mistaken in the application of it to the most acceptable
design of God upon the^, but they who part cheerfully with what God takes
from them, are sure it is disposed in the way of his choice; and this is to
give to God according to his own election, which is much securer then our own
designation.

I am not ignorant of the preference given to active Charity in this point, in
strict comparisons, yet this seems an advantage, which privation for Gods
sake has above action, that we are certain of our vocation to that sort of
service which God declares to us, by his imposition of it, and we cannot be so
secure, in any project of our own for his glory, that the time, the manner, and
other circumstances are rightly consorted to Gods present purpose; whereas in
suffering religiously, what is actually inflicted by God, there can be no
mis-judgement in these circumstances. This is then an advantage, every one may
be assured to make, in accepting piously their losses, and deprivements, to
conclude their goods are more infallibly employed according to Gods present
will, then their own hands could have addressed them to Gods purposes; and so
their devotions may be solaced in this desire of retributing somewhat to God,
even after their hands cease to be ministerial in that office. For they give
him by this faithful resignation all he resumeth, and present him with their
acceptance of the manner of his pleasure, which is more valuable then the
matter of any oblations.

Blessed are they to whom it is given to know these mysteries of the kingdom of
God, for Afflictions seem not only Parables, but even Paradoxes to such as
have not the key of the Cross of Christ wherewith to open them; 1 Cor. 1.18.
for the Word of the Cross to them that perish will be foolishness, but to
them that are saved, that is to us, it is the power of God; and to find the
power of God in all your crosses, I must desire every form of sufferers among
you, to examine it by this Principle, That Crosses are not to be judged of
according to the Praedicament of Quantity, but of relation, that is, you must
not amuse your selves with thinking how much your are afflicted, but apply your
minds to find how much you make of your afflictions. The first is to stay with
the Murmurers in the Gospel, pondering the heat, and burden of the day, the
other is to weigh with S. Paul against momentany tribulatio^s the eternal
weight of glory; 2 Cor. 4.17
which ballancing of your conditions, must needs draw from you all this
confession, that your masters yoke is sweet, and his burden light; nay you
shall find that your carriages are rather a support then an oppression to you,
according to this elegant conceit of S. Bernard, In our course through this
life, the faster we run, the casier it is for us, and the light burden of our
SAVIOR, as it increases, grows more portable. Does not the numerousnesse of
the plumes and feathers elevate, and not onerate the birds that bear them?
Take away the feathers and the rest of the body sinketh downward by the
remaining weight; so the discipline of Christ, the sweet yoke and burden of
the Cross, in their rejection and deposition, only prove our depression,
because they rather carry us then as loads are carried by us, while our minds
feel the worth of that weight which they bear. And I hope I have showed you
in conformity to this, how God has always set plumes of this kind, unto such
as he has designed to raise, as the Prophet says, above the altitudes of the
earth. Those Eagles which are to be congregated to the Glorious Crucified body,
have their wings formed of these plumes, of crosses, persecutions, defamations,
and such like materials, on which they make their mounties up to their rest.
So that very often, when in tenderness to our friends we wish their
deliverances from pressures and tentations, we vote as impertinently their good
and exaltation, as if in pity to birds in summer, we should wish them
unfeathered, that they might be cooler and lighter. For the sweet yoke, and the
light burden of Christ are to Christians, what plumes are to such creatures,
which are carried by this kind of their own portage, since our minds like
their bodies, would lie still upon the earth, if they were not raised and
elevated above it, by these exercitations.

Wherefore confiding onyour virtues, I do lament most their miserable estate,
that while they are now stripping and denuding, you are feathering and imping
out these spiritual wings for your elevation, and are fastening milstones about
their own necks, by this scandalizing the little ones, who are under his
protection, that has interminated this sentence against their offenders; Nay
all the power and prosperity of this world is so vain and variable even in the
scene of this life, as abstracting from the menaces of the other world, there
is nothing worthy of emulation in them, relating only to this age; Esaias 40.30.
and what the Prophet Esaias says is very accommodable to the condition of your
persecutors, and your fidelities in this persecution, Even the youth shall
faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall, but they that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint. In
contemplation of this improvement of the faithful, S. Aug. says, the devil
little knows how much good he is doing, while he is in his highest point of
raging, for he is indeed, but blowing the coals of Gods furnace, where his gold
is refining, and blowing out the flames of his own impure forges; For as God
served himself of the Angels of Satan, to blow out in Saint Paul those sparks
of vanity, and self-love, which are glowing still in our most mortified
nature, lying but raked upon our ashes, not extinguished: so does the holy
Spirit make use of the breath of the malign one, to abate and mortify the
flames of pride, avarice, and sensuality, while he blows the coals of
persecution, and purgation of the children of God.

This considered, may not I justly address my self to all ranks, and postures
of mourners amongst you, in these terms of Saint Paul to his countrvmen in our
conditions, Heb. 13.22. Heb. 10.34.
I desire you brethren that you suffer the word of consolation, for with the
more joy you take the spoil of your goods, the greater share shall you have in
that better and permanent substance you are purchasing. Do not therefore lose
your confidence, which has great remuneration; your firmnes and perseverance
is an adornment of the doctrine of your Savior, a jubilation of the Angels
that are lookers on in your combat, and a contexture of your own crowns, which
when you have finished by perseverance unto the end, you shall find in them,
all the ornaments you have set upon your Saviors doctrine, and the gladness
you have afforded the Angels, and Saints in your laborious framing of your
crowns, so many several prerogatives of glory shining in them, and the joys
your victories have contributed to the blessed Spirits, shall then be rendered
you by every one of your partners, in so incomprehensible a measure and manner,
as each one shall pay his former receipt of joy from you, and in the same act
acquire infinitely more by your receiving theirs, and your Masters joy.

While I am upon these motives of joy, June 30.1646.
the Letters of this week bring me one very proper to remit back unto you,
which is, the glorious martyrdom of one of your brothers, which news I take
me thinks (as the women did what the Angel told them of at the tomb concerning
Christ's Resurrection) with fear and great joy. Mat. 28.8
For in one respect Fluminis impetus latificat civitatem Dei; Psalm 45. The
violence of the river makes the city of God joyful.
in order to the fortifying and confirming your pieties, such objects of the
power and grace of Catholic Religion are to be rejoiced at; and toward the
propitiating of God unto all your necessities, such oblations are very
efficacious; for they are so many Commissioners, sent from time to time from
amongst you, to solicit fresh supplies of graces for the rest of you who are
in the same militancie; but as they lie under the Altar, Apocal. 6.10.
crying with a loud voice for revenge of their blood on those that dwell upon
the earth, in this respect the charity we owe our Nation, intermixeth a sad and
trembling apprehension, to find the measure of their fathers still filling up,
which when it comes to be commensurate to that proportion God has permitted
it, will draw down vials of wrath, for every drop of this blood, wherewith the
Land is contaminated, by the unjust effusion of it.

Do you then for Gods sake strive, to make as much benefit as the occasion
offers. Wherefore all you who are his brothers of the same Tribe, and so by
the Law, his next heirs, ought to account your selves (as indeed you are) left
executors of his labors, charities, and pious offices to your brothers, and
enjoying your own legacies of fervor, patience, and fidelity, which his
example has left you, you may also faithfully dispense the several benefits
of this holy pattern, which respectively belong to all the conditions of the
Nation, that are the remoter kindred of this blessed Testator, who has left
the whole Catholic stock of the Country, proportionate means to their
callings, of being edified by his Testament, the which you must endeavor to
dispense to them, according to their several qualifications; and while you do
providently manage this portion of example he has left you, you may enrich
your selves so, as if Christ shall please to call you to the honor of drinking
of this his own cup, you may also leave this rich talent of Martyrdom,
improved to your survivors and heirs, that every Martyr may seem to add
somewhat to the stock of the Nations merit, to counter-balance in the sight of
God, somewhat the provocation of the other part, and that by the descent of
this spirit of sacrifice amongst you, there may be a successive provision made
of such holy hoasts, out of this family of God, (the which will always
propagate by this generating death) to the end, this spiritual progeny may be
continued, by the fruitful seed of Martyrdom, until it shall please God to
regenerate the whole Nation, by that way which may seem strange to many
Nicodemuses, by making her enter again into her mothers womb. Wherefore I may
lawfully charge all you that are his heirs and executors, with this Commission
from him, Take an example, Jam. 5.10
brethren, of labor and patience, the Prophets, which spoke in the name of the
Lord: Behold, we account them blessed that have suffered.

And for that part of you which remains in the outward court of the
Tabernacle, and so are not appointed to the Altar of Holocausts, you are called
to take an instruction from this sacrifice, which may silence all your
complaints, to wit, that your clothes, as it were, are but used, as this your
brothers person was, for it is your goods only that are quartered, and drawn
from you; so that if you should seem too sensible of that separation, it might
be reproached to you, that your worldly substances were more inviscerate in
your hearts, then the hearts of those your brothers were in their bodies,
whereof they so cheerfully accept the sequestration. I beseech you then by the
bowels of Jesus Christ, to act your parts as graciously, and to bring in your
offerings with as much alacrity, every one according to the several divisions
of graces, 1 Cor. 12.
and the same spirit, that each of you may be, as S. Peter says, a good
dispenser of the manifold grace of God.

And thus while you offer your different oblations, with the same fidelity the
service of the temple may be consummate between you, when one part of the body
furnishes the blood, and the other the fat of the sacrifice. Psalm. 65. My
mouth has spoken in my tribulation, holo causts with marrow will I ofter to
thee.
By this consort of zeal in all parts, the Church among you may sing with the
Psalmist, I ocutum est cor meum in tribulatione mea, holocausta medullata
offeram tibi. And this is the most promising course can be pursued, to plead
for a mitigation of Gods chastisements on his little flock, and to mediate the
reduction of the straying part of the Nation into the fold. Wherefore the
Apostles advice to his Countrymen, is very apposite in this occasion of yours,
Meb. 13.7.
Remember your Prelates, who have spoken the word of God to you: the end of
whose conversation beholding, imitate their faith.

I will not follow this invitation; which seems to call me to say over the
office of the Martyrs, in honor of this supremest vocation of Christianity,
since I may presume, that all those among you, who stand candidat for this
dignity of whitening their robes in the blood of the Lamb, are better
qualified then my self for this election. Wherefore I will rest in this
payment, of my humble reverence to this particular Saint, who has so lately
overcome with the same arms of the Lamb of God slain from the beginning, and
so is now according to his promise, Apoc. 3.21
sitting with him on his throne, invested with power over nations, humbly
beseeching him to intercede unto his Head Christ Jesus, for those hands
(unhappy unto themselves) that have been so beneficial to him, and to solicit
him for his brothers remaining in the foulness of this earth, that those who
are not called to the honor of washing their robes as he, may at least be
furnished with the grace of watching and keeping their garments, Apoc. 16.15
that they walk not naked, and show their turpitude, but may be found in all
their temporal despoilments and devestures, clothed with that silk which is
the justification of the Saints; and so may be dressed in their wedding Garment
for the marriage supper of the Lamb. Apoc. 19.8
And this, which is my supplication to Christ by the intercession of this
Saint, desires all that be witnesses of it to be partners in the same petition,
to the Lamb of God, and to him who sits upon the throne.

After this little usual Parenthesis, which stands like an Island in a stream,
(that rather beautifies the river in breaking a while the course of it) I will
carry you on in the same current of Motives to joy we were upon, which I
designed to branch out into several channels, that might run through, and
refresh the different estates of the sufferers among you, unto all which the
Apostle offers this general congratulation, Phil. 1.28.
To you it is given for CHRIST, not only that you believe in him, but also that
you suffer for him. These are words that do highly extol the grace of
sufferance, for Saint Paul paralleleth it here with the grace of believing, nay
it seems an exaggeration of that of suffering, to a degree above the other,
his saying that to them was given not only to believe, but to suffer, as some
superaddition of an extraordidinary gratification from God. And surely if we
reflect considerately upon the grace of suffering virtuously for Christ, we
shall find, that it is the accomplishment of our faith, and the last term of
Christian perfection in this life, for it is not only a demonstration of our
faith, and hope, but an unquestionable evidence of our love. For what the
Apostle Saint James says of believing, and working, James 21.18.
supposing the occasion, holds adequately between loving, and suffering; for
to any who shall confide in their untryed love, I may say with the Apostle, You
have love, and I patience, show me your love without patience, and I will show
you my love by my patience; you love God while you are benefited, do not the
heathens do the same? This application does quadrate, me thinks, to this
case, for indeed it is not possible to show our love, when we are called to
suffer, without manifesting it by a religious patience, and by that we do
clearly evidence our love.

Therefore it is excellently said by a holy man, That a Christian who knows
not how to suffer, knows as little how to love, for as love is the soul of
Christianity, so suffering is the soul of love. God himself who could not be
prescribed this way of expressing his love, chose it from eternity. So as to
doubt of this Verity, is to shake the whole frame of Christianity. Wherefore we
must not desire to try our loves by those affections we may feel to act for
Christ, when we are in the state of enduring for him, for it may often rise
from natural propensions, 1 Pet. 4.13 Communicating with the passions of
Christ, rejoice, that in the revolation also of his glory you may be glad
rejoicing.
this promptitude to action, but the acquiescence to privation and suffering is
most assuredly the operation of Grace. Therefore you ought now to judge of the
proportion of your loves, by that measure of conformity you find in them, to
this advise of the Prince of the Apostles, Communicantes passionthus Christi
gaudete, ut in revelatione gloria ejus gaudeatis exultantes. For every
different state of sufferers among you, shall be r^ted by their recompenses,
not by their proportions of pains they have endured, but by the measure of joy
they have felt in suffering for Christ; for it is the manner of their
acceptance, not the matter of their impositions, whereupon they are to be
adjudged their reparation. In so much as in your cases, I may invert Christ's
words to distinguish his true Disciples amongst you, from the worlds adherents,
saying, John 16.
The first shall rejoice, and the other weep and lament, and this gladness
shall be turned into more joy, and that sorrow into more discomfort; for they
deserve not heaven, that (...) are so far from giving all they have for it,
as to lament the being assisted in the purchase by Gods own hand, in taking
from them as much as he asks, and demanding only their good will to the
bargain. Whereupon in this exhortation, I may use the words of the Apostle in
the same manner I have done those of our Savior, 2 Cor. 2.2.
Who is it can make me glad, but he that is made glad by me?

The first estate I will present in particular this parabien of their
sufferance, shall be that, which we have nearest in our eye of the refugiats of
our nation, which have taken sanctuary in Catholic Countries, whereof there
are even from the Cedars of Lihanus to the rushes of the fields; and I conceive
the Queen her self may be presented under this notion, for I would to God
Catholic Religion were as much naturalized in England, as I have heard she is
to the Nation; and it were me thinks unjust, not to assign her a due
proportion of joy, who has so large a portion of the national suffering, in
this particular respect of Catholic. Therefore I do humbly present her with
the parabien of all her crosses and vexations relating to her Religion, for
even the defeature of her hopes in this life, may arm her the better for that
victory she cannot fail of, by but virtuously accepting all her defeatures.
For though it has not pleased God, she should have the Emperor Constantines
success, yet she has the same sign to promise her a more glorious Empire,
for looking up by faith, she shall see in all her clouds the Cross with this
inscription, In this sign thou shall overcome. It is at the feet of the Cross
then, I lay that joy I offer to her present condition, presuming she looks
often there, and so will not fail to find it.

I could easily show her many Queens in this procession of the Cruciad, charged
with heavier crosses then hers, but I do not desire to ease her by the
consideration of what she does not suffer, but by the right apprehension of
what she does, for that is the most noble, and most christian manner of
solacing her, not to lighten her burden in her imagination, but to strengthen
her will for the bearing and toleration of it, that she may think her cross
commodious, in respect of the hand that lays it on, not of the company that
has carried it with her, and so aspire to be a greater Saint then she is a
sufferer. And the way to attain to this sovereign prerogative, is to express
a religious and Christian joy, in this her state of communicating with the
passions of Christ, whereby she may supply this defect of her present
condition, the inability to relieve her Catholic Subjects, the way she has
formerly, by communicating to them now joy in their tribulations, by the virtue
of so operative an example; and thus while she remains suspended from the
propagating of Catholic Religion among her Subjects, by way of amplification,
or extent, she may still advance it in degrees of intention and eminence.

And I may truly without endangering the blotting these lines with flattery,
that are drawn toward her, give her joy also of the great improvement of her
piety, in the opinion of all competent judges in this time of her trial and
probation; in so much as I cannot doubt, but her soul acknowledges to God
with King David, Psalm. 118.17.
It is good for me that thou have humbled me, that I may learn thy
justifications. So I beseech God to advance her to that degree, in the
understanding of the Cross, as her heart may avow with that holy King, Psalm.
86.7.
The habitation in thee is as it were of all rejoicing.

There is another here in these our asyles, whose eminent quality may justify
a particular salutation and welcoming into the society of the Cross, and this
may seem the more due to her, in regard of her names being so notorious for
temporal felicity, not only in our Nation, The Lady Duchess of Buckingham.
but the rest of Christendom; and now we look upon her, as a wreck of Fortune
cast upon these coasts; whose secular ruins may serve to disabuse the
commercers in the unfaithful sea of this age, and whose spiritual composure
and virtue may be useful toward the inlightning of lower ranks, in the
benefits of adversity; wherein she seems so illuminated, as she is retreated
further out of the world, then misfortune could chase her, and has taken
sanctuary as it were within the inward veil of the Tabernacle, and so does not
only piously bear her own Crasse, but zealously take upon her another
voluntary crucifixion, seeming not to seek case, but rather activity in the way
of the Cross, by her adventuring so vigorously to repair to a more sanctified
manner of suffering, wherein she is now engaged, and does act in this course as
vigilantly, as if she had neither quality, nor persecution to recommend her.

So as from her virtue, there may be these two public utilityes expected, the
silencing of many complaints that have far lesser sufferings to claim pity
upon, and the exhibiting this reccipt to others, of curing the injuries of the
world by the contempt of it. For truly nothing takes out so well the fire of
tribulation, as the flame of zeal and devotion. Which remedy I beseech God to
impart, to all those of the nation who are now in their fiery trial. And for
the particular of this worthy person, I hope it will not seem unbecomming my
office, to incense her a little with these good odours of her own estimation
in these countries, being it is not like to stuff her head with any vanity,
but only to delight her the more with the savor of piety and religion.
Therefore I will leave her, laying this sweet meditation at the door of her
cell, a perfume taken out of the cabinet of a great and holy King, Psalm. 118.96.
Of all consummation I have seen the end, thy commandment is exceeding large.

There is another person of the same sex, and quality within the Kingdom,
(which though it be out of the limits I had now prefixed my self of this side
of the sea) yet her commemoration cannot come in more properly, The Lady
Marchioness of winchester.
in respect of the company, her case deserving a special remarke, and as I am
informed, her virtue meriting a peculiar note of estimation, to be transmitted
to posterity. And I am certain the singularity of her suffering, requires an
extraordinary animadversion, for imprisonment to her sex and quality for
religion, is a primitive severity, and her zeal, patience and humility is
reported be such, as they seem to have moved God to illustrate them by such a
trial, as only the Primitive Saints have had, among which she may find many
precedents of her case, and fair draughts of all those Christian virtues,
which shall be pleased to pass down by her tradition of them to posterity.

Let her therefore consider herself set up for her sex to copy, that as her
sufferance draws many eyes upon her, so they may be all invited in seeing her
virtue, to draw by her the manner of suffering; and thus her imprisoment may
impart to others, a nobler liberty then her own person is deprived of, and
contribute somewhat to her finishing the samplar of piety and confidence, she is
to exhibit to her sex. I find one figure in the primitive times, very fit to
fet before her eyes, which Saint Basil painteth forth to us in excellent
colors, it was a Lady of great quality called Julitta, who having been called
by the Magistrates to answer the accusation of her faith, and being persuaded by
her less Christian friends, to dissemble her beleese so far, as might
probably exempt her from the rigors proclaimed against the professors thereof,
and when it was argued, that her sex might well extenuate her declining such
terrible penalties, as were decreed upon the refusal of compliance with the
times, she made this heroical answer, Woman is made by the same hand as man,
and equally capable of virtue, for unto the construction of woman, flesh alone
was not applied, but of a bone of the bones of man she was composed, which
signifies, that we are obliged no less then men to exhibit to God, and to the
world evidences of the firmness of our faith and constancy of mind, courage,
and patience in all adversities; And in this disposition she answered her
examiners, in so masculine a style of virtue and religion, as she was presently
condemned to prison, and soon after to a most exemplary martyrdom.

If I be not misinformed, there are many notes of the same key in these two
Ladies lessons, but howsoever I am sure they are both consorted, in the harmony
of virtue in the suffering for the profession of the true religion of Christ;
therefore I shall humbly defire this Lady I now give joy of her sufferance,
that as she is thus far advanced in a similitude with this glorious Saint, she
would endeavor to perfect her disposition of sanctity, that she may honor,
and edify her sex by her exemplary life, and martyrdom of her liberty, as the
other has done by her sanguinary martyrdom, and I may make up my present to
her in this precious cover of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4.14
If you be reviled in the name of CHRIST you shall be blessed, because that
which is of the honor, glory and virtue of God, and the spirit which is his,
shall rest upon you.

By my instancing in particular these two most eminent persons of our nation, I
doubt not but the other virtuous sufferers of their sex, will judge themselves
rather honored then obscured, and the other sex cannot question this civiltiy,
and deference to such remarkable persons, being pressed as it were by such
memorable circumstances in their conditions, nor does my design point at any
particular acquisition of resentment, my profession being (thanks be to God)
out of the reach of private gratifications, and indeed I design it for a
public monument of the virtue of the nation, the impressio^ of the memory of
these two eminent persons, upon the face of time it self, in a more durable
character, then the fading imagery of cursory discourse, that as far as it
shall please God, to suffer these thoughts of mine to pass downwards toward
succeding times, the names of these two excellent women, may have their due
commemoration, while mine rests in a deserved concealment.

Returning now to the generality of our persecuted refugiats, I must desire
them to acount themselves, but travailing in the accomplishment of a vow, for
indeed all Christians are votaries in baptism, of an incessant pilgrimage
through this world, and a convenient local establishment, does commonly banish
the memory of our vow, whereas flight, and exile keeps us upon the stage of our
profession, whereupon Saint Justine Martyr says properly, in commendation of
the minds of the primitive Christians, That every foreign region was their
country, and all their country a foreign region to them. Therefore S. Basil
when he was threatened to be banished out of his Bishopric, answered his
persecutor, That he might be sent home, but could not be banished in this
world, when all places were his way to his country, and no place here his
country. For indeed it is as Saint Augustine says, Every man is made a
stranger by his birth, and by death only makes his remigration. Account your
selves then rather imployd upon several commissions, as Christ's Disciples then
forced out of your habitations, and every time you look up to heaven, think you
are reading your instructions in these words of Saint Paul, Heb. 13.13
Let us go forth therefore to him, without the camp, carrying his reproach,
for we have not here a permanent city, but we seek that which is to come.

O think then on him who descended from heaven, and appeared on earth as a
stranger to seek you, when you were lost, and yet had not so much as the
compassion of being a stranger to recommend him, and was so far from finding
any good usage for his Religion, as that was the subject of his persecution. In
how much an easier condition are you, who are in the way from earth to heaven,
and whose estate of strangers, and persecuted, affords you freedom in your
Religion, and commiseration to your persons? when you balance your present
estates, and your vocations together, you will find this yoke sweet, wherein
Christ has not only drawn in person, but is still drawing with you by a
consociation of his grace, of whom you should rather implore the grace of well
disscising your selves of that native earth you carry about you, then the being
restored to that whereof you are dispossessed. And you may judge of your
dispositions toward this point of Christian perfection, by the rule given by
an holy Father of the Church to his fellow pilgrims, Hugode S. victore.
He is yet too tender, to whom his native country seems sweet, he is strong,
to whom every land seems his country, and he is perfect to whom the whole
world seems an exile. The first has fixed his love in this world, the second
has dispersed and scattered it upon it, the last has extinguished his love to
it. And why should I not hope for your aspiring to this perfect relinquishing
of the world, when you are assisted by so much improbability, of ever returning
to any tempting portion of it?

Therefore the steps of these your peregrinations, must not be halting between
two ways, turning your heads backward upon that country from which your bodies
are removing. This looking awry may easily cause you to stumble in your way,
therefore for Gods sake keep the whole man straight, always advancing forward
in the easiest and safest posture, looking to that home, from whence you are
truly exiled, and are the more distanced, the more you account this your remove
from your earthly habitation, to be a bainshment. Remember Christ marching
before all his Disciples up to Jerusalem, with so much vigor and alacrity, as
they who followed him were astonished at his diligence. When you set your
hearts after this disposition of Christ in your travailes, this your Lawgiver
will give you blessings, and you shall go from virtue to virtue, having
disposed ascension in your heart in this vale of tears; and they among you,
whose hearts, as the Apostle says, confess they are pilgrims, and strangers
upon earth, and say these things, signify, That they seek their true country.

Wherefore for the close of this peculiar instruction, I offer you with Saint
Paul, the reflection on your father Abraham, whom you resemble more specially
then others in this feature of your peregrination. You know if he had been
mindful of the Land from whence he was called forth, he had time and
convenience to return, which is more temptation then you have, and yet he
continued faithful in his sequestration from his country, beholding the
promises much farther off then you do now; and saluting them with a believing
acquiescence to his word that had promised them; for as the Apostle says, Heb.
10.40
for you God has provided some better thing, a present issue out of this
strange sejourment, into the land of promise. Therefore you are more obliged to
that faith is required of you, which has a shorter trial and a sooner
recompense. As far then as you are the only legitimate sons of Abraham, in
point of faith, do I beseech you to do the works of your Father in point of
perseverance and longanimity, Heb. 6.14.
that out of Abraham's tents, you may remove into his bosom, who by patiently
enduring obtained the promise.

Now looking over into England, For prisoners.
the first place a messenger from the Cross ought to land at, is, the Prisons
of the Country; for there he is the likelyest to find those he seeks,
therefore I make there my first salutation, giving them joy of these bonds and
irons that are appertenancies to the Cross of Christ; for as the Church
triumphant has orders, and degrees of beatitudes, so has the Church militant
forms and stations of sufferances, which qualify every one respectively for
that preferment which is to be answerable to the degrees of similitude to the
passions of Christ, which every member attaineth unto, in this time of
crucifixion.

In the figure of Christ's life, which is the exemplar of all our dispositions
in sufferings, we find but a little glimpse of imprisonment, from which we may
draw a copy of our comportment in that state; for there is but one nights
bondage in all his life extant, and exposed for our study; so as this condition
seems one of the least exemplified and innobled portions of the Cross by
Christ's person, but in recompense, to honor this state of suffering, he is
pleased to be personated by every prisoner, and so this state of durance, which
has been honored but a short time by his person, may be looked upon as
dignified by a continual representation of him. And surely Prisoners have this
particular means of meriting, (the being put to represent Christ, in one of
the postures which is the most averse to our nature, being the loss of
liberty) and so may expect a commensurate elevation of their nature, in the
state of the liberty of the sons of God. And the difficulty of your parts
seems raised by this circumstance, of being debarred all manner of acting for
God, or exterior worship of him.

This removal from his presence in his ordinances, is a privation you may
boldly pretend a great restitution upon, and out of all the unpleasantnesse of
your parts, you may derive this consolation, That it is a cross has nothing
of your election in it, and so the likelier to have the more of Gods design,
and consequently to prove the more purgative and depuring of your nature, for
imprisonment is a cross of such a quality, as it is often the most proper
expedient for our improvement in grace, and yet it is not possible for us to
take it, without being helped to it by some necessity, therefore we should
always ascribe this state to Gods knowledge of our want thereof, since our
nature may very often require this receipt, and can never know our wanting it
but by experimenting the operation of it for Gods design upon us, may demand
the severing us from some adherence, which we could not judge opposite to the
order of our grace, until we find our selves by degrees disingaged from it;
for we may be appointed by God to some vocation, we could not imagine, till he
had by means appropriated for that qualification, enlightened, and prepared us
for the discharge of such a calling.

In many cases, no less then the loss of what we could not part with but by
force, which is our liberty, is requisite to conveigh to us, what is better
worth then all we could have wished, before we had received that addition,
which is, an enlargement of grace, and a straighter enclosure of our wills
within the pleasure of our Creator. Wherefore we ought always to attribute
the deprivement of our liberty, to some special purpose of God, which we must
enquire, by the best use we can assign our time unto, which is prayer and
study, and by them God does commonly (as from under the wings of the two
Cherubims) speak to us his design upon us.

This state of sufferance, has been much honored by the persons of the
Apostles; the prisons seemed their Innes in their perambulation of the world.
Wherein we may remarke a special kindness of God to prisoners, who being not
in an estate of hearing the doctrine of Christ, as it passed through their
country, was pleased to send the Apostles as it were so much out of their way,
to seek prisoners and minister it to them. For surely such lodgings, may to
human reason, seem much out of the way, to such as were to circuit the whole
world. And me thinks we cannot render a more apposite reason of Gods bestowing
so much of the Apostles time upon prisons, then his special grace, and
indulgence to this distressefull state of sufferers. For in all other respects,
this immuring of the Apostles, who were so few, and had so long journeys set
them, might seem an impediment of their Commission, and rather a putting that
light under a bushel, then a way to illuminate the darkness of the whole
world, by the diffusion of it; and yet we see how much of Saint Paul's time God
allows to prisons; two years in Casarea, as many interpret it, and certainly
two whole years in his first bonds at Rome, besides all those other
interjections, of those links of this chain, as at Philippi, and other places
in his progress, where we see him dissolving the bonds of his companions, by
touching them at his own, and fastening many to the Cross of Christ, whose
irons he converted into nails for that service.

And Ecclesiastical records deliver unto us eminent and numerous conversions,
wrought in prisons upon the same miracles, which were effectlesse in the
streets, and the temples; and this may well be impured to the congruity, and
simpathy there seems to be, between the vocation of a Christian, and the
estate of a prisoner; for as the first is a dying to the world, the last is a
civil death unto the same; so as this Sequestration from the world, must needs
be a congruous disposition, to a spiritual departure from the life of the
world. And besides this literal analogy, which there is between being buried
with Christ, and being intombed in the world, this similitude is very
operative, as well as consonant; for this state of separation from the objects
of our worldly affections, works much toward their extinction; so that in
many respects, the state of imprisoment, has much consonancy with the
requisitions of Christianity.

If then imprisonment being simply considered, has much report and analogy
with the profession of a Christian, that durance which respects directly the
profession of true Christianity, must needs be a state of very near alliance
to Christ, and so may well be congratulated in those who should pursue nothing
so seriously, as this estate of their patron Saint Paul, of being crucified to
the world, when they are crucified by it.

Wherefore I beseech you studiously to cooperate with the facilitation, this
your condition affords you, to break prison and to dissolve more pernicious
bonds, then those which hang but on your outsides, such fetters as liberty and
prosperity do commonly frame within us, binding our souls so subtly in
their prison, as they perceive not their own captivity. This is a work for
which you cannot wish a fitter time, to file away by degrees these your chains
of all worldly cupidity, which you will find hard enough, when you come to work
upon them, though they are so soft and supple, as you scarce feel them while
they lie entire upon you. And by this enlargement of your souls, you may come
to S. Paul's blessing as well as to his posture, That your brethren may know
that the things which have happened unto you are fallen out rather to the
furtherance of your Religion, when considering your exemplary improvements,
every one may be edified by the grace and virtue of your faith. And thus your
chains may in some proportion have the effects of those of the Apostle, That
many of your brethren in our Lord, having confidence in your lands, may be much
more bold in the profession of their faith.

You may observe for the honor of your conditions, Phil. 1.
that S. Paul sometimes waveth the dignity of Apostle, and pleads this of
Prisoner of Jesus Christ, as an equivalent pre-eminence. Upon which chain of
S. Paul, S. Chrysostom sticks not to say, That it is a more illustrious
estate to be a prisoner for CHRIST, then either Apostle, Doctor, or Evangelist:
and pursues thus the endearement of this state, Nothing can be more blessed
then this chain, I do not repute Paul so happy for his rapture into Paradise,
as for his restraint in those bonds. It seems a greater favor for me to be
ill treated for CHRIST, then to be honored by him. And proceeding to blazon
the coat of this noble condition, he says, So Peter was bound and loosned by
an Angel; in this case if one should have asked me, which I would choose to be,
either Peter inchained, or the Angel striking off his irons, I should have
taken the place of Peter; the grace of this bondage is a greater gift then to
stay the sun, or to move the world, or to command the devils. Acts 16.
The prison was shaken in pieces, where Paul was bound, and the bands of all
the Prisoners were broken. Mark the nature of these bands which dissolve the
bands of others, for as the death of our Lord killed death, so Paul's chains,
unchained fetters, shook prisons in pieces, and broke open doors. So that
Paul bound has dominion over all bands; nay more, when he sailed in bands, he
stays, and binds up the storm, freeth the ship wrecked, and restrains the
venom of the viper. These reflections on the opinions of Saints, may direct you
in the sense of your condition; for though you are not endowed with the gift of
dissolving bands, and opening prisons, yet if you find in your selves the
disposition of piously and cheerfully staying in them, and a desire of
improving this time toward the loosening the cords of Adam in your selves, by
acquiring contrary habits of the spiritual liberty of the second Adam, you
shall possess your selves of the greater grace; for it is an higher estate, to
be with S. Paul nailed to the Cross with Christ, then to be rending the
foundations of prisons, or shaking the vipers that are upon your hands into the
fire. For they are the rods, wherewith S. Paul himself was stricken at
Philippi, which make new rays of glory in his crown, not the chains which he
struck off from his fellow prisoners.

Wherefore I beseech you all, not to intend so much the loosening of your
irons, as the converting them into that gold wherewith the heavenly Jerusalem
is paved, which is celestial charity. Hoping therefore in God that you assign
this your time of civil death to the study of a spiritual life, I will set
this blessed Epitaph upon your tomb for you to read, You are dead, and your
life is hidden with CHRIST in God: when CHRIST shall appear, Colos. 3.34
your life, then shall you also appear with him in glory.

The next visit I make, shall be, For the dispoyled.
to such as heretofore have practiced Christian medicine upon the distresses of
others, and now are patients themselves in this point of necessity. Me thinks
when I come into such families, with the Angels message, Toby 5.11.
to give them joy, I may well expect such an answer as old Toby gave in this
case, What joy can we have, sitting in this darkness of fortune, seeing no
light of any relief or restitution? To such, though I cannot answer as the
Angel did to Toby, Be of good cheer, for your cure is near at hand from God,
yet I have a message to them of no less comfort from the master of that Angel,
Thus says the first, Apoc. 2.12
and the last, who was dead, and lives, I know your tribulation, and your
poverty, but you are rich. What this riches means, they cannot mistake, which
know by experience, that no material substances, which may be so easily
removed and alienated, ought to be accounted the riches of a Christian; Christ
Jesus left no such movables for Christians to reckon their estates upon, as
could be plundered, or sequestered.

Your treasure then is this similitude with Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9.
who being rich, became poor for you, that by his poverty you might be rich.
You are advanced half way toward this complete imitation of him, for of rich
you are made poor for his sake. But in this part, it may be there is little
desert toward him, because your wills have wrought little upon this part of
the copy. The other half then that remains to finish, must be perfected by
the acts of your own wills, which is, to endeavor that Christ may be made
rich by your poverty. This may be done (you being members of Christ) by your
becoming rich in all that spiritual treasure, which may be dug out of this
rock of poverty; as patience, humility, contempt of the world, and the love of
God. For every member of Christ, that accumulateth such treasures of grace,
enricheth the body of Christ. This is an honor that Poverty is allowed, to
enrich Christ, by the same means whereby he has made us rich, to wit, by our
indigence and necessity, to confer treasure on his Church, since all the
opulency thereof, is an addition to his estate.

You need not wonder then, that I offer you joy in this your condition, when
your taking it, and showing that you have it, is the means of your enriching
Christ by this your poverty. For since you have not one of the hardest parts of
poverty to contend with your nature in, which is, the dipossessing your selves,
of those eases which your senses have still hold of, and strive to retain, you
having but the acceptance of your privations left to obtain of your nature,
may account your selves carried by accident, half way to the end of Christian
perfection, of relinquishing all for Christ. And surely if you do now joyfully
embrace your wants and destitutions, you may be said to recover the merit of
having given to Christ all you have lost. For they who give all away in
preference of this state, of the poverty of Christ, do not please God so much
in resolving to want, as in actually feeling the incommodities thereof, and
joying in that conformity to Christ: so that your rejoicing in the present
distresses of poverty, is the point which valueth this condition, and so
brings you to the meritorious part of a voluntary donation of all your
violent deprivements; and on the other side, if you repine and murmur at your
losses, you do commit a kind of mental sacrilege, in desiring to take back
what God seems to have applied to the honoring the poverty of his Son,
which is, the reducing the opulent to embrace and rejoice in indigence, in
order to an attendance upon the necessitous condition of Christ.

Therefore you may well accept with alacrity this order of God, and conclude,
that if you are conscient to your selves of Christian largeness of heart, in
the abundance of your fortune, that God out of mercy has with his own hand
given you these last touches of the image of his Son, that you might have both
these resemblances of him, the having been poor as well as bountiful. In the
first of which features, you know God is so much delighted, as he has so
disposed the world, that it affords him much more of that object, then of the
other; for there is far more poverty upon the earth then charity. And it is so
ordered, as together with the act of charity, there is always extant the
object of necessity, and this latter is often existent single without the
other, so as you may account this state of poverty and passivenesse you are now
in, no less acceptable to God then that of abundance and dispensation to
others, from whence you are translated.

And surely you may conclude this your present estate of sufferance and
purgation, to be fitly ministered for the cure of some infirmity, wherewith your
selves were unacquainted. For we have all sins, which are secrets even to our
own sincerest inquisition. We know David after his confession, Psalm. 18.23.
desired to be informed of God of his omissions, and to be cleansed of his
secret sins; and Saint Augustine praises Gods mercy, for the sins he had not
committed, by the grace of Gods prevention. You may well then impute this
change of your estate, either to a merciful purpose of God, to draw out some
worm, growing imperceptibly in the full body of your temporal commodities,
or to keep out some snake, which God foresaw would have insinuated it self
into those covers of plenty and abundance were standing in your former
conditions. So as in either of these cases, you may resolve this change to be a
mercy, veiled under this mystery of your affliction.

Whereupon I may fitly present you with this comfort of the Evangelicall
Prophet, Isay 54.8
I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness I will
have mercy on thee, says the Lord, thy redeemer. And if you may well take it
for a favorable Composition, the being taxed at some few days revenew in this
life, for a discharge of the least delinquency against your Creator and
Redeemer, how justly then ought you to rejoice at this bargain, wherein there
wants but your setting your heart to it, to make it a valid conveyance of all
your estates over to the land of the living, and so to convert your momentany
privations, into an improvement of your eternal possessions? when you may make
this blessed claim of the Psalmist, Psalm. 38.8.
Now what is my expectation? is it not our Lord? and my sustance is with thee.
These considerations I am certain, may justify my giving you joy of your
present conditions, and if you take it, you will need solicit no other
reparatory, for if the poverty of Christ does thus enrich you, O! what may you
hope for, in the plenitude of his treasure from such a master, as is able to
furnish joy to the followers of him in his sorrow? what may be expected at the
entering into that masters joy?

Thus I have visited the principal stations of our Crosse-bearers, and
according to my best capacity, I have offered the hungry meat, the strangers
hospitality, the prisoners society: I have served every one faithfully with
their several portions of consolation, which the great master of the family
distributeth to them, through my hands; therefore I shall now exhibit unto them
all collectively this Pharmacum Catholicum, this Canonike, or universal
receipt of Saint Paul, applyable to all conditions, Phil. 1.28.
In nothing be terrified of the adversaries, which to them is cause of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God; for to you it is given,
for CHRIST, not only that you believe in him, but also that you suffer for him.

CHAP. XIII. A Summary of the precedent Treatise.
WHen I view these sheets, me thinks they call to my mind the Book sent to
the Prophet Ezekiel, written full with these three Contents, Lamentations, A
Song, and We, whereunto the three Covenants of Sufferance, (the subject of my
lines) may be not improperly accommodated. For the first of them as Men,
answers well to the Lamentations of the Prophet, as consisting altogether of
sorrow and labor. And the second as Christians, reports to the Song, which
signifies praising and gladness, for under the notion of Christians, we may
fitly sing and rejoice in our obligation to suffer. And the last as Catholics,
relates not unfitly to the third of We. For as Persecution and the Cross was
the Mother, so affliction has always been one of the nurses of Catholic
Religion: And the state of Christians, standing in the middle, does like the
Sun in the Sky, inlighten the orbs above and below it; for this condition of
suffering as members of Christ, disasperates the thorns left in the sides of
the sons of Adam, and sweetens that Cup mingled with Myrrh, which we take
from the hand of our mother the Catholic Church, who gathers Myrrh with all
her Aromaticall spices.

And I would to God there were but as much similitude between the persons, as
between the Commissions of the Prophet and mine, for he was sent to treat of
these subjects, with people in your condition, the Church of God in persecution
and captivity, to enjoin them Lamentation for their sins, to promise them joy
to their obedience, and to denounce Woe against their inconformity. Which
offices I have discharged to the best of my capacity; and I may own the charge
from God, in that order, wherein all good gifts come from above, Jam. 1.17
from the Father of lights; and more precisely by Saint Paul's direction, 2 Cor.
3.9
of Communicating to the necessities of the Saints, Romans 12.13
without arrogating any thing, toward the least glimpse of pretending an
extraordinary warrant. The Apostle investeth us with this honor of being Gods
coadjutors. Wherefore the meanest of that function may avouch his Spirit for
the author of what tends to the communicating of his good impulses to the
refection and solace of his desolated brothers; So that whatsoever in these
lines, shall bring any drop of consolation, passes my pen, but as through a
pipe, which gives conveyance only, no virtue, to what is transfused. And I
desire there may be no more ascribed to my ink, then ought to be to the dirt,
or the water of Siloe, John 9.24
which were used in the blind man's cure; for it may be truly answered to all
such as shall receive any benefit by my pen, Give glory unto God, for we know
this man is a sinner.

They who will benefit by these my prescriptions, must be desired to enter into
a serious consideration, of these three points, which do naturally issue from
the heads of our triple covenant. The first is, the misery of our estate as
sons of Adam; The second is, the dignified condition of the members of
Christ; The third is, security of being such by our incorporation into the
Catholic Church, the which only is his body, and his spouse. The first may be
ministered against all refractory humor, that exasperateth our grievances, the
which we may-sweeten by this reflection, that We are born to sorrow as birds to
fly. Job 5.7.
This may well asswag our distempers, to consider sufferance not as an estate
of compulsion, but of consonancy to our condemned nature. The second, may
present to us our sentence of sorrow, converted into a gratification, by
proving the means of our connection to such an head, who by putting the griefs,
and dolours of our nature into his bosom, has taken out the sting, and has
taught us to kill their venom by embracing them; And the third ascertaineth
us, to be within that circle, wherein the eternal benefit of all the sorrows
of the head or members are limited, and determined. This triangle of
meditation, is well proportioned to all your suffering hearts, in which form I
have drawn this present of my heart unto you, and having borrowed of Saint Paul
the most of what I have presented to you to make up the want of weight in what
is of mine own stock, I will borrow this also from him, 2 Cor. 12.15
This little labor I most gladly bestow, and will my self moreover be
bestowed for your souls.

If I may make a request to you upon this present, it shall be, to retain
ch^ifly the second of these three points I have treated; which are, your
obligation to suffer, your manner of bearing the Cross, and your merit in the
faithful carriage thereof. There is little danger of your forgetting the
first, in these times, nor any fear of Gods forgetting of the last, both in
this time, and in eternity. Heb. 6.10.
God is not unjust that he should forget your work and love, which you have
showed in his name. So as all the difficulty rests in your co^plying faithfully
with the Evangelicall manner of suffering exhibited so fairly to you in the
practice and precepts of our Savior Christ Jesus, who as Saint Peter urges it
to us, 1 Pet. 2.21
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that you may follow his steps; which I
have set out before you, as fairly, figured and impressed upon these papers, as
my skill can afford their edition. I have showed you their Marches, toward
friends, and their Postures to enemies, in the exercises of all sorts of
charities, active and passive; I have exposed unto you the Apostles and the
Martyrs following of Christ in the same track, all making one procession of the
Cross; I have removed all those stumbling blocks and stones of scandal I
could find in your way, that might endanger you in your following and carrying
your Crosses safely and graciously in this train; I have cleared all those
scruples, and dissipated those temptations, I conceived the most obnoxious, and
the most subtle the enemy could object to amuse you, or excite, to seduce you.
Against both which impediments in the way of the Cross, (to wit, of doubts
which might keep you unresolved, and of offers that might divert you) I have
given their precautions, and defenses respectively to the natures of the
dangers.

Having thus furnished you, the arms of righteousness on the right hand, and
the left, with all sincerity, and as much ability as God has pleased to impart
unto me, I may use the terms of the beloved Apostle upon the same occasion, 1
John. 14.
These things we write to you that you may rejoice, and your joy may be full.
For surely if out of these principles of Catholic Religion, you do but
extract some drops of joy, Psa. 109.7 Of the torrent in the way shall be drink,
therefore shall he exalt his head.
now while you are drinking or the torrent in the way with him of whom the
Psalmist says, De torrente in via bibet, propterea exaltabit caput; with what
a torrent of joy shall you be refreshed when you come to be united to that
exalted head, and drink as it were with his mouth, tasting the same volupty
which he feeds, and lives upon? In this contemplation, me thinks it should
be no harder a matter for you to be pleased now in your pressures, and
vexations, then it is for a General to rejoice, while his wounds are dressing,
though with much sensible pain, which are the memorials of a glorious victory.
All the pains and asperities of temporal affliction, unto a heart fastened to
the Cross of Christ, Act. 5.41.
(in which posture there is an actual triumph) are but such smarts, and
pungencies, as the body of a Conqueror may feel in his hurts, while his mind
is elevated with a superior Joy and Delectation.

There may be such a present dolorousnesse in the senses of those victorious
sufferers, while their spirits are going rejoicing with the Apostles, in these
stripes, which their persons resent; for Saint Paul the great Doctor in
consorting this suavity and asperity, tells us, Heb. 12.11.
All discipline for the present truly seems not to be of joy but sorrow, but
afterward it will render to them who are exercised by it, most peaceable fruit
of justice. Therefore a Christian who lives by faith more nobly then by sense,
rests not upon what he feels, but passes on to what he believes and hops,
2 Cor. 4.18 The things that are seen are temporal, but these that are not seen
are eternal.
considering that Temporalia sunt quae videntur, quae autem non videntur
aterna. Me thinks Job upon his triumphall arch raised upon the consumption and
ashes of all his temporalities, prefigureth to us the estate, and directs the
course of a Christian, He has set me as it were a proverb for the common
people, and the just shall hold his way, and with clean hands shall add
strength.

These contrarietyes must be expected, yet this rectitude in the way, and this
proficiency in the advance, must be endeavored, and by those, gaining upon our
selves, we attain to that joy which our Savior has promised, none shall take
from us, for our King has associated two things, more inco^patible in the
state of our nature, then the Emp. Merva was so much celebrated for, in the
state of civil regiment, which was, that he had conjoined two things before
his time insociable, Empire and Liberty; But our Prince of peace, has
consociated even the sword and peace, for he professes he came to separate the
nearest alliances of nature, and yet to confederate joy and sorrow in these
separations. And this capacity imparted to our nature of rejoicing and
suffering all together, seems a resemblance in us, of the ineffable union in
him of his Divine and Human natures. For these two operations Angelical and
Humane, seem now conjoined in the faculties of man, when he rejoices as if he
were an Angel, while he suffers as a Man.

This concordancy has Christ made between these two antipathies of joy and
sorrow, by that power which joined himself to us, in such a sort, as no mortal
shall ever conceive the manner of it. And the same power, gives us this
capacity, of issuing as it were out of our selves, in such a kind, as we cannot
comprehend that virtue, by which we are thus enabled to joy, and sorrow in the
same conjuncture. But though we do not conceive fully the virtue by which we
act, we are clearly informed of what we are to endeavor, in all distresses
never so averse to our nature; for where he, whom we believe equal to God,
returned him thanks, and praises for all his crosses and passions, we who are
but worms and dust, cannot doubt how we are to comport our selves in our
chastisements and corrections, under the hand of our Creator.

The Apostle in these instructions given to the Roman Catholics for their
behavior in persecution, compriseth and summeth up in a few words, all my
ratiocinations, Be fervent in spirit, Romans 12.
rejoicing in hope, patience in tribulation, inst^nt in prayer. These are the
Wedges, out of which I have by way of expansion drawn all the leaf-gold, which
I have laid upon these sheets, out of which every one of you may take stuff
enough to gild over his Cross; and now I present you with the bars
themselves out of which each of you may draw that fire-tryed gold, which the
Angel counsels them to buy, that would be made rich. For as the prince of
the Apostles says of these same dispositions, and in little differing terms, 2
Pet. 1.8.
If these things be present with you, and abound, they shall make you not
vacant, not without fruit in the knowledge of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

And you will please to remember, that I have marked you out the way of having
this presence and abundance of these graces and endowments by fervent and
indeficient prayer, which opens the ears of even the unjust judge, and much
more his, who has given us this expedient for all our releefs, Luke 18.2. It
behooves always to pray and not to be weary. 1 These. 5.16.
Oportet semper orare, and non deficere, so that this precept of our righteous
judge, and merciful master, cannot be too much iterated, and urged upon you in
this time of your tentation. And certainly Saint Paul's Rejoice always, and his
Pray always, are fitly set together, for they are Correlatives, prayer being
the father, and joy the son. In this life our necessities require continual
supplies, and in the other life where we shall know no want, these two shall
change their relations, joy shall be the parent and prayer the issue; for there
the fullness of joy shall beget perpetual prayer, whereas here the abundance
of prayer, is it, that produces a continuation of joy.

It is prayer then that is the anchor of our joy in this world, Heb. 6.19.
which may be fastened to the inner part of the veil, where Jesus the precursor
is entered; he has left us this anchor to cast upwards, to stay our peace in
all afflictions, and storms of this sea we sail up and down in for a while, and
if in any calm of spirit we lessen our prayer, we do but as if in fair
weather, a Ship should cut off her anchors, confiding in the continuance of
this serenity, and consequently it can be no less then desperateness, not to
be very instant, and intentive in prayer in the foul weather of persecution.
This prescription then of the Apostle, is the most sovereign that can be
ministered to your exigencies, 2 Timothy 8.2. I will therefore that men pray in every
place, lifting up pure hands without anger or altercation
Volo ergo vires orare in omni loco, levantes puras manus sine ira, and
disceptations. When your hands are thus lifted up to Heaven, the Amalekites are
easilyer defeated, then while they are retorting back their own darts of
malices, and animosities.

Whereupon David in his Canticle of resurrection, wherein he acknowledges his
marvailous restaurations, assigns all to the virtue of Prayer, saying, Psalm.
65.19.20.
Therefore has God heard, and attended to the voice of my Petition. Blessed be
God, who has not removed my Prayer, and his mercy from me. Upon which words
Saint Augustine gives us this rule, That as long as we find not our Prayer
removed from us, we may be sure Gods mercy is not far from us; for God does
often misericordiously deny our prayers, that are in order to temporal
relief, as the Physician knows better then the Patient, what may be
conveniently granted him; but while he gives us this perseverance, he
bestows his will upon us, which must needs be better then our own; it may be
we beg a serpent, and he gives us bread infallibly, when he inspireth this
indeficiency in Prayer.

Wherefore in resemblance of Saint Augustines excellent ejaculation of Lord
give what you command, and command what you please, I will propose to you this
adjunction, in the unsuccessefulnesse of all your petitions, Lord be pleased
not to deny us the persistence in Prayer, and deny us what you please of our
prayers. This is then the universal remedy I humbly offer to all your wounds
or distempers exterior or intrinsike, the constant application of Prayer,
which is as the Spirit to the body of Religion, whereof no violence can
interrupt the exercise, which I shall leave recommended to you with this
testimony of the holy Spirit, Prove 31.29. Many daughters have gathered together
riches, thou have passed them all.
very applyable to the prerogatives of Prayer, Multae filiae congregaverunt
divitias, tu supergressa es universas.

Upon the premission of all these principles of Christianity, I may justly
charge you with this injunction of Saint Paul to his brethren upon the same
occasion, Heb. 12.12
For the which cause stretch up the slacked hands, and the loose knees and make
straight steps to your feet, that no man halting, err, but rather be healed.
Cast off then all faintness, and pusillanimity, let not your hearts hang down
as oppressed with that weight, which grows the lighter, the more your hands
are elevated and lifted to heaven. And nothing is more opposed to the cure of
your hurts, then this halting the Apostle disswadeth, to wit, the favoring of
your nature in that part it is offended by the world, still leaning and swaying
your thoughts toward the desires of temporal restitutions, toward
animosities to enemies, and limping a little between repining and resignation.
These are the haltings, in which our nature seems to ease her self; but in
effect, this is but to favor a sore part, by which tenderness we may suffer
the nerves to contract, and the members may be by degrees rendered useless, by
this error of indulgence.

For this cause we are advised to make our steps straight, to tread confidently
in the vestiges and footsteps of our Savior, who, Heb. 12.2.
joy being proposed to him, sustained the Cross, and the power of walking upon
the same waters, is denied to none, who have faith enough to tread confidently
upon them, when they are called to come to him, in those his paths of many
waters. He who has bid us all take up our Cross and follow him, cannot be
answered, John 14.5
Lord we know not whither thou go, and how can we know the way? For we know
he has entered into his glory this way, and has set our glory at the end of
the same passage, wherein not only his precedencie guides us, but the
concomitancy of his grace and virtue supporteth and carries us, and that the
easilyer, the more we lean upon them.

Therefore turn not your heads awry out of this narrow way, to look upon the
broad flowrie passages of sinners, but making straight steps in your own
track, follow your glorious Crosse-bearer, crying to him with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 93.12, 13.
Blessed is the man whom thou shall instruct, O Lord, and shall teach out of
thy Law, that thou may give him quietness from the evil days, till a pit
be dug for the sinner. There is a Mine digging under all the rosy banks of
full blown prosperity, and it is not our parts to know the times, or moments
of Gods springing this mine. Let it be then your application, to draw as many
as you can by your prayers from under this hollow ground they are walking, and
building on, and not your study to calculate, or prognostike the day of their
destruction. This you may be assured of from the mouth of the Prophet, and
compassionate their sentence, in comparison of your present sufferings, Upon
the ground of my people shall thorns and briars come up, how much more upon all
the houses of the City rejoicing? You may therefore rejoice, Esaias 32.13.
that you are but scratched a little by those thorns and briars, while others
are in danger to have their roses and flowers turned into the fuel of eternal
flames.

O then, how much more are you to be accounted blessed, upon whom is entayled
that inheritance incorruptible, and incontaminate, conserved in the heavens,
Wherein you shall rejoice, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
a little now if you must be made heavy in diverse tentations; that the
probation of your faith, much more precious then gold (which is proved by the
fire) may be found unto praise and glory, and honor in the revelation of JESUS
CHRIST. Therefore in all the provocations of these times, either by our
personal distresses, or by the contumelies, and exprobrations of your
religion, let your spirits answer the reluctant impulses of your sensitive
nature, 2 Timothy 1.2 I suffer these things, but I am not confounded, for I know
whom I have believed, and I am sure that he is able to keep my deposite unto
that day. Apoc. 13.10 Apo. 22.11
with this reply of the Apostle, and Master of the Gentiles, Haec patior sed
non confundor, scio enim cui credidi, and certus sum quia potens est servare
depositum meum in illum diem; remembering always, that there is no promise but
upon fidelity even unto death. Here is, as Saint John says, The patience, and
the faith of Saints, which expects Gods time for all mutations, and until
that fullness of time be come, we must acquiesce to what the Angel signified to
Saint John, and you may take it for an instruction apposite to these times, He
that hurts let him hurt yet, and he that is in filth let him be filthy yet,
and he that is just, let him be justified yet; and let the holy be sanctified
yet. And these two effects, are consequents of one another, for the impiety of
the unrighteous, is raised by their exercising and perfecting pious patients
whose sanctity is refined by the others inquination.

Gods wisdom makes use of all evils, which he permits but to extract
goods, and so allows all vicissitudes their times, until he Who is the
first, and the last, comes to render to every man according to his works.
Wherefore doing good let us not fail, for in due time we shall reap, not
failing: Let this be then your consolation in all that displeases you, that it
proceeds from his order, who can be pleased with nothing, but what is just.
Having thus summed up all the parcells, and fractions of these lines, I shall
seal the total with this signet of our Apostle, and Doctor of all sufferers,
glorious Saint Paul, Gal. 6.9.
Thanks be to God, who has given us the victory by our Lord JESUS CHRIST. 1
Cor. 15.57.58.
Therefore my beloved brethren, be stable, and unmovable, abounding in the
work of our Lord always, knowing that your labor is not in vain in our Lord.

Now me thinks, upon my delivery of this masculine issue of Catholic Religion,
the throes of my labor may be easily forgot; but there is a harder work
belonging to this birth, which is to Christen it with sincere humility, the
Sacrament, as I may call it, that enters all these sorts of children into that
Covenant, whereby they become acceptable to God, as being marked with the
Character of Christ's spirit and disposition, who sought not his own glory in
any of his works, and has left this rule, John. 7.18
He that seeks the glory of him that sent him, he is true, and injustice in
him there is not. Wherefore in all humbleness raising my heart, and bending my
knees to the original Crucifix, upon whose image I now fix mine eyes, I lay
myself, and this issue of my spirit at his feet, unfainedly acknowledging the
first motion of this design, to have issued from his holy suggestion to me, a
particular zeal for the procuring you some comfort in these times of your
destitutions of all ordinary succors, and the abundance of extraordinary
tentations.

I humbly therefore praise his goodness, in this choice of me the youngest of
his house, to blow these sparkles of consolation among you, riseing from that
coal, wherewith he has been pleased to touch my lips: and in a true sense of
his mercy, and my own meannesse, I ought not to believe any thing I have
written in this work, so worthy the offering up to God, as what I have not writ
in it, which is my name. This manner of consumption, and annihilation of
self-regard, may breath out some odor of humility, which is like to be of
better savor then any other quality of the oblation.

If now then I most humbly offer up to the honor of his holy Spirit all my
propriety in this labor, that the work thus consecrated may have this property
of an host, the having no longer any owner but Gods name, and that by this
means, there may be no thoughts shed upon the author, by the way, but the whole
praise and glory may pass up directly and entirely to the holy Spirit, the
Father of lights, from whom all good gifts descend, this is the greatest
contribution I can bring, toward the obtaining a blessing upon this work;
that by the immediate and single glory which you render to God, in
acknowledging to him this solicitude for your necessities, he may be moved to
give the greater efficacy to these administrations of comfort. Cast then I
beseech you, your thoughts, at least upon such an object as my eyes are now
fixed upon, and looking on the Author of faith, Heb. 12.1
and the consummator Christ Jesus, who, joy being proposed to him, sustained
the Cross, contemning confusion. Let me beseech you to join with me in this
Petition to him, for a blessing upon my labors, and his promised beatitude
upon your sufferances.

A Prayer to CHRIST, represented by a Crucifix.
GRacious Lord Jesus, casting our eyes and thoughts upon your Cross, and
considering how by your own disfiguring, you have repaired in us the image we
had defaced, of our creation, we may joyfully accept this image of our
Redemption, stamped upon us by our present Crosses, whereby we are conformed to
you crucified, and so entitled to that similitude we may expect, by but looking
upon you glorified. O! let this present object, have in some degree such an
operation, and make us like you upon the Cross, by looking on you in that
distressed exposure, that we may derive now from that sight, these virtues of
Patience, Humility, and Charity somewhat perfected, as we shall then partake
Joy, Glory and Love, consummated by that other vision of you. Glorious Lord
Jesus, who are now risen from this throne of your humility, to that of your
Majesty, give us leave to challenge this your promise, of drawing all things
after you, when you were thus exalted; be pleased then to draw our humility and
fidelity after yours, that they may extend even unto death; that when we find
any natural reluctance against our crosses and humiliations, we may feel a
more powerful attraction of our conformity after your precedence. O! we have
no excuse left, when we look upon your hands, stretched out upon the Cross in
an equal expansion on both sides, to active, and passive Charity; the one
extended to the relief of the necessities of others, the other reached forth
to the toleration of all their injuryes, whom you were relieving, encompassing
thus the whole globe of Charity. Be pleased O Lord to fasten us in this manner
unto the Cross with you, that being perfect Crucifixes in our dispositions, as
well as in our disfigurements by the World, we may have the nearer
configuration to your image; when we shall no longer need to labor a
likeness to you, but the very seeing you, shall transform us into the same
similitude. Grant then O Lord while we are in this laborious resemblance of
you, that the character of your patience may be as visible upon us, as that of
your passion, and that our enemies by the virtue of our wants, may be releeved
in their own necessities; while our prayers growing the richer by our patience,
we may the better purchase their remissions. This effect was a grace pertaining
to your Cross, which we humbly beg, may in some measure be conferd on ours;
that upon this ladder we may scale heaven our selves, and open the gates to our
enemies. These were the consequences of your Cross, and we may (become one
Spirit with you by our adherence to you) submissively plead, for some such
resultancies from our sufferings, that being enabled by your grace, to say with
you, that we have glorified God upon earth, and consummated the work that was
appointed us, we may expect our presentation from you unto the glorious Trinity,
in the list of those that are come out of great tribulation, and having
abundance of tears in our eyes to wipe off, when we come to be led by the
Lamb, to the fountains of the Water of life, the plenty of these waters have
stood here in our eyes, may fill our vessels the fuller of those celestial
springs. Be pleased then O Lamb of God! that we may follow you now so
faithfully, through the streets of earthly Jerusalem, without clamor, or
contention, as we may be qualifide for our following you wheresoever you go,
in that heavenly city, where our duty, and our delight will be incessant
acclamations of your glory, which shall be answered by a continual replication
of our own Beatitude. In the mean time, grant that the meekness and humility
of our spirits, under our crosses, may extol the virtue of your cross, and
the praises of your Catholic Church, over which the gates of hell shall never
prevail, and the which only, shall prevail, upon the gates of Heaven.

Haec est victoria quae vincit mundum, 1 John 5.4
fides nostra. Quia propter te mortificamur tota die, Romans 8.36.
astimati su^^^^ sicut oves occisionis, sed in his omnibus superamus propter
cum qui dilexi^ nos. FINIS,
Faults escaped, correct thus.
Page 4. line 2. read matris eorum. and l. 4. r. adinventio. p. 7. l. 8. r.
clog. p. 8. l. ult. r. center, the. p. 10. l. 21. read good of man's life p. 31.
l. 22. r. rapiunt. p. 32. l. 1. r. line. p. 33. l. 26. r. as another bow. p.
36. l. 7. r. no imitation. p. 37. l. 7. r. goods, and l. 9. r. matter. p. 44.
l. 13. r. surer. p. 48. l. 20. r. head. p. 83. l. 4. r. that. p. 123. l. 20. r.
affected with. p. 144. l. 13. r. rectify. p. 151. l. 17. r. renitencie. p. 155.
l. 23. r. consolamini. p. 162. l. 11. r. fleeting. p. 169. l. 25. r. probation.
p. 171. l. 23. r. proved. p. 194. l. 3. r. cogitationes. p. 202. l. 1. r. with.
p. 204. l. 11. r. hand. p. 214. l. 11. r. as bringing. p. 254. l. 2. r.
foeneratur. p. 264. l. 2. r. inferd. p. 266. l. 8. r. as thus. p. 287. l. 25.
r. less then their. p. 295. l. 5. r. Father, and in the marg. r. Mat. 5.44. p.
300. l. 10. r. given. p. 319. l. 18. del. they. p. 337. l. 7. r. it; For p.
347. l. 19. r. retain, you having. p. 354. l. 1. r. the best. p. 356. l. 15. r.
assuage. p. 378. l. 12. 1. becoming.


