SICHAH: Or, A Continued TRACT OF MEDITATION. BEING A Discussion of the DEPTHS
of GOD. Methodized, legible, and intelligible, in the IDEA of the BOOK.

By R.M. PHILOPOLITES.

Meditate upon these things. 1 Timothy 4.15.

MALA Mea, pure mala sunt, and Mea sunt:

BONA autem Mea, nec pure bona sunt, nec Mea sunt.

THE SECOND PART.

MAN is the Debtor, GOD the DONOR is:

Who gives GRACE, and GLORY unto His.

LONDON, Printed by Th. Daw^^ for the Author. 1683.

The EPISTLE Dedicatory.
TO his (greatly) honored, and obliging Friend, Anthony Irby, ESQUIRE.
Worthy Sir.
IF this ESSAY be pardonable, then I humbly beg your Pardon, and Prayer. If
this TRACT be profitable, then I also beg your Perusal, and Patronage.

Some derive RELIGIO from Relegando; to remove; or sever one from another.

Some, from Relegendo; to read again; or gather together again.

Some, from Religando; to tie hard; or to bind fast.

Some, from Relinquendo; to leave, and to forsake.

Now, RELIGIO (docenda) non (coercenda) est: There is a certain Thing going up
and down in the World called Religion; which (how dressed soever it be) loses
not its Being. HE, who is an infinite Good, as well as an infinite God; who is
infinite in Attribute, as well as in Essence; and who has Bowels of Mercy, as
well as Beams of Glory, has not left it without a Witness (more or less, sooner
or later, living or dying) in the Bosom of every Individual; to be (like the
Star to the Oriental-Sages) a Directrix unto ISH and ISHAH, in the Pursuit of
it, The Reason (says Basil) why Julian, and all other Apostates slight
Religion, is, because they do not understand it. Most (if not all the learned
men in the world) have found, that the NOTION of God, and Religion, is the
first engraven (in) and the last defaced (out) of the Minds of Men. The Sacred
Scripture proves it is own Divinity; though Divinity (in this last of the latter
Days) be a greater Drug than a Romance, Play, or Ballad. There is a Religion of
which I may write emphatically: This is the Religion of the BIBLE, or the
Christian-Religion. And that I may leave an Emphasis upon it, this is (the)
Religion of Religions.

Sir; of this Religion (thorough the God of Grace, and the Grace of God) am I
with your Self. The two grand Ends of this Religion are the Honor of God,
together with the (present) and (future) Felicity of Man. Of (this) RELIGION I
may write with the greatest Confidence, and Innocence, that the Commonalty
should value it as Silver; that the Nobility should prize it as the Gold of
Ophir, and of Uphaz; and that Majesty should estimate it above the Topaz of
Ethiopia. Some look upon this Religion as a needless Parenthesis of Life; but
Christian-Religion is the Interest of a Person, and the Interest of a Nation.
Tullius Hostilius (the third King of the Romans) spoke like Himself, when he
said, RELIGION does but effeminate men's minds, and make them unfit for noble
Susceptions. But, what the Ark was to Israel, that Religion is to a Nation: And
what the Pairadium was to Troy, that Religion is to a Person; Place; People.
Christian Religion (as Justinian, and the Civilians truly say) is the general,
and universal LAW of NATIONS. The most barbarous People in the World, have
often made Laws to put such to Death as denied all Religion.

Sir; as God is the best of Beings, so Religion is the best of Blessings. The
Earl of Leicester, left this Testimony behind him concerning true Religion,
that the sincere Profession of it had in it SWEETS, and JOYS, that COURTS were
Strangers to. The Religion of the Gospel periods the Jewish-Religion, and
totally subverts all other Religions. It Is pity, that this Religion (and that
in England the Region of Religion; should be now made as a mere ECHO; and that
Enosh (a miserable and mortal Man as the word signifies) should speak of it as
of the Lacedemonian-Nightingale, Vox et praeterea Nihil. The Religion of (most)
upon our Borders, and of (many) in our Bowels, is this: He that shall
assassinate a King (in Zeal to their Religion, and to serve Mother Church) shall
be canonized for a Saint. This Religion may be called Rebellion against Heaven
and Earth; against God and Man. A Religion to be abhorred, and abolished, by
all that are not of it; which resolves to propagate it self every where per FAS
et NEFAS; by (secret) Plots, and (open) Violence; by Fire and Sword; by Fraud
and Force. But the Religion of the Gospel has this to say for it self above
all Religions, that it is no Debtor to the Sword, either in a civil, or in a
military way: Neither the Sword of Justice, nor the Sword of War, can lay any
Claim to this Religion, as a PRODVCT of Theirs. All other Religions (save the
Religion of the Bible, which is the Book of Books) as they have been founded by
the power of the Sword, so they have fallen by the same power. But, as the
Subtilty of Philosophers, and the Eloquency of Orators, did not assist in the
Christian-Religion; so, no Religion (but this Religion) did ever prevail in the
World without humane Help: For the Policy of Julian, and the Power of
Dioclesian, could not put a Period to its Progress.

Sir; GRACE, sometimes runs (as it were) in a Line. The great Doctor of the
Gentiles (2 Timothy 1.5.) writes of an unfeighned Faith; (...); (of a Faith not
hypocritical, as the word signifies) that was in Timothy; which dwelt first in
his Grandmother Lois, and then in his Mother Eunice. Here is a sincere Faith,
which is a Grace, and that dwelling in the Grandmother. Mother, and Son. I
cannot see so far as your Grandfather, or Grandmother; but I can look back
unto your Honorable FATHER, who (though dead) yet speaks; and whose Name
lives now he is dead. I can also look back unto your honorable MOTHER, who is
a Glory to her Sex; and whose Works praise her in the Gates. Let the Truth of
Grace (successively) run in your Line, as to every Individual, if it be the
Will of that God, who has no other Patent for his Power, but his Pleasure.

But Sir, lest this Epistle should smell rankly of Prolixity, and render it self
tedious to a Person of your Quality and Quantity; of your Birth and Bulk; I
shall humbly conclude.

That You, and your honored Lady (under such a Character for RELIGION,) may
appear one Spirit, as ye appear one Flesh: That you two (who are ONE) may live
long together; may live well together; and the longer ye live together, the
better together ye may live: That the only Contention between you may be, which
shall love (a) CHRIST most; which shall live (upon) a Christ most; and which shall
live (unto) a Christ most: That you two (while ye live) may live together as
Heirs of the grace of Life, that your prayers may not be hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7.
That you two may be like that choice Couple, and precious Pair (Luke 1.6.) Who
were both righteous before God; walking in all the Commandments, and Ordinances
of the Lord, blamless; that so when your TIMES shall go into ETERNITY, your
SOULS also may go into GLORY, is the Cordial Cry of

Honored Sir, Your observant Servant, R. Mayhew.

The INDEX.
SECTION. The DEPTHS of GOD.
CHAP. 1. Whether there be the DEPTHS of GOD. PAGE. 1-7. CHAP. 2. What these
DEPTHS of GOD are. 1. Generally. They are, 1. Things. 2. Things of God. 3.
Spiritual Things. PAGE. 7, 8. 2. Particularly. They are reduced to two Heads.
1. SALVATION. PAGE. 9.-13. 2. All in a Tendency unto SALVATION: For Instance.
1. FREE GRACE. PAGE. 13-17. 2. ELECTION. PAGE. 17-22. 3. REDEMPTION. PAGE.
22-29. 4. CONVICTION. PAGE. 29-33. 5. CONVERSION. PAGE. 33-41. 6. AODPTION.
PAGE. 41-48. 7. VOCATION. PAGE. 48-53. 8. RESURRECTION. PAGE. 53-73. 9.
REMISSION. PAGE. 73-80. 10. SATISFACTION. PAGE. 80-93. 11. JUSTIFICAION. PAGE.
93-105. 12. SANCTIFICATION. PAGE. 105-121. 13. UNION. PAGE. 121-137. 14.
COMMUNION. PAGE. 137-141. 15. CONVOY. PAGE. 141-150. 16. CONDUCT. PAGE.
150-156. 17. CONCURRENCE. PAGE. 156-162. 18. FAITH. PAGE. 162-168. 19.
INCARNATION. PAGE. 162-175. 20. GLORIFICATIOM. PAGE. 175 etc.


Qu. But what manner of State is a State of Glory? PAGE. 177. Sol. 1. Sinless.
2. Sorrowless. PAGE. 184. 3. Warless. PAGE. 196. 4. Wantless. PAGE. 199. 5.
Persecutionless. PAGE. 202. 6. Prisonless. PAGE. 207. 7. Cursless. PAGE. 209.
8. Contagionless. PAGE. 213. 9. Temptationless. PAGE. 217. 10. Timeless. PAGE.
220.

Tempora mutantur, sic nos mutamur in illis. THE DEPTHS of GOD.
SECTION 1. The Depths of God.
CHAP. I. Whether there be the DEPTHS of GOD.
THat there are the Depths of God; that these also are searched, and revealed
by the Spirit of God; is so legible in the Sacred Scripture, as if it were
written with a Beam of the Sun; and so intelligible in the blessed Bible (the
BOOK of BOOKS) that they are bound for Hell, and not for Heaven, who live and
dye altogether Strangers unto them.

As there are the Depths that spring out of the Valleys; the Depths of the Sea;
the Depths of the Earth; the Depths of Dissertion; the Depths of Hell; and the
Depths of Satan, ( Rev. 2.24.) which are the devices and policies of Satan,
wherewith he inspires his PUPILS, under the Notion of profound Wisdom; so,
there are the Depths of God, which are searched, and revealed by the Spirit of
God. Thus (1 Cor. 2.10.) But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit: Here
is the Assertion; there is a revelation by the Spirit of God. But what is
revealed by this Spirit? This (running) may be read, ( v. 9.) Eye has not
seen; Ear has not heard; neither have entered into the Heart of Man, etc. Here
are things invisible, inaudible, inconceivable, revealed by the Spirit of God.
For the Spirit searches all things. The word (SEARCH) is Metaphorical; (...)
it is taken from such as use to search in Mines for Gold and Silver: They
search deep, they will break the Clods, and Clots of the Earth all to pieces,
to find out the Oar. Thus the Spirit of God; the Spirit of the Father, or of
the Son; the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son, searches all things. Yea,
the deep things of God. The Depths of God; (...)
so the Greek. Here is the Argument. For the Spirit searches all things, yea,
the DEPTHS of God. The Mysteries of God chiefly kept secret; so Menochius. The
occult Counsels of God; so Grotius. It Is the Spirit of God, that unvaileth God,
and detecteth the Depths of God. It Is therefore called the Manifestation of the
Spirit. Thus (1 Cor. 12.7.) But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every one to profit withal. The Word (PROFIT) imports such a kind of Profit,
(...)
as redoundeth to Community. To the Vtility of the Church; so Piscator. That
the Church may receive Fruit thereby; so Calvin. Revelation is from the Spirit,
but it is according to the Word. If the Word goes without the Spirit, it is a
sealed Book. Thus (1 Cor. 2.12.) We have not received the Spirit of the World,
but the spirit which is of God, that we may know the things which are freely
given to us of God. As the Spirit will not go without the Word, so, if the Word
goes without the Spirit, the Soul is not arrived at an understanding of these
DEPTHS of GOD. There is a prodigious Film upon the eye of lapsed Man, and he
cannot see the Depths of God without the Spirit of God. Some men are born
(naturally) blind, but all men are born (spiritually) blind, and cannot see the
Depths of God, without the Spirit of God. The Reasons are obvious, whether we
respect Them, or the Spirit.

Themselves. The Depths of God, are Things of God, and these are supernatural.
Now, things supernatural, cannot be discovered by those that are natural, but
by those that are spiritual, and that from the Spirit. Thus (1 Cor. 2.14.) The
natural man: The Souly Man; (...)
so the Greek. A Man endued with the Faculties of NATURE only. A (Souly) man,
is a man solely led by the light of humane reason. A (Souly) man, is a man
purely considered in his Naturals; who wants the Spirit of God, and judges of
Divine things from the Intelligence of the Flesh; so Paraeus. But what of this
(Souly) man? He receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he, because they are spiritually discerned
This Word (discerned) is a Law Term, (...). Vox fovensis.
and is usually applicable to the Trial of Doctrine.

Spirit. It is the OFFICE of the Spirit of God, to search and reveal, the
Depths of God. It is the Spirit of God that leads into Truth; into this and
that Truth; into one Truth after another. Vicarius ille meus, meae causae
Patronus. Grotius.
It is the Spirit that (gradually) leads into all Truth. Thus (John 16 13.)
When the spirit of Truth is come: He that supplyeth, and does the Office of
another. He will guide you into all Truth: By internal illumination, or
inspiration. For he shall not speak of himself: Not without Me; or such things
which I have not taught. But whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: All
that he shall hear from the Father, or from Me. And he will show you the things
to come. Concerning the Kingdom of Christ, etc. Concerning future
Contingencies, etc. Concerning the Dishes that shall be served in to the
Church, etc.

No POET am I, nor a Poets Son:
I am not one that has the Laurel won.
In Poetry, I learning am to spel;
This is in order unto reading well.
My Vessel is not filled to the Brim;
But Lambs may wade where Elephants do swim.
If PIGMIES shall upon these Strings be harping,
This follows then, a MOMUS will be carping.
What Poets ever could all carping shun?
May not I go, if that I cannot run?
To Poem (therefore) do I pass from Prose:
How sweetly-sweet may now be Sharons ROSE?
The Depths of God, are Depths indeed I see:
Are not these Depths too deep for Me, and Thee?
The Depths of God! what (lapsed) man can sound them?
But (lapsed) Man has by the Spirit found them.
Lord JESUS, would I not be wholly Thine?
Into these Depths be letting down my Line.
Man (surely) greatly differs from a Beast.
O let my Soul of Famine make a Feast!
CHAP. II. What these DEPTHS of GOD are.
THese Depths of God are too deep for Me. Can Man (who was born of a Woman) tell
the Stars? Can Man (who is but a Wink of Life) empty the Ocean with a
Muscle-shel? Can the Line of Man sound the Depths of God? The most that I can
do is to let down my Line, for I despair of fathoming the Depth of these Depths.

Depths of God?

The things which God has prepared for them that love him. They are called the
Things of GOD. Thus (1 Cor. 2.11.) For what Man knows the things of a Man,
save the spirit of a Man that is in him? The Heart of Man is a great Depth, and
the vastest thing in the World; this is out of the sight, and reach of others.
No Man (but the spirit of Man that is in him) knows those things which lie in
the Heart. Every Man is too great a Stranger to his (own) Heart; but what is
another then to (my) Heart? or what am I then to the Heart of another? (...)
So the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God. No Man
(abstractedly considered) or without the Spirit of God, understands the
Depths of God, which are the Things of God; Termini convertibiles.
and the Things of God which are the Depths of God, for they are convertible
Terms. They are also called spiritual things. Thus (1 Cor. 2.13.) Comparing
spiritual things with spiritual. Things spiritual, cannot be sauingly known
without the Spirit. As it is true, we are to apply spiritual terms, and manners
of propounding, and expressing, to spiritual subjects, and Matters; it is as
true, we are to confer with the Faithful about points of Faith; and to
communicate spiritual Mysteries to spiritual Men, that we may not cast our
Pearl before Swine.

Thus generally; but now particularly to the Depths of God; reducible to two
general Heads; Salvation; and all in a Tendency unto Salvation.

Salvation, that is a Depth of God. This is not only a Step (unto) but also a
State (of) Felicity, and that for an Eternity; which has its Commencement in
the Kingdom of the Son, and its Completion in the Kingdom of the Father. Is not
this then the Depth of God? Where is the Person, that has not (at once) given
a Bill of Divorce both to Reason and Religion, that would be damned? Was there
ever any Age before this, wherein Men became such Monsters as to imprecate
their own Damnation? Are not those Bedlamites who are guilty of such
Imprecations? and does not such a DELIRIUM demerit DAMNATION? Are edged Tools
to be played with? Will men (in their Wits) play with Hell, and sport with the
Devil? Will men play with Damnation as the Fish with the Bait? Let such then
(timely) and if they can (seriously) reflect that tremendous Text, (2 These.
2.12.) That they all might be damned, who believed not the Truth, but had
pleasure in Unrighteousness. All will be damned (judged, (...)
so the Greek) who dye unbelieving the truth, as it is in Jesus, and acquiesce
in iniquity. That French King (LEWIS the 11th) spoke like himself, Si salvabor,
salvabor: Si damnabor, damnabor, etc.
when he said, if I shall be saved, I shall be saved; if I shall be damned, I
shall be damned, and that is all the care that I shall take. But He was of
another Mind, and Mould, who said, Lord, here buffet me, and banish me; here
bleed me, or burn me, so thou will hereafter save me. Paul, was a curious
Orator, and all his Oratory was improved in persuading men to be saved.
SALVATION, is a very beautiful thing; it is as much above our Thoughts, as it
is beyond our Deserts. Thus (1 Pet. 1.9, 10.) Receiving the end of your Faith,
even the salvation of your souls: Of which salvation the Prophets have
enquired, and searched diligently, etc. For a person to have Grace here, and
Glory hereafter; to have Holiness here, and Happiness hereafter; is not this
one of the Depths of God? For a person to have Sanctification here, and
Salvation hereafter; to have a Heaven here, and a Heaven hereafter; to be in
the Suburbs here, and in the City; hereafter is not this one of the Depths of
God? For Grace to be Glory in the Bud, and for Glory to be Grace in the Flower;
for Grace to be Glory militant, and for Glory to be Grace triumphant; for Grace
to go into Glory, when Time goes into Eternity, is not this one of the Depths
of God?

SALVATION is a Depth of God; and is
No Corrosive, but Cordial to His.
It Is not a Step, but State of Happiness,
For EVER to the greater, and the less.
This is made up of Grace; and also Glory;
As (running) may be read in sacred Story.
All saved ones indulged (matchless) pity;
Have Suburbs here; hereafter have the City.
What Heaven here! what Heaven too hereafter!
It Is joyful NEWS to every Son and Daughter.
Ah! than the Gall more bitter is Damnation:
Oh! sweeter than the Honey is Salvaion.
Are not those Bedlamites who do of late,
Their own Damnation (vilely) imprecate?
Shall Those be saved, who would damned be?
I question this, and therefore Them do flee.
Lord, here much rather let me burned be,
Than into HELL hereafter turned be.
Lord Jesus (living) let Me (clearly) see,
That (dying) I shall ever be with Thee.
in a TENDENCY unto Salvation. Whatsoever tends (unto) and ends (in) Salvation,
is one of the Depths of God. Whatsoever concurs, and contributes unto
Salvation, is one of the Depths of God. Now, there are very many things which
are concurring, and contributing to the Completion of Salvation.

All tending (to) and ending (in) Salvation,
Are Depths of God; most worthy Gratulation.
Free Grace, that is one of the Depths of God. Are the Judgments of God a great
Deep? (Psalm. 36.6.) What are the Mercies of God then? For God to measure his
Justice by the ordinary Cubit, but his Mercy by the Cubit of the Sanctuary
(which was twice as big) is not this one of the Depths of God? For God to love
before the Soul was lovely; yea, for God to love (when) and (while) the Soul
was loveless, and loathsome; is not this one of the Depths of God? Thus (Ezekiel.
16.6.) When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted (trodden under-foot) in
thine own blood, I said unto thee live; yea, I said unto thee in thy blood,
live. When thou wast (says Caryl) wrapped in, and defiled with thine own blood
(Sin and Misery) then I had pity on thee, and spoke Life to thee. Every Soul
tumbleth (in) Blood, till sprinkled (with) Blood. The Blood of Man is
Filthiness; the Blood of God-Man is Holiness. GRACE, comes not by Generation,
but Donation. Did ever any finite Intellect perfectly travel the Heights and
Depths, the Lengths and Breadths of Free Grace? For Free Grace to out-bid, and
outvie, not only the Deserts, but also the Desires of Man, is not this one of
the Depths of God? Thus (Ephesians. 3.20.) Now unto him that is able to do
(superabundantly, so the Greek) above what we are able to ask, or think, etc.
What Pensil can draw to the life, the vanishing Features of a Soul beautified
with GRACE? The whole Fabric of Salvation, from the Cell in Nature, to the
Chair in Glory, is founded in Free Grace. The whole Alphabet of Salvation, from
the Alpha to the Omega thereof, is purely legible in Free Grace. Thus (Ephesians.
2.5.), (...)
By grace ye are saved. This is so blessed a Parenthesis, that without this
Parenthesis there had been no Blessedness. This is a weighty, and a worthy
Text; here is the Mercy, that is Salvation; and here is the Medium, that is
Grace; by grace ye are saved. This is a Text of worth, and of weight; here is
the Motive, that is Grace; and here is the Mercy, that is Salvation; by grace ye
are saved. Salvation, is a choice CHAIN, but every Link of this Chain is made
up of Free Grace. I may assert it with the greatest Confidence, and with the
greatest Innocence, that Free Grace is the Wheel, Primum Mobile.
which sets all a going in Heaven, and in the Heart. For God to love, before
loved; yea, for God to love (when) and (while) hated, is not this one of the
Depths of God? For the Mercy of God to be over all his Works; yea, and over all
his Workers too, is not this one of the Depths of God? For that GOD, who is
incapable of Addition, or to be greater; incapable of Substraction, or to be
lesser; to Write rather in Honey, than in Gall; and to draw lines of Love, than
of Wrath; is not this one of the Depths of God? For the Grace of God to be
greater than the Sin of Man; and for the Ephah of God to be fuller of Mercy,
than the Ephah of Man can be of Iniquity, is not this one of the Depths of God?
Thus (Romans 5.20.) But where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound.

FREE GRACE does lead the Van; that is freely-free:
No Native, but a Donative, to Thee.
This is the Wheel, that set's a going all
In Heaven; in the Heart: and fince the Fall
Has ever done: So let it be for Ever:
Thus do I pray, and would retract it Never.
By Grace ye saved are: Now, is not this
To (sordid) Man a sweet PARENTHESIS?
Are Judgments Deep? what are Gods Mercies then?
They well-come are unto the Sons of Men.
Salvation's Sions Chain; but every Link,
Of Free Grace is made up, I more then think.
The two POLES distant are; yet these will meet,
When Free Grace and Free Will each other greet;
In saving Man, a Captive to the Devil:
And freeing also from a double Evil.
The PENSIL draws the Features of the Face:
Oh God of Gods, my Glass does run apace,
While therefore I am running of my Race,
Oh Deck this Soul of mine with saving Grace!
Election, that is one of the Depths of God. The Romanists speak of an universal
Election; but the very name of Election, carries in it a Confutation: For none
can be said to be elected, if all be elected; he that electeth, cannot be said
to take all. Neither can it be said that Election is nothing else but
Dilection; for Dilection was antecedaneous, and praevious unto Election.
Election, is an absolute Act of Grace, and is it not then one of the Depths of
God? Thus (Romans 11.5, 6.) There is a remnant according to the election of
grace: A remnant (comparatively) is very little to the whole piece. There are
(very few) among (very many) that are elected, and it is the election of GRACE.
Election, is made up of Grace; made out of Grace: It is such an Election as
Grace makes; an Election of Graces making. And if by Grace, then is it no more
of Works, otherwise grace is no more grace: But if it be of Works, then is it
no more grace, otherwise work is no more work. The two sorts of righteousness
by the Covenant of Works, and by the Covenant of Grace, are altogether
incompatible. Whatsoever is given for the MERIT of Works, is not freely given,
and (consequently) is not Grace: For (as Aug. speaks elegantly against the
Pelagians) Grace, Gratia non est Gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo.
is not said to be Grace in any sense, or any way, if it be not free every way.
It loses the nature of a work if done to merit by; for if elected partly for
Works, and partly by Grace, then the merit of Works is no Merit: For, if Merit
first enters, it excludes Grace; and if Grace first enters, it excludes Merit.
Now, if Election has for its efficient cause the Purpose of God; for its
formal cause the Mercy of God; for its material cause the Blood of Jesus; for
its final cause the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Man, is it not then one
of the Depths of God? The ARMINIANS say, Non eligit dignum, sed eligendo
efficit dign^m.
that Election is posterior to Faith; to Works; to Perseverance; but these are
posterior unto Election. God elects not the worthy, but having elected them
makes them worthy. They also are under a notorious deception, and prodigious
Delusion, who say, Election is Christ the Seed, not the Persons of Men and
Women. Christ is (if I may so write) Gods first Elect. Thus (Isa. 42.1.) Behold
my Servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights. Christ was
chosen by God to be SAVIOR; Man was chosen in Christ to be saved. There are
those who are called the elect of God. Thus (Col. 3.12.) Put on therefore (as
the elect of God) Bowels of Mercies, etc. Now the elect of God, are elected in
Christ. Thus (Ephesians. 1.4.) According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the World, that we should be Holy, and walk without blame before
him in Love. Here is the elector; this is God. He. As he has chosen. The
elected. Us. Here is the person in whom these are elected; this is Christ. In
him. And here is the end of this Election. That they might be holy, etc. They
were not elected because they were holy; or because they would be holy. PAUL,
Electum Vas.
was an elect Vessel: Now God elected Paul, as Paul, not as a Believer, or a
holy person. Election is absolutely free; there was no Praevision of any
Qualification in Man, as a Motive to God, in order to his Election: Is not this
then one of the Depths of God? Here were some elected, and were not these
Persons? But who were these? They were the Saints at Ephesus, and the Faithful
in Christ Jesus. (Ephesians. 1.1.) And were not here Women as well as Men? Do not
Women believe as well as Men? then elected as well as Men: For (Acts 13.48.) As
many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed. They did not believe, and so
were ordained to eternal life; but they were ordained to eternal life, and so
did believe. But, though Election be before Grace in Existence, yet GRACE is
before Election in Evidence: The former is first in the Ordination of God; the
latter is first in Manifestation to Man. Though Election be not for foreseen
Faith, yet until Faith, none can see their Election. We can never find our
selves in the heart of God by gracious Ordination, til we find God in our
hearts by gracious Operation. Those that conclude election without Grace, will
be as much non-plus'd at the Tribunal of God, as that speechless man was, who
appeared without a Wedding Garment. We cannot find our selves in Gods Roll,
unless we walk according to Gods Rule; nor conclude that we are predestined,
until we are purified. Thus Election is the sublimest Act of divine
Sovereignty, and is not this one of the Depths of God?

Man (lapsing) was obnox'ous to the Rod;
Election therefore is the Depth of God.
Ah lapsed Man! here matter is of Fact:
ELECTION now is Gods sublimest Act.
Election does out-bid Desert; Desire:
This Act prevents a fatal, final Fire.
I will assert (not caring who come next,)
The Sacred Scripture best interprets Text:
Inspect this CANON, and find this Decision,
Election is not from the least Praevision
Of Faith, or Works: It Is not from Idol-Merit,
But Mercy that elected ones Inherit.
Ah lapsed Man! it is easy Thee to find
An Enemy in Manners, and in Mind:
But to prevent (for ever) a Rejection,
There is the Depth of God, divine Election.
Lord, spare a little; give a little space;
Election is made (up) and (out) of GRACE.
As is thy Rule, so let my Walking be;
That I my Name within thy Roll may see.
Redemption, that is one of the Depths of God. If Man's Redemption, be Man's
Re-emption, from the Servitude of Sin and Satan, Redimere, est quasi rursus
emere.
unto the Immunities of the Sons and Daughters of God, by the payment of an
equal Price, is it not one of the Depths of God? If the Redemption of Man, be
the Restoration of Man, from a state of Sin and Death, unto a state of Grace
and Life, is it not one of the Depths of God? He that shall question whether
Redemption be a greater, or a better work than Creation, knows very little what
a REDEEMER is, and what the ransom of an immortal Soul is worth. I should
think, as Man's gaining the World, cannot compensate the loss of his Soul; so
Gods creating the World, cannot equalize Christ's Redeeming of the Soul. It is
proper, and peculiar to Christ, to be the Redeemer of Mankind; yet this work of
redemption the Romists ascribe to MARY; whom they call their Hope; their Joy;
their Mediatress; a Medicine for the diseased; a Defense from the Enemy; a
Friend in the hour of Death. But is not this (among all the Topics of Prayer)
the strongest Argument, that Christ has redeemed us? Or that we are his
redeemed ones? Thus (Ephesians. 1.7.) In whom we have redemption thorough his blood,
the forgiveness of Sins, according to the riches of his Grace. In this Text,
and Truth, there are these things worthy inspection, and reflection.

The MATTER. Subject, and Theme, or Thesis is Redemption. The rare Contrivance
of this, is greatly worthy (of) and calls aloud (for) a critical Contemplation.

Let the redeemed of the Lord take a Prospect of this in its Platform, and in
its Publication.

Platform. Was not this gloriously laid in the eternal Project, and Purpose of
God? Yea, in that (aged) Promise, which passed between the Father, (...)
and the Son? Thus (Tit. 1.2.) In hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot
lie, promised before the World began. Or rather from the beginning of Ages.

Publication. The discovery of this Mystery of redemption was early, and shined
forth in the very Morning of the World. No sooner is Man polluted, but Christ
is promised. Thus (Genesis 3.15.) I will put enmity between Thee and the Woman, etc.

that redeemeth from the curse of the law, etc. If any say, how can they be
blessed, whom the Law pronounces cursed? It Is easily answered, because Christ
was made a Curse for his. For it is Written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree. As the Serpent was accursed above all the Beasts of the Field; so
the Death on the Tree was accursed above all kinds of Death; the Serpent being
the Instrument, and the Tree the Occasion.

Blood. Thorough his blood. (...)
In whom we have redemption thorough his blood. Not (her) blood, but (his)
blood; not the blood of Mary, but of Christ. Not the blood of Hales, and
Becket, but the blood of Christ. Believe it; Redemption is not thorough the
Milk of the Mother, but thorough the Blood of the Son. The Blood of Christ was
meritorious as to Redemption. This blood spoke better things than the blood of
Abel. That blood had as many Tongues as Drops; and every Drop crying for
Vengeance. Was not God in his Inquisition, more critical than the Spanish
Inquisition, though that be done with utmost secrecy and security? Christ must
bleed (and that unto Death) in order to Redemption. Thus (Rev. 5.9.) Thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, etc. Here is a redemption to
God; to the Benignity of God; to Grace and Glory; but this is thorough the
blood of Jesus.

Remittere is retro mittere.
In whom we have redemption thorough his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Here
is remission, and to remit is to send back. It properly signifies the sending
of a thing back to the place from whence it was taken. Here is remission, and
that of sins. Of Lapses and Offenses; (...)
of Faults and Falls; so the Greek. Did Julius Caesar glory in nothing more
than in giving, and forgiving? In giving to his Friends, and in forgiving his
Enemies. What may be said of a Christ then, a greater than Caesar?

(...), etc.
riches of his grace. In whom we have redemption thorough his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. For the most
plentiful goodness of himself; so Grotius. Thus (Romans 2.4.) Or despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, etc.

For Christ (who was without sin) to be made sin for his, that they might be
made the righteousness of God in him, is not this one of the Depths of God? For
a sinless CHRIST to do, and dye; to spend his Breath, and spil his Blood, for
sinfully sinful Creatures, is not this one of the Depths of God? For him by
whom no man knew sin, and who knew no sin by himself, not only to have his
Veins breathed, but also his Vitals let out, is not this one of the Depths of
God? Thus (Heb. 9.12.) By his own blood he once entered into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us. As the high Priest with blood
entered the Holy of Holiest; (...)
so Christ (by his own blood) entered into Heaven (whereof the Holy of Holiest
was a Type) having obtained eternal redemption for his. Christ gave himself
(for) his, that he might redeem them; Christ gives himself (to) his, that he
may reform them. The dying of Christ (for) his, is their Redemption; the living
of Christ (in) his, is their Reformation.

There is a Depth of God which is REDEMPTION;
For Man was sold, and this is his Reemption.
This I assert, refute it if ye can,
It Is (CHRIST) not (MARY) that redeemeth Man.
'T was not a Woman, but a Man must suffer;
The Candle of the Papists wants a Snuffer;
Yea, an Extinquisher; for (solely) HE,
Not SHE, appears in redeeming Thee.
'Twas not the Milk of Mary, but the Blood
Of Christ, that to redeem is understood.
'Twas (HE) not (SHE) who living, dying, said,
It Is FINISHED: Shall his now be afraid?
It was (His) Blood, not (Hers) that did atone.
'Twas (He) not (She) who did redeem alone.
The Veins of (HIM) not (HER) were breathed no doubt:
The Vitals not of (HER) but (HIM) let out.
'Twas not the (Mother) but the (Son) must die:
It Is (HE) not (SHE) that must sepulcred lie.
Lord, have thou done, and died too for Me?
Oh let me do, and also die for Thee!
Conviction, that is one of the Depths of God. As there is an external, and
legal Conviction in the Court of Man, so there is an internal, and effectual
Conviction in the Court of Conscience. Though there be many Convictions without
Conversion, are there any Conversions without Conviction? Then does the WHITE
of Grace appear likest it self, when the BLACK of Sin is set by it; and where
is the Christian whose Experience tells him not, that Conviction is Midwife to
Conversion? Is not this then one of the Depths of God? For a Man to be
convinced of Sin (as) Sin; of Sin in the Nature of it, as well as in the Danger
of it, is not this one of the Depths of God? There are three great Convincers
mentioned in the Sacred Scripture; Conscience; Christ; the Spirit.

And they which heard it, being convicted by their own Conscience, etc. The
Greek word signifies Conviction by Argument; (...)
the refutation of an opinion, that men before had imbibed, and espoused.
Christ made their Consciences their Convincers. Their Conscience told them that
they were Guilty, if not of that sin, yet of other sins as bad as that.

v. 15.) To convince all that are ungodly amongst them. The great day, will not
only be a day of Execution, but also of Conviction.

And when he is come, he shall reprove (convince, (...)
so the Greek) the World of sin, etc. To reprove, is only to discover a fault;
to convince, is to take away all reasons that can be alleged for it. The
Convictions of the Spirit are never single. As the voice of Satan is to cry
Sin, Sin; so the voice of the Spirit is to cry Grace, Grace. As there is a
conviction of sin which is rational; when a man's reason is non-plust, and he
cannot deny the Truth of it: So there is a Conviction of Sin which is
spiritual; when a man's heart stoops under it, and he takes the shame to
himself. Conviction, is a manifest and infallible DEMONSTRATION, which takes
away all the Cavils of the Soul, when a thing is showed to be impossibly
otherwise than it is represented; may not this then be called one of the Depths
of God? Where is the person in a state of Faith, that did not first see himself
in a state of Unbelief, and is not this one of the Depths of God? Where is the
person in a state of Grace, that did not first see himself in a state of Sin,
and is not this one of the Dephts of God? Where is the person in a state of
Religion, that did not first see himself in a state of Rebellion, and is not
this one of the Depths of God? Where is the person in a state of Life, that did
not first see himself in a state of Death, and is not this one of the Depths of
God? Where is the person in a state of Light, that did not first see himself in
a state of Darkness, and is not this one of the Depths of God? Where is the
person that (thorough Grace) is bound for Heaven, that did not first see
himself (thorough Sin) bound for Hell, and is not this one of the Depths of God?

Dulciae non meruit, qui non gustavit amara.

CONVICTION enters next and staged is
A Depth of God, both unto Him, and His.
It Is no new thing, if we the Scripture mind,
Three grand CONVINCERS (running) there to find:
Conscience is one; Jehovah is another:
The Sacred Spirit also is the other.
Who will deny (not under a Restriction)
Unto Conversion MIDWIFE is Conviction?
Conviction may without Conversion be,
But did Conversion ever any see,
Without Conviction? Can the WHITE of Grace
So splendid be? Yea, can her native Face
So charming be, as when the BLACK of Sin
Is standing by? No; now the Soul does win
A JESUS; who to Me is All in All;
And unto Others, ever since the Fall.
Oh mighty Christ! thou have convinced Me
Of Sin (as Sin) that thereby I might see
A State of Sin, before a State of Grace;
And (acquiesce) in running of the Race.
Conversion, that is one of the Depths of God. Nunquam sera, Conversio vera.
True Conversion is never too late. Heaven, is entailed upon Holiness, and the
Crown is appointed for the Head of the Convert; is not Conversion then one of
the Depths of God? The Mind may be thoroughly convinced, and yet the Man not
truly converted. To convert a Sinner, is a greater work, than to work Wonders
in Nature. Though God loves Converts never the worse, for being such Sinners
before they were converted; yet they should loath themselves so much the more,
for being such Sinners before they were converted. There is an indispensable
Necessity of Conversion; is it not then one of the Depths of God? Thus (Mat.
18.3.) If ye be not converted, and become as little children, ye shall not not
enter into the Kingdom of the heavens. (...)
So the Greek. There must be Conversion: If ye be not converted: And there must
be Submission and Humility: And become as little children. The Child of a
Prince (without aversation and dedignation) will associate himself with the
Child of a Peasant. Conversion, is the proper work of Omnipotency, by his
Spirit, in his Word; is it not then one of the Depths of God? The ARMINIAN
says, put all the Operation of Grace that need to be put into one Balance, a
man's Free Will (balanced against it) will weigh it down; will turn the Scales;
and determine the Case whether a man shall be converted, or no; shall accept of
Grace, or no. Now by this Heterodox Opinion, it will follow, that not God by
his FREE GRACE, but Man by his FREE WILL, is the efficient cause of his
Conversion. It Is true, the Soul works in the very Moment of Conversion. Thus
(Acts 9.6.) Lord, what will thou have me to do? I thought I had done well
before, and could have said unto any Opponent, Quid mali feci?
What Evil have I done? But I am of another Mould now; and of another Mind now;
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Saul, was now in FIERI; in making; and
reflect the Beatings of his Pulse. Lord, what will thou have me to do? I have
been doing my own Will, but now I would do thy Will. I have been doing the Will of
Satan, but now I would do the Will of God. I have been doing (without) thee, and
(against) thee, but now I would be doing (from) thee, and (for) thee. Lord,
what will thou have me to do? So Lydia (Acts 16.14.) Whose heart the Lord
opened: There was Christ's work. That she attended to the things which were
spoken of Paul. There was her work. Paul, was a curious Pracher, but he did not
open her Heart. To the Ears (may) a Paul preach, but to the HEART (must) a
CHRIST preach. Whose heart the Lord opened. The Metaphor is taken from opening
a Door or Lock. The Opener is he who has the Key of David, (Rev. 3.7.)
opening, and no man shutting, shutting, and no man opening. The Babes of Grace
act in the very Birth; Yet know, that (in order of nature) the work of God is
before the work of the Soul; and the work of the Soul depends upon the work
of God: The one as the Cause, the other as the Caused; the one as the
Efficient, the other as the Effect; the one as the Spring, the other as the
Stream; the one as the Root, the other as the Fruit. No preparation is
antecedaneous as to God: For, the preparations of the heart in man, (Pro. 16.1)
and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. Believe it, Conversion is
without the Sphere of our Activity. He that is a BARNABAS (the Son of
Conversion, as the word signifies) is so by the God of Grace, and by the Grace
of God; is not this then one of the Depths of God? Nothing below Almightiness
of Power, can effect the Conversion of the Soul; is not this then one of the
Depths of God? Should JEHOVAH say to all the Angels in Heaven, there is such a
Person, in such a Country, and in such a City, who is a Gentile-Sinner; This
Enosh makes Wickedness (not his Woe) but his Work; His Element is Sin, and he
is out of his Element when he is not sinning; when he is not adding sin to sin:
The poor Man stands (as it were) upon the Confines of Eternity; and (as it
were) upon the Battlements of Hell: There is but a Step (as it were) between Him
and Damnation: But such are the (expatiated) Bowels of Benignity in me, that I
had much rather he should be convinced, than confounded; that he should be
converted, than consumed; that he should be saved, than damned; that he should
go to Heaven, than to Hell: Go ye all, therefore, and lay Siege to his Soul;
improve your utmost to give him a seasonable, and suitable CHECK; give him a
timely, and a true Turn out of the way of Sin, into the way of Grace; that he
may happily escape the wrath to come, and not perish for an Eternity. All these
Angels (more than probably) upon the Command of this Being of Beings would go;
for, ENS ENTIVM.
they are all ministering Spirits, (Heb. 1.14.) sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation; and would improve their utmost Power and
Prudence, in order to the Conversion of this ISH: But returning, must give this
Answer unto that GOD, who has Beams of Glory, as well as Bowels of Mercy; and
who is infinite in Power, as well as in Pity: Greatest God; we went to the
Place, and found the Person; one Hyperbolically sinful; sinful to a wonder;
sinful above all wonder: We did set before him the way of Life, and the way of
Death; the way of Deliverance, and the way of Destruction: We presented him
with Precepts and Presidents; with Punishments and Promises: We did set before
him Misery and Mercy; the BLACK of Sin, and the WHITE of Grace: We discoursed
of Sorrow and Solace; of the Torments of Hell, and of the Triumphs of Heaven:
But, as we found him, so we left him; nothing that we said or did, was
influential upon him: Father of Mercies; we could not turn him from darkness to
light, (Acts 26.18.) and from the power of Satan unto God: We did what we
could, but we could not take this CITADEL, and cause him to launch forth into
this great Deep of CONVERSION, which is one of the Depths of God: Lord, if thou
layest not Seige to his Soul thy Self, and (consequentially) make it a Captive
to thy Free. Grace; the Man must dwell with devouring fire, and with everlasting
burnings, notwithstanding all that we have said or done.

It is not the Word which Man speaks, nor Man which speaks the Word,
Libertatem Arbitrii.
but GOD (by his Spirit) who converteth the Soul. Has Man (before Conversion)
a Liberty of Will unto that which is spiritually good? Is not Man (before
Conversion) purely passive? Yea, and (after Conversion) are not the Cedars in
Lebanon, Ex puris Naturalibus.
as well as the Shrubs in the Valley, like a Coach-Wheel, that runs not, unless
it be drawn? Can MAN (from Himself) any more prepare himself for his own
converting, than a Stone can prepare it self to its own softning? Is not
Conversion then one of the Depths of God? Though the ways of God in Conversion
be various; his Spirit working when, where, and how it pleases: And though the
VARIETY of his ways (in this noble work) does transcend the Apprehensions of
Men, if not of Angels; Yet there is an undeniable Necessity of it, and is it
not then one of the Depths of God? Thus (Acts 3.19.) Repent ye therefore, and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. Here is Remission, but it
follows Conversion. Is it not a Metaphor taken from a munificent CREDITOR, who
(remitting a Debt) presently blots it out of his Book of Accounts, as if he had
received it? Or, from a Washer, who rubbeth Spots out of Linen? Or, from a
Scribe, who razeth out the Errors of his Pen, and Menda's of his Writing with a
Penknife? To be (really) converted, is to be ( graciously) turned out of the
way of Sin, into the way of Grace; out of the way of Darkness into the way of
Light; out of the way of Death, into the way of Life; out of the way of Hell,
into the way of Heaven; is not this then one of the Depths of God?

CONVERION follows next as Depth of God,
That Malefactors may evade the Rod.
Can Man create himself? No: Nor can He
Convert himself. As from the Pesthouse flee
ARMINIANISM, which is a fatal Brink:
Not Orthodox, but Heterodox, I think.
It Is not the Word that preached is by Man;
Nor Men who preach the Word, that ever can
Convert a Soul: If CHRIST be passive, then
They still must go for (unconverted) Men.
What turned from the way of Sin to Grace?
That so the Soul might run another Race.
What turned from thy Darkness unto Light?
That it might not to Thee be (ever) NIGHT.
What turned from a State of Death to Life?
That so there might no (longer) be a Strife.
What turned from the way of Hell to Heaven?
And so (at last) be purged of all Leaven.
If this be not the Depth of God, then I
(Oh greatest God!) must live in Misery.
Adoption, that is one of the Depths of God. Christ was made the Son of Man,
that the Sons of Men might be made the Sons of God; is not Adoption then one of
the Depths of God? As Christ was the Son of God by Nature, so the Christian is
the Son of God by Grace. To have the Church for our Mother is much, but to have
God for our Father is much more. If Adoption be a gracious Sentence of God,
whereby (upon the account of Christ) he receives those that believe unto the
Dignity of Sons; is it not then one of the Depths of God; Thus (Jo. 1.11, 12.)
(...)
He (that is Christ) came unto his own: Into his own Land; so Beza. Of Israel;
so Piscator. To his own People; so Maldonat. And his own: His own by Creation;
by Accommodation; by Preservation; by Nation. But what of his own? His own
received him not: They did not make his Person the Object of their Faith; nor
his Precept the Rule for their Obedience. They did not believe in him, and obey
him. They did not acknowledge him to be their MESSIAH. But as many as received
him: As many: Whether Cedars or Shrubs; whether Bond or Free; whether Old or
Young; whether Men or Women; whether Jews or Gentiles. As received him: As
believed in him; as believed in his name, which is the sole name under heaven
given amongst men whereby they can be saved. (Acts 4.12.) To them gave he
power: Hence the Papists say, Power is in Man. Hoc Jus ut Filij Dei sint facti.
(...).
So the Rhemists would have it to be in the power of men (if they would) to be
the Sons of God. The vulgar Latin reads it thus; To them gave he this right to
be made the Sons of God. The Greek word signifies Authority and Right,
Prerogative and Privilege, as well as Power. Now Christ gives the Privilege of
Sons three ways.

Passions of Christ, there was not only a legal Debt, but also more than a
legal MERIT. When the fullness of time was come: (Gal. 4.4, 5.) The fullness of
grace; the fulfilling of promises; the fulfilling of the Law, and Prophets. God
sent his Son: His begotten Son; his only begotten Son; his only (so) begotten
Son; his Son by Nature. Made of a Woman: A Woman shall compass a Man. He was not
without a Woman, as Adam was; nor by Man and Woman, as we are; nor of a Man
without a Woman, as EVE was; but of a Woman without a Man. Made under the Law:
Not only under the (Ceremonial) Law as he was a JEW, but also under the (Moral)
Law as he was a MAN. To redeem those that were under the Law, that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons. The Greek word for (Adoption) indicates the
Nature of it; (...) of (...) and (...)
which is to put one in the place of a Son, that was not a Son; comprehending
all in one word: Is not this then one of the Depths of God? Here is Redemption
in order to Adoption; so that Adoption is by way of Merit. Not from the Merit
of Man: For, though (evil) Works (in order to Justice) do merit Damnation, yet
(good) Works do not merit Salvation: The Argument is irrefragable; because the
good works of the Creature (in order of Justice) are due Debts to the Creator.
We cannot (possibly) merit by what we do, Ex Opere operato.
because obliged unto it by Duty: But to merit, is a work not due; making a
Reward due from the work wrought, which before was not due.

Virtue of his SPIRIT. Christ receives the Spirit; sends it into the Hearts of
his; and so makes them the Sons of God: Is not Adoption now one of the Depths
of God? Thus ( Gal. 4.6.) And because ye are Sons: This he adds (says
Paraeus) lest he should seem to attribute Adoption only to the Jews. God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts: It Is called the Spirit of
the Son, because it proceeds from the Father, and the Son; so Estius, and
Tirinus. It Is called (Romans 8.15.) The Spirit of Adoption. But it may be called
the Spirit of the Son, because it seals up Adoption in Christ, and arrives
the Soul at an Assurance of it. Crying, Abba, Father. (...)
The Father, so the Greek; the last having its Article. The first is Syriack;
the second is Greek; Whereby may be signified the Union of the Hebrews and
Grecians; or Jews and Gentiles in one Church. The gemination (Father, Father)
indicates, and intimates a fiducial, filial, and vehement affection.

Virtue of UNION. Christ, is the Son of God, by virtue of the (personal) Union.
Thus (Luke 1.35.) And the Angel of the Lord said unto her: But who was this?
This was Mary, the Mother of Jesus: A Virgin before she had Children, but not
after. God may be praised for her, who made her the Instrument of the coming of
Christ into the World; but the PAPISTS commit gross Idolatry in making her an
Idol: For they give her the Titles of Mediatrix; Salvatrix; She-Saviour; Queen
of Heaven; Queen of Mercy; the only Hope of the miserable. They parallel
Breasts and Wounds; Vbera and Vulnera.
making the MILK of Mary to be as precious as the BLOOD of Christ. But what of
this Mary? The holy Spirit shall come upon thee: The Spirit did (as it were)
cast a Cloud over her; which may give Check to Mortals, when they make too
curious an Acquisition into the Mystery of the Incarnation. And the power of
the highest shall overshadow thee: A Metaphor taken from Birds, cherishing their
young ones. Therefore also that holy thing: Christ, who was sinless. Which shall
be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Christ (as GOD) was the eternal
Son of the Father; Christ (as MAN) was conceived of a sanctified Mass, or
Substance, without all Sin. Now, as Christ was the Son of God by Virtue of the
(personal) Union, so the Christian is the Son of God by Virtue of the
(mystical) Union: Is not Adoption then one of the Depths of God? Is it so
honorable to be the Son, or Daughter of a (mortal) MAN? how (ineffably)
honorable then is it to be the Son, or Daughter, of an (immortal) GOD? Is not
Adoption now one of the Depths of God? If Adoption be the Translation of a
Person, from the Family of the World, and Satan, into the Family of God, with
his Investiture in all the Emoluments, and Immunities of that Family; is not
this then one of the Depths of God?

ADOPTION enters now, and (on the Stage)
Charms unto Joy the Converts of the Age.
Christ (only) is the Son of God by Nature;
By Grace a Son each Christ'an in his Stature.
CHRIST, maker is of Sons by way of Merit;
By Union; and also by his Spirit.
It Is something to be Sons of (mortal) MEN,
If Men of Birth and Bulk. What is it then
To be the Sons of an (immortal) GOD,
And be exempted from an Iron-Rod?
This is the Wonder since the World began,
The Son of God is made the Son of Man:
That Sons of Men might Sons of God be made;
And (thorough GRACE) in muddy Waters wade.
Sons are invested in Immunity;
And may (in Egypt) Abba, Father cry.
Oh blessed JAH! by Thee the Day is won;
I was a Slave, but now I am a Son.
Oh let me live, that I may also die
A Servant, and a Son in Family!
Vocation, that is one of the Depths of God. Vocation, is a Comment upon
Election; is not this then one of the Depths of God? If Vocation be the
effectual Voice of God to the Soul, by his Spirit, in his Word, in order to a
Revelation of Christ, is not this then one of the Depths of God? They are holy
ones, that shall be happy ones, and pure ones, that shall be perfect ones: They
are gracious ones, Suavis Motus in Verbo; fortis Tractus in Deo.
that shall be glorious ones, and called ones, that shall be crowned ones: Is
not Vocation now one of the Depths of God? Those, all those and only those,
shall be (everlastingly) crowned, who are (effectually) called; is not Vocation
then one of the Depths of God? As Elijah, and Elisha walked together till the
fiery Charet parted them: So, until effectual Vocaion, there is no difference
between Persons; they all run to the same Excess of Riot: Is not this then one
of the Depths of God? If we inspect the Idea, or Index of the Volumes of
ETERNITY, we shall find calling, as well as crowning; and gracious Manners, as
well as glorious Mansions; Is not Vocation then one of the Depths of God? Thus
(Romans 1.6.) Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ. If God gives
effectual Vocation at this Distance (with all the Appendexes, Cum omnibus
pertinentibus
and Appurtenances thereof) what will he give unto this Person when he comes
into his immediate Presence? The Symmetry (indeed) is not to be made between
here and there; now and then. If so much in a Cottage of Clay, what then in a
Palace of Glory? If the first Fruits be an handful; headful; heartful; what
will the Crop and the Harvest then be? If the EARNEST amounts to so much, what
is the total SUM then like to be? But why do such a Pigmy as I attempt to give
an Inventory of the Benefits of Vocation, when Eternity shall be little enough
for their Contemplation? The Potentates, and Princes of the Earth, think they
move in a lofty Sphere; but the (effectually) called are in the highest Orb; is
not Vocation then one of the DEPTHS of GOD? Vocation, is an absolute Act of
Grace, and is it not then one of the Depths of God? Thus (Gal. 1.15.) But when
it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers Womb: From that very time
wherein I was in the Womb; so Piscator. From the very beginning of my Nativity;
so Menochius. Before I was born (says Tirinus) or deserved any thing. And
called me by his grace. Here is Vocation, and that by Grace; is not Vocation
then one of the Depths of God? And called me efficatiously, in the time of my
Conversion; so Estius. If God (efficatiously) calls a Sinner, when there is
nothing in him but Sin, what can be a MOTIVE with God but his Free Grace? Is
not Vocation now one of the Depths of God? Art thou called a Saint? Either be
not so much as called so; or be more than so called; otherwise, thy (external)
Privilege, will be but an (eternal) Punishment. For a Person to be running
with a full CAREER Hel-ward; and Death-ward; and Damnation-ward; and then to be
(effectually) called, is not this one of the Depths of God? For a Person to be
called out of a State of Darkness, into a State of Light; out of a State of
Death, into a State of Life; out of a State of Sin, into a State of Grace, is
not this one of the Depths of God? For a Person to take more pains to go to
Hell, than many do to go to Heaven; and for this Person (then) to hear a voice
behind it (Isa. 30.21.) saying, This is the way etc. Soul, that is not the way,
this is the way: That Is the way to Death, this is the way to Life; that is the
way to Hell, this is the way to Heaven; is not this one of the Depths of God?

VOCATION is the Depth of God above;
For it is (indeed) a signal Act of Love.
From Darkness unto Light, men called are;
That They may in the choicest Mercies share.
From endless Death, unto an endless Life,
Men called are to Period the Strife.
Though this has been obnox'us to Rejection,
VOCATION is a COMMENT on ELECTION;
Which meriteth a (critical) Inspection,
And also calls for a (due) Reflection.
As to Existence, choosing takes place;
But calling as to Evidence embrace.
Though all the Chosen may not called be;
Yet all the Called chosen are I see.
Gods grac'ous Call, and glor'ous Crown also,
(Like Isa'c's Twins) I see together go.
Oh LAMB of GOD! I have a blessed Call:
Let not my Carr'age be a bitter Thrall.
Oh Lamb of God! between the Lip and Life,
No clashing suffer, to foment a Strife.
Resurrection of the Body, that is one of the Depths of God. The Confidence of
Christians, Fiducia Christianorum, Resurrectio Mortuorum.
is the Resurrection of the Dead: Is not this then one of the Depths of God?
The Resurrection of the Body is one of the six Principles. Thus (Heb. 6.1, 2.)
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection: Not that this (countenanceth) a Dereliction (of) the Principles of
Religion, but (commands) a Progression (in) the Principles of Religion. We
are not to cast behind our backs, and quite let slip out of our memories, the
first principles of Religion; but to go forward (like good Travelers) in a
Christian RACE. The Principles follow, which were (as is thought) the six
Principles of the Apostles Catechism.

Repentance from dead Works. Works (here) are called dead; either because they
render a man obnox'us to Death; or because they proceed from Man, who
(naturally) is dead spiritually. They are called dead Works, because they are
the Effects of the Death of the SOUL; so Gomarus: Or, because they do not
profit unto eternal Life, Sicut Anima corpori dat Vitam, ita Animae Deus.
which is the End of humane Actions; so Menochius. These dead Works alienate
from God; For, as the Soul gives Life to the Body, so God gives Life to the
Soul.

Faith toward God. In Father, Son, and Spirit; so Paraeus. Faith in Christ, is
Faith in God; so Gomarus, But the Person of Christ (properly) is the Object of
Faith, as his personal Excellency is the Object of Love.

The Doctrine of Baptisms. May not the Apostle here allude unto the Washings
under the Law? Or, may not the plural NUMBER be put for the singular? Or,
Fluminis; Flaminis; Sanguinis.
may we not understand here the Baptism of the Spirit, and the Baptism of
Water? Or, may we not understand here a triple Baptism? Of Water; of the
Spirit; and of Suffering.

The Imposition of Hands. This Principle is much controverted, as to the
Particularity, and Universality of it; but I shall not enter into the Body, and
Bowels of this Controversy. I shall only subscribe it (were there any need of
my Subscription) that it (was) and (is) one of the six Principles.

The Resurrection of the dead. There is a twofold Resurrection, metaphysical,
and physical.

Metaphysical, or Spiritual. There is the Resurrection of the SOUL. Thus (Col.
3.1.) If therefore ye be risen together with the Christ, the things above seek
ye, where the Christ is on the rigth hand of the God sitting. So the Greek
Text. If ye have a resurrection (graciously) given your Souls, out of a state
of Sin, into a state of Grace, contemplate then (firstly) and (lastly) the
things above, where (the) Christ is near unto (the) God; next unto (the) God.

Physical, or Literal, and Natural. Thus there is a resurrection of the dead,
both of the just, and unjust, (Acts 24.15.) This is a Resurrection of the BODY.
Here is the resurrection of the Elect, and the Non-Elect; of the Good, and Bad;
of the Just, and Unjust. Now between the resurrection of these persons, there
seems to be a considerable Tract of Time. Thus (Rev. 20.4, 5.) I saw the Souls
of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God:
Here is a Resurrection, and this is called the first resurrection. Here are
Martyrs; those, who passed thorough violent Deaths; those, who laid down their
BLOOD on this side the GRAVE. But are those (solely) concerned in the first
Resurrection (which is a Resurrection of the Body) who had their Veins
breathed, and their Vitals let out? No; for this follows in the Text: And which
had not worshipped the Beast, nor his image; neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands: So that (in submission to a
Leviathan-Judgment) not only those who were Martyrs (for) Christ, but also the
Members (of) Christ, are concerned in this first corporeal resurrection. Not
only those that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus; for the things of
Christ, so Grotius; for the Gospel of Christ, so Paraeus; But also all that had
not touched with the Beast; with Antichrist (so Durham) shall be concerned in
the first Resurrection. All that sleep in Jesus; Members as well as Martyrs;
Babes as well as strong Men; Shrubs as well as Cedars, shall be concerned in the
first resurrection. But what follows? They lived, and reigned with Christ a
thousand years. The Greek is (the) thousand years. (...).
The Article, should not be omitted, and the Emphasis lost. They are
egregiously mistaken, and beside the Text, who understand this resurrection to
be Metaphorical, not Corporal; and (the) thousand years reign with Christ (in
PERSON, not by PROXY,) to be in Heaven. But the rest of the dead (who died not
(for) Christ, nor (in) Christ) lived not again until (the, (...).
so the Greek) thousand years were finished. Whether, by the thousand years, a
definite number is put for an indefinite, I shall not determine; but a person
(of my stature at lest, which is the least Stature) would be apt to think, that
(by the thousand years) a confiderable Tract of Time must be understood. And as
there is the first resurrection which shall be unto Salvation, so there is the
second resurrection which shall be unto Damnation. Thus (John 5. 29.) They that
have done good unto the resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to
the resurrection of Damnation.

And of eternal Judgment. Here is the last Principle, and this is JUDGMENT;
yea, eternal Judgment. As there is no appealing (from) this Judgment, so there
is no repealing (of) this judgment. The Sentence is for the Eternity of
Felicity, or Misery of every Man, so Menochius. Hence the Opinion of Origin is
refelled. Sed quid moror istis?
It is one irretractable Judgment of great force for ever; so Grotius. No man
can appear at the last day, by any other PROXY than Jesus Christ. Christus
solus mori voluit; Christus solus surgere noluit.
But to proceed. Christ died a Sufferer, but rose a Conqueror. CHRIST, was
willing to die alone, but he was unwilling to rise alone. The Conception of
Christ was miraculous; the Nativity of Christ was mavelous; the Death of
Christ was victorious; and the Resurrection of Christ was glorious: Is not then
the Resurrection of the Body one of the Depths of God? Had it not been for the
Resurrection of Christ, we had still been in the EGYPT of our Sins, as the great
Doctor of the Gentiles witnesses. Thus (1 Cor. 15.12.) Now if Christ be
preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that there is no
resurrection of the dead? As if he had said, do but grant this, that the Body
of Christ is risen, and you cannot (rationally) deny a RESURRECTION of our
Bodies, for these two Reasons.

Resurrection is the Examplar of (our) Resurrection.

He, and His, are one mystical Body. He, is the Head, and His are the Members.
As it is true, though the personal Passions of Christ in the Flesh were
perfect, yet until all his Members have suffered in the flesh (that which God
has appointed as their PORTION in PASSION) there is somewhat hehind of the
afflictons of Christ, (Col. 1.24.) which Paul (for his part) rejoiced to fill
up: It is as true, till Christ, and Christians, have a Resurrection of Body,
there is somewhat behind of the Resurrection of Christ. Christ is not perfectly
risen, until all his also rise. For, though the personal Resurrection of Christ
was perfect when he arose; yet till all His also arise, personally, the
Resurrection of Christ has not received its utmost Perfection; Is not the
Resurrection of the Body now one of the Depths of God? The Apostle proceeds to
turn this Argument (v. 16, 17, 18.) For if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ raised: And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in
your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. From
all which he draws this Conclusion, (v. 20.) But now is Christ risen from the
dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. Here is a Resurrection of
Christ, and of the Creature; is not this then one of the DEPTHS of GOD? Christ
is so much in the Resurrection, that he calls himself the Resurrection. When
Christ was going to the grave of Lazarus, he says to Martha (John 11. 23, 24,
25.) Thy Brother shall rise again: She. answered, I know he shall rise again in
the Resurrection at the last day: Her faith was clear for the Resurrection, and
Christ approved her Confession; yet gives her further Instruction, as
follows. I am the Resurrection, and the Life: Thus he is, not formally, but
causally, or virtually. He is the Author of the Resurrection, and that in
reference to both NATURES.

Divine. This is the efficient cause of the Resurrection. He shall raise our
Bodies out of the Dust, and the Dust shall give up its Prisoners, by the Power
of his DEITY; for he is God. He is coeternal, coequal, and con-substantial
with the Father. (Phi. 2.6.)

Humane. This is the exemplary cause, or pattern of the Resurrection. Upon this
Ground the Apostle calls Christ (Col. 1.18.) the firstborn from the dead. For,
though some were raised from the dead before Christ, yet seeing his
Resurrection was the cause (says Caryl) of their Resurrection, and will be the
cause of Theirs who shall be raised, therefore he is called the firstborn from
the dead. CHRIST (Rev. 1.18.) had the Keys of Hell, and of Death, resigned up to
him as the Trophies of his Triumphant Resurrection; is not this then one of the
Depths of God? Are not they much beside the Text, and Truth, who assert, that
the Resurrection of the Body, is a Resurrection of the Light within, to a
Dominion of the Man? They make the Resurrection of the Body a mere ALLEGORY;
and against it they make these sollowing Objections.

If a man dies, shall he live again?

Comment on the former part of it. All the days of my appointed time will I wait
til my change comes. What can the meaning be (if GOD understood himself) but
this? He shall not live again in the state wherein he lived, before he died.

What befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts; as the one dies, so dies
the other, etc.

legible, and intelligible, (v. 26.) All go unto one place; all are of the
dust, and all turn to dust again.

Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body. It shall be the same body, but changed
into Spirituality, and Incorruptibility.

But some man will say, how are the dead raised up? and with what body do they
come? Thou Fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die.

Acquisition (after) the Resurrection; but in respect of his Haesitation
(about) the Resurrection, from its seeming Impossibility, and for the Identity
of the Body, (1 Cor. 15.38.) Thou suggestest carnally concerning the
Resurrection, (...) ex priv. and (...) men's La, amens.
and subjectest not thy humane Sense to divine Prudence; so Estius. Thou
might (had thou not been besides thy self, or defective in thy
Prudentials) have learned either of these by daily experience. For, Seeds are
sown, and rot; yet they are so far from perishing thereby, that (contrariwise)
they grow up far more beautiful. They are sown naked, but grow up green and
fresh. Why then should it seem to thee incredible, that our BODIES should rise
from Corruption, and that with far more excellent Qualities than they had
before?

We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. Hence, they say, not the
same body.

Sameness of Body for many reasons.

Change (in) a Person, is not the Change (of) the Person.

Contradiction: For then it must not be a Resurrection, but a CREATION.

(Syllabically) expressed (v. 38.) To every seed his own Body. Though there may
be Diversity as to Form, there is Identity as to Kind. Is not this now one of
the Depths of God?

But lest this should not arrive at a Satisfaction, let another speak, who was
a far greater, and better ORATOR than my self. Thus (Job 9.26, 27.) And though
after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. Whom I
shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, though my reins be consumed
within me.

Confession of the Faith of Job, concerning his own personal Resurrection. I
shall see God.

Obstacles, and Obstructions. Though the Body be destroyed, and the Reins be
consumed.

Narrative of the Felicity that shall accrue to him after the Resurrection of
the Body. I shall see God; I shall see him for my self.

Assertion as to the Identity of his Flesh, or Body, in the Resurrection. The
same Body which falls shall rise. This is asserted in a twoful NOTION.

specifical. It shall be the (same) Body in Kind.

numerical, or individual. It shall be the same particular Body which he had
(on) the Earth, and which he laid down (in) the Eurth. Both these are
evidenced, and evinced (beyond all modest Contradiction) from these passages in
the Text. I shall see him in my flesh; mine eyes shall behold him, and not
another. I; my; mine; and not another; these imply nothing, if not HIMSELF; or
no other thing but HIMSELF: Is not the Refurrection of the Body now one of the
Depths of God?

That there shall be a (corporeal) Resurrection of the Just, and Unjust, is
evident: And why there shall be a Resurrection of These, is as evident, in a
manifold Respect.

God. This God has promised. Thus (2 Cor. 4.14.) Knowing, that he who raised
up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present us with
you, By that Power Christ was raised, shall we be raised also, and this was the
power of God. Thus (1 Cor. (...)
6.14.) God has raised up the Lord, and will also raife us up. But how? By his
own power. Or, by the power of Himself.

Christ. As he was raised; so he has preached it. Thus (Luke 14.14) Thou shall
be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Gazophylacium Christi.
The poor man's Hand, is (as it were) the very TREASURY of Christ, and a Bil of
Exchange for Heaven.

Scriptures. The Sacred Scripture is true. Thus (Col. 1.5.) For the hope which
is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth
of the Gospel.

Faith. For these reasons.

Resurrection of the Body has been believed. As this (in Scripture) has been
registered, and to posterity transmitted; so this (by Scripturists) has been
believed. Faith (Ephesians. 2.8.) is the Gift of GOD. Now God gives not Faith to
believe a LIE.

Resurrection. Thus (Mat. 27.52.) Upon the Crucifiction of Christ, the graves
were opened; and many bodies of saints which slept, arose.

Eaith must not be in vain. Thus (1 Cor. 15.14.) If Christ be not visen -- your
faith is Vain.

co-incident with Salvation. Thus (1 Cor. 15.18.) If no corporal resurrection,
Then they which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.

Body. For two Reasons.

Body must be changed. Thus (Phil. 3.21.) Who shall change our vile body: Who
shall reform, transform, transfigure, and transmute: But what? The Body of the
Vileness of us; so the Greek. (...)
The Body: Not in Substance, or in Figure; in Members, and in Lineaments; but
in Conditions, and Qualities; so Zanchy. That it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, etc. The body of the glory of himself; (...)
so the Greek. Which is most clear, and splendid; so Tirinus. And immortal; so
Menochius.

Body is part of the PURCHASE of Christ. Christ will lose no Part of his
Purchase; but if no Resurrection of the Body, then Christ should lose a Part of
his Purchase, (...)
for he has bought the Body, as well as the Soul. Thus (1 Cor. 6.19, 20.) What,
know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy spirit which is in you,
and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: The word (PRICE) is no
Pleonasm, but added as an Emphasis; to intimate the Excellency, and Dignity of
the Price wherewith we were bought; which was not Silver, or Gold, but the pure
and precious Blood of Christ. But what follows? Therefore glorify God in your
Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's. Is not the Resurrection of the Body
now one of the DEPTHS of GOD? Ah! how greatly unbeleiving are great Persons
about this great Truth, the Resurrection of the Body, although it be one of the
Depths of God. That there should be a specifical, numerical, or individual
Resurrection of the Body; these eyes; these hands; these feet, but incorrupt;
is not this one of the Depths of God? That some part of the Body should be
buried at SEA, and this devoured by the Fish there; that the rest of the Body
should be interred at LAND, and this devoured by the Worms there; and that God
should give this Man a numerical Resurrection, it not this one of the Depths of
God? For part of the Body to be made Dust in the Bottom of the Sea, and the
rest of the Body to be made Dust in the Bowels of the Earth; and for the God of
Gods to gather all this Dust together, and give this Man an individual
Resurrection out of his own Dust; is not this one of the Depths of God? May I
not now write as the Apostle spoke? (Acts 26.8.) Why should it be thought a
thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? Let every Individual
(into whose hands this TRACT shall providentially, and graciously fall) be
cautioned against such Expressions; Yea, Conceptions as these that follow --

That Salvation should be preached in the Name of a pretended God, called
Jesus; who was born of a poor Jewish-Woman, and brought up like a poor
Carpenters Son; who was crucified like a (notorious) Malefactor, between two
(notorious) Thieves; who came under the Arrests of Death, and (like a MORTAL)
was laid in a Sepulcre; when (almost all the Nation of the Jews) affirm, that
he is yet under the Power of Death; and when so few talk of his Resurrection,
what Credibleness of this Doctrine of the Resurrection? Ah Soul! so incredible
is this Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, that all the chief HERESIES
of old, were either against the Divinity of Christ, as the Arrians, Photinians
etc: Or the Humanity of Christ, as the Simonians, Manichees, Marcionites, etc:
Or the Union of Divinity and Humanity into one Person, as the Nestorians,
Eutychians etc; and yet the Resurrection of the Body is one of the Depths of
God.

The RESURRECTION of the Body may
Pass for a Depth of God, I (boldly) say.
Foes very many this has had in Ages:
Friends very few of very many Sages.
This has not met with general Digestion;
In Gospel Times 'twas called into Question:
Then many said without declared Dread,
There is no Refurrection of the Dead.
But there is a Resurrection of the Just,
And Unjust too; both sormed out of Dust.
As there is a RESURRECTION to Salvation;
So there is a Resurrection to Damnation.
Be wisely-worldly, be not worldly-wise
Shall not these Eyes, and Hands, and Feet arise?
Young ones (may) die, but die the Old ones (must;)
Shall these arise (who lived long in Lust)
Out of their own, and not another Dust?
Then (surely) I should not an ATHEIST trust.
The Dust at Sea, and also at the Land,
Will God together gather with his Hand:
He that will search, may in the Scripture find,
That the (same) BODY shall arise in Kind:
In Number too shall the (same) Body rise;
It Is written, and cannot be otherwise.
A Jesus it is must raise (interred) Man,
Whose Days I find compared to a Span.
Oh Lord of Lords! things easy are to THEE;
Let this Vile Body (here) most changed be:
That so (hereafter) Seeing I may see,
This also raised (incorrupt) for ME.
Remission, that is one of the Depths of God. Pardon of Sin is a signal, and a
singular mercy; a precious, and a plural mercy; a congruous, and a complicated
mercy; is it not then one of the Depths of God? Sin, that is dangerous; that is
damnable; is not Pardon of Sin then, and Peace of Soul then, one of the Depths
of God? Oh pray! pray (says Perkins) for the Pardon of thy particular, and
personal Sins. The HEATHENS were wont to fly to the Mercy of their Gods by
Petitions, and purging Sacrifices. They imbibed, and espoused this Principle,
that the GODS were propitious, and propense to pardon. But none of the
Gentile-Gods could ever pardon Sin, for the Pardoner of Sin is the God of the
Gentiles. That the God of Gods is the God of the Gentiles, is evident. Thus
(Romans 3.29.) Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles?
Yea, of the Gentiles also. And that this God is the sole Pardoner of Sin, is as
evident. Thus (Mark 2.7.) Who can forgive sins but God only? The sins of
believing Penitents, and of penitent Beleivers are pardoned, though the Tears
of Repentance stand in their Eyes, and they cannot read their PARDON; Is not
Remission then one of the Depths of God? Lord (says Luther) now do what thou will with me, for thou have pardoned me. Remission of Sin, is of more Validity,
and ought to be of more Value, then all the Crowns and Scepters in the World;
is it not then one of the Depths of God? It Is more Christ-like, and
(consequently) more Christian-like to remit, than to revenge. The Pardon of Sin
is a Mercy invaluable, incomparable, and inconceivable to all below a GOD;
Declarative, non Authorative.
is it not then one of the Depths of God? A Man may pardon Ministerially, but
not Juditially; he may pardon Declaratively, but not Authoratatively; he may
pronounce it, but God performs it: Is not Remission then one of the Depths of
God? The Form of a Monkish-Absolution I find to be thus: God forgive thee my
Brother; the Merit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of blessed Saint Mary (always
a Virgin) and of all the Saints; the Merit of thine Order; the Straitness of
thy Religion; the Humility of thy Confession; the good Works which thou (have)
done, or (shall) do, for the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto thee
available for the Remission of thy Sins; the Increase of Desert and Grace; and
the Reward of everlasting Life; AMEN. Is not this a Linsey-Woolsey Absolution?
As one therefore said concerning the Writings of Moses (Genesis 1.1. etc.) In the
beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth etc. Quomodo probas Domine
Moses? Quomodo probas Domine Monache? Eris mihi magnus Apollo.
These are great things, but Sir Moses how do thou prove them? so I may write
concerning the Absolution of the MONK, This is a larg, and a long Absolution,
but how do thou prove it Sir Monk? Prove this Absolution from the sacred
Scripture (the written word of God) and thou shall have my Subscription (if it
be valuable) that thou art a great Apollo. This (Sacerdotal) Absolution (among
the Papists) is the most hideous, dangerous, and perfidious Cheat of ROME
(says Dr More) that ever she could light on, for the damning of poor credulous
Souls, that thus (superstitiously) depend on the vain Breath of their Priest,
for the Security of their Salvation. GOD (only) can pardon sin: The Pardon of
Sin is his Act; his proper, and peculiar act; He can do it, and none can do it
but He. We read Remission among his royal Titles; is not this then one of the
Depths of God? Thus (Exo. 34.7.) Forgiving iniquity transgression and sin. Here
are three words about sin: As if GOD would not only pardon all Sinners that
cordially repent; but also all kinds and degrees of sin whatsoever; by what
names or titles soever they be styled, upon cordial Repentance, which is
(virtually) included in the Promise of Pardon. Is not this manifest beyond all
modest contradiction, that not one can be a Pardoner of Sin, but he who is
vested (v. 6.) with these preceding glorious Qualifications* Jehovah; Jehovah
God; merciful and gracious; long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth;
keeping mercy for thousands; forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin: Is not
this now one of the Depths of God? To offer Works for the Pardon of Sin, is the
worst SIMONY in the World. For a trembling and a troubled Soul; a doubting and
a drooping Soul; a desponding and despairing Soul, to see and read his Name in
an Act of Oblivion, and Indemnity, and that of Gods own making, is not this
then one of the Depths of God? The Pardon of Pope Alexander the sixth (though
it was for thirty thousand Years) was not worth two Sparrows, and yet they were
sold for a Farthing. It Is the God of Gods that gives Pardon to those that
believe, and that gives FAITH to believe that Pardon. It Is the God of Gods that
gives Remission of Sin to those that repent, and that gives REPENTANCE for
Remission of Sins: Is not Remission then one of the Depths of God? We read of a
Servant (Mat. 18.24.) Who ought to his Sovereign ten thousand Talents. A
considerable Sum here seems to be. If a Talent (according to the lowest
Computation) be three hundred pounds of Money; and if ten thousand times three
hundred be three Millions; then these three MILLLONS are forgiven as a Debt of
three MITES: Is not Remission then one of the Depths of God? For a Person to be
mourning, til it can mourn no more; Yea, after that mourn, that it has no more
mourned; and for Christ then to say to this Person, as he did to that
City-Sinner, (Luke 7.48.) Thy sins are forgiven; Is not this one of the Depths
of God? For Persons to be afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted;
and for Christ then to say to these as he did to them, (Jo. 16.33.) In me ye
shall have peace; is not this one of the Depths of God? For a Person to be days
and nights in the Deep, and to be crying out there, my SINS are not only
innumerable, but also unpardonable; and for God then to say to this Person, as
he did, (Isa. 43.25.) I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own names sake, and will not remember thy sins; is not this one of the
Depths of God? For a Person to be without Sun-light; without Moonlight;
without Starlight: Not only without full Shines and Smiles; not only without
the lest Glance of a reconciled Eye, and Glimpse of a reconciled Face; but also
without a Commemoration that ever God was gracious; that ever God and the Soul
(in a Promise) sweetly and savingly met; and for CHRIST then to say to this
Person, as he did to that Woman, (Mark 5.34.) Go in peace, and be whole of thy
plague; is not this one of the Depths of God?

A Depth of God REMISSION enters now;
Where is the Man that will not this allow?
Who has been sailing by the Gates of Hell,
And (truly) then could not his PARDON spel?
Sins (against Man) may all forgiven be
By Man Himself, as Sages do agree.
Sins (against GOD) are All by God alone
Forgiven Man, that He may change his Tone
Of Sorrow to a Tune of Joy; and sing
HOSANNA unto Christ the Churches King.
It Is not Pope Joan, nor John can (thus) forgive,
But JESUS; that Man may not die, but live.
Let all forgiven ones herein accord,
Forgiveness is a TITLE of the Lord.
Oh chiefest Christ! with both Eyes do I see,
Like to three MITES, three MILLIONS are to Thee;
And (freely) Thou have now forgiven Me.
Oh! to the Root of this accursed Tree,
Lay now thine AXE, I beg on bended Knee,
For (greatly) long I sinless now to be.
Satisfaction, that is one of the Depths of God. Is there any constant
Satisfaction in this Region of Vicissitude? If any ask (says Caryl) what
Satisfaction is; it is to have our Fill: Is not this then one of the Depths of
God? ALEXANDER M. had the World for his Empire, yet not satisfied, for he
thirsted after another world to conquer: Is not Satisfaction now one of the
Depths of God? There is a twofold Satisfaction; as to God; and as to Man.

Man that satisfies God. Quoad Deum.
The Papists say (but they are Liars, and given up to believe a Lie, which
borders upon Hell) that We (by our Sufferings) in some part satisfy the Justice
of God. But Man cannot satisfy God. That there is a Deficiency in all that Man
does, in order to the Pacification of infinite IRE, and Satisfaction of
infinite JUSTICE, is evident, and easily evinced by these three Reasons.

Man does, is a Debt before he does it. All our Duties are Debts before we
perform them. Thus (Luke 17.10.) When ye shall have done all those things which
are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: We have done that which
was our duty to do. This does not assert a Possibility of complete fulfilling
the Law (as some Popish Expositors abuse the TEXT) but Christ speaks it by way
of Confession. Can we pay the Debt of Sin by those Duties which were due,
though Sin had never been committed? Let those that dream of meriting, renounce
their Interest (in) and Claim (unto) Grace, for Grace and Merit are
incompatible.

that Man does. Thus (Exo. 28.38.) Aaron must bear the iniquity of the holy
things. Holy things, yet iniquity in them. There is a considerable difference
between a sinful Action, and SIN in an Action. Here were holy things in the
Matter of them, yet iniquity in the Manner of performing them. The Services of
Man smell of the Vessel thorough which they pass; and taste of the Cask into
which they are put. There is a Stamp of our Sinfulness even upon our holy
things; and can that which is sinful satissie for Sin?

Works of Man want the STAMP of divine Designation for that purpose. God, has
no where set up the Righteouness of Man, as Satisfaction for the
Unrighteousness of Man. The Crucifiction of Christ had not delivered from
Damnation, had it not been written in the Volume of the Book. Thus (Heb.
10.7.10.) Then said I, Lo, I come (in the Volume of the book it is written of
me) to do thy Will, oh God! By the which will (of the Father) we are
sanctified, thorough the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
Sanctification (here) may be taken for Salvation, and all in a Tendency unto
Salvation. The Obligation of the SON could not have saved us, without the
Ordination of the FATHER. There is nothing satisfactory, but what the Law, or
the Will of the Lawgiver makes; or agrees to accept as satisfactory. In the
Volume of the Book (says Caryl) there is nothing written, which appoints Man
such a Work, and therefore he cannot do it. Had Man performed perfect
righteousness, he could not have satisfied infinite justice, unless God had
said he would accept that way of Satisfaction. The highest, and holiest CEDAR
upon Earth, by all his Actions and Passions, cannot satisfy the Justice of God
for (one) Sin. This person (of greatest Grace and Gifts) may say as he did (Job
7.20.) I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee? I cannot satisfy thy Justice;
I cannot pacify thine Ire; nor can I evade thy Power. I cannot get away from
thee; I cannot rescue my self from under thy hand.

Man, but God-Man, who satisfies God and Man.

God-Man that satisfies God. The Socinians (among many notorious and
prodigious Errors) have this Capital, and Cardinal one, denying the Deity (of)
Christ, and Satisfaction (by) Christ. Theanthropos.
Though God will not be satisfied (by) Man, yet he will be satisfied (for) Man,
thorough that Christ who is GOD-MAN. If the true meaning of giving Satisfaction
to God, be to do, or suffer, so much as may be justly sufficient to the
Vengeance of him that is angry, then who below Christ (God-Man) can satisfy
God for Man? Is not Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God? If Satisfaction
to God be the Effect of Action, or Passion, or both; required for the answering
of Sins; by him who had Right, Authority, and Power, to require, exact, and
inflict Punishments for them, then who below a Christ (God-Man) can satisfy
God for Man? Is not now Satisfaction one of the Depths of God? If CHRIST made
Satisfaction for Sin, he did it either as God; or Man; or, as God and Man: Now,
he made Satisfaction as God and Man. Thus (Acts 20.28.) Feed the church of God:
Here is the Divinity of Christ. Which he has purchased with his own blood.
Here is the Humanity of Christ. That which appertains to Christ's Humanity,
is here attributed to his Divinity; because of the Union of the two Natures in
one Person; and Communion of Properties. So (1 Jo. 3.16.) Hereby perceive we
the love of God: Here is the Divinity of Christ. Because he laid down his life
for us. Here is the the Humanity of Christ. Christ was GOD, that he might
Satisfy, and MAN that he might Suffer. As Man had sinned, so God was offended;
Now Christ was God and Man, to satisfy God for Man. Though, the word
(Satisfaction) be not (Syllabically) legible in the sacred Scripture, save in
this only one place, (Number. 35.31, 32.) Ye shall take no satisfaction for the
life of a Murderer, which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to
death. And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city of his
refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the
priest. Yet, there are some words which amount to a SATISFACTION. Thus (Eze.
16.63.) That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou
have done, says Jehovah God. Now if God may be pacified, then he may be
satisfied: But God may be pacified. So (Col. 1.20, 21, 22.) And by him (having
made peace thorough the blood of his Cross) to reconcile all things to himself,
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. Heaven and Earth (by Sin)
were set at Variance, and the Creatures in them; but CHRIST (by the bloody
Oblation made of himself upon the Cross) has caused an Unity, not only between
God and Man, but also betwixt Men and the Angels that are in Heaven; as also
the Creatures that are upon the Earth. But what follows? And you that were
sometimes alienated, and enemies by the mind in wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, (...)
in the body of the flesh of himself, thorough the death, etc. So the Greek.
Now, if God may be reconciled, then God may be satisfied: But God may be
reconciled. So (Romans 5.10.11.) For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled we shall be saved by
his life. And not only so, but we also joy in God, thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have now reciev'd the atonement. By whom now (in this time
of the Gospel) says Toletus; Deo facti sumus Amici.
we are made Friends with God, says Vatablus. Now, if God may be atoned (or
reconciled, for they are SYNONOMA'S) then God may be satisfied: But God may be
atoned. The Blood of Christ, is the Blood of Atonement. Now, when God is once
satisfied, he will not demand another Satisfaction. If Christ has worn up the
Rod to the Stumps, and cast it into the Fire, then it is no more to be
remembered: Is not Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God?

God-Man that satisfies Man. Man cannot satisfy Himself, nor can he satisfy
Another. All (of) the World, and all (in) the World, will not fill an Eye, nor an
Ear; (Eccle. 1.8.) how then should it fill the HEART, which is the vastest thing
in the World? If not the outward Senses, how then the inward Affections? Is not
Satisfaction then one of the Depths of God? A Man sees more than he can eat,
drink, wear, or bequeath, and yet not satisfied; is not Satisfaction now one of
the Depths of God? A wooden-loaf; or silver-loaf; or golden-loaf, will not
satisfy a hungry man, who is ready to prey upon his own Flesh; this man must
have BREAD: Is not Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God? The Dainties and
Delicaces of the World; the Dignities and Diadems of the World; the Grandeur
and Glory of the World; the Plenty and Prosperity of the World; the Puff and
Popularity of the World, will not satisfy a Soul sailing by the Gates of Hell,
and crying out of the Depths; it must be a CHRIST (with) whom the Soul is
satisfied; and it must be a CHRIST (by) whom the Soul is satisfied: Is not
Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God? None (but) Christ, was the Cry of
the Martyr. None (to) Christ, was the Cry of the Psalmist. Children, or I die,
(Genesis 30.1.) was the Cry of Rachel; a Sheep as the word signifies. A Christ or
I die; Yea* a Christ or I am damned, is the doleful Ditty and Dialect, of a
convinced, or converted Soul; of a dark, or doubting Soul; of a despairing, or
desponding Soul; of a tempted, or troubled Soul. He that loves silver, (Eccle.
5.10.) shall not be satisfied therewith, nor he that loves abundance with
increase: Is not Satisfaction then one of the Depths of God? A wicked man is
never satisfied. HAMAN (making Uproar, as the word signifies) was advanced by
Ahasuerus above all the Princes; he calls his Friends, and Zeresh his Wife; he
tells them of his Riches; the Multitude of his Children; and of his Promotion,
yet not satisfied: Is not Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God? AHAB (
King of Israel) yet not satisfied: Naboath, must part with his Vineyard, or
part with his Life: Is not Satisfaction then one of the Depths of God? It Is
possible for a Man to have Lust and Life; to have Honor and Health; to have
Wisdom and Wealth, and not satisfied: Is not Satisfaction then one of the
Depths of God? It Is possible for a Man to live in a full House; to sit down at
a full Table; to have full Bags and Barns; to have full Coffers and Closets,
and not be satisfied, but have many empty Corners in his Soul: Is not
Satisfaction then one of the Depths of God? And, as a (godless) man is never
satisfied, so a (godly) man is never satisfied but (by) CHRIST; or (with)
Christ; who has such Variety served in continually; and such Suavity in that
Variety, that the Soul is no longer satisfied then it is with Him: Is not
Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God? The WORLD at (most) is not big
enough, and at (best) is not good enough to fill, or satisfy the Mind of Man;
but Christ (the Charmer, and Stiller of the Soul.) must say, (Jer. 31.3.) I
have loved thee with an everlasting love: Is not Satisfaction then one of the
Depths of God? There are some who have as many Bags and Barns; as much Honor
and Health; as much Wine and Wealth, as they can tell what to do with; Yea,
they know not what to do with all these, and yet are not satisfied: Is not
Satisfaction then one of the Depths of God? What (of) the World, and (in) the
World, can give Quietness, when CHRIST (the Sun of Righteousness) goes down
upon the Horizon of the Soul? Is not Satisfaction then one of the Depths of
God* The HEART (says the Anathmost) is a Three-Square, and nothing but a
Trinity in Unity, and an Unity in Trinity can satisfy this; Is not
Satisfaction now one of the Depths of God? The Will of the Father; the Worth of
the Son; the Work of the Spirit; the Father purposing; the Son purchasing; the
Spirit perfecting, are only able to satisfy a Soul like a (troubled) Sea: Is
not Satisfaction then one of the Depths of God? It is a good Observation that
the World is round, but the Heart of Man is triangular; so that all the GLOBE
of the World will not fill the (triangular) Heart of Man: Is not Satisfaction
then one of the Depths of God?

Another Depth of God is SATISFACTION;
So let it pass, not meeting with Retraction.
Man (by his Lapse) disgusted Majesty;
But Christ was GOD that He might satisfy.
That Christ might suffer, he was MAN also;
That Ish and Ishah might to Heaven go.
Oh GOD and MAN! my Silver is but Tin;
My Gold but Brass, that will not go for Pay:
All DUTIES (then) cannot for any Sin,
Be satisfying Justice for a Day.
Christ satisfies as God; or Man; or both:
He (not as God, or Man) but GODMAN does.
Oh God and Man! the Service must be Mine;
But all the Satisfaction must be Thine.
There is a Difference (without a Fraction)
Between the SERVICE, and the SATISFACTION.
The Service, that is mine; and it is decryed:
The Satisfaction thine; and not denied.
As GOD is satisfied, so is MAN
By Jesus Christ: It Is He, no other can
Atoner be of more than (finite) Ire;
It Is He that plucketh Souls out of the Fire.
Oh GOD and MAN! all Riches and Relations,
But Ciphers are without Significations.
All Duties smell so (rankly) of the Cask,
To satisfy is more than (humane) Task.
Oh GOD and MAN! what will become of Me,
If Satisfaction be not made by Thee?
As it is true, the Sore is (solely) Mine,
Is is as true, the Salve is (solely) Thine.
Justification, that is one of the Depths of God. For a Person to be acquitted
from Sin, and Death, the WAGES thereof; to be also accounted righteous unto
Life and Glory, the REWARD thereof, is not this one of the Depths of God? Is
not Justification an (absolute) Act of Free Grace, and (consequentially) one of
the Depths of God? God does not justify a Sinner, for any thing that he finds,
or sees in him; the Act (as to the Sinner) is (altogether) free; and is it not
then one of the Depths of God? Thus (Romans 4.5.) But to him that works not:
That works not for reward; so Paraeus. But believes on him who justifies
the ungodly: They (were) ungodly, but they (are) godly. God makes them holy as
well as righteous; and justifies as well as sanctifies. Righteousness of LIFE,
must follow Righteousness of FAITH. God justifies the ungodly, but Woe to that
Man who justifies the ungodly. God, would not justify the ungodly, but for
the righteousness of another, and shall we justify the ungodly in their own
unrighteousness? God justifies the ungodly, not (in) their Sins, but (from)
their Sins, thorough a (sinless) CHRIST. His faith is counted for
righteousness. Not for our Merit, but for the Merit of Christ; not inherent in
us, but communicated to us by his Spirit; not from the Act of Faith
(abstracted) from the Object of Faith. There is a Soul-solacing Difference
between Moses the Servant, and Christ the Son; the one condemns, the other
condoneth; the one accuses, the other acquitteth; the one charge, the other
discharges; the one judges, the other justifies all his Jedidiah's, and
JEWELS. Justification is a Jowel; but this Jewel only hangs upon the Ear, and
this Chain only hangs about the Neck of a person given unto Christ, and unto
whom Christ is given. Socium habet Neminem.
We may say of Christ (as was once said of Caesar) he (may) have a Companion,
but he (must) not have a Competitor. Is not that TEXT sweeter than the Honey,
or the Drops of the Honeycomb? Being justified freely by his grace, thorough
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. The whole Act of Justification in this
Text (Romans 3.24.) has its Description in Law-Terms. Here is the Criminal, who
is the Sinner; the Plaintiff, who is Satan; the Witness, which is Conscience;
the Advocate, who is Christ; and the Judge, who is God: Is not Justification
then one of the Depths of God? This Justification is described from the
efficient, and the impulsive cause.

Grace. Being justified by his grace. (...)
By grace (here) is not meant a mere external proposing of the word of God, as
the Pelagians say; nor any work of Sanctity within us, as Papists say; but the
Grace and Goodness of God without us. The Grace of Himself.

Freely. (...)
Being justified freely by his grace. Without Cause; says Beza. From free
Gift, or mere Liberality; says Toletus. Without our Merits; says Lyra.
Without our Merits, either foreseen, or present; says Paraeus. To be justified
by Grace, is to be justified freely; but to he (freely) by Grace justified, Aut
praevisis aut praesentibus.
is to be justified with all (imaginable) Freeness; Yea, with a Freeness
uninimaginable: Is not Justification now one of the Depths of God? But, as this
impulsive cause is internal, so it is external, which is Redemption. Being
justified freely by the grace of himself, thorough the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus. Is not Justification now one of the DEPTHS of GOD? Here is
Justification from the efficient and impulsive cause; Freeness of Grace,
together with the (Active) and (Passive) Obedience of Christ. The Price was
Jesus Christ, says Vatablus. He (by his Action and Passion) redeemed; which
most aptly may be subjoined, that it may be exclusive as to the Glory of humane
Works.

But how can Justification be free, Intervention of a Price?

It may be free; Yea, freely free (ex part Hominis) as to Man; though it be
not so (ex part Christi) as to God-Man. This Liberation (as to Justification)
may well be ascribed and attributed unto divine GOODNESS, because it was of the
Goodness of God that Christ was given. Thus (John 3.16.) So God loved the Word,
that he gave his only begotten Son etc. Here is a God (not a Man) loving the
World; a lapsed World; a lustful World; a wicked World; a wickedly-wicked
World: A SIC without a SICUT.
Yea, so: So God loved the World. Here is the Emphasis; it is an Emphatical SO;
a SO to a wonder; a SO it is above all wonder. This (So) signifies the
Vehemence of his Love, says Chrysostom. God loved the world so vehemently; so
admirably; says Polanus. But how does this appear? In giving a Son, not a
Servant: His Son, not his Servant: His (begotten) Son, not his (adopted) Son:
Nay, his (ONLY) begotten Son. This was such a Gift, as none but a God could
give. Had this God such another Gift to give but Himself? and in giving his
Son, he gives Himself.

Oh greatest God! here is the greatest Love:
An (only) CHRIST is given from above.
But if Justification be free, Faith required? Can this be free, when that is
imposed?

Faith is the Gift of God. Sine Pretio, et Praemio.
Thus (Ephesians. 2.8.) By grace ye are saved thorough faith: By grace: Favore Dei
gratuito, Zanchy. By the Favor of God without reward, or hope of recompense.
Ye are saved. Ye are justified; so Tirinus. Thorough faith: Not as the Hand,
but as the Instrument: Though he speaks here not only of the Habit, but also of
the Act of FAITH, yet this Act must not be taken without the Object. In order
to Salvation (or Justification) there must not only be the Grace (of) God, but
also Grace (from) God, to believe in the Person of Christ. And this (Faith) not
of your selves. Not from the strength of Nature; so Estius. Or Dignity; so
Bodius. Or Desert; so Menochius. Or Desire; so Zanchius. It is the Gift of God.
This FAITH comes to us from the gratuitous, and spondaneous Liberality of God.
The Apostle therefore (deservedly) adscribeth, and assigns this Faith to the
Goodness of God; and (emphatically) calls it his Gift. Christ has made our Sins
HIS, that he might make his Righteousness OURS; is not Justification now one of
the Depths of God? He that justifies himself, condemns himself, for his very
Justification is an Accusation. He that would be justified by his WORKS, must
not have one ill Action amongst all his Actions. One Fly (in the Box of
Ointment) corrups all. One Defect makes one sinful, but many good Actions
cannot make one righteous. He is just, not only that has no Sin, but He also
who is acquitted from his Sin; or to whom his Sin is not imputed: Is not
Justification then one of the Depths of God? To justify our selves that we are
righteous, is worse than all our Unrighteousness. JAH, has no Respect to our
Righteousness in the business of Justification; is not this then one of the
Depths of God? It Is said of Christ (1 Jo. 5.6.) that he came by Water, and
Blood. To intimate, and indicate, that no more are justified by his MERIT, than
are sanctified by his SPIRIT. It is Christ who takes from Man Unrighteousness,
and gives unto Man his own Righteousness: Is not Justification now one of the
Depths of God? Aug.
One says, that Marcellina hung the Picture of Christ, and the Picture of
Pythagoras together. Are there not many (not only in ITALY, but also in
ENGLAND) who join Christ and their Works together; Christ and their Prayers
together; Christ and their Tears together; Christ and their Teachers together;
Christ and their Alms together. In the Law (Deu. 22.11.) God commands not to
wear a garment mingled of linen and woolen. This Law was figurative, and
teaches that in the case of our Justification, Acceptance, and Salvation, we
are not to join our Services, and Sacrifices, to the Righteousness of Christ;
Is not Justification then one the Depths of God? The Object of Worship (God)
abominates a LINSEY-WOOLSEY Righteousness. The Gloss of the Scoolmen is
flagitious; who say, that Faith (adorned with Charity) justifies. The
Romanists condemned in Councils the Doctrine of Justification by the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ, which is not in us but in him. The Rhemists
call it a fantastical Justice; a new-no Justice. But Luther says, whosoever
rightly esteems of the Vtility, and Majesty of Justification, to him all
things should seem vile, and worthless: For what is Paul? what is Peter? what
is an Angel from Heaven? what are all other Creatures to the ARTICLE of
Justification? Is not this then one of the Depths of God? I cannot but mention
the Tutissimum of Bellarmine, who having written 5 Books against Justification
by Faith; gives a Defeat to his whole Design, in concluding the Controversy
with a Confutation of all that he had written of it, in these words: Tutissimum
est, Fiduciam totam in Dei sola Misericordia, et Benignitate reponere. It Is
safest to put the whole Confidence in the Mercy, and Benignity of God. Is not
Justification now one of the Depths of God? The Justification of one Sinner, is
a far greater Work than the Creation of all the WORLD; is it not then one of
the Depths of God? They justify themselves sinfully, who say they are
justified by Christ (from) their Sins, and yet continue (in) their Sins, and
hold fast their iniquities: Is not Justification then one of the Depths of God?
What Righteousness (says Farnworth) Christ performed without Me, was not my
Justification; neither was I saved by it. May not this be believed of this man
himself, if he died in the same mind?

Justification is by Grace, and not by Works? The Scripture says, it is by
Works, and not by Grace only; and who is most authentic God, or Man?

Justification; before God, and before Man.

Works cannot justify. No righteousness can stand before God, but the
Righteousness of Christ only. Thus (Romans 3.20.) Therefore by the deeds of the
law shall no flesh be justified in his sight etc. (...)
No flesh; all flesh, so the Greek. All flesh shall not: But the meaning is no
flesh shall. Metonymia Materiae.
Flesh (by a double Figure) is put for a Man. It Is put for the Body, it being
the Matter of it. Synecdoche Membri.
It Is also put (as a part) for the whole man. Here the word (ALL) joined with
the Negative, is often (according to the Hebrew phrase) put for none. All
flesh; that is, no flesh: All Men; that is, no Man. No man, how (great) soever;
how (good) soever, can be justified by Works before God. So (Romans 4.2.) If
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God.
If Abraham were justified by the Works of the Law, or Nature, apart from faith;
so Estius. He has whereof to glory, but not before God. Not in Scriptures of
God, where God speaks; so Vatablus. Not before God, because such a
Righteousness cannot free from Sin, nor reconcile to God; so Toletus,

By their works ye shall know them. So (Jam. 2.26.) As the body without the
Soul is dead, so faith without works is dead. As the Body is Lifeless, if
Soulless; so the Soul is Faithless, if Workless. Though a man be justified
without the Righteousness of Works, yet that MAN (who is without Works of
Righteousness) is not justified: Is not Justification now one of the Depths of
God? As it is true, Grace is (ever) alone in justifying (before) God; it is as
true, Grace is (never) alone in the person justified (by) God: Is not
Justification then one of the Depths of God? Grace and Works dwell under the
same Roof.

JUSTIFICATION is the Thesis next:
An Act of Grace (according to the Text)
Most absolute. Can ISH in his own Dress
Be just with JAH? No; it is the Right'ousness
Of JESUS intervening with the Flag;
Man's Right'ousness is but a filthy Rag. God had (for Sin) with Man a certain
Duel:
Justification is the Christ'ans Jewel,
Where is the Man but for a BANKRUPT went?
This is unto his Ear an Ornament:
Yea, Golden-Chain this is unto his Neck;
And does (indeed) a BLACK most rarely deck.
No more are justified by the Merit,
Than also sanctified by the Spirit.
The Spirit of the Almighty gave me Breath;
Lord Jesus me acquit from Sin, and Death:
I (thorough Grace) delight in sacred Story;
Lord right'ous me account to Life and Glory.
Oh dearest JESUS! is my Sin made Thine?
Then is thy Right'ousness made also Mine.
Sanctification, that is one of the Depths of God. For the Heart of Enosh, that
was black with sin, to be beautified with Grace; and for Him who was a BLACK by
Nature, to be a BEAUTY by Grace; is not this one of the Depths of God? That
there is such a thing as Sanctification, is evident; that this (according to
the Greek) is a Sanctification of Spirit, and belief of Truth, is as evident.
Thus (2 These. 2.13.) But etc, because God has from the beginning chosen you:
From the beginning of Evangelical preaching; so Cajetan, From the beginning of
your Vocation; so Vorstius. From Eternity; so Beza. Before the foundations of
the world were laid; Et Animae; and Corporis.
so Piscator. But unto what are these chosen? Unto Salvation: Eternal; so
Grotius. Both of Soul and Body; so Gomarus. Then follows; in sanctification
of Spirit: Of a (divine) Spirit, which sanctifies; so Zegerius. Or, of a
(humane) Spirit, which is sanctified; so Estius. And belief of Truth. Faith
lays hold, not on a Lie, but on Truth: Is not Sanctification now one of the
DEPTHS of GOD? The Grace of sanctification always follows the Grace of
Justification: and though it may (easily) be distinguished from it, yet it can
no more be divided from it, than Heat from Fire; and Motion from Life; is it
not then one of the Depths of God? If Happiness be intailed upon Holiness; and
Glory be intailed upon Grace; and Salvation be intailed upon Sanctification, is
it not then one of the Depths of God? The Crown is appointed for the HEAD of
the Convert. Thus (Heb. 12.14.) Follow peace with all men, and holiness: Here
is an Apostolick-Exhortation unto following peace and holiness. Follow, or (as
the propriety of the word is) persecute; that ye may arrive, (...)
and attain the highest Degree of Grace. Follow Peace and Holiness, as a Hunter
his Prey, who pursues it, till he takes it. The word does not simply signify
to follow, but to follow as the PERSECUTOR; who rests not till he has him
whom he persecuteth; it being the same word that signifies to persecute. But
what follows? Without which (Holiness, that being the Antecedent) no man shall
see the Lord. God himself is infinitely, and perfectly holy, therefore they
cannot see him that are unholy. As his Name is HOLY; yea, thrice holy; Holy;
Holy; Holy: So his Nature is HOLINESS; how then can they (who are unholy) take
a Prospect of this God, whose Name is Holy, and whose Nature is Holiness? Is
not Sanctification now one of the Depths of God? There must be an (internal)
Holiness; Holiness in the Organ; to take in the Holiness of the Object. God
first works holiness in us, and then we behold him the holy, holy, holy God: Is
not Sanctification now one of the Depths of God? They that shall wear the Robes
of Kings in Heaven, must first wear the Robes of Saints on Earth; is not
Holiness then one of the Depths of God? The highest in Holiness, Ubi Been, nemo
Melius; Ubi Male nemo Pejus.
are the lowest in the Thoughts of the Ungodly. May it not be said of the LIVES
of some, as it was said of the Writings of Origin? Where he was good, no man
was better: Where he was bad, no man was worse. It was Lactantius who said it,
Godliness always enricheth the Possessor. Is not Sanctification now one of the
Depths of God? The Heathens also (as he reports) have a NOTION amongst them,
That the way to honor their Gods was to be like them. The best way to honor
Christ, is to be like unto Christ, who is that Holy One: Is not Sanctity now
one of the Depths of God? I have read of one Heliogabulus (and if He were the
first, I wish also he may be the last) who loved his Children the better for
resembling him in Sin. Christ loves his Children the better for resembling him
in Sanctity: Is not SANCTIMONY then one of the Depths of God? As the Image in
the Glass resembles the Face, or Figure; the Feature and Favor; so does the
Christian (after his Proportion) resemble Christ. As Christ was made like unto
Christians, and had NATURE: Thus (Heb. 2.17.) Wherefore in all things (Sin
excepted) it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren: To the Elect; so
Estius. Electis. Fidelibus.
To the Faithful; so Cameron, That he might be a merciful and faithful high
Priest etc. An Ability of Sufficiency to be merciful, had Christ as God, though
he had never been made like unto us by becoming Man; but he had not that
Ability (as some speak) of Idoneity, or Fitness to be merciful. His being made
like unto his Brethren, has given him a double Idoneity, for the Temerity of
his Heart toward Them. It Is legible, and intelligible here, that CHRIST was
(perfect) Man; consisting of an humane Body, and of an humane Soul; obnoxious
to all the Infirmities both of Body, and Soul, which imply neither Iniquity,
nor Impotency, in his Passions. Thus Christ was made like unto Christians, and
had Nature. So Christians are made like unto Christ, and have GRACE. Thus (2
Cor. 3:18.) But we all with open face: We all under the Gospel; so Capellus.
All we Christians; so Tirinus. All we Sons of the new Testament; so Estius. All
we that are Faithful, whether Jews, or Gentiles; so Grotius. Detecto Vultu.
With open face: With uncovered, or unvailed face; so the Greek. With a
discovered Countenance; so Tirinus. Manifestly, and boldly; so Sclaterus. Not
thorough a VAIL, as before under the LAW; so Capellus. Not thorough so many
Ceremonial Shadows; Grotius. Beholding as in a glass: He proceeds with the
Allegory of the Covering; and compares the Gospel to a Glass. It Is but one
word in the Greek. (...)
The glory of the Lord: The knowledge of the mysteries of our salvation; Estius.
The glory of the grace of God in Christ; Dicsonus. Are changed into the same
image: We are made conformable unto him; so Caryl. We receive (as it were) the
Sculpture of SANCTIY upon our Souls. From glory to glory: From the glory of
Christ; so Menochius. Or, (...)
of God; so Valla. To glory: Into our glory. Sanctification is called Glory,
because it is the Beginning of Glorification; for, by this the Image of God is
repaired, and restored in us, which is our Glory. Thus Grace is Glory in the
Bud. As of the Lord the Spirit. So the Greek. Is not Sanctification now one of
the Depths of God? (...)
Challenge not for thy (Right) Happiness, unless thou find in thy (Heart)
Holiness; is not this then one of the Depths of God? Sanctification does not
un-man a MAN; there is nothing destroyed but what would destroy. The Life of a
Saint, should be a visible SERMON of Sanctification, and is it not then one of
the Depths of God? Some, are like the Camelion, of whom it is storied, that it
changes it self into any Color but White. The Kalander of the POPE only
sainteth the Dead; but the Sacred Scripture requires Sanctity in the Living;
is not this then one of the Depths of God? Non Causa regnandi, sed Via ad
regnum.
Though Sanctification be not the Cause of Reigning, yet it is the Way to the
Kingdom. A whole Paradise of (temporal) Felicity, falls short of a Part in
(spiritual) Sanctity; is not this then one of the Depths of God? Though
Constitution and Custom; Delight and Dignity; Gain and Glory; Profit and
Pleasure; Riches and Relations, should be Advocates, and plead for Sin, yet our
Ears should be deaf unto their insinuating Oratory: Is not Holiness then one of
the Depths of God? Can they have Peace with the GRAVE, Vix been moritur, qui
male vixit.
that have not Peace with GOD? Can they die comfortably, who have not lived
christianly? Can they (end) with Safety, who have not (begun) with Sanctity? Is
not this now one the Depths of God? As Christ was made like unto Christians
naturally, so Christians are made like unto Christ graciously. And, as
Christians are (partly) like Christ here, so they shall be (perfectly) like him
hereafter: Is not Sanctification now one of the Depths of God? Thus (1 Jo.
3.2.) When he shall appear we shall be like him: when he. When Christ. Shall
appear: Shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation, we shall be
like him. More like him in a state of GLORY, than we can be like him in a state
of GRACE. We shall be like him: Not in Nature, but in Quality; so Tirinus. We
shall be like him, not only in Sanctity, but also in Eternity, and Felicity; so
Grotius. Et Aeternitate, et Beatitudine.
We shall be like him in eternal Glory, of Soul, and Body; so Gomarus. In
Immortality, and Splendour. For we shall see him as he is. The Beatifical Vision
is seeing as HE is; or seeing FACE to FACE; which Vision will be without
Amission, or Intermission. This seeing him as he is, is opposed to seeing him
in a Glass. We now see him in a glass; darkly see him. We now see him in
Ordinances and Duties; in his Word, and in his Works: But when we shall see him
( as he is) there will be no need of these Glasses; these Glasses (which now
reflect him) will be out of Use then. This ( as he is) is opposed to ( what he
was) while he was here in the Form of a Servant. Here is a (real) but not a
(full) seeing of God, and Christ. Our Sight of these (here) is by FAITH. Thus (2
Cor. 5.7.) We walk by faith, not by sight. We neither walk by Sight as carnal
Men do, who have no Faith; nor do we walk by Sight as glorified Saints do, who
are above Faith: But we walk by Faith; which though it be opposed, both to the
Sight of Nature here below, and to the Sight of Glory that is above; yet that
also is a Sight, and by that we see God and Christ.

Providence. I saw the Lord, says Isaiah. Mine eyes see thee, says Job. I
have seen God face to face, (Genesis 32.30) says Jacob.

Promises. Promises are great things, and good things: They are the Stock of
the Church, and the Patrimony of Believers. Now these Promises are Glasses,
wherein God and Christ are seen. Thus (John 8.56.) Your Father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad, He saw it in the Promise, and there
God is to be seen.

Ordinances. There are various Ordinances; there is Praying and Preaching;
there is Reading and Meditating etc, and in all these God, and Christ, may be
seen. They, who (here) turn their Backs upon the Ordinances of God, may
(hereafter) turn their Backs upon the GOD of ORDINANCES. Some Scholars can as
well tell how to be without Bread, as to be without a Book-David, was a great
Lover of Ordinances, and he knew not how to be without them. Thus (Psa. 27.4)
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life; to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. But Ainsworth thus; One thing I have asked
of Jehovah, the same will I request; that I may fit in the house of Jehovah all
the days of my life, to view the pleasantness of Jehovah, and to enquire in his
Palace. The Hebrew thus: Achat sha-alti me et Jehovah, otah abakkesh, shibti be
beth -- Jehovah, col jeme chajai; lachazot benognam Jehovah, ulebakker be
hechalo. Which may thus be englished: One I have sought from Jehovah, the self
same thing I will seek; that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of
my life; to view the pleasantness of Jehovah, and to enquire in his temple. One
Thing, or Petition, is understood. Ponitur pro Primo seu Primario.
One thing (amongst) many things; one thing (before) many things; one thing
(above) many things; one thing above (all) things, I have sought from Jehovah;
the self same thing will I seek: This one thing is put for the (FIRST) or the
(CHIEF) thing.

(One) thing?

One) thing, is branched into ( Three) things; Communion; Vision; Inquisition.

Communion. That I may dwell. Not only be, but also dwell. But where? In the
house of Jehovah. That I may dwell in the Church of Jehovah; that I may have
Communion with Jehovah; with all also interessed (in) Jehovah, and influenced
(by) Jehovah. But for what time would David dwell in the House of JEHOVAH? For a
long time; for all his time; until his Time went into Eternity. All the days of
my life. Not only some; or many; or most; but all. Here he would live, and here
he would die. And, as he desired here to dwell, so he delighted to dwell here.

Vision. That I may see: That I may contemplate; (...)
so the Septuagint. But what would he see? The Amaenity (or Pleasantness) of
Jehovah; Pool, in Loc.
so Muis. The Sweetness and Pleasantness of Jehovah; so the Arabic. Syriack,
and Chaldee. The Delectatiou of the Lord; so the Seventy. (...)
That I may see the Beauty of Jehovah. i. e. the Face of Jehovah; for Beauty
sits in the Face, and the Face is the Seat of Beauty.

Inquisition. And to enquire in his temple. In his Tabernacle, for the TEMPLE
was not yet built; so Muis and Piscator. The Servants of God, seek to know the
Will of God, in the House of God. Pardon this Digression, and suffer this
Assertion, that Sanctification is one of the Depths of God.

Though every LIKE is not the same; Nullum Simile est Idem.
the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father; yet like begets like,
and the Son is like the Father. ADAM (Genesis 5.3.) begat a son in his own
likeness etc. Not having only the same specifical Nature (with) his Father; and
personal Figure (of) his Father; but also begat a Son that was a SINNER as
himself was. The Saints (even in this life) are sanctified in every part,
Similium similia sunt Consequentia.
though they are sanctified but in part: Is not Sanctification then one of the
Depths of God? The Will of God, (1 These. 4.3.) and our Sanctification, they are
contiguous; Yea, they are continuous; they are not incompatible, but they are
inseparable: Is not Sanctification then one of the Depths of God? Does not Fame
follow Virtue closer than the Shadow does the Body? Commune Bonum.
Is not a sanctified person a common good? Is not true Piety as a thousand
Eschuteheons in it self? what is (suture) Happiness but the ELIXIR of (present)
Holiness? Certainly then it is one of the Depths of God. Two things may plead
Antiquity; the one is Verity, the other is Sanctity. I dare write it as a most
serious Sentiment, that Sanctification is not a Web woven out of thine own
Bowels; that the whole Frame depends upon God, as the Stream depends upon the
Fountain; and as the Beam depends upon the Sun; is it not then one of the
Depths of God? We want a thousand times more Grace than we have; Pejor esse
nolo; Meliorem esse non cupio.
and therefore should be unlike that MONK, who said, I am unwilling to be
worse, but I desire not to be better. The Precept of God, and the Practice of
Man, must not be Two, but One. It is the Conception, and Deception of the
World, that Greatness and Goodness are inconsistent; whereas in some (though
but a very few) they have a happy, and a comely Conjunction: Is not
Sanctification then one of the Depths of God?

SANCTIFICATION comes to the Test;
And Depth of God it passes with the rest.
For Name, and Nature changed now to be;
I Will act a MOSES this great Sight to see.
A Saul, is Paul; a Persecutor, Preacher:
A Sinner is a Saint; a Theif, a Teacher.
Felicity, the Subject of the Mind,
On SANCTIMONY I intailed find.
Oh precious Soul! in running of the Race,
I Glory see intailed is on Grace.
Still (SEEING) let me see that Man's Salvation.
Intailed is on Gods SANCTIFICATION.
Ah trembling Soul! espouse no Towering Thought;
For this I find, when I have (truly) sought,
That SANCTITY cannot as Web be wrought
From Bowels of our own; and forth be brought.
As on the Fountain does depend the Stream;
And on the Sun depends every Beam:
So Sanctity upon a GOD depends;
And (greatly) this unto his GLORY tends.
Is Holiness the Work, and also Will.
Of ELOHIM? Oh then this Vessel fill
With Grace, that then may into Glory go,
When Time into Eterinty does so!
Oh Holy One! Shall I hereafter be
(When thou appearest) made like unto Thee?
Oh what a SIGHT will this be unto Me!
Not (as thou WAST, but as thou ART) to see.
Oh Holiest! am not I one of Thine?
Be changing (now) this sinful Soul of Mine
From Grace to Grace; for this is called GLORY.
It Is written thus within the sacred STORY.
Union, that is one of the Depths of God. It is not Christ (without) us, but
Christ (within) us, that is the Hope of Glory; is not Union then one of the
Depths of God? All the spiritual, signal, silencing, sealing Looks, and Loves
of Christ to the Christian, run in the Channel of UNION; is not this then one
of the Depths of God? Though Communion with Christ may be lessened, yet Union
with him can never be dissolved; is not this then one of the Depths of God?
What can do the Soul good, unless there be Union with Christ the Head? If Union
with Christ, and Satisfaction from Christ, unto infinite Ire and Justice, by
his active and passive Obedience, be the only two PILLARS, that must support an
(immortal) Soul, leaving a (mortal) Body, certainly then the one (as well as the
other) is one of the Depths of God. There is a six fold Union.

Oneness. The Father and the Son are (essentially) One. Thus (John 10.30.) (...)
I, and my Father are one. I and (the) Father are one; so the Greek Text. Not
only One (as the Arrians have expounded it) in Consent, and Concord; so
Maldonat. They are One in Nature; so Piscator. They are One in Power, etc; so
Brugensis. The Father and the Son are One in Consent and Will; in Essence; in
Power and Dominion. The Son was coequal, co-essential coeternal, and
con-substantial with the Father. Thus (Phi. 2.6.) Who being in the form of God:
There is not a little Contestation with Arrians and Socinians (who deny the
Deity and Eternity of Christ) about the true meaning of these words, who being
in the form of God. (...)
The word here (FORM) to me signifies an essential, and substantial Form. Who
being in the Simi^^^^^ and Image of God; so Tremelius, and the Syriack. Talis,
qualis est Deus.
Who being such as God; so Beza. Christ, is the Likeness, or Image of God the
Father; not accidental, for in God there are no ACCIDENTS; but subanstial, and
essential; so Zanchy. But what follows? Thought it not robbery to be equal with
God. There is also a great Controversy concerning these words. He thought it
not robbery; Not Pillage, and Ravine; so Erasmus. (...)
'To be equal with God. Christ (though in the Form of God) made it not a matter
of Triumph, and Ostentation, to be equal with God. Christ (says Grotius) has
not boasted of his power. It Is a mighty Text and Truth, that the Son, and the
Father are One: For this word (One) confutes Arrius, who denied Christ's eternal
Divinity: And this word (ARE) confutes Sabellus, who denied a Distinction in
the Deity.

Oneness. The two Natures in Christ (Divine and Humane) make one Person and
Passover; one Surety and Savior; one Minister and Mediator: Thus (1 Timothy 2.5.)
For there is one God: Not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles. And one
Mediator between God and Man: One MIDLER of God and Men; (...)
so the Greek. The Man Christ Jesus. He does not add Man, to exclude the Divine
Nature from the Mediatorship, but (emphatically) to demonstrate that Nature, in
which he gave himself a Ransom for us, of which he speaks in the next words.
Thus (v. 6.) Who gave himself a ransom for all. For though the Ransom was
paid by him who is God, or had a Divine Nature, yet (says Caryl) it was paid
in the Manhood, or Humane Nature only. The Humane Nature was the Matter of our
Ransom, but the Divine Nature, yet (says Caryl) it was paid in the Manhood,
or Humane Nature only. The Humane Nature was the Matter of our Ransom, but the
Divine Nature gave Worth and Weight to it; gave Value and Validity to it.

Oneness. Thus (Genesis 7.1, 2, 3.) Noah, and all his House, were to go into the
Ark, and be One there. He was to take also of clean Beasts by Sevens, the Male
and the Female: Of Beasts not clean by Two's, the Male and the Female. Of Fowls
also he was to take by Sevens, the Male and the Female. These, were to be taken
into the Ark, and to be One there.

is a (Metaphorical) One-ness. This is three fold.

Artificial. There is an (artificial) Oneness. The Foundation and the Fabric
are (artificially) One. There is the Foundation, and the Superstructure: The
Superstructure consists of many Lofts, and Stories, but the Stress of all is
laid upon the Foundation; for the Foundation and the Fabric are One;
artificially one. Thus (Zach. 4.9.) The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the
foundation of this house; his hands also shall finish it. This is an EMBLEM of
the UNION between Christ and the Church. As He is the Foundation, (1 Cor.
3.11.) So She is the Fabric, (Heb. 1.6.)

Natural. There is a (natural) Oneness. The Vine, and the Branches are
(naturally) One. Thus (John 15.4.) The branch cannot bear fruit of it self
except it abide in the vine. This is an Hieroglyphick of the UNION that is
between Christ and Christians: As He is the Vine, so They are the Branches,
(John 15.5.)

Moral. There is a (moral) Oneness. The Husband and the Wife are (morally) One.
Thus (Mat. 19.5, 6.) For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and
cleave unto his Wife: The word here (CLEAVE) in the Greek imports to be glued
unto: (...)
And shall be glued unto his Wife: Hereby is intimated the straight knot which
is between Man and Wife, as if they were glued together; like two Boards joined
together with Glue, which are as firm and close, as if they were but one Piece.
Unto his Wife, (not WIVES.) This gives Check to Folygamy. And they twain: Not
more. Shall be one flesh. That God, who (in the Creation) made Two of One, did
(by Marriage) make One of Two. This also shadows out the UNION between Christ
and the Church: As He is the Husband, (Isa. 54.5.) So She is the Wife, (Rev.
21.9.) Is not Union now one of the Depths of God?

Oneness. There is an Oneness between the Head and the Body, which is literal,
physical, or natural. The Head and the Body are One, and make (one) Man. Thus
(1 Cor. 12.21.) The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the
head to the feet, I have no need of you. This is truth in the very Letter; and
we are not to understand here by Head and Foot (as the Papists do) the POPE and
the CHURCH: Pap^m and Ecclesiam.
But by (Head) understand a Cedar in Lebanon; and by the (Foot) understand a
Shrub in the Valley. As the little Finger in the material Body, is of Use to
that Body; so the lowest, the least, the last Member in the mystical Body is
useful to that Body. Does this not also shadow out the UNION which is between
Christ and the Church? For, as He is the Head, so She is the Body, (Ephesians. 1.22,
23.) Thus, as the aptest Similitudes, Foundation and Fabick, Vine and Branches,
Head and Body; so the nearest and dearest Relations, as Master and Servant,
Father and Son, Husband and Wife, are improved by the Spirit as Emblems, to
shadow out the noble UNION, and Conjunction, that is between Christ, and those
that are (actually) His: Is not this then one of the Depths of God?

Oneness. There is an Oneness that is spiritual, metaphysical, or supernatural.
This is two fold: An Oneness between Christians; an Oneness also between Christ
and Christians.

Christians. It Is pity that Sin should make Two, whom Grace has made One; that
Satan should make Two, whom God has made One; that Antichrist should make Two,
whom Christ has made One. Eadem velle, et nolle, est firma Amicitia.
Friends (acted by the same Principles) will, and nil, the same things. Though
we must not unite with (any) in their Iniquity, yet we must unite with (all)
that are Christians, in their Christianity. DIVISION, is an ill Companion unto
Glory, Perpetuity, and Safety. Did not Dissension in two Brothers make a Gapp
to the Turks? Did not Dissension of Christians lose Constantinople? In the
material and natural Body, there is a constant Amity and Unity, because one
Spirit runs thorough all: Thus should it be in the Metaphorical, and Mystical:
For (1 Cor. 12.13.) By one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we
be Jews or Greeks; bond, or free etc. I am of this Opinion (and I care not who
knows it) that SAINTSHIP must not be confined within one Party. The new
Creature is found in Circumcision, and in Uncircumcision: Yea, as (eminent) in
the one, as in the other. Were it not the highest Sacrilege in the World to
make a Monopoly of Christianity? Let none (for the future) monopolize that
Title of Saints, and godly Party, to any (one) Party. The Devil is pictured
with a cloven FOOT; signifying, that it is his Work to cause, Divide and Impera.
and continue Divisions in the World. Is not this also his Sophistry? Divide
and rage; divide, and rule; divide, and reign; divide, and ruin: Is not Union
now one of the Depths of God? Is not Division an unholy, and unhappy Weed,
which (prodigiously) grows at this Juncture of Time, and under this
Conjuncture of Affairs? It Is too connatural unto the best of Men (who are but
Men at best) rather to take notice of that which will divide, than of that which
will unite, Vis unita fortior.
though (united) FORCE be the most forcible; and though Saints in more agree,
than wherein they can disagree, and be SAINTS; for they agree in Fundamentals,
and only differ in Circumstantials: They differ in Paul, Apollo, and Cephas,
but agree in Christ: Is not Union then among Christians one of the Depths of
God? Thus (Gal. 3.28.) There is neither Jew nor Greek; there is neither bond
nor free; there is neither Male nor Female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
In this pure and precious Text, and Truth, there is an Assertion, and an
Argument.

Jew nor Greek: Is not this written, to check the Pride of the Jews, and to
cherish the Heart of the Gentiles? There is neither Bond nor Free: Is not this
written to take away the carnal Difference between Professors? There is neither
Male nor Female: Is not this also written to take away the base Difference
(between the two Sexes) made by the Turkish-Mahomet, when he says that the
Woman (which is the weaker Vessel) has no Soul to save?

Argument to prevent Distinction upon the Account of Union. No Nation, whether
Jew, or Gentile: No Relation, whether Master, or Servant: No Sex, whether Man,
or Woman, makes a Difference, for ye are all one in Christ. Jesus. It matters
not whether ye be Jews or Gentiles; whether ye be Masters or Servants; whether
ye be Husbands or Wives, if ye be in Christ; for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus: Is not Union now one of the Depths of God?

Christ and Christians. That there is an Oneness between Christ and the Church;
between Christ and the Christian, what is more legible, and yet what is less
intelligible? what is more asserted, and yet what is less understood? Thus (1
Cor. 6.17.) But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit. He that is
joined: He that is glued. (...)
There is not a word (says Leigh) in all the Greek language, that signifies a
nearer Conjunction than this word. To the Lord: To Christ; so Estius: Who is
the Husband of the CHURCH; so Piscator. Is one Spirit. Not essentially, (...)
but accidentally; so Tirinus. Spiritually, and Mystically; so Beza. One in
Love; in Consent of Will; in Grace; and in Glory; so Menochius. Thus Friends
(Acts 4.32.) are called one Soul; because of the Concord of Souls. It Is a
Metonymy, wherein the Cause is named for the Effect. He that is one Spirit, is
spritually, and wholly Christ's, by Union with him: He is not divided between God
and Mammon; Agitur and Regitur.
between the Spirit, and the Flesh; but he is led, and governed, by the
self-same Spirit. So (Ephesians. 2.12, 13.) At that time ye were without Christ --
But now in Christ Jesus etc. To be (in) Christ, is to be (ONE) with Christ; and
to be (one) with Christ, is to be (IN) Christ, for these are convertible Terms.
Christ, and the Soul (out) of Christ are TWO; but Christ, and the Soul (in)
Christ are ONE: Is not Union then with Christ one of the Depths of God? So
(John 14.20.) At that day ye shall know: At that day: But what day was that? In
that day when I shall be raised; so Vatablus. In that day when I shall appear to
you a Victor of Death; so Grotius. In the day of Pentecost espicially; so
Menochius. In a future life; so Maldonatus. Ye shall know. They knew before, but
then they should more gloriously and perfectly know. But what should they then
(so) know? The UNION between the Father and Himself; between Himself also and
his Saints. That I am in my Father, and You in me, and I in you. Is not Union
now one of the Depths of God? So (John 17.21.) That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. So (v.
23.) I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one etc. Here
is an Union between the Father and the Son: Thou in me. As the Father and the
Son are one by Unity of Essence. (Phi. 2.6.) And by the Deity dwelling in the
Humanity. (Col. 2.9.) So by Cooperation, (John 14.10.) Here is also an Union
between the Son and the Saints: I in them. And here is an Union between the
Saints: That they may be made perfect in one. Is not Union now one of the
Depths of God? So (v, 26. -- And I in them. Dwelling in them. Now Christ
dwells in a Christian

Communication of Nature. Thus (Heb. 2.11.) He who sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified, are all of one: Christ and Christians are of the same Family,
and have the same Father. For which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren. Though CHRIST did not assume the Person of Abraham, or any other
Saint, yet he did assume the Nature of Abraham, and of every other Saint. So
(Ephesians. 5, 30.) We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. We
all: All who are Believers of the right Stock, and Stamp. Are members of his
body: ESTIUS.
Mystical, which is his Church. Of his flesh, and of his bones. We are
Participants of the same humane Nature with Himself.

Inhabitation of the Spirit. Thus (Romans 8.10.) If Christ be in you etc. Thus he
is by the Spirit. Be in you; as in his Temple, and by his SPIRIT; which (says
Grotius) is called by Tertullian the VICAR of Christ. So (v. 11,) -- By his
Spirit that dwells in you.

Operation of Faith. Thus (Gal. 3.26.) For ye are all (Jews and Gentiles) the
children of God thorough says in Christ Jesus. So (Ephesians. 3.17.) That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith etc.

Operation of Love. Thus (1 Jo. 4.16.) God is Love: Not only lovely, and
loving, but also LOVE: He is so properly, and essentially; so Estius. He is so
causally; so Menochius. But what follows? And he that dwells in love,
dwelieth in God, and God in him. As the Church is one with the Son by Faith, so
she is one with the Father by Love: Is not Union now one of the Depths of God?

Here UNION in Poem now does enter:
Communion (herein) does also Center.
It Is most prudential (now) to look about us:
A CHRIST within us, not a Christ without us,
The Scripture says the Hope of Glory is:
And (Ever) will be unto each of HIS.
Communion with Christ may lessened be;
But UNION shall none dissolved see,
Who (once) are One, for they are (ever) so:
And certainly shall unto Heaven go.
Similitutes, that are adapted best;
As Fabric and Foundation (with the rest)
But HIEROGLYPHICS are: Yea, those Relations,
Who nearest are, and dearest in their Stations,
But EMBLEMS are (let no man henceforth doubt)
This Union with Christ to shadow out.
Lord Jesus Christ, this UNION with Thee,
The CHANNEL is; wherein does run to Me
Thy (signal) Favors: All thy Looks are Loves,
As unto Me, so unto all thy Doves.
Communion that is one of the Depths of God. When Galeatius (that noble
Marquess) was presented with (golden) Temptations, he replied, Let their Money
perish with them, that account all the Gold in the World worth one days
Communion with Jesus Christ in the Spirit: Is not Communion then one of the
Depths of God? If Communion with a Saint be a HEAVEN on EARTH, what is
Communion with a Savior then? With a Surety then? With a Sovereign then?
Certainly this is one of the Depths of God. A Friend to the Body, may prove a
Favor to the Soul: Civil Acquantance, may be of spiritual Advantage; and from
Communion with the Saint, some come to have Communion with the Sanctifier. God
brings Naomi and Ruth acquainted, and Naomi was Naomi to Ruth; beautiful;
lovely; or greatly moving as the word fignifieth. That there is such a thing as
Communion with the Father, and the Son, is evidently evident; but this is far
better experienced, than it can be expressed: Is not this then one of the
Depths of God? Thus (1 Jo. 3.3.) Our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ. Our Society, Communication, or Communion. Communion with
Christ is a COMMUNICATION of Loves from Christ to the Soul: (...)
Thus (John 14.21.) I will love him, and will manifest myself to him: And
Reciprocation of Loves from the Soul to Christ. Thus (Cant. 7.12.) There will I
give thee my Loves. Is not this now one of the Depths of God? The infinite
Disparity that is between GOD and MAN, made the great Philosopher conclude,
that there could be no Friendship between them. Communion with God, is more in
Conversation (with) God, then in Contemplation (upon) God; is not this then one
of the Depths of God? Thus (1 Jo. 1.6) If we say, that we have Fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. So (1 Jo. 2.6.) He
that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even as he walked. If
the Pythagoreans imitate Pythagoras; if the Stoics imitate Zeno; if the
Academicks imitate Socrates; how much more should the Christian imitate Christ?
That God might have Communion with U.S, Christ was made Partaker of the
(humane) Nature: Thus (Heb. 2.14.) For as much then as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same etc. The
Children: The Apostles and Disciples; so Tena. The Sons of God, or Godly; so
Grotius. Were pertakers of flesh and blood; they continue in flesh and blood;
so Beza. They are men mortal and miserable; so Estius. Himself also took part
of the same etc. In kind; so Camerarius. Without Sin; so Gerhard. That we might
have Communion with GOD, we are partakers of the (divine) Nature. Thus (2 Pet.
1.4.) Whereby are given unto us exceeding great, and precious promises; that
thereby we might be partakers of the divine nature etc. Not of the Substance of
the DEITY, as the Familists say. It Is a Fellowship with God in his Sanctity;
the Purity that is eminently, and infinitely in Him, is formally in His. It Is a
Fellowship also with God in his Felicity; i. e. in the beatificial Vision, and
Brightness of Glory: Is not Communion now one of the Depths of God? For a Soul
to lie (as it were) in the Bosom of God, and, to live (as it were) in the
Embracement of God, is not this one of the Depths of God? For a Soul to see the
Face of God, and be indulged the charming and ravishing Shines and Smiles of
that Face, is not this one of the Depths of God? This Communion with God and
Christ, is thorough the Spirit. Thus (2 Cor. 13.14.) The grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the holy Spirit, be
with you all. Amen.

Is Ish without his Pangs, and Pannick Fears?
COMMUNION (a Depth of God) appears.
If this be false, thy Pen may this correct;
Of Union Communion's an Effect.
Experienced I COMMUNION see,
Far better is, than can expressed be.
That God may have Communion with His,
Of humane Nature CHRIST Partaker is:
That We may have Communion with God;
And Glory in the burning of the Rod:
Of that Nature, which is divine do We Participate: Herein let all, Agree.
Oh blessed BRNCH! in Thee was never Leaven:
Is Fellowship with Thine on Earth a Heaven?
What then is Fellowship with THEE above?
Where Faith and Hope survived are by Love.
Convoy of Angels, that is one of the Depths of God. As Pharaoh, David etc, had,
so Men (in Capital Letters) now have their Guards: They think themselves safe
enough with these, though they be mercenary, and mortal men; howsafe then are
they who have a Convoy of Angels, which is one of the Depths of God? Psalm.
91.11.
For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
For his Angels will he command for thee, to keep in all thy ways; so Ainsworth.
So the SEPTUAGINT. (...)
Ki maleachaiv jetzavveh -- lach etc. For his Angels will he command to thee
etc. So the Hebrew. Though the Power of God be sufficient to govern us, yet he
appoints his Angels to watch over us, as Soldiers encamped about us. These
words were applied to CHRIST when he tempted him (Mat. 4.6.) And no wonder;
for, if they belong to all the faithful in general (as Interpreters agree) much
more (eminently) unto the Head, and Patron of Believers; who is the Author and
Consummator of their Faith, (Heb. 12.2.) God is a Preserver of Men (mediately)
by Instuments: He preserves Man by Man; by the Beasts of the Earth, and Fowls
of the Air; but (chiefly) he preserves Men by ANGELS. For his Angels shall he
command to thee. Is not a Convoy of Angels now one of the Depths of God? To
keep thee in all thy ways. But (thy) ways must be (his) ways; those ways which
God has given thee to walk in. In all thy Actions; fo Mariana. In thy Affairs
praescribed thee of God; so Gejerus. In the ways of the LORD; so Munsterus.
This Clause the Devil left out when he laid Seige to the Mediator of the
Promise. Is not this Convoy now one of the Depths of God? No Prince in the
world (who is not a Saint) has such a Guard at (home) nor such a Lifeguard
when he goes (abroad) as the meanest Saint has: Is not a Convoy of Angels then
one of the Depths of God? So (Heb. 1.14.) Are they not all ministering Spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? He does not so
much ask as affirm; for the Hebrews improve an Interrogation for the greater
Confirmation of a thing. Are not Angels the Ambassadors and Heralds of
Omnipotency? Do not these carry COMFORT from his Throne to his Footstool? from
Heaven to Earth? Certainly then their Convoy is one of the Depths of God? The
best part of Man (even his SOUL) is lower than Angels: An Angel is a (persect)
Soul; and a Soul but an (imperfect) Angel: Is not their Convoy now one of the
Depths of God? The Schoolmen have a Distinstion between Angels; calling some
assisting, which are always before God: Others ministering, which are commanded
up and down by God etc. But, it is the greatest Folly in the World to be Wise
above what is written. If the Nature of Man be nothing but Sin, Quod supra Nos,
Nihil ad Nos.
and Angels have not any sin at all in their Natures, is not their CONVOY then
one of the Depths of God? These Angels are very great, and so (consequentially)
is their Convoy; but there is an Angel (ineffably) greater, and so must his
Convoy be. Thus (Isa. 63.9.) And the Angel of his presence saved them. Some
Jewish Doctors understand here Michael, the tutelary Angel (as they account
him) of their Nation. Others, Mitraton, an Harbinger, or Messenger etc. But is
not this CHRIST, of whom God speak unto Moses? (Exo. 23.21, 23.) called
Jehovah, (Exo. 13.21.) And an Angel, (Exo. 33.2.) But what of this Angel of
Angels? He is a Convoy unto all ransomed, and rescued by him. Is not the Convoy
of a Christ now one of the Depths of God? Thus (Isa. 27.2, 3.) In that day: At
that time, when Caligula's shall be destroyed; when the CHURCH shall be pruned,
and purged by Passion. Sing ye unto her a Vineyard of red wine: May not this be
the Church (the Vineyard of God) degenerated from her (native) Excellency, and
restored to her (primitive) Generosity and Glory? Any Jehovah.
I Jehovah do keep it: So the Hebrew: That must needs be kept, which Jehovah
keeps; but Christ keeps the Church. I will water it every moment: That it may
fertile be, it shall be very often under divine Dews, and Drops. Lest any hurt
it, I will keep it Night and Day. Night and Day comprehend all time: To be
(therefore) kept Night and Day, is to be kept constantly; to be kept
continually; to be kept without intermission: Is not the Convoy of a Christ now
one of the Depths of God? So (Zach. 2.5.) And I will be unto her, says the
Lord, a wall of fire in a Compass, or Circuit; and unto Glory will I be in the
midst of her. So the Seventy. Unto her: Unto Jerusalem. But what will this
CHRIST (who is the Lord of Lords) be unto Jerusalem? A Wall of Fire: The City
shall be safe, though it may not have Walls; so Calvin. A Wall of Fire: Not of
Mud, though that may be strong; nor of Brick, though that may be stronger; nor
of Stone, though that may be strongest; but of Fire. As if God had said, If you
want a Wall, I will be your Wall; my immediate Providence shall be your Defense,
rather then you should not be defended: Is not the Convoy of Christ now one of
the Depths of God? The ROMANS (in their Wars) used to call out the Tutelar-Gods
of those Cities they beseiged etc; as beleiving them a stronger Defense to
those Places, than Walls, or Forts. What may be said of a Christ then, who has
promised to be a Wall of Fire? Who can batter down a Fire, that is it is own
Fuel? Or, who can set up a Ladder to scale the Flames? Is not the Convoy of
Christ then one of the Depths of God? And (the) Glory; or (unto) Glory; or (of)
Glory, in the midst of her. She shall not only be safe, and secure, though
without Walls of Stone, and Brass; though without Towers and Fortifications;
though without Ditches and Trenches; but I will also be the Glory in the midst
of HER. They shall sing Praises and Thanks to Me; so Grotius. There will I be
glorified; so Menochius. The solid Felicity of Jerusalem (within and without)
shall be in me alone, and in my grace; so Calvinus. Is not the Convoy of Christ
now one of the Depths of God? Once more, (Psa. 125.2.) As the mountains are
round about Jerusalem (to fortify and defend that) so Jehovah is round about
his People (to fortify and defend them) from henceforth, even for ever. Is not
the Convoy of JEHOVAH now one of the Depths of God? The Trojans had their
Palladium; so long as That was safe, They were safe. The Romans had their
Ancile, (or Buckler;) so long as that was kept, they were secure. The Isralites
had their Ark; so long as that was sure, there was a Defense upon mount Sion.
If CHRIST be thine; then thou have a far better, and a far greater Guard: Is
not this then one of the Depths of God?

To dissipate the direful Pangs of Fear,
A Depth of God a CONVOY does appear.
The (meanest) Saint is guarded far above
The (might) Prince, that is not a Valley-Dove:
Where is the Man who lives without Complaints?
The Angels are a CONVOY to the Saints.
They Keepers are of These in all their Ways;
And will be Keepers of Them all their Days:
But These must keep the Ways of GOD; and so
Must not aside to right, or left Hand go.
The ANGELS are Ambassadors to bring
The (timely) Tidings of the greatest KING.
These Solace (swiftly) carry from the Throne
Unto the Footstool, when it is most alone.
From Heaven These do carry timed JOY,
Unto the Earth, when this is like a TROY.
The noblest part of Man is called Soul;
Lower than Angels it is without Control.
An ANGEL is a perfect Soul; but then
Imperfect Angels are the SOULS of Men.
Angels commanded are by Heavens Sage,
A CONVOY unto Saints in every Age.
One (greater than all These) is now at hand;
At Sea a Convoy, and a Guard at Land.
There is the present, and the future Tense;
Oh HEAD of SAINTS! be thus to me Defense.
But who is this? It Is He that bears Sway:
Oh HEAD of ANGELS! keep me Night and Day.
Lord! round about me be a Wall of Fire,
And qualify me for the Papal-Ire.
Conduct of God, that is one of the Depths of God. For a Person to walk after
the Spirit, and not after the Flesh; to walk (in) the Flesh, and not war
(after) the Flesh, is not this one of the Depths of God? Thus (2 Cor. 10.3) For
walking in the flesh: (...)
So the Greek. Although we may be Men; so Erasmus. Like to the rest of Men; so
Tirinus. As to Infirmimities; so Sclaterus. And Afflictions; so Vorstius. The
Building of the Body; so Menochius. Or, the Nature of the Flesh. Though living
in the Flesh. We do not war after the flesh. We do not practice a carnal
Warfare; so Estius. We do not follow carnal Affections; so Tirinus. We live not
after the manner of carnal, and political Men; so Menochius. Is nor the Conduct
of the Spirit now one of the Depths of God? For a Person to be indulged the
CONDUCT of the Spirit; to live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, is not
this one of the Depths of God? Thus (Gal. 5.25.) If we live in the Spirit, let
us also walk in the Spirit. Where there is Life, there will be Motion. What the
Soul is to the Body, that the Spirit is to the Soul. If there be Life (from)
the Spirit, there is also a Life (after) the Spirit. For a Person to be led by
the Spirit (in) the way to Heaven, until he be led (into) Heaven, is not this
one of the Depths of God? That there is the Conduct of the Spirit is evident.
Thus (Romans 8.14.) As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.
It is not said ruled, but led. When one is ruled by another, Plus est Agi, quam
Regi.
he acts Him-self, and his Action is Visible; but when he is led by another,
though he may act Himself, yet the Action of the Other is more Visible than his
Own. The SPIRIT leads according to the WORD. A Child of God has the Word
(without) and the Spirit (within) for a Guide; is not the Conduct of these then
one of the Depths of God? So (Gal. 5.18.) If ye be led by the Spirit, then are
ye not under the law. Not under a law of condemnation; for there is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus; who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. Romans 8.1. But, as there is the Conduct of the Spirit, so
of the FATHER. Thus (Ps. 27.11.) Teach me thy way, Jehovab, and lead me in a
path of plainess, be-, cause of those which observe me. There is also the
Conduct of the SON. Thus (John 10.3.) He calls his own sheep by name, and
leads them out. Into Pastures; In Pasiua.
so Grotius. As Christ is the Leader of His, so he leads these from Earth to
Heaven; from a state militant to a state triumphant; thorough a State of GRACE,
to a State of GLORy. Thus (Ps. 73.24.) Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel,
and afterward receive me to Glory. Is not the Conduct of the Father now, and of
the Son, thorough the Spirit, one of the Depths of God? Those (actually)
Christ's, are under a constant, and continual Conduct. The Prophet having
eligantly, and eloquently expressed a counterfeit, and a true Fast; registers,
and transmits to Posterity this pure, and precious Promise, (Isa. 58.11.)
Jehovab shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in droughts, and
make fat thy bones: Fear not leaness, and wasting of thy body with fasting;
thou shall not be a SKELETON, and look like an Anatomy; for God will make fat
thy bones; he will comfort thee, and fill thee with joy both of Soul and Body.
Thou shall not pine by spiritual Fasting, for I will make fat thy bones. But
what follows? And thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
water, whose waters fail not. Whose waters lie not; or deceive not; so the
Margent. Thus, the Lord Jesus Christ is a continual LEADER. Did he lead
yesterday? he will lead to day* Does he lead to day? he will lead for ever; for
yesterday, to day, and for ever, he is the same. There are many Persons who
imbitter their Sweets; who lay Load upon themselves, and add to their own
Burdens; who dig their own Graves by anticipating PROVIDENCE, and not
reflecting that sacred, and silencing TRUTH, (Mat. 6.34.) -- Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof. That day will have its care when it comes, and this
day has enough of it self now it is come. The evil thereof. The Vexation
thereof; so Scultetus. The Affliction thereof; so Erasmus. (...)
The Trouble thereof; so Beza. Let the Vexation in that very hour suffice; so
Drusius. The Trouble of the day it self will be enough, we need not add to it.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof: The evil of Crime, Malum Culpae,
et Penae.
and of Correction; The evil of Sin, and of Suffering: Ah! says one, what shall
I do when Poverty and Prison come? Ah! says another, what shall I do when the
Plague and the Sword come? Ah! says a third, what shall I do when the Fire and
the Famine come? Ah! says a fourth, what shall I do when the RACK and the STAKE
come? But Soul, do not anticipate Providence, nor so reflect Futurity, as to
omit, or intermit present Duty. Thou have Grace little enough for the
Corruption, and Temptation of the present day. Besides, these things may not
come while thou art upon the Stage; but if a severe Storm, and stupendous
Shower should come, he that leads now, can lead then into Chambers of Serenity,
and Security. Or, if he prepares this POTION for thee, he can also prepare Thee
for this Potion. If he delivers thee not (from) it, he can deliver thee (in)
it: Is not the Conduct now of the Father, Son and Spirit; or of the Father and
Son (thorough the Spirit) one of the Depths of God?

The CONDUCT of the Spirit unto me
A Depth of God appears now to be.
This leads both the Aged and the Youth,
As into one, so into every TRUTH.
The Father too of all (sincerely) His,
A grac'ous and a gentle LEADER is.
It Is He that leads in ways of Right'ous ness
His Isra'lites; the greater, and the less.
Christ Jesus too I do a Leader find:
And (as to CONDUCT) always in a Mind.
It Is He that did (alone) the Winepress tread:
It Is He that does from Earth to Heaven lead.
When mort^^ Man is running of his RACE,
It Is He that leads in a way of GRACE.
From a state militant (I clearly see)
Unto a state triumphant leads He.
Oh Crowned CHRIST! Thou dwell now above;
And yet thy BANNER over thine is Love:
From Earth be leading unto Heaven ME,
For then there shall no longer Leaven be.
Concurrence, that is one of the Depths of God. A Concurrence of all things for
Good, is one of the Depths of God. For the Winds to be lofty, and the Waves to
be loud; for the Winds to be prodigious, and the Waves to be impetuous; for the
Winds to rise, and the Waves to roar; and yet all things to work together for
Good, to the Soul graciously interessed (in) Christ, and graciously influenced
(by) Christ; it not this one of the Depths of God? Is not Evil as well as GOOD,
to be received at the hand of God? Thus (Job 2.10.) Shall we receive good at the
hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? The Emphasis of the words (says
Caryl) carries it thus: Shall we receive Good (with Hand, or Heart) at the hand
of God, and shall we not (in the same manner) receive Evil? In the fame manner
we receive Good from the hand of God, in the same we ought to receive Evil.
Good and Evil, are to be alike received, and entertained, from the hand of GOD.
As we must receive Good, so we must receive Evil cheerfully; gratefully;
reverentially: We must (as it were) kiss the Hand, and take the One, as well as
the Other. By (Good) here, we may understand the good things of this life; and
by (Evil) here, the bad things of this life. We are not by (Evil) here, to
understand the Evil of SIN; for, the Sun shall sooner send forth a Cloud, than
God send forth any EVIL, properly taken: So that by (Evil) here, we are to
understand the Evil of Suffering, and not of Sin. Now external Evil, as well as
external Good, shall be in a happy Concurrence for Good, to the Lovers of God;
is not this then one of the Depths of God? As Summer, so Winter; and as fair,
so foul Weather, shall (happily) concur for Good, to the Soul given unto Christ,
and unto whom Christ is given; is not this then one of the Depths of God? For
JOB to lose All, and yet to be no looser at all, is not this one of the Depths
of God? Thus (Job 42.10.) The Lord gave him twice as much as he had before.
Though this will not hold as to Person, for his Children were the same as to
Number; yet this will hold as to Possession, or his personal estate, for that
(at lest) was doubled. Confideratis, Considerandis.
Now (these things considered, and reflected) is not Concurrence one of the
Depths of God? If Adversity as well as Prosperity, and Penury as well as Plenty,
shall be in a happy Tendency, and Concurrency for Good, to the Soul eternally
chosen, and effectually called, is not this then one of the Depths of God?
External CROSSES, as well as external COMFORTS, shall (happily) concur for Good
unto the People of God; is not this then one of the Depths of God? For Joseph
to be in the Jail, and Jeremiah in the Dungeon; for Daniel to be in the Den,
and the three Children in the Furnace; and for all this to work together for
Good unto all THESE; is not this one of the Depths of God? For the Israel of
God to have no Prospect of Deliverance, but of Destruction, without a Miracle
wrought by the God of Israel; and for this direful Dispensation to work for
Good; is not this one of the DEPTHS of GOD? For Blasting and Banishment; for
Fire and Famine; for Impoverishment and Imprisonment; for Pestilence and
Penury, to be all (seemingly) working for Evil; and yet all (really) working
for Good, is not this one of the Depths of God? Thus (Romans 8. 28.) And we know:
We assuredly, certainly, and experimentally know: Either from the Word of God;
or the History of the Saints; or from a (filial) Confidence; so Paraeus. But
what follows? That all things shall work together for good: Things prosperons,
and adverse; Tam prospera, Quam adversa.
so Estius. All things: Not only (this) thing, or (that) thing, and the (other)
thing, but also (ALL) things. These things shall cooperate for Good. But to
whom? To them that love God: From the whole HEART; so Tirinus. To them that are
the called according to his purpose. As they are the called according to his
Purpose, so it is his Purpose (which is not a successless Purpose) that there
should be a Concurrence, and Cooperation of all things for their good. Is not
this now one of the Depths of God?

CONCURRENCE is another Depth of God,
That Saints may make a Comfort of a Rod;
As well as make a Comfort of a Staff;
And (dying) in the Face of DEATH may laugh.
Thus may a Rod (under a dismal Shade)
As well as Staff be then a Comfort made.
If CHRIST be mine in Covenant, then I
Shall find all things concurring really
For (saving) GOOD; though (seemingly) for Evil:
And so Defeat is given to the Devil.
Though Joseph Goaled be (a Jedidiah;)
And in the DUNG'ON be a Jeremiah:
Though Daniel too be in the Lions Den;
And in the Furnace be the three Children:
Though ISRAEL no Prospect has of Life,
(No more than Job had Comfort from his Wife:)
Yet all things did concur for all their Good;
And They the Depths of SHADDAI understood.
Lord Jesus Christ, mine Eyes are up to THEE;
Oh let all thins in a Concurrence be
For Good, and not for Evil unto ME!
That I (also) the Depths of God may see.
Faith, that is one of the Depths of God. If Mary (once a Virgin, but not always
so) was more blessed in receiving the (FAITH) than in conceiving the (FLESH) of
Christ, certainly then Faith is one of the Depths of God. If an affectionate
closing (with) and acting (of) any known Sin, be utterly incompatible, and
inconsistent with a living Faith, certainly then this is one of the Depths of
God. If Faith comes with an empty hand, and takes in all from the Plenitude of
Christ, certainly then this is one of the Depths of God. If Faith be the
(first) work; the (great) work; Yea (THE WORK) by way of Emphasis; Eminency;
Excellency: If Faith be the greatest, and most glorious work; the Work of
Works; certainly then this is one of the Depths of God. Thus (John 6.29.) This
is (the) work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. This is (the)
work of God. (...)
This is (the) Command, and Will of God. 1 Jo. 3.23. This is (the) work which
God esteems above all Works. This is (the) Work, and Gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8.
This is (says Beza) the work that pleases God. It Is true; Quod DEO placet.
for (says the Apostle, Heb. 11.6.) without faith it is impossible to please
God: Is not FAITH now one of the Depths of God? If Faith may be shaken (in) the
Soul, but not (out) of the Soul; if Faith goes not into Vision, til Time goes
into Eternity; if Belief lives, til the Beleiver dies; certainly then this is
one of the Depths of God. This should be the DIALECT of a Christian, Vox
Christiani.
under the greatest Despondency of Spirit; Lord! thorough grace I believe; yet
Lord (thorough Grace) I (do) believe; Yet Lord (thorough Grace) I (would)
believe; Yet Lord (thorough Grace) I (will) believe; help Lord (thorough Grace)
my Unbelief. The Father of that Child (who had a dumb Spirit) has set us this
Copy to write after. Thus (Mark. 9.24.) Lord, I believe, help thou mine
unbeleif. Supply with Grace in (thy) Self, the Defect of this Grace in (my)
Soul. Faith and Unbelief, may be in the (same) Soul, at the (same) Time, in the
(same) Action, and upon the (same) Subject. Has not Faith a Chymical-Art? Will
not Chemists extract Gold out of Silver, or Stones? Will not the Act of Faith
(thorough the Object of Faith) draw help out of things cross and contrary? Is
not FAITH an Herculean-Task, and the hardest work in the World? Hic Labor; hoc
Opus.
May Spira (though dead) speak? You call upon me to believe; but I cannot
believe: Oh how fain would I believe, but cannot! It Is easier to keep the moral
Law than to believe; for, it is (natural) to work for Life: but it is
(supernatural) to believe for Life: Is not Faith now one of the Depths of God?
To believe things incredible; to hope things improbable; and to do things
impossible (any other way to be done) they were Luthers WONDERS; and are Mine;
and may be Thine. To believe that another will pay my Debts, and bear my
Charges; that He will be buffeted, that I may be blessed; that He will be hated,
that I may be loved; that He will be crucified, that I may be crowned; that He
will be sacrificed, that I may be saved; is not this one of the Depths of God?
Did Vlpian complain that there were few true Philsophers? We may complain there
are few true Beleivers: Is not Faith then one of the Depths of God? If FAITH be
a Gift of God, effected by the Spirit of God; whereby there is a Reception of
Christ, and a Recumbancy upon Christ (only) for Salvation, certainly then this
is one of the Depths of God. If Faith be the first Hand to receive a Mercy. and
the first Eye to discover a Judgment, is it not then one of the Depths of God?
If this be the true Logic of FAITH, to draw Conclusions of Peace in War; of a
Feast in Famine; of Safety in Danger; of Light in Darkness; of Life in Death;
certainly then this is one of the Depths of God. If Salvation, and all in a
Tendency unto Salvation, be intailed upon Faith in the Person of Christ,
certainly then this is one of the Depths of God. Thus (Acts 16.31.) Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ: There Is the Precept. The Object of Faith, is the Person
of Christ, in his Triple OFFICE, Prophetical, Sacerdotal, and Regal. Lord Jesus
Christ. We may believe the Church, but we must not believe (in) the Church.
It Is Christ (and not the Church) that must be believed (on,) and believed (in;)
for the Church is not God, but the House of God. And thou shall be saved.
There Is the Promise. Is not Faith now one of the DEPTHS of GOD? It is as easy
for the Children of Belial, and of Blood, to pluck the Sun out of the
Firmament, as true Faith out of a true Christian: Is not this then one of the
Depths of God? Tertullian says of the Papists, They believe (without) the
Scriptures, Credunt (sine) Scripturis ut credant (contra) Scripturas.
that they may believe (against) the Scriptures. The Jewel of Faith, can never
be kept in a cracked Cabinet; in a crasie Conscience: Is not this then one of
the Depths of God?

FAITH enters now in Poem; it is the Grace
That leads the Van of others in the Race.
This is a Depth of God, and so will go
With (every) Friend; but not with (any) Foe.
This is the GIFT of God; this is his Will:
And (of all Works) this is the greatest still.
This is the Work of Works; an EMPHASIS
Deservedly is written over This.
The Heart is Cabinet, and Faith a Jewel;
Which (thorough Christ) fails not in any Duel.
'Twas so with PETER, and with many Saints;
That (greatly) Comforts might out-bid Complaints.
FAITH may be shaken (in) the Soul of Man,
But shaken (out) of Souls this never can:
For Faith must live til the Beleiver dies;
When all his TEARS are wiped from his Eyes.
Lord Jesus Christ, thou Author art of Faith,
And Consummator too the Apostle says:
Oh be the ACTOR of it now to Me!
For act it Self it cannot without Thee.
Incarnation of Christ, that is one of the Depths of God. As an Unity in
Trinity, and a Trinity in Unity, is the Mystery of Mysteries; so the
Hypostatical Union (or Union of Natures in Christ) is the Wonder of Wonders: Is
not this then one of the Depths of God? That Christ was GOD, is evident. Thus
(John 1.1.) In the beginning was the word: (...)
In the beginning. Before the beginning of any Creatures. In the beginning of
Time; so Brugensis. In which the World began to be; so Beza. In the beginning,
is Christ; from the beginning are Creatures. That which was in the beginning,
was ever. In the beginning: Not temporal, determinate, or to be measured by
time; but indeterminate, eternal, and before all time. In the beginning was:
(...)
Was the Word: The Word; the Son of God. Was: Not that the Son of God had
beginning with the Creatures, but was before their beginning, from Eternity.
This WORD, was not made when the Creatures were, but before any of them were,
HE WAS. And the word was with God: Here (Word) is taken personally. And the
word was God. Here (Word) is taken essentially. And the word was God: (...)
Or (according to the Greek) and God was the word. Christ was coequal,
co-essential, coeternal, and consubstantial with the Father. The Son of God
(Christ) did not then begin to be when he was manifested in the Flesh; but was
God from all Eternity, made Flesh in the last times. That Christ was MAN, is as
evident. Thus (John 1.14.) And the word was made flesh: The Son (not the
Father, nor the Spirit,) became Man; not by Confusion of Natures, but by Union
of Natures in one Person of Christ, God and Man. Was made flesh. Made himself,
or assumed flesh; in which he might be manifested to the Senses of Men. Was
made flesh: Not by changing the GODHEAD, Non mutando quod erat, sed assumendo
quod non crat.
but by assuming the MANHOOD. Though he became Man, he still remained God. The
Godhead became not a Manhood, nor the Humanity a Deity. The Assumption of the
Humanity was no Diminution of the Deity. But what follows? And dwelt among us:
As in a Tabernacle, or Tent, for a short time. And we beheld his glory: The
manifestation of his divine Majesty, not only in his Transfiguration, but also
in his Doctrine; Life; Miracles; Passions. The glory as of the only begotten of
the Father: Such glory, as was proper, and peculiar, to the only (so) begotten
of the Father. Full of grace, and truth. Full of Grace, or the Favor of God
toward us: And of Truth, or by Gifts and Benefits, which might demonstrate the
Truth of that Favor; so L. de Dieu. Full of Grace, or with the chiefest Mercy;
and of Truth, or with the Truth of praeceding Shadows; so Hammond. Is not the
Incarnation of Christ now one of the Depths of God? So (1 Timothy 3.16.) And
without controversy: Omnium Consensu, and Confessione.
Confessedly, and by an universal Confession. Great is the Mystery of
godliness: The GOSPEL may be so called, because, as it is a Doctrine made for
the Dignity, and Promotion of Godliness; so it is a Doctrine consisting of such
truths, and connexious of things, that are far remote from the common
Cogitations, Reasons, and Intellects of Men. But what follows? God was manifest
in the flesh: The eternal Son of God made his Divinity known in his Humanity,
which he assumed into the UNITY of his Person. Justified in the Spirit:
Approved righteous, and innocent, though condemned by Jews and Gentiles as a
Malefactor. Seen of Angels: As his Messengers and Ministers. Preached unto the
Gentiles: As the Subject and Substance, and Sum of the Gospel, to Sinners in
Folio. Believed on in the World: Made the Object of FAITH by a Remnant
according to the Election of Grace: Received up into Glory. His Session is at
the right hand of the Majesty on high. Is not the Incarnation of Christ now one
of the Depths of God? For him who had Eternity for his Mansion: Thus (Isa.
57.15.) For thus says the high and lofty one who inhabiteth Eternity. Who
alone has Immortality; who alone is eternal; without Beginning, or Ending; who
is not only immortal, but also immutable: For him also who has Eternity for
his Measure: Thus (Psa. 90.2.) Vme gnolam gnad-gnolam attah El: So the Hebrew:
From Eternity until Eternity thou God: To be an Infant of a day old: Thus (Luke
2.11.) To you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord: Is not this the Wonder of Wonders? and (consequentially) one of the
DEPTHS of GOD? For him who had Heaven for his Palace, to have the Earth for
his Pilgrimage, is not this one of the Depths of God? For him who was higher
than the Heavens, (Heb. 7.26.) to be lower than Angels, (Heb. 2.9.) and who was
waited by (sinless) Angels, (Mat. 4.11.) to be watched by (sinful) Men, is not
this one of the Depths of God? For him who was the Ancient of Days, (Dan.
7.22.) to be a Babe, (Luke 2.12.) and who was the GOD of Joys, (Mat. 11.29.) to
be a MAN of Sorrows, (Isa. 53.3.) is not this one of the Depths of God? For him
who was born King of the Jews, (Mat. 2.2.) to be born in a Stable; and who lies
in the Bosom of the Father, (John 1.18.) to lie in a Manger, (Luke 2.7.) is
not this one of the Depths of God? For him who was crowned with Glory, (Heb.
2.7.) to be crowned with Thorns, (Mat. 27.29.) and who was the Desire of
Nations, (Hag. 2.7.) to die for Sinners, (Romans 5.8.) is not this one of the
Depths of God? For him who was the Being of of Beings as God; (John 1.3.) the
Beauty of Beauties as Man; (Psa. 45.2.) and the Blessing of Blessings as
God-man, (Heb. 7.22.) to be written (if this be a Prophecy of him) a worm, and
no man; a reproach of Men, and despised of the People, Psa. 22.6.) Is not this
the Wonder of Wonders? and (consequentially) one of the Depths of God?

The INCARNATION of a Christ I find,
To be a Depth of God unto Mankind.
In the Beginning was the WORD, and This
Was with God; was God; is God unto His.
For Him who had Eternity for Mansion;
And Banners (there) of LOVE have due Expansion:
For Him who had Eternity for Measure;
Who also is a (complicated) Treasure:
To be an INFANT of a Moment old.
(For this the Angel unto Shephards told:)
For Him who was the GOD of Joys, to be
A MAN of Sorrows; and from Mortals flee:
For Him who was of Nations the Desire,
To be the Object of (Almighty) Ire:
For Him who higher than the Heavens is,
Lower than ANGELS to me made for His:
For Him who waited was by Angels, then
To watched be by (mercenary) Men:
For Him who crowned was with GLORY, thus
To crowned be with THORNS for abject Us:
Of Wonders it is a Wonder unto Me,
And Depth of God may also be to Thee.
Glory, that is one of the Depths of God. But before I proceed, At quis tantis
Ego, tantillus Ego?
I must give my self Check, and (with the greatest Reflection, and Trepidation)
acknowledge what is a PIGMY to discover this Goshen, or Garden! this Country, or
City which has Foundations! this Mount of Beatitudes! this Palace, or
Paradise! this Haven, or Heaven! A Life of Glory, is the Grace of Life; is it
not then one of the Depths of God? If Glorification be a perfect Transformation
of the Saints of God, into the Image of the Son of God, is it not one of the
Depths of God? If GLORY be the real Transmutation of a Person from Misery, or
Penalty of Sin, into eternal Felicity, is it not one of the Depths of God? If
(for this end) God made Man that he should eternally live unto his Praise, in
the eternal Enjoyment of Himself, is it not one of the Depths of God? If a
State of Glory be an (eternal) STATE; Yea, a State of ETERNITY, and that of
Felicity; is it not one of the Depths of God? That there is a State of Glory is
evident. Thus (1 These. 2.12.) That ye would walk worthy of God: As become the
Worshippers. and Servants of God; so Menochius. Who has called you:
Efficatiously; so Estius. But unto what? Unto his Kingdom and Glory. Is not a
State of Glory now one of the Depths of God? Yea, that there is a State of
eternal Glory, is as evident. Thus (2 Timothy 2.10.) Therefore I endure all things
for the Elects sakes, that they also may obtain the Salvation which is in
Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. Is not a state of Glory now one of the Depths
of God?

But what manner of State is a State of Glory?

What Drexelius says of God, that I may say of Glory; God: What God (is) that
I know not; what God (is not) that I know. Thus I may say of Glory: What Glory
(is) I know not; what Glory (is not) that I know: Yet this may be asserted with
the greatest Confidence, and Comfort, that a State of Glory is a State which is
--

State of Glory is a sinless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
There are Sinners (on) Earth, and (in) Hell, but there are none in Heaven; and
if no Sinner there, then no Sin there: Is not a state of Glory now one of the
Depths of God? If Sin be the Sting; the Evil of Evils; the Pest of Pests; the
Poison of Poisons; certainly then a state of Glory (which is a sinless State)
must be one of the Depths of God. Was that Question (Pro. 20.9.) ever yet
answered? Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Is
there a Day without Clouds? Is there a Moon without Spots? Is there a House
without Rubbish? Is there a Garden without Weeds? Is there a Heart without
Leaven? Is there a Soul without Sin? But a state of Glory is a sinless State,
and one of the Depths of God. If what is said of War, may be said of SIN, that
it is a complex, Malum complexum.
and a complicated EVIL, is not a state of Glory then (which is a sinless
State) one of the Depths of God? Of all men living, there are none that look
like greater Strangers unto their own Hearts, than those who (now) pretend unto
a personal Perfection. PAUL, was cried up for an earthly Angel, yet not without
the Plague of the Heart; not without Sin within, and that as an Inhabitant.
Thus (Romans 7.17.) It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. But,
a state of Glory, is a sinless State, therefore one of the Depths of God. The
Truth of Grace consists in opposing every Sin; the Strength of Grace
consists in mortifying every Sin; but the Conquest over every Sin is the
Ingression of the Soul into GLORY: Is not now a state of Glory (which is a
sinless State) one of the Depths of God? SIN is Evil; all Evil; so bad, that we
cannot call it worse than it is. Its Name is Evil. Thus (Romans 7.13.) That sin
by the commandment might become exceeding sinful. Or, (...)
(according to the Greek) that sin by the Commandment might appear a SINNER
unto an HYPERBOLE. But now a state of Glory is a (sinless) State, and is it not
then one of the Depths of God? If Sin be a darkning of the Glory of God; a
defacing of the Image of God; a crucifying of the Son of God; a grieving of the
Spirit of God; and a wounding of the Soul of Man; is not then a state of Glory
(which is a sinless State) one of the Depths of God? If SIN be the only thing
in all the World that is the Object of Gods Abhorrence; if this be the only
thing in all the World that makes Man truly miserable, and of Angels made
Devils; certainly then a state of Glory (which is a sinless State) is one of
the Depths of God. If SIN be the only thing in all the World that necessirates
Mercy; that called for the Action and Passion of Christ; and that caused Tears
to stand in his (sinless) Eyes; certainly then a State of GLORY (which is a
sinless State) is one of the Depths of God. If SIN be the only thing in all the
World that God looks upon with a (Vendictive) Eye; that Christ came to destroy;
that makes a Hell within; and that caused the Maker of Man to repent of Man's
making; certainly then a state of GLORY (which is a sinless State) must needs
be one of the Depths of God. Every thing in Nature, the higher it is, the purer
it is. The Earth is the lowest, and the grossest of the Elements. The Water
(next to the Earth) is grosser than the Air. The Air is grosser than the Fire,
which Philosophers call the highest of the Elements. The higher we go, the more
Purity we find; and when we come in a State of Glory, or at the HIGHEST, In
Altissimis.
there is nothing but Purity; perfect Purity. There is not the least Mixture of
Dross, nor the least spot of Dirt, in a State of Glory. This Place, and this
State is all pure; and none shall come there but such as are pure. Persons (that
are pure) are fit; Yea, they only are fit for Heaven, and a State of Glory, who
are (pure) Persons. And HE (1 Jo. 3.3.) that has this hope in him (of dwelling
there) purifieth himself, not only as Heaven is pure, but as GOD is pure; in
whose pure eyes, Heaven it self is impure. Job 15.15. Grace is (with Sin) in a
continual Conflict; but Glory makes a total Conquest: Is not a state of Glory
now (which is a sinless State) one of the Depths of God? SIN, (as much as in it
lies) puts God out of the World: It Is therefore called GODMURDER; DE ICID IUM.
as being that which would murder God. Sin, would not allow him a Being in the
World, who gave the World its Being. Thus (Isa. 30.11.) Get you out of the way,
turn aside out of the path: Steer another Course; sail by another Compass: Be
not so strict, and precise in your Preachings. But what follows? Cause the holy
one of Israel to cease from before us. Talk not so much to us; molest us no
more with so many Messages from him. But, He that is the Treasury of Satan for
SIN, is like to be the Treasury of God for WRATH; Is not a state of Glory then
(which is a sinless State) one of the Depths of God? If thou killest not thy
Sin, Aug.
but it dies of it self, then Sin has killed thee, and thou have not killed
thy Sin. One Leak in a Ship will sink it: One Wound kills Goliath, though Caesar
had Twenty Three before he dyed: One DELILAH may be as injurious to Sampson as
all the Philistines: One broken Wheel makes the whole Clock unserviceable: The
breaking of the Vein may let out all the Vitals: Oue Sin (unrepented off) is
damning in the Act, and will be Damnation in the Issue: Is not then a state of
Glory (which is a sinless State) one of the Depths of God? It is the Sign of a
good Constitution, to continue healthful in an infectious Air: Thus the Truth
of Grace, shows it self in its Care, not only to evitate the Company of
Sinners, but also the Contagion of Sinners. If nothing be so bitter as Sin in
the ACT, nor any thing so bitter as Sin in the ISSUE, certainly then a state of
Glory (which is a sinless state) is one of the Depths of God. As it is true;
there is no Sin in Grace, nor any Grace in Sin: It is as true, though there be
Sin in a State of Grace, there is no Sin in a State of Glory: Is not then a
state of Glory (which is a sinless state) one of the Depths of God? If Sin be
the Seed of Trouble, and Trouble be all the HARVEST we reap by Sin; and if a
Non-impugnation of an Inclination (to) sin, makes way to stupefaction (by) Sin;
certainly then a state of Glory (which is a finless State) is one of the Depths
of God. Posse peccare.
If a Possibility (to) sin, or a Potentiallity (of) sinning, was in a
Paradisical state; Posse non peccare. Non posse non peccare.
if a Possibility not to sin, (as a Christless Person sins) be in an
Evangelical state; and if an Impossibility of sinning be in a Caelestial state;
certainly then a state of Glory (which is a sinless State) is one of the Depths
of God. There are sinners upon EARTH; many sinners upon Earth; very many
sinners upon Earth; too many sinners, (...). vot.
upon Earth, who are Workers of Iniquity; who are (wickedly) arrived at an
Artificialness in Wickedness. The Apostle says (1 Jo. 5.19.) We know that we
are of God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness. A great part of the
World; the greater part of the World; the greatest part of the World, lies in
wickedness. They lie in Sin as in a (deep) Dungeon, or in a (dead) sleep: They
are under the Power of that wicked one, the DEVIL. The whole World; Mankind; so
Calvin. Worldly Men; so Estius. Unregenerated Men; so Vorstius. This is written
(as it were) in Capitals, and (as it were) with a Beam of the Sun, that there
are Sinners upon Earth, but there are no Sinners in Heaven. The Apostle (Heb.
12.22, 23, 24.) transmits to posterity a NARRATIVE of the Communion (if I may
so write) of Heaven; where I find a God; a Christ; Angels; and the Spirits of
just men made perfect; but not a Sinner: And, if no Sinner there, no Sin there:
Is not now a state of Glory (which is a sinless State) one of the Depths of God?

State of Glory is a sorrowless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
In a state of Grace, there are Tears standing in the Eyes of (every) Saint;
but, in a State of Glory, there shall not be a Tear standing in the Eyes of
(any) Saint: Is not a State of Glory then (which is a sorrowless state) one of
the Depths of God? There Is sighing in a state of Grace; there is singing in a
state of Glory; is not this now one of the Depths of God? In a State of GRACE,
the Praises of Saints are noted with Selah; but, in a state of GLORY, the
Praises of Saints shall be a Note above Elah: Is not then a state of Glory
(which is a sorrowless state) one of the Depths of God? There is (in a state of
Grace) the double Vail of Corruption, and Affliction; but (in a state of Glory)
this double Vail shall be taken off; is not a state of Glory then (which is a
sorrowless state) one of the Depths of God? It was Tertullian who said it of
Himself, that he was born for REPENTANCE; and who advises Persons backward in
Thoughts of Repentance, Prima Conditio est non peccasse; secunda vero
penituisse.
to be forward in Thoughts of Hell. It Is true, he that is born in Sin (and so
every one is) is also born for Repentance. It Is best not to sin, but (having
sinned) the next best is to repent. They who believe without repenting, shall
repent without beleiving. They were the words of blessed BRADFORD at the stake;
Oh England! England! England! repent of thy Sin; repent of thy Sin; repent of
thy Sin. Our present life is like Checker-Work; we must mourn like Doves, and
groan like Turtles, as well as sing like Larkes. While we are on this side a
state of Glory (which is a sorrowless State, and one of the Depths of God) we
must mingle Tones of Sorrow, with Tunes of Joy. Let none so flatter themselves
with the fair Weather of of Gods Mercy, as not to know, that when the Sun, and
the Wind meet, it will rain. There Is a twofold Sorrow, Legal and Evangelical.

Legal. There is a wordly Sorrow which works death. Thus (2 Cor. 7.10.) But
the sorrow of the world works death. A Sorrow proper to the MEN of the World,
as was in in Cain and Saul; in Achitophel and Judas, etc. But Sorrow of Heart
(without Change of Heart) is the Portion of Sinners for ever.

Evangelical. As there is a Repentance unto DEATH, so there is a Repentance
unto LIFE. Thus (Acts 11.18.) Then has God also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life. Unto life; that they may live; so Vatablus, and Cornelius
a Lapide. Now Evangelical Sorrow is a Gift of God; wrought by the Spirit and
Word of God, in the Heart, and Life of a Sinner; confisting in a confessing
(of) Sin; in a sorrowing (for) Sin; and in a turning (from) sin. Is not that
person happy, who is concerned in a Call, Cause, and Cross, not to be repented
off? Now that Repentance (solely) is not to be repented off, which is a
Repentance after a godly manuer; (...)
or (according to God) so the Greek: Which is a Repentance unto Salvation. 2
Cor. 7.9, 10. As it is true; the God of Gods, and Good of Goods; the Being of
Beings, and Blessing of Blessings, has a BAG for the sins of a (beleiving)
Penitent; it is as true; this God and Good, Being and Blessing, has a BOOK for
the Prayers, and a BOTTLE for the Tears of a (penitent) Beleiver. Are not Tears
potent Orators? Does not God read our Hearts in those Lines which Tears draw on
our Faces? Are not Tears the truest Rhetoric of a troubled Spirit? Have not
these a prevailing, winning SWADA with God, and Man, beyond the lowdest, and
the quaintest Oratory? One of the ancient Philosophers has adjudged Weeping
unworthy a MAN; and tells us that it is only for Women, and Children to weep.
But, as there are TEARS of effeminate, and childish Pusillanimity, so there are
Tears of Heroical, and Spiritual Importunity. To weep (to) Man, for Fear of
Passion (from Man) is indeed below a MAN in CHRIST: But to weep (to) God, when
we suffer under the hand (of) God, or Man, does well become the Sons of Men;
even the Best of them. Was not David a Man of Men? a good, as well as a great
Man? Who (more) if (so) courageous as He, not fearing the Lion, nor the Bear,
nor the Philistine? Who feared not an Host encamping against him? Who feared
not though he walked in the Valley of the Shadow of Death? yet he wept;
egregiously wept; so wept, as if he would have drowned himself in his own
Tears. Thus (Psa. 6.6.) I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my
bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears. I faint with my sighing, I make my
bed to swim in every night, I water my Bed-stead with my tears; so Ainsworth.
Iagangti be-anchati, ascheh becol-lailah mittati; bedimgnati gnarsi amseh. I am
wearied in my sighing, I will cause to swim in all the night my bed; with my
tears my couch I will dissolve; so the HEBREW. There are very many things
necessary, but a sorrowing (according to God) is of an indispensable Necessity.
Thus (Luke 13.3.5.) Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Here were
some, whose blood was mingled with their sacrifices, v. 1. And others upon whom
a tower fell; who were not greater Sinners than others, v. 2. From which Verses
may be drawn two Meditations.

Cases, and Conditions, from their (fatal) Casualties, and Calamities. Some are
slain by the Hand of MAN, and some are slain by the Hand of GOD.

Repentance is (indispensably) necessary unto Salvation. Except (which except
is without any Exception) ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Now that which Christ here threatened to the impenitent, was forty years after
fulfilled; for Titus (the Emperor of the Romans) on the Feast of the Passover
beseiged the City; and (having taken it) slew many impenitent Jews as they were
sacrificing. That aimed Fury, and incarnate Devil (CALIGULA) used to say of
Himself, that he loved nothing better in Himself, then that he could not be
ashamed. For a Man to be an ISHBOSHETH, (a man of shame as the word signifies)
and not to be ashamed, is not this sinful, and sad? is not this dangerous, and
damnable? Let no man live and die under this Deception, and Delusion, that
Evangelical Repentance is obsolete, and antiquated; for, so long as the Ship
springs a Leak, we must keep the Pump at work. We must repent so long as we
sin. So long as an Issue of Sin is kept open, an Issue of Sorrow must be kept
open also. When there is a Cessation of Sin, then (and not til then) there is a
Cessation of Sorrow also. It was the sweet Saying of One, I repent all my life,
D. Done.
but that part I spent in Communion with GOD, and in doing GOOD. It Is time (for
things have a sad Aspect, and there is little else but prodigious Judgment in
Prospect) to abhor that godless Proverb, Spiritus Calvinisticus, Spiritus
Melancholicus. As if a pure Spirit must needs be a dumpish Spirit. The Heart of
a Christian is (usually) fullest of Joy, when his Eyes are fullest of Tears.
Can thou think him Melancholic, that has so good Company Heavenward, when,
and while thou art Jovial among thy dismal Hel-bounded Company? but, if he
weeps, may not thou tremble? If he mourns, may not thou houl? But as there
is a State of Sorrow, so there is a state of Solace; is not then a state of
GLORY (which is a sorrowless State) one of the Depths of God? As there is a
Wilderness, so there is a Canaan; as there is a Cross, so there is a Crown; is
not a state of Glory then (which is a sorrowless State) one of the Depths of
God? As, if there be no Sun, there can be no Light; so, Sublata Causa, tollitur
Effectus.
if there be no Cause, there can be no Effect: If there be no Sin, there can be
no Sorrow: Is not then a state of GLORY which is a sinless, and a sorrowless
State one of the Depths of God? As there is a state militant, so there is a
state triumphant; as there is a state of Misery; so there is a state of Glory,
which is one of the Depths of God. This State of Glory is called a CROWN of
Glory. Thus (1 Pet. 5.4.) When the chief shepherd shall appear: When Christ
Jesus (that great and good Shepherd) shall appear the second time without sin
unto salvation. Ye: Not All. Ye Christians, not Anti-Christians; or
Psuedo-Christians. Ye Saints, not Sinners; not Sinners (in) your Sins. Ye. Ye
shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away. (...)
Here is not only Glory, but also a Crown of Glory, which is a Reward of Grace;
and is not this then one of the Depths of God? (...)
Yea, an unsadable crown of glory. Each Word has its weight, and may be read
thus: We shall receive that unfadable Crown of (the) or (that) Glory: Is not a
state of Glory now one of the Depths of God? It Is also called ETERNAL Glory:
Thus (1 Pet. 5.10.) But the God of all grace: The Donor of all Grace; and of
all Degrees of Grace. But what follows? Who has called us into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, etc. Here is a state of Glory; Yea, an (eternal) state
of Glory, and is it not one of the Depths of God? A State of Glory is a State
of Joy: Not a Step (unto) Joy, but a State (of) Joy; is it not then one of the
Depths of God? Thus (Mat. 25.21.23.) Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Metonymia Finis, vel Adjuncti. Piscator.
Enter into Heaven; the (third) Heaven; a State of GLORY (which is a sorrowless
State) and one of the Depths of God. It is not said by Christ, let the Joy of
thy Lord enter into Thee, but enter Thou into the Joy of thy Lord. Intimating,
that the Joys of Heaven are so many, that they are not comprehended in the Soul
of MAN. This Joy of the Lord, is the Joy that Christ himself provideth, and
which Christ himself enjoys: Is not this then one of the Depths of God? The
Joy of the Lord, and a State of Joy, are convertible Terms. Severinus (that
Indian Saint) was heard to say (upon his Restoration from the Confines of
Eternity) thus: Oh my GOD! do not for pity so overjoy me; if I must still live,
and have such Consolation, take me to Heaven. Is there such Joy in a State of
Grief? What Joy then is there in a State of Glory (which is a sorrowless State)
and one of the Depths of God? A State of Glory, is a State of so great JOY,
that no Geometrician can measure it; no Arithmatician can number it; no
Logician can define it; and no Rhetorician can express it: Is not then this
State (which is a sorrowless State) one of the Depths of God? When Aug. (in a
nigh Speculation) endeavored to express caelestial JOY, Quid agis?
he was asked by a grave old man, what do thou? Aug. what do thou? A Man
may as well draw in all the Air in the World with one Breath, as to express (to
the Life) what thou art now about; not that there is Want (of) Words, but Wants
(in) Words to express it: Is not then a state of GLORY (which is a sorrowless
State) one of the Depths of God? The chief City of Persia was Shushan. Believe
it: Heaven, is a Shushan (a City of Joyfulness, as the word signifies:) Is it
not then not only (one) of the Depths of God, but indeed (the) Depth of God? It
was Mrs Bretterg that said it, oh the Joys! the Joys! the Joys that I feel!
They be wonderful; they be wonderful; they be wonderful. Is Joy (below) thus?
what is Joy (above) then? Certainly this is one of the DEPTHS of GOD. In Hell,
there is nothing but Hell; in Heaven, there is nothing but Heaven; certainly then a
state of Glory (or Heaven) is one of the Depths of God. Mr Bruen (a little
before his Death) being asked, whether his Consolations did abound in the midst
of his Afflictions; answered, Yes, I bless God, and far exceed them. Oh my
Soul! Is there such Consolation before Death? what Joy then will there be in a
state of GLORY (which is a sorrowless State) after Death? Is not this then one
of the Depths of God? I have read of one, Pedcock.
who (after his Dissertion) said, the Sea is not fuller of Water, nor the Sun
fuller of Light, than my Heart is full of JOY: Yea, the Joy that I feel is
incredible. Was it thus here? what then will it be hereafter? which
necessitateth this Concession that a state of Glory (which is a sorrowless
State) is one of the Depths of God, Aug.
If one may be credited herein, he says this: If one DROP of the Joys of
Heaven should fall into HELL, it would swallow up all the Bitterness in Hell. The
Joy of Grace, is, when the Lord is with Us: The Joy of Glory, is, when We are
with the Lord: Is not a state of Glory then (which is a sorrowless State) one
of the Depths of God? As the Sorrow of the Soul is the (greatest) Sorrow; so
the Joy of the Soul is the (greatest) Joy; but the (Greatness) of this Joy will
be in a state of Glory: Is it not then one of the Depths of God?

State of Glory is a Warless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God? If
all Aceldema's be Bochims; and none fitter for Places of Weepers, than Fields
of Blood; certainly then a State of Glory (which is a warless State) is one of
the Depths of God?

Nulla Salus BELLO, Pacem te possimus omnes. If Peace be better than War, Pax
potior Bello.
and so far to be preferred before Victory it self, as the End is better than
the Means; certainly then a state of Glory (which is a warless State) is one of
the Depths of God. The Sage of Israel says (Eccl: 3.8.) There is a time of
war, Nomen Pacis desiderabile.
and a time of peace. If the Name of PEACE be desirable; witness the late
(intestine) War in England, that is fresh in many Memories; and which was
attended with such Cares and Crosses; with such Calamities and Cruelties; with
such Devastation and Depopulation; with such Barbarity and Blasphemy; with such
Theft and Treachery; with such Rape and Ruin: Certainly then a state of Glory
(which is a warless State) is one of the Depths of God. The Effect of WAR is
Wast. It Is said of the Turkish-War, that where the Horse of the grand Seignior
sets his Foot no more Grass will grow; he makes Havoc of All. There is War upon
EARTH; in (many) if not in (most) parts of the Earth; but there is no War in
HEAVEN: There is Peace; pure Peace; perfect Peace: Is not then a state of Glory
(which is a warless State) one of the Depths of God? That we call ( Civil War)
is the most barbarous; for the Father rises up against the Son, and the Son
against the Father; Brother against Brother, and Tribe against Tribe. What
Expressions are so horrible and terrible, as to delineate the Barbarity
(especially) of an intestine WAR? Shall I mention the Dragon of Pliny, sucking
out the Blood of the Elephant, til the (dying) Elephant (by his Fall) crushed
the Dragon to Death? Shall I mention the EMBLEM of Philip (Duke of Burgundy)
being Flint and Steel, beating one upon another until both are wasted,
producing no other Issue but Fire? Shall I represent (Jer. 13.12, 13, 14.) the
earthen Bottle of the Prophet? A Passage not to be read with dry eyes, if the
FACE of Things (which has so tremendous an ASPECT) be duly reflected. PAX opt
ma Rerum.
But a state of Glory is a warless State, and one of the Depths of God. If
Nat^onal Peace be cried up forth best of Things; if Sin, Satan and War, have
all one Name, and EVIL be the best of Them; if the best of Sin be Deformity;
the best of Satan be Enmity; and the best of War be Misery; certainly then a
State of Glory (which is a warless State) is one of the Depths of God. It was
prophesied long since (by the Prophet of Prophets) and is now fulfilled in our
ears, Ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, etc. Mat. 24.6. What Paradise
is there under Heaven, that a lasting WAR will not turn into a Wilderness? Is
not every Siege, the Funeral of a City? every pitched Battle a Massacre? every
Army an armed Fury? Certainly thena state of Glory (which is a warless State)
is one of the Depths of God. If the bare Names of a Political Peace and War,
carry to every man's Understanding (not defective in his Prudentials) a Summary,
or Collection of all temporal Mercies, or Mischeifs; certainly then a state of
Glory (which is a warless STATE) is one of the Depths of God.

Rara Fides, Pietasque Viris, qui CASTRA sequuntur. If War be that miserable
Desolation, which finds (before it) a Land like Eden, and leaves it, (behind
it) like Sodom and Gomorra; a desolate, and forsaken Wilderness; certainly then
a state of Glory (which is a warless State) is one of the Depths of God.

State of Glory is a wantless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
If it be a Curse to be poor in the possession of Riches; (Eccl. 5.10.) and an
Affliction to be poor for want of Riches; (John 12.8.) Certainly then a state
of GLORY (which is a wantless State) is one of the Depths of God. He, that has
fewer Eyes (according to the Mythology of the Poets) than Argus had, may now
see Poverty coming in like a (prodigious) Torrent; as if it would bear down,
and break down all before it: Is not then a state of GLORY (which is a wantless
State) one of the Depths of God? There are Wants upon Earth, but not in Heaven.
The Disciples were poor; very poor: Though they had (great) Treasure in their
Hearts, they had (little) in their Houses. Thus (1 Cor. 4.11.) Even unto this
present time we both hunger and thirst: Here is a Recital of the principal
Discommodities of Life, from whence the rest of that kind are intelligible. And
are naked: While others are in their Robes, they are in their Rags. And are
buffeted: Though they wanted meat, drink, and clothes, yet they had blows and
stripes. And have no certain dwelling place. Here is Hunger and Thirst; here is
Nakedness and Buffeting. But is here all? No; there is another Dish of bitter
Herbs yet behind: After all this, they have not a certain place wherein to hide
their Heads. But now a state of Glory is a wantless STATE, and one of the
Depths of God. Yea, as it was with the Disciple, so it was with the MASTER.
Thus (Mat. 8.20.) The Foxes have holes: He does not say Kings have Palaces, but
I have none; but the Foxes have holes. And the Birds of the Air have nests:
Places of abode; shelter in trees; or other convenient receptacles. But the Son
of Man has not where to lay his head. Whether CHRIST (the Creator of all
things) lived in a hired house, or lodged with his Disciples, I determine not.
Here is the (terrene) State of the Servant, and of the Master: Is not then a
state of Glory (which is a wantless State) one of the Depths of God?

There may be Wants to (many) upon Earth, but there are no Wants to (any) in
Heaven. There may be Wants to (many) in the Kingdom of the Son, but there shall
be no Wants to (any) in the Kingdom of the Father. There may be Wants to (many)
in a State of GRACE, but there shall be no Wants to (any) in a State of GLORY;
Is not this now one of the Depths of God?

State of Glory is a persecutionless state; is it not then one of the Depths of
God? Is Persecution a Novelty? No; the first Man that ever died, died a MARTYR:
Is not now a state of Glory (which is a persecutionless State) one of the
Depths of God?

Utere Jure tuo (Caesar) Sectamque LUTHERI,
Ense, Rota, Ponto, Funibus, Igne NECA.
Great Caesar! thou do now the Scepter sway;
Act like a Cain; the Sect of Luther slay:
Let That be Object of thy (Royal) Ire.
By stabbing; wheeling; drowning; roping; Fire.
This was the Diabolical DIALECT then; and should it be so now the World is
grown so gray, I should join Issue with Luther; who says, that CAIN will be
killing his Brother ABEL to the end of the World; but He is most (bloody) in
his old days. May not this be the Motto of the Palmtree? The more Weight,
Depressa resurgo.
the more Height: Like the Children of Israel, the more they were afflicted,
the more they multiplied: But now a state of GLORY is a persecutionless State;
and is it no^ then one of the Depths of God? We may read (if we can read) of a
great persecution (Acts 8.1.) against the Church which was at Jerusalem: That
this Persecution (Chapter 11.19.) arose about Stephen: Is not now a state of GLORY
(which is a persecutionless State) one of the Depths of God? It was Cardinal
Farnesius who desired to wade in the Blood of the Lutherans up to his horses
Bridle. This also was the Cry concerning Jerome, let him be burned; let him be
burned: But there is no Persecution in a state of Glory; and is it not then one
of the Depths of God? There has been very (great) Persecutions on Earth, but
there is not the (least) Persecution in HEAVEN. He, who was a Persecuter, (Acts
9.5.) was also persecuted, (Gal. 5.11.) A state of Glory is the Presence of all
Good, and the Absence of all Evil; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
There is not a Persecutor in Heaven: All Persecutors are (on) Earth, or (in)
Hell, so living, and dying. There Is not a Cain, nor a Caligula in Heaven; not an
Ishmael, nor a Julian in Heaven; not a Pharaoh, nor a Pilate in Heaven: Is not
then a state of GLORY (which is a persecutionless State) one of the Depths of
God? It Is written of Fulgentius, that (in the midst of his Sufferings) he used
to say, Plura pro Christo toleranda.
We must suffer more than this for Christ. The Will of God must be suffered as
well as done; There must be Passion as well as Action; and as there (must) be
doing, so there (may) be dying. (...)
Thus (2 Timothy 3.12.) All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. Or (according to the Greek) shall be persecuted. But there is no
Persecution in a state of GLORY, and is not this then one of the Depths of God?
It is said of the Christians (al little before the Neronian-Persecution) that
they laughed at their Torments; that they courted the Flames; and that they
went out to meet DEATH in its blackest Dress. The Duke de Alva boasted, that
(in the space of six years) he had executed Eighteen Thousand Men. Bloody
Bonner was often heard to say, that he would burn a Thousand Heretics; and so
might well be termed the Harbinger of Death. But a state of GLORY is a
persecutionless State, and is it not then one of the Depths of God? Now, as
Persecutors have been great, and Persecutions have been great; so the Judgments
of GOD upon Persecutors, for their Persecutions, (that they might read their
Sin in their Punishment) have been also very great. For instance --

Antiochus fall from his Judicial Seat suddenly? crying out, that all his
inward Bowels burned; and so died.

Gardener die despairingly? saying, I have denied with PETER, but I have not
repented with PETER.

Severus poison himself at York, to period the Dolor of his Gout?

Valens (who consulted with the Devil about his Successor) pursued to a
Cottage, and burned alive in it, to leave his Name a Curse to all Ages?

Monster of Mankind) drink a Glass of Poison? then (falling upon bis own Sword)
died miserably, as he had lived wickedly.

John de Roma, who cried out (Oh this is for my Cruelty to Christians!) die
accursed?

buried among Thieves and Murderers, as hated of God, and Man?

Judas (the betrayer of an innocent Jesus) his own Executioner?

Julian slain (ignota Manu) by an unknown Hand? when he cried out, Vicisti,
Galileae, Vicisti. Oh Galilean! thou have overcome.

Pilate (who would not hearken to the Advice of his Wife, when she said, have
nothing to do with that just one) lay violent hands upon himself? But now there
is no Persecuter (therefore no Persecution) in a state of Glory, and is it not
then one of the Depths of God?

State of Glory is a prisonless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
There are Prisons upon Earth, but there are none in Heaven. Joseph was
imprisoned here, but He is not imprisoned there. No sooner was JOSEPH in a
Prison, but JEHOVAH was with him. Thus (Genesis 39.20, 21.) His Master took him,
and put him into the prison etc. But Jehovah was with Joseph, and showed him
mercy etc. Extended kindness unto him; so the Margent. Now Jehovah can make a
Prison a Palace; Yea, a Prison a Paradise, by his special Presence. A Prison
(with) a Christ, is better then a Palace (without) a Christ. John (the Baptist)
was imprisoned; bound in prison; and beheaded in the prison. (Mark 6.17.27.)
Peter was in prison; kept in prison; chained in prison. (Acts 12.4, 5, 6.) Paul
also writes himself a prisoner of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 3.1.
For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles. Not
that he was imprisoned (by) Christ, Christi Causa.
but (for) Christ. For the sake of Christ; so Drusius. For asserting the
Doctrine, and Glory of Christ; so Zanchy. In particular, a Prisoner for the
GENTILES; because he was their chief Apostle, and the ground of his Passion (at
this time) was the Hatred of his Countrymen the JEWS. So (2 Cor. 11.23.) -- In
prisons more frequent --. Thus he met with a Prison on Earth, but he meets with
no Prison in Heaven. With a Prison have (many) met in a state of Grace, but
with a Prison shall not (any) meet in a state of Glory; is not such a state then
one of the Depths of God? a state of Glory is so far from being a Prison, that
it is called a PARADISE. Thus (Luke 23.43.) To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. This (to day) is emphatical. The Master promised more than the
Malefactor asked. So (Rev. 2.7) To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. A state of Glory
also and HEAVEN look like Synonoma's, and seem to differ more in Sound, than in
Sense. The Sacred Scripture mentions a three fold Heaven.

Aireal. In this the Fowls fly, and are called (Job 35.11.) the Fowls of
Heaven.

Siderial. In this the Lights are, and are called (Genesis 15.5.) the Stars of
Heaven.

Empyreal. In this the Angels have their Residence, and are called (Mat.
24.36.) the Angels of Heaven. Is not this that which the Apostle calls (2 Cor.
12.2.) the third heaven? The Heaven of Heavens; the chiefest Heaven; so
Grotius. The Empyreal Heaven; so Estius. The Seat of CHRIST; so Piscator. And
of blessed Spirits; so Drusius. If this be so, certainly then a state of Glory
(which is a prisonless State) is one of the Depths of God.

State of Glory is a cursless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
Are not (cursing) men (cursed) men? yet this Age abounds with such Men; but a
state of Glory is a Curserless, and Cursless state; is it not then one of the
Depths of God? There are Cursers, and Curses, while Persons are in a State of
GRACE; but there are no Curses (for there are no Cursers) when Persons are in a
State of GLORY; is not this State then (which is a curless state) one of the
Depths of God? The righteous have the Curses of the wicked; but the God of
Grace can convert the Cursings of the graceless into Blessings to the gracious.
Thus (Deu. 23.5.) The Lord has turned the curse into a blessing to thee,
because the Lord thy God loves thee. David (though a Man after Gods own heart)
had a SHIMEI upon Earth, (2 Samuel 16.5 -- 14.) who came forth, and cursed still
as he came; but he has no Shimei in Heaven: Is not a state of Glory then
(which is a cursless state) one of the Depths of God? The Prophet was the
Object of the Curse of the People. Thus (Jer. 15.10.) I have neither lent to
Usury, nor men have lent to me on Usury, yet every one of them does curse me.
The Italian-Antichrist (who looks like the Reuben of Satan) sends forth his
Excommunications, and Execrations; he curses the People (whom God has
blessed) with Bell, Book, and Candle: But a state of Glory (which He is never
like to see, much less to enjoy) is a cursless state; is it not then one of the
Depths of God? Did not the Jews also (Acts 23.12.) band together, and bind
themselves under a Curse (or with an Oath of Execration) that they would
neither eat, nor drink, til they had killed Paul? But now a state of GLORY will
be a blessed State; Yea, a State of Blessedness; when the Soul shall not be
severed one Moment from the Embracements of CHRIST to Eternity: Is not this
then one of the Depths of God? If a state of Glory, be a State (as to Vision
and Possession) of perfect Felicity, and that to Eternity, without Amission, or
Intermission; is it not one of the Depths of God? Did the Emperor say, I had
been happy, if I had not been an Emperor? Faelix, si non imperassem.
May not I say, I had been happy, if I had not been a Sinner? Now, if this be
the Reason why the Saints in Heaven shall have so much Felicity, Faelix, si non
peccassem.
bcause all the GOOD in Heaven is a (fixed) Good, certainly then a state of
Glory (which is a State of Blessednesses) is one of the Depths of God? The
Apostle (Ephesians. 1.3.) has a spiritual, and sublime Strain; which take as
follows. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with spiritual blessings: With all spiritual Benediction; so the
Greek. (...)
It is in the singular number; all, and yet but one Benediction: Intimating,
that spiritual Benedictions, and Blessings, are so concatinated, that they all
make but one Benediction, or Blessing; for where God gives (one) Blessing, he
gives (all) Blessings. Yea, they are spiritual; because bestowed upon the
Spirit; wrought by the Spirit; and have a (spiritual) Tendency. But where are
these Benedictions? The Text says in heavenly places etc. In HEAVENLIES; so
the Greek. (...)
The word it self (according to the proper Notation of it) fignifieth the upper
heavenlies. Were these blessed (in) a state of Grace, and (with) a state of
Grace? what are they in a state of Glory, which is one of the Depths of God? If
Gold and Silver be Happiness, then Happiness should be found in the
Wildernesses of India, and Turkey; with such like barbarous and brutish
places; But the Philosophers say, that Happiness must consist in such a State,
where there is an Aggregation of all good things: Now, a State of GLORY (which
is a state of Beatitude) is such a State; and (consequentially) one of the
Depths of God. When God had given to the World a Being, Esse et Bene-esse.
that he might give it a Wel-Being, (Genesis 1.22.28.) he adds to the Work of
Creation a Word of Benediction. If it be the Felicity of Saints on Earth that
God always beholds Them; and their Felicity in Heaven that They always behold
God; certainly then a State of GLORY (which is a state of Beatitude) is one of
the Depths of God. Thus (Rev. 14.13.) Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord etc. If persons are never happy in their Distances from God, and nothing
can make them unhappy when they are near to God; certainly then a State of
Glory (when they shall be nearest God) is one of the Depths of God.

State of Glory is a contagionless state; is it not then one of the Depths of
God? Omnis Morbus non ad Mortem.
Though every Disease be not unto Death, yet Death may be dressed in a thonsand
Shapes, and may be in very many things we see in the World: Is not now a state
of GLORY (which is a contagionless State) one of the Depths of God? It is not
for Me (if for Galen and Hypocrates) critically to enumerate the Varieties, and
Multiplicities of (contagious) Diseases, while Men are in a State of Grace: Is
not a state of GLORY then (which is a contagionless State) one of the Depths of
God? A Disease is a Malady, or evil Disposition of the Body. It is (in Effect)
the same with Sickness. Now Diseases may be reduced to two Heads.

Corporal. Thus (2 Chro. 21.15.) Thou shall have great sickness by disease of
thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out, by reason of thy sickness day by day.

Spiritual. This was a Reprehension to the Shepherds, (Eze. 34.4.) Ye have not
strengthened the diseased; nor healed that which was sick; nor bound up that
which was broken, etc. As there is the PLAGUE of the BODY. Thus (Ps. 106.29.)
Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and the plague brake in
upon them. The Plague, or Pestilence, is accounted the greatest Judgment
inflicted upon the Bodies of Men. The worst of our corporal Diseases is the
Plague of the Body. Job (speaking of a wicked man, Chapter 27.15.) says; Those
that remain of him shall be buried in death. Now, is it not to die of the Plague
to be buried in Death? May not the Plague be justly called DEATH by way of
Eminency, because it is a Disease so deadly? The Chaldeans number not the
Plague among Diseases, but call it Death. May not they who die of the Plague,
be said (in a sense) to to be buried in Death? Because They (so soon as dead)
are suddenly carried out to Burial; lest they should infect the Air, and
(consequentially) taint the Bodies of the Living. Is not a state of Glory now
(which is a contagionless State) one of the Depths of God? This Name (DEATH)
seems to be given the Plague. Thus ( Rev. 6.8.) Behold a pale horse, and his
name that sat on him was death. Is not this the Plague? Then follows: And Hell
followed with him: The Page of Death is Hell to the wicked; and the Page of
Death is the Grave to the righteous. But what then? Power was given them to
kill with the sword, and with hunger, and with death etc. Post Famem, Pestis.
With Death, i. e. The Plague; for this is wont to follow Famine. This also (by
Ecclesiastic Writers) is called MORTALITY; which now has passed into many
Mother Tongues. The Plague (say some) is an immediate Stroke from God. If other
Diseases slay their Thousands, this slays its ten thousands: Is not now a
state of Glory (which is a contagionless state) one of the Depths of God? But
as there is the Plague of the Body, so there is the Plague of the SOUL, which
is the Pest of Pests. Thus (1 Kings 8 38.) When every man shall know the plague
of his own heart etc. As the worst of our (corporal) Diseases is the Plague of
the BODY, so the worst of our (spiritual) Diseases is the Plague of the HEART.
Is not now (in both these respects) a state of Glory (which is a contagionless
State) one of the Depths of God? Is not the Soul a far more fruitful Seminary
of Sins, than the Body is of Diseases? There is a thing called a CRISIS, which
is an unlooked for mutation of a Disease for better, or worse; unto Life, or
unto Death. It is a physical Axiom, that the highest Degree of Health is a
Crisis; Subita Morbi in melius, pejusve, ad Vitam, aut Mortem, mutatio.
a Prognostic of the Appropinquation of some violent, and mortal Distemper,
and Disease. There are Contagions on Earth, but there are none in Heaven: Is
not a state of GLORY then (which is a contagionless State) one of the Depths of
God? There is the Plague of the Body in a State of Grace, for Sin is the Womb
of Plagues; but there is no Plague of the Body in a State of Glory; is it not
then one of the Depths of God? There is also the Plague of the Heart (which is
Sin in the Soul) in a State of Grace; but there is no Plague of the Soul in a
State of Glory, (for he that is dead is freed from sin; Romans 6.7.) Is not a
state of Glory then (which is contagionless as to Body and Soul) one of the
Depths of God?

State of Glory is a temptationless State; is it not then one of the Depths of
God? Our whole life (says Luther) is but a Temptation. I am (says He) set
upon (without) by all the World; and (within) by the Devil, and all his Angels.
It was thus on Earth, but it is not thus in Heaven: Is not a state of GLORY then
(which is a temptationless State) one of the Depths of God? If there be no
Place in the World that can secure from Temptation, and be a Sanctuary from
Satanical-Suggestion; certainly then a state of Glory (which is a
temptationless State) is one of the Depths of God. That there is such a thing
as TEMPTATION, is so legible, as if it were written with a Beam of the Sun.
Thus (Heb. 11.37.) -- They were tempted --. Beza.
It Is much (says One) that this should come in after the Recital of such
Capital punishments; and therefore would rather have it read, were burned. But
the word (TEMPTED) may well be retained: For (seeing they could do no good with
Violence) they made them great Profers, and Promises; trying if they could
prevail that way, as appears in the Martyroligy. They were tempted. But who
were These? They were WORTHIES. Thus (v. 38.) Of whom the world was not worthy.
That is, Mankind; Genus humanum.
or wicked men who persecuted the good; so Estius. The World was not worthy of
their Presence, and yet these were tempted. But wonder not, for one (infinitely
more worthy than these Worthies) was also tempted. Suspend thy Judgment as to
those under Temptation, for Christ himself was tempted in the highest Measure
that could be, (Mat. 4.1 -- 11.) Satan may tempt (unto) Sin, but he cannot
tempt (into) Sin: His Sparks could never inflame us, if he found no TINDER in
our own Boxes. Though Satan be the Father of Temptation, yet the Heart is the
Mother of Corruption. The Enemy (without) were there not a Correspondency
(within) could never hurt us. Suggestion (without) were it not for Corruption
(within) would be invalid, and insignificant. Is not Man his own Devil, and
does he not often tempt HIMSELF? But now a State of Glory is temptationless,
and corruptionless; is it not then one of the Depths of God? Satan (as to his
Temptation) is confined to the Aerialpart; therefore called (Ephesians. 2.2.) The
Prince of the Power of the Air. Of the dark Air next us; so Estius. There he
only reigns, not as a LORD, but as a TYRANT; Non ut Dominus, sed ut Tyrannus.
so Erasmus. There was a Tempter in the terrestial, but there shall never be a
Tempter in the caelestial Paradise: Is not now a State of Glory (which is a
temptationless State) one of the Depths of God?

State of Glory is a timeless state; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
The Cry of a (damned) Soul is, I never minded Eternity: But a State of Glory is
a State of Eternity, and is it not then one of the Depths of God?

Cuncta trahit secum vertitque volubile Tempus. Tempus est Edax et Index Rerum.
Is not TIME the Shadow of Eternity? Our Life may be compared to a Mariner in
a Ship, that has all her Sails spread, and these filled with Wind. The Child
born in the Morning, is old enough to die before Night: Is not then a State of
Glory (which is a timeless State) one of the Depths of God? If the Quistion
should be, what is TIME? Might not the Solution be, it is nothing else but a
Meditation of ETERNITY? Though Man be a Microcosm, yet his Life is compared to
a Span. Ps. 39.5. To a Shadow. Ps. 144.4. To a Vapor. Jam. 4.14. But now a
state of Glory is a (timeless) State; is it not then one of the Depths of God?
Thus (1 Pet 1.4.) To an inheritance incorruptible: It perishes not as the
Riches of the World. (...)
Ambrose, and Erasmus, render it immortal. And undefiled: (...)
The name of a STONE; which (being cast into the Fire) is not consumed, nor
corrupted, but is taken out more splendid; so Isidore. And fades not away:
This is the name of a Flower; (...)
which (being hung up in a House) fades not, but remains fresh and green.
Reserved in heaven for you. (...)
Or (according to the Greek) reserved in heavens for us. Here is the
Excellency, and Certainty of the Inheritance; so Estius. The Stability, and
Perpetuity of the Inheritance; so Gerhard. It Is reserved in the heavens; in the
hand of the God of Gods; out of which (Jo. 10.28.) it can never be plucked. The
Inheritance (here) is a CROWN; a Crown of Life; a State of Glory; a Life of
Glory. Here is also the Incorruptibility, and Certainty; the Stability, and
Eternity of this State: Is it not then one of the Depths of God?

As GRACE did lead the Van; so up the Rear,
Does GLORY bring, without a (brinish) Tear.
Did Luther (here) and Calvin live in Strife?
The Life of GLORY is the GRACE of Life.
The Presence of all Good is Heaven; and
The Absence of all Evil. Here Is a Land!
Lord! shall I not (like Moses) mounted be?
This Holy Land in (ANTITYPE) to see.
But to inspect the Manner of the State,
That Matters here (below) does Antiquate.
Sin is the Pest of Pests;
The very Basis of (terrene) Contests.
Of Poisons it is (the) Poison: But Free Grace
Is made its ANTIDOTE within the Race.
Ah fatal Ish and Ishah! see your Stature;
Sin EVIL is in Name, and also Nature.
Thus to the dark side of the Cloud; but now
A Prospect of the other some allow.
Be joyous Soul; no Corrosive to Thee,
But Cordial a (sinless) State will be.
Christ, and His:
A perfect State, of perfect JOY it is.
For when the Cause is taken quite away,
There no Effect can be the Learned say.
No Baca, neither Bochim, HEAVEN is:
To (saved) Ones a perfect Shushan it is.
Tears may be in a State of GRACE; but can
Tears in a State of GLORY be to Man?
Oh take a Prospect of this (highest) Land!
No Tears in Eyes shall (there) a Moment stand.
Effect of War is Wast;
Thus has it been in all the AGES past:
Yea, in this Age. Lord! let not Feilds of Blood,
In ENGLAND any more be understood.
A lasting War will (I must needs confess)
A GOSHEN turn into a WILDERNESS.
A Funeral a Seige is to a City:
And Armies armed Furies are. It Is pity.
Oh Prince of Peace! intestine War prevent,
By causing ALL (in Earnest) to Repent.
State of Grace,
There may be WANTS to Runners of the Race:
But in a State of Glory there are none;
There Is (timeless) Fullness with the (living) Stone.
Though (upon EARTH) there may be Wants to Many;
Yet there are none in HEAVEN unto Any.
Oh Bread of Life! who (always) art a Feast
In Famine to the Greatest and the Least:
Lord! give me Food and Raiment by the Way,
That so no (longer) I may go astray.
Hunting is
(Of very many JESUS owneth His)
Their Lives to take: But is this any Loss?
The Way unto the Crown is made the Cross.
Did ABEL (who first died) MARTYR die?
No Wonder let it be to Thee: For I
Would much more willing be to die than live;
And (dying) Witness for a JESUS give.
Oh grac'ous God! set this be granted Me,
That as my Burden is, my Back may be.
Disgrace
Rise only from the Crime? not from the Place.
Immured Saint! the CAUSE is Right'ousness:
Why art thou sad, and in in a (sable) Dress?
This POEM taken Air, thy Newgate-State,
Not to Condote, but to Congrutulate.
New gate is Heaven if a CHRIST be there;
He made the Stable so, and Sepalcher.
Oh said Soul I no (Prison) unto Thee
But (Palace) shall a State of Glory be.
Houses here of Clay,
Saints meet with many Cursers by the Way;
And Curses too. But there is a HOUSE above,
Made without Hands, where nothing it but Love.
If (cursing) men, be (cursed) men, this Age
Has SHIMEI'S in Danger of the Cage.
But, blessed Soul! thou art not now the Worse,
For bring made the OBJECT of their Curse.
Oh Sacred Surety! let all Cursings be
Converted into Blessings unto Me.
below,
Do Mortals reap according as they sow.
There are (on Earth) Diseases manifold;
Were all these (ever) by a GALEN told?
BUt there are none in Heaven: That Is a State
Where ENOCH finds Diseases out of Date.
Oh thou that art the best Physician!
Who speak HEALING when no other can:
My Glass does run; my Days are almost spent:
The PLAGUE of Body, and of Soul prevent.
Place?
Or Person here (below) that (for a Space)
Can MAN secure? or can secured be,
From those Temptations nauseous unto Me?
Like unto His was JESUS made, and tempted;
His also are, (and none of them exempted)
That like to Him they also might be made;
And so might drive (above) a better Trade.
LORD! over Sin, and Satan Conquest give;
That I to (THEE) but not to (THEM) may live.
Man,
Whose Days are not compared to a Span?
As to be born, so there is a time to die:
TIME is the Shadow of Eternity.
Man is a WINK of Life; but GLORY is
A (timeless) State to all Christ owneth His.
Oh chiefest GOD! may I address to Thee?
These Depths of Thine did ever Bernard see?
Oh chiefest GOOD! this Essay pardon Me;
Then shall all Glory given be to Three.
(...)

