A COPY of VERSES presented To all my Worthy Masters and Mistresses in the
Parish of Lambeth.
By ANDREW MAXSEY Belman.
The PROLOGUE.
What dangers of the night do then pursue
Behold here comes your Servant Andrew
And now methinks it does some senses ravish
To hear me ring my Bell in Lambeth Parish.
From South Lambeth to Fox Hall I do go
And through the town kind Sirs you all do know,
Where oftentimes I try yo^^ doors with knocks
In hopes you will not forget my Christmas Box.
For Christmas Day.
^He Son of God and supreme King of Kings
(...) Does teach us to despise all worldly things,
(...) bend our minds to things supernal
(...) fly things transitory, and seek eternal,
^^ereby to inherit his Kingdom of Salvation
which is the only end of our Creation.
For St. Stephens Day.
(...) Steven was a man to be bemoaned
^^r Preaching of God's word the Jews him stoned,
and therewithal bereaved him of his life
^^at never was indicted unto strife,
(...) prayed his Enemies all might be forgiven
and now remains a blessed Saint in Heaven.
For St. John's day.
Awake kind sirs, this morning think upon
The Holy Evangelist named Saint John,
Who writ of Christ our Lord's Devinity
^or the good benefit of our posterity.
^hen thanks to God that did so gracious prove
(...) send his only Son our sins for to remove.
On man's Life, Psalm 39.
Man's life it is compared to a span,
So frail and weak is every man;
We are here to day and gone to morrow
And all our days are full of sorrow,
Therefore let us make God our friend
That well may be in time our latter end.
October 29.
This day the Lord Mayor's show is to be seen
Both Men and Paggins are clothed all in green,
The King and Queen attend upon his honor
And Marshal train will be their Bannor,
Greeting the Lord Mayor as his Aldermen pass by
And so to Guild Hall they ride triumphantly.
portrait of bellringer
Suppose each ringing Knel puts thee in mind
Take heed that death thee unprepard not find
For thou art in the way unto the Grave,
But so in all thy life thy self behave
As if you were the man whose turn is next
And would not with a sudden death be vexed
November 17.
The first Queen that did rule this famous Land
Did Tyrannize with a high ruling Command
Elizabeth that renowned and famous Queen
God's Gospel in her life she did bravely maintain
And kept her subjects all both safe and sound
Therefore still let her honor be renowned.
On Mortality.
(...) man that dye you must
(...) ^eturned to the dust
Where nothing there shall you bereave
No enemy neither Moth nor Thief
Therefore repent while time you have
There is no Repentance in the Grave.
A welcome home for Seamen,
Welcome kind sir, now lately come a shore
And the dangers of the Seas you have passed ore
Now you are come unto your dwelling place
The Lord preserve you with his aiding grace,
God bless you now and keep you from sorrow
Your Belman bids you heartily good morrow.
On God's power,
The God of Power preserve us all
And send us grace on him to call
To pardon sin which now is past
That so we may have joy at last
In Heaven, where nothing else shall be
But continually joy and felicity.
On the Weather.
What weather next can we desire to have
We wanted Frost and Frost to us God gave,
And having frost we seemed not be content
We wanted Snow and snow to us God sent,
Out of the South he caused the winds to blow
Dissolved the frost and quite consumed the Snow.
The Belman's Care.
Kind sirs my duty I am free to do
And it is in hopes thereby to please you (...)
Walking about and ringing of this my Bell
And finding that all things are safe and well
Then turn again to rest and soundly sleep
And God I hope will you in safety keep.
The EPILOGUE.
Thanks noble Masters kind that you me give
I hope thereby your dearest souls may live
That when you dye your souls return to rest
To live with Saints and Angels always blessed.
Returning thanks to Masters and Mistresses all
And through the Town and Mash I call
For all grand Rogues and Thieves I do defy
And rather than i will see you wronged i will dye.
Printed by H. Brugis for Andrew Maxsey 1680.


