THE VVhite-Powder Plot DISCOVERED, OR, A PROPHETICAL POEM, Wherein is most
elegantly revealed the secret Combination of Hell and Rome, against the
interest of true Religion, and more particularly against the late King of
Blessed Memory, and Kingdom of England.

Written before the late unhappy Wars broke forth, and too sadly verified in
them, which yet the Author scarce lived to see.

Also a Prophetical Rapture concerning the future extent of this British Empire
into Italy.

By GEORGE MAY, Gent.

LONDON* Printed, and are to be sold by Francis Grove Stationer on Snow-hill
and by Francis Mawborn Stationer in York, 1662.

Courteous Reader,
IT would be too much of injury to thee, to detain thee any time with a tedious
Epistle, and to avoid that, I only in short give thee this account; that the
Book thou art now about to engage thy pains in, (if thou do not read it too
slightly over) will not fail thee, as some do, that are larger in the first
page than in all the rest that follow, but fully answer all thy expectations,
that take their rise from thy view of the Frontispiece. Thus I leave it to thy
judgment, which I hope will neither be severe nor rash; and I doubt not but
after a serious perlection, thou will conclude it a friendly part done of him
that brought the Poem to the Press, which above this twenty years has been
kept close prisoner in his dead Master's Closet, and seems to be antienter in
its date than the first Scottish Expedition; and perhaps after thou have weighed
all its particulars, thou will be as great an Admirer of it, as he that
commends it to thee.

Farewell.
Upon that excellent Poem of Mr. George May, called, The White-powder Plot
discovered.
Were It not a sin both against Heaven and Thee,
To wish Thee back from thy Eternity;
How earnest should I be, that Earth again
Were enriched with thy presence? But in vain
Are all such thoughts, it is enough that we
Have any thing that did belong to thee.
Thy Book these many years since thou did die,
Has Cloistered up it self from every eye,
Like a Close Mourner; Nay, a man may say,
It Buried was, like Thee, from sight or day,
And so had laid, but that a Happy Fate
Attends the Press, and those to it relate.
Thus, and no other way, it comes to be
Extant with us, and risen before thee.
A. B.

Upon that most Ingenious Poem of Mr. George May, called, The White-powder
Plot.
I Now believe a Transmigration
Of Souls is no such fond opinion:
Since did not thy foreseeing one inherit
Some old Sybillas strange Prophetic Spirit,
It were not possible thou should so well
The King and Kingdoms Fortune thus foretell;
Or sing in lofty numbers Englands fate,
Which thou so long before did antidate.
Such is thy Method, such thy History,
So clear thy Vein, so smooth thy Poetry,
So strangely taking, that it would require
The ripest Judgment which most do admire.
Prophetic raptured Soul! was I possessed
With the least spark which did inspire thy breast,
I Would write thy Praises in a strain as high,
As is thy much admired Prophecy;
Nay I Would turn Prophet too, and boldly say,
None ever was, or will be, match with May.
A. C.

On the posthumous Prophetical Poem of Mr. George May, called, The
White-powder Plot discovered.
HAd I faculty for Verse,
I would employ't to grace thy Hearse
With Elegies,' cause Thou did die
So soon, cut off by Destiny:
And that thy Book came forth so late,
Which might have saved both King and State.
But, O alas! Thy hour was come,
Through our irrevocable doom,
Not thine own fate: Thy Book concealed,
That Wrath on Sin may be revealed.
What Dress, O May, can suit thy worth?
It Is thine own Flowers sets thee forth.
I would be glad to live and see
What Is yet behind, foretold by Thee.
For thy sake, I could wish St. George's day
Henceforth translated to the Month of May.
A. D.

To his BOOK.
MY little Book, if any chance to bring
Thee to the hands of Charles, my Sovereign King,
Present my bounden Love and Loyalty
And faithful Service to his Majesty.
Tell him that Men run mad, beware to trust,
For not a Man, amongst a thousand's just.
The Dev'l's unloos'd from his inchained Den,
And reigns, and rages, in the hearts of Men;
Sin strives with Virtue, gets the upper hand,
And makes Gods Vengeance scourge this Sinful Land.
The Devil's Motto is of great and small
Embraced: ( Each for himself, and God for all)
The time has been, when men would spend their Blood,
And sacrifize themselves, for Sovereigns good.
The time is now, (O happy time to reign)
When King love's People, People him again.
They are his Members, he their Royal Head,
How could they thrive, if he were sick, or dead?
Oh, then endeavor both with foot and hand,
To underprop this Head of British Land.
But now, alas! both hands and feet are lame,
Some both in Court and Country are too blame
In many things, which would amended be,
If that his eyes were open, that he might see:
But they disable, Eye, and Hand, and Ear,
That he should neither See, nor Feel, nor Hear;
They know his Justice, and they fear his Rod,
As guilty Conscience fears the Wrath of God.
What Joseph now, does near the King remain,
That foresees Famine, and provides for Grain,
For to relieve their King and Countries want,
When Victuals fail, or Money waxes scant?
I may with David, restifie there is none
In all the Court, or Country, scarcely one
That seeks for to advance their Prince's store,
Unless they pluck it from the backs of the Poor.
Poor Souls, they want, yet do not murmur much,
Because their true Religion makes them such.
But if in Popish times such things had been,
You should have many change of colors seen;
But God be blessed, Religion does advance,
Our days, above those times of Ignorance.
We do adore our Kings as Gods, for we
Know, God commands, on Earth it so should be;
And pray that God may so our Souls reward,
As Kings may safely walk, without a Guard.
But I am sure his Royal ears would itch,
If he should hear how the o'r-ruling Rich
Oppress the Poor, and like self-loving Elves,
Care not who weep, so they may laugh themselves,
When as his Majesty well understands,
That a small number of some Rich Men's hands,
Cannot so much unto his profit prove,
As the enjoyment of his Commons Love.
Yet easy 't were, to speak't I dare be bold,
To furnish him with weighty sums of Gold
By lawful means, and fill his Chests with store,
And yet not take one Farthing from the Poor,
Nor wrong one Subject, If his Grace did know it,
And I persuade my self that I could show it.
Yet tell that true Catholic Faith's Protector
Thy Master is no common base Projector,
Nor aims at his peculiar private gain,
For he esteems all fading pelf, but vain;
Desires no superfluous Wealth, or Meat,
But clothes for warmness, wholesome cates to eat;
And only wishes he may spend his Blood,
To do his Highness, and his Country good.
But God, who knows things secret and concealed,
Limits all times, when ought should be revealed.
God bless his Grace, and send him long to reign
To God's good glory, and our Britains gain.
Non nobis solum nati sumus.
G. M.

The Author's humble Petition to his right Royal, and thrice Noble Patron.
GReat Sir, when you shall grace this little Book,
By lending of your Royal eyes to look
Thereon, and therein find ought that shall please
Your Highness appetite, my heart's at ease.
But whatsoere you cannot well digest,
Then cancel it; For here I do protest,
My heart is guiltless, and my thoughts are free
From the least tincture of Disloyalty,
Or injury unto the meanest Swain,
Which in these Territories does remain;
And live in hope to see, that time, and place,
Wherein I may do service to Your Grace.
And therefore ( thrice renowned Noble,) since,
My aim shoots at the profit of my Prince,
I humbly pray, to let misprisions pass
Your Gentle Censure: For I know, alas,
My Oaten-pipe, and rustic homebred strain,
Lacks pleasant Relish, for your Courtly brain.
Which done, if you vouchsafe your Royal hand
Unto the same: I Am sure it will command
The Churlish Printer, without further strife,
To give it freedom; Then whilst we have life,
My Book, and I, will both unto our power
Endeavor to approve, that we are
Your Graces obsequious Servants: And will pray For your eternal Happiness
George May.

The Authors Prayer before his Book.
NOw thou who know the obtuse heart of Man,
Who measurest the Earth as with a span,
Who keepst the hurling Winds within thy fist,
So that they cannot rage, but when thou list;
Who graspst the curled Waves within thy hand;
Who numberest each fraction in the sand;
Whose Power can be abated by no Faction;
Who swaist, and over-rulest every action;
So guide, and rule, this Terrene hand of mine,
That whosoever reads, may know the work is thine.
Pardon, O pardon, my presumptuous hand,
For his dear sake, who Advocate does stand
At thy right hand, to stay deserved ire,
Which else for Sin, might justly be my hire.
But since his Blood has washed my Sins away,
Now show thy mercy on new-moulded clay.
Thy Mercy, makes thy Glory, brighter shine,
Than all thy Attributes, great, and Divine.
Direct, and lead, my Heart, my Hand, and Pen,
That all may glorify thy Name.
Amen.
The WHITE-POWDER PLOT Discovered.
DArk Nights black Curtains being something drawn, A description of the Morning.

Grey-eyd Aurora in a smock of Lawn
Appears: and Darkness like a Drunkard reels
Through days bypath, but shuns the burning Wheels
Of glorious Titan, who does blush to see
Aurora up and ready, before he
Could fix his fulgent Rays upon his head,
Which dies the Eastern World with so much Red,
That 't caused Mortals stand and gaze thereon,
Imagining some haughty Phaeton
Usurpt his Fathers Charet once again,
To curb his fiery Horses with the Reign.
Just at this time, even at this present hour,
I laid me down within a pleasant Bowr.
The Hawthorn's white, the Brier begins to bud, The Spring described.

Upon the Grass appears a Crystal flood
Of pearled Dew, to quaver up and down,
As threatening the Earth once more therewith to drown.
Roses, and Violets, Flowers of fragrant smell,
Did on such clusters, in this Arbor dwell,
As though alone within this pleasant Arbor,
The choicest Flowers on Earth did strive to harbor.
Grazing my Senses on this new come brood
Of Springs sweet Progeny, me thought there stood
A Man Angelical, his Robes were White,
His hair was long, much like a Nazarite,
Whose awful sight causing my flesh to quake,
To ease my fear, thus (thunder-like) he spoke;
Fear not (said he) good courage take, my Friend,
For I come to thee for a holy end,
That what by me, to thee, this time presages
Thou may proclaim unto succeeding ages,
And unto Mortals, testify, and tell,
Those things thou hear'st, and see, in Heaven and Hell.
Alas (said I) I am but rural brea,
Such high imploiments will confound my head,
If that thy powerful Deity will be pleased,
Let thy poor Vassal of this task be eased,
Eiect a Person of some greater worth,
Who can with Lofty, Courtly, terms set forth
These Mysteries: poor Hackneis serve for Us,
And none but Courtiers mount Bucephalus.
My faltering tongue these words had scarcely said,
When into the Arbor steps a modest Maid,
And in her hand, she brought a Pen and Ink,
Some of the Muses sure she was, I think,
Who stooping to the ground, kneeling thereon,
I brought this Ink (said she) from Helicon:
Within that Pen-sheath likewise is a Quill
Pulled (from a Swan bred on Parnassus Hill)
By cunning Mercury, who proved the same,
To win that beautiful, and starely Dame,
Proud Danae to Jupiter for Gold,
As ancient Poets have in Stories told.
This said, She made it fast unto my side,
Then out of sight more quick than lightning glide.
My eye scarce twinkled after this was done,
But strait I sound my resolution
Quite metamorphoz'd, ready pressed to go
Where ever it pleased my Guide conduct me to.
Well (said the Angel) we must hence away,
Our business calls, and will not brook delay.
With that, as though a thunderbolt were driven
Upon proud Earth, from just revenging Heaven,
So fast, and faster were my Guide and I
Mounted from the Earth, above the azur'd Sky.
Even here I found, that our Divines say true,
We shall know men in Heaven, which we never knew
Here upon Earth: and therefore sure to know
Those friends above, which here we know below.
For like as Adam knew his new-fram'd Wife Simile

So soon as ere she had a taste of life:
And straitway called upon her by her name,
Never asking what she was, not how she came;
And like as Scripture unto us discloses,
How that Elias, and the Prophet Moses,
Were known to Christ's Disciples on the Mount,
When whosoever list to calculate, or count,
Shall find those Prophets died long before,
Above a thousand years, or rather more.
As Adam's Wife, and as the Apostles these
By inspiration knew; So did it please
The Almighty Rector of the hearts, that I
Whilst I remained in thoughts above the Sky,
Was excellent in knowledge, could have told
Each Man, or Angels name, I did behold. A Parliament in Heaven.

Then instantly, a Cloud was drawn away,
Which done, I might behold as clear as day
A spacious place, all richly gilt with Gold,
And precious Stones, mine eyes did never behold
So rare a Prospect, Man cannot invent
A thing of so great note or wonderment.
Here did the Prophets, and Apostles sit,
The Evangelists, and all the rest that writ
The life of Jesus, and his sacred Word,
And all that Martyred were, by fire and sword,
Whose Robes were as of color d'yd in blood.
I to behold this Army Royal stood
As metamorphoz'd; yet desired to know
The event would follow such a glorious show:
Like when a Traveller weary, and sore, Simile.

With travel, sits him down upon the shore
Near to the Sea, seeking his limbs to ease;
He takes delight to view the restless Seas,
Birds sweetly sing, the Sun most gently shines,
The Winds are calm, each thing to rest inclines;
When all on sudain he is circled round
With furious Lions, hemming in the ground,
Each Lion on his curled back does bear
An armed Man, or warlike Trumpetter,
Then Winds they bluster, Seas they rage and swell,
The Trumpets sound, the Lions roar and yell,
The Heavens rend, sending huge claps of thunder,
And all at once engender cause of wonder:
So whilst I sat in silence, with intent
To see what this Assembly Royal meant;
A sudain voice more fearful than all these,
The Lions, Thunder, Trumpets, and the Seas,
Did pour forth words, but every word it spoke,
Made all the frame of Heaven to dance, and shake;
Then casting up mine eyes a little higher,
I saw a bleeding Lamb in clouds of fire,
Which did his speeches, down to them direct,
Whose words were these, or unto this effect.
The Lamb's Speech in Parliament. SHall I, the uncreated King of Kings,
Be torn, and tortured, by these Earthly things?
Shall Justice, (staid by Mercy,) make them bold?
Shall the Potter by his Vessel be controld?
Have I not cherished, nourished, bent my smiles
Upon that Island, above all the Isles Great Britain.

Of the Terrestrial Orb? Have I not given
The crumbs of Manna, and the dew of Heaven,
For meat, and drink, unto that wretched Land,
And like a Nurse fed them with breast and hand?
What do they want that Man can say is good,
They eat, and drink* my Body and my blood.
The more they feed on me, I love them more,
Did Man, or God, ever show such love before!
And yet this thus blessed Nation has begun
To disobey the Father, scorn the Son,
And that their Sins might ripen to the most
Spurn at the (Comforter) the Holy Ghost.
How dare they (each day praying) call me Father,
When they appear, to be the Devils rather?
If I thy Father be, and thou my Son,
Where is the honor thou to me have done?
Is it in offering Incense unto B'all,
Or in thy feasting Locusts in thy hall?
Am I so black, is my surpassing beauty
So far decayed, that thou forgetst they duty?
Oh no, it is sure in me is found no change,
But thy corruption makes thee prone to range,
Thou art ingrafted so on things below,
That Heavenly things thou carest not to know.
I with the Ocean have hemd them in
To keep them to myself, from foreign sin,
Yet make they Ships.
Wooden Bridges, where pass over
Romes Babylonians, from France to Dover,
They 'r so besotted with that hellish train,
As though the Romans were their Lords again.
And it were just, to leave them in their paws,
To be consumed with their Fagot-Laws,
And take my Candle-stick from off their boards,
And giv't to some that better fruits affords.
The Infernal Fiends for Justice rage, and rave,
Justice they cry for, Justice they shall have:
When the quintessence of Justice shall be shown,
The Devil, and Hell, can have but what 's their own,
And those are theirs I will no longer cherish,
Mine shall be safe, although the damned perish:
But you that are my solace, and my joy,
Who suffered tribulation, and annoy,
For my names sake, whilst you on Earth remained,
And now the Crown of glory have attained,
I make y' Exec'tors of my Testament,
Perform 't according to my just intent.
Let it be published abroad for use,
Not subjected to silence, and abuse,
Nor yet be writ in Babels unknown tone,
The Author of Folly, and Confusion,
But fair engrossed in Text, to read and spell,
That those that run, or ride, may read it well,
And see what Hell that Lower House requires,
If it be just, confirm to their desires.
But look that Mercy, which is my delight,
Be not encroach'd on, by the Prince of Night,
My Blessing, Love, and Peace be with you still,
I leave you now, to execute my will.
The Lamb's Speech ends.
This said, he veiled himself behind a Cloud,
As does the Sun, when he his Rays does shroud.
Then did the Saints unto the Lamb sing praise,
In holy Songs, and heavenly Roundelaies:
Sitting attentive to receive such bills,
As any offered, and to right their ills. St. Michael.

My Guide, whom now I know to be the same
Who striving with the Devil, overcame,
For Morses body, which devouring Dis
Did claim, and falsely challenge to be his,
Took me by the hand (saying) we must to Hell
To see their actions that below do dwell;
But fear thou nothing: for even I thy Guide
Will thee protect from Hell, or ought beside.
Stra^t we descended to Infern Abyss, Hell described.

Where black Egyptian Darkness always is,
Darkness indeed, so thick it may be felt,
Where Hellish stink of Styx we quickly smelt,
But when my Guide with 's finger touched my nose
All smelt to me as sweet as any Rose.
And though we were where it is eternal night,
Yet had we to our selves a glorious light.
Thus walking safely in the shades of death,
Drawing in midst of stink, delicious breath;
By this we came unto the Rivers brink,
Which was of color full as black as Ink;
Here did Night-Ravens, and the Scritch-Owls fly,
Here did the Harpies, and Hyennaes cry,
Here did the Toads, and Crocodiles rejoice,
Here did the Yelling Dragons make a noise;
Here sat old Charon in his loathsome Boat,
Near to the shore, in careless wise on float;
Here did I such a lovely sight behold, Charon described.

As Paint never drew, nor Story ever told.
This tattered Devil, his shagged locks were black,
Which hang benitted dangling on his back,
In curled rolls, as ugly and as big,
As any Monsieurs pock-hold Periwig;
His head hung lolling down betwixt his thighs;
As burnishd sawcers brandished his eyes.
Well (quoth my Guide) to make our time seem short,
With this old Boat-man, we will have some sport.
Charon (said he) I charge thee forthwith tell
What caused that uproar was of late in Hell?
Like to the slow pace of a Thief by night, Simile.

Or like a house removed by force and might,
Or like a Ship that 's turned without a Helm,
Or like one lifting at a mighty Elm,
As swift at least it seemed, or something more
Was Charon's haste to turn him to the shore.
Then like the voice of one from under ground, Simile.

Or like the opening of a deep-mouthed Hound,
Or like one closed within a hollow Oak,
With belching voice at last these words he spoke.
Charon's Speech. I marvel you that live in blisfull light,
Should trouble us here in eternal night,
Our Prince is more abated of his Pride
By thee, than all the Host of Heaven beside.
Know that this hurly-burly here of late
Was caused by two Potentates of State,
In Parliament which should the Speaker be,
And they in words did so far dis-agree,
That from great words to fearful blows they fell,
So that the Inferior Subjects of black Hell,
Some taking this part, and some taking that,
They dealt full roundly many a churlish bat.
The noise being heard by Pluto, who did dine
At that same instant with his Proserpine,
Caused him on sudain rise, and leive his Wife,
To know the meaning of such deadly strife:
When coming, many a grisly Devil he found,
By sturdy strokes, ly tumbling on the ground,
But by his presence having made them cease,
And (which is seldom known in Hell) made peace,
Inquiring of the cause of this debate,
Forth steps a Devil with a broken pate,
And unto Pluto in plain terms did tell,
How that stern Judas and Achitophel
Were cause of all: For that they strive (said he)
Which in this Parliament shall Speaker be.
Then Pluto charged them both by Archeron,
Charon, Styx, Tartar, Po, and Phlegeton,
That they therein hereafter should not strive,
For he would by his own Prerogative,
Determine it the next time he had leisure,
Commanding them, on pain of his displeasure,
Not once to mention it in the mean space.
Then strait took Boat, and landed at this place,
With whom in company is gone the Pope,
Who are arrived on Earth by this, and hope
To bring good tidings unto Hell again
From all their Factors that on Earth remain.

For Whom (said the Angel) will thou give thy voice,
Or which will Pluto (think thou) make his choice?
I Am sure (said Charon) Judas is the Man,
(Let proud Achitophel do what he can)
For his true service and great labor spent
On Hells behalf in former Parliament.
I charge thee Charon (said my powerful Guide)
Since leisure does permit thee at this tide,
Declare what Parliament, and for what reason
Did Pluto call the same, and since that season
What acts did Judas, which his fame did raise
So high, that he deserves so much thy praise.
Like to a fretted Ape that mops and mows,
Or like a Baboons fond faced antique shows, Simile.

Or like a Bull that's chewing of his cudd,
So Charon fares: Then fast into the mudd
He runs his Boat, with all the force of Oar,
And stepping forth, sits on the Stygian shore.
Then like the grumbling of some angry Cur, Simile.

His slabber'd Chaps at last began to stir,
Sounding like one within an empty Tub,
At length these words were bluster'd by this Cub.
Charon's true tale. HE needs must run the Devil drives (they say)
But when the Heavens command, the Devils obey,
And (though per force) yet list and I will tell
The truest tale that ever was told in Hell.
When Christ (that is called the Son of God) was born,
Our Pluto thinking for to work him scorn,
To further his determinated ends,
He summoned the chiefest of his Feinds,
And though they sat in Council day by day,
Yet all that ever they could plot, or say,
Could not prevail against that Heavenly Seed,
Whom Men call Savior, as he is indeed,
Until full time was come, or he the rather
Offered himself, sweet Incense to his Father,
To satisfy his Justice once for all,
Who lost his favor by frail Adam's fall.
But where he gave our Prince one wound before,
He at his Death, gave many Millions more.
Each Christian now dares challenge him the field,
And by Faith: force, enforce him for to yield. The cause of Hells former
Parliament.

Our Prince was wounded full upon the face,
And galled with such eminent disgrace,
Came down to Hell, with Countenance so grim,
That scarce his Proserpine durst speak to him;
But not the boldest or most hardy Spright
That could be absent, would come in his sight.
His choler something post; incontinent,
He calls his chiefest Lords to Parliament,
For to devise how to suppress Christ's Word,
Which had already as a conquering sword,
So ranged about the World like a Commander,
That it was talked on more than Alexander.
Some said it must be this way, Some, be that;
With eager minds both night and day they sat.
(Quoth Pluto) though in Hell be plaguie Wits,
Yet there is not one that in this Council sits
Has levelled right, or shot just in the white.
At last stood up an old Gray Headed Spright,
An ancient Devilish, that winks still with one eye,
By name he is called Swordly Policy;
One so well red in Hells prognostic School,
No mortal man can take him for a Fool;
He made obeisance, stooping so low down,
Until he made the table kiss his crown;
Then with a hem or two, to clear his throat,
He sung to Pluto, this well-pleasing Note.
Great Prince (said he) although my face be old, Worldly Policy's Counsel.

Yet shall my counsel be more worth than Gold.
Thou know that Christian people make great odds
Between us Devils, and the immortal Gods:
If we intend for to delude their sight,
We must transform our selves from black, to white,
Seeming as though we came to them from Heaven,
So by this means, they shall be quite bereaven
To seek the right way, and be led by us;
The platform of my drift is framed thus;
Some old faced Devil, whereof we have good choice,
Of subtle heart, but singular of voice,
Shall stand for Peter, Now this is my plot,
In Peter's stead, to place Iscariot.
The only Man, befitting such a place,
For he will betray even Jesus to his face.
Thou know Religion is as yet but young,
Suppress it therefore, ever it grow too strong.
I speak not this, thy Tutor for to be,
For all I have ( Great Prince) proceeds from thee,
But having shown my duty, from my breast,
My part is played, do thou direct the rest.
My Friend (said Pluto) thou have pleased me well,
I henceforth make thee Chancellor of Hell.
And forthwith Judas he did thither call,
Who being placed in the middle of the Hall;
Judas (said he) because I have thee found Pluto his Commission to ludas.

Unto my service alwais firm and sound,
I mean to employ thee, and I here install
Thee upon Earth our Vicar General.
Great Rome shall be thy Seat, as Peter's Heir,
Thou shall inherit both his Keys and Chair.
But when thou nam'st thy self, be sure thou lie,
And write thy self, Servant of Jesus Christ.
So by that* means, men shall be drawn by thee,
To prostitute their Souls to Hell and me.
In Bishops habit shall thou go each day,
But in thy Robes shall be more rich than they.
Thou Keys, and Crosier-staff, in hands shall bear,
And Golden Sandals on thy feet shall wear.
No common Crown shall serve, thou shall in stead
Be triple-crown'd, and Myturd on thy head;
That who so names, what on thy head he sees,
May have the Devils T -- betwixt his teeth.
Thou shall not marry during all thy life,
For many Whores are sweeter than one Wife:
Such Brood as on their wombs thou shall beget,
Make thy great Cardinals, let them be set
In chiefest places, next to thy right hand,
They may be always ready at command.
Fear nothing, never doubt in ought to err,
For Wordly Policy thy Counselor
Shall thee instruct; and see that no disgrace
Befall thy self nor any in thy place.
All Pluto's Subjects shall on thee attend,
With help from Hell; thou shall not need to send.
Give pardons for all Sins, nay, sell them rather,
For Whoredom, Murder, though one kill his Father,
Commit Theft, Incest, or what ever thing,
To any Subject that shall kill his King.
Thus shall thou heap up Wealth in endless store
By Bribes, and gifts, from every Knave or Whore.
Thus wealthy Men from Sin shall never cease,
In hope their pelf will purchase their release.
Imitate me thy Prince, for thou do know,
That Fercer-like I give Christ blow for blow,
And though I could not overcome by might,
Yet ce^st I not to work my utmost spite:
So though thy aim do sometimes chance to miss,
Yet faint nor, but molest both him and his.
Strike the best Christian always on the face,
And by all means work virtuous Men disgrace.
Though never so small their fault, yet shall thou make
Them baited be, like Bulls at every stake.
Suppress Religion, but be sure to advance
Found Superstition, and Ignorance.
Make Laws, and Statutes, wherein let't be death
For him that whispers but the smallest breath
Against thy Supreme Power, so Mighty Nations
Shall fear thy Bulls, and Excommunications.
Let Dirges, Masses, and such trash be brought
Into the Churches as are good for naught,
But to fill Men's minds with vain fantastic toies,
As Drums and Ratles please young Gils and Boys.
The end of Pluto's Oration. This said, Don Pluto sat down in his place,
For whilst he spoke he stood up all the space.
Judaa by signs did gratify his Lord,
For he made curt'sies, but spoke never a word.
Then 't was devised how this great Potentate, Judas his State,

Should be conveid unto his Chair of State,
Some said't were fitting that the Great Iscarios,
Triumphant like should have a stately Chariot.
Some said, by water he might better go:
But I denied, and swear I would not row
So far from Styx, although it be not far,
For Styx and Tyber, two near neighbors are:
But loss might come hereby, and you may note,
And we lose Souls by wanting of my Boat.
One cried a Coach, and this was liked well,
The first that ever was known was made in Hell,
Strait six Pegasian Sprights were ready pressed,
To draw the Coach, in Harness richly dressed,
Despite was Coachman, whose commanding hand
Did guide the reigns, and make them go or stand And Attendants.

At every check, who with his knotty whip,
Would now and then, cause them curvet and skip.
He had so his Postillian Vain Desire,
A vile ambirious Dwarff, who to be higher
Does toil, and moil, in mire and dirt full often,
And yet regards not, so he be aloft.
In the one end Judas sits, in the other sat
Pride, with a plume of feachers in his Hat.
In one Boot sat Murder and Treachery,
In the other Drunkenness and Leachery,
Twelve Lacquies ran close by the Coaches side,
As pestilent as any there, but Pride,
Ten thousand Furies rode before and after,
Some making antique tricks, provoking laughter,
So thus attended mighty Judas road,
And strait in Rome was honored as God:
And reason good, who else durst be so brisk
To tread upon the Asp and Basilisque?
At first he spreads abroad his potent Theme,
Charging the World to Title him Supreme.
The haughty Spaniard he began to puff,
And swore by's Rapier and great Spanish Ruff, Spain is startled.

That with the Prelates pride he would be even,
Scorning to stoop to any under Heaven.
To stop whose mouth, Judas did forthwith call
On Pride, who newly was made Cardinal,
And sent him Lord Ambassador to Spain,
The scope of whose Embassage did contain,
That Spain should pardons have for Usurpation,
And Pride should be no sin unto that Nation.
He likewise from his Hollowness did bring,
Spain's Popish Title: The Catholic King.
The Cardinal in Spain such favor gained,
That by the King he strait was entertained
In sum^tuous manner: who did likewise give
Him maintenance in Spain whilst he should live.
This news from Spain went posting into France, France fiels.

Who g^^l'd therewith upon great Horses prance
Into the fields, threatening not only Rome,
But all that took their parts in Christendom;
Whose fiery fury Judas to prevent,
Sent an Ambassador incontinent,
Who brought them pardons for Idolatry,
Fainthearted Cowardice, and Lechery,
Though they should worship breathless stones and stocks,
And Whore, and wanton till they got the Pox,
Yet should these be no sins unto that Nation,
But only counted for their Countries fashion.
These things buz'd into their fantastic heads,
The Apes return from fields, unto their bedds.
This done the Ambassadors return again,
The one from France, the other forth of Spain,
The Spaniard sent (in token of contrition) Both are quieted.

Word, he would found the Spanish Inquisition.
The French sent word to Rome, he would advance
The Pope's Supremacy throughout all France.
By imitation of these two great Kings,
He in short time, into subjection brings,
All Christendom, within the Papal power,
T'imbrew themselves in lust with- Babels Whore.
Thus lulled a-sleep with poison of her Cup,
Of which all Christian Nations took a sup:
Hell danced for joy, for Souls did seldom cease,
To fill my Boat, and glut Hell with increase:
From Sweathland, Poland, Holland, Germany,
From Denmark, Ireland, and fair Albany
Came Popish Proselites in flocks to Hell:
It were impossible the number tell.
Thus it continued many hundred years,
Until at length, in Germany appears
Some glimpse of the Gospel, and to England came
King Henry, called the eighth King of that name.
In whose last years, and his son Edward's Reign
Hells Kingdom lost in England: But again
King Edward dead, Queen Mary got the Crown,
Our hopes revive, the Gospel's trodden down.
Oh then our friends did flourish in the Court, Gardener and Bonner.

London and Winchester did make us sport.
My Boat and I, on Thames were as well known,
As here upon this River of our own.
But as for Lambeth, Canterburies seat,
Old Cranmer left thereon such holy sweat
As I had rather spend my time in Hell,
Than one hours space, be bound to abide that smell.
Well, all Queen Mary's days, Smithfield did flame
With fire and Faggots, one may without shame
Report that Smithfield had more Roast therein
Than all Pye-corner, yet commit no sin.
But sure I think, that blood for vengeance cried
Against Rome and Hell, for then Queen Mary died:
Whose too stout sister, banished the Pope, Q. Eliz.

His Mass Priests suffering penance in a Rope.
And although Rome did often stout spirits send,
With strange devises for to work her end,
Yet could they never prevail, good reason why,
For she had help which man could not espy.
As in her life, so did she at her death
Her Crown and Kingdom unto one bequeath
As far declining from Romes power as she,
As by his own handwriting you may see,
Whose Son (Great Charles) is of his fathers mind,
So that we are almost past hope to find
Any redress in England: yet we hope'd
That when their King had with Queen Mary cop'd,
We should have gotten in by means of France,
And by Queen Mary's means our cause advance,
But she is more like to Mary Christ's dear Mother,
Than their last Mary Queen, or any other.
Yet under color of that Flower de Luce,
Our Priests make bold to chatter and seduce:
So that in England we have better store
Of Papists now, than threescore years before.
By this, and other grievous sins we know,
Which in that Land do plentifully flow,
We hope such Bills against them to prefer
As shall take place at Gods Tribunal Bar.
As he is merciful, so is he just:
And Sinnets certainly he punish must.
If We for one sin were cast down to Hell,
And they unpunished pass; he does not well.
For our one sin, we will prove at least a score
Embraced by them, if not a thousand more:
We stay but till our Prince return again,
And then we hope to work their utter bane.
Now have I done, I can no longer stay,
For Pluto calls, and I must needs obey.
Charons Tale ends.
Thus with a clownish tone his tale he ends,
Then to his rusty Boat in haste he wends.
My Angel smiled to see this hasty Devil,
How swift are they (said he) to run to evil?
But we will prevent their haste, and be in Hell
Before they come to hear Achitophel
Dispute with Judas, for the Speakers place,
And yet we will be concealed all the space.
Then were we there, before one could devise
To think one thought, or twinkle with one's eyes.
The place was wondrous spacious, dark as night, Hell described.

But that Sulphurous fire did give some light.
The noise was mavelous, the shrieks and howls,
Which pierced our ears, from Hell-tormented Souls.
The several torments I cannot declare,
But wish all men take heed, they come not there.
Scarce had we viewed this ghastly spacious round
But that we heard a strange disordered sound,
Much like the noise of some Rebellious rout,
Such burly burly was made all about.
By which we guest, that place was then prepared
Against the Disputation should be heard.
And as we thought, so did the matter prove, A Parliament in Hell.

For strait came Pluto, and with him his Love,
With whom such multitudes of Devils came
As it is past all cunning for to the name.
The Rabble set, in some disordered order,
There stood up one, I think 'twas Hells Recorder,
Who after Declaration of the cause
Of this their meeting, took a little pawse,
Then roaring out aloud, he did proclaim,
In their great Prince, Don Plutoes dreadful name,
That none should dare, once silence for to break
Whilst the two Disputants had ought to speak.
This said: Ahithophel appeared in place,
And then came Judas, with a shameless grace,
Who strait began in vile unmanner'd sort
Without leave asked, to break silence in the Court.
But Pluto, sharply him then reprehended,
Although (said he) thou art to be commended
For much good service, yet I must thee tell,
Thou art much younger than Ahithophel,
So that when he his mind has first declared
( My friend) at large thou likewise shall be heard.
This caused Judas cease; then strait began
Ahithophel to stroke his beard, and than,
Obeisance made, with thanks unto his Prince,
He thus begun.
Ahithophels Oration. Most dreadful Monarch, since
It is thy pleasure, so far me to grace,
To give me such pre-eminence of place,
And you my Lords, and fellow Furies all,
By him assembled, in this spacious Hall,
Give me but leave t'unfold my mortal life,
Then judge of me, this Judas, and our strife.
My famous Counsel unto David, (King
Of mighty Judah) through the Word did ring,
He, and his Princes, did my cousnel follow
More than the Oracles of great Apollo.
No thing was done, which pleased not me well,
No Counsel then, but from Ahithophel.
Thus did I flourish in that famous Court
For many years, as Scriptures do report:
Until proud Absalom began to rebel,
Oh then began thy fall, Ahithophel.
For though my Master was King, Prophet, Priest,
And more than that, the Type of Jesus Christ,
Yet did I (Oh abominable thing)
Seek to betray this Prophet, Priest, and King.
Read Histories and Scriptures, over and over,
And you shall never find the like before.
And yet not satisfied with this great evil,
To show I loved my Sovereign Lord the Devil,
I sacrifiz'd to him my latest breath,
So to make sure my everlasting death,
Having a great desire with him to dwell,
And, rather than see David, live in Hell.
I know that many foolish Jacks and Gills,
Have come to Hell: but sore against their wills,
In hope to rid themselves from further pain;
But I, of malice, and of proud disdain
Did choose this place: because I was persuaded
I should not meet my wronged Master David:
Where I have dutifully ever since,
Attended on the person of our Prince.
Now having both Antiquity and fame
Preceding Judas, I do hold it shame
To stand in competition with a fool,
Who never was trained like me, in wisdoms school.
I hope this is sufficient: and will try
Which of us twain, Iscariot, or I,
Deserve the more respect in each degree,
And therefore judge, betwixt the fool and me.
Ahithophels Oration ends.
Then sent the Devils out a mighty yell,
Casting up firebrarnds, cried Ahithophel,
Ahithophel, Ahithophel, cried they
Must have the place, come, let us not delay
To give our voices all with one consent
He may be Speaker in this Parliament.
Nay, soft (said Judas) you must hear me speak,
Or else you cause our Prince his promise break:
And when at full I have declared my mind,
Then give your voices, unto him you find
The best deserving, for our King and Hell,
Whether to me, or proud Ahithophel.
Then Pluto said, they could not well deny
His reasonable suit, therefore reply
With expedition, what thou have to say,
For often danger is bred by delay.
Thus Judas having leave, did forthwith rise,
And on Ahithophel did fix his eyes,
Judas his speech. I wonder (said he) this man has a face,
With me to make contention for this place,
For I can cause him eat each word he spoke,
And for his folly, me amends to make:
One but half-witted, marking every word,
May well perceive, they very much afford
For my avail; for see how he begins
Even at the first (fool like) to break his shins.
He was of Counsel to a mighty King,
A goodly Dish; nay more, to mend the thing,
Not only King, but Prophet, and a Priest,
And Type of that immortal Jesus Christ.
In one of these thou art mistaken: why,
He was no Priest, and therein do thou lie,
Now judge of this, and of the rest beside,
He served the Type, and I, him Typifi'd,
He did the shadow, I the substance serve
In all his life: and never from him swerve,
But followed him, and was of credit such,
I all his Treasure kept, though never so much.
He did betray an Earthly man: but I
A heavenly wight, and King of Majesty.
Now judge, I pray, if our deserts be even,
He betrayed Man, But I great God of Heaven.
Did ever any do the like, beside
My self, and thee ( great Beelzebub) in pride?
I imitate thy self, for thine was done
Against the Father, mine against the Son,
In one thing we agree all three the most,
We all did sin against the Holy Ghost.
But as my sin was equal unto thine,
Ahithophels cannot compare with mine,
I did deserve not only to be Pope,
But with great Beelzebub himself to cope,
Much more to stand at this same time, for place,
With such a slave, I do my self disgrace.
And therefore choose you whom you list, for me,
I scorn the matter should in balance be.
Judas his speech ends.
And so in fury from the place he flung,
Having their ears with these his speeches stung.
And when they saw how fiercely he departed,
It made Ahithophel to seem faint-hearted.
But all were mute, and dumb, till Pluto's self
Began to speak, (said he) this peevish elf,
I mean Iscariot, has but truly said,
And for his service should be ill apaid,
If we should not reward him with this place,
Or any other, though of greater grace.
And as for thee Ahithophel, I Will see
By some means else, to grace and honor thee.
This said, they all consent, and gave their voices
For Judas, which they yiel'd with fearful noyses,
Crying, a Judas, Judas, all about,
And so broke up this Court of hellish rout.
Thus having seen Hells scope, and full intent,
We haste to Heaven, against the Parliament,
Which we imagined would begin with speed,
And as we thought, so did it prove indeed:
For as we came without the Walls, (we found)
Of New-Jerusalem, a spacious ground New Jerusalem.

All full of seats, in order finely set,
Some white as Ivory, some black as Jet,
But none might come thereto by a great space,
Without leave got, of them who kept the place,
Which were strong Angels, who were set to guard
The place from comers, so I was debarred
From entrance in, until my Angel said
He must come in; who heard, was strait obeyed.
Then sat we down upon a bank of Roses,
As wearied men are wont to take reposes,
Until such time as some few hours were spent
Before the appointed time of Parliament:
But I being weak of nature, could not keep
My orewak'd eyelids open, but fell asleep:
Wherein such heavenly Visions did bewrap me,
As I desired such sleep might still benap me.
There did the Lamb and Lion play together,
The Dove and Falcon, Dog and Hare, yet neither,
The Lion, Lamb, Dove, Falcon, Dog, or Hare
Showed any enmity, or malice there,
But were as Loving one unto another,
As any Sister to her dearest Brother.
With many slumbers of such sweet delight,
I past the quantity of one whole night,
Yet is no night, nor darkness in that place,
For it was light as Sunshine, all the space.
But when my Angel saw it time to wake me,
He took me by the elbow, and did shake me,
Saying, it is time to rouse, for now (said he)
The time approaches, wherein thou shall see,
The houses set, and all the Devils at hand,
To urge their bills against thy Native Land:
Where thou shall be admitted to speak thy mind
When just occasion thou shall see or find.
Alas (said I) I am but Earthly mould
And dare not think, much less to speak, be bold.
The Devils are fearful, yet for them I care not,
But before Heaven and glorious wights, I dare not.
Then he rebuked me, saying, Thou can tell
That I preserved thee from the powers of Hell,
And that at my command thou wast let in
Into this place, where none (like thee in Sin)
Did ever enter, therefore never doubt
To answer, for my self will help thee out.
With that recomforted, I promised I*
Would (by him prompt) make answer, and reply
For my poor Country; so thou must (said he)
For 't is determined that it so shall be.
I am content (said I) then did we hear,
Such Music, as might ravish mortal ear,
Then Thunder, Lightning, and such streaks of fire
Were hurled abroad, as made me to admire
What was the cause; well now the Lamb (said he) The Lamb takes his place in
Parliament.

Does take his place, and sit unseen: yet see
All passages, what here is said or done
More perfectly than e're thou saw the Sun.
Then Thunder ceast, and Music played again,
When I beheld a brave and goodly train
Of glorified Saints, appear in view,
(I never did see men's faces of such hew)
Who filled all the seats of Ivory white,
In such grave order, that bred sweet delight,
I never saw so brave a sight before,
Nor mortal eye was ever delighted more.
We Will, they being set, the Music then did cease,
And for a space, there was a silent peace:
Until a Trumpets sound was heard from high,
Which done, a Royal voice did by and by
Pronounce these words: My Faithful servants, here
The damned Fiends of Hell will strait appear
To cry for Justice against that sinful Land, England.

Which I have loved as my own right hand;
And cannot hate it, if they would be driven
To leave their vices, and look up to Heaven:
Which is as much offended with their crimes,
As with Jerusalem in former times.
For as their Barns, and Coffers fill with store,
So do their sins abound, and gather more.
So that the Dev'ls will find sufficient cause
Of punishment, for breach of all our Laws.
You shall their bills, and all such answers take,
As any person to the same shall make,
Which you in Parliament shall read and see,
But you the censure shall referr to me:
So that no Statute shall be made, or done,
Before I grant for it Commission.
This said, we presently did hear a Din, The British Island is indicted.

Crying, on, on apace, in in, in in;
Then came grim Pluto rushing in, with whom,
Came hand in hand the powerful Pope of Rome,
Accompanied with such a hellish Rabble,
As to account Arithmetick's not able:
Who being seated, Judas up did stand,
Crying for Justice on the British Land;
If God be just (said he) we Justice crave,
That they with us might equal Justice have.
I have brought Witnesses to prove their sin,
Desiring they may be admitted in.
Some of their Witnesses I here will name, Enter the Witnesses.

Who with their bills, they brought to prove the same.
They brought to prove Pride. FAbius, who in his life swelled with pride,
Swallowed a hair in Milk, whereof he di'd.
Poppeia, Neroe's Concubine of old,
Who shod her Horses feet with burnisht Gold.
The Emperor Dioclesian likewise came,
Who ( brother to the Sun) himself did name.
To prove Covetousness. THey brought Hermocrates, who at his death
Did all his goods unto himself bequeath.
Craesus and eke Caligula were there,
Whose covetous Actions did surpass compare.
Demonica, who Ephesus for gain
Sold, and with weight of that same Gold was slain.
To prove Anger. GReat Alexander, who in 's angry mood
Killed Clitus his old Counselor, and good.
And Dionysius, who orecom'd with rage,
Stabbed to the heart his most indulgent Page.
Periander who with furious anger led
His most dear Wife unkindly murdered.
To prove Drunkenness. THe Tyrant Dionysius, whose delight
In too much drinking, caused him lose his sight:
Aruntius who in beastly drunken fit
With his own Daughter incest did commit.
And Ptolomy, who with excess oppressed
Slew both his Parents, and di'd like a beast.
To prove Disdain. GReat Anthony, who caused Tullies head
Be set to scorn, when Cicero was dead.
Xenophon, Demosthenes, and Plato wise,
Who each to other, did strange scoffs devise.
And Geta, and Antonius, brethren born,
Who each killed other, through their private scorn.
To prove vain Delight. SArdanapalus pleasures true sworn guest,
Who from a man was changed to a beast.
Xerxes who unto none would give his Treasure,
But to such as could invent new kinds of pleasure.
Demetrius who to pleasure was so given,
That from his Country he was forced and driven.
To prove Lust. QUeen Cleopatra whom her brother used,
And both her husband, and her self abused.
Thalestris, who did twenty five days ride
To ly one night by Alexanders side.
Claudius, who of his sister made no spare.
Semiramis, who used her Son and Heir.
To prove Blasphemy. PHer^cides, who did great God despise,
Then eat with Lice, most miserably dies.
Lucian the Atheist, likewise God denied,
Who torn by Dogs in pieces, justly di'd.
Justinian, who did slightly God regard,
Became a fool, and di'd with that reward.
To prove Idolatry. THey brought so many for to prove this same,
That I admired, and therefore cease to name.
All these (said Judas) ready are to prove
The English Nation do embrace and love
All these forenamed sins, and Millions more,
As well as we, who damned are therefore.
The old World of Gods Justice yet can tell,
Ninivie and Babylon can witness well;
Thus Sodom and Gomorrha, tokens bear
That by his Justice they consumed were.
Nay, his beloved people can declare
How that Jerusalem he did not spare.
And Judahs Lion yet can testify
Gods Justice spared not him, but he did die.
And is it just that this so sinful Land
Should find more favor* flourish still, and stand?
If that his Justice he has quite forgot,
Then let him favor us, we feel it not.
Or if his Mercy has o'r-drown'd it quite,
Then let him turn our Tortures to delight:
Or else impartial always let him prove,
And not for sin, some punish, and some love.
I wish some of that Land were in this place,
That we might plead our causes face to face.
Then spoke my Guide, I here have brought a man, The Poets plea for his Native
Country.

To answer for his Country what he can.
With that prostrated on the ground I fell;
(Said I) These vvitnesses are all of Hell.
Therefore according to our English Laws
I might except against them and their cause.
But great Celestial Saints, I dare not move it,
For they have nothing said, but they may prove it.
There is no sin, these Hellish Fiends do name,
But in our Land abundantly the same
Does overrun it: yet God does not will
For any sin, a Sinner strait to kill.
He in his Mercy, always shakes the Wand,
Before in Justice, he consume a Land.
Thus with the old World, it is understood,
He sweetly dealt, before he brought the Flood.
With Babylon, Ninivie, Jerusalem,
Sodom, Gomorrah: And as so with them,
Even so to us he has fair warning given,
That by that Means we might from sin be driven;
For often our distressed Sin-sick Land
Is scortched by the Taper of his hand.
And if these warnings cause us not to renew Plague.

Our lives, we may fear Judgments will ensue.
But as a Woman which at Bar does stand, Simile.

And is commanded to hold up her hand,
Then being asked what she can reply
To stay her sentence, that she should not die,
She falling down, does openly confess,
That as the Jury found her, so no less
She has deserved death, and Guilty stands
Ready to suffer, when the Judge commands:
But yet his Lordships favor she does crave,
He would be pleased for to let her have
The benefit of her increasing Womb,
Before the execution of her Doom.
It is not fit, the Judge does then reply,
For Mothers fault, the guiltless Child should die,
Because hereafter (if God send it health)
It may do service to the Commonwealth;
And therefore grants the Woman a Reprieve,
That till she be delivered, she may live.
Even so, I here in my poor Nations name
Plead guilty, and confess that for the same
It stands condemned to the fire, and know not why
It should not execution have, and die;
But that within it is some unknown birth
Of holy fruit, as yet not blossomed forth,
Which may hereafter (if God bless 't with health)
Prove to Gods glory, and to the Commonwealth
A special Member; therefore we desire,
Till it be born, to spare us from the fire:
Which being done, let execution come,
And all the World receive the fiery doom.
Until which time, we trust the Lord will prove
(As he has promised) the God of Love,
And keep his Justice in his powerful hand,
But pour his Mercy, on us, and our Land,
That we thereby may once again be driven
To leave our sins, and set our minds on Heaven.
The Devils Justice cry, I Mercy crave,
And either party hope their suit to have;
But sure, I shall obtain, they shall mistake,
For I beg Mercy, for Christ Jesus sake.
Whereat the Devils trembled; but that face
Which never yet had any spark of grace,
Hells Speaker Judas, he began to cry
God wants Justice, if they do not die,
And bawling Lawyer like, made such a do,
I think he would have bawled until now,
But that St. Michael caused him cease his prate,
Teaching him Manners with a broken pate.
Then stood up good St. Paul, who thus Disputes; St. Paul's Plea.

Of all Jehovahs mighty Attributes,
He loves Mercy, though he Justice show,
Unto some sinful peoples overthrow,
Yet is that unto some forsaken place
Which is past hope, and barren of all grace.
What though this Land in many sins abound?
Yet in this place they near the Gospels sound,
Which of it self, sufficient is to gain,
A sinful Soul, although't be died in grain.
And therefore ( blessed Saints) if you consent
For this time we will adjourn this Parliament,
And send these bawling faries into Hell,
Me thinks this Englishman has pleaded well.
For since it was jehovahs sacred mind
To send them plagues, we hope we shall them find
Hereafter penitent, and grace obtain,
Or otherwise, they but prolong their pain.
With that the Saints did yield their full consent The Parliament is adjourned.

For that time to adjourn the Parliament;
But promised Pluto that if Mercy fail
To work redress, then Justice shall prevail.
With that the Devils were compelled again
Unto their place of everlasting pain:
And in a Moment I could not espy
A Creature left besides my Guide and I;
Which made me stand as one full sore amazed,
Or like a man beside his wits I gazed.
My Angel (smiling said) poor mortal wights,
How quickly are you daunted in your sprights?
Take courage man, and bear a manly heart,
For I will set thee safe before we part,
Where first I found thee, therefore let us haste,
For time is precious, which we must not waste.
Then as we came without the Gates of Heaven,
There laid the heap of stones that brained St. Steven,
With many more, But yet I marked one
Had writ upon it The Philosophers stone,
Which taking in my hand, I did behold,
(Said I) is this the stone turns all to Gold?
It is, (said he) How comes it then (said I)
That mortal men do seek to come thereby
By Chimistry, whereas it only lies
Within this place, and not below the skies?
Because they are fools (said he) for none may come
To purchase it, although there have been some
In former times, which did obtain the same,
Philosophers, of whom it bears the name;
But such they were, as not the like is found
These sinful days, to live upon the ground.
For there is no mortal can obtain this Stone,
Unless he be of Conversation one, How they must be qualified that can obtain
the Philosophers stone.

As will not put the same to any use,
Which may redound to Commonwealths abuse:
Nor to his profit must convert the same,
Either for lucre, pleasure, ease, or Game.
Such as to no vain earthly thing is given,
Ort' love the World or pleasure can be driven.
As will by no means bribes, or gifts receive,
Although thereby the whole World he might have:
Nor will to any use employ this Stone,
But for the Church, and Commonwealth alone.
If thou do find thy self such one to be,
Take thou the Stone, it does belong to thee.
I must confess (said I) I much desire
To have the same, and did intend to require
It at thy hands, but henceforth will not crave it,
Because I far unworthy am to have it:
So difficult a thing it seems to me,
That such a man upon the Earth should be.
Though I could all the rest; yet could I scant
Forbear to help my Wife, or Child in want.
Nay, that one may with safety do (said he)
Or ought belongs to his necessity:
But any other way must not exceed,
Unless his Country, or Religion bleed
For want of help, and in such case he may
Unto his bounty give access, and way.
And because I will thee some favor show,
A little taste thereof I will bestow
Upon thee strait, which I will cause thee drink,
Whereby thou shall esteem thy self, and think,
Thou art more happy, by one Cup of Wine,
Than if the best Town on the Earth were thine.
This said, he took the Stone into his hand,
And bruised a piece thereof as small as sand:
Then strait-way did appear a Cup of Wine
To come in presence, by his power Divine,
He cast the bruised Stone into the Cup,
And at one draught, he made me drink it up.
What have I gained by this? I know no more
(Said I) by drinking this, than heretofore.
Then mark (said he) when a Religious King
Shall want supply of Gold for any thing
Which tends to Countries, or Religions gain,
And knows not how such Treasure to obtain,
Unless he drain it from his Subjects backs,
Who are o'r-burthened with Rents and Racks,
Do but thy mind to such a Prince unsold,
And every word thou speak shall turn to Gold.
So shall thou cure thy Royal King of care,
And from poor Commons purchase many a prayer,
When thou shall multiply their Princes store,
Yet they, nor theirs, be burdened therefore.
In this case shall thy words only prevail,
And turn to Gold: but in all other fail.
I never shall make trial of this thing,
Nor come (said I) in presence of a King;
I lead my life within an obscure place,
And in the World have no great name, or grace,
So once (said he) was Joseph in a pit,
Yet afterward in higher place did sit
In Pharaoh's Court, the greatest in his Land,
And faithful proved, in all he took in hand.
God always works by Men of low degree,
And simple means, that Men may know 't is he
That acts all, can raise the lowly one,
As David, from a Sheep-hook to a Throne.
But now remember where I first thee found,
And here I leave thee on the self-same ground;
Ponder these things, and when thou findst them true,
Remember God, and me, And so Adieu.
With that I roused my self, but could espy
No body in the place, but God and I,
As goes the Proverb: only there I found
A Scrowl of written paper on the ground,
Which taking in my hand, I did begin
To read the same, and found these words therein
The Scrowl.
That thou must know thy foresaid Vision's true,
These shall be signs, and shortly shall ensue;
For thou shall free thy native Commonwealth
From begging Rogues, and Thieves that live by stealth,
In driving Droans and sluggards from their hives,
And placing Bees of more laborious lives.
And by Heavens help, within few years to come
Shall see thy King, Monarch of Christendom.
With other things, of excellence most rare,
Which I to thee hereafter will declare.
M. A.

Which having read, I blushed, and looked about me,
Fearing some man had writ the same to flout me;
But spying none, I mused how this could be,
That such emploiments were reserved for me:
At which amazed, I know not by what chance
My Spirits failing, I fell in a trance,
Wherein (I thought) unto me did appear,
A lovely VVight, with grave and sober cheer.
St. John's speech. Mortal (said he) I charge thee to resort
With all speed possible unto the Court,
And there declare unto Great Britains King,
That I have sent thee to declare this thing.
If he demand my name, say it is John
Who wrote the Book of Revelation.
Then tell him, in the Numbers he may read Numb. 24 v. 17.

How that a Wizard ( Balaam) prophesied
Of Jesus Christ: And likewise it appears,
(How that one Merlin, who lived many years
Ago in Britain) by some old Records,
Did prophesy in these, or such like words.
A Prophecy of Merlins.
After the many irruptions in this Land
By foreign Kings: yet let men understand,
The time shall come, that in despite of them,
Our Kings shall wear Brute's ancient Diadem.
If this be true, as it appears no less,
How could a Witch, or Devil, better guess?
It is well known, how that in time of old,
Brute (as a Monarch) did all Britain hold.
And that his seed and issue ruled the same,
Until the Gospel into Britain came;
And was embraced wholly through the Land,
So that Brute's Monarchy did thereby stand,
Not only having all one King alone,
But all consenting in Religion.
But Brute, unto his children did divide
His Monarchy; which did not long abide
After the Gospel flourisht: for even then
The Devil envying the happiness of Men,
Began to sow his Tares amongst this Corn,
So that Brute's children they begun to scorn
Each others happiness; and so brought in
Strangers to Rule: (the punishment of Sin)
By which unlucky, dismal, fatal chance,
Came many Rulers, and much Ignorance.
So that ten Kings at once did Scepters sway, Ten Kings at once in Britain.

And true Religion daily did decay.
Which God (in Mercy) minding to repair,
Has molded for old Brute, a son and heir,
Not only for to rule the Land alone,
But to establish true Religion.
But see, the Devil has even now begun
To skreen the glory of this rising Sun;
Doubting that if this Monarch should have peace,
So that his Crown, and Subjects should increase,
He would espy his own: and by and by
Advance his Horns against proud Italy, Revel. 17. v. 16.

Of which by Brute he is undoubted heir, K. Heir to Italy.

And plant Religion, and Christ's Banners there.
Which to prevent, the Dev'll has Treason sown,
Such, in that Kingdom yet was never known.
The last he plotted (they have not forgot)
Was that most horrible Black-powder Plot:
But that, in competition cannot stand,
With this White-powder Plot that 's now in hand.
One Plot, I rather fear I might say plots,
Besides that show of rising by the Scots,
Which I commend not, but condemn, for Hell
Is the Ringleader to all that rebel.
God laid them open in that Treason Black;
But White strikes dead, and yet it gives no crack. A White Powder plot more
dangerous than the Black.

The Peoples love (which is a Prince's heart)
The Devil seeks to hatred to convert. The Devils policy.

The hand is lifted up to strike us down,
He comes full near my head, who hits my crown.
The Romanists him Governor admit,
But as for Head they will not acknowledge it. Papists deny the King's supremacy.

And certainly Men will repute him dead,
Who wants a Heart, or is without a Head.
But they that take the one half of his right,
Would also have the rest if that they might;
And when they see their time, will have a cast
To hazard all, or else to throw their last.
Thus by degrees, this Plot he does contrive,
Because things rashly acted seldom thrive.
But works digested with a solid brain,
Are never impotent, or prove in vain.
The Plot is Sable, though the color 's White,
Satan 's transformed to a Saint of light.
And if prevention do it not withstand
The platform 's laid, which will consume the Land.
Which God foreseeing, (who does all things see)
Has sent me down, to tell the same to thee,
Knowing thou art thy King and Countries Lover,
And therefore I here charge thee to discover
The things intended; that advice may blot,
This later, as the former Powder Plot.
So that by stripping naked of the thing,
Thou shall do service to thy Royal King;
Who, if he look therein, may well perceive,
How those Arch-Traitors, who did prowdly heave
His Fathers issue to have overthrown
Were mild, compared with this against his own.
For no such danger is in open Foes,
As seeming Friends, who Plot our overthrows.
But God who always stands his Servants friend,
Returns wrath on the Plotters in the end:
Who having placed his Love upon this Crown,
Will never suffer Treason pull it down,
Until all be performed as he has willed, Revel. 17. 16, 17.

And what I prophesied be fulfilled.
I John have spoken it, (say) it was I,
Who never spoke, or writ, ought proved a ly.
St. John's Speech ends.
With that unto my self I came again,
Much wondering, at the wandering of my brain,
Casting about me many a meager look,
At last a Bible in my hand I took,
And found each word he said, was very true
In both the Testaments, of old and new:
For in the Numbers I did find it there, Chapter 24 17.

Of Christ the VVizard Balaam did declare.
Which thus unto my self I did apply,
If Balaam of the King of Kings; then why
May not our Merlin, (as in other things)
Prophecy truly of our British Kings?
And since the preterperfect did not fail,
The future without question must prevail,
When it is seconded by such a one
As the true Prophet, ( Christ's beloved) John.
And seeing we foresee the Devil's Treason,
We should prove Fools, and quite devoid of reason,
If we should marry, eat, and drink, and stand,
Until this Deluge overflow our Land.
Or stand as Statues, made of helpless Lead,
Until our fainting body lose her Head;
Which being lost, by Treasons poisoned Dart,
What hope of Safety is left for the Heart?
Which to prevent, Great Heroes lend a hand, The Poet's zeal for his King and
Country.

Grave Senators of this our fruitful Land.
Nay look (Great Charles) and tender thine own blood,
Whereon depends our safety, and our good.
As Subjects without King are nothing, then,
A King, is King of nothing, wanting Men.
And as good lose a man as lose his heart
Which guides all, and is the noblest part.
Me think I hear that Zedekiah swears, 1 Kings 22. 24.

He presently will have me by the ears,
As once he hit Micaiah on the cheek,
When (by good counsel,) he did truly seek
To save his King from foreseen death indeed,
Which he neglecting, followed with speed.
And yet a poor Micaiah must not fear
To speak the truth for a sound box of the ear.
Then Zoilus he steps in, and thus does say,
I must not speak of Scripture, I am Lay:
And 't is not lawful for a Layman's tongue
To speak of Scripture, or ought does belong
To State occasions; Zoilus, hold thy prate,
Each Subject has a property in the State:
And cursed be his tongue in hateful Hell,
Who knows of Treason, and yet-will not tell;
Or will not counsel give (under control)
For safety of his Princes life, or soul; Subjects are bound to speak in these
cases.

Or does esteem his own honor, or wealth,
Before his Sovereigns safety and his health.
Though Haman hold his tongue, and all conceal,
Good Mordecai will his plots reveal. Esther 6. v. 2.

But yet I hope our Caesar need not fear
A Zedekiah or a Haman here:
Which if there be, all loyal Subjects then
Kneel down, and wish them Haman's end.
Amen.
Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos.
GEORGE MAY.

FINIS.
A Dialogue between the Author and the World.
World. WHo wrote this Book?

Au. A friend of mine a Poet.

W. Oh then he is poor.

A. Alas for woe, I know it.

W. I care not for such men.

A. nor they for thee.

W. Why, greatest Monarchs are in love with me:
For those I love I fill with wealth and store.

A. Yet (wanting Virtue) these but make them poor.

W. Nay wealth buys all things.

A. wicked World thou lie;
Thy Prince could not obtain of Jesus Christ,
The smallest bending of his humble knee,
For all the wealth and glory was in thee.

W. I speak of Earthly things, and not of Heaven.

A. Whose joy's on Earth, of Heavenly joy's bereaven.

W. I see thou art grown foolishly Divine.

A. Yea: and therein more wise than thou or thine.

W. Why say thou so? thou see the Lawyers dare
Not speak a word against me at the Bar,
Nor any one of never so high degree;
The Pulpits dare not speak; although they see;
I charge thee then, obey at my command,
As thou do look for favor at my hand.

A. Avaunt vain World, I laugh in scorn, thy solly,
Thy frenzy does proceed from Melancholy,
Which does distill from thy Earth-heavy brain,
Thou art half mad, thy wits are in the wain,
They Leaden heels are nailed to Earth below,
And higher things art not inured to know.

W. What art thou, not of Adam? this my womb
First gave him birth, and afterward a Tomb.

A. Our Earths gross substance from thy womb we have,
But our best part shall never taste the Grave;
The art like the Apple given to work him evil,
A seeming Saint, but Factor for the Devil.

W. What, was I not created before Man?
Declare those Attributes belongs me than.

A. God did create thee for the Creatures use,
And not to prostitute thee to abuse;
These are thy Attributes: A Sea of Glass, The worlds Attributes.

Pageant of fond delights, Vanities Ass,
Labyrinth of Error, Gulf of grief, A Sty
Of filthiness, A Vale of misery,
A spectacle of woe, River of tears,
A Cage of Scritch-owls, Den of Wolves and Bears,
Whirlwind of passions, Cabin of idleness,
A nest of Scorpions, Deaths vast Wilderness,
A painted Comedy, Delightsul madness,
Where Is false delight, but right assured sadness,
Uncertain pleasures, Fleeting fickle Wealth,
Long heaviness, Short-joy, Unconstant health.
These are thy Epithetes; he is mad would have
A Master to himself, of such a Slave.

W. I Am glad I know it, Thou shall not have a bed
Whereon to ly, nor house to hide thy head.
Honor and Riches shall be none of thine,
Nor any thing, that I can say is mine.

A. Thou art deceived, when thou have done thy worst,
They shall be blessed, that are by thee accursed,
My Savior said, The Swallow has a nest,
But not the Son of Man wherein to rest.
I care not for thy Riches, or thy honor,
He Is mad so loves the World to dote upon her.
Love thou the Lord (my Soul) who sits above,
Thou shall have Honor, Riches, Peace, and Love

Altiora peto.
Meliora spero.
Non est mortale quod opto.

G. M.

FINIS.

