ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Between his EXCELLENCY PRINCE MAURICE, And the EARL of
STAMFORD, Upon the delivery of the CITY of EXCESTER, The fifth of September,
1643.

Together with a Letter relating the Earl of STAMFORDS proceedings in the West.

Sept. 20. 1643.
Imprimatur

John White.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the flying Horse near York House. 1643.

Articles of Agreement, etc.
MAURICE,
1. IT is concluded and agreed on, that the City and Castle of Exon be
surrendered into the hands of his Highness Prince Maurice, with all Arms,
Ensigns, Ordnance, Ammunition, and all other warlike provisions whatsoever
within the said City and Castle.

2. That the right honorable Henry Earl of Stanford together with all
Officers above the degree of Lievetenants, both of horse and foot, now within
and about this City and Castle, do march out of this City and Castle, on
Thursday the 7. of this month, by nine of the clock in the morning, with their
troops of horse, full Arms, bagg and baggage, provided it be their own goods,
and that the Lievetenants and Ensigns march out with their swords at the East
Gate, and that the foot soldiers march out at the same time leaving their
Arms at the Guild hall, all having a safe Convoy to Winsor or to go elsewere
if they please, and such as will stay shall have pay in the Kings Army.

3. That there be carriages allowed and provided to carry away their bagg and
baggage, and sick and hurt soldiers, and that an especial care be taken of
such Officers and soldiers as (being sick and wounded) shall be by the Earl of
Stanford left behind in the said City, and that upon their recovery they shall
have passes to depart to their own homes respectively.

4. That the Kings forces march not into the City till the Parliaments force
are marched out, except 100. Musketteeres at the East part through which they
pass.

5. That his Highness shall forthwith procure a free and general pardon unto
Henry Earl of Stanford Sir George Chudleigh, Sir John Bampfield, Sir John
Northcot Baronets, Sir Samuel Roberts, and Sir Nicholas Martin, Knights, and
unto the Major, Bailifs and Cominalty of the City of Exon, and to all other
persons of what degree, condition, or quality soever, now being within the said
City of Exon, for all Treasons and other offenses whatsoever committed by them
or any of them since the beginning of this present Parliament relating to these
unhappy differences between His Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, and
that all or any of them shall have his particular pardon for the foresaid
offenses or treasons if he shall sue forth the same.

6. That the true Protestant Religion now established by Law shall be preserved
and exercised in the City.

7. That all persons, Citizens and Inhabitants may at any time depart with
their families, goods and estates, unto any part of this Kingdom, and that
they and every of them shall have power to dispose, sell or alien either by
themselves or others, whatsoever goods or parts of their estates, they shall
not convey or carry with them.

8. That all persons now in this City may have free liberty to repair to their
houses in the Country or elsewhere, and there to remain in safety, and enjoy
their estates, lands, rents, and goods, without plundering, fine or
imprisonment, or any other molestation, and may travel to and fro without any
interruption, hindrance or denial.

9. That all Ministers and Preachers of Gods word now within this City shall
have free liberty either to stay here or go to their own houses, cures or
charges, or elsewhere within his Majesty's Dominions, with their wives,
children, families and goods, there to abide peaceably, and to exercise their
ministerial functions, and to enjoy their estates according to the Laws of the
Land.

10. That all the Charters, Liberties, Privileges and Franchises, Lands,
Estates, Goods and Debts of the said City shall be preserved and confirmed, and
that the ancient government thereof, the present Governors and Officers may
remain and continue in their former condition.

11. That no new oath or protestation be enforced upon any, nor any compelled
to take up Arms against the Parliament.

12. That for avoiding inconveniences and distractions, the quartering of
soldiers be referred to the Major and Governor of the City for the time being.

13. That all these Articles which are now agreed upon shall be ratified and
confirmed by His Majesty under the great Seal of England.

14. That the Officers and Soldiers in their marching out shall not be
reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches or affronts offered or given unto
them by any Officer or Soldier of the Kings, and that the convoy appointed to
march with them may go and return safely without any violence or wrong
offered unto them by any force of the adverse party.

Stanford. Chr. Clarke Major. Rich. Cave. Jos. Bamfield.


The Letter.
SIR,
I Send you the Articles of agreement for the delivery up of Exeter, partly to
satisfy the world, as well as you of the causes of the loss of it, and some
of the precedent passages of the Earl of Stamford, which I pray communicate. I
hear there be some will hereafter enlarge the story; accept of these in the
mean time. It is not unknown to those that have looked into the passages of
this late and present War, that the Earl of Stamford was always as forward
for the Parliaments Cause as any Peer or Member of the House of Commons
whatsoever. That his freeness of spirit was the occasion why he was
continually put on upon the forlorn hope of his excellencies Army, and that
when the King was at Shrewsbury, it being uncertain which way the King would
take, the Earl was sent before to Hereford a malignant County, and frontier to
a malignanter Wales, all which he gallantly curbed with only 800. Foot, and two
Troops of Horse for above ten weeks space, till he was constrained to come to
Gloucester upon Colonel Essex his leaving of it naked, and then there came to him
a Commission from his Excellency, and the Parliament upon the request of the
Pembrokeshire Gentry, and others that he might be General of all Wales, and
the four Counties adjoining, which he no sooner had received, but he presently
raised three new Regiments at the charge of the well-affected County of Gloucester,
visited Sommersetshire and Wiltshire, and had proceeded on in the other
Counties for the raising of a far greater force, without charging the
Parliament or the City of London, but he was suddenly commanded away to Exeter
with Mericks Regiment only, leaving his former Horse and Foot under his
Lieutenant Colonel Massy in Gloucester, and the new raised Regiments
uncompleated, and there being no certain Commander left in chief by reason of
the difference between Colonel Fines and Essex. His Excellency intimated to
the Committee for the safety of the Kingdom by Colonel Hampden that the Earl
of Stamford might be called back into Glostershire; but that not being thought
fit, and the Earl being betrayed or unobeyed (choose you whether) as he has
ever been since he went into those parts by his then Lieutenant General, and
the Country Colonells at Liscard to secure Plimoth, was besieged there, during
which time Cirencester was lost, and all that well-affected County but (...)*
which was then also besieged, defended by Massy, and relieved by Sir William
Waller. The Earl had no sooner freed himself of the siege of Plimoth, and cut
off the Enemy at Modbury, but the Country people usually wilful to their humors
will have a Treaty, having forgotten the fresh plundering of their houses and
cattle, and the barbarous destroying of their fruit trees by the Cornish. The
Earl must fight with the hands that would treat, and pay his Army with their
money, which before he had a discretive power to do, but now because he could
not make them do what they would not, his Lordships power of disposing of
money was taken away which gave great discontent to the Officers and Soldiers:
Mr. Buller was displaced, a man of fortune and honesty to the Parliament, and
young Chidleigh put in his place of Major General, without the nomination of
the Earl, which made him knowing Chidleighs fire and heat, to make his father
Sir George Chidleigh Lieutenant General for his more temper. The new Major to
make good the vogue of the people does a stratagem in a dark night with 108.
Horse to all men's amazement, but his enemies, that he might betray them with
more confidence as he did afterward. Now these great orderers of the Earls
Army, full in popularity, and presumed by all men to know the Country well led
the Army and Earl to such a way, that had he not rid out himself with some
few Gentlemen to take the air and view the Country, all his Foot had been
brought unawares upon the enemies whole Body, at the same time when the father
Chidleigh had carried away half the Horse into Cornwall first, presently Mr.
Anthony Nichols by warrant under the sons hand took all the rest Horse and
Dragoons, with the Lifeguard from the Earl without his knowledge. The time now
comes to betray the Foot in the Horses absence: The Earl having viewed the
ground that it was morasse but in two passages at a bridge and a mill, and a
third to a house adjoining, commands a good guard of Musketeers to every of
them, Chidleigh disappoints those places, and the Enemy straight possesses
them (and it is since confirmed by two Centinells whom Chidleigh cudgelled that
night for shooting at him that he was absent in the Enemies quarters above an
hour) and alarmes him by break of day, where himself was taken, and the Van
of a brave Army killed, taken, and rooted with him. After all this the Earl
had 3000. men left, store of Ammunition and Ordnance, which himself stood to,
and entreated them to stand also, but no entreaty could persuade above thirty
of them to stay. The Earl made his retreat by Barnstable, for the securing of
that and Bidford for their consequence on the Irish Seas, and so to Exeter,
where he was besieged by young Chidleigh, and the same popularity that ran away
from him before, and continued besieged three months and nineteen days;
during which time, we hear it was labored in the City of London on the
behalf of the Earl that there might be 2000. of their new Auxiliaries sent
thither by Sea, with the Earl of Warwick who otherwise attempted the raising
of the siege, but either for want of that strength, or else by the treachery of
Sir Alexander Carry (who since has been surprised in design of delivering up
St. George his Island to the Falmouth Forces) could not effect it, though he
lost three Ships in attempting it, or else by land to join with Sir Walter
Earl, and by that means Dorchester, Weymouth, and all that Country might have
been saved. When the Earl of Stamford being so relieved, might have had a
sufficient force to have come upon the back of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir William
Waller being in his Front with so great a force of Horse and Dragoons, whereof
1200. had been sent from the Earl: but no supply coming from the City of
London or elsewhere, nor intelligence passing, the siege was so straight, and
the Citizens of Exon not well stomaching their Soldiers, nor paying them, nor
quartering them like men, suffering hundreds of them to lie upon stalls,
whereby above a thousand of them ran away, and most probably to the Enemy: they
urged the Earl to their conditions, although the Enemy himself had but two
days before offered fifteen days time to send to the Parliament for aid, or
else to render upon honorable conditions, which was then refused, but these
are plausible enough to those that hope only to be quiet in this world, and
wish for peace and pardon at any rate, which I believe they shall as well enjoy
as their Apple Trees.

Sir, I shall add one thing more, to tell you the generosity of the City of
Exeter, and their affections to the Parliament Arms, that although the 500.
men left in the Town had endured so many assaults, watched constantly every
second night, and sometimes four or five together, and in one of many sallyes
had slain and taken 200. men, and brought away three pieces of Ordnance, and
withal they had not lost one inch of ground, would not pay the Soldiers nor
Commanders in the Town, nor give them one farthing at their going out of it.

FINIS.

