THE OBSERVATOR, UPON The Success of former Parliaments: BEING By way of
Parralell compared with this present PARLIAMENT.

Published to un-deceive the People.



LONDN Printed for I. H. and H. White. 1643.

The Observator, UPON The success of former Parliaments.
THe constitution of our English Monarchy is by wise men esteemed one of the
best in Europe, as well for the strength and honor of the Prince, as the
security and freedom of the Peopl and the Basis, on which both are founded, is
the conveniencie of that great Council, the Parliament. Without which neither
can the Prince enjoy that honor and felicity, that Phillip de Commines. a
forrainer, so much admires, where he delivers what advantages the Kings of
England have by that representative Body of their People by whose assistance in
any action they can neither want means, or loose reputation. Nor on the other
side, can the People have any possibility of pleading their own rights and
liberties, for in the interim between Parliaments, the People are too scattered
and confused a body, to appear in vindication of their proper interests; and
by too long absence of such Assemblies they would loose all* For (as Iunius
observes) Populus authoritatem suam tacit non utendo amittit; sic plerumque
accidit ut quod omnes curare tenentur curat nemo, quod omnibus commissum est,
nemo sibi commendatum putet: The People insensibly loose their power for want
of using it: for so it happens, that what all should look after, no man does;
what is committed to all, no man thinks his own charge.

And in that interim it happens, that those Optimates Regni, who under the
Prince are entrusted with government, meaning Councillors, Judges, and other
great Magistrates, either through fear, flattery, or private corruption, do
often betray the Peoples rights to the Prince.

The state of government standing thus; If distempered times happen to be (as
our Chronicles have showed some) where by dissension between Prince and People,
the Kingdoms ruin has been endangered, it does not so much prove that the
English Government is not the best, as that the best Government may be abused.
For in every Monarchy, how limited soever, the Prince his person is invested
with so much Majesty, that it would seem a mockery in Sat, if there were no
considerable power entrusted into his hands; yea, so much as that, if he be bad
or weak, he may endanger the ruin of the Kingdom; so necessary is it for all
humane ordinances, how wise so ever, to leave somewhat to Chance* and to have
always need of recourse to God, for his assisting or curing providence.

And though the Kingdom of England, by virtue of the government thereof, will
be as hardly brought into confusion, as any in Europe; yet there is no warrant
against the possibility of it.

For it was ever heretofore seen, that our Parliaments were rather a strength
and advantage to an honorable wife Prince, than a remedy against a bad or weak
one; or if we change the expression, they were rather an excellent diet, to
preserve a good reign in strength, than Physic to cure a bad one; and
therefore have bin as much loved by sound and healthy Princes, as loathed by
them that were out of temper; the latter having thought them a depression of
their Dignity as the former have esteemed them an advantage to their strength.
So that in such times only the true convenience of that great Counsel has
been perceived by England, and admired by foreign Authors: in the other times
it was that those witty complaints have bin in fashion, (as Sir Robert Cotton
speaks of a bad time) that Princes in Parliaments are less then they should
be, and Subjects greater. But on the contrary, that they have been an advantage
unto Kings, the constant Series of our History will show. 1. By those great
atchievments which they have enabled our wise Kings to make, who were most
constant in calling them, and consenting to them. 2. That no one Prince was
ever yet happy without the use of them.

It may therefore seem a Paradox, that any Prince should disaffect that which
is so high an advantage to him, and a great wonder, that some Kings of England,
not vicious in their dispositions, nor very shallow in their understandings,
have so much kicked against Parliaments. And that such have been (before we
show what reasons may be of it) see the characters of some Princes, whose
success and fortunes are known ^o all that read the Histories, as they are
delivered by Polidore Virgil, who in his sixteenth book speaks thus of Henry
the third: Fuit ingenio miti, animo magis nobili quam magno, cultor religionis,
adversus inopes liberalis. He was of a gentle nature* a mind rather noble then
great, a lover of Religion, and liberal to the poor.

In his eighteenth Book thus of Edward the second; Fuit illi natura bona,
ingenium mite, quem primo juvenili errore actum in leviora vitia incidentem,
tandem in graviora malorum consuetudines and consilia traxerunt. Non deerant
illi animi vires, si repudiatis malis suasoribus ille just exercuisset. He was
of a good nature and mild disposition, who first by the errors and rashness
of Youth, falling into small faults, was afterward drawn into greater, by the
society and counsels of wicked men, there was not wanting in him a strength of
mind, if avoiding evil counsel, he could have made a just use of it.

And in his twentieth Book, thus of Richard the second; Fuit in illo spiritus
non vilis, quem consociorum improbitas, and insulsitas extinxit. He was of a
spirit not low or base, but such as was quite destroyed by the wickedness and
folly of unhappy Consociates.

A reason of this accident may be, that their souls, though not vicions, have
not been so large, nor their affections so public, as their great calling has
required; but being too much mancipated to private fancies, and unhappy
Favorites, and long flattered in those affections under the specious name of
firmness in Friendship, (not being told that the adaequate object of a Prince
his love should be the whole people, and that they who receive public honor,
should return a general love and care) they have too much neglected the
Kingdom, and grow afraid to look their faces in so true a glass as a
Parliament, and flying the remedy, increase the disease, till it come to that
unhappy height, that rather then acknowledge any unjust action, they strive for
an unjust power to give it countenance, and so by along consepuence become
hardly reconcilable to a Parliamentary way.

Such Princes have been a greater affliction to this Kingdom, than those who
hay been most wicked, and more incureable for these reasons. 1. They have not
been so conscious to themselves of great crimes, and therefore not so apt to be
sensible of what they have bin made to do by evil Council; And therefore they
are more prone to suspect the People as unkind to them, then themselves as
faulty, and so the more hardly drawn to repent their Actions, or meet heartily
with a Parliament. 2. The People look with honor upon the Prince, and when
they find but few personal vices in him, will hardly be brought to think,
though themselves feel and suffer for it, that he is faulty; and therefore
sometimes (which would hardly be believed, if experience had not showed it) the
People have bin so rash as that to maintain for the King an unjust Prerogative,
which themselves understand not, they have to their own ruin, and the Kings too
(as it has after proved) disserted that great Council whom themselves have
chosen, add by whom only they could be preserved in their just rights,; until
too late, they have seen and repented their folly.

Such a dissertion was too sadly seen at the breaking up of that Parliament of
Edward the second, where his Favorites the two Spencers were banished, and the
tragical effects that followed, when the King found so great a party of the
Clergy and Layity, as enabled him to call home his banished Favorites* and
proved fatal to so many Parliamentary Lords, as the like execution of Nobility
had never before been seen in England: over whose graves the People afterward
wept when it was too late, and proceeded further in their revenge, then became
the duty and allegiance of Subjects. It is therefore a great misfortune to
England, and almost a certain calamity, when the distempers of government have
been let grow so long, as that for their cure they must need a long Parliament.
For there are no ways, how just, how moderate soever they be, which that great
Council can take (if they go far enough to make the cure) but will provoke,
either by the means, or the length of them, the Prince his impatience, or the
Peoples inconstancy.

For the first; the Delinquents must needs be many and great, and those
employed, and perchance highly favored by him, besides the reflection which is
made upon his judgment by their sufferings, and that will be one reason of his
impatience.

Another is that many prerogatives which were not indeed inherent in the Crown,
but so thought by the Prince, and by him and his bad Council long abused, to
the prejudice of the People, with some seeming advantage to him* (though well
weighed they brought none) are then after a long sufferance called in question.

For the People are used to entrust kind Princes with many of their own
privileges and rights, and never call for them again till they have been
extremely abused. But at such a time to make all clear after so long a
reckoning (and those long reckonings in State being commonly fatal; for
Parliaments have seldom been disconntinued, but by such Princes whose
government in the Interim have been very illegal) they usually question so
much, as that the Prince thinks himself hardly dealt withal, such a Prince
as we spoke of, who not bad in himself, but long misled by wicked counsel,
was not enough sensible of the injuries he had done.

The second obstacle that such Parliaments may find is the Peoples inconstancy;
and what age is not full of such examples which before we name, let us consider
whether there be any reason for it? This perchance may be one, that the People
naturally are lovers of novelty. Long discontinued and reforming Parliaments
seems to carry the face of a change of government, and those things may then
happen which do in the shift of Princes, that some people may for a while
flatter themselves with new and strange hopes, that prove frustrate, or else
with quicker redresses of inconvenience, then the great concurrence of so many
weighty businesses can possibly admit, how industrious soever that great
Council be, distracted with so great a variety; and the People after some time
spent, grow weary again of what they before had so long wished to see. Besides,
the People are more and more poisoned daily by the discourses of the kindred,
friends, and retainers to so many Delinquents, as must needs be at such a
Parliament: who, though they be no considerable party in respect of the whole
Commonwealth, yet ply their particular interests with more eagerness than
most do the public. They subtly persuade the People, that what ever the
Parliament does against those Delinquents is a ymed at the Kings honor, and
that he is wounded through their sides. And this opinion is somewhat furthred
when the People see how many prerogatives of the Prince; (as we said before)
are after long enjoying called in question. So that by this means their
inconstancy seems to be grounded upon loyalty to the King, and they perchance
with honest, but deceived hearts) grow weary of the great Council of the Land.

Another reason may be, that the Prince himself averse from such a Parliament,
for the reasons aforesaid, can find power enough to retard their proceedings,
and keep off the cure of State so long, till the People tired with expectation
of it. have by degrees forgot the sharpness of those diseases, which before
required it.

By this means at last, accidentally a miracle has been wrought after along
Parliament, which is, that the People have taken part with the great
Delinquents against the Parliament, for no other reason, than because those
Delinquents had done them more wrong then the Parliament could sudenly redress.
And so the multitude of those great Delinquents crimes have turned to their own
advantage.

But in such reforming Parliaments, upon whom so much business lies, not only
the inconstancy of the People has been seen in History, but the
unstedfastnesse of the Representative Body it self: and the distractions of
that Assembly, whilst they forsake each other under so great a burden, have let
that burden fall dishonourably to the ground. The most unhappy instance in this
case, was that Parliament of Richard the second, begun at Westminster, and
adjourned to Shrewsbury, in the nineteenth year of his reign; a Parliament
that difcharged their trust the worst of any that I read of; where there was as
much need of constancy and magnanimity as ever was, to redress those great
distempers which were then grown upon the State; and as much mischief ensued
by their default, both upon Prince and People, which might have been well
prevented, and his happiness wrought together with their own (in the judgment
of best writers) if they had timely and constantly joined together in
maintaining the true rights of Parliament; and resisting the ilegall desires of
their seduced King. But being fatally distracted, the major part of Lords and
Bishops, wrought upon by the King, and the House of Commons being too far
prevailed with by Bushy the Speaker, and his Instruments, they utterly
disserted the Commonwealth, and looking only upon the Kings present desire,
assented to such things as made the Prerogative a thing boundless; that he
himself (as the Story reports) was heard glorying to say, there was no true
Monarch in Europe but himself. Upon which the same bad council which before
had brought him out of love with Parliaments, brought him to as great an abuse
of that power which he had now gotten over a Parliament. And then followed the
blank-Charters, and other horrid extortions, besides the suffering of some
Lords whom the people most loved, and shortly after, by a sad consequence, his
own ruin. Nor do we read that any of those Lords who under the color of
Loyalty and Love, (as they called it) to his person, had trodden down the power
and privilege of a Parliament under his feet, had afterward so much Loyalty
to him, as to defend his Crown and person against an Usurper, who without any
resistance or Contradiction unjustly ascended the Royal Throne, the sad
occasion of that miserable and civil war, which in the following Ages so long
afflicted the Kingdom of England. This was the worst example of any
Parliament, but in other times, they have proved better physic then any other
earthly means could be; yet their greatest virtue and excellency is seen, when
they have been used as a diet by honorable and just Princes, such as this
Nation has been sometimes blessed with; and such who have thought it no
disparagement or depression of their dignity, to be ruled by the sway of that
great and honorable Council, then a wise guider of a Ship would think it to
follow his Compass, or any Mathematician to be directed by his necessary rules
and instruments.

FINIS.

