Imprimatur, Hic Liber, cui Titulus, Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility,
etc.

May 17. 1688. Guil. Needham, R.R. in Chapter P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris Domest.

DOUBTS Concerning the Roman Infallibility: I. Whether the Church of Rome
Believe it. II. Whether Jesus Christ or his Apostles ever Recommended it. III.
Whether the Primitive Church Knew or Used that Way of Deciding Controversy.


LONDON,

Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXVIII.

DOUBTS Concerning the Roman Infallibility.
THE Advantage of having an Infallible Judge to Determine Controversies of
Religion is so Visible, that those, who for their Lives cannot bring themselves
to believe, Either that there is such a Judge on Earth; or that the Church of
Rome is so Qualifyed, cannot yet but wish, That there were one exempt from the
common Frailty of Mistaking. For who would not be desirous of being released
from the Toil of Examining every Point of his Faith by Scripture and Tradition,
when after all, the Issue is uncertain? Who can envy himself the Blessedness of
being raised above all Apprehension and Jealousy of being Mistaken in (that
which concerns him above all things) the Religion and Faith by which he is to
be Saved? When therefore we see so great a part of Christians Disputing against
their own Wishes, and rejecting all Pretenders to Infallibility; it is a strong
Presumption, That the Truth of such Infallibility is not so Evident and
Visible, as the Advantage that flows from the Supposition of it. For it is
commonly more than half way toward Believing a thing to be True, to have a
desire that it should be so.

The common Objection of the Force of Prejudice against Evident Truth, can have
no place here; for if there be any Prejudice in this Case, it is For, and not
Against Infallibility. For those of our Church, who have opposed this Pretense
with greatest Diligence and Success, have taken care to prevent this
Imputation, by professing more than an ordinary Desire that it might be true.
The Lord Falkland, a Person of great Honor as well as of Learning and
Acuteness, declares, That if God would leave it to him, Which Tenet should be
True, he would Choose that Infallibility should, rather than the contrary. Mr.
Chillingworth, who thought once to have found out the Infallible Judge, (but lo
it was a Dream) makes this Solemn Profession: For my part, (so he speaks) I
know I am as Willing and Desirous, That the Bishop or Church of Rome should be
Infallible (provided I might know it) as they are to be so esteemed. Dr.
Hammond doubts not to profess the same good Inclination, Dr. Hammond's Preface
to his Defense of the Lord Falkland.
in the Name of all Protestants. If there were (says he) but one Wish offered
to each Man among us; it would certainly, with a full Consent, be laid out on
this one Treasure, the setting up of one Catholic Umpire or Days-man, some
Visible, Infallible Decider of Controversy. It is very hard that Persons so
well disposed, should not be able to attain to the Belief of so Easing and
Commodious a Principle; for, besides their Good Will, they wanted neither
Learning nor Diligence, nor Judgment, to make themselve Masters of their
Desire: But it seems it is not given to all to Believe Infallibility; and
possibly the great Talents of these Persons might be no small Hindrance to
their Belief.

Now, since we still Profess to have the same Desire and Fondness of Believing
Infallibility upon good Grounds, with the Persons abovementioned; in Earnest,
Reverend Fathers of the Mission, it will be some Disparagement to your Glorious
Undertaking of Conversion, to suffer Men so well Disposed, to languish out
their Lives with a Fruitless Desire of finding the Infallible Judge, and at
last to Dye without that Comfort: For you certainly, or none, the Glory of our
Conversion is reserved, for the Proof of the Infallible Church is your peculiar
Province; and to do you Right, you keep so close to it, as seldom to suffer
your Study or Understanding to pass the Bounds of this Question, humbly content
with this Summary Creed; I Believe the Infallible Church. If therefore, you
have any Demonstrations, or Infallible Arguments, or Weighty Reasons, we
beseech you to produce them, deny not your selves the Glory of Convincing us,
for we long to be your Conquest. But then, to prevent a Needless Trouble, we
are obliged to let you know, That the Old Arguments have been all Weighed with
great Care, and found Light, and it will not be for your Reputation to offer us
the same Bad Money for Payment, that has been refused a hundred times before.
You may, if you please, call these Demonstrations and Unanswerable Things; but
for our part, we, after the most Diligent Examination, can find Nothing in them
but Noise, that may perhaps create Disturbance to some Weak Persons,
unacquainted with Sophistry, but serve only for Sport to the more
Understanding. They are like the Clock of a Death watch, a poor little Worm
scarce visible, that may Fright, it may be, Melancholy or Timorous Persons, but
in Truth signify nothing. Or like the Dwarf of Augustus, described by
Suetonius, That was but seventeen Pound Weight, not two Foot High, and of a
Prodigious Voice; only this Creature had some Substance, though but very little:
But the Evidences for the Infallibility, hitherto produced, will not turn the
Scale against a Feather.

Now to give you some Comfort for your Unsuccesful Practice upon Minds so well
disposed, I will make bold to lay before you some Instances of your Brethren
and Companions of the same Misfortune. The Doctors of the Stage, whom
Scurrilous Men call Mountebanks, proclaim themselves Infallible in their Way,
they make Liberal Offers of Infallible Medicines, of never-failing Remedies, or
Certain and Never-erring Operations. Yet a great part of the World, and reputed
the Wisest, pass by these great Dispensers of Health, these Confident Ensurers
of Life and Longevity, and depend upon such Modest Physicians as declare
themselves Fallible, and do not Dissemble their Diffidence of the success of
their Applications. Yet these Patients have as strong a Desire of Ease and
Health, as any of their Neighbors, and would give all the World for a really
Infallible Operator.

There are other Men Bold enough, to Pretend, That they have the Secret of
making Gold. This they affirm with so much Assurance, that the Church of Rome
cannot show more in her Claim of Infallibility. Nay they have their
Demonstrations, their Probable Reasons, their certain Grounds: And at last, for
an Irresistible Inducement to believe, they have their Revelations too. Now as
well as Men love Gold, there are not many that will Believe the Pretense, or be
persuaded to send their Baser Metals to undergo the Improvement of this Golden
Transubstantiation.

I am loath to impute this general Infidelity, either in regard of the
Infallible Judge, or of the Infallible Operators, wholly to the want of
competent Proof on the Side of the Pretenders; the greediness of believing what
Men have a mind should be true, seems to me sufficient to Counterballance that
Defect, and to dispose Men to accept very slender Evidence. Therefore besides
want of Proof, there must be some other powerful hindrance, some visible and
obvious Presumptions of Imposture, that immediately stop our easiness and
forwardness of Believing. For,

I. It is strong presumption of a Cheat, when Men are observed to be utterly
destitute of all those great good things they pretend to have in their power to
bestow. Who can have regard to the Vapouring of a Mountebank upon the Stage,
that has seen the Family of that Pretender languishing without relief under the
most Common and Curable Diseases? Who can endure the Cant of a Beggar about the
Secret of Making Gold? Or have the Patience to see a Man who has the Indies
within the power of his Art, if his Pretense were not a Lie, condescend to Beg
or Borrow a small piece of Money to save himself from Starving? It is no
otherwise with the Pretense of Infallibility; our desire of believing it, lies
under the check of this Presumption. For the Church of Rome, that offers us the
Benefit of her Infallibility, to remove the Differences we have with her, or
among our selves, is found to make no use of it in her own Occasions, to heal
those Differences that arise within her own Communion. The Disputes between the
Jesuits and Dominicans are of great Importance, yet the Infallible Judge all
the while they depended, did never think fit to Interpose. This Doctrine of
Infallibility it self, is doubtless fundamental, and the Church of Rome is
divided about it, some ascribing it to the Pope, others to a Council; yet the
Infallible Judge is so shy of using his Gift, as to restrain it, when it is
most necessary for the Manifestation and Defense of its own self. If the Church
of Rome has an Infallible Judgment, it has indeed a wonderful Gift, but to the
least purpose or effect that can be imagined. For in deciding the Controversies
of those that pretend to believe it, the Church does not think fit to use it.
And those that do not believe it, can receive no benefit by its Definitions;
and yet it is to these only that it thinks fit to define.

II. If the Church of Rome were Infallible, we cannot but think she would
afford her People Infallible Instruction; i.e. she would take care that her
Catechisms, her Liturgies, and her Sermons, should be Infallibly true Doctrins.
But if you will enquire how this Infallible Church teaches her Disciples, you
will find, that her Catechisms were Composed by Fallible Men, and are Expounded
by Men as Fallible as they. If you go to her Sermons, you hear the words of
Fallible Monks, or Curates, or sometimes of Bishops, who may be Heretics, and
Preach damnable Doctrins. If you go to her Public Offices, there you meet with
Forms made by they know not whom; there you will hear Lections of Uncertain
Authority, taken out of Legends, and the Writings of Men that either were or
might be mistaken. Therefore when some of the Advocates of the Roman Church,
are pressed by any Objections taken from the Public Offices, they decline the
Authority, and dispense with themselves for maintaining them as the Unerring
Belief of the Church. For the Infallible Church, forsooth does not speak to the
People in these Offices. This we readily accept, but then we desire some reason
may be given, why this Church, being (as they pretend) Infallible, does not
think fit to instruct her People infallibly in her Liturgies or Homilies, since
those are the ordinary ways by which the People are Instructed? And why she
exposes the Souls of Men to the possible danger of Miscarrying by the ignorance
or perverseness of her Fallible Priests, when it is in her power to prevent all
this by her own Infallible voice, speaking in Homilies, or Catechisms, or
Liturgies, or other Authentic Books, all as true as the Bible? Wherefore all
things considered, I conceive our Opinion, That the Church of Rome may Mistake,
is less dishonorable to her than theirs, who would flatter her to fancy her
self Infallible. For we leave her a good Excuse why she does not give her
Children Infallible Instruction, Because she has no such Privilege; whereas her
Flatterers leave her inexcusable, for not doing that which they confess she
does not do, and yet contend she is able to do. Which will certainly leave her
in the Opinion of all Impartial Judges, most unworthy of so great a Trust as
that of Infallibility.

III. Although the Roman Catholics in their Disputes with Us, are very forward
to appeal to the Infallible Judge, because he is their own; yet when they
mistrust that their own Opinions are in danger of being Condemned by the same
Judge, they make use of all means to prevent or decline his Judgment. We have
several Instances to this purpose in the Council of Trent, which I think has
most voices in the Roman Church for being Infallible. But I will content my
self with one only, and that is the Debate about the Immaculate Conception of
the Virgin. When the Article of Original Sin came to defined, it seemed scarce
to be avoided, but that this of the Conception must be involved. For if they
defined in General, without Exception, That Adam's Sin passed upon All, the
Virgin would be concluded, and the Franciscan Doctrine Condemned: But if she
were Excepted, and declared Pure from that Original Blemish, then the
Dominicans would be Condemned. Be it so; but why should either Side be afraid
of an Infallible Judge? Why should they not by consent submit their Disputes
and their Opinions, to that which had clearer Light, and could not be mistaken?
They had wrangled enough about it in the Dark, and according to their Uncertain
and Fallible Judgment, now an opportunity offered it self, of letting all Sides
know the Truth, and of putting an End to that tedious Controversy. But nothing
could be done for want of Faith, and Resignation to the Infallible Judge: I
cannot believe so hardly of the Dominicans, as that they were unwilling to know
the certain Truth of the Matter; and if they had been in their Conscience
persuaded, that whatsoever the Majority of the Council had defined, must be
Truth, it cannot be conceived why they should be so Industrious to avoid a
Sentence. They saw indeed a Majority on the other Side; but then it was a
Majority of Private Judgments, which if they were in the wrong, must change,
when they came to define as a Council, or else farewell all
Council-Infallibility. But the Dominicans it seems would not trust that, and I
do not blame them; but then we appeal to their Equity, and desire that they
would not put upon us that Infallible Judge, to whom they are so loath to submit
their own Opinions.

But let these Dominicans be as restive as they please, and unwilling to have
this Point Decided, yet the Majority of the Council, which is to some an
Infallible Judge, they, methinks, should not be afraid to declare the whole
Truth; for they surely could not mistrust their own Infallibility, and as
little could they Question the Acquiescence and Submission of all good
Catholics, yet these had Scruples, and could not speak out, for they had
received a Caution from Rome, whence their Spirit of Defining came, That they
should by no means Meddle with that Controversy that depended between
Catholics, which might occasion a Schism: How! For a General Council to
determine a Controversy between Catholics, would it be to expose the Church
to the Danger of Schism? Where then is their Belief of Infallibility? Where is
their Resignation to the Decrees of the Church? Or to what Purpose is
Infallibility given, if it cannot be Exercised for fear of Offense, and giving
occasion to Schism? We are told, That the only Remedy against Heresy and
Schism is the Determination of the Church, and we are pressed to forsake our
Religion, because the Council of Trent has condemned it; whereas, in Confidence
between Pope and Council, we find that their Catholics would leave them for
that very Reason which they use to Convert us, i. e. If they durst Condemn
their Opinions, as they have done ours.

It is said indeed, That this Article of the Immaculate Conception is not of
Faith, and therefore needs not to be decided, and if it were, the Decision of
the Church may not be Infallibly True, because the Promise of Infallible
Assistance extends only to Matters of Faith. I should be better content with
this Answer, if I could be satisfied once, What is of Faith, and what is not:
How comes Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images and Purgatory, to be of
Faith, and this not? It cannot be said, Because the Church has determined those
Points and not this. For, before I enquired, Why the Church would not determine
this, and it was given me for a Reason, That it was not of Faith. Or is it
because it does not seem to be of so great moment in it self? This cannot be
pretended; for Matters of less Moment have been declared to be of Faith: For
Instance, The Perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Virgin, is an Article, in it
self, of less Moment than this of the Immaculate Conception; for he that denies
that the Mother of our Lord always continued a Virgin, makes her less Perfect
in the Opinion of some, but not Criminal in the Judgment of any: For if she had
enjoyed the Liberty of Wedlock she had not sinned. But he that affirms her to
be Conceived in Sin, if she knew no Sin, is a False and Blasphemous Accuser,
and does her real Dishonor. Yet Helvidius, and some others, that denied her
Perpetual Virginity, are Heretics; the Dominicans, that charge her with
Original Sin, and that Unjustly, according to the Opinion of the major part of
the Council of Trent, if we may believe Pallavicini, and of the present Roman
Church, are still Good Catholics, and the Question must not be Infallibly
Decided against them for fear of Schism.

But one of the greatest Hindrances of our Belief of Infallibility is to see,
That those who affirm that such a Privilege belongs to their Church, cannot
agree where to place it: Some are for the Pope, some for a General Council,
some for the Church Diffusive; now if but one of these Competitors be
Infallible, of three Parties, into which the Roman Church is divided upon this
Question, there are two against him, and as very Heretics as we. If all the
three be Infallible, then all the Roman Church is in a Dangerous Error, for of
this Trinity of Infallible Judges, no Party believes but one, to the Exclusion
of the other two. Nor can they Reproach us with rejecting all the three, for we
allow the Church Diffusive to be Infallible in a Sense; that is, That there
shall be always Persons professing the Substance of the Christian Faith, only
we do not make these Infallible Judges, nor resolve our Faith into this Pious
Opinion as into a first Principle. But we need not insist upon this, for the
Romanists themselves confess, That the Church Diffusive can be no Judge, and
that no Controversy in Religion was ever yet Decided by it. Now, while the
Romanists are Disagreed about their Infallible Judge, how can we believe that
they have any? For surely, If God had appointed such a Judge, he had rendered
him so Conspicuous and Remarkable, that every one who was not wilfully Blind
must have Discerned him, else there could be no Use of him, and instead of
Ending Controversy, he would Serve only to Increase it, by becoming himself
the Subject of a New Dispute. For what Use, I pray, of an Infallible Judge that
lies incognito; or what benefit from that Infallibility that is Distracted
between many and Endless Competitions? The Wisdom of God is not wont to confer
so great a Gift to so little purpose, and those who concern the Divine Wisdom
in this Question, by saying, That God had not made sufficient Provision for his
Church, if he had not made it Infallible, do not consider, That while they
Disagree about this Infallibility, they overthrow their own Argument, and
betray the Divine Wisdom, after they had interested it in their Disputes. When
they pretend to be all agreed in this, That they Blieve the Pope and a General
Council in conjunction to make up one Infallible Compound, we have great Reason
to suspect, That what they say is not True, and that they do not believe it
themselves; for several have lived and dyed in their Communion, who publicly
taught, That a Pope and General Council concurring, may err in the Faith, and
were never Censured for this Doctrine: Besides, it is as reasonable to believe
that two Ciphers joined may make up a Sum, as that two Fallible Parties can
make up one Infallible in Conjunction. Or if these Parties are Infallible
apart, they do but mock us when they talk of their Conjunction. But that they
do not Believe their own Pretense, seems to me plain, Because they take no Care
to be always provided of this Infallible Compound. How can they believe a Pope
and Council united to be the only Infallible Judge, and yet use no Means to
bring them together once in a hundred Years? The Council of Constance, when it
had Decreed Councils to be Infallible, took Care to Act according to their
Pretense; and therefore ordered Councils to be frequent, and provided against
all those Impediments which the Jealousy of the Roman Court might oppose to
their Design. But that Men should believe that Infallibility of Judgment
belongs to a certain Conjunction of Parties, and yet to be content they should
never meet, and to let Ages pass without the least Benefit of this
Infallibility that was in their Power, is such a Riddle that overcomes my Weak
Faith, so Rank a Pretense as would turn the Stomach of a Pharisee. But if they
pretend, That the State of the World and Circumstances of Princes will permit
such Assemblies but seldom, they fall foul upon the Wisdom of God, that should
leave the Infallibility of the Church at the Discretion of Temporal Princes,
and make the very Being of the Infallible Judge to depend upon the Disposition
of these either to Peace or War. If it be said that such frequent Assemblies
will be very inconvenient to the Church Universal, they must be answered, That
the Subsisting of an Infallible Judge, is such an Advantage to the Church, as
will abundantly satisfy for all the Inconvenience that can be pretended:
Besides, who does not see that all this is mere Shift? for in Rome there are
commonly more Prelates attending upon that Court, than have made up several of
the General Councils, which are accounted Infallible. Yet after all, this
Church that boasts so much of her Infallibility, and makes that the Ground of
her Dominion over the Faith of all Christians, when she may easily contrive
that that Judge, which she pretends to be Infallible, should be also a standing
one and perpetual, is content to commit either to the Inquisition, which was
never pretended to be exempt from Error; or to Episcopal Vicars, who are
generally no great Divines, the Power of Declaring Heresy, and of Condemning
to the Fire, Men by them Adjudged to be Heretics, when all the while, these
very Judges are no less subject to Heresy than the Poor Creatures on whom they
pronounce their Sentence. And though a General Council, once in an Age or two,
might correct the Errors of these Decrees, yet can they restore the Souls which
they have slain, or raise again the Bodies which these Mistaken Judges had
reduced to Ashes?

The more we consider this Pretense of Joining Pope and Council to make up an
Infallible Judge, the more our Suspicions do increase, not only that those who
set up this Judge against us, do not Believe him Infallible themselves, but
that the very Parties set up are not satisfied of the Goodness of their own
Title: For if they were convinced, That the only Means of having the Christian
Faith without Danger of Mistake, was by their joint Instruction, they would
surely have better Inclination one for the other than has appeared for these
last Ages, and would be desirous of more frequent Meeting. But who does not
know how the Popes stand affected to a Council? since for some Ages they have
taken Care to Express their Good Will, by a yearly Excommunication of all those
who shall presume to Appeal to it, which the Council of Basil declares to be
Heresy: But let the Sorbon, and the Abettors of that Council look to this
Tender Point.

It cannot be unknown to any that Reads, with what Difficulty the Council of
Trent, so much Magnifyed after its Dissolution, was Obtained, or rather
Extorted: What Instances the Emperor used, what Importunity and Threats, and
that could obtain nothing during one whole Pontificat, and yet no very short
one. All Prinees of that Communion joined in the same Request, but to little
Purpose; Paul the Third shifted it off as long as he could, with Delays and
Excuses, and Affected Exceptions, and all the Tricks of a Resolved Aversion,
till at last absolute Necessity did Extort it from him. If God had appointed
that Infallibility should be the Issue of this Conjunction, in all likelihood
he had Prepared the Parties with Kinder Dispositions toward one another: For
when he ordered the Preservation of all Animal Kinds, by the Conjunction of
Male and Female, he inspired them with a Mutual Good-liking; but the Antipathy
which Popes have for Councils, makes it very Improbable that their Agreement
should be the only Certain Infallible Means of Preserving the Truth of the
Christian Religion.

But besides the Unwillingness of these Parties to come together to be
Infallible, the great Distrust they have one of another, when Met, begets in us
a farther Suspicion that they themselves are not fully persuaded of this
Infallibility, at least that they have not the full Assurance of Divine Faith
about it: Two Kings at an Interview, or two Opposite Generals in Time of War,
cannot be more Jealous or more Scrupulously Cautious about the Condition of the
Place, or the Number of Attendants. If there must be a Council, the Pope would
be best content to have it within his own Dominion, or where he can Command.
Possibly such Assemblies may be most Infallible within S. Peter's Patrimony,
though the Poor Apostles were forced to meet in an Enemy's Country: But what
matters it where they Meet, if the Pope and they are Infallibly assisted? A
Simple Man would expect, That two Tallies should not Agree more exactly when
joined together, than these two Pieces of Infallibility, when they come to
confer Notes; but the Councils of Constance and Basil, and Pisa, will Inform
us, That there may be a Disagreement, and that too if either Side is to be
believed about Matters of Faith. These Old Jarrs made the Popes, who are the
Standing Part of the Infallible Compound, very jealous of the other, which is
but Occasional. And therefore, when the Council of Trent sat, the Popes that
directed it, thought they could never have Security enough of its
Good-behaviour: For first, They would by no Means allow it the Title of
Representing the Universal Church, lest it should pretend to Engross the
Infallibility, as others had done; then it was ordered, That nothing should be
Proposed for Debate in it but by the Popes Legates; Then the Sum of all
Debates were to be sent to Rome, and nothing to be Concluded without new
Direction: And as if all this were not Sufficient, Care was taken that Italian
Prelates should be sent thither in such Numbers, as might carry it against all
the rest, and if any Accession of Bishops came from France or other Places
beyond the Mountains, new Levies were made in Rome, and sent immediately to
Trent to observe the Motions of those Strangers. These Italians, it may be,
have a nearer Capacity of being Infallible, and if Infallibility depend upon
the Agreement of Pope and Council, it cannot be denied, for I think it is more
possible for them both to Mistake by Consent, than for a Synod composed of such
as these, to have any Difference with him that Sends and Pays them. But if the
Popes had been of Opinion, That all Private Opinions and Engagements were to be
Overruled by the Infallible Spirit of Councils, and that whatsoever they might
have Promised for the Wages of Unrighteousness, like Balam, they could not
pronounce otherwise than as God moved them: Surely their Holinesses would have
learned to be Wiser, by the Example of Balack, than to have wasted their
Treasure to engage Men of Uncertain Suffrage, and at last to receive a Curse,
perhaps instead of a Blessing. This Way of Procuring an Infallible Sentence, is
enough to destroy all the Credit and Authority of it: For the Oracles of Old
quickly Sunk in their Reputation, when the Gods, and their Officers
condescended to accept of Pensions.

Now as the too wary Conduct of the Roman Church toward her own Members, seems
to confess a distrust of her own Infallibility; so the Unreasonable Confidence
which she uses toward us, begets in us a just Suspicion that she is in the
wrong, and is not altogether Insensible of it. For it is a sign of a very bad
Cause, when those concerned to Defend it, are unwilling to enter into its
Merits; and instead of that, only bluster and stand upon their Privilege;
instead of Maintaining it by Law and Reason, declare that they are to give Law,
and not to submit to any; and that whatsoever they say, that must be Reason:
This is an Extravagancy in which no Authority upon Earth can bear a Man out.
For if a Professor, when he is pressed by some Untoward Objections against some
Opinion he has delivered, should think fit to answer only with his Brow, or
else to deliver it again as his positive Judgment out of the Chair, declaring,
That it belonged to him to dictate in that place; I am apt to believe that his
Beard, though never so venerable, would scarce be able to preserve him from the
Contempt and Derision of his own Disciples. Or if a Judge, questioned for an
Unjust Sentence, should instead of Law or Equity, produce only his Commission,
to justify his Act; I am afraid whatever became of his Person, his Reputation
would be in some danger: Especially if all were of Judge Rustworth's Coll. T.
1. P. 506.
Dodridg's mind, That it is no more fit for a Judge to decline to give an
Account of his Doings, than for a Christian of his Faith. Now this is the Case
between Us and the Church of Rome; We charge Them of Corrupting the Faith, of
Establishing Superstition, and Insufferable Tyranny: We produce our Evidence,
and allege Scripture and Primitive Antiquity to make out Our Charge. On the
other side, She takes upon her, and stands upon her Privilege; She defines and
proves it with a Curse, which is a Spiritual kind of Hectoring, and We are
Heretics convict, because we are not satisfied with these Demonstrations. For
my own part, I think they are to blame that do not like this Proceeding in an
Enemy; for the nearest thing to an Acknowledgment that the Roman Cause is
Indefensible, is this desperate way of maintaining it; the less of Argument Men
have, the more Positive they grow, and endeavor to make up their want of
Reason by the Boldness and Peremptoriness of their Affirmation: And though some
may ascribe the Infallibility-shift to the Confidence of the Church of Rome, I
shall rather impute it to her Desperation. And we are the more confirmed in
this Suspicion, that the Roman Church was brought to this Shift by Distress,
rather than Choice, when we consider the time and the Occasion upon which we
find her openly to have declared her self Infallible. When the Eastern Church
quarreled with those of the West, about some Points of Doctrine, as well as
Ecclesiastical Observances; among other things, they urge, That the Catholic
Church was on their Side. For of the five Patriarchs which Governed the Church,
whom they usually compared to the five Senses, there were four for the Eastern
Opinions: And if two to one be accounted odds, it will be intolerable
Presumption for one to oppose four. For so Michael Cerularius urges, not
intending to confer any Infallibility upon those four Patriarchs, but from a
Majority pleading a Presumption of Right. Pope Leo opposes to this the Dignity
of St. Peter, and the Privilege which the Roman Church had of being Infallible,
though she stood alone. This appears by the Letters of Michael, Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Peter of Antioch, and Leo the Ninth's Reply to their
Objections; and it is no wonder the Pope took Sanctuary in such a Pretense,
when Authority did commonly bear down Reason: And the Roman Church was too
great to depend upon the sole Merit of the Cause, and such Reasons as were
common to her with every private Christian in the World. But this Pretense of
Infallibility was yet rather Insinuated than Defined, till Gregory VII.
(condemned and deposed by several German and Italian Councils) was forced to
lift up his See beyond all Human measure, and to declare positively, That his
Church could never Err. About an Hundred and fifty Years after this, the
Schoolmen invented the Term Infallibility, to express this Unaccountable
Privilege. Mr. Cressy calls it an Unfortunate Word; and (...) is indeed: For
never any had harder usage than this. It is forced to stand against Scripture
and Tradition, against Authority, and Reason, and Sense: This poor
Infallibility must hide all Faults, must cover every Defect, and vouch every
Absurdity, and justify even Transubstantiation.

I have insisted I fear too long upon the grounds we may have to suspect, that
the Church of Rome does not really believe her own Infallibility. What conceit
she may have of her self, or how she may stand in the Opinion of her Adherents,
is to us of no great Importance, since we do not conceive our selves concluded,
either by her fond Fancies of her own Excellence, or the extravagant Applauses
of her Flatterers; only we would desire she would not press us too vehemently
to this Belief, while she is under such flagrant Suspicion of Deriding it
within her self. If she do really believe this, we envy her not the Paradise of
such a Conceit; but rather pity her Disease, and the disorder of her
Imagination, for so it is. And something not unlike her case we have in the
Character of the Church of Laodicea; Because thou have said, I am Rich, and
increased with Goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
Wretched, and Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and Naked; anoint thine Eyes with
Eyesalve, that thou may see.

But be the Roman Pretense never so sincere, we have further grounds of
Suspicion, that really there is no such thing. For,

I. Christ himself, the Author of our Faith, though he was Infallible because
he was God, yet did not think fit to use this way of Authority or mere
Defining, to introduce his Doctrine, nor to recommend it to his Disciples as a
Principle for trying Doctr^^^, when he was gone to Heaven. The way therefore
which our Savior took, was to Prove and to Convince by Arguments proper and
conclusive: When he was questioned, he appealed to the Scriptures, Search the
Scriptures, for they testify of me. If I bear witness of my self, my witness
is not true. And therefore produces the Testimony of John the Baptist, of his
Father at his Baptism, of the Miracles that he did, The same Works which I do,
they bear witness of me that the Father has sent me. -- If ye do not believe
me, believe the Works. But above all, he alleges the Scripture in Vindication
of his Person and his Doctrine. When he was blamed for Healing on the Sabbath,
he justifies himself from the Law that permitted Beasts to be relieved on that
day, and by an Argument a fortiori, he proves, That a Charity toward a Child
of Abraham was much more to be allowed. When the Sadducees disputed with him,
he reproached them for not knowing the Scriptures, but blames them not at all
for being ignorant of the Infallible Judge. In short, all his Instructions, all
his Preaching, all his Disputes, were full of Arguments and Proofs drawn from
the Merits of the Cause, from Scripture and Reason; and to finish his Evidence,
and the Conviction of his Hearers, oftentimes he crowned all with Miracles. The
Pharisees indeed, when they were at a loss for an Argument, would take Refuge
in their Authority; and therefore when they could not answer a poor Man, thus
they take upon them, Thou wast altogether born in Sin, and do thou Teach us?
Are we blind also? And have any of the Pharisees believed on him? But our
Savior, instead of Encouraging this assuming way, warns his Disciples against
it; Call no Man Rabbi or Master upon Earth; call no Man Father; i.e. Submit not
your selves implicitly to such Arrogant Teachers as these, that usurp Dominion
over your Faith. And therefore he recommends to Men the Use of their Judgment,
Why of your own selves judge ye not what is right? And lest any should think
that this noble Faculty was given them only for their Worldly Occasions, he
reproaches the Jews for not making due Use of it in Enquiries of Religion, Ye
can discern the face of the Heaven, and why do you not discern this time of the
Messiah; Which the Scriptures did plainly mark out to those that would use
their Judgment to discern them. Now it became our Savior to deal with us in
this manner; for since upon our account he was pleased to be made Man, it was
most suitable to that Condescension to speak to us as a Man, and to meet us in
our own way of Apprehension. And besides it seems more agreeable to the Nature
of the Eternal Word or Reason, to satisfy and convince our Understandings,
than to amaze and confound them with Paradoxes without Proof or Explanation.
Although Christ's Disciples called him Master, and so indeed he was; yet he did
not use them as Servants, but as Friends; For the Servant knows not what his
Lord does: A Servant is not to demand Reasons, or to know the Intention of his
Master in every thing he commands. But Christ calls his Disciples Friends,
because he had made known to them all things that he had heard of the Father.
Besides, it is much cheaper to affirm Confidently, than to preduce any
tolerable Proof; and many may amaze Men with strange and extravagant Opinions,
that are not able to render any Reason that may move an ordinary, sober
Understanding. The Gnostics, and the extravagant Sects that sprung from them,
would submit their wild Conceits to no rational Examination; you must take all
upon their Credit, or be an Infidel. For these Mystical Rabbis were above the
poor Dispensation of giving Reasons. Apelles the Heretic, in a Conference with
Rhodon, affirms, That a Man ought not to Examine his Faith, but to content
himself with whatever Opinion he had received: And being demanded a Proof for
his Belief of One God, since he rejected Moses and the Prophets. He frankly
confessed He had none to give, but that he was moved, he knew not how, to
believe it: And therefore is justly derided by his Antagonist. But the true
Christians did not thus learn Christ; they received his Doctrine not only
because he Pronounced it, but because he gave Proof and Demonstration of what
he said. And besides the outward Testimony of Miracles, it was no small help to
their Conviction, to see the Inward Merit and Excellency of this Religion, that
it had nothing unworthy of God, nothing contrary to Moral Honesty, or the
Principles of Natural Religion. And Justin Martyr, though he believed in Christ
with so much Assurance as to Die for him; yet to let us see that his Faith was
not altogether Implicit, but grounded upon Rational Conviction from the Merit
of the Doctrine, makes this bold and somewhat harsh Declaration, in his Book
against Marcion; That he should not have believed Christ himself, had he
preached any other God beside the Creator. And we have Irenaeus's Approbation,
That it was well said.

The Apostles did not think fit to make use of this way of Infallibility,
though the Promise upon which it is now grounded was made immediately to them;
and the Assistance of the Spirit was visible in the Miracles they wrought. But
they did not affect to be above their Master, and they could not forget that
Caution he gave them, Not to be called of Men Rabbis. Nay, so far were they
from affecting Dominion over the Faith and Understanding of Christians, that
they permit and applaud the diligence of those, who would not receive the
Gospel upon their bare Affirmation, but searched the Scriptures, to see whether
those things were so as they were alleged by the Apostles: If we may allow St.
Luke to speak their sense. It was St. Paul's Advice to the Corinthians, that
they should Examine themselves whether they were in the Faith; and he renounces
all Dominion over their Faith. When the same Corinthians doubted of the
Resurrection, St. Paul does not think it sufficient to say, That it was
defined, and a received Article of the Creed: But enters into the Merits of the
Cause, and proves the Truth by Arguments unanswerable, and Defends it against
all the Objections that had rendered it suspected. When the Churches of Galatia
were divided upon the great Question, Whether the Gentile Christians were
obliged toobserve the Law of Moses; and many pretended the Authority of Peter
and James to the Prejudice of Christian Liberty; St. Paul undertakes our
Defense, and throws off all, not only the Authority of Men, though they were
Apostles, but of Angels; Though an Angel from Heaven should preach any other
Gospel, let him be accursed: And this high Declaration was intended, if
Chrysostom understand it right, to show, That where the Debate is concerning
Truth, St. Paul will not be satisfied with the Dignity or Office of any
Persons; As if that must be Gospel which they declare. Alas then for the
Infallible Judge, if there be no respect of Persons, no regard of Offices, when
Truth is in question! We were told a quite contrary story, That the only way to
know the Truth, was to consult Men placed in certain Dignities, and to take for
Oracle whatsoever they shall think fit to define. St. Paul, it seems, knew
nothing of any Infallible Judge, from the heavenly Angels downwards; and
Chrysostom, his Interpreter, takes not the least care to Except him. The Greeks
have a Tradition, That when Chrysostom wrote his Comments upon St. Paul's
Epistles, the Apostle was seen for several days standing behind the Bishop's
Chair, and whispering into his Ear: But without believing this, a Man may have
reason to be satisfied, that the Gloss speaks the sense of the Text; and if all
his Epistles had been as clear as this Passage, I am apt to believe that this
Apostle might have saved himself the labor of coming down from Heaven to be
his own Commentator. I must confess, that in reading this Epistle, I have often
wondered how St. Paul should come to omit one Argument, which, according to the
Men of the Infallible way, must have been worth all the rest: And that is, the
Determination of this Question by the Council of Jerusalem; for all are agreed,
and the Notation of years which we find in the First and Second Chapters, makes
it clear, that this Epistle was written after that Council; yet in all this
long Vindication of the Liberty of the Gentile Christians, it is not once
urged. And I cannot conceive any reason of this Omission, unless it be that
having in the very beginning laid aside all Human Authority, and Respect of
Persons, he might not think it proper afterward to allege the Apostolical
Decree: But if this had been the only Infallible way of Deciding Controversy,
this Omission cannot be excused. Now because some have endeavored to prove the
Infallibility of Councils, from the Example of that of the Apostles, I proceed
briefly to show, That they did not proceed in the way of Infallibility, though
they were really Infallible, because they were Inspired Persons; but all their
Proceeding was according to Allegation and Proof, and the Conclusion is made to
depend upon these Premises, and not their Infallibility in pronouncing it.
Whereas in the New Way, the Conclusion is Certain, because some Men declare it,
though the Reasons alleged may be good for nothing: The sum of that Synodical
Action was this; First S. Peter represented to them, How the Holy Ghost had
already Determined that Question, by falling upon Cornelius and other Persons
Uncircumcised; then Paul and Barnabas declared, What Wonders that God had
wrought among the Gentiles by them. And lastly, S. James shows out of the
Prophets, How the Conversion of the Gentiles was foretold; and concludes,
Wherefore my Sentence is -- Then it pleased the Apostles and Elders to send
certain Persons with an account of this whole Matter, to the Churches
concerned; and a Letter with this Expression, among others, It seemed Good to
the Holy Ghost and to us: Which does not import as if whatsoever they agreed to
declare must therefore be the Truth, and to be received without asking farther
Questions, though what they did Decree was certainly Truth and Right; but only
suggests the former Decision of the Holy Ghost, in the Case of Cornelius; and
some other declared by Barnabas and Paul; for then it seemed Good to the Holy
Ghost to receive the Gentiles without Circumcision. But in the Assembly of
Jerusalem, we have not the least Intimation of any Declaration of the Spirit,
either by Miracle or Revelation. But the Holy Ghost having before visibly
declared upon the Point, to that in all likelihood the Expression must allude.
But whatever the Apostles thought of the way of Infallibility, it is plain, The
Believers were not yet well instructed concerning it; for this Definition could
not end the Controversy. And in the beginning of the next Chapter, We find S.
Paul Circumcising Timothy, whose Father was a Greek, Because of the Jews that
were in those Quarters, and how little Use was made of it in ending the same
Controversy in the Church of Galatia, I have observed already. But further
yet; S. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, teaches another Method of Belief
than the Advocates for Infallibility, for some time would impose upon the
World; for he utterly disallows this way of making the Faith of God to depend
upon the Belief or Unbelief of Men, as if that were to be the Standard of Truth
and Error: For what if some did not Believe? shall their Unbelief make the
Faith of God of none Effect? God forbid! Yea let God be True and every Man a
Liar, as it is written, etc.

This is an Answer to such Objections as were Suggested against the Christian
Faith, from the Unbelief of the Jews. For when our Savior appeared, they had
the Visible Church, and all Ecclesiastical Authority the Priesthood, the
Sanadrim, the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Renowned Doctors were theirs, the
Religious Sects, the Outward Purity, the Opus operatum, and Supererogation were
on their Side. Now if these must prescribe to our Belief, we Christians have
lost our Cause; for the High Priest and the Elders assembled, i. e. The Pope
and Council of that Time condemned Christ for a Blasphemer. But S. Paul would
no more submit to such Definitions, than we Protestants to those of the Council
of Trent, but enters his Protestation against all such as by any Act of Men
would Prescribe against the Truth of God, and gives Reason and Scripture for
his Proceeding; God must be Pure, but all Men may be Liars; and so fairly takes
his leave of all Infallible Men. And so far is he from Affecting that
Brerogative himself, which he denies to others, that he appeals to the
Scriptures, as his Vouchers, and does not desire to be believed upon the
Authority of his Place, but by the Method he uses of proving what he advances,
he sets a Fair Precedent to all other Teachers, and which Origin, upon this
Place, understands to be his Design. For if a Person so Great and so Qualifyed
as S. Paul, did not think the Authority of his Saying any thing to be
sufficient, unless he prove it out of the Law and the Prophets; how much more
should we, the least of Gods Ministers, observe the same Rule?

And Lastly, S. Peter, from whom some of the Competitors for Infallibility
derive their Title, advises all Christians, To be ready always to give an
answer to every one that asks them a Reason of the Hope that is in them. Now
all Interpreters of this Place, both Ancient and Modern, that I have seen, are
very much out, if this Reason be no other than the Infallibility of S. Peter,
or of the Church: Now this Answer, I Believe because the Church Believes, is
surely the Easiest of any, and all other Answers would be Impertinent, if this
alone were the Infallible Reason: The Schoolmen have upon some Occasions
thought fit to ground their Rational Way upon this Passage, and Valued their
Usefulness and Service to the Church on this Account. But for God's sake, What
Use can there be of these Fallible Reasons in a Church that is Infallible in
her Conclusions, and holds not her self obliged to render any other Reason for
them but a Curse? And indeed I cannot see any Occasion of giving any Reason,
since her Disciples do Profess that they have no Assurance, but that in these
she may be Mistaken.

Now if the Apostles did not think fit to use this Way of Infallibility, it
seems something incongruous for the Church in Succeeding Ages to pretend to it;
for as the Gifts of the Spirit grew less, methinks the Way of Teaching should
rather be less than more Magisterial; unless some new Paraclet, to supply the
Defect of Miracles and Inspiration, had thought fit to confer upon it the Gift
of Infallible Decision: But the Generation next to the Apostles knew nothing of
this Matter, but Confess the State of the Church in their Time to be Inferior
to that of the Apostolic Age, and that Heretics then could not be so
effectually Suppressed, as they were by the Apostles and immediate Disciples of
our Savior. For Hegesyppus, speaking of the Martyrdom of Symeon Bishop of
Jerusalem, observes, That to that Time the Church had continued a Virgin and
Unpolluted; for while the Apostles lived, Heretics were forced to keep
themselves close; but when their Generation was closed, then these Deceivers
began to appear with wonderful Confidence. What absurd Fellows were these to
think They could prevail against an Infallible Church at one Time more than
another; had they no Dread of the Infallible Judge? Did they not know that his
Sentence could make them Heretics Convict, when ever he thought fit to
pronounce it; or at leastwise, Did they not know that all Christians Believed
such a Judge? and therefore could have as little Hopes then, as in the Time of
the Apostles. But though we let these pass for Impudent Stupid Fellows; Yet
what should this Hegesyppus mean by Representing the Church as a Virgin but to
such a Time, since in despite of all Heresies the Church must always remain
Pure and Uncorrupted? Valesius would fain refer this to the Church of Jerusalem
only: But he ingenuously Confesses, That Eusebius who Cites it, meant
otherwise, and applied it to the Church in General: And the Reasons that
Hegesyppus gives, make it plain that so he meant it too. And therefore Valesius
bespeaks a favorable Interpretation of them both. How little Thought Justin
Martyr and Irenaeus had of this Way of Infallibility I have mentioned before,
they both Wrote against Heresies, and Irenaeus his Books are still Extant; but
not the least Mention made of the Authority of the Infallible Judge; Scripture
and common Sense furnish all his Arguments. Tradition, indeed, is once
mentioned, because Heretics made this their Pretense; but then too it is used
only for a Negative Argument, to show that the Apostolic Churches never Taught
any such Traditionary Doctrines, without the least Pretense that those Churches
had received any other Articles of Belief besides what were contained in the
Scripture. Clemens of Alexandria lays down several Ways of Detecting Heretics,
but it was his Misfortune, or rather that of his Age, to be Ignorant of that
which is now accounted the only Infallible. Tertullian Prescribes against all
Heretics, without troubling the Scriptures, from the Common Rule of Faith,
which is not an Indefinite One in petto, but a short Summary of the chief
Points of Christian Religion, from the Novelty of Heresies, from the Doctrine
of Apostolical Churches, Founded before those Opinions Sprung. But his
Misfortune is not only to omit the Infallible Judge, but to preclude him in the
very Beginning of his Book by this Remarkable Passage: What then (says he) if a
Bishop, or a Deacon, or a Widow, or a Virgin; nay if a Martyr or a Doctor
should fall from the Rule, must Heresy therefore be Truth? What do we receive
Doctrines for the sake of Persons, or Persons for the sake of Doctrines? But
how shall we know Truth from Heresy, if we may not depend upon the Person of
the Infallible Judge? And do not those who resolve their Doctrine into the
Definition of an Infallible Judge, approve the Doctrine for the Persons Sake?
Orig. contra Cells. l. 3.
When Celsus Reproached the Christians with their Divisions, and Multitude of
their Sects, Origin had no better Reply to make, than, That this Misfortune was
not peculiar to them, for the same thing happened to Physicians and
Philosophers, and yet to Wise Men it was no Prejudice against those
Professions. And then shows how these Sects sprung from their different
Understanding of the Scripture; but could not, it seems, think of the Remedy
which was peculiar to them, and of an Infallible Judge, and that therefore,
those who rejected his Definitions, were inexcusable, and unworthy of the Name
of Christians. But Chrysostom, on Acts 15, draws this Answer to the Point, when
he declares, That Christians had no other way of choosing their Church, in this
variety of Christian Sects, than Physicians or Philosophers had in determining
what Sect they should follow: Which was no other than using their best Judgment
and Diligence in the Application of the Common Rule. But Lactantius, De vera
Sap. l. 4.
for want of Knowing this Infallible Judge, gives the meanest Direction of any
to discern the true Faith, in the midst of Different Pretensions. The Catholic
Church, says he, alone has the True Religion: If he had stuck here, we might
have thought, perhaps, that he had known the Mystery of Infallibility; but when
he proceeds a little further, he spoils all: Heretics, says he, pretend to
have the Catholic Church as well as the Truth. His Answer to the Objection
follows, That those have the Catholic Church who have Confession and Penance,
and that Heals those Sins and Wounds to which Human Frailty is subject. The
Good Man at that Time happened to think of the Montanists or Novatians, and
therefore describes the True Church in Opposition to their Severity, to be that
which restored Penitent Sinners to Communion, after Public Confession of their
Fault, and public Satisfaction to the Church. But, by this Rule, how shall we
know the True Church in the Controversy between the Catholics and the
Arrians, for they were both agreed in this Point of Discipline? But how can we
expect that these Writers before the Nicene Council, should say much of the
Infallible Judge; since she had no such, if either a General Council alone, or
in conjunction with the Pope be it? for it is well known, That from the Time of
the Apostles to the Synod of Nice, there was no General Council. And Alphonsus
a Castro imputes the Number and Extravagance of the Heresies of those Times to
the Want of an Infallible Judge, Adv. Here Is. l. 1.
which he takes to be a General Council. But I cannot get this Scruple out of
my Head, How God should intend such a Judge, as the only certain Means of
Preserving the Integrity of Christian Religion against Heresy, and yet suffer
his Church to be without it for almost three Ages, when she stood in the
greatest Need of such a Help, and was otherwise by her Holiness and Glorious
Martyrdoms, best qualifyed to receive such an Extraordinary Favor: And
afterward, when the Emperors were Christian and Orthodox, there seemed to be
less Need of it, for their Laws against Heretics might perhaps be more
Infallible in their Effect of Suppressing them, than the most solemn Sentence
of the Infallible Judge. For the Popes of those Ages, though they were engaged
in several Controversies, yet neither did they pretend to be Infallible, nor
were they acknowledged as such by any other Churches. The Dispute between Pope
Stephen and S. Cyprian about Rebaptizing, is well known, and whoever compares
their Opinions with what the Council of Nice Determined upon that Question,
will find they were both in the Wrong. Tertul. adv. Prax.
Pope Anicetus gave but a poor Sign of his Infallibility, when he received the
Prophecy's of Montanus, Prisca and Maximilla, and received the Asiaticks and
Cataphrygians into his Communion: And Marcellinus his Infallibility must surely
forsake him, when he offered Incense to Idols, as the Roman Offices do accuse
him; and though Baronius mentions the Endeavors of some Zealous Men to take
off this Blemish, yet after all the Revisions of the Breviary, it remains there
still.

But be the Catholic Church, before the Nicene Council as destitute of
Infallible Judgment as it was of Civil Force, surely when Councils were
assembled, with the concurrence of Popes, all Dispute and Heresy must be at an
end; for when the Infallible Judge has taken his Place, all Knots in Religion
must be Untied, and all Doubts removed, for who so Ignorant or Perverse, as to
dispute against his Sentence, whom all the Christian World must know to be
incapable of Mistake? Now the Misfortune is, That after Many General Councils,
received by the Bishop of Rome, and the greatest part of Christendom, we hear
no Tidings of an Infallible Judge, nor of the Roman Resolution of Faith into
the mere Authority of Papal Councils: And this is such a Disappointment, under
which no Man can be patient, and in spite of all Good Disposition of Believing
the Roman Method, it will breed Suspicion, That the Infallible was not revealed
to the Church of those Times. Athanasius, the great Champion and Confessor for
the Nicene Creed, in all his Apologies, forgot this great and unanswerable
Defense, That he followed an Infallible Guide. He Explains and Confirms from
Scripture, Athan. or. ad Maxim. Id. de Nicen. Synod. Decret. Orat. 1. contr.
Arrian.
the Notion of Consubstantial; but could not be so happy as to urge, That it
must be true, Because the Infallible had pronounced it. He deservedly commends
the Nicene Council, and the Faith defined there; but his Reasons turn
Infallibility upside down: For he received the Determination of that great
Assembly; because in his Judgment he was convinced, That it was True, and
Consonant to the Scriptures, but did not therefore think, It must be as True as
Gospel, Because it was the Sentence of an Infallible Judge. And, at last, in
the Way of our Protestant Resolution of Faith, declares, That in those
Controversies that divided the Church, We ought to pray for the Spirit of
Discretion, That every one may know what to Receive and what to Reject: A
Faithful Disciple of the Gospel is able to distinguish between Truth and
Pretense, because he has the Spirit of Discerning; but the Simple is carried
away with every Color. But what should we do with this Private Spirit of
Discretion, in a Controversy already decided by the Infallible? And what
danger of the Simple, if he can but be Simple enough, to Believe as the
pretended Infallible Church Believes? And it is yet more strange, That after
the Nicene Decisions this Father should recommend the Scriptures as a better
and more sufficient Means than any other for our Direction to the True Faith.
Con. Maxim. l. 3. c. 14.
S. Augustine was surely to blame, when in a Dispute with an Arrian, he makes
this Proposal, That they should by Consent lay aside the Authority of
Council-Definitions, and gives up the Judgment of the Nicene Fathers, in
exchange for that of the Heretics of Rimini, and leaving the Advantage of a
Sentence, by which alone the Truth could be Infallibly known, according to the
Roman Supposition, descends to put the Matter upon an Issue, which we are now
told, is very uncertain, and of dangerous Consequence; that is, To be tried by
Scripture and Reason. One would think it had been a much easier and shorter
Task for him to prove the Council of Nice Infallible, if he had thought it as
Demonstrable as the Missionaries say it is, than to convince the Heretics by
Disputable Passages of Scripture, interpreted according to his Private Reason:
Here indeed he overthrows Infallibility, but Implicitly and by Consequence; but
in another place he expressly Disclaims it: The Church, says he, L. 2. con.
Crescon.
ought not to set her self above Christ: -- for he always Judges according to
Truth, but Ecclesiastical Judges, as Men, are commonly-Mistaken. And then, lest
you may imagine General Councils excepted, in another place he declares, That
even Plenary Councils may need Amendment; and that, L. 2. de Bapt. c. 3.
The latter may Correct what is Amiss in the former. And in an Epistle to S.
Jerome, he further declares, That he had learned to pay this Deference only to
the Canonical Scriptures, of believing their Authors to have erred in nothing.
But others, though never so Learned or Holy (without any Exception) I read so,
as not to take any thing to be True, because they were of that Opinion, but
because they proved it by Scripture or Reason.

S. Jerome professes so firm adherence to his Private Coviction, Ep. ad August.
Apud Flac. Illyr. in Cato l. Test. and Suttliv. de Eccles.
That the Authority of all the World should never be able to make him depart
from it. This, says he, I affirm, this I boldly pronounce, though all the World
should gainsay it: And he makes no Scruple of Rejecting Councils, if they
determine any thing against the Doctrine of the Scriptures; In Esai. c. 30.
nay he makes it the Character of Heretics, That they take upon them so great
Authority, That whether they Teach Truth or Falsehood, they will not allow their
Disciples to examine by Reason, but Implicitly to follow their Leaders: And yet
I do not know of any of these arrived to such an Extravagance as to pronounce
themselves Infallible. Nazianz. ep. ad Procop.
Gregory the Divine was surely a Stranger to the Infallible Judge, when he
resolves to shun all Assemblies of Bishops, because he never saw Good Issue of
any of them. And I can scarce believe that he would have been con tent to
submit the Faith to Major Vote, Orat. ad Arrian.
when he brings in the Arrians insulting over the little Flock of Christ,
defining the Church by Multitude, and preferring the Sand to the Stars. Joh.
Antioch. in Conc. Ephesians. t. 3. p. 70. and 76. Ed. Labbe.
He must needs be Ignorant of the Infallible Judge, that thus writes to the
Emperor Theodosius against Cyril and his Ephesin Council; That a great number
of Bishops is unnecessary for the Examination of Opinions in Religion, and
serves only to create Tumults: For this End our Adversaries bring great
Numbers, depending only upon that, and not upon the Truth and Orthodoxness of
their Belief: And then speaking of Cyril, Endeavoring to ratify his Heresy
by Multitude, not considering, That in Religion, it is not Number that is
required, but Orthodox Faith, and the Truth of Apostolic Doctrine. And it is
strange, in all the Disputes between Cyril and Theodoret there is not the least
Word about the Infallible Definition of the Ephesin Synod; which had decided
the Matter under Dispute: And it is no small Prejudice against the Infallible
Way; Cyril. Ep. ad Euopt.
that Cyril tells his Adversary, That he ought to Argue out of the Scriptures
only. There was never Council occasioned more Dispute than that of Chalcedon;
the World was a long while divided about it: But those who declare their
Adherence to it, never pretend it to have been Infallible; but on the contrary,
Ep. Anatol. ad Leon. Ep. Episcop. Europ. ad Leon. and Episc. Isaur. ad eund.
vid. Tom. 5. Conc. Ed. Labb.
Profess their Approbation of it, Because it had Asserted the True Faith; not
that the Faith must be true because asserted by it; because it had defined
nothing New or Strange against the Rectitude of the Faith; because it had added
nothing to the Faith, or altered nothing in the Constitutions of former
Councils, or explained any thing Incongruously, but followed the Scripture and
the Nicene Council. Ep. Syriae 2. ibid.
And the Bishops of Syria declare their Opinion not only of this, but of all
the other received General Councils, That they Decree them to be True Councils,
because they have Asserted and Ratified this Faith by the Holy Seriptures. What
shall we call this but a Protestant Rule of Faith, when a Council is to be
known to be True or False from its Doctrine, and not the Doctrine from the
Infallibility of the Judge? And Maximus, it seems, Collat. S. Maximi cum
Theodos. Ep. Caesar. Ed. Sirm. p. 161, 162.
had no other Means of discerning True from Erroneous Councils, but the
Doctrine they defined: For (says he) If the Emperor's Summons or Commands, give
Authority to Synods, and not the True Faith; receive the Synods that have been
assembled against the Word Consubstantial: And having reckoned up many
Heretical Councils, concludes, But they were all condemned for the Impiety of
their Erroneous Opinions confirmed by them -- And then, The Rule of the Church
acknowledges those for true Synods, which the Orthodoxness of their Opinions
does Recommend -- And Theodosius Answers, It is so as thou affirmest, It is
Orthodoxness of Belief gives Credit and Confirmation to Synods. I might pursue
the same Observation through several other General Councils, which a
considerable part of the Church believed to have actually mistaken, but to
which none for some Ages ascribed the Prerogative of Infallibility; but those
in which I have instanced, being the Principal for Reputation and Authority, it
is needless to observe the same thing of those that followed: And the Fathers
taking the Liberty of Judging Conciliary Definitions by the Rule of Faith, the
Holy Scriptures, do plainly overthrow all Pretense of an Unaccountable,
Infallible Way of Defining, presumed to be above all Examination and Review,
because above all possibility of Mistaking.

Now as the Church was Ignorant of the Infallible Judge during the conjunction
of East and West, and the Opportunity of General Councils; so the Greek Church,
after it was broken off from the West, was altogether unacquainted with this
Infallible Way, and when the Church of Rome began to assume to it self the
Quality of Infallible, the Eastern Church Protested against it. And while they
follow the Patriarch Photius, they can never Resolve their Faith into any Human
or Ecclesiastical Authority; for he has prevented all such Pretenses, by that
strong Protestation he makes in his Epistle to the Bishop of Aquileia; Photii
Ep. ad Ep. Aquil. in Auct. Biblioth. Patr. per Combef. p. 535.
where, in answer to the Authority of the Fathers, touching the Procession of
the Holy Ghost, he says: What, should I descend so low, as to speak concerning
the number of those that affirm this thing? though the whole Creation should do
it with onc Voice, none surely would leave the Instruction and Doctrine of the
Creator to hearken to the Voice of the Creature, contradicting him that made it.

To conclude, I cannot avoid suspecting the Roman Infallibility, when I
consider not only, That no other Church pretends to it, but that no Heresy or
Sect of Christians ever claimed it. These did seldom come behind the Church in
Assuming and Pretense, and commonly presumed more upon their Authority, and
what they wanted in Truth and Proof, they made up with Arrogance and the
Positive Way. There is no other Principle into which Faith is used to be
resolved, but they endeavor to make their own: Scripture, Tradition, Miracles,
Revelation, all these they boldly challenged; but this Assurance of
Infallibility, we never find them to have usurped; I am loath to ascribe it to
their Modesty; it is more likely, they had no Example to provoke them, and they
were not so Fortunate as to find out the Way themselves to so bold a Pretense,
unless we may imagine that they had a better Opinion of their Way, than to
think it stood in need of so Miserable a Subterfuge. So that the Impudence of
this Pretense is peculiar to the Church of Rome, and may serve as a more proper
Note to distinguish it, than any of those laid down by Bellarmine. But this is
no note of Honor, but a Brand; for as the Church of Rome corrupted it self
beyond all others in Doctrine and Worship, the Divine Judgment delivered her up
to a Reprobate Sense, that renders her incapable of Discerning or Reforming her
Errors; this Presumption, That she is not subject to Mistake, hanging
perpetually like a Veil over her Eyes.

FINIS.
Books Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
I. A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress are
Historically considered. In Quarto. II. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the
Rule of Faith; writ by Reginald Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the
Reformation, about the Year 1450. In Quarto. III. Several Captious Queries
concerning the English Reformation, first proposed by Dean Manby (an Irish
Convert) in Latin: And afterward by T. W. in English. Briefly and fully
Answered by the late reverend and learned Dr. Clagett, Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Gray's Inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. IV.
Two Discourses of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead. In Quarto. V. The
Present State of the Controversy, between the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome: Or an Account of the Books written on both Sides, in a Letter
to a Friend. In Quarto. VI. Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called, The Religion of
Protestants a safe Way to Salvation, made more generally useful by omitting
Personal Contests, but inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of
Protestants, or defends the Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents;
and an Addition of some genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's never before
printed, viz. against the Infallibility of the Roman Church,
Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an Account of what moved the Author to
turn Papist, with his Confutation of the said Motives. In Quarto. VII.
Clementis epistolae duae ad Corinthos, interpretibus Patricio, Juneo,
Gothifredo, Vandelino and Joh. Bapt. Cotelerio; recensuit and notarum
spicilegium adjecit Paulus Colomesius, bibliothecae Lambethanae curator;
accedit Tho. Brunonici Windsoriensis dissertatio de Therapeutis Philonis. His
subnexae sunt, epistolae aliquot singulares, vel nunc primum editae, vel non
ita facile obviae. In Quarto. VIII. The Travel, of Monsieur de Thevenot into
the Levant; in Three Part, viz. 1. Into Turkey, 2. Persia, 3. The East Indies.
In Folio.

