THE Young Man's GUIDE TO Blessedness OR, SEASONABLE DIRECTIONS FOR YOUTH IN
their unconverted state.

By R. MAYHEW Minister of the Gospel.

ECCL, XII, 1, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, etc. LONDON,
Printed for John Hancock at the Three Bibles in Popes-Head-Alley, Cornhill.
1677.

To my Dear Children.
Dear Children,
It Was Jacob that said to Pharaoh, Genesis 33.5.
These be the Children which God has graciously given thy Servant. Oh that I
could say, Ye are the Children, which the God of Grace, has indulged the Grace
of God! Grace is a Pearl of that worth and weight, that the whole Universe is
not able to weigh against it. The Topaz of Ethiopia is but a Pebble to this
Pearl. It Is Grace that entitles and entails Glory; Grace is Glory in the bud,
Glory is Grace in the flower; Grace and Glory differ not in kind, Non specie
sed gradu.
but in degree; Grace is Glory Militant, Glory is Grace Triumphant. It Is the
same state in another stature: when Time shall go into Eternity, then Grace
shall go into Glory. Ioh. 4.1.
The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water, springing up
into everlasting life. As it is true, no Sun, no light; no tree, no fruit; It
is as true, no Grace, no Glory; no Holiness, no Happiness. If (therefore) a
Grave-change do antecede a Grace-change, woe, woe, woe to that soul for an
Eternity.

Good Parents, good Tutors, good Masters, and good Guardians, (with whom
children are) are a great mercy. It Is true, godless Parents may have godly
children; Amnon had a Josiah, Abijam had an Asa. But when the Mother is an
Hittite, and the Father an Amorite, the Daughter seldom proves an Israelite.
It Is as true, godly Parents may have godless children; Adam had a Cain as well
as an Abel; Abraham had an Ishmael as well as an Isaac; Isaac had an Esau as
well as a Jacob; Jacob, as he had by (Rachel) an advancing Joseph, so by (Leah)
an abasing Simeon. Now, though Parents cannot entail their personal
perfections, or imperfections, upon their posterities; for, as the child cannot
go to Hell for his Fathers sin, but for his own; Eze. 18 Mar. 16.16.
The soul that sins shall die; so the Child cannot go to Heaven by his
Fathers Copy; he must believe, or be damned; yet the Children of Believets are
nearest a blessing, and their probabilities for mercy are fairest. Such
children have great Advantages above others: They have a stock of prayers, and
Tears a going: they have the example (of) Parents, and instruction (from)
Parents. Genesis 12.19.
Did not Abraham read Divinity-Lectures to his Family? Was not Monica a fervent
and frequent, a cordial and constant Suppliant, at the Throne of grace, for her
Son Augustine, and was not the success sweet? Train up a Child in the way that
he should go and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Grace, Pro. 22:6
runs (as it were) in a Line. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith
that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois: Tim. 1.5.
and thy Mother Eunice, and am persuaded is in thee also. The Children of
Parents (truly gracious and godly) are under promise. I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty, Isa. 44.3.
and Floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine Offering. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says
Jehovah, Isa. 59.21.
my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says Jehovah, from henceforth, and for ever. A man's
Children are himself: the Child is a Father multiplied: Those Children, are not
lost to their Parents (when they die) who are not lost to God (while they live.)

Children, the Glory of God should be our first and last: Primum and Ultimum
this should be the white in our eye, at which we should level every Arrow;
this must be propounded as the utmost and ultimate end of all our actions; Now,
(next unto this glory and your good, together with the good of others) for two
Reasons have I prepared this for the Press, that the Press might prepare it for
your perusal.

1. Because God was pleased to give (...) welcome to a little Tract of mine,
that was formerly printed, Entitled, Love, to the Life. 2. Because, I have
little, if any thing else, to leave you. I am reduced to an astonishing ebb; I
have but a very ^ittle Meal in my Barrel, and Oil in my Cruse; but blessed be
God for a Crum; for a Drop. He that deserves nothing should be content with any
thing: Nature is satisfied with a little, Grace with less: Take ^his
(therefore) that has for its Title, A Paternal Gift for a Paternal Portion.
Mr. Bolton
It was the Charge of a worthy Minister, upon a dying bed, to hi^ Children, that
they should not dar^ to meet him at the last day in an unregenerate state. Mat.
25.34 41.
Oh, that I may no^ meet you in a Christ-less, and Grace less state then! Oh!
the thoughts o^ these words cause me to tremble, le^ Christ should say to
Parents, Come y^ blessed, and to Children, Go ye cursed.

Now, Gal. 3.26.
that ye may be all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus that ye may
not have Oil (only) i^ your Lamps, Mat. 25.4.
but (also) in your Vessels; Rev. 3.1.
that ye may not have (only) name to live, 2 Timothy 3.5
but (also) the natur^^ of life; that ye may not look one wa^ and vow another:
Having a form Godliness, Gal. 2.20
but denying the Power ther^of; that ye may not hang on the outside of the
Ark, but have a li^^ from (Christ) and for (Christ), an^ (with) Christ; 2 Co. 5
15.
that the eternal Go^ may be your Refuge, and undernea^ you everlasting arms;
that the God. of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, John 17.24. Deuteronomy. 33.27.
may be your God, Guide, and Guard, blessing your souls, and this Mite unto
your souls, humbly, and heartily prays,

Dear Children, Your dear Father, according to the Flesh, RI. MAYHEW.

To the READR.
Reader,
A Writing may speak, when the Writer (do) not, when the Writer (dare) not,
when the Writer (cannot:) yea, which is ^ore, when the Writer (is) not. Books
may speak when men are speechless; yea, when men are lifeless. Though there be
many (good) Books, and these (may) be read, yet thero is the Bible, (which is
the Book of Books) and this (must) be read, Blessed is (he) or (she) which
reads (that) Book, and keeps those things which are written therein. Rev.
1.3^


As it is true, there is a (so) believing; but of them that believe to the
saving of the soul: A (so) doing; Heb. 10. ult.
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing:
And, a (so) running; so run, that ye may obtain: It is as true, Mat. 24.46. 1
Co. 9.24 Acts 8.30.
there is a (so) reading. Understandest thou what thou read? Now, that thou
may not (only) read, but (so) read Gods Book, and Man's Book, (if the Book of
Man be according to the Book of God) take these following Directions.

Be conscientious in reading. Direct. 1.
It Is not enough to (own) Duty, but we must be (one with the Duty which we
(own). It Is not (cursory) but a (cordial) and (conscientious reading, (...).
Col. 3.23.
that is promising for an advantagi^ous issue. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily
from the heart, from the very soul.

2. Let not one Duty justle out another There Is hearing as well as reading; and
praying as well as hearing; pray, before tho^ read, and pray over what thou
read Not (only) reading, but (also) exhortation and doctrine, were (at the
same time) an^ (with the same breath) imposed by Paul upon Timothy. Give thy
self to reading, to exhortation, 1 Timothy 4.13.
and to doctrine.

3. Engage the Spirits Influence and Impress. It will be to little purpose and
profi^ to engage in this work without the Spirit It Is the Spirit that searches
all things, (...) 1 Co. 2.10
yea the Depths of God; so the Greek.

4. Let thy heart be a Cabinet for what thou read. Jewels are not (only) to
b^ looked upon, but (also) to be locked up. B^ in a holy imitation of that holy
Matron^ who kept the sayings of her (Son), Luke 2.51
yea, of he^ (Savior) in her heart.

5. Make Faith of what thou read. Ther^ must be believing, as well as
reading; For^ as the (Precept) is a (Rule) for Obedience, (...) the (Promise)
is a (Ground) for faith. 'T^^ ^ike to be with (Reading) as it was with
(Preaching) not profiting, Heb. 42.
not being mixed with faith.

6. Look unto Jesus. There Is no going about this work, without Christ; For
without him we can do nothing. Look unto him (therefore) as the (Actor) as well
as the (Author) of Grace. Ioh. 15.7.


Now, that (this) Christ may be (with) Thee, and signally bless reading (unto)
Thee, cordially prays,

Reader, Thy Friend and Servant, for Jesus sake, RI. MAYHEW,

THE CHILD'S DUTY.
ECCL. 12.1. first part thereof. Remember (now) thy Creator, in the days of thy
Youth.
THAT Solomon (Isreal's Sage) is the Penman of this Book of Ecclesiastes (or
the Preacher,) appears, both from the Style thereof, and from the Title
thereof. In this Book, ye have the Inscription of it, and then (...) general
Proposition about it.

1. An Inscription. The Words of the Preacher, Eccl. 1.1.
Son of David, King in Jerusalem. Now, in this Inscription, you have a
Description of Solomon, in a threefold Relation. 1. In his natural Relation,
the Son of David. 2. In his Civil Relation, King in Jerusalem. And, that this
is Solomon, is evident, for David had no other Son King in Jerusalem. 3. In his
spiritual Relation, A Preacher; The words of the Preacher, Son of David, King
in Jerusalem.

2. A general Proposition. This sets forth the utter insufficiency of all
things under the Sun, to make a man truly happy and blessed; together with the
extreme vanity which is in them, in order to such an end Now this is proved two
ways.

1. From the Mortality of man. One Generation passes away, and another
Generation comes, Eccl. 1.4.
but the Earth abides for ever. 2. From the Instability of all other Creatures
1. In respect of their weakness, to minister satisfaction to so noble a
creature as man. The Sun arises, goes down, and hastes to the place where he
arose. The wind goes towar^ the South, Eccl. 1.5, 6, 7.
and turns about unto the North it whirleth about continually, and returns
again to its Cireuits. All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not
full; unto the plac^ from whence the Rivers come they return. 2. In respect of
the restless and fruitles^ labor, which is taken in seeking satisfaction from
such things, as only affect the senses* All things are full of labor, man
cannot utter it: Eccl. 1.8.
the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. 3. In
respect of the continued Vicissitudes, and Returns of the same things. The
thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done, is
that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun, Eccl. 1.9,
10, 11.
etc. 4. From Solomon's own Experience in these things, Vauity of vanities,
says the Preacher, ^^ll is vanity. This also is vanity and vexation ^f spirit.
Not (only) vanity, Eccl. 1.2. chap. 2.26.
and so un^ble to satisfy the soul; but (also) Vexation, ^ausing much sorrow
of heart, to those that ^^re inordinately conversant about them.

But, to the Text, Remember (now) thy Cre^tor in the days of thy youth. Now,
remem^er now; In the Greek, and vulgar Latin, ^now) is (and) And remember thy
Creator in the ^ays of thy youth. It Is well read either way This Text is an
Exhortation unto a timely and youthful remembering of God: and so ^ook like an
Inference drawn from the vanity ^f Childhood, Eccl. 11.10.
and youth (with which the ^ormer Chapter ends; for childhood and ^outh are
vanity) Remember (now) thy Crea^or in the days of thy youth. Wherein you ^ave
the Object, the Act, and the Season for that Act upon thee.

1. The Object, Creator, or Creators, Father, ^on and Spirit; the first
purposing, the second ^urchasing, the third Perfecting. 2. The Act, Remember.
This word has va^ious significations, but properly it signifies to ^all to
mind, or keep in mind, yea, to call to mind and keep in mind. Thus Peter
remembered the ^ords of the Lord. He reflected what he had ^een a doing, and
resorded what he had done. So then, a remembrance, is (properly) a call to
mind, and keeping in mind. Art thou c^^^^ to call my sin to remembrance, and to
slay son? 3. The Season. Now, or in the days of t^^ Youth. Here Is the Season;
for the Act, (...) on the Object; Seaeson.
in the days of thy Youth. (...) not said, in the Years of thy Youth, but in
(...) days of thy Youth; It is not said, in the T^^^ of thy Youth, but in the
days of thy You^^ to intimate, that our life is but a few day it is but a
vapor; a span; a flower; a shadow^ dream. Though Death be before the (...)
Man's face, yet Death may be behind t^^ young Man's back: In the days (therefore
of thy youth, while thou art yet young, ve^^ young, in the beginning of thy
days, remem^^^ thy Creator, yea, Creators, Father, Son a^^ Spirit: Remember the
Will of the first, t^^ Worth of the Second, the Work of the Thir^^ To the
making of Man, a Council was call in Heaven; Genesis 1.26.
Come, let us make man. Remember the Father, so, as to know him; and (...)
(inwardly) yea, (intimately) acquainted wi^^ him: Remember the Son, so, as to
believe (...) him, and rest upon him: Remember the Spirit, so, as to feel his
Power, and his Presen^^ and to experience his Influence. Thus, ye^ much more
then thus, remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Meditation.

That young ones, must concern their ^^ls, with the Concerns of their souls,
(...) the days of their youth. It is a duty ^^umbent upon those that are young,
^^d that while they are young, to concern ^^eir souls, with the Concerns of
their souls. ^^ose that are young, even while they are ^ung, are to remember,
that is, call to mind, ^^d keep in mind, the Concerns of their ^^ls.

In the managing of this meditation (as I (...) more or less under a divine
Gale and ^ust) I shall propound two things by way of ^^thod; Method.
the Proving and the Improving (...) it.

1. Now, here I shall make an innocent ^nquiry after two things.

1. What these Concerns of the soul are, The Proving of i^.
^herewith those that are young, are to con^^rn their souls in the days of
their youth. 2. Why those that are young, are to con^^rn their souls, with
their soul-Concerns, in ^^e days of their youth.
1. What these Concerns of the Soul are, ^herewith those that are young, are to
con^^rn their souls in the days of their youth.

I can but touch upon the Concerns of the ^^ul, and therefore can give you but
a Tas^ ^f soul-concerns. I am conscious to my self, ^^at my line is too short
to sound this bottom, and fathom this Depth.

But what are the Concerns of the Soul? Quest.


The concerns of the Soul are Grace and Glory; Solution.
holiness here, and happiness hereafter; a heaven here, and a heaven hereafter;
a believing in Christ here, and a being with Christ hereafter; Grace here, and
Glory hereafter, are undoubtedly the great concerns of the soul. But, to speak
to these distinctly.

1. Grace. Grace.
Grace, must needs be a great concern of the soul, whether ye consider the
Excellency of it, or the Necessity of it.

The Excellency of it.
1. The Excellency of it. Grace in the soul is the Ornament of the soul. As the
Firmament is without the Sun, so is the soul without grace. As the body without
the soul, so is the soul without grace. Now, what would the world be without
the Sun, but darkness? perfect darkness? Its perfect night to the soul, before
Christ and Grace arise there. What Is the body without the soul, but a dead
carcass? it is action-less, and motionless, because soul-less and life-less;
for, as the soul is the life of the body, so Christ is the life of the soul.
Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; yea, Christ does not only live in
me, but (He) is my life. When he who is our life shall appear. Gol. 3 4.
To me to live is Christ, Grace and Truth do not only come by Christ, come
along with Christ, John 3.16.
but Christ himself is a gift of Grace. So God loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son. Grace is of such worth, and of such weight, as that it is
not for me to say of what worth it is, of what weight it is. And, not only
Grace in God, but grace in the soul; the work of grace there, and grace wrought
out there, is worth a world, a thousand worlds, ten thousand worlds, if there
were so many.

2. The Necessity of it
The Necessity of it. Salvation is a great concern of the soul, and (therefore)
this must needs be a great thing; but no salvation without grace. Is not that a
blessed Parenthesis? Ephesians. 2.5.
By grace ye are saved.

The Grace of God which brings salvation. Tit. 2.11.
Certainly, Salvation is a great thing, a glorious thing, but this is by Grace.
The free grace of God, is the primum mobile, the wheel that sets all a going,
the moving cause, the active and passive obedience of Christ, the meritorious
cause of this salvation. Ask the Papists what pains do he seemingly take?
witness his Expense, witness his Fasting, witness his whipping, witness his
Penance, Pilgrimage, etc. Ask the Sinner, that is sailing by the Gates of Hell,
and what would he not give for salvation, if he could have it for money? Ask
the Saint; the man, or the woman, that is, under doubt and darkness, Lord, do
what thou please! Lord, do when thou please! lead me thorough the water,
lead me thorough the fire, so thou will but lead me to thy self, that I may be
saved at last. This Soul cries out (as one did) Lord, August.
here beat me, and buffet me; here, bleed me, and burn me, so thou will but
(hereafter) save me! It Is true, the word, Grace, has a variety of
Acceptations, in the holy Scriptures of Truth; but, by Grace, I principally
Intend the Graces of the Spirit; Grace, wrought in the Soul, and Grace
wrought-out for the Soul, that it may be Holy, and Heavenly, which is the great
Concern of the Soul. Thus Grace here; a heaven here, holiness here, a being in
Christ here, is the souls great concern,

2. Glory. Glory.
As Grace (here) So Glory (hereafter) is the Souls great Concernment. Grace, is
the way to Glory; Holiness, is the way to Happiness. H. b 12.14.
Without holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Grace, is the Seed; Glory is the
Flower. Grace, is Glory in the Bud; Glory, is Grace in the Flower. Oh, where is
the Soul, that have a Hell here, but would have a Heaven hereafter? Oh, say the
Soul, let me get to Heaven at last, though I Swim through a Sea of Blood; Now,
for a Soul to be created in Christ, and Glorified with Christ; for a Soul to
have a Being in Christ, (through Grace) here, and a Being with Christ (in
Glory) hereafter, must needs be a great Concernment of the Soul. The great
Doctor of the Circumcision, looked upon Grace (from) Christ, and Glory (with)
Christ, to be the great Concerns of the Soul, and therefore presses to
ascertain the one, that the other may be certain, for the one Entitles unto,
and Entails the other. Lend both ears to what he says; Give diligence; the
word (in the Greek) seems to be Emphatical, and has the signification of
Study, and Diligence; as if the Apostle had said, Hoc agite, make it your
Business; let it be the great Concern of your Souls: But what? to make your
Calling, and election sur; that is firm, and Constant: Why? for this he gives
two reasons. 1. To Prevent a Final falling. For, if ye doc hese things, ye
shall never fall; 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. (...).
or (according to the Greek) ye shall not, not, fall. 2. To be Estated in an
everlasting Kingdom. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto yeu
abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.
Is a Crown nothing? a Kingdom nothing? but, who is able to say what the Kingdom
of Heaven is? what the Kingdom of Glory is? Is not a Sinless state? a
Sorrow-less state? a Temptationless state? a Time-less state? worth the
hearing? worth the having? Oh, Soul, it is a Heaven to hope it! what then is it
to have it? Now Glory hereafter; Happiness: hereafter; a Being with Christ
hereafter; a Heaven hereafter, must needs be a great Concern of the Soul; which
leads me to the next Head proposed.

2. Why those that are Young, are to Concern their Souls, with their
Soul-Concerns, in the days of their Youth.

1. Because it is their Duty so to do. To this my Text speaks; Remember thy
Creators in the days of thy Youth. Here is a positive Precept, and Prescript;
now, as divine Commands, are not to be Dispensed with, so they are not to be
Disputed, but Dispatched. Oh, you that are young, your Lot is cast where ye may
seek after the Lord! you have the means, and Opportunities of Grace. Oh, how
many Young Persons (laid in everlasting Chains of Darkness) would give
Ten-thousand Worlds (had they so many Worlds to give) for an Opportunity to
hear one Sermon more! to Read one Chapter more! to make one Prayer more! to
Keep one Lords day more! may not I (therefore) say to you (as the Apostle did)
with a very little Variation, How shall ye escape; if ye neglect so great
Salvation, Heb. 2.3.
2. Because it is their Dignity so to do. Oh what a rare sight is it, to see
Nature, and Grace, Contemporaries! to see Grace, and Nature! Budding together!
Blossoming together! Oh how honorable is it, but Beginning to Act Rationally,
beginning also to Act Spiritually! was not this the honor of A^ijah, 1 Kings
14 1, 12, 13.
to concern his soul with the concerns of his soul, in the days of his youth?
was not this the honor of Obadiah, to fear the Lord in the days of his youth?
was not this the honor of Josiah, 1 Kings 18.12. 2 Chro. 34* 1, 2, 3.
(that precious and promising Prince,) to seek after the God of David his
Father in the days of his youth? was not this Timothy's crown, that he knew the
holy Scriptures from a child, which are able to make wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15
thorough faith which is in Christ Jesus? And was not this the Apostles joy,
that he found children walking in the truth? 2 ep. Jo. 4
3. Because it is their Mercy so to do. Have Mercy in thine eye? it is thy mercy,
and that in a manifold respect, to concern thy soul with the concerns of thy
soul, in the days of thy youth.
1. Because childhood and youth are vanity. Solomon (speaking to the young man)
to remove sorrow from his heart Eccl. 11.10
and put away evil from his flesh, gives this reason, for Childhood and Youth
are vanity. Young ones, in the days of their youth, are loytering when they
should be laboring, playing, when they should be praying; singing, when they
should be sighing; merry, when they should be mourning; Childhood and Youth,
are not only vain, but vanity it self; It Is not long after Children have been
breathing, but they are belching out hideous and horrid Oaths. Do not children
bring original sin with them into the world? Psalm. 51.5.
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Now, it is not
long before they act sin, and the soul that sins shall die. Are not there
many children, that have not long began to speak, but begin to take the sacred
Name of God in vain, yea, desperately to curse, and to swear? Is it not (now)
the Child's mercy to concern his soul, with the concerns of his soul, in the
days of his youth? 2. Because the truth of Grace, is a Child's greatest
Ornament. This pur-blind Gentry and Age, look to the Face, but not to the
Heart; upon beauty in the face, but not upon grace in the heart. Absalom was a
perfect beauty, as to his body, but a perfect black as to his soul, for he was
Christless, and graceless, and Godless. Grace is the Image of God stamped upon
the soul, and such a child is lovely in the eyes of God, though it be loathsome
in the eyes of man. How crooked soever; deformed soever; poor soever, weak
soever, this child be as to body, yet it is beautiful as to soul, having grace
stamped upon it. It Is a beauty in the eyes of a God, and of a Christ. though it
be a black in the eyes of a man that is Godless and Christless. Thy Renown went
forth among the heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect thorough my
comeliness, Ezekiel. 16 14.
which I had put upon thee, says Jehovah God. As if God had said, thou were a
black, but thou art now a beauty. Oh Child! thou art (by nature) as black as
sin can make thee, and art like to be as miserable as hell can make thee? Is it
not (now) thy mercy, to concern thy soul, with the concerns of thy soul, in the
days of thy youth. 3. Because their Glass is running. God does (as it were)
turn up a Glass when we come into the world, and this is running; running
apace, and die thou must: What man is he that lives, and shall not see death?
i.e. shall not die? Child! die thou must; yea, die thou may, and that in a
little time: Thou art in health to day, thou may be sick tomorrow: thou art
upon a down-bed to day, thou may be upon a dying-bed tomorrow; thou art upon
earth to day, thou may be in hell tomorrow; Is it not (now) the concern of
the child, to remember his Creator in the days of his youth? We say, Time and
Tide stay for no man: My days are swifter then a Post, Job 9.25.
they fly away, they see no good. The Ancients emblem'd time with wings, not
running, but flying. Time is like the Sun, that never stands still, but is ever
a running his race. The Sun did once stand still, yea, went back but so Time
never did. The Shunamites son was short-lived, and so was David's that he had by
Bathsheba. 2 Samuel 12.18.
Is it not (now) a child's mercy, to concern his soul with the concerns of his
soul, in the days of his youth. 4. Because children have immortal souls.
Children have souls as Parents; children have souls as well as men: And these
souls of theirs have a stamp of excellency, and a stamp of Immortality. They
have a stamp of excellency. The body, that is the cask; the soul, that is the
wine: the body, that is the cabinet; the soul, that is the jewel; the body,
that is the work of God; the soul, that is the Breath of God. And, as the soul
has a stamp of excellency, so of immortality. Death can kill bodies, but it
cannot kill souls. The soul lives, though the body dies. The soul is a blossom
of eternity, and has a stamp of immortality. Every child has a soul, which
death it self despaireth how to kill. That opinion of the mortality of the
soul, together with the body, too much favors of Atheism. Mat. 10.28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Is it
not (then) a child's mercy to concern his soul with the concerns of his soul in
the days of his youth? 5. Because, they will have fewer sins to repent of. Did
it not lie near Paul's heart, that he was in Christ no sooner? Romans 16.7
Youthful sins may prove Ages terror, said that heavenly Preacher Mr. Buroughs.
Salute Androniens and Junea my Kinsmen, which are of note among the Apostles,
which also were in Christ before me. Oh, had not Paul cause to repent that he
was in Christ no sooner! that he concerned his soul with the concerns of his
soul no sooner! might not this have bin his complaint? Oh that I had not lived
to have been a Man, a blaspheming man, a persecuting man, before I went to
Christ! and concerned my soul with the concerns of my soul! Oh that I had not
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, and
haled men and women to prison! Oh that I had not consented to Stephens death,
(a man full of faith, and of the holy Spirit) but had concerned my soul with
the concerns of my soul, in the days of my youth! Did not the sins of David's
youth lie near David's heart? Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not against me the ^e sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. Is
^t^^t (now) a child's mercy, to concern his (...) with the concerns of his soul
in the days of ^^^th? 6. Because the Time of Youth, is the best Time for
Service. As, the Morning Time, is the best Studying Time, Aurora Musis amica.
so, the Morning Time, is the best Serving Time. Oh, young ones! now, your
Parts are Lively; now, your Senses are Fresh; now, your Memories are Strong;
now, your Nature is Vigorous; the days of your Youth, are the Spring, and
Morning of your Time. Now, that God might Shadow out your Duty, in the days of
your Youth, he required that the first fruits, and the first born, should be
offered to him. Is it not (then) a Child's mercy, Exodus 22.29.
to Concern his Soul, with the Concerns of his Soul, in the days of his Youth?
7. Because the Promise is made to a Timely Seeking, and serving. I love them,
that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me. He, that seeks me
early, or, in the Morning, shall find me. They, that seek me in the Spring,
Prove. 8.17.
and Morning of their days shall find me. As the Israelites went early in the
Morning to seek Manna; and as Students rise early in the Morning, and go to
their Studies; so, says VVisdome, they that seek me in the morning, and Flower
of their Youth, shall find me. Is it not (then) the Child's mercy, to concern
his soul, with the concerns of hi^ soul, in the days of his youth? 8. Because
an Eternity of Felicity, a^^ Glory, hang upon a few moments of time. Hence,
that counsel, Heb. 3.7
To day if you will hear his voice. Was it not a good question the Lawyer put
to Christ? Luke 10.25
What shall I do to inherit eternal life? As if he had said, Sir, I know that I
shall be eternally happy, or eternally miserable; eternally blessed, or
eternally cursed; eternally saved, or eternally damned. Good Sir, what shall I
do to inherit life? Oh, my cares and fears! my thoughts and troubles, they are
all conversant about an eternity! No time can reach eternity; No age can extend
to eternity; no tongue can express eternity. U number perpetuum hodie.
Eternity is that one perpetual day which shall never have an end. What shall I
do? what shall I not do that I may be happy for an eternity? Oh, get the
impressions of an eternity upon thee, in the days of thy youth! As the Painter
painted for an eternity, so do thou hear for an eternity, read for an eternity,
believe for an eternity, pray for an eternity, do from life for an eternity. Is
it not (now) the Child's mercy, to concern his soul, with the concerns of his
soul in the days of his youth?
2. The Improving of it.
I have only one Use to make of this, and that is by way of counsel.

Are those that are young, to concern their souls with the concerns of their
souls, in the days of their youth? Suffer (then) the words of Exhortation.

But this Use has a double Aspect, looking unto those that are old, 1. To the
old.
and then to those that are young.

Now these are either in a state of Nature, or a state of Grace. To those in a
state of Nature.


1. To those in a state of Nature.

1. Art gray, and yet graceless? repent (then) and believe the Gospel. Haft
gray hairs upon thy head, Mar. 1.15 Heb. 1.6.
and not grace in thy heart? it is high time (then) for thee, to have repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh soul! there are but a
few sands in thy Glass; look about thee, yea, look above thee; look within
thee, ^sa. 45.22.
yea, look without thee. Look unto me all ye ends of the earth, for I am God,
and there is none else.

But, will looking amount unto any advantage? yea, Look unto me, and be ye
saved: When any are old in sin, woe to such an old Age. Its better to die young,
then live to be old, and die in sin. Oh how sad is it, to live to be old, and
yet die before the old man dies! Then (only) is old age good, when we are good
in old age; Pro. 16.31
not only die in a good old age, but are good dying old. The glory of young men
is their strength, but the beauty of old men is their gray head, The gray head
is a crown of glory, if it be found in a way of righteousness. Oh soul! are
grny hairs here and there upon thee? have scarcely an eye to see with? have
scarcely a Foot to walk with? have scarcely a Hand to work with? and have not
yet Concerned thy Soul, with the Concerns of thy Soul? Certainly (then) thou
art in danger of hell fire.

2. Art Gray, and yet Grace-less? despair not, there is hope for thee at the
eleventh hour. Art going upon the last hour? despair not, Matt. 20.9.
for he that came the eleventh hour, received a penny. Did not the Thief go
from a Cross to a Crown? Luke. 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. But their things are not written
for your Imitation, but to prevent your Desperation. We say, so long as there
is Life, there is Hope. Are going off the Stage, and yet have not gone to
Christ? there is great ground for thy Faith, and Repentance, but not for thy
Desperation; the reason is Obvious, for as God is the Author of Mercy, so he is
the Timer of Mercy; And, as he calls (whom) he will, so, he calls (when) he
will. Caesar (when he saw Alexanders Statue) wept, having (though young) done
so much, when himself had done so little. Do thou see a (green one) in the
way to Heaven, when thou (a gray one) art in the way to Hell? Here Is cause for
mourning, but not for despairing, because God, who can have mercy on (whom) he
will, will have mercy (when) he will.

2. To those in a state of Grace.
1. Art gray, but gracious? make (then) death familiar. There are few that have
much familiarity with Christ when they die, but those that have made death
familiar before they die. That Is the soul that goes singing home (when) he
dies, that makes death familiar (while) he lives. That Is the soul that can
laugh death in the face (when) he dies, that makes death familiar (while) he
lives. This is the soul, that through grace) can say, Oh death, where is thy
sting? Oh grave, 2 Timothy 4.6,
where is thy victory? Paul had not only a knowledge, that he should not long
live before he died, for he could say, I know the time of my departure is at
hand; Phil. 1.23.
but he had made death very familiar while he lived, for he could say, I desire
to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far much better. Man is a Mass of
Mutabilities, be daily (therefore) reading Lectures upon thy mutability. Man is
but a wink of life, be daily (therefore) reading Lectures upon thy mortality.
the Heathens Emblem for life, Oculus apertus; oculus clau; (...).
was an eye op^n; and for death; an eye shut; as if there were no more
difference between the living and the dying, but the twinkling of an eye.

2. Art gray and gracious? multiply cries (then) for thy children, if thou have
children. Thus Abraham did Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight! Now, he
having such a spirit of Prayer, would not (only) pray for the life of his body,
but (also) for the life of his soul, according to my Charity toward him. Thus
David did for the child he had by Bathsheba at first; the child was sick; He
prayed, and fasted, and lay upon the earth all night. Now, David, 2 Sa. 12.16*
having such a spirit of Prayer (such is my charity concerning him also) did
not (only) pray for the life of the body, but (also) for the life of the soul.
Have not many sick children? and some sinful children? multiply cries (then)
for these. Oh Lord, make this Ishmael an Isaac! Oh Lord, make this Esau a
Jacob! Oh Lord, make this Cain an Abel! Oh Lord, make this Benoni a Benjamin!
this son of sorrow, a son of my right hand! Oh Lord, make this Dinah a daughter
of Abraham; this wandering daughter, a believing daughter!

3. Art gray and gracious, and have children? concern thy soul (then) with
their Education: Good Parents; good Masters; good Tutors; and good Guardians,
are (many times) great Blessings to Children. Now, that Parents are to look
after the Education of their Children, there is both Precept, and President.

Precept. Commands, are Obligatory; the Commands of God, and Christ, are not to
be Dispensed with; these are to be Dispatched, not Disputed; a Dispensation
from the Italian-Monster, is altogether Insignificiant, as to these Commands.
Now that there is a Parental obligation, for a filial Education, is evident.
And ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath, lest they be discouraged,
Ephesians. 6.4.
but bring them up in the Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord. Nutriment of
Soul, as well as Nourishment of Body, should be in the Parents Eye: If the
Father be desirous, that the Body of the Child should grow bigger, he is to be
more then desirous, that the soul of the Child should grow better. Only take
heed to thyself, Deu. 4.9.10.
and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes
have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life, but
teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons; Specially the day that thou stoodst
before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather the people
together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me
all the days that they shall live upon the Earth, and that they may teach
their Children. This is still evident, by what follows: These words, which I
command thee this day, Deu 6.6* 7.
shall be in thy heart; And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children,
and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Once more; Isa.
38.9
The Fathers to the Children shall make known thy Truth.

2. President. How careful were the Heathen, that Chidren might, have Education
Morally good? Now, not Christian Parents? Believing Parents endeavor an
Education Spiritually good? An Unbroken heart, and an Vnchatechised head, Genesis
18* 19.
will keep distance enough between a Sinless Creator and a Sinful Creature. Is
there not sufficient President, for this Practice? Did not Abraham read
Divinity Lectures to his Family? Take the Testimony of God himself. For I know
him, that he wlll Command his Children, and his Household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice, and Judgment etc. Thus Abraham
did; and did there not grow upon the Stalk of his Instructions as as eminent
service and obedience, to the Father of flesh, and to the Father of spirits, as
ever was? was not Isaac willing to offer his Throat to the sacrificing Knife?
was not Isaac's faith great as well as Abraham's? the sons as well as the
fathers? And, was not the son's life as dear to him as the fathers son was to
him? Once more, and no more, as to this: I will open my mouth in a Parable, I
will utter dark sayings of old, which we have heard, and known, and our Fathers
have told us: we will not hide them from their childrer, showing to the
generation to come the Praises of the Lord, etc. for he established a Testimony
in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Isra^l, which he commanded our fathers, that
they should mak^ them known to their children; that the generation to come
might know them, even the children which should be born, who should arise and
declare them to their children; Ps. 78.2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7.
That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the Works of God, but
keep his Commandments.

Question 1. But what Reasons may be given ( besides Precept and President) why
Parents should Concern their Souls, with the education of their Children?

Solution. 1. Because of its ordinary Tendency. Train up a Child in the way he
should go; what then? and when he is old, he will not depart from it. In which
words, Pro. 22.^
you have the Fathers Duty, and the Child's Mercy; the one, to train up (when
young) the way he should go; the other, to be trained up (when young) the way
he should go, that when he is old, he may not depart from it. God (who wills
all men to be saved) is pleased to bless the Fathers Duty, and make it the
Child's Mercy. Soul Education in Childhood, is often and Ordinarily (though not
always) blessed to Children. It Is true, Joash (King of Jerusalem) was Seemingly
Religious, 2 Chro. 24. 2.17, 18.
so long as Jehoiada lived, but Jehoiada dying, the Religion of Joash seemed to
be laid in the same Grave with him; no sooner did Jehoiada dye, but the
Religion of Joash dyed also. Thus possibly, it may be, that old age may
outlive Education in Childhood, but it is not Usually so; at least, it is not
always so: let Parents (therefore) Concern their Souls with the Education of
Children.

2. Because all Children, are Children of Wrath by Nature. Paul (writing to the
Saints at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus) tells them in words at
length. That they had in times past their Conversation in the lusts of the
flesh, fulfilling of the desires (or according to the Greek) the wills of the
flesh, Ephesians. 1.1. (...). Ephesians. 2.30
and of the mind, and were by nature Children of wrath, even as others. Now,
are Children (Naturally) Children of wrath? Are they Obnoxious to the pouring
out of the Vials of infinite, and unmixed wrath? Are they in a desperate state?
in a dangerous state? in a damnable state? Oh how Incumbent (then) is it upon
Parents, to look after their Education!

3. Because a man's Children are himself Children, are Parents Multiplied.
Children, are near unto Parents. The Apostle has a lofty Expression,
Concerning the Relation between a Husband, and a Wife. Husbands, love your
Wives, even as Christ loved the Church, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27, 28.
and gave himself for it; That he might Sanctify, and cleanse it with the
washing of water, by the word; that he might present it, to himself a Glorious
Church, not having Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy, and without blemish. So ought men to love their Wives, as their own
bodies; he that loves his Wife, loves himself. Thus there is a near Relation,
between a Father, and a Child; a Mother, and a Child, and do not one come out
of the Bowels of the other? Let Parents (therefore) look to the Education of
their Children. Cameli^, the Mother of the Gracchi, Haec sunt Ornamenmea.


4. Because Children are a man's Chiefest and Choicest Chattels. I have read of
a Matron of Campania (who laying before Camelia her pearls, with her costly
Attires, and Furnitures) Camelia, held her in discourse till her Sons came
home, and then Pointing to her Sons, said, These are my Ornaments; these are my
Jewels. Children, are the greatest Jewels, and the richest goods, in a man's
worldly Inventory. The Spirit (therefore) staging the Suffering of Job, begins
with his Children. There were born unto him seven Sons, and three Daughters.
Job 1, 2.
The man had no less then ten Children. And more Sons, then Daughters; he had
seven Sons, and three Daughters. Children, if Beautifyed and Blessea with
Grace; are a great blessing; the Greatest blessing, for a Mutable, and a Mortal
blessing; let Parents (therefore) look to the Education of their Children.

5. Because the real Change of a Child (and that in Childhood) makes Music
upon Earth. Oh what Music was there upon the return of the Prodigal! Bring
hither (said the Father) the best Robe: what shall he, (who probably had
scarcely a Rag to his back, have a Robe now? yea, the best Robe now put upon
him? Put a Ring on his Finger: What, shall he, (who possibly had not a Glove
for his hand,) have now a Ring for his Finger? Put shoes on his Feet: Luke
19.22, 23.
Is the man Shooe-less, and shall he have Shoes Put upon his feet now? Bring
hither (also) the Fatted Calf, and k^ll it: What, shall he (who fed upon Husks
at best) before, eat of the Fatted Calf now? Bring hither the Fatted Calf, and
kill it, and let us eat, and be merry: My Son was dead, and is alive again; and
was lost, and is found; and they began to be merry. There Is Music upon Earth
for the change of a Child, let Parents (therefore) look to the Education of
Children.

6. Because the real Change of a Soul, makes Music in Heaven. As Men, so
Angels Rejoice at a Change of Sinners. There shall be joy in heaven over one
Sinner that repents, Luke 15.7
more then over ninety and nine just Persons which need no Repentance: That is,
which see no need of Repentance. There is joy in heaven, in the presence of the
Angels of God, over one Sinner that Repents. Lu. 15.10.
Now, if there be such Music upon Earth, and in Heaven too, upon the real
Change of a Sinner, let Parents (then) look to the Education of their Children.

7, Because of the Promise. The promise it unto you, and to your children, and
to all that are afar of: Acts 2.39
But who are these? to as many as the Lord our God shall call: that is,
effectually call. But what is the Promise? The Promise, is the gift of the holy
Spirit. Repent, and be baptized, Acts 2.38.
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit: That is (if I mistake not) a
greater efflux of the Spirit. I will peure water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry Ground; Isa. 44.3.
I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my blessing upon thy Offspring.
Take one place more: As for me, this is my covenant with them, says Jehovah,
my Spirit that is upon thee, Isa. 59.21.
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds Seed, says
Jehovah, from henceforth, and for ever. Is not this a good Encouragement now,
and is there not strength of reason, that Parents should look after the
Education of their children?

8. Because of the Times. What reason the Apostle gives for Redeeming of time,
may I give for Educating children: Redeeming the time; why? because the days
are evil: So Educate Children Religiously; why? Ephesians. 5.16
because the days are evil. Is not the time evil? evilly evil? and shall not
children be religiously educated? Did ever any Age sin as this does? and ever
any place sin as England does, where there was such a plentiful and powerful
Preaching of the Gospel? Oh the Madness and Murder now! Oh the Prefaneness, and
Polygamy now! Oh the Fornication, and Adultery now! Oh the Cursing and
Swearing; Cheating and circumventing now! Oh the Carnality, and Covetousness
now! Oh that Pestilential, and Prodigious Atheism now! Does not Atheism begin
to break her Banks? What Foundation-truth (almost) is there, that is not
unbelieved now! or Disputed now! or opposed now! Does not all manner of Sin
come in like an Armed man, and like a Mighty Stream, threatening to bear down
all before it? Oh what Generation is the next like to be, if this be thus! Upon
Paul's healing the impotent man, the cry was, Gods are come down to us in the
likeness of men. Act. 14.1^.
But, may not the cry now be, Devils, are come up to us in the likeness of men.
Are there not many men now like so many Incarnate Devils? Do they not look upon
Oaths, as the greatest Rhetoric? and, upon Adultery, as the greatest Pleasure?
Do they not look upon Murder, as a just revenge? and upon Polygamy as an
Ornament to worldly Grandeur? If this Generation be thus, what is the next
Generation like to be? I have read of one Father (and 'twas pity there should
be that one to read of) who liked his Children the better for resembling him in
wickedness. I have also read of others, who hearing their Ancestors were gone
to hell, said, that they would go thither too. Do not many Parents now seem to
be unwilling to go to hell, without their Children, indulging them in all
manner of Impiety, and Impurity? Is it not enough for them to go to hell, but
must their Children follow them? Certainly now, these things considered, it is
incumbent upon Parents, to look after the Education of their Children.

2. To the Young. Now these have Grace, or have it not. To these (therefore)
distinctly. 1. To the Young, that have Grace. I have two words to these.

1. Art Green, and yet have Grace? Admire (then) the Riches of Free Grace. Has
God plucked thee as a brand out of the Fire, and left the rest of the Children
to dwell with everlasting Burnings? Oh infinite mercy! Art not only born, but
born again? born of water, and of the Spirit? Oh Matchless mercy! Are not only
many young ones, but many old ones, yet in their blood? bleeding to death? and
it is to be feared an Eternal death? and has Jehovah God said unto thee Live?
Oh, Admire then, the Riches of Free Grace! Oh, let this be thy Holy, and thy
Heavenly boasting, in all places, 1 Cor. 15.10,
and amongst all Persons, By the grace of God I am, that I am! 2. Art Green,
and yet have Grace? Be joyous (then) thy Joy may be greatest, when thou art
Oldest. Polycarpus, could say, when he was old, Thus many years have I served
my Master Christ, and hitherto has he dealt well with me. Those are like to
have most Peace when and while they are old, that have Grace when and while
they are young. For thou art my hope, Oh Lord God; thou art my trust from my
youth. Psalm. 71.5, 17, 18.
Oh God, thou have taught me from my youth. -- Now also I am gray headed, for
sake me not.
2. To the young that have not grace. Art young, and have not grace? set (then)
upon this work, and Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Oh, now
begin to concern thy soul, with the concerns of thy soul!

Quest. But what Directions may be given to young ones, that are graceless ones?

Solut. 1. Look not upon death at a distance in the days of thy youth. Many, if
not most young persons look upon death at a distance; and it is death to them to
think upon death. Oh, how many young persons are there that greedily swallow
down that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.10
The days of our years are three score years and ten; or, (according to the
Margent) As for the days of our years, in them are seventy years. Oh, say not,
we have Calculated our Nativity, and we find our years to be three score years
and ten! Is there one of threescore and ten, that lives to threescore and ten?

2. Shun the Occasions of sin in the days of thy youth. If thou would not
fall down of ^he Plague, keep clear of the Pest house. May not I say with that
great Doctor of the Gentiles, Flee youthful lusts? 2 Timothy 23.22.


3. Be very conversant with the holy Scriptures of truth in the days of thy
youth. Be much in reading the Scriptures. Oh, there is no book like unto this
Book! Oh soul, this Book is the Book of Books! Other Books are called the books
of men, but the Bible is called the Book of God. Oh, turn over these leafes,
and converse these lines! On soul, in those lines thou may read the Love that
Christ had to little ones? Suffer children, yea, little children (says Christ)
to come unto me, and forbid them not, Mat. 19.14
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Wait at Wisdoms Gates, and in her Galleries, in the days of thy youth.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word Preached. Jam. 1.19
May not I say to thee as the Apostle did? Be swift to hear, slow to speak,
slow to wrath.

5. Look upon thy self as lost in the days of thy youth. Suppose Parents
gracious, yet they cannot entail grace upon their Posterity. Oh Child! believe
me, thou can not go to Heaven by thy Fathers Copy, thou must have a Christ of
thine own. Grace of thine own, or dying, thou will be damned, and tha^ for an
eternity. Mar. 16.16.
He that believes not, shall (...) damned; not (may) but (shall) be damned.

Look unto Christ in the days of thy youth. Thou art a Sinner, Lastly,
but Christ is a Savior; thou art a great sinner, but he is a great Savior.
Oh Child, Luke 19.10.
thou art lost! but Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. Not
(only) to save, but (also) to seek, in order to saving that which was lost. But
to close this Discourse; If thou have any love to thy self, love to thy soul,
concern (then) thy soul with the concerns of thy soul, in the days of thy
youth. Remember (now) thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

(...), Col. 3.11.
Heart Keeping the hardest Keeping.
PROVE. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the Issues of
life.
THAT Solomon is the Author of this Book in general, is generally acknowledged;
but he is so the Author of this, as David is of the Psalms; for, as the whole
Book of Psalms is not David's, so the whole Book of Proverbs is not Solomon's.

A Proverb and a Parable differ more in sound then in sense; (...) and (...)
they are of very near Affinity; for, they are are the speeches of wise men,
yea, they are the Extracts, and spirits of wisdom. I will open my Mouth in a
Parable, Psalm. 78.2.
I will utter dark sayings of old. These are called Aenigmata, dark Sentences.
To understand a Proverb, and the Interpretation; Prove. 1.6.
the words of the wise, and their dark sayings. So that a Proverb properly
signifies a Parable, and a Parable properly signifies a Proverb. Sed quid moror
istis? Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.

In these words you have a Duty imposed, and a Reason for imposing that Duty.

1. The Duty imposed. Keep thy heart with all diligence. 2. The Reason for
imposing the Duty, For out of it are the issues of life.
I am to concern my self, if Christ concern my Soul, with the Duty imposed;
Keep thy heart with all diligence. (...)
So your Translation; but the Hbrew thus, Above all keeping heep thy hear. And
the Septuagint thus: With all keeping, keep thy heart.

In this part of the Verse, you have the Person, and the Praedicate.

1. The Person. Now this may be under stood either Physically, The Person.
and literally, or Metaphyfically, and Spiritually. If Literally, then Solomon
speaks to his Son, and Children are to obey their Parents. If Spiritually; then
a greater then Solomon is here, and he speaks to a Saint; Now, Christ, is to be
obeyed, for he is the Author of eternal Salvatior, to those that obey him. Thus
(if I mistake not) we are Arrived at the Person.

The Praedicate.
2. The Praedicate; or what is spoken concerning this Person. Herein you have 1.
The Act, Keep. The Greek word signifies solicitously to keep, and save
something lest it be lost, or taken away by others. Keep. 2. The Subject.
Heart; thy heart. Keep thy heart. 3. The Direction. With all keeping; or above
all keeping. Above all keeping, keep thy heart. Men, will most of all keep the
heart from wounding, for a wound in the heart is Mortal. Thus, Spiritually; we
are especially, and Solicitously, to keep the heart; to watch the thoughts of
the heart. Above all keeping, keep the heart. The Words (thus) opened, the
Meditation follows.


That it is incumbent upon a Son of God, above all keeping, to keep his heart.
Medication.
If a methodical discourse may be blessed to Edification, let this (then) be
the Method, to inquire after these things.

1. Whether the heart of man must be kept above all keeping? 2. What this heart
of man is, that must be kept above all keeping? 3. How the heart of man must be
kept above all keeping? 4. Why the heart of man must be kept above all keeping?
5. What use may be made of this, that the heart of man must be kept above all
keeping?
1. Whether the heart of man must be kept above all keeping. What Solomon says
concerning Getting; with all thy getting, get understanding; I may say
concerning Keeping with all thy keeping; ^eut. 4.9.
yea, about all thy keeping, keep thy heart. Keep thy heart above all keeping.
Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, etc. Keep thy Soul,
that is, keep thy self: The Soul is often put for the whole man. Where one
Evangelist says, lose his Soul; another says, lose himself. Keep thy Soul,
^a. 16.26
that is, thy self; diligently, or vehemently. Luke 9.25
Take ye good heed unto your selves; that is, unto your Souls. Take good heed;
Deu. 4.15 (...)
keep vehemently your selves, your Souls, so the Greek: Keep Vehemently: the
word implies Strength, as well as Diligence, But take one Vote more for the
Evincement of this Truth: 1 Ti. 5.22
Keep thy self pure. Keep thy self; thy Soul, pure; or holy. The Apostle here
makes use of the same word that the Seventy do in my Text; Primum vivens,
ultim immo^ te^s.
above all keeping, keep thy heart. Keep thy self pure; thy Soul pure; thy
Heart pure; the Heart is the principal Seat of the Soul; that being the first
that receives life, and the last that keep it.

2. What the heart of man is, that must be kept above all keeping?

1. The heart, is sometimes put for the whole man. My Son give me thy heart.
That is, give me thy self; thy Soul; give me thy whole self; thy whole Soul; by
a Sinecdoche of the part, Deu. 6.5.
for the whole Thou shall love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy might. To the same purpose do the Psalmist speak:
P^al. 51.10, 17.
Create in me a clean heart, Oh God! and renew a right spirit within me. The
Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, Oh God,
thou will not despise. So that the heart is put for the whole soul, because the
Soul keeps her Residence in the heart, and there shows her self most present
(as it were) in her Chair of state.

2. The Heart is sometimes put for the Faculties of the soul.

1. For the understanding and mind. For the understanding. It is expressly
said, That the Lord opened the heart of Lydia. Act. 6.14
Its Gods Prerogative Royal to open the heart. Lydia's heart was opened, but
God was the Opener of her heart. You have her understanding in the things that
were spoken by Paul. And, as for the understanding, so, for the mind. The whole
multitude were of one heart, Act. 4.32.
and of one soul. 2. For the Affections. Where the Treasure is, there will the
heart be also. Mat. 6.21.
The heart is rather where it (loves) then where it (lives). The Affection
will be where the Object is. 3. For the Will. If thou shall confess with thy
Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, ^om. 10.
that God raised him from the dead. thou shall be saved. 4. For the Memory.
It Is said of the Mother of Jesus, that she kept her Sons sayings in her heart;
^uke 2.51
She recorded and registered them down within; she remembered what he said. 5.
For the Conscience. The Conscience is a thousand Witnesses for, or against a
man. If our heart condemn us, (...) illc te^es. Jo. 3.20.
God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things. If our heart condemn
us, that is, if our Conscience condemn us. Conscience is Gods Deputy and
Notary. Gods Vicegerent and Viceroy within, despise not therefore the voice
thereof. Oh! do not turn off Conscience, as Faelix turned off Paul. Go thy way
for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for thee.
3. How this heart of man must he kept above all keeping? This word (keep) is a
military word, a Metaphor taken from Soldiers that keep a City or Castle.

Quest. But how do Soldiers keep a City or Castle?

Solut. I have not been trained up a soldier, and therefore may discover some
weakness, but (I would hope) not to discover any lightnese.

1. Soldiers are stocked and stored with Provisions for their Persons, and for
the Place.

1. For their Persons, Men, that keep a City, or a Castle, are accommodated
with Provision, as bread, beer, beef, etc. Though a City or a Castle may be so
strong, that it is not easily stormed, and the walls scaled by the Besiegers,
yet the besieged for want of Provision may be starved out. The god of this
world will lay a close siege to the heart; if therefore this be not well
stecked and stored with grace, it may be taken when it is stormed. Walk in the
spirit, Gal. 5.16.
and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. A heart without grace, vea, a
heart without a good stock of grace, ^^like the City of Rome, of which it is
said, That it was never besieged, but it was taken. Romans 1^.14.
If thou would keep thy Castle, keep thy heart, then the Apostle tells thee
negatively what thou must not do; Thou must not make Provision for the flesh,
to fulfill the lusts thereof; And positively, what thou must do, Thou must lay
up in store a good foundation for the time to come. 1 Timothy 6.19.


2. For the Place. Soldiers are stocked and stored with Provision for the
Place. Ci^es and Castles they are accommodated with Ammunition. A Castle has a
Magazine in it self, it has Match, Powder and Bullet. A Castle is accommodated
with Vtensils of War, as Canons, Muskets, Spears and Swords. Soul, if thou
would keep thy Castle, keep thy heart, be sure to stock and store thy self
with Ammunition, stock and store thy self with Precepts. Oppose a written word
to every temptation. This course Christ himself steered. It is written Man
shall not live by bread alone. Mat. 4* 4, 7
It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Oh here is a curious
Copy to write after! Soul, take the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God. This course David also steered, I have hid thy Word in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee. Whatever the temptation be, be ready to answer with
a written word. Ps. 119. 11 For instance.


1. Does Satan say, swear; Be ready to answer, no; for it is written, Swear not
at all, Mat. 5 34. 2. Does he say, curse? No, for it is written, Bless and curse
not, Romans 12.14. 3. Does he say, Lie; No, for it is written, Lie not one to
another, Col. 3.9. 4. Does he say, steal; No, for it is written, Ltt him that
steal, steal no more, Ephesians. 4 28. 5. Does he say, unbelieve Christ? No, for it
is written, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, John
8.24. 6. Does he say Work no more? No; it is written, If any would not work,
neither should he eat. 2 These. 3.10. 7. Does he say Pray no more? No; it is
written, Pray without ceasing. 1. These. 5.17. 8. Does he say Read no more? No;
it is written, Search the Scriptures. John. 5.39. 9. Does he say Hear no more?
No; it is written, Be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. Jam. 1.19.
10. Does he say Fear no more? No; it is written, Serve Jehovah with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Psalm. 2.11. Thus, Soul, Endeavor to have a written
word ready, to answer every Temptation.
2. Soldiers, they have their Armor on. There is in a City, or Castle, not
only Armor for the Soldiers to put on, but, if the Enemy be at hand, the
Soldiers they have their Armor on, or put on their Armor: They gird on their
Swords; take up their Muskets, etc. When Nehemiah (a Person of Eminency) was
eminently concerned in rebuilding Jerusalems walls, and repairing her Breaches,
its said that those upon the wall, with one of their hands wrought in the work,
and with the other hand held a weapon. Neh. 4.17.
Souls, the Enemy is in the Field, and if ye would keep this Castle (the heart)
ye must have your Armor on: If you would so Fight, as to Overcome, ye must put
on Armor; yea, ye must put on the Armor of God; Ephesians. 6.13. (...).
yea, ye must put on the whole Armor of God. The Greek word is a compound
word, and signify not only Necessary, but Complete Armor, such as Covers
all the Body, and leaves no place Naked, and Unfenced. There must be
Headpiece, Back-Piece, Breast-Piece. etc.

3. Soldiers, they keep up a Watch, and ward. If men would keep a Castle, they
must keep upon their Guard. When the Lord of Life was dead, and laid in the
Sepulcher, the chief Priests, and Pharisees made their Application unto Pilate,
and desired him that he would make it sure; he answered, ye have a watch, Mat.
27.64, 65, 66.
go, and make it as sure as ye can: So, they went, and made the Sepulcher
sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch. Thus (also) Nehemiah did
concerning Jerusalem. We made our prayers unto our God, and set a watch against
them day and night, because of them. Oh Soul! Neh. 4.9.
would thou keep this Castle (thy heart?) be then upon thy Guard; keep up
thy watch. What I say unto you (and it is Christ that speaks it) I say unto all
watch. Mark 13.37.


Now, here, I shall Advise unto two things; an Observance of the Enemies
Motion; and then of the hearts Corruption. There must be a Curious, and a
Critical observance of both these.

1. Let there be a Curious observance of the Enemies Motion. Men in a Fort,
City or Castle, art not only sensible of the Enemies Being in the Field, but
also Curiously, and Critically observe his Motion, which way he bends his
Force; that place of the City he goes about to Storm; against what Gate he
places his Canons, to make his Batteries. This Enemy is Satan, and he is ever
in Motion: He (like a roaring Lion) goes about, 1 Per. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour. Observe (therefore) that Sin he Courts; what Bait
he Lays, for he has a Bait for every Fish; a Last, for every Foot.

2. Let there be a Critical observance of the hearts Corruption. Do not
(only) observe what place Satan storms, but which place (also) is Weakest, and
where he is likeliest to ^uter. Oh Soul! Double, and Treble thy Guards upon the
Sin of thy Nature; that is the weakest place of the Castle, and there Satan will
Endeavor to Enter. Watch, in the Watchtower, I stand continually upon the
Watchtower in the day time, Isa. 21.5, ^.
and I am set in my ward every night.

4. Why this heart of man must be kept above all keeping.

4. The heart of man, above all keeping, must be kept in a threefold respect;
God, Christ, the Heart.

1. In respect of God. God has commanded the keeping of the heart, In respect
of God.
and therefore the heart must be kept. Let this Text ring in thy ears, and my
ears, Above all keeping keep thy heart. The Commands of men (if counter and
contrary to the Commands of God,) may be dispensed with, but who can give a
Dispensation to the Commands of God? As God i^ displeased with the Commission
of evil, so with the omission of ^ood; God is displeased with the not doing of
what he commands, as he is with the doin^ of what he forbids: Oh break not (as
it were) the heart of God (as they did) and give him cause to say concerning
you, as he did concerning them! Oh, that this people would do as they say! Oh
that this people would do as I say! ^os. 2.4.
do, as they say! May not I say unto you, as Pharaoh did to the Egyptians? Go
unto Joseph, and whatsoever he say unto you, do. And, may not I say unto you,
as Mary (at the Marriage,) said unto the servants, concerning Christ?
Whatsoever he say unto you, do it.

In respect of Christ.
2. In respect of Christ. The Heart is Christ Seat, this (therefore) must be
kept above all keeping. The Heart is Christ's Throne here below now; this is his
House. As the Christian is Christ's lesser and lower house, so the Christians
heart (if I may speak it with a holy reverence) is Christ's lodging room in that
house. That Christ may dwell, but where? in your hearts, but how? by faith.
Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Shall not a Princes
Presence Chamber? his lodging-room be kept above any chamber? above any room?
kept above all keeping? As the Womb of Christ, wherein he was conceived, was;
and the Tomb of Christ wherein he was laid, was; so must his Temple be. Now,
Christ was conceived in a Womb, wherein no other was conceived; interred in a
Tomb, wherein no other was interred; so, will he Temple himself in that heart
where no other shall be his Corrival, and where no affected lust shall be his
Equal: If Christ dwell in the heart by faith, then sin must out of the house
by force. Christ and Corruption (especially if affected) cannot dwell under the
same Roof in Peace, cannot lodge in the same house with love and liking. 1 Cor.
16* 15.
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Many,
too many have their Paramours, their Concubines. Oh soul, lodge not an Harlot
in thy heart, for that is Christ's house! Was it not pity that David should take
Bathsheba into his house, for she was another Man's wife? Oh, how did the
displeasure of God begin to flame against the King of Gerar, for taking Sarah
Abraham's wife! was it not pity, that Sampson took Dalilah into his lap? The
Man (first) lost his locks, and (then) lost his life.

In respect of the heart.
3. In respect of the heart. As the heart must be kept above all keeping in
respect of God, because he has commanded it; in respect of Christ, because
it is his Seat; so in respect of itself, and that upon a manifold Account. For
-- 1. It Is a corrupt heart. The heart of a Saint is very corrupt, but the heart
of a sinner has nothing but corruption; Corrupt. Jerusalem wash thy heart from
wickedness.
a Saints heart has too much sin, but a sinners heart is fuller of sin, then
the Sun of light, or the Ocean of water. The heart of a Saint is sinful, but
the heart of the sinner is sinfully sinful, wickedly wicked. The heart is the
Nursery of sin, the Magazine where all the weapons of unrighteousness lie; Deu.
15.9.
It Is a lesser Hell. Beware, that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart,
in thy Belial heart; so the Margen. Its a kind of an Hell, Jer. 4.14.
for a man that has b^t a spark of grace, to be tempted and turmoiled with the
innate corruptions and rebellions of his own heart; And if a man would devise a
Torment for a soul truly gracious, he cannot devise a greater then this; Shall
not this heart (then) be kept above all keeping? 2. It Is a brutish heart.
Brutish. Psalm. 92.6.
A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this. The heart of
man is not only filthy, but foolish. The brutish man is the foolish man.
Wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness. The heart of man is
naturally foolish, and as the heart is foolish, so the man is childish, for he
feeds upon dirt, rather then upon bread; yea, upon dirt, but not upon bread.
Understand ye brutish among the People: Folly is bound up in the heart of a
Child, but the Rod of Correction shall drive it away from him. Folly is not
only bound up in the heart of a child of man, but in the heart of a child of
God. Do ye thus require Jehovah, Oh ye foolish people, and unwise? Den. 32.6.
Should not the heart (now) be kept above all keeping? 3. It Is a barren heart.
There Is not a seed of grace in the heart till the hand of God sow it there.
Berren.
The heart naturally and originally is like white Paper, without any
Inscription; Not a Syllable of the Grace of God is written there, till the
Finger of God write it there. This shall be the Covenant that I will make with
the House of Israel; Jer. 31.33
but what is it? I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people: But who is this I?
It Is Jehovah. After those days, says Jehovah, I will put my Law in their
inward Parts, and write it in their hearts. May not the best of men speak after
the Prophet? My leanness, my leanness, Woe unto me. Might not Christ say, Isa
24.16
(were there not a spark of grace within) to the best of men, as he did to the
fruitless Fig Tree? Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Luke 13.7
Shall not the heart (now) be kept above all keeping? 4. It Is a dark heart,
Dark.
A natural heart is a dark heart; yea, a natural heart is not only dark but
darkness it self in the very Abstract, before the Sun of Righteousness arise
there. For ye were sometimes (darkness) but now are ye light in the Lord, (...)
Ephesians. 5.8.
walk as children of light. What would the World be without the Firmamental
Sun, but a World of darkness? Oh, what would the Soul be without the eternal
Son (the Sun of Righteousness) but a Dungeon of darkness. Oh, says the soul,
how muddy are my thoughts! how dark is my understanding! I know nothing yet as
I ought to know: Oh, it is little that I know, and I am ignorant of my
ignorance! The most perfect soul has but an imperfect sight of God or himself.
The most seeing man, or the Seer himself, has a Film upon his eye, (at least
much darkness in it,) and must (at present) look thorough Spectacles. 1 Cor.
13.12. (...)
We now see thorough a Glass darkly. Darkly, or in a Riddle, according to the
Greek. Shall not this heart (then) be kept above all keeping? 5. It Is a hard
heart. Hard.
The heart of man is so bad, I cannot tell how bad it is. The heart is compared
to an Adamant. They made their hearts as an Adamant stone, etc. Zach. 7.12
Is not a Flint hard? but an Adamant is harder. As an Adamant (harder then a
Flint) have I made thy Forehead. Ezekiel. 3.9.
Oh wonder not (then) to hear Persons to complain of their hardness of heart;
They are strangers to their own hearts, that complain not of the hardness of
their hearts. Oh, says one, Ezekiel. 36.26.
my heart is a stony heart! a slinty heart, a rocky heart; but God (for this)
can give a heart of flesh! Oh, says another, my heart is like the nether
Millstone! The lowest Millstone is the hardest Millstone. Oh, says a third, my
heart is hard as an Adamant! Job 41.2^
Now, an Adamant is utterly impierceable, the Fire not being able to consume
it, nor the Hammer to break it. Shall not this heart then be kept above all
keeping? 6. It Is a proud heart. Proud.
There Is much pride in that heart that is most humble; nay, may not a man be
proud of his humility? God resists the proud. ^am. 4.6
Some are proud of their Robes, others are proud of their Rags. Some are proud
of their Chains of Gold, others are proud of their Chains of Iron. Him that
has a high look, and a proud hear will I not suffer. Ps. 101.5.
Humility is the Ornament of Angels, but Pride is the deformity of devils.
Angels are humble in the midst of all their Triumphs; but Devils are proud in
the midst of all their Torments and Tortures. Oh, what Garden is without this
weed? what Scutcheon is without this blot! was not Paul's spirit tympanious? 1
Co. 12.7
Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of the
Revelations, there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of
Satan to buffet me, Oh, how apt men, the best of men, to be lifted up in
themselves, under singular and signal discoveries! A Paul, when he is led into
the Secret of God, is apt to be lifted up in himself, his heart is climbing
under those towering revelations. Those, that curiously observe the Workings and
Counter-workings of their own hearts, may find (after duty) their hearts
aspiring and climbing upon some singular and signal appearance of God (under
duty.) Is not the heart apt to rise and bubble (after a duty) upon some smiles,
shines and showers of mercy (under the duty?) Shall not this heart (then) be
kept above all keeping? 7. It Is a Passionate heart. Passionate Ephesians. 4.26 Psa. 7
11.
There is a holy Passion. Be angry, and sin not. A man may be angry with sin,
and yet not sin, being angry. A man (also) may be angry with sinners, as
sinners. God is angry with sinners every day. Thus, men may be angry with
sinners, as sinners; they may be angry with the sin of the Person, but not with
the Person that sins. There is (then) a sin-less passion, and a Son of God
(may) yea, a Son of God (must) have a holy indignation against others,
especially against himself, as Moses had against the Calf. He burned it to
Powder, cast it upon the water, Ex. 32.20.
and gave it to the Children of Israel to drink of it. But, as there is a
sin-less, so there is a sin-ful passion. Moses (the Mirror of Meekness for a
mere man) was not without his Pettish humor, Hear ye Rebels. Had it not been
more becoming language to have said, Hear ye Israelites? But, hear ye Rebels,
Numb. 20.10, 11.
must we fetch you water out of this Rock? Yea, he smites the Rock thrice, when
he should not have smitten it once. Jonah (a Dove) as the word signifies; and a
Dove (they say) is gall-less, was not without this Plague Sore.


Do well to be anqgy? ^na 4.9.
and it is Johovah that speaks it: And he said, I do well to be angry even to
death. As if he had said, I am angry, and I do well to be angry, I do well to
be even angry. I am angry while I live, and do well to be angry till I dye. Oh
this was a sad, and a Sinful passion! Ask those (that are not strangers to
their own hearts) and they will tell you that they have Passionate hearts. Oh,
says one, I want a Bearing, and a Forbearing Spirit! Oh, says another, I have
not yet learned (if their be two senses left) to take things in the best sense!
Shall not this heart (then) be kept above all keeping? ^eep. ^^gust^s ^^^nde
^rofun^um ^ot only ^rofun^um ma^nt, sed ^ali Pro ^undum.


It Is a deep Heart. The Sea is a great Depth, but who can say what a Depth the
heart is? The Philosopher calls it the greatest Depth in the World. Another
calls it a great Depth, Where is the Man, or the Woman (in whose heart Christ
has taken up his Residence by Faith) that cannot set his Seal, the heart is a
great Depth? I may call it, not only a deep evil, but the Depth of evil; not
only a wicked Gulf, but the Gulf of wickedness. There are Depths in the heart
of man, which the Line of man (whether of Nature, or of Grace) cannot sound;
and such Turnings therein, which man cannot find out; but God has a Line that
can sound all the Depths of the heart, and a Thread that will Lead him (into
all) and (through all) the Labyrinths thereof. Did the woman say, The well is
deep? But who can say how deep the heart is? Joh. 4.11
They search out Iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search (or according to
the Margent, Psalm. 64.^
they accomplish a search searched;) both the inward thought of every one of
them, and the heart is deep. Shall not this heart (then) be kept above all
keeping?

6. It Is a deceitful Heart. Decei^^^^
There are Millions upon Millions of Deceits in the heart. The World is a great
Cheat, but the heart is the greatest Cheat in the World. This Lubim (the heart
of Man) as the word signify, is apt to take many false Stiches in the work of
Salvation. For.

1. It Is apt to take Morality for Grace. Now, Morality is but Nature refined;
it is old Adam in a better Dress. That profound Moralist thought (possibly) that
he wanted nothing, when he wanted Grace, for he wanted Christ, and if a man
would have Grace, he must have Christ. Master all these have I observed from my
Youth. Ma. ^


2. The heart is apt to take the show of grace, ^^e fi^^le non (...) idem. ^^ny.
for grace. Things may be alike, but not the same. The Naturalists say, that
there is a Beryl-stone which resembles the true Diamond. Thus, some things look
like grace, but are not grace. The heart of Man would not only deceive others,
and our selves, in a way of Dissimulation, concerning that which indeed is;
and, in a way of Simulation counterfeiting that which indeed is not; but it
would deceive even God himself, and impose upon the All-wise. As the Tongue is
the greatest Troubler in the World, so the Heart is the greatest Impostor in
the World. Oh, what Arithmetician (below a God) can enumerate the veins of
deceitfulness in the heart? No wonder, that Prophetical Narrative (concerning
the heart) is transmitted to Posterity. ^er. 17.9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it? Now, shall not this heart (which is deceitful above all things) be kept
above all things? Above all keeping, keep thy heart.

10. It Is an unbelieving heart. ^nbeliev^ng.
The heart is naturally unbelieving; yea, in a state of unbelief; for faith is
not natural, but supernatural. Faith is not a slip growing in our own Garden,
but a Heaven-born-Grace: Faith is an outlandish Plant, and of a divine
Extract. It Is called a Faith of the Operation of God. Unbelief is a great sin,
Col. 2.12.
the greatest sin. Unbelief lies at the bottom of all sins; it is the
Mother-sin, the main sin, the mortal sin. If ye believe not that I am he, Joh.
8.24.
ye shall die in your sins. Unbelief cuts asunder the Sinews of the Promise;
this stops (as it were) the springs of mercy. He did not many works there;
there, where? in his own Country; why? because of their unbelief. He did not
many mighty works there, because of their unbelief. Mat. 13.54, 58.
There are many Bills about hardness and haughtiness of heart, about darkness
and deadness of heart, about Pride and Passion of spirit, about wanton^ess and
worldliness of spirit; but I seldom hear or read of one about unbelief, though
he or she that believes not is condemned already. Joh. 3.18.
The man or the woman (that believes not) seems to be under the Judgment,
before the Judgment. Oh, there are few Bills about unbelief, though this be
the deadly sin the daring sin! Oh, what little complaining is there of
unbelief? though this does the greatest injury to God, and put the greatest
indignity upon God, of any sin in the world, for it makes him (who is Truth it
self) a Liar. He that believes not God has made him a liar, 1 John 5.10
because he helieveth not the record that God gave of his Son. Shall not this
hoart (now) be kept above all keeping? Above all keeping, keep thy heart.

5. What use may be made of this, that the heart of Man must be kept, above all
keeping? Above all keeping, keep thy heart.

I have only one Use to make of this, and that is by way of Counsel. Use.


Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Suffer (then) the words of
Exhortation. But, this Use, has a double Aspect, looking to the Unbelieving
Sinner, and then to the Believing Saint.

To the Unbelieving Sinner, 1. To the unbelieving sinner.


Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Reflect (then) thy heart, and
Tremble. Oh how many Trembling Arrest, and Attack thee, that art in thy Sin!

But what manner of heart, Quest.
is the Sinners heart?

A Sinners heart, Selut.
is Originally, and Totally defiled and depraved.

1. The heart of a Sinner, is Originally defiled, and depraved. The heart, is
the Root from which all those corrupt Branches grow, the Fountain, from which
those corrupt Streams flow; the Womb, wherein all those corrupt Monsters are
Conceived; the Shell wherein all those Cockatrices are hatched. Out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Mar. 15.^, ^0.
Fornications, Thefts, Falswitness, Blasphemies: These are the things which
defile is Man.

2. The heaert of a Sinner is Totally defiled, and depraved. This appears two
ways; The whole heart is in evil, and whole evil is in the heart.

1. The whole heart is in evil. Man (Naturally) is in his Blood. I said unto
thee; but when? when thou wast in thy Blood, Live. Oh! this Gall of Bitterness,
has Imbittered; Leaven, Soured; and this Leprosy, Infected the whole heart.
2. Whole evil, is in the heart. There are the Seeds, and Spauns of all Sin in
the heart, as in their Proper (though Polluted) Center. Not only the Seeds of
all Sin, that are to be found in (one) Man, but that are to be found in (all)
Men, are to be found in (every) Man. As there was in the Chaos (at the first
Creation) the Seeds of all the Creatures, as Fire, and Air; Water, and Earth,
etc. So, there are the Seeds of all Sin in the heart. The heart is not only the
soil, that have the seeds of all sin in it, but is the Sun and the Rain, to
warm and water those seed in order to growth. The heart is not only the Shop,
but the Artificer, yea, the very Tool that frames wickedness: They conceive
mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares deceit. Joh 15.35.
Is it not time (now) to reflect thy heart, and to tremble? May not Trembling
take hold upon thee, that thou may rest in the day of trouble.
2. To the believing Saint. To the believing ^aint.
As the Sinner, so the Saint; as the unbeliever, so the believer is concerned
in this Use.

Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Endeavor (then) through Christ, to
sense thy heart with those things, that are (undoubtedly) incumbent upon thee.
For instance, 1. Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Know (then) that the
heart must be kept (for) us, as well as kept (by) us. May not I say concerning
the keeping of the heart, as the Psalmist does concerning the keeping of the
City, Psa. 127.1
Except Jehovah build the House, they labor in vain that build it; except
Jehovah keeps the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. Now, as it is true,
except Jehovah keep the City, he that watches, watches in vain; it is as
true, except Jehovah keep the heart, he that works, works in vain.
Heart-work, as it is hard work so it is Heavens work; And, as this heart must
be kept (by) us, so it must be kept (for) us. 2. Must the heart be kept above
all keeping? Read (then) thy Mercy, in conjunction with thy Duty. Mercy and
Duty (like Rebecka's Twins) go hand in hand: As Mercy will not go without Duty,
so Duty shall not go without Mercy; (...) 10.22.5.
Thorns and Snares are in the way of the froward; he that does keep his soul,
shall be far from them. There are nothing but snares in the way of the
Christ-less, and Grace-less: every step he takes, he steps upon some Thorn or
other, upon some Briar or other; the way of sin is full of snares: God has
threatened to rain snares upon the wicked. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares,
fire and brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; Psalm. 11.^.
this shall be the Portion of their Cup, Upon the wicked he shall rain snares,
is not that a severe, and a sad word? Snares shall come like showers; but he
(that above all keeping keep his soul, or his heart, (which is the principal
Seat of it) shall be far from them. Though there be snares in the way of a
bel^ever, yet he shall not (so) be ensnared by them, if his heart be kept above
all keeping. It Is true, there are Rock^ in a Believers voyage, but he shall
sail between these, and not stave upon them, if his heart be kept above all
keeping. What temptations and snares soever are in a Believers way, yet if his
heart be kept, if there be not a consent of the Will, he may triumph, and say,
The snare is broken, Ps. 124.7.
and I am escaped. 3. Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Know (then) as
the heart is, the man is, before God; as the hand is, the man is, before man;
but, as the heart is, the man is, before God. Men judge of our hearts by our
words, and our works; but God judges of our words and our works by our hearts.
Jehovah sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, 1 Samuel 16.7.
or (according to the Margent) on the eyes; for Man looks on the eyes, but
Jehovah looks on the heart. 4. Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Up
(then) and be doing. May not I advise concerning keeping, as Isreal's Sage do
concerning getting? Pto. 4.7.
With all thy getting, get understanding: so, with all thy keeping keep thy
heart, yea, keep thy heart above all keeping. You must not say concerning the
heart, as Cain said concerning Abel; Am I my Brothers Keeper? Gen, 4.9.
Do not say, Am I my hearts Keeper? Above all keeping let this be kept. 5. Must
the heart be kept above all keeping? Multiply cries (then) that God would keep
it. The Mother loves to hear from the Child, though it can but stammer and
stutter. God loves to be enquired of by the House of Israel. God has a greater
respect to the chattering and lisping of a Saint, then to the greatest
Eloquence and Or^tory of a sinner. God w^ll lend and la^ his ear to a Daniel,
when he has no great variety of matter, and can (as it were) but just speak;
witness this place; Dan. 9.19.
Oh Lord, hear! Oh Lord, forgive! Oh Lord, hearken and do! defer not for thine
own sake, Oh my God! for thy City and thy People are called by thy Name. Soul!
get into a Corner, get into a Closet, and cry there, Lord, keep my heart, for
it is to be kept above all keeping. Oh, I have a base and a brutish heart! a
hard and a haughty heart! Lord, keep it. Oh, I have an unbelieving and a
misbelieving heart! a proud and a passionate heart! Lord, keep it. Oh, I have a
dark and a dead heart! a corrupt and a carnal heart! Lord, keep it, for it is to
Be kept above all keeping. Thus, the Psalmist did; Oh Lord, Ps. 25.20.
keep my soul, and deliver me; let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in
thee.


But here I shall advise unto a making faith of the Power of God, the Presence
of God, and the Guard of God.

1. Make faith of the Power of God. God, is as able to keep it, as he was to
make it; as able to keep it, as he was to enlighten it; as able to keep it, as
he was to enliven it. Great is the Lord, and of great Power. 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am Persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. But, what is God able to
keep? He is able to keep the soul, able to keep grace in the soul, able to keep
glory for the soul. Whatsoever the soul has deposited into the Hand of God, he
is able to keep it: Now the heart is a main thing that is committed to God:
Psa. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. Commit thy way to the Lord; Roll thy way upon Jehovah; thy way, but what
way? the way of thy heart, or thy inward way; the way of thy hand, or thy
outward way. That is, concern Jehovah (which is the Father or the Son) with all
thy concerns, especially with the heart, which is the greatest concern: Art a
son or daughter of Abraham? make faith (then) of the Power of God; believe,
that the Power of God is greater to help thee, then the Power of Sin, or of
Satan can be to hurt thee. Oh soul! the Lord can do whatsoever he will, though
he will not do whatsoever he can. Gods Power has no limit but his pleasure.

2. Must the heart be kept above all keeping? make faith (then) of the Promise
of God. As there is the Power of God, so there is the Promise of God, in order
to the keeping of the heart. God has Promised to keep his People, and he will
keep his Promise. He is God that has Promised, and he will Perform. Gods Word
may be taken, though Man's can scarcely be, such is the Immorality of the last,
of the latter days. Soul, plead the Promise of God for keeping thy heart. Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, or (according to the Hebrew) in Peace, Peace,
whose min^^ is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Isa. 26.3.
Now, there can be no Peace, no inward and abiding Peace, when the heart is not
kept. There can be no Peace, no perfect Peace, no constant and continuing
Peace, when the heart is not kept. For, as there is no Peace, no true Peace to
the wicked, so there is no abiding Peace, when the heart is not kept, but (like
some mighty Torrent) it overflows its Banks. God (speaking of his Vineyard)
says; Is. 27.2, 3.
I Jehovah de keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day.

3. Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Make faith (then) of the Guard of
God. God has appointed and approved a Guard for the heart. There Is a
possibility, yea, a probability for the keeping of the heart, because there is
an appointed and approved Guard, in order to the hearts keeping. He shall give
his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways. It Is true, Ps. 91.11.
these words (when Christ was tempted by Satan) were applied by Satan to
Christ; If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, for it is writter, He
shall give his Angels Charge concerning thee, Mat, 4 6.
and in their hands shall they bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy
foot against a stone. Wonder not that these words are applied to Christ; for,
if they belong to all sanctified believers in general (as Interpreters agree)
much more eminently to the Head and Husband of these, Christ Jesus, who is the
Beginner and Consummator of Grace. The most mighty and magnificent Monarchs in
the World, have not such a Train, such a Retinue at home, nor such a Life,
Guard when they go abroad, as the meanest Saint has, for he has a Guard of
Angels, a Convoy of Angels, and this is approved as well as appointed of God,
in order to the keeping of the heart.

6. Must the heart be kept above all keeping? Mourn (then) over that in the
heart, which has made it so treacherous. Sin is the greatest Treason in the
world, and this makes the heart so treacherous. May not I say of Corruption, as
the Queen did of Calice, Rip me open when I am dead, and you will find Calice
at my heart. Should ye rip open a person, would ye not find corruption at his
heart? It Is man's sin that kills him. As Sin infects, so it inters the man it
infects. No sc^ner do we begin to live, but we begin to die* Genesis 2.27
In the day thou ea^est thereof dying; thou shall die. Thou shall be dying till
thou die; as thou art obnoxious to the first, so to the second death. Genesis
6.^. (...).
And God saw that the wickedness of man was great, and that every imagination
of the thought of his heart was only evil, and that continually. Continually,
every day, so the Hebrew; all days, so the Greek. Not only the frame of a
natural he art, but whatsoever a natural heart frames is evil, only evil,
every day evil. Was not Stephens Enterment without great lamentation? Devout
men carried Stephen to the Grave, and made great, lamentation over him. And
shall not sin in the heart lie near the heart, and be greatly lamented? Did
David mourn, (till he could no more mourn) for the burning of a Ziklag? and
shall not the soul mourn for sin in the heart, that has made it so sinful? Ch
let thine eye be like a Limbeck, continually dropping, for sin in the heart! To
this end, endeavor (thorough Christ) to sense thy heart with these
Considerations.

1. Sin, has a Being (still) within. There are the Remainders of sin within:
There are Philistines (yet) in thy Land; accursed Inmates (yet) in thy house:
Thy Garden is not (yet) without weeds: thy house not (yet) without rubbish; thy
heart not (yet) without leaver. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him
a Liar, and his Word is not in us. Nay, if we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. 1 John 1
There is such a thing as sin; yea, 1 John 1
sin within the tallest Cedars. Paul (though cried up for an earthly Angel,
(...). 7.20.
in respect of his holiness) acknowledges, but sin that dwells in me. Sin
was an Inmate; he does not speak of it as a Guest, but as an Inhabitant; and
shall not this si^ in the heart, lie near in the heart, and be mourned over? Oh
mourn over sin, for it has a being (yet) within. 2. Sin had not a being (from)
God. Sin is man's own, his own Babe. Man is Sins Parent. Though Satan be the
Father of temptation, yet the Heart is the Mother of Corruption. Sin has its
Conception within. (...). 15.
Lust, when conceived, brings forth sin. Now, as Sin had its conception in
man, so man had his conception in Sin, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my Mother conceive me. (...) 51.5. (...) non (...) non ^^care ^^^sse non ^^are.
^^^sse ^^care.
As there is original sin (which is an habitual exorbitancy, and an universal
depravity of man's nature:) so there is the original of sin, which was a
possibility for, and a potentiality in man to sin. There is an impossibility of
sinning, and that is in a Celestial state; there is a possibility for not
sinning, and that is in an Evangelical state; but then there was a possibility
for sinning, and that was in a Paradisical state. Man (and that in a
Paradisical state) had a Potentiality of sinning; this is the original of sin.
Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help! No wonder,
thy destruction is of thy self, for thy Corruption is of thy self; There had
been no destruct on. had there been no corruption: As if God had said, Oh
Israel, thy sin and thy sorrow lay near my heart, but thy destruction is of thy
self; this Calf, this Sin, which is from thy self, therefore is the meritorious
cause of thy destruction. Seek the cause where thou will, it is not in me, but
in thee* Sin had not a being from me, though it has a being in thee. Shall not
this then be mourned over, which had not a being from God? 3. Sin cannot have a
being with God. Nothing shall have a being with God, but that which had a being
from God; but S^^ had not a being from God; no sin, no sinner ^^all inherit the
Kingdom of God. The unrighteous (as unrighteous) shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Know ye not that the unrig^teous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
No soul in his sin shall have Heaven for his Mansion. Nothing that defiles,
or works abomination, or makes a Li^, Re. 21.2^
shall enter this ^erusalem; yea, shall not enter into a lesser and lower
Jerusalem then this is, even that Jerusalem which comes down from God out of
Heaven. Shall not this Sin then be mourned over? 4. Sin strikes at the very
being of God. Ens Hatium.
Sin does not only strike at the being of man, but at the very Being of God,
who is the very Being of God, who is the Being of Beings. Sin would not only
un-m^n a Man, and (...)-Saint a Saint, but un-Christ a Christ, but un-God a
God. Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the Path, ^^a. 30.11.
cause the holy One of Israel to cease from before us. This is the Dialect of
Sin in a Man, and of a Man in his Sin; Shall not thine eyes now be like the
Rivers in Heshbon?
1. Suffer me now to present thee with some Motives, Motives
and then with some Directions: 1. Would ye not be Captives to
Constitution-Corruptions? Then (above all keeping keep your hearts. Sam. 22.
I was also upright before him, and have kept my self from mine iniquity. There
was some particular sin, the Sin of his Nature, that he observed, and that you
may also observe in your selves. This is the Sin that does so easily beset us.
A^ there is the Master-Grace, I^^. 12
so there is the Master-sin. Indeed, this Reason the Spirit of God (in the
Text) gives, for keeping the heart above all keeping; Above all keeping, keep
thy heart: why? for, Out of it are the Issues of life: Or, for out of it the
Actions of life proceed. 2. Would ye keep your lips, then (above all keeping)
keep your hearts. If ye would keep a close lip, ye must keep a clean heart. The
Heart is not far situated from the Tongue; M. 12 34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the Mouth speaks. Out of the abundance
(or, redundance) of the heart, the Mouth speaks The Lips, they are the
outworks, and must not be neglected; the Heart, that is the Citadel, and must
be chiefly kept. The Hand reaches but a small Compass, but the Tongue sa^ls
thorough the Universe. The Tongue has no mean; its either exceedingly good, or
excessively evil; it knows nothing but extremes. The Lips do offend N^gatively
as well as Positively; as in speaking, so in not speaking; for Silence,
som^imes, is a loud sin. Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile, is imposed by the Psalmist, and transmitted to Posterity. 3. Would ye
not set up Idols in your hearts? Then (above all keeping) keep your hearts.
Little Children, keep your s^lves from idols. Though these were Children, 1 Jo.
5.21
yet they are called l^ttle Children, and little Children may have Idols, at
least they are in danger of setting up Idols within. C^ 3 1.
Set your affe^^^^ns on things above, not on things on the earth. The Affection
is a Faculty of the Soul, and this may be set upon things below. Love not the
world. 1 Jo. 21
nor the things that are in the world; If any one love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him. The World may b^ s^^* b^t it must not be loved. The
World is a great Idol (the Diana that have so many Worshippers) and the heart
is the Seat for this Idol, for that is the Seat of Love. Covetousness is a great
si^, a grievous sin: For the iniquity of his Covetousness was I wroth, and
smote him. The love of money is called the Root of all evil. Covetousness is
called Idolatry. Col. 3.5.
And Covetousness which is Idolatry. But how is a covetous man, an idolatrous
man? yea, an Idolater? He that gives that to any creature, (which is due to
God) makes himself an Idolater. Keep the World (therefore) out of thy heart,
for that is often set up there as an Idol. Now, if ye would keep the world out
of your hearts, ye must of necessity then ^^ep your hearts. 4. Would ye f^llow
the Footsteps of the Flock? then (above all keeping) keep the heart. The
C^ristian may be followed so far and so fast as he follows Christ. Thou may
set thy Watch by his, if he set his by the Sun. C^r 11.
^e ye followers of me, even as I a so am of Christ. Be ye followers of me,
even as I also am of Christ. Be ye followers, that is, be ye Imitators of me,
even as I am an Imitator of Christ. Go thy way forth by the f^otsteps of the
Flock. By the footsteps, or in the footst^ps of the Flock: ^ant. 1.8.
that is, go in those ways, and do those works, which the sheep or flock of
Christ have gone in, and done before thee. 5. Would ye follow the foot steps of
the Shepherd? Then (above all keeping) keep the heart. As Christ was the
highest Principle, so the highest Pattern and President, an incomparable Copy
to write after, Path to walk after, Exemplar to work after; Now, there was no
Guile in his Mouth, and there would be less in ours, if we would be more
car^ful, conscious, cordial and constant, in k^eping our hearts above all
keeping. She has left us an example that we should follow his steps. 1 Pet.
2.21
6. Would ye have a conversation in heaven, and for heaven? then (above all
keeping) keep the heart; we are to drive a Trade with heaven, and for heaven.
Oh soul! what a ^^ss^^ and lower heaven is it, to have a clean and a chaste
heart? a holy and a heavenly heart? For our conversation is in heaven, from
whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.2 (...).
The word here for conversation, (though but one word in the Greek) yet it
cannot be expressed by one word in English, but may be read thus, Our
conversation is in heaven; that is, we carry and behave our selves in this
life, as free Denizons in the City of heaven. It is the Ambition of a Saint to
live godly in Christ Jesus. We should live upon earth, according to the Laws of
Heaven; our Ambition should be to have all in Print. Every Saint should be an
earthly Angel, and live upon earth after the rate of heaven. An Evangelical
life should be an Aagelical life.


1. Would ye (above all keeping) keep the heart? 2. Directions.
^ngage Christ then in this work. The heart is the strongest Castle, the
highest Turre^; no Arrow will do execution, but what the Lord takes out of his
own Quiver, and sheets out of his own Bow. Let God be passive, and the heart is
impregnable, notwithstanding all the Batteries that are made against it. Rev.
6.2.
It Is Christ that went forth conquering and to conquer. And (thorough Christ)
Christians are more then Conquerours. To. 8.37.


2. Would ye (above all keeping) keep the heart? Make use then of the Spirit.
The flesh and the spirit are contraries, and contraries have contrary
consequences: As one contrary discovers another, so one contrary seeks the
destruction of the other. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other. Gal. 5.17.
Now, contrariety is the ground of all contestation and conflict. If ye would
mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13.
ye must take the Spirit, If ye by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
flesh, ye shall live.

3. Would ye (above all keeping) keep the heart? Let your hearts then be taken
up with heaven. When thou find thy thoughts wandering, and ready to bre^^
their bounds, endeavor to turn them into another Channel, concern thy soul then
with heaven, and h^^venly things. All below heaven should be below the heart,
Mat. 6.21.
Where the treasure (...) will the heart be also. A heart must be where its
treasure is, and its treasure where Christ is, It Is pity, that a good head and
a good heart should not ever be companions. Your head is in heaven, let your
heart be there also; the head and the heart may be together.

But, to end as I did begin, and there to end, where I did begin; As
heart-keeping is the hardest keeping, so the heart must be kept above all
keeping. Above all keeping, keep thy heart, for out of is the actions of life
proceed.

Dilecti, si cor nostrum nos non condemnet, loquendi libertatem apud Deum
habenius, 1 John 3.21.
The Sufficiency of Grace.
2 COR. X^I. 9. former part. And he said unto me, My Grace is sufficient for
thee.
In the Text, and Context, ye have the Apostles Narrative, concerning his
Revelation; his Temptation, upon that Revelation; his Supplication, upon that
Temptation; and his Supportation, upon that Supplication.

1. His Revelation. It is not expedient for me to glory, 2 Cor. 2.1.
I will come to visions, and revelations of the Lord. Some, distinguish
visions, from Revelations, thus: A vision (they say) is, when something is
Supernatural, represented to the sight, the party not knowing the Signification
thereof. Such was the vision of Pharaoh concerning the Cattle, and the Corn,
which were one, and the same thing; Gen 41,
seven years Fullness, and seven years Famine. Such (also) was the vision of
Nebuchadnezzar, concerning the Tree, Dan. 4.
which was Interpreted of Himself.

A Revelation (they say) when something is Supernaturally represented to the
sight, and the Signification thereof is made known to the party; such were the
visions of the Prophets.

Others distinguish visions from Revelations, thus: A vision, may be without an
Ecstasy. Thus, the two Mary's seeing the Angel at the Sepulcher, Mar. 16. beg.
they were Affrighted. They were Affrighted, but not in an Ecstasy. But, a
Revelation, such (as Paul here speaks of) was an Apparition in an Ecstasy.
Such was that of Peter concerning the Sheet. Acts io. 10, etc.
Such also) was that of John, when in the Isle of Patmos; He was in the Spirit
on the Lords day, Rev. 1.9, 10.
and heard behind him a great voice, as of a Trumpet.

2. His Temptation upon this Revelation. And lest I should be exalted above
measure through the abundance of the Revelations, 2 Co. 12.^.
there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
me, lest I should be exalted above measure. Some, by this Thorn in the flesh,
understand Concupiscence; Others understand Alexander the Coppersmith; but
there appears not to me the least Shadow of a Probability, that either of these
should be the Thorn in the Flesh: Is it so much as Probable that the Disease
should be Corporal, when the Remedy was Spiritual? that the Malady should be
Corporal, when the Medicine was Spiritual* that the Sor^ should be Corporal,
when the Salve was Spi^^^^^? So that by the Thorn in the flesh, I understand
Temptation; that is, some Satanical Suggestion, and Solicitation, concerning
the Faith and Sincerity of the Apostle.

3. His Supplication, upon this Temptation. For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me. 2 Co. 12.8
Here is a Copy for you (under Temptation) to write after; the Apostle has a
Thorn, has a Temptation, but what Course does he now Steer? To this Closet he
goes; to his Knees he goes; to the Throne of Grace he goes; go you, and do
likewise.

4. His Supportation, upon this Supplication. And he said unto me, my grace is
sufficient for thee. Christ answers in Effect, though he does not answer in
Kind. Paul, is not presently Delivered (from) the Temptation, but he is
Delivered (under) the Temptation; he is supported (under) it, though not
Delivered (from) it. And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee.

In this text and truth, you have something implied, and something expressed.

1. Something implied; that is the sore. This is temptation, that is, this is
some fiery and furious assault and attempt of Satan. 2. Something expressed;
that is the salve. And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee. In
which words you have these Observables.
1. The Person, salving. He, that is, God, or Christ; Or Christ. who is God.
He, And he said. 2. The Person salved, Me; that is Paul, And he said unto me. 3.
The subject matter of the salve, and that is grace, Now, grace is an excellent
thing, an excelling thing. All are Pebbles to this Pearl. 4. The Propriety that
Christ claims in this grace. My grace, or this grace of mine. My grace; not thy
grace, but my grace; Not grace in thy private hand, but in thy public head;
not grace in the stream, but in the fountain. My grace. 5. The Efficacy of this
Grace, sufficient. My grace, and sufficient. As if Christ had said, though thou
have a burden, yet thou shall have a back for that burden: thy back shall not
break under thy burden, nor bow under thy burden, though thy burden be great,
my grace is greater. Sufficient. 6. The certainty of the efficacy of this
Grace, Is. My grace, my grace is sufficient for thee. It Is grace, and my grace,
that has not only been, but yet is sufficient. And he said unto me, my grace
is sufficient for thee.
From the Text, and Context, you have these Meditations,

1. That the chiefest and choicest of Christians are obnoxious unto
temptations. Meditations.
Paul, who was of the highest form, if not the highest in that form of grace,
and gifts, was not without his temptation; he had a thorn in the flesh. Paul
was an eminent Servant of Christ; had eminent Revelation from Christ, and yet
under eminent temptation; he had a thorn in the flesh. Persons, shall not need
to wonder when tempted, for temptation is no new thing; but to pass that.

2. That the greatest temptation does ordinarily succeed the greatest
revelation. It was thus with the Master; when Christ had that voice, This is my
beloved Son in whom I acquiesce, then he was led away by the Spirit into the
wilderness to be tempted by the devil. Now, was it thus with the Master? No
wonder then if it be thus with the servant; but humbly to take leave of that
also.

3. That Christ suffers temptation to succeed revelation, in order to the
prevention of carnal exaltation and ostentation. Persons are apt to be puffed
up with a fleshy mind under Revelations. The Spirit begins to swet, and become
Tympanious, under the greatest Manifestation, and Revelation. Where is the Body
that do not sometimes stand in need of Physic? Oh, but where is the soul, that
stands not often in need of a pill, and a potion to purge out corrupt Crudities?

4. That it is (at once) both the Duty, and the Dignity of a Christian, to
multiply Cries, and cry mightily unto Christ, under Temptation. For this I
besought the Lord thrice; but to pass that also:

5. That a word from Christ, is a suitable, and seasonable supply, and support,
unto a Christian, under Temptation. And he said unto me. This was under the
writing of the Scriptures, and this has been ever since the Scriptures were
written, the method of Christ unto Christians, under affliction, and under
Temptation, to give some word, or other, And he said unto me.

6. That there is a sufficiency of grace in Christ, for a Christian, under
Temptation. My grace is sufficient for thee. This is the truth that I shall
discourse, and discuss, if indulged a divine Gale, and Gust. There is a
sufficiency of grace in Christ, for a Christian. By a Christian, I mean a
Christian of Christ, making: not of Man's, but of Gods making; or, (...) from
(...)
not of Man's making, without God. By a Christian, I do not mean every Babe, or
any Babe that is sprinkled, for the word Christian is a Derivative from Christ:
By a Christian, I mean a believing Saint, and a sanctified Believer. By a
Christian, I mean a Person (in) Christ, for so the Apostle wordeth it; I knew a
man in Christ; that is, actually in Christ; drawn (unto) Christ, and drawn
(after) Christ; now, there is a sufficiency of grace in Christ for such a
Christian, and that under temptation; the greatest temptation. 2 Cor. 12. ^,
My grace is sufficient for thee.

In the Managing of this Meditation, Method.
suffer a serious, and sober Inquiry after five things.

1. Whether there be a sufficiency of grace in Christ, for a Christian, under
temptation. 2. What manner of grace, this grace is, that is in Christ; And is
sufficient for a Christian, under temptation. 3. How this grace is in Christ,
which is sufficient for a Christian, under temptation. 4. Why there is in
Christ a sufficiency of grace for a Christian, Method.
under temptation. 5. What Use may be made of this, that the grace which is in
Christ, is sufficient for a Christian, under temptation.
1. Whether there be a sufficiency of grace in Christ, for a Christian, under
temptation. Will it not be lost labor, and (as it were) to hold a candle to
the Sun at noon, to go about to prove this? That there is a fullness of grace in
Christ, is Evident. Herein, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, is positive: Col.
1.19.
For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. The word
(Father) is supplied in the English Translation; (...).
for it pleased, so the Greek; that is (if I mistake not) it pleased both the
Father and the Spiit, that in the Son should dwell; but what? fullness; yea, all
fullness; For it pleased that in him should all fullness dwell. All fullness of
grace, or, a fullness of all grace. Col. 2.5.
In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Personally. Here Is fullness,
yea, all fullness, yea, all the fullness of the Godhead, yea, all the fullness of
the Godhead, and that Personally. Once more; the Apostle speaking of Christ as
Head, and the Church as Body, speaks of the Church as the fullness of Him, and
of Him as the fullness of the Church. (...)
And gave him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all; Or (according to the Greek) filling all
things in all things.

2 What manner of grace, this grace is, that is in Christ, and is sufficient
for a Christian under temptation.

1. Grace in Christ is free grace. It Is Grace, and therefore free; it is free,
and therefore Grace. It Is Grace no way, unless free every way. Wine and Milk
may be had without money, and without price: yea, Grace and Glory are had
without money and without price. Jehovah God is a Sun, and a Shield, he gives
Grace and Glory, Grace here, glory hereafter; grace upon earth, glory in heaven
are given; they are Donatives. Grace (in) Christ, and (from) Christ is free.
Ephesians. 4.7t
To every one of us is given gra^e according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. 2. Grace, in Christ, is formidable grace. Grace, in Christ, is able to
weather any storm; every storm: How prodigious soever the winds of temptation
be, and how impetuous soever the waves of tribulation be, grace, in Christ, is
able to weather all. The temptations of Christ were great, but grace in Christ,
weathered all. He went out conquering, and to conquer. And, as grace (in)
Christ, so grace (from) Christ, weathers all. As the temptations of Christ were
great, so the temptations of a Christian are great, and yet grace (from) Christ
weathers all. When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy, Oh Lord, held me up.
Psalm. 94.18.
3. Grace, in Christ, is attracting grace. There is not a greater naturalness
in the Loadstone to draw Iron to it, then there is in the grace of Christ, to
draw the soul to Christ. The grace of God, and of Christ, have a mighty
Influence. Moses spoke from Mount Sinai; Christ spoke from Mount Zion. Moses
(by his thundering) did not draw to Christ, but Christ (by his grace) draws to
himself. Can. 1.4.
I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love. And as Christ draw (unto)
himself, so (after) himself, in a way of grace. Draw me, and we will run after
thee. 4. Grace, in Christ, is abounding grace. Grace in Christ, is grace in the
Fountain; now grace in the Fountain, is, for Quality, and Quantity, ever the
same. Grace, in Christ, is grace in the Ocean; now how empty soever the channel
is, the Ocean is full; always full. I will give to him that is athirst, of the
fountain of the water of life freely. There Is abundance of grace in Christ, so
much I cannot tell how much; grace in Christ, is a wonderful Deep, and my Line
cannot sound this Depth. In Christ, there are deep Ditches which cannot be
sounded, and rich Deeps which cannot be Exhausted, Where sin abounded, grace
did much more abound. Romans 5.20
5. Grace, in Christ, is abiding grace. Grace, in a Christian, though it may
decay, yet it cannot dye. Grace, in a Christian, must continue, until grace
goes into glory, when Time goes into Eternity. Now, if grace be thus in the
stream; what is it (then) in the fountain? Grace, in Christ, is lasting, yea,
everlasting: As (from) Eternity (to) Eternity. Christ is God, so (from)
Eternity (to) Eternity, he is good, and gracious, and can as soon cease to be
God, as to be good; Psalm. 103.17.
cease to be God, as to be gracious. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting,
to everlasting; or thus; The mercy of Jehovah, is from eternity, to eternity,
upon them that sear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children. The
Mercy of the Lord endures for ever. 6. Grace, in Christ, is commodious grace.
Is not Advantage in every man's eye? Grace, is very Advantageous; it brings
Salvation along with it. By grace ye are saved. Is not Salvation a great thing?
B^n. 2.5.
Is not Damnation a bitter Pill, and potion? Is not Salvation a sweet morsel?
This is by grace, and this grace is laid up in Christ. This Gold, lays in this
Ore. Salvation, and all in a Tendency unto Salvation, runs in the veins of
free grace. The whole Fabric of Salvation is laid in grace. 7. Grace, in
Christ, is Efficatious grace. The Man that fell among Thieves, was left by the
Priest, and the Levite, as they found him; but Christ, by his grace, had
compassion on him. What men, and means cannot do, Christ, by his grace can do,
without men, and means. What men, and Angels, cannot do, Christ, by his grace,
can do. That grace which brings Salvation, teaches also to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, that we may walk soberly, and righteously, and
godly, in this present world. T^^. 2.11, 12.
8. Grace, in Christ, is suitable grace. What so suitable for a sinner, as a
Savior? What so sovereign against sin, as grace? There Is no Physic more
suitable for the Body, then grace is for the Soul. Is not Bread suitable for
the hungry? Water for the thirsty? so is grace for the soul that is sick of
sin. If any man thirst, let him come unto me, Joh. 7.37.
and drink. If any man, if any one, so the Greek; Man, or Woman; let that man,
and that woman, come unto me, and drink Bread, and Water, are suitable for the
hungry, and thirsty. 9. Grace, in Christ, is seasonable grace. Every thing (we
say) is beautiful in its season; and the more seasonable any thing is, the more
beautiful it is. The season of a mercy, greatly accent the mercy. As the Death
of Christ was in season; While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us; and in
due time Christ dyed for the ungodly; So the grace (of) Christ, and (in)
Christ, is seasonable when the soul is under temptation, and under Affliction.
Is not that a lofty, and a lovely expression. For peace, I had great
bitterness, Isa. 38.17.
but thou in love to my soul have delivered it from the pit of corruption; for
thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. 10. Grace in Christ, is surpassing
grace. Sin, is an evil thing; Sin, is an evil; the evil of evils: There Is evil,
and nothing but evil in sin. Sin, is evil, but grace is good; sin is worse, but
grace is best. Sin, is a large Field* a large Territory, but grace is a larger.
Sin, is the largest Territory in the World, but grace. Man's Ephah, is full of
sin, but Gods Ephah is fuller of grace: Man's cup is full, but Gods cup is over-
full, and that for an Eternity. For as sin has reigned unto Death, Rom 5. (...).
so has grace reigned (through righteousness) unto eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Here is sin reigning unto death, but here is grace reigning
unto Eternal life. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is Eternal
life, Romans 6. (...)
through Jesus Christ our Lord. There Is sin enough in man, to damn man; there is
grace enough in Christ to save man: There Is sin enough in man, to damn man, and
that for an Eternity; there is grace enough in Christ, to save man, and that for
an Eternity.
3. How this grace is in Christ, that is sufficient for a Christian, under
temptation. Grace, is in Christ, two ways; Formally, and causally.

1. Formally. Grace, is in Christ, Formally.
as in the subject of it. Christ is the God of grace. In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. But what then? The word
was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, Jo. 1.1, 14
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

2. Causally. Grace, is in Christ, Causally.
as in the fountain of it. As Christ is the God of it. so he is the giver of
it, for he is (thee) head of the Church. Col. 1.13.
And he is thee head of the body the Church. Now, thus Christ is, in a manifold
respect.

1. Because Christ is above the Church, and rules it, as the Head guides the
body. Christ, is sovereign, as well as Savior, and Surety; He is therefore
called, King of Saints. Rev. 15.3.
2. Because Christ conveyeth Life into the Church, as the Head to the Members.
Christ gives life (to) the Church; Maintains life (in) the Church; yea,
Christ in the Churches life. Col. 3.4.
When he who is our life shall appear. 3. Because Christ provideth for the
Church, as the Head does for the Members. Christ, gives the Church Manna; yea,
Christ, does not only feed the Church, but is the Churches Food, and he is (at
once) Meat and Medicine. I am the bread of life. Jo. 9.48.
4. Because Christ Participates with the Church, in the same nature with it as
the Head does with the Members. For we have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
4. Why there is in Christ, for a Christian, a sufficiency of Grace, under
temptation.

In a threefold respect; God, Christ, and the Christian.

1. In respect of God; God. 2 Timothy 2.16.
because his foundation stands sure. The foundation of God stands sure,
having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his. God, knows those, all
those, that he has given unto Christ, and he has laid up in Christ, a
sufficiency of grace for these, that they may not miscarry for an Eternity.

2. In respect of Christ; because he is to lose none, that are given unto him.
Christ.
While Christ was in the World he kept his, and upon his going out of the
World, he engaged the Father to keep them. As God knows all that are given unto
Christ, so Christ is to keep all that are given unto him. Jo. 17.11.
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name, those that thou
have given me have I kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son of perdition,
that the Scripture may be fulfilled. Jo. 17.12.
But where did the Scripture speak this of Judas? Let his days be few, and let
another take his Office. Psa. 109.8.


3. In respect of the Christian. As there is a sufficiency of grace in Christ,
upon Gods account, and upon his own, Christian.
so upon the Christians.

1. In order to the strengthening of the Christian. There Is a fullness of grace
in Christ for Christians, that Gods power may be made known, yea, 2 Cor. 12.9,
10.
made perfect in man's weakness. This appears by the words after the Text; for
speaking of his grace as sufficient in the Text, he gives this reason, For my
power is made perfect in weakness; and when I am weak, then am I strong. When I
am weak in flesh, I am strong in Spirit; when I am weak in my self, I am strong
in my Savior. Christ can say, Paul, thou art weak. but I am strong; yea, I am
strength; The strength of Israel, that cannot lie. Now, there is a Sufficiency
of grace in Christ, that a Christian may be strengthened under all his troubles
and trials; under all his Temptations, and Tribulations.

2. In order to the smiling of the Christian. We use to say, a Christian life,
is like a Courtiers life; for, upon the favor, or disfavour of the Prince,
depends the Comfort, or discomfort of the Courtier. Thus, upon the smiles, or
frowns of Christ; depend the comfort, or discomfort of the Christian. A
Christian, is like the Marigold, concerning which they say, that it opens with
the shining, and shuts with the setting of the Sun. If the Sun of Righteousness
set in a Cloud, it is as Death to the Christian; but, if this Sun of
Righteousness break thorough a Cloud, it is as life to the Christian. Christ
will not always frown, lest the Spirit should fail before him, and the soul
which he have made. If ever a drooping, desponding, despairing soul be
comforted, Christ must be the Text, and the Preacher too. I, even I am he that
comfort thee. Now, there is a sufficiency of grace in Christ, in order to a
Christians comfort. Jo. 6.63.
The words that he speak, they are Spirit, and they are Life.

3. In order to the feeding of a Christian. There Is a sufficiency of grace in
Christ, that the Christian may feed upon the promiss; that when he has nothing
in his purse, he may find enough in the promiss; and when he has nothing in
his private hand, he may find enough in his public head. Feeding, upon the
promise, is believing in the promiss, for the promiss is a ground for Faith, as
the precept is a Rule for Obedience. Man, lives not by bread only; how then?
but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. Now, the promiss is
a full breast, Mat. 4.4
and God delights that Faith should draw it.

4. In order to the fraughting of the Christian. Christ, will lade the soul
with Experiences, and that in a double respect.

1 In respect of himself. Christ would have every Christian to have something
in hand, something in store, against a rainy day; against a winter day. Christ,
would have the Christian to lay up in store a good Foundation for the time to
come; and, to remember the days of Old. Agracious reflection of former
experiences, is a good relief to the soul under future Extremities. Oh, say the
soul. I was in the Depths at such a time, but Christ kept my head above water.
We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God which raises the dead; 2 Cor, 1.9.10.
who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust
that he will yet deliver us. The Apostle argues from former Experience (...)
future Deliverance.

1. In respect of Others. There Is a sufficiency of grace in Christ, that a
Christian may not (only) have a word for himself, but (also) a word for others.
Who comfort us in all our tribulations; Why? That we may be able to comfort
them that are in any trouble; 2 Cor. 1.4.
but how? By the comforts wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.
Christian converse often prove (thorough the riches of free grace) Christian
comfort: Now, as there is a sufficiency of grace in Christ that we may be
comforted, For instance.
so that we may comfort one another; Ch, says one, I am tempted! tempted to
curse God, and dye! Oh, says the other, so have I been! but (then) that word
was given in, Bless, and curse not.

2. Oh, Romans 12.14.
says another. I am under various temptations! my temptations are many, and
mighty too! Oh, says the other, so have I been! but (then) this word was given
in, Blessed is the man that endures temptation. Iam. 1.12.


3. Oh, says another, but I am afflicted! afflicted, and ready to dye! Oh,
says the other, so have I been! but (then) that word was given in, In all
their affliction, he was afflicted. He was affected with their affliction, ^sa.
63.9.
and under their affliction, they had his affection.

4. Oh, says another, I am reproached! They lay to my charge things that I
know not. Oh, says the other, so have I been! but (then) that word was given
in. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil
against you (falsely) for my sake. Mat. 5.11..


5. Oh, says another, but I am persecuted! and persecution (in plain English)
is hunting; a hunting after the soul to take it! Oh, says the other, so have I
been! but (then) that word was given in, persecuted, but not forsaken. 2 Cor.
4.9.


6. Oh, says another, but I am hated! hated of Neighbors! hated of Relations!
Oh, says the other, so have I been! but (then) that word was given in. Marvel
not, my brethren, if the World hate you. 1 Jo. 3.13.


7. Oh, says another, but I am impoverished! I am reduced to a low Ebb! I
have very little Meal in my Barrel, and Oil in my Cruse! Oh, says the other,
so have I been! but (then) that word was given in. Mat. 6.36,
Take no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the
things of it self.

8. Oh, says another, I am unbelieving, and my Faith is at a low Ebb! Oh,
says the other, so have I been! but (then) that word was given in, 2 Ti. 2.13
Though we believe not yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.

9. Oh, says another, but I have high, and hard thoughts! brutish, and
blasphemous thoughts! wanton and Worldly thoughts! Oh, says the other, so have
I had! but (then) that word was given in, I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, Jer. 29.11.
says Jehova, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.
Or (according to the Margent) End, and Expectation.

10. Oh, says another, my grace is weak, and my Corruption strong! yea, my
corruption, is (sometimes) stronger then my grace! Oh, says the other, thus it
have been with me! but (then) this (good) Text, and (great) Truth, was given
in. My grace is sufficient for thee. Thus, a Christian converse, prove a
Christian comfort, and to this End (among others) is th^re a sufficiency of
grace in Christ, that we may be comforted and (consequentially) comfort one
another.

What Use may be made of this, But Fifthly.
that the grace which is in Christ, is sufficient for (...) Christian, under
temptation.

I have (only) one Use to make of this, Use
and that is by way of Counsel: If there be in Christ, for a Christian, a
sufficiency of grace under Temptation, suffer (then) the ^ords of Exhortation.

But (here) I would speak to two sorts of Persons; Those (out) of Christ; those
in) Christ.

1. To those out of Christ.
1. Art out of Christ? Tremble (then) for thou art without Grace. As, no Sun, no
Light; no Fountain, no Stream; no Fire, no Heat; So, no, Christ, no grace, and
no grace, no glory. Oh who that has grace in his private Hand, and in his
public Head, would (if he could) be in thy condition for a World! for a
thousand Worlds (if there were so many) for thou art Christ-less, and so
Grace-less. As the Apostle (upon the believing Hebrews) imposes this, so he
encourages (the believing Hebrews) unto this; Let us therefore come boldly to
the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, Heb. 4.16.
and find grace and help in the time of need. But, oh soul, what will thou do
when a Storm come? when a tempest come? what will thou do when sickness come?
when death (the King of Terrors) come, if thou have not Christ, thou have not
grace to help in that time of Need?

But what shall I do? whither shall I go? Quest.
If to be Christ-less, be so be Grace-less; if to be Grace-less, be to be
Glory-less, what shall I do? whither shall I go?

Go unto Jesus. If thou would have grace, go unto Jesus for it. Did Pharaoh
say, go unto Joseph? may not I (then) s^y unto thee, go unto Jesus? There is no
grace, out of a Christ. Solu. Genesis 41.55. Jo. 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth, came by Jesus Christ. As
Christ's grace is sufficient for the supportation of a soul in himself, so for
the Salvation of a soul out of himself: As his grace is sufficient for the
Sustentation of a soul in himself, so for the Sanctification of a soul out of
himself: My grace is sufficient for thee.

Art in Christ! Triumph. (then) there is grace enough in Christ for thee,
Secondly to those in Christ.
under the greatest Trials and Troubles; under the greatest Tribulations and
Temptations. My grace is sufficient for thee. As if Christ had said; though
(thy) Barrel be empty, (mine) is not; though (thy) Cruse be empty (mine) is
not. My grace is sufficient for thee. Paul, there is matter enough in the
Ocean, though thou have but a little in thy Pitcher. Of his fullness have we all
received, and grace for grace.

Oh but though this Text be a truth, Jo. 1.16.
what is Text, and truth to me, unless mine? This Text, Objest.
and truth, is made to Christians, but I question whether I be a Christian.
There must be the Application of a Promise, as well as the Apprehension of a
Promise: Others may apply themselves to promises, but Christians [only] can
apply the promises to themselves. Oh, I question whether I be a Christian. Solu.


1. It Is possible for Christians, to question whether they be Christians, was
it not strange? and might it not have been ranked among the wonders of the
world, that John? John the Baptist? John the Forerunner of Jesus, should send
two of his Disciples to Christ, and ask, Art thou he that should come, Mat.
11.23. Lam. 3.18
or do we look for another? Is it not Strange, that the Church should say, My
strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord? And, is it not strange, that
the Church should also say, not only forsaken, but forgotten? though, doubting,
be sinning, yet there may be doubting, not [only] before, but [also] after
believing. O thou of little Faith [said Christ to Peter] Wherefore did thou
doubt? Isa. 49 14. Mat. 14.31.


2. A [true] Christian, is [truely] in Christ. As a Christian is (from) Christ,
so (in) Christ; that is Actually in Christ; he is one with Christ: As the
Branch is one with the Vine, so is the Christian one with Christ. As there is a
time when the soul is out of Christ; Ephesians. 2.12.
At that time ye were without Christ; So, there is a time when the soul is in
Christ: But now in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2, 13.


3. Art a Disciple of Christ? then thou art a Christian. The Disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch. Acts 1^.26


But how shall I know that I am a Disciple of Christ? Quest.
It Is true, if there be any Christians in the World, they are the Disciples of
Christ; but how shall I know that I am a Disciple of Christ?

1. A Disciple of Christ, is under the teaching of Christ. Sol.
As none teaches like unto Christ; he is the Paragon, and Prince of Prophets;
so those that are Christ's, are under the teaching of Christ. Ephesians. 4.21.
But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have heard him, and have
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. 2. A Disciple of Christ, is under
the leading of Christ. As taught by him, and his Spirit. Rom 8.14.
so led by him, and his Spirit. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God. 3. The Disciples of Christ are believing ones. It Is said
upon Christ's Miracle in Cana of Galilee, Jo. 2.11.
that his Disciples believed on him. 4. The Disciples of Christ are Observing
ones. Mat. 26.19.
The Disciples did as Jesus appointed them, and made ready the Passover. Not
only (what) but (as). 5. The Disciples of Christ are Persevering ones. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. Jo. 8.31.
6. The Disciples of Christ are Faithful ones. We have forsaken all, Mat. 19.27.
and followed thee, what shall we have therefore? 7. The Disciples of Christ
are Fruitful ones. Herein is my father glorified that ye bring forth much
fruit, Io. 15.8.
so shall ye be my Disciples. That is, so shall ye manifest your selves to be
my Disciples. 8. The Disciples of Christ are Lovers of Christ. It Is said of
that John (who appears an Evangelist in his Gospel; an Apostle in his Epistles;
and a Prophet in his book of the Revelations) that he was the Disciple which
leaned on Christ's breast. As looking, Io. 21.20.
so leaning, demonstrate loving. 9. The Disciples of Christ are Lovers of those
that are Christ's. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, Io.
13.35.
if ye have love one to another.
But, as I did begin, so I must end. Art in Christ? Art a Christian? Art a
Disciple of Christ? Art taught by Christ, and led by Christ? do believe in
Christ, and obey Christ? Do persevere in the way, and worship of Christ? Art
faithful (to) Christ? and fruitful (before) Christ? art a L ver of Christ, and
of those that are Christ's? then draw water out of this Well; then manifest a
holy, and a Heavenly Triumph, for there is a Sufficiency of grace in Christ for
thee, under all thy troubles, and Trials; under all thy Temptations, and
Tribulations

And he said unto me, My Grace is Sufficient for thee.

PSALM. 84.11. Jehovah God is Sun, and a shield.
Jehovah, will give grace, and Glory.

SIN. the Folly of Sinners.
Prove. 14.9. Part thereof. Fools make a Mock at Sin.
That Solomon [Israels Sage) was the Author of this Book in general, is
generally acknowledged; but, so, as David of the Psalms; for, as all the
Psalms were not made by David, so all those Proverbs were not made by Solomon;
but, as the Psalms are called David's, so the Proverbs are called Solomon's:
Either (1) because he was the maker of a good, and great part of them. Or [2]
because he was the Collector, and Approver of the rest.

Now, as the Author of this Book of the Proverbs is easily known by his Name
Solomon; the Son of David; King of Israel; so the Argument of this Book, is as
easily known by the Inscription it bears, the Proverbs.

A Proverb, and a Parable, differ more in sound, then in sense; they are very
near Affinity. They are the Speeches of Wisdom: Prove. 1.1.6.
They are the Extracts, and Spirits of Wisdom. These Proverbs, are called
Aenigmata; dark sentences. So that a Proverb, properly signify a Parable, and
a Parable properly signify a Proverb. Proverbs, as well as Psalms, are like
Islands, that have [little] if [any] Neighborhood one with another, which leads
me to the words of the Text; Fools make a mock at sin.

This Text, is an entire proposition of it self; wherein you have 1. The
Person. 2. A Description of these Persons. 1. A Description of them by their
Folly, Fools. 2. A Description of their Folly. They make a mock at sin.

Fools make a mock at sin.

The meditation is made to my hand, and it is of the Spirits making; now, as who
ought, so who dares [but a daring sinner] go about to mend, what the Spirit
have made, so [then] the meditation shall be word for word, Meditation.
with the words of the Text. That, Fools make a mock at sin.

Now, if a Methodical discourse, may not be blasted, but blessed, three things
by way of method; Method,
the explaining of it; the confirming of it; the applying of it.

1. The Explaining of it. Now (here) I shall enquire after three things.

1. What this Sin is, that Fools make a mock at. 2. What this Mocking is, that
Fools make at Sin. 3. What these Fools are, that make a mock at Sin.
1. What this Sin is that Fools make a mock at. Description.


Sin (in the Nature and Notion of it) is a transgression of the Law. Sin,
supposes a law in being, for where there is no law, there is no transgression.
But, where there is sin, To. 4: 15. (...).
there is a law, and a transgression of that Law. Whosoever commits sin
transgresses the Law, for sin is a transgression of the Law; Or (according to
the Greek text) And Sin is Lawlesness: Yea, Sin is not only the transgression
of a Law, but of a good Law. To. 7.12.
For the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good. Yea, the
transgression, Ps. 89.30, 31.
not (only) of a good Law, but (also) of Gods Law. If his children forsake (my)
Laws and walk not in (my) judgments: If they break (my) Statutes, and keep not
(my) Commandments. So that Sin is the transgression of a Law, of a good Law, of
Gods Law. Now the Law forbids not (only) the doing of evil, (whether in
thought, word or deed,) but (also) commands the doing of good. So that to omit
the good commanded as well as commit the evil forbidden, is Sin. As it is true,
against the Fruits of the spirit there is no Law; no Law of Condemnation; It is
as true, Gal. 5.23. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
against the works of the flesh there is Law, for they are all against the Law.
Whatever (then) does transgress the Law of God (in whole, or in part) for, (
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, Jam. 2.10.
he is guilty of all) Is (therefore) a sin, and [therein] a sin, whether it
brake an Affirmative, or a negative precept; that is, whether it be the
Omission of Good, or Commission of Evil.

2. What this mocking is, that Fools make at sin. To this Negatively, and
Positively.

1. To mock, Negativly
is to beguile. Thou have mocked me these three times, said Delilah to Sampson
( Judge. 16.15.) But thus you are not to unstand it here.

2. To mock is to deride. Now, this Derision is either inward, or outward.

1. Inward. Then persons are said to mock, when (from their hearts) they deride
God in his Goodness, Word and Ordinances, with hypocritical mockers in feasts.
Psa. 35.16:
2. Outward. Now this is by Gesture, and by Actions.
1. By Gesture. All that see me, laugh me to scorn, Psa. 22.7.
they open the lip, they shake the head. But thus you are not to understand it
here. 2. By Actions. Others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea,
Heb. 11.3^
moreover of bonds and imprisonments. But thus you are not to understand it
here.
2. Positivel^
2. To mock, is to speak lightly and sparingly of sin. A person then mocks at
sin, when he speaks of it, as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one? Thus, the
wicked Papists, Genesis 19.20.
wickedly distinguish, between sins Venial, and Mortal; a distinction not
legible in the holy Scriptures of truth. Paul (who was of the highest stature
in grace, though not in Nature) speak expressly. The wages of sin is Death. Not
only the wages of (this) sin, To. 6.23
and (that) sin, but of (any) sin, is death; the second death, Eternal death.
When persons speak of sin, as many do of Ceremonies, are not these little ones?
to wear this, and that, to read, and bow, etc. are not these little ones? so,
to speak this, and do that; are not these little things? To speak thus, is to
make a mock at sin, and thus you are to understand it in the Text, Fools make a
mock at sin; that is, they speak lightly, and sparingly of it.

3. Who these Fools are, 1. Negatively.
that make a mock at sin. To this Negatively, and positively. But to this
Generally, and then particularly.

1. Generally. A Fool (liberally) is an Idiot; one destitute of wit; a Person
of little or no Capacity; or Discretion. Thus the wise and the foolish, are
opposed. Eccl. 2.1.
Who knows whether he shall be a wise man, or a fool?

1. By Fools sometimes understand those that acknowledge themselves to be so. 2
Particu^^^ly. 1. Cor. 3.18.
Let not a man deceive himself, if any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool that he may be wise. That is, (says Musculus) let
him be a Believer. Christians (formerly) were called Credentes; believing ones;
as if their Faith had been their Folly, when it is the greatest Folly to be
without Faith. But thus you are not to understand it here. 2. By Fools,
sometimes understanding those that are accounted by others so. ^ Cor. 4.^0.
We are fools for Christ's sake. Accounted so by the World; thus not to be
understood here. 3. By Fools, sometimes understand those that have only Oil
in their Lamps. Five of them were wise, Mat. 25.2.
and five were foolish. The wise were those that had Oil in their Vessels, as
well as in their Lamps; the foolish were those, that had Oil in their Lamps,
but not in their Vessels; but thus you are not to understand it here. Fools
make a mock at sin. 4. By Fools, sometimes understand those, that though they
have knowledge, and faith, yet they have much Ignorance, and unbeleif,
remaining in them. Luke 24.^5.
Oh fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! But
thus you are not to understand it in the Text, Fools make a mock at sin. 5. By
fools, sometimes understand worldly men. Thou fool, Lu. 12.20.
this night shall thy soul be required of thee. But thus you are not to
understand it in the Text.
2. Positivly.
2. By fools, sometimes understand wicked men. The fool has said in his heart
there is no God. Thus, you are to understand it in the Text. Fools make a mock
at sin. Psa. 14.1.
Wicked men, that do not only work wickedness, but make wickedness their work,
are the fools that make a mock at sin. They that play with sin, as the Fish
with the bait, and sport with the Devil, they are the fools that make a mock at
Sin. Fools make a mock at Sin. But, if we look no farther then the Text and
Context, it is legible, for fools are opposed to the righteous: Fools make a
mock at sin, but with the righteous there is favor. These righteous ones, are
those that are spiritually and actually so, that are concerned in an imputed
and imparted righteousness.

2. The confirming of it. Now (here) I shall enquire after two things; Whether
fools make a mock at sin, and why fools make a mock at sin.

1. Whether fools make a mock at sin. If to make a mock at sin, be to think, or
speak lightly, or spearingly of it; if to make a Mock at sin, be to sport with
it (as undoubtedly) it is; then, that (fools) thus make a mock at sin, is
evident. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, but a man of understanding
has wisdom. Pro. 10.23
As a mad man that casts Firebrarnds Arrows, Pro. 26.18 19
and Death, so is the man that deceives his Neighbor, and says, am not I in
sport? To make a mock at sin, is to sport with sin; And to sport with sin, is
to take pleasure, and delight in sin. Thus Israel (according to the flesh)
sported themselves with their Whorish Idolatries; Genesis 3.4.
and this their mocking at sin, lay near the heart of God. Against whom do you
sport your selves? Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue?
are ye not Children of Transgression? Isa. 57.4.
a seed of falsehood? Did not this lay near the heart of God?

2. Why Fools make a mock at sin?

1. Because it is possible for these so to do. Look upon Adam, (which was the
first man) and there was in him (under the first Creation) an innate
potentialit), or power unto sinning. It Is true, sin never had a being from God;
though God Created Adam, he did not Create sin in him; but Adam had (in
himself) a power to sin, which is the Original of sin. Had there not been a
possibility for man to sin, and a potentiality in man unto sinning, in vain had
that Threatening been, The day thou eatest thereof, dying, thou shall dye. Genesis
2.1
That is, no sooner shall thou begin to live, but thou shall begin to dye, and
continue dying, 'till thou be swallowed up of death.

This Threatening (dying thou shall dye) God gave in Charge, and against this
threatening the Serpent laid his siege, Ye shall not dying, dye. Now (certainly)
had there not been a possibility, and potentiality in man to sin, God had not
given this in Charge; for he cannot (without great blasphemy) be charged with
vanity. Besides, the Effect, which the siege, and Temptation (from the Serpent,
Gen, 3.12.
and the woman had) upon Adam, sufficiently proves, that there was a
possibility for man to sin. The woman, whom thou gave to be with me, she gave
me of the Tree, and I did eat.

2. Because it is connatural unto these to do so. As it was possible for an
unfallen man to sin, so it is connatural unto fallen man to sin. Look upon man
in his Conception: I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive
me. Psa. 51.5.
As there is the Original of sin, so there is Original sin. Look upon man in
his natural Constitution. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon
the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil; Jen. 6.5
not only evil, but (only) evil, and that continually. As there is the
Original of sin, and Original sin. so there is actual sin. Look upon men in
their Naturals, and they are Enemies to God; Col. 1.21.
to good; to goodness. And you who were sometimes alienated, and enemies in
your mind by wicked works; Or (enemies (by) your mind (in) wicked works) Yet
now has he reconciled. The Apostle has yet a higher strain. Because the
carnal mind, (or the minding of the flesh) is Enmity against God, It Is (...).
nor (...).
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. It Is Enmity,
not an Enemy; for an Enemy may be reconciled, but Enmity is irreconcilable.

3. The Applying of it. I shall make (only) one use of this, Vsus.
and that is by way of Counsel: If fools make a mock at sin, suffer (then) the
words of Exhortation.

But (here) I would speak to two sorts of Persons; the spiritually wise, and
sinfully foolish.

1. To the wise.
1. To those that are spiritually wise.

1. Do fools make a mock at sin? Mourn (then) over this sinful mocking. Did the
suffering of a place lay so near Nihemiah's heart, and shall not the sinning of
a place, or people, lay near our hearts? The wall of Jerusalem is broken down,
and the Gates thereof are burnt with fire; Neh. 1.3, 4.
and when I heard these things I wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted,
and prayed before the God of Heaven. A Jesting with sin makes a man a fool in
earnest. Lot had an express from the Angels, to go out of Sodom, and all that
he had; but Lot, Ge. 19.12
upon his intimation of the destruction of that vicious City, and his
Invitation out of that City, Ge 19 14
seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law. Let but one man reprove
another for his cursing and swearing, for his dancing and drinking, for his
roaring and whoring, he is as one that mocketh, and is mocked for his Reproof;
Now, shall not this be laid to heart, and mourned over? Oh, how near did the
violating and vitiating of the Law of God, lay the heart of the Psalmist!
Rivers of tears run down mine eyes; but what is the matter? Ps. 119.136.
The Psalmist is ready (as it were) to weep out his eyes, and drown himself in
his own tears; but what is the matter? because they keep not thy Law. They that
keep not the Law, break the Law, and they that break the Law, keep not the Law,
and this lay near the Psalmists heart. May we not join issue with him, and make
it the matter of our request as he did? Oh that mine head were full of water,
and mine eyes a fountain of tears! Why? because Fools make a mock at sin. Let
this (then) be for a Lamentation.

2. Do Fools make a mock at sin? Bless God (then) for the difference Grace has
made. There Is a vast difference, between making a mock at sin, and a mourning
for sin; between a boasting of sin, and a being burdened for si; between a
glorying in sin, and a being grieved for sin. Now, soul, do thou gr eve (for)
sin, when, and while others glory (in) sin? Art thou burdened (for) sin, when
and while others boast (of) sin? Do thou mourn (for) sin, when, and while
others make a mock (at) sin? Oh bless God (then) for the difference that the
God of race, and the grace of Go^, has made between thee, and others! Oh let
that word ring in thine ears, and b^ ready always to avouch the truth of it!
we makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou, 1 Cor. 4.7.
that thou did not receive?

3. Do Fools make a mock at sin? Stand (then) in awe, and sin not. Believe it,
a Christi^^ cannot sin at a cheap rate; sin cost the Saint dear. Oh the pains
of Body, and pangs of soul, that sin cost! Oh! it is far better suffering then
sinning, for a man may suffer and not sin (In all this Job sinned not;) but a
man cannot sin, but he must suffer; And Peter went out, and wept bitterly, Who
would (that is in his wits, and have not given to his reason a bill of divorce)
disoblige a Friend? and provoke a Foe? As God (therefore) is the best Friend,
and should not be disobliged, so he is the worst Foe, and should not be
provoked. Stand in awe, and sin not. Psalm.
Oh, it is better to suffer, then to sin; better to suffer a thousand times,
then to sin once; and better to suffer a thousand Deaths (if a man could suffer
so many) then to sin, and suffer for sin, the second death. Oh soul get into a
Closet (while fools make a mock at sin) and there cry, Oh Lord, let me be sick,
rather then sinning! Oh, Lord, let me be sighing, rather then any thing! Oh let
me rather dye [to] sin, then live, and sin! Oh let me [rather] dye, that I
might not sin, then live, and sin!

1. Do make a mock at sin? Tremble foul, for God is not mocked. 2. To the
foolish.
Thou may deceive thy self, and deceive others, but thou can not deceive
God. It is impossible to impose deceit upon God. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. He that sows to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the
Spirit; Gal. 6.7, 8.
shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting. Thou may make a mock at sin, and
make a mock at the grace of others, as Ishmael did at the grace of Isaac, but
God cannot be mocked. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she
did bear unto Abraham, mocking.

2. Do make a mock at sin? Tremble, soul, for as thou art mocking in a time
of prosperity, so God will be mocking in a time of adversity. Because I have
called, ^v. 1.2^ ^ 26, 27.
and ye refused; I have stretched ou^ my hands, and no man regarded; but ye
have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: But what then?
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, when
your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind. To
make a mock at sin, is to sport with sin; To this the Apostle speaks, Sporting
themselves with their own deceivings. And to sport with sin, 1.2.13.
is to take pleasure and delight in sin. As it is the Spirit of Godliness to
delight in God, so it is the spirit of sinfulness to delight in sin. Sin is the
element of a sinner. That they all might be damned which believed not the
truth, ^hes. 2.
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. The Fish is not more in its element, when
in the water, then a sinner is in his element, when he is sinning; sinning with
a high hand; sining with both hands; when he is adding Drunkenness to Thirst,
adding sin to sin. To mock at sin, is to sport with sin; to sport with sin, is
to take pleasure in sin. There are many (and is it not pity there should be
any?) that do not (only) take pleasure in their own sinning, but (also) in the
sinning of others; but against these the Apostle thunders; Who knowing the
Judgment of God, Romans ^.32
(that they which commit such things, are worthy of Death) not only do the
same, but have pleasure in them that do them. Now, these are the Persons that
are mockers at sin, and these (seem to me) to be under a prodigious
preparation, and qualification, for destruction, and damnation.

3. Do make a mock at sin? Go (then) and sin no more; may not I say to thee,
as Christ did to the Adultress? Go and sin no more. May not I (also) say to
thee, as Christ did to the impotent man? Sin no more, least a worse thing come
unto thee. Io. 8.1^ Io. 5.14.
Now, that thou may not make any more a mock at sin, take these following
Considerations.

1. There Is but one thing in all the World, Considerations.
that is opposite to the well-being of man, and that is sin. Sin, is against the
well-being of man in this life. It Is true, man was born to a great estate, but
by Sin (which was, and is Treason against God) he forfeited all; Paradise was
Man's Inheritance, but God (for his sin) dispossessed him of it. Man was
Emperor of Eden, but God (for his Sin) banished him his native Country. We
brought nothing into this world, 1 Timothy 6.7.
and it is certain we can carry nothing out. Man, in this world is but a Tenant
at will, and seeing he deserves nothing he should be content (with) and
thankful (for) any thing; Now, will thou make a wo^k at sin?

2. There Is but one thing in all the world that is against the Being of man, and
that is sin: As sin would not suffer a man to be well in the world, so not
suffer a man to be long in the world. Sin is not (only) against the well-being,
but (also) against the very being of man. Sin would not (only) that man should
not be well, but (also) that he should not at all be. Oh, how many does Sin
strangle in the Womb! Oh, how many Abortives and Miscarriages does Sin make!
Oh, how many does Sin send from the Cradle to the Grave, that have run their
race before they begin to go! Man no sooner begins to live, but he begins to
die. Sin has reduced man's age to a very little pittance; from almost a
thousand years, to a few years, yea, to a few days. He that is born to day, is
not sure to live a day. He that is born to day, is old enough to die. For, what
is our life? it is even as a vapor, which for a little time appears, Jam. 4.1
and then vanishes away. Now, will thou make a mock at sin?

3. There Is but ^^e thing in all the world, that is a Reproach to Persons, and
that is Sin. Sin lays a person under infamy. Sin is such a spot and stain, as
nothing but blood will wash out. It Is not (properly) a reproach for a person to
be poor; Poverty is not (properly) a reproach; He that mocketh the poor, Pro.
14.3
reproacheth his Makes: The poor and the rich, the Lord is the Maker of them
all. But now, sin is a reproach to persons, a Reproach to Nations.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, or
(according to the Margent) Nations. Righteousness exalts a Nation* but sin is
a reproach to Nations. Now is sin thus, and will thou make a mock at it?

4. There Is but one thing in all the world that is a ruin to persons and that ^
Sin. Ahaz would sacrifice to the gods of the King of Syri^, that they might
help him, but they were the ruin of him and of all Israel. Sin is not only the
reproach of a person, but the ruin of a person, not only the reproach of a
Nation, but the ruin of a Nation. Repent ye and turn from all your
transgressions, ^zek. 18.^0.
so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Now, Soul, is sin thus, and will thou
make a mock at it?

5. There Is but one thing in all the world contrary to the Image of God, and
that is sin. Grace and Holiness, stamped upon the soul, is the Image of God upon
the soul. God made Man in his own likeness, that is, in righteousness and
holiness, for so the Apostle wordeth it, And put on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness, ^ph. 4.24.
and holiness of truth. Now, Sin is as contrary to holiness, as deformity to
beauty, as darkness to light, as death to life, as Hell to Heaven. Sin is the
Devils Image, Grace is Gods Image. Sinners are like Satan. ^ Jo. 3.8.
He that commits sin, is of the Devil. He is not (only) a servant, but a
child of the devil. ^ohn 8, 44
Ye are of your Father the devil, said a sinless Jesus to the sinful Jews.
Never was a child more like a father, then a sinner is like Satan. Now, will thou make any longer a mock at sin?

6. There Is but one thing in all the world that is opposite to the people of God,
and that 's Sin. It Is Sin, and Sin only that wars against the seed of God, and
of Grace in them. (...) 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit. It Is true, Sin and Satan cannot hate
thee, so much as God loves thee; nor do thee so much hurt as God can do thee
good; but Sin and Satan too will do their worst. Dearly beloved, 2 Pet. 2.1
I beseech you as Pilgrims and Strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts; Why?
which war against the soul. Now, will thou (any longer) make a mock at sin?

7. There Is but one thing in all the world, that is contrary to the Nature of
God, and that is Sin. God is holy, his Name is holy, his Nature is Holiness. As
his Name is, so is He; Holy, all holy; yea, he is so, and cannot but be so. God
is (without compare) for holiness; Who is like unto thee, Jehovah, among the
Gods? Ex. 15.11.
who is like unto thee glorious in holiness, fearful in Praises, doing wonders?
Now, as God is holy, all holy, altogether holy, always holy; so sin is sinful,
all sinful, altogether sinful, always sinful. In me, (that is, To. 7.18.
in my flesh, in my corrupt nature) dwells no good thing. As, in God* there
is no evil, so in sin there is no good. As God is the chiefest of Goods, so sin
is the chiefest of evils. As no good can be compared with God for goodness, so
no evil can be compared with sin for evil; Now, will thou (any [longer] make a
mock at sin?

8. There Is but one thing in all the world, that is an enemy to the Trinity, and
that is sin. As God is the greatest enemy to sin, so sin is the greatest enemy
to God. Sin, is against the very essence and existence of God. Sin is an enemy
to the Father, Son, Spirit.

1. Sin, that is an enemy to the Father. They are Sinners that say, Depart from
us, for we desire not the knowl^dge of thy ways. Job 21.14
2. Sin, that is an enemy to the Son. They were Sinners that said, Crucify him,
crucify him. Io. 19.6.
3. Sin, that is an enemy to the Spirit. They are Sinners that resist the holy
Spirit; As your Fathers did, Acts 7.51.
so do ye. Thus, Sin is an enemy to Father, Sin, Spirit. Though Sin be against
(all) good, yet not so much against any good as against God, and that because
he is the chiefest good; Now, will thou, any longer, make a mock at Sin? But,
as I did begin, so I must end: Oh soul! hug no longer this Monster; this
Monster of Monsters; Play no longer with this bait: Oh do not any longer play
with Hell, and sport with the Devil! Oh flee from Sin, as from a most
Pestilential plague! Oh let this Text and Truth ring in thine ears,
whenever, and whithersoever thou go! Fools make a mock at Sin.
Fools make a mock at Sin, but with the Righteous there is favor.

(...), Romans 6.23.
FINIS.
Books Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock at the Sign of the Three
Bibles in Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the
Gospel at Margarets New- Fish-street.
1. Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices; Or,

Salve for Believers and unbelievers sores; being a Companion for those that
are in Christ, or out of Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a
pretense of living above them; that are growing in spirituals, or decaying;
that are tempted, or deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or
want it; on 2 Cor. 2.11.

2. Heaven on Earth: Or,

A serious discourse touching a well-g^ounded Assurance of Man's everlasting
happiness and blessedness; discovering the nature of Assurance, the possibility
of attaining it, the causes, Springs, and Degrees of it, with the resolution of
several weighty Questions on Romans chapter 8. v. 32, 33, 34.

3. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or, Meat for strong men, and milk for
babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons, from Ephesians. 3.8. Preached on his
Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill: 4. His Apples of Gold for Young Men and
Women. And

A Crown of glory for Old Men and Women: Or the happiness of being good
betimes, and the Honor of being an Old Disciple, clearly and fully discovered,
and closely and faithfully applied.

With the young man's objections answered, and the old man's Doubts resolved.

5. A String of Pearls: Or,

The best things reserved till last, delivered in a Sermon preached in London,
June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of (that triumphant Saint) Mrs. Mary Blake, late
Wife to his worthy friend Mr. Nicholas Blake Merchant.

6. The Mute Christian, with sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: Or,

A Christian with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under the greatest
afflictions, the sharpest and forest trials and troubles, the saddest and
darkest Providence and changes, with Answers to diverse Questions and
Objections that are of great importance; all tending to win and work souls to
be still quiet, calm and silent, under all changes that have, or that may pass
upon them in this world, etc. lately printed, and dedicated to all afflicted,
distressed, dissatisfied, disquieted and discomposed Christians throughout the
World.

7. An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day.

Wherein is showed the transcendent Excellency of a Believers Portion; on Lam.
3.24.

8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity; Or,

Holiness the only way to Happiness; discovered in 48 Sermons on Heb. 12, 14.

9. The Privy Key of Heaven; Or,

A Discourse of Closet-Prayer, Twenty Arguments for it, with the Resolutions of
several considerable Questions. etc.

10. A Heavenly Cordial for all that have had, or escaped the Plague, etc. 11.
A Cabinet of Precious Jewels, or a Box of Precious Ointments. 12. Londons
Lamentations.
Mr. Calamy's Godly Man's Ark. Christ, Communion with his Church Militant, by
Nicholas Lo^kver. Sin the Plague of Plagues, by Ralph Venning. The Accurate
Accomptant, or London Merchan^ ^eing Instructions for keeping Merchant
Accounts, by ^homas Brown Accountant. Short-writing, the most Easy, Exact,
Lineal, and ^peedy Method that has ever yet been obtained, by Thomas Metcalf.
Also a Book, called a Schoolmaster to it, explaining the Rules thereof. A Copy
Book of the newest and most useful Hands Bridges Remains, being Eight Choice
Sermon's, by that Reverend Divine Mr. William Bridges, heretofore Minister at
Yarmouth. A Discourse of Christ's coming, by Theophilus Gale. King James his
Counterblast to Tobacco. A Brief De^cription of New York. The Shepherds Legacy,
or forty years Experience of the Weather. Vennin^'s Remains, or Christ School,
consisting of four Classis of Christians. viz. Babes, Children, Young Men and
Fathers; being the substance of many Sermons by Ralph Venning: Prepared for the
Press by him self before his Death. A Disswasive from Conformity to the World;
as also Gods severity against Impenitent Sinners; with a Farewell Sermon; by
Henry Stubs Minister of the Gospel. Baxters poor man's Family-Book. Luthers 84
special and Choice Sermons. Comae Berenices, or the Hairy Comet. The Young man's
Conflict with and Victory ove^ Devil by Faith or a True and Perfect Relation of
the Experiences of Thom. Powel, begun in the fifteenth an^ Continned till the
seventeenth Year of his Age Gospel-Love, heart-prurity, atd the Flouishing o^
Righteous, being the Last Sermons of the Late Reverend, Mr Joseph Caryl.
All sold by John Hancock as aforesaid.

FINIS.

