I Have read over the first part of this History, contained in three Books, an
impartial Truth; and judge it fit for public view by the printing.

JO. LANGLEY.
May 7. 1647.
THE HISTORY OF THE PARLIAMENT Of England: Which began November the third,
M.DC.XL. With a short and necessary view of some precedent years.

Written by THOMAS MAY Esquire, Secretary for the Parliament.

Published by Authority.

Tempora mutantur.
Mutantur Homines.
Veritas eadem manet.
Imprinted at London by Moses Bell, for George Thomason, at the Sign of the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church Yard, M.DC.XL.VII.

The Preface.
THe use of History, and the just Rules for composure of it, have been so well
and fully described heretofore by judicious Writers, that it were lost labor,
and a needless extention of the present work, to insist by way of
Introduction, upon either of them. I could rather wish my abilities were such,
as that the Reader, to whose judgment it is left, might find those Rules
observed in the Narration it self, then told him in the Preface by a vain
Anticipation.

I will only profess to follow that one Rule, Truth, to which all the rest
(like the rest of Moral Virtues to that of Justice) may be reduced, against
which there are many ways, besides plain falsehood, whereby a Writer may
offend. Some Historians, who seem to abhor direct falsehood, have
notwithstanding dressed Truth in such improper Vestments, as if they brought
her forth to act the same part that falsehood would; and taught her by
Rhetorical disguises, partial concealements, and invective expressions,
instead of informing, to seduce a Reader, and carry the judgment of Posterity
after that Byas which themselves have made. It was the opinion of a learned
Bishop of England, not long ago deceased, that Cardinal Baronius his Annals
did more wound the Protestant Cause, then the Controversies of Bellarmine: And
it may well be true. For against the unexpected stroke of partial History the
ward is not so ready, as against that Polemike writing, where Hostility is
professed with open face.

This fault I have endeavored to avoid: But it is my misfortune to undertake
such a subject, in which to avoid partiality, is not very easy: But to escape
the suspicion or censure of it, is almost impossible for the cleerest integrity
that ever wrote. Others, I suppose, will handle this Theme; and because that
none, perchance, may perfectly please, I shall, in the behalf of all, entreat
a Reader, that in his censure he would deal with the Writings of men, as with
mankind it self, to call that the best, which is least bad.

The Subject of this work is a Civil War, a War indeed as much more then
Civil, and as full of miracle, both in the causes and effects of it, as was
ever observed in any Age; a War as cruel as unnatural; that has produced as
much rage of Swords, as much bitterness of Pens, both public and private, as
was ever known; and divided the understandings of men, as well as their
affections, in so high a degree, that scarce could any virtue gain due
applause, any reason give satisfaction, or any Relation obtain credit, unless
amongst men of the same side. It were therefore a presumptuous madness, to
think that this poor and weak Discourse, which can deserve no applause from
either side, should obtain from both so much as pardon; or that they should
here meet in censure, which in nothing else have concurred.

I cannot therefore be so stupid, as not at all to be sensible of the task
imposed on me, or the great envy which attends it; which other men who have
written Histories, upon far less occasion have discoursed of at large in
their Prefaces. And Tacitus himself, complaining of those ill times which were
the unhappy subject of his Annals, though he wrote not in the time of the same
Princes, under whom those things were acted; yet because the Families of many
men, who had then been ignominious, were yet in being, could not but discourse
how much happier those Writers were, who had taken more ancient and prosperous
times for their Argument; such as he there expresses, in which the great and
glorious actions of the old Romans, their honorable Achievements, and
exemplary Virtues are recorded.

And I could have wished more then my life (being my self inconsiderable) that
for the Public sake, my Theme could rather have been the prosperity of these
Nations, the Honor and happiness of this King, and such a blessed Condition
of both, as might have reached all the ends, for which Government was first
ordained in the world: Then the description of Shipwracks, Ruins, and
Desolations. Yet these things truly recorded and observed, may be of good Use,
and benefit Posterity in diverse kinds. For though the present Actions, or
rather sufferings of these (once happy) Nations, are of so high a mark and
consideration, as might, perchance, throw themselves into the knowledge of
Posterity by Tradition, and the weight of their own Fame: Yet it may much
conduce to the benefit of that knowledge, to have the true causes, original,
and growth of them represented by an honnest Pen.

For the truth of this plain and naked Discourse, which is here presented to
the public view, containing a brief Narration of those Distractions which
have fallen amongst us, during the sitting of this present Parliament; as also
some Passages, and visible Actions of the former Government (whether probably
conducing to these present calamities or not, of which let the Reader judge) I
appeal only to the memory of any English man, whose years have been enough to
make him know the Actions that were done; and whose conversation has been
enough public, to let him hear the Common Voice, and Discourses of People
upon those Actions, to his memory I say, do I appeal, whether such Actions
were not done, and such Judgments made upon them, as are here related. In
which perchance some Readers may be put in mind of their own thoughts
heretofore; which thoughts have since, like Nebuchadnezzars dream, departed
from them. An English Gentleman, who went to travel when this Parliament was
called, and returned when these differences were grown among us, hearing what
Discourses were daily made, affirmed, That the Parliament of England (in his
opinion) was more mis-understood in England then at Rome; And that there was
greater need to remember our own Countrymen, then to inform strangers of what
was past; So much (said he) have they seemed to forget the things themselves,
and their own Nations concerning them.

But where War continues, people are enforced to make their residence in
several Quarters, and therefore several, according to the places where they
converse, must their information be concerning the condition and state of
things. From whence arises not only a variety, but a great discrepancy for the
most part in the Writings of those who record the passages of such times. And
therefore it has seldom happened, but that in such times of calamity and
War, Historians have much dissented from each other. Franciscus Haraeus
compiled Annals of the bloody and fierce Wars in the Netherlands, when some
of those Provinces fell from the obedience of Philip the second, King of
Spain: Which business he relates in such a way, as must in probability lead a
Reader to believe that the King and his Officers were altogether innocent, and
the people of those Countries the only causers of their own Calamity. Meteranus
wrote the History of those very times; which who so reads, must needs make a
contrary censure concerning the occasion of that War. The like discrepancy
has been found in Historians of all ages and Nations, and therefore not to be
much wondered at, if it now happen.

But that which of all other is most likely to be differently related (because
informations will not agree in such a distance) is concerning the actions of
War and Soldiery; and in the time of this War it is a thing of extreme
difficulty (I might say of impossibility) for those of one Party to be truly
informed of all the Councels, or the very Performances and Actions of
Commanders and Soldiers on the other side. How much valor the English Nation
on both sides have been guilty of in this unnatural War, the World must
needs know in the general fame. But for particulars, how much Worth, Virtue,
and Courage, some particular Lords, Gentlemen, and others have showed, unless
both sides do write, will never perfectly be known. My residence has bin,
during these Wars, in the quarters, and under the protection of the Parliament;
and whatsoever is briefly related of the Soldiery, being toward the end of
this Book, is according to that light which I discerned there. For whatsoever I
have missed concerning the other Party, I can make no other Apology then such
as Meteranus (whom I named before) does in the Preface to his History, De
Belguis tumultibus. Whose words are thus: Quod plura de Reformatorum, and
patriae defensorum, quam de Partis adversaere. bus gestis exposuerim; mirum
haudquaquam est, quoniam plus Commercii, and familiaritatis mihi cum ipsis, and
major indagandi, opportunitas furt. Si Pars adversaidem tali probitate
praestiterit, and ediderit; Posteritas gesta omnia legere, and liquido
cognoscere magno cum fructu poterit. In like manner may I aver, that if in
this discourse more particulars are set down, concerning the actions of those
men who defended the Parliament, then of them that warred against it; it was
because my conversation gave me more light on that side; to whom, as I have
endeavored to give no more then what is due, so I have cast no blemishes on
the other; nor bestowed any more characters, then what the truth of Story must
require. If those that write on the other side will use the same candor, there
is no fear but that posterity may receive a full information concerning the
unhappy distractions of these Kingdoms.

This I must add, that to inform the world of the right nature, causes, and
growth of these Distractions, it will require that the Discourse begin from
precedent times; which I shall endeavor to deduce down to the present with as
much brevity, as the necessity of unfolding truth can possibly admit.

Neither is it needful to begin the Story from times of any great distance; or
to mention the Government of our most ancient Princes; but from that Prince
(fresh in the memory of some yet living) who first established the Reformed
Religion in this Kingdom, and according to that, (...) a new interest in the
State; which was most behoofefull and requisite for her Successors to follow,
and much conducing, besides the glory of Almighty God, to their own Honor,
Power, and Greatness.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
WHerein is a short mention of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and the beginning
of King Charles his Reign His two first Parliaments. Of the War with Spain and
France. The death of the Duke of Buckingham. And the third Parliament of King
Charles. 1
CHAP. II.
A brief Relation of some grievances of the Kingdom. The various opinions of
men concerning the present Government. The condition of the Court and Clergy of
England. Some observations of a stranger, concerning the Religion of the
English people. 15
CHAP. III.
The condition of the Scottish State and Clergy, when the new Book of Lyturgy
was sent unto them; how it was received; with some effects which followed. The
Kings Proclamation sent by the Earl of Traquare; against which the Lords make
a Protestation. 27
CHAP. IV.
The Scots enter into a Covenant. The Marquess Hamilton is sent thither from
the King. A National Synod is granted to them, but dissolved within few days
by the Marquess, as Commissioner from the King. The King declares against the
Covenanters, and raises an Army to subdue them. 38
CHAP. V.
The (...) of the English People from this War with Scotland (...) King
advances to York with his Army. The prepa^^^^ (...) the Scottish Covenanters.
A Pacification is made, and (...) Armies disbanded. Another Preparation for
War with ^^^^land. A Parliament called to begin in England on the 13 of
(...). The Parliament of Scotland is broken off by command of (...) to the
Earl of Traquare. 46
CHAP. VI.
The Parliament begins in England, but is soon dissolved. The Clergy
continue their Convocation. The Scots enter into England. Some passages of the
War. A Parliament is called to begin on the third of November. A Truce between
the Armies for two Months. 58
CHAP. VII.
The beginning of the English Parliament. Grievances examined. Sufferers
relieved. Delinquents questioned. The Archbishop of Canterbury committed to the
Tower. The flight of Secretary WINDEBANKE, and of the Lord Keeper FINCH. 70
CHAP. VIII.
The Trial and death of the Earl of Strafford. Conspiracies detected during
the agitation of it. An Act for continuance of this present Parliament. With a
mention of that Grant of the Trienniall Parliament in February before. 87
CHAP. IX.
Allowance of money from the English Parliament to the Scots. The vast Charge
of disbanding the two Armies. The great Taxations for that purpose, and the
manner of Poll Money. The people take a Protestation. An Act for putting down
the High Commission Court, and Star Chamber; with other occurrences of that
time. The Queen Mother departs England. The King goes into Scotland. 103
BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
A Standing Committee during the Recesse of both Houses of Parliament. The
Rebellion of the Irish; and Massacre of the ^testants there. Some endeavors of
the English Parliament (...) relief of that Kingdom. 1
CHAP. II.
The King returns out of Scotland, and is pompoushly entertained by the City
of London. The Remonstrance is published by the Parliament. The King enters
into the House of Commons. The (...) of the 12. Bishops; and how it was
censured by the Lords and Commons. Diverse unhappy obstructions of the relief of
Ireland. 16
CHAP. III.
The Queen passes into Holland, with her Daughter the Princess Mary.
Difference between the King and Parliament concerning the Militia. The King
goes toward York, and is followed with a Petition from the Lords and Commons
to Theobalds, and another Declaration to Newmarket. The King is denied entrance
into Hull by Sir John Hotham. 38
CHAP. IV.
Many Members of both Houses leave the Parliament, and repair to the King.
Nine of the Lords who first went away, are impeached by the Commons, and
censured by the Peers. The Great Seal is carried away from London to York. Some
Votes of Parliament concerning the Kings Proceedings. A Petition, with nineteen
Propositions, sent from the Parliament to the King. 58
CHAP. V.
An Order for bringing in of Plate and Money into Guild Hall. The Kings
Declaration to the Lords about him. Their Profession and Protestation to him.
The King lays Siege to Hull; but raises it again. The Earl of Warwick takes
possession of the Navy, as Lord Admiral. The Earl of Essex is voted in
Parliament to be Lord General of all their Forces. 83
CHAP. VI.
A brief Relation of the condition of diverse Counties in England, when the
Parliaments Ordinance for the Militia, and the Kings Commission of Array were
put in execution. With a mention of some Lords and otherswho were actors on
either side. The Lord Mayor of London committed to the Tower, and sentenced by
the Parliament. A mention of some Declarations, Messages, and Answers that
passed between the King and the two Houses of Parliament. 99
BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
PRince Rupert and Prince Maurice arrive in England. The Earl of Essex taking
leave of the Parliament, goes to his Command. The King increases in strength
at Shrewsbury. A Skirmish at Worcester. The great Battle of Keynton is fought.
1
CHAP. II.
The Parliament send to the King concerning an Accommodation. A fight at
Brainford. Another Treaty with the King begun, and broken of. Reading besieged
by the Lord General Essex, and surrendered to him. A Conspiracy to betray
Bristoll. A treacherous Plot against the Parliament and City of London,
discovered and prevented. 29
CHAP. III.
Matters of State trans-acted in Parliament, touching the Assembly of Divines.
The making of a new Great Seal. Impeaching the Queen of High Treason, and
other things. The Lord General Essex, after some Marches, returns to quarter
his wasted and sick Army about Kingston. The Kings Forces Masters of the West.
The Earl of Newcastle, his greatness in the North. Some mention of the Earl
of Cumberland, and the Lord FAIRFAX. 47
CHAP. IV.
Some Actions of Sir Thomas Fairfax in the North. The Queen lands in England.
The revolt of Sir Hugh Cholmley, and the two Hothams. The state of this War
in the Western parts. The condition of the Associated Counties. A short
relation of Sir William Waller his Actions; of Colonel Cromwell, Sir William
Brereton, and Sir John Gell. 63
CHAP. V.
The death of the Lord Brook, and of the Earl of Northampton. A short mention
of some Actions in diverse Counties. The low condition of the Parliament at that
time. The Siege of Gloucester. 85
CHAP. VI.
The Expedition of the Lord General Essex for relief of Gloucester. The great
Battle of Newbury described. 101
THE HISTORY OF THE PARLIAMENT OF England.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is a short mention of Queen ELIZABETH, King JAMES, and the beginning
of King CHARLES his Reign; his two first Parliaments. Of the War with Spain
and France. The death of the Duke of BUCKINGHAM. And the third Parliament of
King CHARLES.
Queen ELIZABETH, of glorious Memory, together with that great Stock of Wealth
and Honor, which her prudent and just Government had brought to the English
Nation, had enriched them besides with a greater Treasure (which we may justly
account the cause of all the rest) Religion reformed from Popish Superstition.

That Reformation engaged the Queen in a new Interest of State, to side with
the Protestants against those Potent Monarchs of the other Religion, which
seemed at the beginning as much danger and disadvantage to her, as it proved in
conclusion security and Honor; so impossible it is for any disadvantage to
prevail over them that help the Lord against the Mighty.

That Storm from France, which so much threatened the weak beginnings of her
Reign, was suddenly blown over by the death of HENRY the second, and some few
Months after of his Son FRANCIS, who had married the Queen of Scotland; the
danger which remained greatest was from Spain, where PHILIP the second then
reigned, a Prince not greater in Dominion, Treasure, and Armies, then deeply
engaged against the Protestant Religion, by the instigation and assistance of
the Jesuits, an Order, which in the Age before had been highly counrenanced
by Pope PAUL the third, in opposition to the Gospell-Doctrine, that then began
to spread apace in Germany, and other parts.

The whole Order of Jesuits (as endeavoring to set up one Temporal Kingdom
of Christendom, suitable to the Papal Hierarchy) applied their service
altogether to the Monarchy of Spain, as being then far the greatest in Europe
(and fittest for their purpose) by the late uniting of so many Kingdoms and
Dutchies under the person of CHARLES the Emperor, who by a fortunate
birthright inherited, together with Casule, and Arragon, and all the great
Acquisitions of his Grandfather FERDINAND in Italy, and the West Indies, the
rich and useful patrimony of his Father PHILIP, Burgundy, and the Netherlands;
all these he had left entirely to his Son PHILIP, who to so large a
Territory, had made that strong addition of the Kingdom of Portugal, and
might seem an Enemy too mighty for England and all the Protestants of Europe
to oppose.

But Queen ELIZABETH had woven the interest of her own State so inseparably
into the cause of Religion it self, that it was hard to overthrow one without
the ruin of the other. And God, who had given her so much grace and courage as
to rely wholly upon him, did with that Almighty hand, not only hold her up
from sinking, but lift her above the heads of all her enemies.

By what degrees and means she achieved the great Actions of her reign, and
brought so much prosperity to her Nation, it is not the scope of this discourse
to relate at large (for her History is not the work in hand) but only in
brief to declare that before her death she was the happy instrument of God to
promote the Protestant Religion in all parts. She curbed the Spanish greatness
by supporting France from ruin, to give some balance to the other, as she
preserved Scotland from being swallowed up by the French before. She protected
the Hollanders against him, vanquished his Armies both by Land and Sea, with
many other such things as might seem too much to be the achievements of one
Reign. And last of all, she reduced Ireland wholly to obedience,
notwithstanding all the subtle machinations of Spain, and open assistance
given in Arms to her Irish Rebels. All which she accomplished by the justice
and prudence of her government, by making the right use of her Subjects hearts,
hands and Purses in a Parliamentary way; as also securing her own Kingdom by
strengthening the hands of Protestants abroad; insomuch as she stood at last
above the reach of any enemy by open war; and protected by God, though often
attempted by domestic Treasons and Assasinations, till in the end she died in
a good old age, leaving to her Successor King JAMES the Kingdom of England in
an happier condition then ever it was; the Kingdom of Ireland wholly subdued
and reduced, to reap for himself the harvest of all her labor and expense;
and nothing to do for it, but to propagate the true Faith in that Kingdom,
which she prevented by death could not perform; and was, in probability, an
easy task for King JAMES at that time; much conducing, besides the honor of
God, to his own Temporal strength and greatness, if he had only gone
fairly on in that way which Queen ELIZABETH had made plain for him.

The Prosperity of England seemed then at the height or (...); and it pleases
God that States many times shall decline from their happiness without any
apparent signs to us, or reasons that we can give, as a Heathen complains: Oh
faciles dare summa Deos, eademque tueri
Difficiles? Lucan.
How easy are the Gods to raise States high,
But not to keep them so?


These things have made some high-reaching Writers impute the raising and
declination of Kingdoms and Commonwealths to certain aspects of heavenly
Constellations, to Conjunctions, and Oppositions of Planets, and various
Ecclipses of Celestial Luminaries; others, to an hidden strength, and secret
efficacy of Numbers themselves; and most men to the perpetual Rotation of
fortune: but the judgments of God in those things are past our finding out,
and they are too wise, who are not content sometimes to wonder.

For King JAMES, the Successor to Queen ELIZABETH, was a wise and learned
Prince, of disposition merciful and gracious, excellently grounded in that
Religion which he professed, as the world may find by his extant writings; a
Prince of whom England conceived wonderful hope, and received with great joy
and Triumph; but he did not begin where his Predecessor left, proceeding
rather in a contrary way; what the reasons of it were, I will not at all
presume to deliver my opinion, though some have been bold to write and publish
of late years, that it was fear for his own Person, that made him to
temporize with Rome, considering the boldness of Jesuiticall Assasines: others
more heartily conceived it might be his great desire of peace and union with
other Princes, though he might err in the means of attaining that end; for he
was by nature a great seeker of Peace, and abhorrer of bloodshed, according to
that Motto which he ever used, Beati Pacifici. I cannot search into men's
thoughts, but only relate the Actions which appeared.

King JAMES, at the beginning of his Reign, made a Peace with Spain, which
was brought very low by Queen ELIZABETH, and had been nearer to ruin in all
probability, had she lived a few years longer; the Estates of the united
Provinces of the Netherlands, those useful Confederates to England, began to
be despised by the English Court, under a vain shadow in stead of a reason,
that they were an ill example for a Monarch to cherish. Then began secret
Treaties to pass betwixt Rome and the Court of England; care to be taken about
reconciliation of Religions; the rigor of Penal Laws against the Papists
(notwithstanding that odious plot of the Gunpowder Treason) was abated; the
pomp of Prelacy, and multitude of Ceremonies, increased daily in the Church of
England, and according to that were all Civil Affairs managed both at home
and abroad.

Neither was it easy for the King to turn himself out of that way, when he
was once entered into it; so that at last the Papists began by degrees to be
admitted nearer to him in service and conversation. Exceeding desirous he then
was to match the Prince his Son to the Infanta of Spain, about which many
and long Treaties passed, wherein not only the Spaniard, but the Pope, made
many present advantages of the Kings earnest desires, and many ways deluded
him, as it appeared plainly by his own Letters to his Ambassadors there,
since found and published.

Thus was the King by degrees brought, not only to forsake, but to oppose his
own interest both in civil and religious affairs, which was most unhappily
seen in that cause (as the Duke of ROHAN observed,) wherein, besides the
interest of all Protestants, and the honor of his Nation, the estate and
livelihood of his own children were at the height concerned, the Palatinate
business.

From hence slowed a farther mischief; for the King being loath perchance that
the whole people should take notice of those ways in which he trod, grew
extremely disaffected to Parliaments, calling them for nothing but to supply
his expenses, dissolving them when they began to meddle with State Affairs,
and diverse times imprisoning the Members for Speeches made in Parliament,
against the fundamental privileges of that high Court.

Parliaments being thus despised and abused, projects against the Laws were
found out to supply the Kings expenses, which were not small; and the King
(whether to avoid the envy of those things, or the trouble of them) did in a
manner put off all business of Government from himself into the hands of a
young Favorite, the Duke of BUCKINGHAM, whom he had raised from a Knights
fourth Son, to that great height, and entrusted with the chief Offices of
the Kingdom; besides the great power which he had by that extraordinary favor
of confering all places and preferments both in Church and State.

This Duke, not long before the death of King JAMES, was grown into
extraordinary favor and entireness with the Prince, whom he afterward swayed
no less then he had before his father; like an unhappy vapor exhaled from the
earth to so great an height, as to cloud not only the rising, but the setting
Sun.

King CHARLES, with great hopes and expectation of the people, and no less
high expressions of love and duty from all in general, began his Reign on the
27 of March, 1624. and indeed that love which the people bare to his Person,
had been before testified, whilst he was yet Prince, at his return from
Spain, though the journey it self had not been pleasing to the Kingdom; for
when the people saw him arrived in safety, there needed no public Edict for
thanksgiving or joy; every society and private family (as if the hearts of all
had been in one) did voluntarily assemble themselves together, praising God,
with singing of Psalms, with joyful feasting, and charity to the poor;
insomuch that I suppose the like consent, without any interposing authority,
has not been often known.

The same affections followed him to his Throne; the same hopes and fair
presages of his future Government, whilst they considered the temperance of
his youth, how clear he had lived from personal vice, being grown to the age
of 23. how untainted of those licentious extravagances, which unto that age and
fo^tune are not only incident, but almost thought excusable.

But some men suspended their hopes, as doubting what to find of a Prince so
much and so long reserved; for he had never declared himself of any Faction,
or scarce interposed in any State affairs, though some things had been managed
in his fathers Reign, with much detriment to his own present and future
fortunes. Yet that by the people in general was well censured, as an effect of
his piety and obedience to the King his father, and happy presages gathered
from it, That so good an obeyer would prove a just Ruler.

They wondered also to see him suddenly linked in such an entire friendship
with the Duke of BUCKINGHAM; for extraordinary Favorites do usually eclipse
and much depresse the Heir apparent of a Crown, or else they are conceived so
to do; and upon that reason hated, and ruined by the succeeding Prince; in
which kind all ancient and modern Stories are full of examples.

In the beginning of King CHARLES his Reign, a Parliament was called, and
adjourned to Oxford, the plague raging extremely at London, where the Duke of
BUCKINGHAM was highly questioned, but by the King (not without the grief and
sad presage of many people, that private affections would too much prevail in
him against the public) he was protected against the Parliament, which for
that only purpose was dissolved, after two Subsidies had been given, and
before the Kingdom received relief in any one grievance; as is expressed in
the first and general Remonstrance of this present Parliament, where many
other unhappy passages of those times are briefly touched; as that the King,
immediately after the dissolution of that Parliament, contrived a War against
Spain, in which the design was unhappily laid, and contrary to the advice
which at that time had been given by wise men, who persuaded him to invade the
West Indies; a way, no doubt, far more easy and hopeful for England to
prevail against Spain then any other: instead of that, the King with great
expense of Treasure, raised an Army and Fleet to assault Cales, the Duke of
BUCKINGHAM bearing the Title both of Admiral and General, though he went not
himself in person; but the matter was so ordered, that the expedition proved
altogether successelesse, and as dishonorable as expensive.

They complained likewise of another design (which indeed was much lamented by
the people of England in general) about that time put in practice, a thing
destructive to the highest interest of the Nation, the maintenance of
Protestant Religion; a Fleet of English Ships were set forth, and delivered
over to the French, by whose strength all the Sea forces of Rochell were
scattered and destroyed, a loss to them irrecoverable, and the first step to
their ruin.

Neither was this loan of Ships from England (for such was the peoples
complaint and suspicion against those, who at that time stood at the Helm)
supposed to proceed so much from friendship to the State of France, as from
design against Religion; for immediately upon it, the King, by what advice the
people understood not, made a breach with France, by taking their Ships, to a
great value, without making any recompense to the English, whose Goods were
thereupon imbarr'd, and confiscate in that Kingdom.

In revenge of this, a brave Army was raised in England, and commanded by the
Duke of BUCKINGHAM in person, who landing at the Isle of Rhea, was at the first
encounter victorious against the French; but after few Months stay there, the
matter was so unhappily carried, the General being unexperienced in Warlike
affairs, that the French prevailed, and gave a great defeat, where many
gallant Gentlemen lost their lives, and the Nation much of their ancient Honor.

From thence proceeded another step to the ruin of Rochell; the sick and
wounded English were sent into that City, and relieved by the besieged
Rochellers, out of that little provision which they then had, upon faithful
promise of supplies from England in the same kind: The provisions of Rochell
were little enough for their own relief at that time, if we consider what
ability the French King had to continue that siege; when to the proper wealth
and greatness of his Crown, was added that reputation and strength, which his
late success against all the other Protestant Garrisons in France had brought.

The besieged Rochellers, not doubting at all of the due and necessary supply
of Victual from England, sent their Ships thither for that purpose; but those
Ships, whose return with bread was so earnestly expected, were stayed in
England by an Imbargo; and so long stayed, till that unhappy Town was enforced
to yield by famine, the sharpest of all Enemies.

But in the mean time, whilst these Ships with Victual were detained, a
great Army was raised in England for relief of Rochell, but too great was the
delay of those preparations, till time was past, and that Army in the end
disbanded by the sad death of the Duke of BUCKINGHAM their General, who was
stabbed at Portsmouth by a private Gentleman, JOHN FELTON.

This FELTON was a Soldier of a low stature, and no promising aspect; of
disposition serious, and melancholy, but religious in the whole course of his
life and conversation; which last I do not mention out of purpose to
countenance his unlawful act, as supposing him to have had (as some did then
talk) any inspiration or calling of God to it: His confessions to his friends,
both public and private, were, That he had often secret motions to that
purpose, which he had resisted and prayed against, and had almost overcome,
until he was at last confirmed in it, by reading the late dissolved
Parliaments Remonstrance against the Duke: That then his conscience told him it
was just and laudable, to be the executioner of that man, whom the highest
Court of Judicature, the representative body of the Kingdom, had condemned as
a Traitor. But let Posterity censure it as they please; certain it is, that
FELTON did much repent him of the unlawfulness of the fact, out of no fear of
death, or punishment here, for he wished his hand cut off before the execution,
which his Jugdes could not doom by the Laws of England.

The King had not long before broken off another Parliament, called in the
second year of his Reign, in which the Petition of Right was granted, to the
great rejoicing of the people. But it proved immediately to be no relief at
all to them; for the Parliament presently dissolved, the King acted over the
same things, which formerly he had done; and that grant, instead of fortifying
the Kingdoms Liberty, made it appear to be more defencelesse then before,
that Laws themselves were no bar against the Kings will. The Parliament in
hope of gracious Acts, had declared an intent to give his Majesty five
Subsidies, the full proportion of which five Subsidies was, after the
dissolution of that Parliament, exacted by Commission of Loan from the people,
and those imprisoned which refused the payment of that Loan: Great sums of
money were required and raised by privy Scales: A Commission for squeezing the
Subject by way of Excize: Soldiers were billited upon them: And a design laid
to inslave the Nation by a force of German Horse: with many other things of
that nature.

Those affairs of State which concerned Con^ederates abroad, had been managed
with as much disadvantage, and infelicity to them, as dishonor to the English
Nation, and prejudice to the Cause of Religion it self.

Peace was made with Spain without consent of Parliament; by which all hope
was utterly lost, of re-establishing the Kings nearest kindred in their just
Dominion; and the Protestant Religion much weakened in Germany. What Counsels
had then influence upon the Court of England, might be the amazement of a wise
man to consider; and the plain truth must needs seem a paradox to posterity;
as that the Protestant Religion, both at home and abroad, should suffer much by
the Government of two Kings; of whom the former in his own person wrote more
learnedly in defense of it; and the latter in his own person lived more
conformably to the Rules of it, then any of their Contemporary Princes in
Europe. But the Civil Affairs of State were too ill managed, to protect, or
at least to propagate true Religion; or else the neglect of Religion was the
cause that Civil Affairs were blessed with no more honor and prosperity. The
right ways of Queen ELIZABETH, who advanced both, had been long ago forsaken,
and the deviation grew daily farther, and more fatal to the Kingdom. Which
appeared in a direct contrariety to all particulars of her Reign. Titles of
Honor were made more honorable by her, in being conferred sparingly, and
therefore probably upon great desert, which afterward were become of less
esteem, by being not only too frequently conferred, but put to open sale, and
made too often the purchase of Mechannicks, or the reward of vicious persons.

At the death of that Duke, the people were possessed with an unusual joy,
which they openly testified by such expressions, as indeed were not thought fit
nor decent by wise men, upon so tragical and sad an accident, which in a
christian consideration might move compassion, whatsoever the offenses of the
man were.

To such people that distick of Seneca might give answer: Res est sacra miser;
noli mea tangere fata:
Sacrilegae Bustis abstinuere manus.
Sacred is woe; touch not my death with scorn:
Even sacrilegious hands have Tombs forborne.


And it may be that God was offended at the excess of their joy, in that he
quickly let them see, the benefit was not so great to them as they expected by
it; but his judgments are too high for men to search. True it is, that the
people in general loving the Kings Person, and very unwilling to harbor the
least opinion of ill in him, looked upon the Duke, as the only hinderance of
the Kingdoms happiness; supposing, that though other Statesmen might
afterward arise, of as bad or worse intentions, then the Duke; yet none would
have so great a power for execution of them; nor any other Genius be ever
found, to have so great a mastery over the Kings Genius. But it is certain,
that men did much therefore rejoice at the death of this Duke, because they did
before much fear what mischief might befall a Kingdom, where that man, who
knew himself extremely hated by the people, had all the keys of the Kingdom
in his hand, as being Lord Admiral and Warden of the Cinque Ports; having the
command of all the Soldiers, and the only power to reward and raise them.

These joys and hopes of men lasted not long, for in the same year (being the
fourth of King CHARLES) and after the death of the Duke of BUCKINGHAM, another
Parliament was dissolved; and then the Privileges of that high Court more
broken then ever before. Six Members of the House of Commons, who had been
forward in vindicating the Privileges of Parliament, were committed close
Prisoners for many months together, without the liberty of using books, pen,
ink and paper, while they were detained in this condition; and not admitted
Bail according to Law: They were also vexed with informations in inferior
Courts; where they were sentenced, and fined for matters done in Parliament;
and the payment of such Fines extorted from them. Some were enforced to put in
security of good behavior, before they could be released: The rest who refused
to be bound, were detained diverse years after in custody, of whom one Sir JOHN
ELLIOT, a Gentleman of able parts, that had been forwardest in expression of
himself, for the freedom of his Country, and taxing the unjust actions of the
Duke of BUCKINGHAM, while that Duke lived (though the truth be, that the (...)
of his were no other then what carried (...) consent in them) dyed by the
harshnesse of his imprisonment, which would admit of no relaxation, though for
healths sake; he petitioned for it often, and his Physician gave in testimony
to the same purpose. The freedom that Sir JOHN E^^OT used in Parliament, was
by the people in general applauded, though much taxed by the Courtiers, and
censured by some of a more politic reserve (considering the times) in that
kind that TACITUS censures THRASEAS POETUS, as thinking such freedom a
needless, and therefore a foolish thing, where no cure could be hoped by it.
Sibi periculum, nec aliis libertatem.

After the breaking off this Parliament (as the Historian speaks of Roman
liberty, after the battle of PHILIPPI, nunquam post hoc praelium, etc.) the
people of England for many years never looked back to their ancient liberty. A
Declaration was published by the king, wherein aspertions were laid upon some
Members; but indeed the Court of Parliament it self was declared against. All
which the dejected people were forced to read with patience, and allow against
the dictate of their own reason.

The people of England from that time were deprived of the hope of Parliaments;
and all things so managed by public Officers, as if never such a day of
account were to come.

I shall for methods sake first of all make a short enumeration of some of the
chief grievances of the Subjects, which shall be truly and plainly related; as
likewise some vices of the Nation in general, that the Reader may the better
judge of the causes of succeeding troubles, during the space of seven or eight
years after the dissolution of that Parliament, and then give some account
concerning the several dispositions of the people of ENGLAND, and their
different censures of the Kings government during those years; touching by the
^^^^mewhat of (...) manners and customs of the (...) ENGLAND, and then briefly
of the condition of Ecclesiastical affairs, and the censures of men
concerning that.

CHAP. II.
A brief Relation of some grievances of the Kingdom. The various opinions of
men concerning the present Government. The condition of the Court and Clergy of
England. Some observations of a stranger, concerning the Religion of the
English people.
IT cannot but be thought, by all wise and honest men, that the sins of
England were at a great height, that the injustice of Governors, and vices of
private men, were very great; which have ^^nce called down from Almighty God
so sharp a judgment; and drawn on by degrees so calamitous and consuming a
War. Those particular crimes an English Historian can take no pleasure to
relate, but might rather desire to be silent in, and say with STATIUS: -- Nos
certe taceamus, and obruta multa
Nocte ^egi nostrae patiamur crimina gentis.
Let us be silent, and from after times
Conceal our own unhappy Nations crimes.


But to be silent in that, were great injustice and impiety toward God, to
relate his judgments upon a Kingdom; and forget the sins of that Kingdom,
which were the cause of them. The Heathen Historians do well instruct us in
that point of piety; who never almost describe any Civil War, or public
affliction, without relating at the beginning, how vicious and corrupted their
State was at that time grown, how faulty both the Rulers and People were, and
how fit to be punished, either by themselves or others. Nor do any of the
Roman Poets undertake to write of that great and miserable Civil War, which
destroyed the present State, and enslaved posterity; without first making a
large enumeration of such cause^; how wicked the manners of Rome were grown,
how the chief Rulers were given to avarice and oppression, and the whole State
drowned in luxury, lusts and riot, as you may see upon that subject in two the
most elegant of them. And shall we Christians, who adore the true God, and live
under the Gospell-light, not be sensible under so heavy a judgment of our own
offenses.

To begin with the fault^ of the higher powers, and their illegal oppression
of the people, during these eight or nine years, in which Parliaments were
denied to England, which I briefly touch, referring the Reader to a more full
narration in the Remonstrance; multitudes of Monopolies were granted by the
King, and laid upon all things of most common and necessary use, such as Soap,
Salt, Wine, Leather, Sea-cole, and many other of that kind.

Regia priva^is creseunt aeraria damnis. Claud.
By loss of private men the Exchequer grows.
Large sum^ of Money were exacted through the whole Kingdom for default of
Knighthood, under the shadow of an obsolete Law. Tonnage and Poundage were
received without the ordinary course of Law; and though they were taken under
pretense of guarding the Seas, yet that great Tax of Ship Money was set on foot
under the same color; by both which there was charged upon the people some
years near 700000. li. though the Seas at that time were not well guarded.

These things were accompanied with an enlargement of Torrests, contrary to
Magna Charta, the forcing of Coat and Conduct-Money, taking away the Arms of
Trained Bands in diverse Counties, disarming the people by engrossing of
Gunpowder, keeping it in the Tower of London, and setting so high a rate upon
it, that the poorer sort were not able to buy it; nor could any have it without
license; whereby several parts of the Kingdom were left destitute of their
necessary defense.

No Courts of Judicature could give redress to the people for these illegal
sufferings, whilst Judges were displaced by the King, for not complying with
his will, and so awed, that they durst not do their duties: For to hold a rod
over them, the clause, Quandiu se been geserint, was le^t out of their Patents,
and a new clause, Durante been placito, inserted.

New illegal Oaths were enforced upon the Subjects, and new Judicatories
erected without Law; and when Commissions were granted for examining the
excess of Fees, and great exactions discovered, the Delinquents were
compounded with, not only for the time past, but immunity to offend for the
time to come; which in stead of redressing, did confirm, and increase the
grievance of the Subjects.

By this time, all thoughts of ever having a Parliament again, were quite
banished; so many oppressions had been set on ^oot, so many illegal actions
done, that the only way to justify the mischiefs already done, was to do
that one greater, To take away the means which was ordained to redress them,
the lawful Government of England by Parliaments.

Whilst the Kingdom was in this condition, the serious and just men of
England, who were no way interessed in the emolument of these oppressions,
could not but entertain sad thoughts and presages, of what mischief must
needs follow so great an injustice; that things carried so far on in a wrong
way, must needs either inslave themselves and posterity for ever, or require a
vindication so sharp and smarting, as that the Nation would groan under it;
and though the times were jolly for the present, yet having observed the
judgment of God upon other secure Nations, they could not choose but fear the
sequel. Another sort of men, and especially Lords and Gentlemen, by whom the
pressures of the Government were not much felt, who enjoyed their own
plentiful fortunes, with little or insensible detriment, looking no farther
then their present safety and prosperity; and the yet undisturbed peace of the
Nation, whilst other Kingdoms were embroyled in calamities, and Germany sadly
wasted by a sharp War, did nothing but applaud the happiness of England,
and called those ungrateful and factious spirits, who complained of the breach
of Laws and Liberties; That the Kingdom abounded with wealth, plenty, and all
kind of elegancies, more then ever; That it was for the honor of a people,
that the Monarch should live splendidly, and not be curbed at all in his
Prerogative, which would bring him into the greater esteem with other Princes,
and more enable him to prevail in Treaties; That what they suffered by
Monopolies, was insensible, and not grievous, if compared with other States;
That the Duke of TUSKANY sat heavier upon his people in that very kind; That
the French King had made himself an absolute Lord, and quite depressed the
power of Parliaments, which had been there as great as in any Kingdom, and
yet that France flourished, and the Gentry lived well; That the Austrian
Princes, especially in Spain, laid heavy burdens upon their Subjects.

Thus did many of the English Gentry, by way of comparison, in ordinary
discourse, plead for their own servitude.

The Courtiers would begin to dispute against Parliaments in their ordinary
discourse, That they were cruel to those whom the King favored, and too
injurious to his Prerogative; That the late Parliament stood upon too high
terms with the King; and that they hoped the King should never need any more
Parliaments. Some of the greatest Statesmen and Privy Counselors, would
ordinarily laugh at the ancient Language of England, when the word Liberty of
the Subject was named. But these Gentlemen, who seemed so forward in taking up
their own yoke, were but a small part of the Nation (though a number
considerable enough to make a Reformation hard) compared with those Gentlemen
who were sensible of their birthrights, and the true interest of the Kingdom;
on which side the common people in the generality, and Country Freeholders
stood, who would rationally argue of their own Rights, and those oppressions
that were laid upon them.

But the sins of the English Nation were too great, to let them hope for an
easy or speedy redress of such grievances; and the manners of the people so
much corrupted, as by degrees they became of that temper, which the Historian
speaks of his Romans, ut nec mala, nec remedia far possent, they could
neither suffer those pressures patiently, nor quietly endure the cure of them.
Prophannesse too much abounded every where; and which is most strange, where
there was no Religion, yet there was Superstition: Luxury in diet. and excess
both in meat and drink, was crept into the Kingdom in an high degree, not
only in the quantity, but in the wanton curiosity. And in abuse of those good
creatures which God had bestowed upon this plentiful Land, they mixed the
vices of diverse Nations, catching at every thing that was new and foreign.

-- Non vulgo not a placebant Petronius.
Gaudia, non usu plebejo trita voluptas.
-- Old known delight
They scorn, and vulgar bare-worne pleasure slight.
As much pride and excess was in Apparel, almost among all degrees of people,
in new fangled and various fashioned attire; they not only imitated, but
excelled their foreign patterns; and in fantastical gestures and behavior,
the petulancy of most Nations in Europe.

Et laxi crines, and tot nova nomina vestis. Petr.
Loose hair, and many new found names of clothes.
The serious men groaned for a Parliament; but the great Statesmen plied it the
harder, to complete that work they had begun, of setting up Prerogative above
all Laws.

The Lord WENTWORTH (afterward created Earl of STRAFFORD for his service in
that kind) was then laboring to oppress Ireland, of which he was Deputy; and
to begin that work in a conquered Kingdom, which was intended to be afterward
wrought by degrees in England: And indeed he had gone very far and
prosperously in those ways of Tyranny, though very much to the end ammaging
and setting back of that newly established Kingdom.

He was a man of great parts, of a deep reach, subtle wit, of spirit and
industry, to carry on his business, and such a conscience as was fit for that
work he was designed to. He understood the right way, and the Liberty of his
Country, as well as any man; for which in former Parliaments, he stood up
stiffely, and seemed an excellent Patriot. For those abilities he was soon
taken off by the King, and raised in honor, to be employed in a contrary way,
for inslaving of his Country, which his ambition easily drew him to undertake.
To this man, in my opinion, that character which LUCAN bestows upon the Roman
Curio, in some sort may suit.

Haud alium tauta civem tulit indole Roma,
Aut ^ ui plus Leges deberent recta sequen^i:
Perdita tune urbi nocuerunt secula, postquam
Ambitus, and Luxus, and opum metuenda facultas,
Transverso mentem dubiam Torrente tulerunt,
Momentumque fuit mutatus curio rerum.
A man of abler parts Rome never bore,
Nor one to whom (whilst right) the Laws owed more:
Our State it self then suffered, when the tide
Of Avarice, Ambition, factious pride,
To turn his wavering mind quite cross began,
Of such high moment was one changed man.
The Court of England, during this long vacancy of Parliaments, enjoyed it
self in as much pleasure and splendor, as ever any Court did. The Revels,
Triumphs, and Princely Pastims, were for those many years kept up, at so great
a height, that any stranger which traveled into England, would verily believe,
a Kingdom that looked so cheerfully in the face, could not be sick in any part.

The Queen was fruitful, and now grown of such an age, as might seem to
give her privilege of a farther society with the King, then bed and board; and
make her a partner of his affairs and business; which his extreme affection
did more encourage her to challenge: That conjugall love, as an extraordinary
virtue of a King, in midst of so many temptations, the people did admire and
honor.

But the Queens power did by degrees give privilege to Papists; and among
them, the most witty, and Jesuited, to converse, under the name of civility and
Courtship, not only with inferior Courtiers, but the King himself, and to
sow their seed in what ground they thought best; and by degrees, as in
complement to the Queen, Nuntio's from the Pope were received in the Court of
England, PANZANI, CON, and ROSETTI; the King himself maintaining in discourse,
That he saw no reason why he might not receive an Ambassador from the Pope,
being a Temporal Prince. But those Nuntio's were not entertained with public
Ceremony; so that the people in general took no great notice of them; and the
Courtiers were confident of the Kings Religion, by his due frequenting Prayers
and Sermons.

The Clergy, whose dependence was merely upon the King, were wholly taken up
in admiration of his happy Government, which they never concealed from
himself, as often as the Pulpit gave them access to his ear; and not only
there, but at all meetings, they discoursed with joy upon that Theme; affirming
confidently, that no Prince in Europe was so great a friend to the Church, as
King CHARLES; That Religion flourished no where but in England; and no reformed
Church retained the face and dignity of a Church but that: Many of them used to
deliver their opinion, That God had therefore so severely punished the
Palatinate, because their Sacrilege had been so great in taking away the
endowments of Bishoprics.

Queen ELIZABETH her self, who had reformed Religion, was but coldly praised,
and all her virtues forgotten, when they remembered how she cut short the
Bishopric of Ely.

HENRY the eight was much condemned by them, for seizing upon the Abbeys, and
taking so much out of the several Bishopricks^ as he did in the 37 year of his
Reign. To maintain therefore that splendor of a Church, which so much
pleased them, was become their highest endeavor; especially after they had
gotten in the year 1633. an Archbishop after their own heart, Doctor LAUD;
who had before for diverse years ruled the Clergy, in the secession of
Archbishop ABBOT, a man of better temper and discretion; which discretion or
virtue to conceal, would be an injury to that Archbishop; he was a man who
wholly followed the true interest of England, and that of the Reformed Churches
in Europe, so far as that in his time the Clergy was not much envied here in
England, nor the Government of Episcopacy much dis-favoured by Protestants
beyond the Seas. Not only the pomp of Ceremonies were daily increased, and
innovations of great scandal brought into the Church; but in point of
Doctrine, many fair approaches made toward Rome; as he that pleases to
search may find in the Books of Bishop LAUD, MOUNTAGUE, HELYN, POCKLINGTON,
and the rest; or in brief collected by a Scottish Minister, Master BAILY. And
as their friendship to Rome increased, so did their scorn to the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas; whom, instead of lending that relief and succor to
them, which God had enabled this rich Island to do, they failed in their
greatest extremities, and in stead of harbors, became rocks to split them.

Archbishop LAUD, who was now grown into great favor with the King, made use
of it especially to ad^vnce the pomp and temporal honor of the Clergy,
procuring the Lord Treasurers place for Doctor JUCKSON, Bishop of London, and
endeavoring, as the general report went, to fix the greatest temporal
preferments upon others of that Coat; insomuch as the people merrily, when they
saw that Treasurer with the other Bishops, riding to Westminster, called it the
Church Triumphant: Doctors and Parsons of Parishes were made every where
Justices of Peace, to the great grievance of the Country in civil affairs,
and depriving them of their spiritual edification.

The Archbishop, by the same means which he used to preserve his Clergy from
contempt, exposed them to envy; and as the wisest could then prophecy, to a
more then probability of losing all: As we read of some men, who being
fore-doomed by an Oracle to a bad fortune, have run into it by the same
means they used to prevent it. The like unhappy course did the Clergy then
take to depresse Puritanisme, which was, to set up irreligion it self against
it, the worst weapon which they could have chosen to beat it down, which
appeared especially in point of keeping the Lords day; when not only books were
written to shake the morality of it, as that of Sunday no Sabbath, but sports,
and pastims of jollity and lightness permitted to the Country people upon that
day, by public Authority, and the Warrant commanded to be read in Churches;
which in stead of producing the intended effect, may credibly be thought to
have been one motive to a stricter observance of that day, in that part of the
Kingdom, which before had been well devoted; And many men who had before been
loose and careless, began upon that occasion to enter into a more serious
consideration of it, and were ashamed to be invited by the authority of
Churchmen, to that which themselves at the best, could but have pardoned in
themselves, as a thing of infirmity.

The example of the Court, where Plays were usually presented on Sundaies, did
not so much draw the Country to imitation, as reflect with disadvantage upon
the Court it self, and sour those other Court pastims and jollities, which
would have relished better without that, in the eyes of all the people, as
things ever allowed to the delights of great Princes.

The countenancing of looseness and irreligion, was, no doubt, a good
preparative to the introducing of another Religion: And the power of godliness
being beaten down, Popery might more easily by degrees enter; men quickly
leave that, of which they never took fast hold: And though it were
questionable, whether the Bishops and great Clergy of England aimed at Popery,
it is too apparent, such was the design of Romish Agents; and the English
Clergy, if they did not their own work, did theirs. A stranger of that
Religion, a Venetian Gentleman, out of his own observations in England, will
tell you how far they were going in this kind; his words are:

THe Universities, Bishops, and Divines of England, do daily embrace Catholic
opinions, though they profess it not with open mouth, for fear of the
Puritans: For example, They hold that the Church of Rome is a true Church; That
the Pope is superior to all Bishops; That to him it appertains to call
general Counsels; That it is lawful to pray for souls departed; That Altars
ought to be erected; in sum they believe all that is taught by the Church,
but not by the Court of Rome.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was much against the Court of Rome, though not
against that Church, in so high a kind: For the Doctrine of the Roman Church
was no enemy to the pomp of Prelacy; but the Doctrine of the Court of Rome
would have swallowed up all under the Popes Supremacy, and have made all
greatness dependant upon him: Which the Archbishop conceived would derogate
too much from the King in Temporalls, (and therefore hardly to be accepted by
the Court) as it would from himself in Spiritualls, and make his
Metropoliticall power subordinate, which he desired to hold absolute and
independent within the Realm of England.

It is certain, In the English Pope.
that the Archbishop of Canterbury (as an English Gentleman observes) would
often profess against those Tridentine Papists, whom only he hated as Papists
properly so called. For at the Council of Trent, all matters concerning the
Court of Rome, which are of themselves but disputable, were determined as
points of faith, to be believed upon pain of damnation: But matters of faith
indeed concerning the Church of Rome, were left disputable, and no Anathema
annexed to them. But that Venetian Gentleman, whom before we cited, declares in
what state, for matter of Religion, England at that time stood; and how
divided, namely, into Papists, Protestants, and Puritans; Papists are well
known. The Protestant party (says he) consists of the King, the Court Lords,
and Gentlemen, with all that are raised by favor to any honor: Besides almost
all the Prelates, and both the Universities.

What the Protestants are, he farther declares. viz.

They hate Puritans more then they hate Papists; That they easily combine with
Papists to extirpate Puritans; and are not so far engaged to the Reformed
Religion, but that they can reduce themselves again to the old practice of
their forefathers; That they are very opinionative in excluding the Popes
Supremacy.

He speaks then concerning the Puritans, and says: That they consist of some
Bishops, of almost all the Gentry and Communalty; and therefore are far the
most potent party.

And further declares what they are. viz. They are such as received the
Discipline of the French, and Netherlanders, and hold not the English
Reformation to be so perfect, as that which CALVIN instituted at Geneva; That
they hate Papists far more then they hate Protestants, etc.

Thus far of this strangers observation, concerning England.

CHAP. III.
The condition of the Scottish State and Clergy, when the new Book of Lyturgy
was sent unto them; how it was received; with some effects which followed. The
Kings Proclamation sent by the Earl of TRAQUARE; against which the Lords make
a Protestation.
IN this condition stood the Kingdom of England, about the year 1636. when
the first coal was blown, which kindled since into so great a combustion, as
to deface, and almost ruin three flourishing Kingdoms. Neither was this coal
blown by the grieved party of England, the Communalty, and those religious men
that prayed for Reformation, but by the other side, who had oppressed them. No
commotion at all was raised from the oppressed party, though it consisted of
the body of the Nation, and therefore strong enough to have vindicated
themselves, would they have risen in illegal tumults.

The Land was yet quiet, and that storm which the people had feared before the
death of the Duke of BUCKINGHAM, was not in so long a time fallen upon England,
although the causes in Government which made them fear it, had continued at
the height ever since. They only wished for a Parliament, but durst not hope
it, unless some strange accident, not yet discovered by them, might
necessitate such a cure. The Commons therefore (...) (...)

But in Scotland it was once quite ruined, and by degrees built up again, not
without many difficulties, not without great reluctance of the Peers, Gentry,
and most of the Ministers; not without extraordinary interposition of Regal
Authority, and great art used by two Kings in managing the business, and
raising it to that height, in which then it stood; as you may read at large in
some late Writers of that Kingdom.

Neither were the Peers and Gentry of that Kingdom so impatient of this new
yoake^ only out of zeal to preservation of Religion in purity, (though that,
no doubt, were their greatest reason; that Church having been ever much
addicted to the Reformation of Geneva: And those other Churches, as it appeared
by their great unwillingnesse to receive those few Ceremonies of the English
Church, at their Synod of Perth,) but as loath also to suffer any diminution of
their Temporal Liberties, which could not be avoided in admittance of
Episcopal Jurisdiction, and was manifested in that Kingdom, by diverse
examples of rigorous proceedings, which some Bishops used against Gentlemen of
quality, by way of Fines and Imprisonments, and the like; which particulars are
too large to be here inserted in this Narration.

In the year 1637. a Book of Lyturgy was composed, and sent out of England,
(which they complained of, because it was not before allowed by their Church in
a National Synod, as was fit for a business of so great import) with an
express command from the King, that they should reverently receive it, and
publicly read it in their Churches, beginning on Easter day, and so forward;
against which time the Privy Council of Scotland had commanded that every
Parish should buy two at the least of them.

That Service-Booke was the same with the Common Prayer Book of England,
excepting some few alterations, of which some (as they observed) were
alterations for the better, but others for the worse.

For the better, they esteemed, that so many Chapters of the Apocrypha were not
appointed to be read, as in the English Prayer Book; and where the English
retained the old vulgar Latin Translation, especially in the Psalms, that
Book followed the last Translation, commonly called that of King JAMES.

Those alterations for the worse were diverse, observed by the Scots, especially
in the Lords Supper, of which some were these: The express command for
situation of the Altar (so called) to the Eastern Wall; together with many
postures of the Minister, whilst he officiated, expressed in their exceptions;
but especially this, that in the consecrating prayer, those words, which in the
English Common Prayer Book, are directly against Transubstantiation, were
quite left out in that Book, and instead of them, such other words, as in
plain sense agreed with the Roman Mass Book.

As for example: Hear us, O most merciful Father, and of thy Omnipotent
goodness grant, so to bless and sanctify by thy Word and Spirit, these
creatures of bread and wine, that they may be to us the body and blood of thy
beloved Son.

Many other alterations the Scots have observed and expressed in their
writings, and in one word affirmed, that wheresoever that Book varies from the
English Lyturgy, it approaches directly to the Roman Missall; and offered to
prove, that all the material parts of the Mass Book are seminally there.

It was thought by many, that if the Book, without any alteration at all, had
been sent into Scotland, though the Scots perhaps would not have received it,
they would not have taken it in so evil part: And it might have been construed
only as a brotherly invitation to the same service which England used. But
what the reasons were of those alterations, I find no where expressed, but
only where the King in his Declaration concerning that business, is pleased
to say thus:

WE supposing that they might have taken some offense, if we should have
tendered them the English Service-Booke totidem verbis; and that some factious
spirits would have endeavored to have misconstrued it, as a badge of
dependence of that Church upon this of England, which we had put upon them to
the prejudice of their Laws and Liberties; We held it fitter that a new Book
should be composed by their own Bishops, in substance not differing from this
of England, that so the Roman Party might not upbraid us with any weighty or
material differences in our Lyturgyes; and yet in some few insensible
alterations, differing from it, that it might truly and justly be reputed a
Book of that Churches own composing, and established by Our Royal Authority,
as King of SCOTLAND.

These were the Kings expressions, which, as it seemed, were not satisfactory
to the Scots in that point.

For they were (as is before specified) not well affected to their own
Bishops, whose power and jurisdiction over them, was rather enforced then
consented to. Neither did they suppose that a conformity in Church-Worship, had
it been such as their consciences could well have embraced, had been any badge
of their dependancy upon England, as being a people not conquered, but united
in an equal freedom under the same King.

Besides, they could not relish it well, that the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
other English Bishops, who in many points of Ceremony and Worship, which they
accounted things tolerable, did make as near approaches to the Church of Rome,
as possibly they could; for no other reason (as they profess in their
writings) then that they labored to bring union into the Christian Church, if
it were possible; should now invite the Church of Scotland (whom they accounted
more puritanicall then themselves) to union, by a quite contrary way; as in
stead of framing their Service nearer to the Scottish profession and
Discipline, to urge them to a Lyturgy more popish then their own: So that it
seemed, for unity they were content to meet Rome, rather then Scotland.

To return to the Narration; The Service-Booke, according to the Kings
command, was offered to the Church of Scotland, and the Council there, and
published by Proclamation; a day for the reading of it in all Churches
appointed, which was the Easter day following. 1637.

But then upon some considerations, and further trial of men's minds (as the
King declares) the first reading of it was put off until the 23. of July next
ensuing, to the end that the Lords of the Session (their Session being the same
with the Term in England) and others, who had any Law business, might see the
success of it before the rising of the Session, which always ends upon the
first of August; and that so upon their return into their several Countries,
they might report the receiving of this Book at Edinburgh; it being ordered,
That on that Sunday the Book should be read only in the Church of Edinburgh,
and some other near adjacent; and warning was printed, and published in those
several Pulpits the Sunday before, that it was to be read.

On the 23. day of July, being Sunday, the Book was read in Saint Gyles
Church, commonly called, the great Church at Edinburgh, where were present many
of the Privy Council, both Archbishops, and diverse other Bishops, the Lords of
the Session, the Magistrates of Edinburgh, and a great auditory of all sorts.

But the people, especially the meanest vulgar, (for they first appeared
against it) and some women expressed so great a detestation of the Book, not
only in words and outcries, but actions; that the City Magistrates were
troubled much to get the Service performed; and the Bishop who read it, coming
out of the Church, had probably been slain by the multitude, if he had not
been rescued by a Nobleman.

Between the two Sermons the Council and Magistrates met about preventing
future tumults; but though the Book were read more quietly in the afternoon,
yet the tumult was far greater after evening Prayer, from the people who had
stayed in the streets; and the Bishop, in the Earl of ROXBOROUGH his Coach,
hardly escaped from being stoned to death.

The greatest men and Magistrates of Edinburgh, to excuse themselves to the
King (some of them also writing to the Archbishop of Canterbury) laid all the
fault upon the Rabble; for as yet none of quality had appeared, insomuch as
that the Privy Council and Magistrates of Edinburgh, the next morning held
some consultation about finding out, and punishing the ringleaders of that
uproare.

But not long after, upon the appearing of some others of higher rank, and
Petitions from diverse Ministers, That the reading of that Book might be a
while tespited, till his Majesty might be further petitioned and informed; the
Council yielded so far, as that it should not be urged by the Bishops, till
his Majesty's pleasure were further known. Upon which, many Gentlemen and
Ministers, who had resorted to Edinburgh with Petitions not long before,
returned in part satisfied to their own habitations; and at many places met
together, with fastings, and Prayer, That God would be pleased to direct the
Kings heart in that way which they conceived most conducible to the happiness
of the Church and State of Scotland.

Upon the 18. of October following, harvest being now ended, a great conflux of
all sorts was at Edinburgh, to hear what the King was pleased to determine of
the business; where they find an Edict against them, That upon pain of being
guilty of Rebellion, all should within few hours warning, depart the City; and
because the Citizens of Edinburgh had twice tumultuously opposed the Prayer
Book, and assaulted the Bishop of Edinburgh; as a punishment to that City, the
Term was to be removed to the Burgh of Linlithgow; and the next Term, after
the ordinary vacants, to be held at the Burgh of Dendie, there to remain
during his Majesty's pleasure.

The Petitioners (as they were then called) were much moved at this Edict; and
on the 19. of that October, presented to the Privy Council a great complaint
against the Bishops, whom they conceived the Authors of all this business, and
desired justice against them, as well for other crimes, as for introducing
contrary to Law, that superstitious and idolatrous Book.

To this complaint a great number of all ranks subscribed, and professed to the
Council, that they could not depart out of Edinburgh till some way were found
out to settle the present grievances.

Whilst they stayed there, their number daily increased, from all the remotest
Provinces, that the Council were enforced to give way, that till the Kings
pleasure were yet further known, they might choose some out of their number of
all ranks, to represent the rest, and follow the cause in the name of all the
rest: Upon which they chose four of the higher Nobility, four of the lower
rank of Nobility, as representers of Provinces; as many Burgesses of Towns;
and four Pastors, as representers of the Classes; having settled this, the rest
quietly departed to their own homes.

The King hearing of these things, sent a command to the Council of Edinburgh,
not to take upon themselves any more the decision of this controversy, which
he reserved in his own power: And Proclamation was made in December, 1637.
concerning the Kings intentions, that they were not to infringe the Laws or
Liberties of the Kingdom.

When therefore the Commissioners petitioned the Council to give way to them,
to bring their Actions against the Bishops, the Council answered, That the
King had commanded them to receive no more Petitions, against either the
Bishops, or Book of Service.

Whereupon the Commissioners discontented, prepare a Protestat^on against the
Kings Council, declaring, That what mischief soever might afterward ensue,
was to be all imputed to the Kings Council, for denying Justice.

The Council fearing what effects might follow, desired the Bishops to absent
themselves, and gave leave to the Commissioners to appear before them; where
the Lord of Lowden, in name of all the rest, made an Oration, in which charging
the Bishops with other crimes, besides these stirs; he desired them to be
altogether removed from the Council Table, till they had answered and cleared
themselves. To the like purpose spoke one of the Ministers.

The Council seemed sorry, that it lay not in their power (since the Kings
Command was peremptory) to give satisfaction to their desires; but entreated
their patience for so small a time, as till they might again receive notice of
his Majesty's pleasure.

The King further certified by them, sent for the Earl of TRAQUARE into
England, who was soon dispatched again into Scotland; and in February, 1638.
caused the Kings Mandate in Sterlin (where the Council then sat) to be
published.

The Proclamation declared that the Bishops were wrongfully accused, as Authors
of sending the Prayer Book; That his Majesty himself was Author of it, and
all was done by his Command; That he condemned all tumultuous proceedings of
his Subjects to exhibit Petitions or complaints against the innocent Bishops,
and book of Lyturgy, and all subscriptions to that purpose hitherto, as
conspiring against the public peace; pronouncing pardon to those which
repented, and the punishment of high Treason to such as persisted; promising to
hear the just complaints of his Subjects, so they offended not in matter or
form.

After the Proclamation was made at Sterlin, the Earl of HUME, Lord LINDSEY,
and others, in name of all the Petitioners, made a Protestation against it;
which Protestation was afterward repeated at Lithgow, and last at Edinburgh.

The effect of that Protestation was (for we cannot here insert it at large)
That the Service Book was full of Superstition and Idolatry, and ought not to
be obtruded upon them, without consent of a National Synod, which in such
cases should judge; That it was unjust to deny them liberty to accuse the
Bishops, being guilty of high crimes, of which till they were cleared, they did
reject the Bishops as Judges or Governors of them. They protested also against
the High Commission Court, and justified their own meetings, and
superscriptions to Petitions, as being to defend the glory of God, the Kings
Honor, and Liberties of the Realm. This Protestation was read in the Market
place at Sterlin, and the Copy hung up in public.

CHAP. IV.
The Scots enter into a Covenant. The Marquess HAMILTON is sent thither from
the King. A National Synod is granted to them, but dissolved within few days
by the Marquess, as Commissioner from the King. The King declares against the
Covenanters, and raises an Army to subdue them.
FRom Sterlin the Commissioners resorted to Edinburgh, whither many from all
parts met to consult of the present business; and concluded there to renew
solemnly among them that Covenant, which was commonly called, The lesser
confession of the Church of Scotland, or, The confession of the Kings family;
which was made and sealed under King JAMES his hand, in the year 1580.
afterward confirmed by all the Estates of the Kingdom, and Decree of the
National Synod, 1581. Which Confession was again subscribed by all sorts of
persons in Scotland, 1590. by authority of Council and National Synod; and a
Covenant added to it, for defense of true Religion, and the Kings Majesty;
which Covenant the aforesaid Lords, Citizens, and Pastors, in the year 1638.
did renew, and took another according to the present occasion.

The Covenant it self (expressed at large in the Records of that Kingdom)
consisted of three principal parts: The first was a re-taking word for word,
of that old Covenant, 1580. confirmed by Royal Authority, and two National
Synods, for defense of the purity of Religion, and the Kings Person and Rights,
against the Church of Rome. The second part contained an enumeration of all the
Acts of Parliament made in Scotland, in defense of the reformed Religion, both
in Doctrine and Discipline against Popery.

The third was an application of that old Covenant to the present state of
things, where, as in that all Popery, so in this all innovations in those
Books of Lyturgy unlawfully obtruded upon them are abjured; and a preservation
of the Kings Person and Authority; as likewise a mutual defense of each other
in this Covenant are sworn unto.

Against this Covenant the King, much displeased, made these four principal
objections: First, By what authority they entered into this Covenant? or
presumed to exact any Oath from their fellow Subjects? Secondly, if they had
power to command the new taking of this Oath, yet what power had they to
interpret it to their present occasion? it being a received Maxim, That no
less authority can interpret a Law, then that which made it, or the Judges
appointed by that Authority, to give sentence upon it. Thirdly, What power they
had to add any thing to it, and interpose a new Covenant of mutual assistance
to each other, against any other power that should oppose them, none excepted.
And fourthly, That all Leagues of Subjects among themselves, without the
privity and approbation of the King, are declared to be seditious by two
Parliaments in Scotland, one of the tenth Parliament of JAMES the sixth, Act
the twelfth; and the other the fifteenth Act of the ninth Parliament of Queen
MARY.

What answer the Covenanters made to these objections, and what arguments the
King used to enforce the contrary, are largely expressed in many writings;
being such indeed, as not only then, but since, in the sad calamities of
England, have been discoursed of in whole volumes; containing all that can be
said concerning the true Rights and Privileges of Princes and People.

The Covenant notwithstanding was generally subscribed by all there present at
Edinburgh, in February, 1638. and Copies of it sent abroad to those who were
absent, and so fast subscribed by them also, that before the end of April, he
was scarce accounted one of the Reformed Religion, that had not subscribed to
this Covenant. And the Church and State were divided into two names, of
Covenanters, and Non-Covenanters; the Non-Covenanters consisting first of
Papists, whose number was thought small in Scotland, scarce exceeding six
hundred: Secondly, some Statesmen in Office and favor at that time: Thirdly,
some^ who though they were of the Reformed Religion, were greatly affected to
the Ceremonies of England, and Book of Common Prayer.

Many Bishops at that time came from thence to the Court of England, and three
Lords of the Council of Scotland, whom the King had sent for, to advise about
the affairs of that Kingdom, where, after many debates what course to take,
whether of reducing the Covenanters by Arms, or using more gentle means: The
King at last sent the Marquess HAMILTON, together with those three Lords, into
Scotland.

The Marquess arrived at Dulketh, and within few days entered Edinburgh, in
June, being met and conducted into the City by a great multitude of all ranks,
in which number were seven hundred Pastors of Churches.

The Marquess, by the Kings Command, dealt with the Covenanters, to renounce
their Covenant, or else told them, there was no hope to obtain a National
Synod, which they so much desired, for settling of the Church, which they
affirmed could not be done, without manifest perjury and profanation of Gods
Name.

But when nothing was agreed upon, they besought the Marquess at his return
into England, to present their humble desire to the King: But before his
departure, in July he published the Kings Proclamation, wherein his Majesty
protests to defend the Protestant Religion; and that he would no more press
upon them the Book of Canons, or Service Book, but by lawful Mediums; That
he would rectify the High Commission, and was resolved to take a speedy
opportunity of calling both a Parliament and Synod.

When the Proclamation was ended, the Covenanters read their Protestation; of
which the heads were: That they never questioned his Majesty's sincerity in the
Protestant Religion; That these grants of his were not large enough to cure the
present distempers; for he does not utterly abolish that Service-Booke, nor the
High Commission, being both obtruded against all Law upon them; That their
meetings are not to be condemned in opprobrious words, being lawful, and such
as they would not forsake, until the purity of Religion, and peace, might be
fully settled by a free and National Synod.

The Marquess went into England, to return at a prefixed day, the twelfth of
August; In the mean time the Scots keep a solemn Fast; and the Covenanters,
not hoping from the King so quick a call of a National Synod, as the present
malady required, published a writing, wherein they endeavor to prove, That the
Church in such a condition may provide for it self; That the power of calling
a Synod, in case the Prince be an enemy to the truth, or negligent in promoting
the Churches good, is in the Church it self. And that the State of the Church
of Scotland at that time was necessitated to such a course; which they
endeavor to prove by reciting all their particular grievances, and by
answering all arguments of the contrary side, for the Right of Princes,
howsoever affected to Religion; as appears at large in their Tractate
concerning the necessity of Synods.

The Marquess returned into Scotland before the appointed day, and brought
Articles from the King, to which the Covenanters, if they would have either
Parliament or Synod, were required to consent.

But they utterly rejected those Articles, as too invalid for their purpose of
settling things; so that the Marquess fearing least the Covenanters, weary of
delays, would call a Synod without staying the Kings consent, earnestly
persuaded them to forbear it only till his next return from Court, whither
he would presently go to persuade the King. Which request of his, with much a
do was granted by them, and the day for his return appointed the 22 of
September; by which time, unless the Marquess returned, it was free for the
Covenanters to provide for their own affairs.

But the Marquess with singular diligence prevented his day, and published the
Kings Proclamation, of which the chief heads were: First, The King did
abrogate all Decrees of Council for the Book of Canons and Common Prayer, and
abrogate the High Commission. Secondly, That none should be pressed to the five
Articles of Perth. Thirdly, That Bishops should be subject to the censure of a
Synod. Fourthly, That no Oath should be given at Ordination of Pastors, but by
Law of Parliament. Fifthly, that the lesser Confession of 1580. should be
subscribed to by all the Kingdom. Sixthly, That the King called a National
Synod to begin at Glasco the 21 of November, 1638. and a Parliament at
Edinburgh the 15. of May, 1639. Lastly, for peace sake he would forget all
their offenses past.

The Covenanters at the first hearing of this peaceful Message, were much
joyed; but looking nearly into the words, they found (as they affirm) That
their precedent actions were tacitly condemned, and the just freedom of a
National Synod taken away.

Therefore loath to be deceived, they frame a Protestation, not (as they
alleged) mis-doubting the candor of the King, but not trusting those in favor
with him; by whose destructive Council they supposed it was, that the King had
not showed this clemency at first.

The chief heads of their Protestation were these: First, after humble thanks
to God and the King, they conceived this grant no sufficient remedy for their
sores.

For His Majesty calls that a panick fear in them, which was upon no
imaginary, but just grounds, as a real mutation both of Religion and Laws, by
obtrusion of those Books directly popish.

Secondly, whereas the King in his former Mandates so highly extolled those
Books, as most religious, and fit for the Church; they could not be satisfied
with a bare remission of the exercise of them, unless he would utterly
abrogate and condemn them; or else itching Innovators would not be wanting
hereafter to raise new troubles to the Church about them.

Thirdly, the just liberty of National Synods is diminished, and Episcopacy
set up, they being allowed as Bishops, though not deputed by the Churches, to
give their voices in a Synod.

Fourthly, the subscribing again of that old Covenant, could not be admitted
for many reasons there at large expressed; of which some are, That it would
frustrate their late Covenant, and make it narrower then before, and not able
to suit to the redress of present grievances, and be a needless multiplying
of Oaths, and taking the Name of God in vain; with many other objections,
which cannot be fully here inserted.

That Covenant notwithstanding was solemnly taken at Edinburgh by the Marquess
of HAMILTON, the Kings Commissioner, and all the Privy Council.

The Marquess then gave Order for the Synod, fearing least the Covenanters, if
he delayed to call it, would do it themselves, and on the 16. of November came
to Glasco in great state.

Where after many meetings for preparation to the business, on the 21 of the
same Month, according to the Kings Edict, the National Synod began: But
within seven days that Synod was dissolved by the Marquess HAMILTON, in the
Kings Name, and they commanded to sit no more.

The Marquess alleging for reason of it, that they had broken the Laws of a
free Synod in many proceedings, not only in those few days of their sitting,
but before it began in their manner of Elections, with other such like matters.

But they protested against that dissolution, and continued the Synod when the
Marquess was gone. What were the Acts of that Synod, what proceedings it had,
and what impediments it met withal, you may read in two large descriptions,
the one published by the King, the other by the Synod; how the Bishops
protested against the Synod; how the Synod answered their Protestation; how the
Synod wrote to the King; how they proceeded against the Bishops, deposing them
all from their Dignities; how of all fourteen Bishops, eight were
excommunicated, four excluded from all Ministerial Function, and two only
allowed to o^^ic^ate as Pastors; how the five Articles of Perth, the Book of
Lyturgy, the Book of Canons and Ordination, were all condemned, the High
Commission taken away, and whatsoever else had crept into the Church since the
year 1580. when that National Covenant was first established.

The Scots Covenanters, when themselves broke up the Synod, wrote a Letter of
thanks to the King, and immediately after published a Declaration, dated the
fourth of February, 1638. from Edinburgh, and directed To all the sincere and
good Christians in England, to vindicate their actions and intentions, from
those aspersions which enemies might throw upon them.

That Declaration was welcome to the people of England in general, and
especially to those who stood best affected to Religion, and the Laws and
Liberties of their Country: But by the Kings Authority it was suppressed, as
all other papers that might be sent from the Scots; and a Proclamation soon
after, bearing date the 27. of February, 1638. was published by the King, and
commanded to be read in all Churches of England; the Title of it was, A
Proclamation and Declaration to inform our loving Subjects of England,
concerning the seditious Actions of some in Scotland, who under false pretense
of Religion, endeavor the utter subversion of our Royal Authority.

The Declaration was ^illed with sharp invectives and execrations against the
Scottish Covenanters; but the truth is, it wrought little upon the hearts of
the English People; who conceived a good opinion of the Scots; and were more
confirmed in it, because the King had carried the whole business so closely
from the English Nation, as not only not to declare unto them in a Parliament,
(which former Princes used to call upon less occasions) but not revealing the
proceedings of it to the Body of his Privy Council, acquainting only some of
them whom he thought fittest for his purpose, as the King himself expresses
in two places of his own Book, entitled, A large Declaration concerning the
late tumults in Scotland, page 76. and page 126. in fine, the Scots are
declared Rebels; and the King in Person with an English Army richly furnished,
is going to chastise them.

CHAP. V.
The averseness of the English people from this War with Scotland. The King
advances to York with his Army. The preparation of the Scottish Covenanters.
A pacification is made, and both Armies disbanded. Another preparation for
War with Scotland. A Parliament called to begin in England on the 13. of
April. The Parliament of Scotland is broken off by command of the King to the
Earl of Traquare.
NEver were the people of England so averse from any War, as neither hating
the Enemy against whom, nor approving the cause for which they were engaged.

Their own great sufferings made them easily believe that the Scots were
innocent, and wronged by the same hand, by which themselves had been
oppressed; and for the cause, it was such, wherein they could not desire a
Victory; supposing that the same Sword which subdued the Scots, must destroy
their own Liberties; and that the contrivers of this War, were equal
Enemies to both Nations.

Nor was this only the thought of wisest Gentlemen, but the common people in
general were sensible of the mutual interest of both Kingdoms.

Those Courtiers who were in all things wholly complyant to the Kings will, did
also dislike this War with Scotland, though not for the same reason which the
forenamed did, as not considering the cause or quarrel, but the disadvantage of
the War it self.

Those disadvantages they used to vent in contemptuous expressions of the
poverty of Scotland; That nothing could be gotten from such wretched Enemies;
That the King were happy (if with his Honor he might suffer it) to be rid of
that Kingdom, and would be a great gainer by the loss of it: The younger
Courtiers were usually heard to wish Scotland under water, or that the old Wall
of SEVERUS the Emperor were now re-edified.

Those Courtiers that were of a graver discourse, did likewise seem to fear
the consequence of this b^sinesse, and I remember, would daily mention the
Story of CHARLES Duke of Burgundy, his pressing of a War upon the Swissers;
and what PHILIP DE COMMINES relates about the Battle of Granson, that the Duke
lost to the value of three millions of Crowns; all which he fondly ventured
against so wretched a people, that it is there expressed, if all the Swissers
had been taken Prisoners, they would not be able to pay a Ransom to the value
of the Spurs and Bridle-bits in his Camp: And very frequent in their mouths
was that Verse: Curandum in primis ne magna injuria fiat
Fortibus and miseris. Juvenal.
Take heed of offering too great injuries
To people stout and poor.


But the people of England, though they abhorred the very thought of that
unnatural War; yet glad they seemed to be, that such an occasion happened,
which might in reason necessitate the King to call an English Parliament, and
so by accident redress the many grievances of England: Which might also
prevent the fear of such Wars for the future, and bring a just punishment
upon those who were sound to be the Authors or assistors of this present
disturbance.

But the King, though resolved to pursue his design of War, rather then take
the advice of a Parliament, was content to want the aid of it; and to seek
supplies of a lower condition. Great sums of money he borrowed from the chief
Nobility; and required proportionable Loanes from all the Judges and Officers;
but specially the Clergy, of all ranks, were liberal in contribution to this
War; which was then called by many men, Bellum Episcopale.

All Courti^^s, as well extraordinary as ordinary, were summoned to attend the
King in Person with Horse and Arms in a proportion suitable to their ranks.

By whom, and such volunteers of the Gentry, as came in to gain His Majesty's
favor, with old Soldiers that embraced it as their profession, a gallant Army
was made up, York was appointed for the Rendezvouze, and the Earl of ARUNDELL
Commander in chief.

The King, as it was well known, had been advertised by many, and especially
by the prosecuted Bishops, who were fled out of Scotland, that the Scottish
Covenanters were in no sort able to resist him; That scarce any English Army at
all would be needful to fight, but only to appear, and His Majesty would
find a party great enough in Scotland to do the work.

And indeed much might have been done in that kind, if the Lords of the
Covenant had not used a most dexterous and timely prevention, which is as
necesssry in a defensive, as an offensive War.

For besides the feared incursion of the English upon their Borders, and what
invasion the Deputy of Ireland, on the Western Coast might make, together with
the Earl of ANTRIM, and his Forces from the Hebrides; the Marquess HUNTLEY in
the North, and Marquess DUGLAS toward the Southern parts, with the Earl of
HETH, were to be feared, and the Town of Aberden to be secured, before it
could fortify to receive the Kings Fleet.

All which with timely care was undertaken, and provided against by several
Lords, as ARGILE for the West, MONTROSSE for the North, Colonel MONROE for the
South.

The most considerable Forts in that Kingdom were taken in at the beginning,
without any blood or resistance, and furnished by them with Ammunition, as
Edinburgh, and Dun-Britain, and the Haven of Leeth, to secure Edinburgh,
suddenly fortified. All Neuters, or suspected persons, they disarmed without
tumult; The Castle of Dalketh they scaled and took, with all the warlike
provision which had been brought into it by Marquess HAMILTON the year
before. In that Castle they found the Kings Crown, Scepter, and Sword, which
in great state and solemnity were carried from thence by the greatest Noblemen,
and laid up in Edinburgh Castle.

The Covenanting Lords at the same time published a long Remonstrance, in
answer to the Kings Proclamation against them, the 27. of February, and to
satisfy the people of England concerning their proceedings and intents.

The Marquess HAMILTON arrived at Forth with a Fleet in May, and sent Letters
to the Governor of Edinburgh to obey the Kings Commands, and especially to
publish in Edinburgh that Proclamation, which had been by the King proclaimed
at York, upon the 25^ of April; wherein among other things, the Rents and
Debts due to Covenanters from Tenants and others, are forbidden to be paid to
them.

The Governor desired the Marquess to expect an answer till the Parliament
sat, which was to begin within few days, who returned answer to the
Marquess, That they could not in that obey his Command, for many reasons,
expressed at large in their Commentaries.

In the mean time the King commanded the Parliament to dissolve, which
immediately obeyed; And being threatened with War on every side, elected Sir
ALEXANDER LESLEY, an experienced Commander in the German Wars, to be their
great General; to whom all the greatest Earls and Lords of the Covenant,
swore obedience in all warlike Commands; taking an Oath of him for performance
of his duty; and immediately betook themselves every man to his charge
throughout all parts of the Kingdom, according as they were commanded by
LESLEY.

Whilst the Armies on both sides advanced forward, and no decision of this
difference seemed with reason to be hoped for, but such as the stroke of War
must allow; The Scottish Covenanters did nevertheless continue their first
course of petitioning the King; and by many addresses to him, protested their
loyalty to his Crown and Person; and did not omit by Letters and Messages, to
solicit as Advocates those English Noblemen, whom they esteemed best and
truest Patriots, as the Earls of ESSEX, PEMBROOKE, and HOLLAND, as supposing
that this War was not approved of by any that were firm to the Cause of
Religion, and Liberties of both Kingdoms, (for so themselves express it.)

The Earl of DUMFERLING having free passage about that time to the English
Army, assured his fellow-Covenanters, that those Noble forenamed Earls, and
almost all the English Nobility, were much averse from this War, and
^avourers of their suit to the King.

Which did so much encourage the Covenanters to continue their humble Petitions
to the King, (and God being pleased to give his blessing) that after some few
Messages to and fro, the King was pleased to give leave, that six of them
should come and personally treat at the Earl of ARUNDELL his Tent, upon the
tenth of June, with some of the English Nobility; at which Discourses some few
days after, the King himself vouchsafed to be present: At last after many
humble expressions of the Covenanters, and some expostulations of the King with
them, by the happy mediation of wise and noble Counselors, a Pacification was
solemnly made, upon such Articles as gave full satisfaction to all parties,
save only that the Scottish Covenanters were not pleased with some expressions
which the King had used in the Preface to the Pacificatory Edict, as calling
their late Synod, Pseudo Synodus Glasquensis; and aspersing their proceedings
in Arms, with such Epithites, as tumultuous, illegal, and rebellious.

Which notwithstanding, at the humble suit of them, the King was pleased to
moderate, to expunge some of those harsh phrases; as likewise to explain more
clearly other ambiguous sentences, to take away all suspicions from peoples
hearts; the Copies of which were delivered to diverse of the English Nobility,
who had taken faithful pains in procuring that happy peace; that if any
doubts should afterward happen, their judgments might be taken concerning the
intention of the writing.

The King also declared, for satisfaction of the Scots, That though his
expressions at some places might seem harsh, yet his meaning to them was never
the worse; That care must be taken of his own reputation in foreign parts;
and that litigation about words was vain, when the matter was clear, and
their suit wholly granted.

The King granted them a free National Synod, to be holden upon the sixth of
August following, and a Parliament to begin upon the 20. day of the same
Month, to confirm and ratify what the Synod should decree; which the Scots
thankfully receive, esteeming that to be the only proper and efficatious way
to settle a firm peace both in Church and State.

They were also joyful, that the King had promised to be there himself in
person; but that hope afterward failed them, for the King excused himself,
affirming that urgent and weighty affairs at London, as he was certified by
Letters from his Queen and Council, required his presence there; but that he
would send a Deputy thither, with full power to make good whatsoever he had
promised, which was the Earl of TRAQUARE.

This Pacification, to the great joy of good men, was solemnly concluded on the
18. of June, 1639. and both Armies within eight and forty hours to be
disbanded, which was accordingly done, and both the English and Scots returned
home, praising God; who without any effusion of blood had compounded this
difference, and prevented a War so wickedly designed.

But that joy lasted not long; for the Earl of TRAQUARE, the Kings
Commissioner could not agree with the Scottish Parliament; the Scots
complaining, that nothing was seriously performed, which the King had promised
at the Pacification, as shall more appear afterward.

But however it were, within a little time after that the King had been at
London, that Paper which the Scots avowed to contain the true Conditions of
that Pacification, was by the King disavowed, and commanded by Proclamation to
be burned by the hands of the hangman; though the Contents of that Paper were
not named at all in the Proclamation, nor the people of England acquainted with
any of them. Which put the English in great fear that the former Counsels of
divisions yet prevailed in the Court, especially discerning a show of
preparation for War again.

But leaving the Scots at their Parliament a while. In the mean time the Lord
WENTWORTH, Deputy of Ireland, arrived in England, and was received by the King
with great expressions of grace and favor, dignified with a higher Title, and
created Earl of Strafford.

Great was the expectation of all the English, what might be the effect of his
coming over; great was the opinion which men in general had conceived of his
ability and parts; looking at him as the only hinge, upon which the State was
now likely to turn. But very different and various were the conjectures of
Gentlemen at that time, in their ordinary discourses, (for I will relate the
truth,) what use this great Statesman would make of his ability and favor.

Some (as they wished) did seem to hope, when they considered his first right
Principles, that whatsoever he had acted since his greatness, was but to
ingratiate himself perfectly with the King; that so at last by his wisdom and
favor he might happily prevail, both upon the Kings judgment and affection,
and carry him from those evil Counsels which he had long been nurtured in,
to such ways as should render him most honorable and happy; That the Earl
was so wise as to understand what most became a wise man, and would make
greatness beloved and permanent.

But others durst not hope so much from him, when they considered his
Government in Ireland, and the ambition of the man: They feared that neither
his virtue was great enough to venture his own fortunes, by opposing any evil
Counsels about the King, nor his favor great enough to prevail in
overruling; That he was sent for only to complete that bad work, which
others of less brain then he had begun.

Which he would sooner venture to do, then to make himself the Author of a new
and good one; seeing it has been observed, that few Statesmen have ever
opposed Princes, but rather seconded and assisted them in their bad
inclinations.

From whence it comes, that few Statesmen have converted Princes from ill
courses, but been themselves perverted from that goodness which seemed to be
before in them. Historians therefore neither imputed the goodness of AUGUSTUS
to MARCUS AGRIPPA, or STATILIUS TAURUS, nor TIBERIUS faults to SEJANUS.
According to that sentence of MACHIAVELL, Recta consilia a quocunque
profiscuntur, a Principis prudentia; non autem Principis prudentia a rectis
consiliis derivatur.

At that time the King declared to his Council an intention that he had of
calling a Parliament in England, to begin in April following. The people
seemed to wonder at so great a novelty as the name of a Parliament, but feared
some further design, because it was so long deferred, whilst in the mean
time preparations for a War against Scotland, seemed to go forward, and the
Deputy of Ireland was first to go over, and summon a Parliament in Ireland,
which he accordingly did, crossing the Seas about the end of December.

What work he was to do there, the people knew not, but wished that the
English Parliament might have begun, before the Scottish business had
proceeded too far, which they supposed might happily prevent so sad a War,
and save those charges, which would before April grow upon such warlike
preparations, and require a supply from that Parliament; that it were better to
prevent such a necessity, then purposely to stay till that necessity were made.

On the 18. day of that December, the Earl of TRAQUARE, by a Command from the
King, under his Privy Seal, broke up the Parliament in Scotland, and prorogued
it till the second day of June in the following year.

The Scots complained that it was a new example and breach of their Liberties,
not heard of before in twenty ages; That a Parliament fully assembled, and
complete in all her Members, whilst business of moment was depending, should
be dissolved without the consent of the House it self; That whatsoever Kings
in other Kingdoms might do, it concerned not them to enquire, but it was
absolutely against their Laws, according to which, the King had lately
promised them he would only proceed.

TRAQUARE, immediately upon the dissolution of the Scottish Parliament,
hastened to the Court of England to certify the King of all proceedings.

And the Parliament Deputies of Scotland dispatched away with special
instructions to the King also four Commissioners, the Earls of DUMFERLING and
LOWDEN, DUGLASSE, and BARCLAY.

Their instructions were, That before the King himself, not the Council of
England (because of the independency of that Kingdom) they should complain of
those injuries, and entreat redress, which had been offered to them since the
Pacification; The dissolving of their Parliament; The Garrisonning of Edinburgh
Castle with three times as many as would serve for defense; The garrisoning of
Dun-Britain Castle with English Soldiers; That the Scots trading in England,
but more especially in Ireland, were enforced to new Oaths, damning their late
Covenant, and contrary to the Articles of Pacification.

They sent withal an information to the English Nation in general, touching
all their proceedings and intentions, and expressing at large (as may be there
read) what particular injuries they had received since the Pacification, and
how much contrary to that Agreement.

The four Scottish forenamed Commissioners, after some audiences before the
King, and diverse of his English Council, were in March committed to Prison,
the King intending shortly to charge them, the Parliament being near, LOWDEN
to the Tower, and the other three to other custody.

About this time the Earl of STRAFFORD returning out of Ireland, where he had
held a short Parliament, and gotten four Subsidies from them, came to the King
again; and the English Parliament being presently to begin, an accusation was
drawn against LOWDEN, then Prisoner in the Tower, concerning a Letter written
from the Scottish Covenanters to the French King; to which Epistle the said
Earl had set his hand.

The matter of accusation was, That the Scots, weary of obedience to their own
King, had recourse to a foreign Prince for assistance, and by that means
might draw the Armies of France into this Island.

His answer was, The Letter was written in May, 1639. when Scotland was
threatened with a grievous invasion, and they had notice, that by Ambassadors
and Agents their Cause was represented odious to all foreign Princes and
States; That their intention was to clear themselves from those aspersions
abroad, and especially to the King of France, whose Ancestors had been ancient
friends to the Kingdom of Scotland; and for fear least that King might
possibly be wrought upon to be their Enemy otherwise.

That it was not to draw Warlike assistance from the King of France (which
nevertheless they thought lawful in an extreme necessity and persecution)
but only his mediation in their behalf to their own King; and that the Letter
well examined would bear no other sense; Though there were mention of aid, yet
their secret instructions to their Messenger had specified what kind of aid it
was which they desired; But howsoever, they alleged that the draught of that
Letter did not then please them, nor was it at all consented to, nor intended
to be sent; besides that, the Superscription To the King, at which so great
exception was taken, as if they acknowledged the French King for their
Sovereign, was not written at all by them, but added by some Enemy, after that
it was gotten out of their hand. Besides all this, the thing was done before the
Pacification, and Act of Oblivion, and ought not now to be remembered against
them. Whether their answer were sufficient or not, true it is, that nothing at
all was made of that business, though the King himself at the beginning of
the English Parliament, mentioned it against the Scots, as a proof of their
disloyalty, and justification of those Warlike preparations which he had made
against them.

The Scots in the mean time had written to the English Parliament a large
Justification of all their proceedings, entreating them by the way of Brotherly
advice, To be wary in vindicating their own Laws and Liberties, to frustrate
the design of those evil Counselors, who had procured this Parliament for no
other end, then to arm the King with warlike supplies against his Scottish
Subjects, and by that War to inslave, if not ruin both the Nations; That
after so many violations and dissolutions of Parliaments in England, this was
not called to redress grievances, but to be so overreached (if they were not
careful and courageous) that no possibility should be left for the future of
redressing any; That some dangerous practice might be well suspected, when at
the same time a Parliament was denied to Scotland, though promised by the word
of a King, granted to England when not expected; and obtruded upon Ireland,
when not desired.

Many particulars of that nature were expressed in the Scottish Remonstrance.

CHAP. VI.
The Parliament begins in England, but is soon dissolved. The Clergy
continue their Convocation. The Scots enter into England. Some passages of the
War. A Parliament is called to begin on the third of November. A Truce
between the Armies for two Months.
Upon the thirteenth of April the Parliament began; when the King produced
that forenamed writing of his Scottish Subjects to the French King, as an
apparent token of their disloyalty, and a necessity in him of chastising them
by Arms; for which he had already made so great a preparation, as required a
present supply of money from this Parliament. To the same purpose that the King
had briefly expressed himself, the Lord Keeper FINCH, in a long and eloquent
Oration dilated the business.

Twelve Subsidies were demanded by the King, in lieu of which, the release of
Ship Money was promised; to which demand answer was made by diverse Members of
the House in several Speeches, That redress of grievances was the chief end
of assembling Parliaments, and ought to precede granting of Subsidies. Which
not only reason, but the constant practice of all ages had confirmed; That
there was never more need of redressing grievances than at this time; without
which the people would repine to part with twelve Subsidies; That the sum was
extraordinary great, especially to be given for releasing of that which they
never conceived the King had any Title to, but had taken by power against the
Laws.

The King promised that grievances should be afterward redressed, but required
the Money first, because there was a necessity of hastening the War; without
which the opportunity of Summer would be lost. To which it was answered by
many, That the people had no reason to pay for that which was never caused nor
desired by them, nor could any way prove to their good, but quite contrary to
the danger and detriment of the whole Kingdom; That the same people would
undoubtedly pay with more willingness so many Subsidies to prevent that
unhappy War, to settle the State, and punish the principal contrivers or
assistors of that disturbance.

Among all the Gentlemen of the House of Commons, who spoke to that purpose,
the Lord GEORGE DIGBY, Son to the Earl of Bristoll (a young Nobleman of
extraordinary abilities) was ^minent for a Speech there; wherein complaining
that the House was required to give present answer concerning supplies to the
King, to engage himself in a War, and that a Civil War; For, said he, so I
must needs call it, seeing we are of the same Religion, and under the same
King. He divided his Complaint into five heads: 1. We are not permitted to
redress grievances at all. 2. We are not permitted so much as to represent to
His Majesty the dis-affection of his Subjects to this War. 3. We are not
permitted to say, That we think they are the same persons that are the causers
of our grievances, and the grievances of Scotland; and that the cutting off of
those Incendiaries of State, would be a safe, easy, and honorable cure. 4.
That War will make the breach wider, and the remedy desperate. 5. That the
best Justice is to fill the pits which are made to entrap others, with the
bodies of those that dug them, etc.


Master PYM also, a grave and religious Gentleman, in a long Speech of almost
two hours, recited a Catalogue of all the grievances which at that time lay
heavy upon the Commonwealth.

Of which many abbreviated Copies, as extracting the heads only, were with
great greediness taken by Gentlemen and others throughout the Kingdom; for it
was not then in fashion to print Speeches of Parliament,

Diverse of the Members besides (too many to be here named) did fully descant
upon such particular grievances, as they had informed themselves of, in their
several Countries and Buroughs.

But it is most true, though it have been said, Quicquid multis peccatur,
inultum est, That there was never any Parliament which was more unanimous in
apprehension of grievances, and yet more moderate in the Language and manner of
declaring against them. And so great seemed to be their care of offending in
this Parliament, being the first that in so many years had been granted to
England; that notwithstanding they perceived the Money they were to give to the
King, must be employed against their own interest, yet they took the
Subsidies into consideration; by which they might perchance gain the Kings
affection to Parliaments; and were content to hope, that whilst the Houses
sat, the bad Council about the King might be awed into moderation; and the
War against Scotland, by wise and honest interpositions, might be again
composed, as it had been the Summer before.

But whilst the business was in debate, whether they were not quick enough in
granting, or the Conditions were too much feared by the King, I will not judge,
but only relate what was done.

The King in Person came into the House upon the fifth of May, and dissolved
the Parliament, but used fair language to them, protesting that he would
govern as much according to Law, as if a Parliament were constantly sitting:
Yet the next day after the dissolution of it, some Members were imprisoned, the
Lord BROOK was searched for Papers, his Study, Cabinets, and Pockets; Master
BELLOSIS, and Sir JOHN HOTHAM, were committed to Prison for Speeches, but soon
discharged; Master CREW, who was a Member of the House of Commons, and was in
the Chair for Petitions concerning Ministers, was committed to the Tower, for
not discovering some Petitions delivered to him in Parliament, and continued a
Prisoner almost to the beginning of the next Parliament.

After the dissolution of this Parliament, the Convocation of Divines continued
their sitting, and by authority from the King, made diverse Canons, and an Oath
to be imposed upon not only Clergymen, but many of the Laity.

That continuance of the Convocation, whatsoever themselves, perchance ignorant
of the Law, might think of it, was judged very illegal, as it appeared by the
Votes of the succeeding Parliament, and the opinion of Lawyers delivered there.

When Master BAGSHAW, the November following, inveighing against those Canons
which were made whilst they sat, proved the Bishops and Clergy in a
premumire: The Lord DIGBY at the same time affirming, that their Convocation
was a new Synod, patched out of an old Conventicle. Many other Lawyers of note
at several times argued the case concerning those Canons.

Insomuch that the House of Commons in December following, nullo contradicente,
resolved that those Canons were against the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
the Property and Liberty of the Subject: And in the following April, 1641.
falling again upon the late Convocation, for their Canons and other
misdemeanors, they voted the Convocation House in 200000 pounds fine to the
King; The Archbishop of Canterbury to pay 20000 pounds, the Archbishop of York
10000 pounds, the Bishop of Chester 3000 pounds; and the rest of the Clergy
according to their abilities proportionably, to make up the sum.

Certain it is, it was not in any substantial way advantageous to the King;
but only to give them time and opportunity to tax the Clergy in Money for
supplying his Majesty in the War then on foot against the Scots.

The King must needs be driven to a great exigent at that time, having so
expensive a War in hand, and wanting the assistance of Parliament.

The courses that were then taken by the King, to supply that defect, were
partly the contribution of the Clergy, to whom that War was less
displeasing, then to the Laity.

Collections were made among the Papists; Writs of Ship Money were issued out
again, in a greater proportion then before; great Loanes were attempted to be
drawn from the City of London, to which purpose the names of the richest
Citizens were by command returned to the Council Board. But these ways being
not sufficient, some other were made use of, which were of a nature more
unusual, as the seizing of Bolloine in the Tower; the Lord COTTINGTON also for
the Kings use took up a great Commodity of Pepper at the Exchange, to be sold
again at an under rate.

A consultation was also had of coining 400000. l. of base Money, upon
allegation that Queen ELIZABETH had done the like for her Irish Wars, but the
King waved that, upon reasons which the Merchants gave of the inconveniences
of it.

The Scots hearing of the breach of this English Parliament, thought it high
time to provide for their own safety; and being restrained in their Trade, and
impoverished by loss of Ships seized in diverse parts, resolve to enter England
with a sword in one hand, and a Petition in the other; signifying in the mean
time to the people of England in two large Remonstrances, what their intentions
were to that Nation, and the reasons of their entrance; which who so pleases,
may read at large in their printed Book.

When the King had notice of the Scots intentions, a Fleet was forthwith sent
to annoy the Maritime Coasts of Scotland, and a Land Army to meet at York,
where the Earl of STRAFFORD, as President of the North, commanded in Chief,
though the Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND at the time of raising the Army was named
Generalissimo, but for want of health could not be present.

A great Magazine of Ammunition had been sent to Hull, Newcastle, and Berwick,
the Castle of Edinburgh being kept by RIVEN, a firm man to the Kings side.

But in the Expedition of the Kings Army toward the North, it was a mavelous
thing to observe in diverse places the averseness of the Common Soldiers from
this War.

Though Commanders and Gentlemen of great quality, in pure obedience to the
King, seemed not at all to dispute the cause or consequence of this War; the
Common Soldiers would not be satisfied, questioning in a mutinous manner,
Whether their Captains were Papists or not, and in many places were not
appeased till they saw them receive the Sacrament; laying violent hands on
diverse of their Commanders, and killing some, uttering in bold speeches their
distaste of the Cause, to the astonishment of many, that common people should
be sensible of public Interest and Religion, when Lords and Gentlemen seemed
not to be.

By this backwardness of the English Common Soldiers, it came to pass that
the War proved not so sharp and fatal to both Nations, as it might
otherwise have done.

Some blood was shed, but very little, first at Newburne, a Town five miles
distant from Newcastle, where part of the English Army encamped to intercept
the passage of the Scots, as they marched toward Newcastle.

But many of the English Soldiers forsook their Commanders and ^led, sooner
then the use of that Nation is to do in War: But the English Horse made good
a fight, and with great courage and resolution charged upon the Scots, but all
in vain, their number being too small.

In this Skirmish which happened upon the 28. of August, the number of men
slain on both sides is not related, either by the English or Scottish
Relation; but certain it is, that it was not great.

Three valiant and active Commanders of the English Army were taken Prisoners,
Colonel WILMOT Sir JOHN DIGBY, and ONEALE, the two latter being Papists, and
both Captains of Horse.

This fight opened that rich Town of Newcastle to the Scots, and within few
days after, they put a Garrison into Durham, commanded by the Earl of
Dumferling, and taking that Fort of Newcastle upon Tine, intercepted some Ships
which were newly arrived there with Provision of Corn for the Kings Army.

Some blood was also shed about the same time, when part of the English
Garrison at Berwick, hearing that some Ammunition was laid up in a little
Town of Scotland, Dunsian, made an attempt upon it, but found it better
fortified then was expected, and were repelled with some slaughter; from whence
hearing that a greater power of Scots was making toward them, under the command
of the Lord HADINTON, (who unfortunately perished afterward, blown up with
powder at Dunglasse) they returned to Berwick.

The King, during these Skirmishes, had by Proclamation warned all the English
Nobility, with their followers and Forces, to attend his Standard at York
against the Scots, the 20. of September; where whilst himself in Person
resided, he received an humble Petition from the Scots, containing an
expression of their loyalty to him, and the innocence of their intentions
toward England.

But their expressions were in such general terms, that the King returned
answer to the Earl of LANURICK, Secretary for Scotland, Commanding them to
specify their demands more particularly: Which whilst the Scots prepared to
do, it pleased God to open the hearts of many English Lords, who considering
and bewailing the great calamity and dishonor which England was then thrown
into, by these unhappy proceedings of the King, framed an humble Letter,
subscribed by all their hands, and sent it to His Majesty, wherein they
represent to him the miserable condition of the Kingdom, and mischiefs
attending that wicked War; as the danger of his Person, the waste of his
Revenue, the burden of his Subjects, the rapines committed by that Army which
he had raised; wherein Papists, and others ill-affected to Religion, are armed
in Commands, who are not by the Laws permitted to have Arms in their own
houses; The great mischief which may fall upon the Kingdom, if his
intentions, which are reported of bringing in Irish and foreign Forces,
should take effect; The urging of Ship Money; The multitude of Monopolies and
other Patents, to the great and universal grievance of his people; The great
grief of the Subjects, for the long intermission of Parliaments, for
dissolving of the last, and former dissolutions of such as have been called,
without any good effect: For remedy whereof, and for prevention of future
dangers to his own Royal Person, and the whole State, they humbly entreat his
Majesty, That he would be pleased to summon a Parliament within some short and
convenient time, whereby the causes of these, and other great grievances, which
the people lie under, may be taken away, and the Authors and Counselors of
them, may be brought to legal trial, and condign punishment; And that this
War may be composed without blood, in such manner as may conduce to the honor
and safety of his Majesty, the comfort of the people, and uniting of both
Kingdoms, against the Common Enemy of the Reformed Religion. Subscribed by
almost twenty Earls and Barons.

The King receiving this Message from the Peers of England; by his
Proclamation ordained a day, which was upon 24. of September, for all the Lords
to meet at York, to whom he declared, that of his own free accord he had
determined to call a Parliament in England, to begin as soon as possibly could
be, allowing the usual time for issuing out of Writs, which was upon the third
of November ensuing, 1640.

But he desired first to consult with them, what answer to return to the Scots
demands, and how with his honor he might deal with them, who had so boldly
invaded England.

And to make them understand the whole state of the business, he commanded the
Earl of TRAQUARE, who had been his Commissioner there, to relate all
occurrences since the beginning.

He desired likewise their advice how his Army might be paid before supplies
of Parliament could come.

After many debates, and different opinions in point of honor and convenience;
it was at last agreed by the greater part of Peers, and so conluded, that
sixteen Lords should be chosen to treat with the Scots, and agree upon what
Conditions they thought fit.

Eight Earls were named, BEDFORD, ESSEX, HARTFORT, SALISBURY, WARWICK,
HOLLAND, BRISTOLL, and BARKSHIRE; as likewise eight Barons, WHARTON, PAGET,
KIM^OLTON, BROOK, PAWLET, HOWARD, SAVILE, and DUNSMORE.

The Scots were required to send as many with full Commission, to whom Letters
of safe Conduct in the amplest manner were granted.

When the matter came to debate, the Earl of Bristoll for the most part was
Prolocutour to the English, and the Earl of LOWDEN to the Scots.

After many demands on both sides, and expostulations upon sleighter matters,
which were easily reconciled, there was one point, which seemed too hard a case
in the eyes of the English Peers, that the Scottish Army should be paid by
the English, whilst their own Army was in great distress by reason of
Arreares.

But in conclusion, those honest Lords, who understood the condition of that
unhappy War, were content upon any terms to make an end of it; and in
conclusion an agreement was made upon these terms: 1. A Truce or Cessation of
Arms for two Months, till the 16. of December. 2. That 850. l. a day should
be paid to the Scots, during that Truce. 3. That if it were not paid, the
Scots might force it from the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland,
Westmerland, and Durham. 4. That those Counties should be allowed the Scots for
their winter Quarters. 5. No new preparations for War to be made. 6. That
private injuries should not break the Truce, so satisfaction were made upon
complaint. 7. That Merchants might freely traffic in either Kingdom, without
Letters of safe Conduct, but Soldiers without leave might not pass their
limits.


Upon such terms was this unnatural War (although the Armies could not as
yet be disbanded) brought to a Cessation; and both Nations rested in assured
confidence, that a peace must needs follow, since the whole matter was now to
be debated in the English Parliament, which was to begin about a fortnight
after; for it was likely that a Parliament should put a period to that War,
which could never have been begun, but for want of a Parliament. They were also
confident, that that freedom which the fundamental Laws and Constitutions of
the Kingdom of England allow to Parliaments, could not be denied to this
(though to many others it had long been) as being that Parliament, to which the
King was necessitated; and the only way which was now left him to tread, after
so many deviations unfortunately tried; and upon which the people had set up
their utmost hope, whom it seemed not safe after so long suffering, to provoke
any further.

In what a desperate condition the Kingdom of England was at that time, what
necessity there was of a present cure, with how much difficulty that cure was
to be wrought, and with what wariness and wisdom it concerned both King and
people to play their parts, a judicious Reader may partly conjecture by the
former passages already related.

But further to enlighten the Reader (for in this plain Relation I shall be
sparing to use any descants of my own (I will refer him to Speeches which at
the beginning of this Parliament were made by judicious Gentlemen, and those of
greatest moderation, laboring as much as they could possibly to spare the
King, and touch tenderly upon his Honor, which I shall mention anon.

According to the reason of the Parliament and Kingdom, went along the sense
of Courtiers themselves (as was expressed in an ingenuous Treatise found in the
privy Chamber) concerning the condition in which the King and Kingdom of
England were in, when this so much expected Parliament was to begin.

CHAP. VII.
The beginning of the English Parliament. Grievances examined. Sufferers
relieved. Delinquents questioned. The Archbishop of Canterbury committed to the
Tower. The flight of Secretary WINDEBANKE, and of the Lord Keeper FINCH.
ON the third of November 1640. the Parliament began; where the King expressed
himself very well, in a Speech gracious and acceptable to both Houses; who did
not expect from him any such acknowledgement of former errors, as might seem
too low for the Majesty of his Person; but only desired to gain his
affection for the future.

Very pleasing to them all was that gracious expression, that He did now
clearly and freely put himself upon the love and affections of his English
Subjects, desiring them to consider the best way for the Safety and Security of
the Kingdom of England; and in order to it, for satisfaction of their just
grievances, wherein he would so heartily concur, that the world might see his
intentions were to make it a glorious and flourishing Kingdom. In which
business he did freely and willingly leave it to them where to begin.

He desired also that all Jealousies and Suspicions might be laid aside by
them, which he promised to do on his part. And withal, to give some
reasonable color to his former War, whether to excuse or justify the
Proceedings of it, he seemed as yet much distasted with the boldness of the
Scots, who had entered England with an Army against his will; calling them by
the name of Rebels; and that it concerned the honor of him and England, to
drive them out again.

And in his second Speech, two days after, I told you (said he) that the
Rebels must be put out of this Kingdom; it is true, I must needs call them so,
so long as they have an Army that do invade us; although I am under Treaty with
them, and under my Great Seal do call them Subjects, for so they are too.

His desire to have them out, was sweetened with that reason, That he was
sensible how much his English Subjects of the North would suffer otherwise.

All which, with more particulars, was set forth in a long Oration by the Lord
Keeper FINCH; who likewise justified the Kings intention of calling this
Parliament, before the Peers petitioned him at York.

Though the King were thanked for his Grace toward his English Parliament; yet
that motion of expelling the Scots, was otherwise considered of by the Houses,
as will appear in the particulars of it: For about a week after it was
ordered by the House of Commons, That 100000 l. should be paid to the two
Armies, to be levied rateably upon all the Counties of England, (except the
Northern Counties, which were then charged) and till it could be leavied the
Money to be taken up at Interest.

And Scottish Commissioners were allowed to come and exhibit their complaints,
and dispute the business at London; who accordingly came thither about the
nineteenth day of the same Month, for the business was not yet ended, but
still in Treaty, which Treaty (as the King said in his Speech) was but
transported from Kippon to London.

Before the great cure, which was expected from this Parliament, could go on,
it was necessary that some time should be spent in searching and declaring the
wounds, which in diverse elegant and judicious Speeches, was done by some
Members of both Houses.

The abuses which of late years had been committed about Religion, and the
manifold violations of Laws and Liberties, were upon the first day after the
House of Commons was settled, being the ninth of November, enumerated and
discoursed upon by Master GRIMSTON, Sir BENJAMIN RUDIERD, Master PYM, and
Master BAGSHAW, and the abuses of Ireland, reflecting much upon the Earl of
Strafford, were opened by Sir JOHN CLOTWORTHY of Devon, but living in Ireland.

The like Speeches for many days following, were made by diverse Gentlemen of
great quality; where in the midst of their complaints, the King was never
mentioned, but with great Honor. They always mixing thanks for the present
hope of redress, with their complaints of former grievances.

The first of which they rendered to the King, and threw the other upon his
Ministers; of which if the Reader would see a perfect exemplar, Sir BENJAMIN
RUDYERD his Speech (the second that was delivered in the House) will best
discover the present state of grievances, and the way of sparing the King, a
Religious, Learned, and Judicious Gentleman.

Cujus erant mores, qualis facundia. Whose Speech I shall wholly insert, that
the condition of the State may the better be understood.

Master Speaker:

WE are here assembled to do Gods business, and the Kings, in which our own
is included, as we are Christians, as we are Subjects: Let us first fear God,
then shall we honor the King the more; for I am afraid we have been the less
prosperous in Parliaments, because we have preferred other matters before him.
Let Religion be our Primum quaerite, for all things else are but Et caetera's
to it; yet we may have them too, sooner and surer, if we give God his
precedence.

We well know what disturbance has been brought upon the Church for vain
petty trifles; How the whole Church, the whole Kingdom, has been troubled,
where to place a Metaphor, an Altar.

We have seen Ministers, their wives, children, and families undone, against
Law, against conscience, against all bowels of compassion, about not dancing
upon Sundaies: What do these sort of men think will become of themselves, when
the Master of the House shall come and find them thus beating their fellow
Servants?

These inventions were but sives, made of purpose to winnow the best men, and
that is the Devils occupation.

They have a mind to worry preaching; for I never yet heard of any but
diligent Preachers that were vexed with these and the like devices.

They despise Prophecy, and as one said, they would feign be at something were
like the Mass, that will not bite; a muzzled Religion. They would evaporate
and dis-spirit the power and vigor of Religion, by drawing it out into solemn
and specious formalities, into obsolete antiquated Ceremonies, new furbish'd
up. And this (belike) is that good work in hand, which Doctor HEYLIN has so
celebrated in bis bold Pamphlets: All their acts and actions are so full of
mixtures, involutions, and complications, as nothing is clear, nothing
sincere, in any of their proceedings: Let them not say, That these are the
porverse suspicions, malicious interpretations of some factious spirits amongst
us, when a Romanist has bragged and congratulated in print, That the face of
our Church begins to alter, the Language of our Religion to change: And SANCTA
CLARA has published, That if a Synod were held Non intermixtis Puritanis,
setting Puritans aside, our Articles and their Religion would soon be agreed.

They have so brought it to pass, that under the name of Puritans, all our
Religion is branded, and under a few hard words against Jesuits, all Popery is
countenanced.

Whosoever squares his actions by any rule, either divine or humane, he is a
Puritan: Whosoever would be governed by the Kings Laws, he is a Puritan.

He that will not do whatsoever other men would have him do, he is a Puritan.
Their great work, their Masterpiece now is, to make all those of the Religion,
to be the suspected party of the Kingdom.

Let us further reflect upon the ill effect these courses have wrought, what by
a defection from us on the one side, a separation on the other; some imagining
whether we are tending, made have to turn or declare themselves Papists before
hand; thereby hoping to render themselves the more gracious, the more
acceptable. A great company of the Kings Subjects, striving to hold communion
with us; but seeing how far we were gone, and fearing how much further we
would go, were forced to fly the Land, some into other inhabited Countries,
very many into savage Wildernesses, because the Land would not bear them. Do
not they that cause this cast a reproach upon the Government?

Master Speaker:

Let it be our principal care, that these ways neither continue, nor return
upon us; if we secure our Religion we shall cut off and defeat many plots that
are now on foot by them and others. Believe it, Sir, Religion has been for a
long time, and still is the great design upon this Kingdom. It is a known
and practiced principle, That they who would introduce another Religion into
the Church, must first trouble and disorder the Government of the State, that
so they may work their ends in a confusion, which now lies at the door.

I come next, Master Speaker, to the Kings business more particularly; which
indeed is the Kingdoms, for one has no existence, no being, without the
other, their relation is so near; yet some have strongly and subtly labored
a divorse, which has been the very bane of both King and Kingdom.

When foundations are shaken, it is high time to look to the building; he has
no heart, no head, no soul, that is not moved in his whole man, to look upon
the distresses, the miseries of the Commonwealth, that is not forward in all
that he is and has, to redress them in a right way.

The King likewise is reduced to great straights, wherein it were
undutifulnesse beyond inhumanity to take advantage of him: Let us rather make
it an advantage for him, to do him best service, when he has most need, not to
seek our own good, but in him, and with him, else we shall commit the same
crimes our selves, which we must condemn in others.

His Majesty has clearly and freely put himself into the hands of this
Parliament; and I presume, there is not a man in this House, but feels himself
advanced in this high Trust; but if he prosper no better in our hands, then he
has done in theirs, who have hitherto had the handling of his affairs, we
shall for ever make our selves unworthy of so gracious a confidence.

I have often thought and said, That it must be some great extremity, that
would recover and rectify this State, and when that extremity did come, it
would be a great hazard, whether it might prove a remedy or ruin. We are now,
Master Speaker, upon that vertical turning point, and therefore it is no time
to palliate, to foment our own undoing.

Let us set upon the remedy; we must first know the disease; But to discover
the diseases of the State, is (according to some) to traduce the Government;
yet others are of opinion, That this is the half way to the Cure.

His Majesty is wiser then they that have advised him, and therefore he cannot
but see and feel their subverting destructive Counsels, which speak louder
then I can speak of them; for they ring a doleful deadly knell over the whole
Kingdom: His Majesty best knows who they are. For us, let the matters bolt
out the men, their actions discover them.

They are men that talk largely of the Kings Service, yet have done none but
their own, and that is too evident.

They speak highly of the Kings power; but they have made it a miserable power,
that produces nothing but weakness, both to the King and Kingdom.

They have exhausted the Kings Revenue to the bottom, nay through the bottom,
and beyond.

They have spent vast sums of money wastfully, fruitlesly, dangerously; so that
more money without other Councels, will be but a swift undoing.

They have always peremptorily pursued one obstinate pernicious course; first,
they bring things to an extremity, then they make that extremity of their own
making, the reason of their next action, seven times worse then the former; and
there we are at this instant.

They have almost spoiled the best instituted Government in the world, for
Sovereignty in a King, Liberty to the Subject, the proportionable temper of
both which, makes the happiest State for power, for riches, for duration.

They have unmannerly, and slubbringly, cast all their projects, all their
machinations, upon the King, which no wise or good Minister of State ever did,
but would still take all harsh, distastefull things, upon themselves, to
clear, to sweeten their Master.

They have not suffered His Majesty to appear unto his people in his own
native goodness.

They have ecclipsed him by their interpositions. Although gross condense
bodies may obscure and hinder the Sun from shining out, yet he is still the
same in his own splendor. And when they are removed, all creatures under him
are directed by his light, comforted by his Beams.

But they have framed a superstitious seeming Maxim of State for their own
turn, That if a King will suffer men to be torn from him, he shall never have
any good service done him. When the plain truth is, That this is the surest
way to preserve a King from having ill servants about him; and the Divine truth
likewise is, Take away the wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be
established.

Master Speaker: Now we see what the sores are in general; and when more
particulars shall appear, let us be very careful to draw out the cores of
them, not to skin them over with a slight suppurating festring cure, least they
break out again into a greater mischief: Consider of it, consult, and speak
your minds.

It has heretofore been boasted, That the King should never call a Parliament,
till he had no need of his people: These were words of division, and Malignity.
The King must always, according to his occasions, have use of the peoples
power, hearts, hands, purses; The people will always have need of the Kings
Clemency, Justice, Protection: And this reciprocation is the strongest, the
sweetest union.

It has been said too of late, That a Parliament will take away more from the
King, then they will give him. It may well be said, That those things which
will fall away of themselves, will enable the Subject to give him more then can
be taken any way else. Projects and Monopolies are but leaking Conduit-Pipes;
The Exchequer it self at the fullest, is but a Cisterne, and now a broken one;
Frequent Parliaments only are the fountains, and I do not doubt, but in this
Parliament, as we shall be free in our advices, so shall we be the more free of
our purses, that His Majesty may experimentally find the real difference of
better Councels, the true solid grounds of raising and establishing his
Greatness, never to be brought again (by Gods blessing) to such dangerous,
such desperate perplexities.

Master Speaker: I confess I have now gone in a way much against my nature,
and somewhat against my custom heretofore used in this place: But the
deplorable, dismal condition, both of Church and State, have so far wrought
upon my judgment, as it has convin^ed my disposition; yet am I not vir
sanguinum; I love no man's ruin: I thank God, I neither hate any man's person,
nor envy any man's fortune, only I am zealous of a through Reformation, in a
time that exacts, that extorts it. Which I humbly beseech this House, may be
done with as much lenity, as much moderation, as the public safety of the King
and Kingdom can possibly admit.

In so great a concurrence of business, and weighty affairs, concerning the
safety, and the very being of three Kingdoms, as far as the Parliament had
leisure to consider and redress the damages or other injuries of particular
persons; Their first care was to vindicate distressed Ministers, who had been
imprisoned, or deprived by the Bishops, and all others who in the Cause of
Religion had been persecuted by them: Many of those Ministers, within few weeks
after the beginning of the Parliament were released from durance, and restored
to their Charges, with damages from their oppressors; Many Doctors and other
Divines, that had been most busy in promoting the late Church innovations
about Altars and other Ceremonies, and therefore most gracious and flourishing
in the State, were then questioned and committed, insomuch as the change, and
the suddenness of it, seemed wonderful to men, and may worthily serve as a
document to all posterity.

Quam fragili loco starent superbi.
In what frail places stand the proudest men.
Among diverse others of this kind, and the most remarkable of all, was that
relief which the Parliament, immediately upon their first sitting, gave to
three persecuted Gentlemen, Doctor BASTWICK a Physician, Master PRYNNE a
Lawyer, and Master BURTON a Minister.

The whole passage of whose Story we will here insert in one continued
discourse, that it may not hereafter interrupt any other Relations of business.

These three men, for the same offense, or very little differing in substance,
(as those that read their extant Books may perceive) not being able to
contain themselves in such a cause, had written against the manner of English
Episcopacy, and those inconveniences, or extravagancies, which, as they
conceived, flowed from it, to the prejudice of purity in Religion; For which
offense they were all three heavily censured in the High Commission Court, at
several times, and committed to several Prisons, where they long remained in
durance, till afterward their cause was brought into the Star Chamber, where
they received a sad doom; and the same day stood all three upon Pillories in
Westminster Palace yard, where their ears were likewise cut off.

It seemed, I remember, to many Gentlemen (and was accordingly discoursed of) a
spectacle no less strange then sad, to see three of several Professions, the
noblest in the Kingdom, Divinity, Law, and Physic, exposed at one time to
such an ignominious punishment, and condemned to it by Protestant Magistrates,
for such Tenants in Religion, as the greatest part of Protestants in England
held, and all the Reformed Churches in Europe maintained.

But the Court of Star Chamber seemed to take cognizance only of their
unlawful publishing those Tenants, and disobedience to the Authority then in
being.

This was but the beginning of their punishment; they were afterward banished
to remote places of the Kingdom, and there kept in close and solitary
consinement, not allowed pen and paper, nor the sight of any friends, no not so
much (for two of them were married) as of their own wives. Their
imprisonments, at several removes, were in the Castles of Lanceston,
Lancaster, Carnarvon, and Isles of Sylly, Garnsey, and Iersey.

These three, within five days after the Parliament began to sit, were sent
for home from their banishment; and accordingly Master PRYNNE, and Master
BURTON, upon the 28. of November came into London, (Doctor BASTWICK within few
days after in the same manner) being met upon the way, some few miles from
London, and brought into the City by five thousand persons, both men and women,
on horseback, who all of them wore in their hats Rosemary and Bays, in token
of Joy and Triumph.

The discourses of men upon this action, were very different, some both of the
Clergy, of the Court, and other Gentlemen besides, did not conceal their
dislike of it, affirming that it was a bold and tumultuous affront to Courts of
Justice; and the Kings Authority: Others, who pitied the former sufferings of
those men, and they that wished Reformation in matters of Justice, were pleased
with it; hoping that it would work good effects in the Kings mind, and make
him sensible how his people stood disaffected to the rigor of such
proceedings; and esteemed it as a good presage of the ruin of those two
Courts, the High Commission, and Star Chamber. Which proved true within half a
year after.

How it wrought at that present upon the King, is not known. But actions of
that nature, where the people of their own accords, in a seeming tumultuous
manner, do express their liking or dislike of matters in Government, cannot
have always the same success, but work according to the disposition of the
Prince or Governor, either to a sense causing Reformation, or to an hatred of
them as upbraiders of his actions, aut corrigunt, aut irritant.

Within a month after, the business of these three men, was by Order of the
Parliament referred to Committees to examine and report.

Upon which reports, not two Months after, it was voted by the House of
Commons, That those Judgments so given against them (but severally for every
one of the three) were illegal, unjust, and against the liberty of the
Subject; and within a month after voted that they should receive damages for
their great sufferings; and satisfaction should be made them in money, to be
paid by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the High Commissioners, and those Lords
who had voted against them in the Star Chamber; That they should be again
restored to their callings, and receive Master BURTON 6000. l. and Master
PRYNNE 5000. l. Doctor BASTWICK in a vote by himself was given the like sum.

As these were comforted after their sufferings, so other Divines (for the
beginning of this Parliament seemed a little Doomesday) after a short pleasure
were brought to their torment.

A Committee was made to enquire of scandalous Ministers; which appeared in two
kinds (and were accordingly censured) either loose livers, and men of a
debauched behavior, for many such were gotten into good preferments, and
countenanced to affront the Puritans; or else offenders in way of
Superstition; of the former sort many were in short time accused, by degrees
censured, and turned out of their livings: Of the latter sort there was no
small number of offenders, nor in likelihood could that, which had been the
way to all high preferments, want walkers in it.

Among all the men of his rank, Dr. COOSENS, Master of Saint Peter's College
in Cambridge, was most noted for superstitious and curious observations in many
kinds; a man not noted for any great depth of learning, nor yet scandalous for
ill living, but only forward to show himself in formalities and outward
Ceremonies concerning Religion, many of which were such as a Protestant State
might not well suffer.

This man was questioned upon many Articles, some by himself, some, where
other Divines were joined with him, imprisoned he was, afterward bayled; and
though deprived of some preferments, yet escaped without any great punishment,
and was one of them, in that crowd of offenders, who might rejoice that the
Parliament had so much business.

But greater Clergymen then Doctor COOSENS were then to come upon the Stage;
Bishop WRENNE a man guilty of the same crime in Superstition, that COOSENS was,
as far as concerned his own person, but far more guilty as a Magistrate,
and able to impose it upon others, was upon the 19. of December accused of
Treason, and entered into a recognizance of 30000 l. to appear, with three
sureties engaged each of them in bonds of 10000. l.

This WRENNE being Bishop of Norwich, a Diocese in which there were as many
strict Professors of Religion (commonly called Puritans) as in any part of
England, had there violently pressed superstitious Ceremonies, or such as they
conceived so, upon them, put down accustomed Lectures, and deprived many
Ministers much beloved and reverenced among them. By which rigor he grew
accidentally guilty of a wonderful crime against the wealth and prosperity of
the State.

For many Tradesmen (with whom those parts abounded) were so afflicted and
troubled with his Ecclesiastical censures and vexations, that in great
numbers, to avoid misery, they departed the Kingdom, some into new England,
and other parts of America, others into Holland, whether they transported their
Manufactures of Cloth, not only a loss by diminishing the present stock of
the Kingdom, but a great mischief by impairing and indangering the loss of
that peculiar Trade of Clothing, which has been a plentiful fountain of
Wealth and Honor to the Kingdom of England, as it was expressed in the
Parliament Remonstrance; but more particular crimes were laid against the
Bishop, which there may be occasion to discourse of hereafter, in the
proccedings against him.

The day before Bishop WRENNE was accused, being the 18. of December, a greater
man, both in Church and State, WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury, was
voted in the House of Commons guilty of High Treason; Master DENZILL HOLLIS, a
Member of that House, was sent up to the Lords, to appeach him there; upon
which he was sequestered, and confined to the Black Rod. He was also charged by
the Scottish Commissioners, together with the Earl of Strafford, as a chief
Incendiary in the late War between both Nations; and diverse Articles laid
against him; which to examine and discuss further, a Committee was appointed.

Upon the 23. of February, Master PYMME made report to the House of Commons,
what heinous and capital crimes were objected against him: Upon which the
House fell into a serious debate, and a Charge of High Treason in fourteen
Articles was drawn up against him; which Charge two days after was sent from
the House of Commons by Master PYMME up to the Lords.

The Archbishop was that day brought before the Lords, to hear that Charge
read; and it was there voted, That he should immediately be sent to the Tower;
but upon his earnest suit, for some special reasons, he was two days longer
suffered to abide under the Black Rod, and then accordingly sent to the Tower;
where we will leave him^ till the course of this Narration bring him to further
trial upon those Articles.

Civil offenders, as well as Ecclesiastical, must needs be many, in so long a
corruption of Government; of whom one, as he was first in time, and soon le^t
the Stage, besides his chief Crime concerning matters of Church and Religion,
so he shall first be named.

Sir FRANCIS WINDEBANKE, Principal Secretary of Estate, a great Favorite and
friend to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and by his friendship, as was thought,
advanced to that place of Honor, was upon the 12 of November questioned in an
high kind concerning Popish Priests; of whom in that seven or eight years
that he had been Secretary, he had bayled a great number, and released many by
his power, contrary to the Laws made, and then in force against them; which
being examined by a Committee, and certain to prove foul against him, as it
did afterward; for upon examination there were proved against him 74. Letters
of grace to Recusants within four years, signed with his own hand, 64
Priests discharged from the Gate House, 29 discharged by a verbal Warrant from
him; he thought it his best course, before trial, to fly the Land; so that
upon the fourth of December news was brought to the House, that Secretary
WINDEBANKE, with Master READ his chief Clarke, was fled; and soon after,
notice was given that he arrived in France, where he long continued.

About that time came the great business of Ship Money into debate in
Parliament; and was voted by both Houses to be a most illegal Taxation, and
unsufferable grievance; in reference to which case, almost all the Judges were
made Delinquents, for their extrajudiciall opinions in it, as more particularly
will afterward appear. As for other petty grievances, such as were the
multitude of Monopolies upon all things, and Commodities of greatest and most
familiar use; the House daily condemned them, and the Delinquents of meaner
note in that kind, were examined and censured, too many to be here named: Nay,
so impartial was the House of Commons in that case, that many of their own
Members, who had been guilty of such Monopolies, were daily turned out of the
House for that offense.

But the business of Ship Money, did reflect with a deeper stain of guilt
upon the then Lord Keeper FINCH, then upon any of the other Judges whatsoever,
for his great activity and laboring in it, by threats and promises working
upon the other Judges, as we find alleged against him.

Sir JOHN FINCH, in the year 1636. when that Taxation of Ship Money was first
plotted and set on foot, was newly made Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, a man in favor with the King, and many of the greatest Lords in Court,
having before been the Queens Attorney, a Gentleman of good birth, of an high
and Imperious spirit, eloquent in speech, though in the knowledge of the Law
not very deep.

Upon the death of the Lord Keeper COVENTRY about December 1639. the King was
pleased to confer that high Trust of keeping the Great Seal upon him; which
Office at this time he held.

Upon the seventh of December, when Ship Money was fully debated, and
absolutely damned by the House of Commons, and the offense of the Judges began
to be scanned, sixteen Gentlemen of that House were chosen to examine those
Judges, that had given their extrajudiciall opinions for it (for three gave
their opinions otherwise: The arguments of two, Judge CROOK, and Judge HUTTON,
were very famous; Baron DENHAM, by reason of sickness, could not declare his
opinion in so large a manner) what threats or promises had been used to them,
and by what persons.

Upon which examination, and further light given, the next day a Committee was
named to draw up Charges against the Judges, and against the Lord FINCH, then
Lord Keeper, a Charge of High Treason. He not many days after, became an
humble Su^tor to the House of Commons, That before the Charge of High Treason
were delivered against him, they would be pleased to hear him Ore Tenus in
their own House.

His suit was granted; and the next day save one, in a long Oration he
endeavored to clear himself; but all in vain was that endeavor, though his
deportment were very humble and submissive, and his Speech full of persuasive
Rhetoric, it could not prevail to divert the Judgment, though many in the
House were moved to a kind of Compassion.

He, either secretly informed by friends, or himself perceiving by evident
signs, how things were likely to go with him, conceived it best to use a
timely prevention, and the next day disguised fled, and soon crossed the Seas
into Holland.

After his flight, he was voted by the House of Commons guilty of High Treason
for four causes: 1. Disobeying the House, in refusal to speak at their
command, when he was Speaker in Parliament, in the fourth year of King
CHARLES. 2. For threatening some Judges in the matter of Ship Money. 3. For his
illegal and cruel Judgments in the Forest business, when he was Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 4. For drawing that injurious Declaration
after dissolution of the last Parliament.


Upon which a Charge was drawn up against him, and carried up to the Lords
upon the 14. of January, three weeks after his flight, by the Lord FAWKLAND;
who presented it with a very pithy and sharp Oration against the man.

These two last Delinquents (though men of eminent place in the Commonwealth)
as they did not long trouble the Parliament, nor much retard the progress of
public business, preventing their Trialls by timely flight, so can they take
up no large room in this Historical Narration.

CHAP. VIII.
The Trial and death of the Earl of Strafford. Conspiracies detected during
the agitation of it. An Act for continuance of this present Parliament. With a
mention of that Grant of the Trienniall Parliament in February before.
BUt now a greater Actor is brought upon the Stage, THOMAS Earl of Strafford,
Lieutenant of Ireland, a man too great to be let escape; no sooner accused but
surprised, and secured for a Trial.

Which Trial of his, if we consider all things, the high nature of the Charge
against him; the pompous circumstances, and stately manner of the Trial it
self; the time that it lasted; the pretiousnesse of that time so consumed; and
lastly, of what moment and consequence the success of it must prove, I may
safely say, that no Subject in England, and probably in Europe, ever had the
like.

So great it was^ that we can hardly call it the Trial of the Earl of
Strafford only; the Kings affections toward his People and Parliament, the
future success of this Parliament, and the hopes of three Kingdoms depending
on it, were all tried, when Strafford was arraigned.

Many Subjects in Europe have played louder parts upon the Theater of the
world, but none left it with greater noise; nor was the matter of his
accusation confined within one Realm; three whole Kingdoms were his Accusers,
and eagerly sought in one death a recompense of all their sufferings: That we
may say of his case, as CLAUDIAN of RUFFINUS.

Offensis Ruffinum divide terris. Within ten days after the Parliament began,
the Earl of Strafford newly returned from the North, was sitting in the House
of Lords; when Master PYMME, an ancient Gentleman of great experience in
Parliamentary affairs, and no less known fidelity to his Country, came up to
the Lords, and in the name of all the Commons of England, accused THOMAS Earl
of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, of High Treason; and desired their
Lordships that he might be sequestered from Parliament, and forthwith committed
to Prison; as also to let them know, that the Commons within very few days
would resort to their Lordships with the particular Articles and grounds of
this Accusation.

The Earl was required to withdraw; and after a debate thereof, called in, was
committed to safe custody to the Gentleman Usher; And immediately after, upon
the 13. day of November, a Sergeant at Arms was sent into Ireland for Sir
GEORGE RATLIFFE, a great Favorite of the Earls, and one that under him had
been very active in the oppression of Ireland; a man of subtle wit, and
knowledge of the Law; as having before been educated at the Innes of Court,
and taken the degree of Barrister.

Sir GEORGE accordingly upon the fourth of December came in, and yielded
himself to the Speaker; from whence he was committed to custody. And four
days after the Lords of Parliament sent the Earl of Strafford to the Tower,
with a strict command to the Lieutenant, that he should keep a close guard
upon him.

Much time was interposed between the several proceedings against this Earl
of Strafford, by reason of the multiplicity of weighty business which the
Parliament then had. But before the end of January, a long Charge was read
against him in the House of Commons, and a Message not long after sent to the
Lords, to desire that he might be sequestered from all his places of Dignity and
Honor, in England and Ireland.

The Charge against him consisted of nine Articles, which afterward upon a
further impeachment, were extended to eight and twenty. All those Articles are
to be seen at large in the Records: But for further satisfaction of the
Reader, I will give a brief touch of the scope of them. The first and second
being much alike, concerning his ruling of Ireland, and those parts of England,
where his Authority lay, in an Arbitrary way, against the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, which Laws he had endeavored to subvert. Thirdly, his retaining
part of the Kings Revenue, without giving a legal account. Fourthly, The
abusing of his Power, to the increase and encouragement of Papists. Fifthly,
That he maliciously had endeavored to stir up Hostility between England and
Scotland. Sixthly, That being Lieutenant General of the Northern Army, he had
wilfully suffered the Scots to defeat the English at Newburne, and take
Newcastle; that by such a loss and dishonor, England might be engaged in a
National and irreconcilable quarrel with the Scots. Seventhly, That to
preserve himself from questioning, he had labored to subvert Parliaments, and
incense the King against them. Eighthly and lastly, That these things were done
during the time of his Authority as Deputy of Ireland, and Lieutenant General
of the Northern Armies in England.

The Commons, saving to themselves a liberty of further impeachment against the
said Earl, etc. do require his legal answer to all.

The further impeachment, consisting of 28. Articles, was for the most part
branched out of these, and insisted upon in more particulars, concerning his
Tyranny in Ireland over diverse persons, contrary to Law. Concerning which the
Reader must be referred to the Records themselves, as being too large to be
here inserted.

The Earl of Strafford upon the 23. of February was brought before the Lords,
to give in his answer; which he accordingly did; the King himself being there
present to hear it read.

It was very large, and when it was done, he was sent back to the Tower, there
to remain till further Order.

A Committee being appointed to consider of that business, upon the fourth of
March following made report in the House, That they would manage and maintain
their Accusation of Treason against him; and thought it not fit to reply to his
Answer, but call him to speedy trial.

Immediately upon which, a Conference was had with the Lords concerning that
Trial, and some Circumstances which were thought fit to be used at it.

The Commissioners of Scotland had likewise a Charge against the Earl of
Strafford; concerning those injuries, which, as they conceived, their Nation
and Kingdom had suffered from him. But the substance of that Charge was
employed in these Articles before specified, which the Parliament of England had
exhibited against him.

Upon the 22. of March, 1640. that remarkable Trial of the Earl of STRAFFORD
began.

Westminster Hall was the place chosen, where Scaffolds were raised on both
sides, nine degrees in height; whereof seven were appointed for the Members of
the House of Commons to sit on, who were all there in a Committee: The two
upper degrees of the Scaffold, were appointed for the Commissioners of
Scotland, and the Lords of Ireland, who were then come over.

In the midst, on a lower ascent, sat the Peers of England, the Earl of
Arundell being Lord high Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High Constable.
The Throne was placed for the King: But the King coming thither (which he did
every day of the trial) sat private with the Queen and other Ladies, in a
close Gallery, made of purpose to hear the proceedings, and took notes
himself in writing of them,

The Earl of Strafford answered daily at the Bar, whilst the whole House of
Commons, having put themselves into a Committee, had liberty to charge him,
every man as he saw occasion: But though many of them did sometimes speak, yet
the accusasations were chiefly managed by two expert Lawyers, Master GLYNNE,
and Master MAYNARD, both Members of the House.

Many foul misdemeanors, committed both in Ireland and England, were daily
proved against him: But that ward which the Earl, being an eloquent man,
especially lay at; was to keep off the blow of High Treason, whatsoever
misdemeanors should be laid upon him; of which, some he denied, others he
excused, and extenuated with great subtilty; contending to make one thing good,
That misdemeanors, though never so many and so great, could not by being put
together make one Treason, unless some one of them had been Treason in its
own nature.

Every day the first week, from Monday to Saturday, without intermission, the
Earl was brought from the Tower to Westminster Hall, and arraigned many hours
together; and the success of every days trial, was the greatest discourse or
dispute in all companies.

For by this time the people began to be a little divided in opinions; The
Clergy in general were so much fallen into love and admiration of this Earl,
that the Archbishop of Canterbury was almost quite forgotten by them.

The Courtiers cried him up, and the Ladies, whose voices will carry much with
some parts of the State, were exceedingly on his side.

It seemed a very pleasant object, to see so many Semproniaes (all the chief
Court Ladies filling the Galleries at the Trial) with pen, ink, and paper
in their hands, noting the passages, and discoursing upon the grounds of Law
and State. They were all of his side; whether moved by pity, proper to their
Sex, or by ambition of being thought able to judge of the parts of the Prisoner.

But so great was the favor, and love, which they openly expressed to him;
that some could not but think of that Verse: Non formosus erat, sed erat
facundus Ulysses;
E^ ^amen aequoreas torsit amore Deas.
Ulysses, though not beautiful, the love
Of Goddesses by eloquence could move.


But his Trial in this manner lasted, with few days intermission, from the
22. of March, till the midst of April following, the Earl having personally
answered ^i^teene days.

After all this long Trial, the House of Commons ^ell into debate about a Bill
of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford; and voted him guilty of high
Treason in diverse particulars of that Accusation, in which they had proceeded
against him; and in more particular he was voted guilty of High Treason, for
his opinion given before the King, at a secret Council, which was discovered
by some notes of Sir HENRY VANE, who was also a Privy Councellor, and present
at that time; in which notes it was found that the Earl of Strafford had said
to the King, That he had an Army in Ireland, which his Majesty might employ to
reduce this Kingdom to obedience.

These notes Sir HENRY VANE, eldest Son to the before named Sir HENRY had
found (as he alleged to the House) in his Fathers Cabinet, and produced
before the House without his Fathers knowledge; who seemed extreme angry with
his Son for it.

This is related the more at large, because it was the first occasion (that was
open and visible) whereby so eminent a Member as the Lord GEORGE DIGBY was lost
from the House of Commons, as will afterward appear: For that Vote was opposed
by the Lord DIGBY, and some others.

Nevertheless a Committee was appointed to draw up the Bill of Attainder,
which was accordingly done, and read in the House of Commons on the 21 day of
April, when the Earl was again voted guilty of High Treason; which was
carried by far the greater part; for on the other side were but nine and
fifty, of whom the Lord DIGBY was one; who made to that purpose a very elegant,
though much displeasing, Speech in the House; Of which more hereafter.

That Bill of Attainder was sent up to the Lords, where after the reading of
it, a great division was in that House, and many of the Lords much opposed it.

But Master St. JOHN, the Kings Solicitour, and a Member of the House of
Commons, was appointed within few days after to make good the Bill by Law, and
give the Lords satisfaction, which was accordingly done upon the 29. of April
in Westminster Hall; where the Earl of Strafford was present at the Bar, and
the King and Queen seated in their usual places.

Master St. JOHN opened the Branches of the Bill, and in a Discourse of two
hours made it good by precedent Statutes, and the like, to the satisfaction of
almost all that heard him.

But the King was not satisfied in conscience, as he declared to both Houses
two days after, to condemn him of High Treason; and told them, No fears or
respects whatsoever should make him alter that resolution, founded upon his
conscience: But confessed, that his misdemeanors were so great, he held him
unfit to serve him in any Office whatsoever; with other expressions of that
kind.

The Kings Speech was somewhat displeasing to the Houses; but the City were out
of patience, and within four days after came to Westminster, about five
thousand of them, crying for Justice against the Earl of Strafford; and
following the Lords, complaining that they were undone, and trading decayed for
want of due execution of Justice.

The Lords gave them good words, and promised them to acquaint the King with
it. But the next day they appeared again with the same complaint. Their fears
being more aggravated, by reason of reports, that attempts were made to get the
Earl out of Prison; upon which occasion some Lords were sent to keep the
Tower, and assist the Lieutenant there.

But the King was hard to be removed from his resolution, although the Judges
in the mean time had delivered their opinions in the House of Lords concerning
the Earl of Strafford; and the Lords had voted him guilty of High Treason upon
the ^i^teenth Article, for leavying of money in Ireland by force of Arms; and
upon the nineteenth, for imposing an Oath upon the Subjects in Ireland, That
they should not protest against any of the Kings Commands.

The King at last, wearied with these complaints, called a Privy Council at
White Hall, where he spent a great part of the day, calling also the Judges to
deliver their opinions before him, concerning the Earl of Strafford; and sent
for four Bishops, to resolve him upon scruple of conscience. After which he
granted a Commission to the Earl of Arundell, the Lord Privy Seal, and the
two Lord Chamberlaines, to sign that Bill for the execution of the Earl of
Strafford three days after, being Wednesday, the 12. of May, 1641. which was
accordingly done upon the Scaffold on Tower Hill.

This was the unfortunate end of that Earl of Strafford, whose character and
actions have been in some manner before described.

Of whom we may truly say, That as his life and Counsels had been of great
moment and concernment in the State before, so did his death and Trial by
unhappy accidents prove to be.

The divisions and disturbances which his life could make, were not greater
then those that his death occasioned.

APPIANUS observes of SYLLA the Dictator, That as his living power had robbed
the Roman Senate of their freedom; so did his very Funeral: Where so many of
his old Soldiers and Hacsters followed the solemnity, that the Senators who
were present, durst not with freedom express their thoughts of him; but were
enforced to flatter him dead, as well as living.

How far the Earl of Strafford did in his life time divide the Kings
affections from his People and Parliaments (which was part of his Charge) I
cannot surely tell; But certain it is, That his Trial and death (which has
made me insist the longer upon it) did make such a division in that kind, as,
being unhappily nourished by degrees afterward, has almost ruined the three
Kingdoms.

The length of his Trial, whilst two Armies at an heavy expense were to be
paid, and other business at a great stand, did divide some impatient people
(at least in some degree) from the Parliament; The manner of his condemnation
divided the Parliament in it self; and the eager pressing of his death did
discover or cause a sad division of the King from his Parliament.

Nine and fifty Members of the House of Commons dissented in Vote from the
rest, upon the Bill of Attainder, Upon which some indiscreet persons (for so I
must needs esteem them, though it was never known who they were, or by whose
notice it was done) the next day set up a paper upon the Exchange, with the
names of those nine and fifty, and a Title over it, The names of those men, who
to save a Traitor, would betray their Country.

They that were thus posted up, supposing it to be done or caused by some of
their House, were much provoked at it, many of them growing by degrees
disaffected to the Parliament, (not all, for there were among those dissenting
Gentlemen very wise and learned men) and upon that unhappy distraction that
fell out about a year after, forsook the Parliament.

Upon the same Bill of Attainder, the Lord DIGBY made his foresaid Speech,
which by a Command from the House (for he had printed it) was to be burnt by
the Hangman, which was the visible cause of his deserting the Parliament, and
proving so great an Actor against it, as shall hereafter be declared.

The worst consequence of all was, that the Kings heart did upon this occasion
appear to be quite alienated from the Parliament.

For to prevent the Earl of Straffords death, an escape for him out of the
Tower was contrived. To further which, and to curb the Parliament in other
things by force of Arms, a great conspiracy was entered into by many Gentlemen
of rank and quality. The design of this conspiracy had many Branches, as
shall appear in the Narration.

The persons of chiefest note in it, were Master HENRY PERCY, brother to the
Earl of Northumberland, Master HENRY JERMIN, the great Favorite of the
Queen, to whom he was Master of the horse, Master GORING, eldest Son to the
Lord GORING, Master WILMOT, eldest Son to the Lord WILMOT, Colonel
ASHBURNHAM, Captain POLLARD, Sir JOHN SUCKLING, ONEALE an Irish man and a
Papist, with diverse others of a more inferior rank, such as were privy but to
some part of the design: For it seems their Counsels were divided, and they
not all guilty of the same things, as by their several Examinations upon Oath
appeared.

But that which grieved the hearts of honest men, and made them almost despair
of that happiness which was before hoped for by this Parliament, was, That
they discovered the King himself to be privy to this conspiracy against them;
which was plainly testified by Colonel Gorings examination; as likewise by a
Letter Written by Master PERCY to his Brother the Earl of Northumberland;
where he names the Kings discourses with him, and the desire which the King had
to join such as he thought fit with them.

The Conspirators had taken an Oath of secrecy among themselves.

The Report made in Parliament from Committees after the Examination of
several Gentlemen, concerning this conspiracy, discovered many branches of
their design.

One was concerning the Tower of London, That Soulders should have been put
into it. For sir JOHN SUC^LING, and some others of the Conspirators, under
pretense of raising Forces for the Portugal, had gathered men in London, who
were to possess themselves of the Tower.

The Lieutenant, Sir WILLIAM BALFORE, was commanded by the King himself to
admit those Soldiers into the Tower. But he perceiving that it was a Plot to
let the Earl of Strafford escape, disobeyed that Command of the Kings, as
appeared by his Examination.

In which is likewise specified, that the Earl offered 2000. l. in Marriage
with his daughter to the Laeutenants Son, if he would consent to the Earls
escape.

Another branch, and that the chief of this design, was to bring up the
English Army, which was in the North, as yet undisbanded, and to engage it
against the Parliament, to awe the Houses in diver^ things concerning the Kings
Prerogative and maintaining Episcopacy, as Master PERCY signified in the
forementioned Letter.

To join with these Forces, and strengthen the Plot, a French Army was to be
landed at Porismouth, and that Town for the same purpose was to be put into
Master JERMINS hands.

The Irish Army, consisting of eight thousand, almost all Papists, when the
Earl of Strafford had escaped out of the Tower, was to be brought over under
his conduct, and engaged in the same Service.

All these things were confessed upon several Examinations.

The Parliament were most grieved to find the King ^o ^arre in it; and then
re-called to mind, how His Majesty on the 28. of April before, had told the
Houses, That he could not allow of the disbanding of the Irish Army for diverse
reasons best known to himself.

The Conspiracy being in some part detected, PERCY, JERMYN, and SUCKLING fled
the day before they should have been examined, being the sixth of May, and
passed into France, where SUCKLING not long after dyed.

But afterward, upon the reading of a Letter in the House upon the 14. of
June, sent by Master PERCY out of France to his Brother the Earl of
Northumberland, WILMOT, ASHBURNNAM, and POLLARD, (three Members of the House of
Commons, mentioned in that Letter, as privy to this Conspiracy) were commanded
to withdraw, and then called in severally, examined, and committed, WILMOT to
the Tower, ASHBURNHAM to the Kings Bench, and POLLARD to the Gate House; from
whence they were not long after released upon Bail, as being found guilty, not
in so high a degree as others were.

GORING, upon his Examination, dealt so clearly with them, and so far purged
himself from evil intentions, that he was not at all committed by the
Parliament.

ONEALE, who proved most guilty of that part of the Conspiracy, for bringing up
the English Army against the Parliament, was presently after apprehended, and
committed to the Tower, whence it was generally thought he would be brought to
Trial for his life, and suffer; but he made an escape.

The Parliament considering what great disturbance they began to find in
settling the State, what conspiracies had been on foot; and doubtful of the
Kings sincere affection toward them; considering also what great disbursements
of money were to be made for payment of two Armies, and other charges for
settling the State, to which purpose money was to be borrowed upon the Public
Faith; by a joint consent of both Hou^^, moved the King to sign a Bill for
continuance of this present Parliament, That it should never be dissolved till
both Houses did consent, and agree that public grievances were fully redrest.

A Bill was drawn up to that purpose, and the King, the same day that he
signed the Bill for execution of the Earl of Strafford, being the 10. of May,
1641. signed that also for continuance of the present Parliament.

But in this place it is sit to insert what had past before in this kind.

The King upon the 15. of February before, had signed a Bill, presented to him
by both Houses, for a Parliament to be held in England every third year; That
the Lord Keeper, and Chancellor of the Duchy, for the time being, should be
sworn to issue forth the Writs, and upon default to lose their places.

The same day in the afternoon there was a Conference between the two Houses,
to return the King thanks; upon which it was concluded that the whole House
should go to the King to White Hall, and that the Lord Keeper, in the name of
both Houses, should return their thankfulness to his Majesty, which was
accordingly done.

Expressions of joy, by Order from the Parliament, were that night made about
London, with ringing of Bells, making of Bonesires, with such usual things.

It is observable in the course of Histories, how much Kings in such limited
Monarchies as that of England, do in time by degrees gain upon the peoples
Rights and Privileges. That those things, which by constitution of the
Government, the people may challenge as due from the Prince, having been long
forborne, become at last to be esteemed such Acts of extraordinary grace, as
that the Prince is highly thanked for granting of them.

Such was the case of this Trienniall Parliament, as both Houses afterward,
when the unhappy division began, and the King upbraided them with this favor,
could plainly answer, That it was not so much as by Law they might require,
there being two Statutes then in force, for a Parliament once a year.

The King himself also at the time when he granted that Trienniall Parliament,
could not forbear to tell them, That he put an obligation upon them in doing
it, which they had scarce deserved.

For hitherto (said he) to speak freely, I have had no great encouragement to
grant it, if I should look to the outward face of your actions or proceedings,
and not to the inward intentions of your hearts, I might make question of doing
it.

But that Grant which the King since passed upon the tenth of May, for
continuance of the present Parliament, not only afterward by himself was much
upbraided to them, but by many Gentlemen, who were not well affected to their
Parliament, and all the Faction of Prelaticall Clergy, in their ordinary
discourse, was censured a greater grace then was fit for the King to grant.

To such men, their discourses and writings, afterward, when the great
distraction happened, and the War was breaking out, the Parliament in many of
their Declarations answered:

That though there were in it some seeming restraint of the Regal Power in
dissolving Parliaments; yet really it was no taking that Power from the Crown,
but susspending the execution of it for this time and occasion only. Which was
so necessary for the Public Peace, that without it they could not have
undertaken any of those great Charges; but must have left both the Armies to
disorder and confusion, and the whole Kingdom to blood and ruin.

For to pay the Armies, and defray other necessary charges, money was to be
borrowed upon the Public Faith; which had been nothing worth, if that
Parliament could have been dissolved at the Kings pleasure.

And where it was objected, That no King ever granted the like before; they
answered, It was evident, that no King before ever made so great a necessity
for a Parliament to require it. And besides that, in the constitution of
Englands Government, it was never the meaning of the Lawgivers, that the King
should dissolve any Parliament, whilst the great Affairs of the Kingdom were
depending; and though the King had used to do so, it was nevertheless
unlawful.

The Scots in their Remonstrance 1640. told the King, That he had broken their
Laws in dissolving the Parliament there, against the consent of their House.

And it is very well understood by those that are skillful in Laws of both
Nations, that English Parliaments have originally the same freedom.

It was nevertheless probably then thought by all, that the King would not
have assented to that Act, if at that time the freshness of those
forementioned grievances in the peoples hearts, and the present discovery of
that odious Treason, of bringing an Army against the Parliament, had not made
it unsafe for him to deny.

That opinion was more confirmed by the following Actions, since time, and the
unconstancy of some Lords and Gentlemen, had raised him a Party. When that
knot, which by Law he could not again untie, he indeavo^^^^ to cut a sunder by
the Sword; as was afterward observed in the Parliaments Declarations.

CHAP. IX.
Allowance of money from the English Parliament to the Scots. The vast Charge
of disbanding the two Armies. The great Taxations for that purpose, and the
manner of Poll money. The people take a Protestation. An Act for putting down
the High Commission Court, and Star Chamber; with other occurrences of that
time. The Queen Mother departs England. The King goes into Scotland.
THe Parliament, conceiving themselves somewhat strengthened and secured by by
that Act of continuance, began to fall upon the maine business of the
Kingdom; but their first desire was to ease themselves of that unsupportable
charge of keeping two Armies in pay. It was therefore resolved, that both the
Armies should forthwith be disbanded.

The Earl of Holland was nominated by the King, and well approved of by the
Parliament, to go down as General, for disbanding of the English. And for the
speedy disbursement of so great a sum, which was to be raised out of the
Poll-Money (of which I shall speak anon) and the ^ix Subsidies; much Pla^e was
appointed with more then ordinary haste to be melted and coined.

The Reader will here perchance desire to be satisfied, by what means the
Scottish Army, which the King in the beginning of the Parliament, was so
d^sirous to have driven out of the Kingdom, and styled Rebels, should
continue undisbanded till this time.

The Cessation of Arms, which was made before, to expire about the end of
December last, was at that time renewed by the Parliament for a Month longer;
who presently after took it into consideration, that the Scots should be
satisfied for all their charges they had been at, and losses sustained since
that unhappy War that the King had raised against them.

In the February following, after a serious debate concerning that business,
the necessities of the Scots being well weighed, and their demands considered,
it was not only agreed that their Ships, taken since that War, should be
restored, and 4000. l. in ready money given to them to rigge those Ships; but
for the maine of all, it was resolved upon by both Houses, to give the full
sum of 300000. l. in these words expressed, Toward a supply of the losses
and necessities of our Brethren of Scotland; and that the Parliament would in
due time take into consideration the manner of raising, and days of payment.

Whereupon the Scottish Commissioners three days after returned thankfulness
to the Parliament, not only for that great sum of 300000. l. but for the
style of Brethren which they had given them.

And the same week, to continue, and further strengthen the amity of both
Nations, the Parliament of England Ordained that all Books, Libels, and
Proclamations against the Scots, should be called in; and a thanksgiving to God
should be in all Churches through England, for the happy conclusion of that
peace.

But before the time came that the Parliament, pressed with so many great and
weighty Affairs, could have leisure to consider and fully determine the times
for payment of that great sum to the Scots (which was not till the 19. day of
the following June, when it was concluded, that they should receive 100000 l.
of it at Midsomer come twelve Month, and the other 200000. l. at Midsomer two
years after) the Scots presented many Papers to the House at several times,
for money to supply the wants of their Army, which were friendly entertained,
and considered by the Parliament; for that Army was kept long undisbanded;
insomuch as about the end of the following May, there was in Arreare due to the
Scottish Army (besides the gift of 300000 l) 120000. l.

So great a charge was the Parliament of England content to be at, rather then
suffer the Scots to go, till businesses were better settled; which gave occasion
to many of the Clergy, and others not well affected to them, not only in
discourse, but written Libels, to tax the Parliament, and impute it to them as
a crime of too much distrust of the King; and that they kept a foreign Army
to awe their own Prince.

But certain it is, that since that time when the forenamed Conspiracies began
to break out, the Houses, not well assured of the King, nor fully trusting the
English Army, were content that the Scots should not be disbanded, until the
other were; being also doubtful of that Irish Army, which the King (as is
before expressed) had told them he could not disband, for some reasons best
known to himself.

Nor was that Army of Scots disbanded till August, at the same time when the
English Army was, by the Earl of Holland, appointed General to that purpose.
And both the Armies quietly departed, conducted to their own homes by Order
from Justices of Peace, through the several Counties.

To defray so vast a charge as the payment of two great Armies, the Parliament,
besides the grant of six Subsidies, imposed a Tax seldom or never known,
which was that of the Poll-Money, wherein the whole Kingdom were to be
personally assessed. Every Duke at 100 l. a Marquess at 80 l. Earls at 60 l.
Viscounts and Barons at 40 l. Knights of the Bathe 30 l. other Knights 20 l.
Esquires 10 l. every Gentleman dispending 100 l. per annum, was seized at 5 l.
and all others of ability to pay a competent proportion, the meanest head of
the whole Kingdom was not excused under six pence.

This Bill of Poll-Money was offered by the Houses to the King, together with
two other of great concernment, one for putting down the High Commission
Court, and the other for putting down the Star Chamber.

But the King showed some reluctance in that business, desiring to pass only
that Bill of Poll-Money for the present, and to deliberate about passing of the
other two. At which the House of Commons, being certified so much by the Lords,
were not well contented, and voted that his Majesty should pass all three, or
none at all.

Notwithstanding, the King upon the second of July, did accordingly pass the
Poll-Money, and demurred upon the other two. But understanding that the matter
was so ill taken, and loath, upon mature deliberation, to displease the
Kingdom at that time, he came again upon the following Tuesday, being the
fifth of July, and passed the other two, for putting down the High Commission
and Star Chamber.

Many of the Courtiers, and nearest servants about the King, were very sorry
that his Majesty, seeing that he passed those two Bills so soon after, had not
freely done it at the same time (as was desired) together with the Poll-Money:
Because it might be thought an unwillingnesse in him, and that his heart (which
was then feared) did not perfectly concur with his Peoples desires: Whereby
much of the thanks, which so great a grace freely and forwardly expressed,
might have deserved, did seem in a manner lost.

The King therefore at the passing of those two Bills, told them as much, That
He could not but be sensible of those reports of discontent, which he had heard
was taken by some, for his not passing them before; and thought it very
strange, that two things of so great importance, should be expected from him,
without an allowance of time to consider of them: That he wondered they could
harbor any discontent, if they remembered how much he had done this Parliament,
as his granting that the Judges hereafter should hold their places quam diu se
been gesserint; bounding the Forest Laws; taking away Ship Money;
establishing the Subjects property in Tonnage and Poundage; granting the
Trienniall Parliament; free Justice against Delinquents. With other things;
Concluding graciously, That He would omit nothing which might give them just
content.

And when he had signed the forenamed Bills, after a short mention of the
journey which he intended speedily to take into Scotland; he propounded to them
a thing very acceptable, concerning his Nephew the Prince Elector Palatine,
that he could not but (at the desire of that Prince) send an Ambassador to
assist him at the Diet at Ratisbone with the Emperor; and fearing that he
should not receive so good an Answer, as might in justice be expected. For the
better countenancing that business, he intended to publish a Manifesto in his
own name, but would not do it but by consent and advice of Parliament; without
which he conceived it would be a thing of no validity.

Which Manifesto was afterward made by the full consent of both Houses, and
Sir THOMAS ROE, a Member of the House, and a Gentleman of great abilities, was
sent to the Emperor at Ratisbone about it, but without any good success.

At the same time the Queen Mother of France, as was before desired by the
Parliament, was to take her leave of England. The King consented to her
departure; but Money wanting for the Provision of her Journey, the Parliament
allotted ten thousand pounds to her, out of the Poll-Money. This great Lady had
arrived in England almost three years before, and so long been entertained by
the King, her Son in Law, with great respect, and an allowance answerable to
support her State, 100. l. per diem.

It was her misfortune, (how far her crime I cannot tell) that during her
abode here, the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland were imbroyled in great
troubles; which the People were apt to impute in some measure to her counsels,
knowing what power the Queen her Daughter had with the King.

Others taxed her not at all, but looked upon other causes, the same counsels,
which long before her arrival had distempered England; but the people made
their judgment upon it, from her actions or successes in other places.

But however it were, the Queen was fearful of the people here, and had not
long before desired to have a guard allowed her, pretending fear of her life,
by reason of some attempts, which she conceived made against her; upon which a
Guard was set about her house.

Her Regency in France had not been happy, nor according to the interest of
that Kingdom; though that, perchance, may be accounted a fault not so
particular to her, as commonly incident to the Regency of Queen Mothers in
that Land: In so much as THUANUS commends the saying of CHARLES the ninth (a
Prince whom otherwise he does not praise) upon his death bed, That since he
must dye at that age, (being four and twenty) he thanked God he had no Son,
least France should fall under a Regency, of which he had found the sad
effects. His Mother was KATHERINE DE MEDICIS of the same Family with this
Queen.

After the time of her Regency, her actions had been such, that the King her
Son would not harbor her in his own Kingdom; nor was she welcome into the
Territories of her Son in Law the King of Spain. But the people there were
no less desirous of her departure, then afterward in England.

Insomuch as she became a strange example of the instability of humane
fortunes, that so great a Queen, and Mother to so many mighty Princes, should
want a quiet Harbor for her age.

Not long after her departure from England, she died at Culleine, and might
seem a parallel in some things, to the same Empress, who founded that City,
and there planted a Roman Colony, AGRIPINA, wife to CLAUDIUS CAESAR, and Mother
to NERO. They both had tasted of power, been active in it, but not pleasing to
the people. They were both taught, that the greatness of their Sons, was not
so much advantage to their Power, as they had hoped; and had learned, that all
power dependent upon another, is of small validity, and less stability; as
TACITUS observes, speaking of the same AGRIPINA, Nihil rerum mortalium tam
instabile, and fluxum est, quam fama potentiae non sua vi nixa.

About two Months before the departure of this Queen, the Princess MARY,
eldest daughter to the King, not yet ten years of age, was married with great
triumph at White Hall, to the young Prince of Orange, WILLIAM; Bishop WRENNE,
being then Deane of the Kings Chapel, performed the solemnity on Sunday the
second of May, 1641.

The Marriage had been before debated of in Parliament, and consented to; The
King himself upon the ninth of February having declared to the Lords what
large Propositions the Ambassadors of the States had made to him upon that
purpose.

The people in general were pleased with this Marriage, and glad the King had
chosen out a Protestant Prince, and servant to a State, which had been long
confederate with England, and whose interest carried them the same way,
Professors of the same Religion, and in that kind of Discipline, to which the
greatest part of Parliament and People were inclined; and hoped (though at that
time it was not so fully declared as afterward) to reform the Church of
England to, as that of Scotland already was. By this Match of the Kings own
choosing, they began to hope that the Spanish Faction in Court was not now at
all prevalent, but that things might hereafter be carried according to the
right English way.

In this hope they were the more confirmed, seeing the Parliament go on without
any opposition from the King, no dissension having yet happened, nor likely to
happen, as they conceived; for that Conspiracy of bringing up the Army against
the Parliament, which we touched before, was not yet discovered, nor at all
thought of, though within few days after it broke out.

But some there were, who suspended their joy, and were not much confident that
this Marriage would bring happiness to England, unless the King were
perfectly right with his People, and wished the same thing they did;
considering at one side the condition of the Prince of Orange, and that he
might be ambitious of more then was due to him; and for that reason engage
himself in a reciprocal way for the King against his People, if occasion
served.

On the other side, they considered the States as Politicians of this world,
and men who had other interests then that of Religion; and if dissension should
in England happen, between Prince and People (which was never but feared in
some degree) might be apt to side with the King against the just freedom of
the Subject; which must needs depresse the strength of England, and keep it
from so much greatness, as might eclipse their own; the King of Spain being
now weak, and no such fear from him, as might enforce them to need Englands
strength as heretofore.

But the Parliament about the beginning of this July, were busied in such a
multiplicity of Affairs, which by several Committees they daily did,
concerning the reformation of domestical abuses, that it were an endless, and
indeed an improper thing for an Historian to describe them all: The Records
will at large satisfy those that are curious in particulars; only some of the
chief I will briefly touch which happened before the King went into Scotland.

Upon the fifth of July, 1641. the Committee appointed for that purpose, made
their report to the House of Commons, of the Charge against MATTHEW WRENNE
Bishop of Ely, whose Accusation was before mentioned, consisting of many
Articles; which all tended to the introducing of Superstition, and too near
approaches to the Roman Religion, as those Articles will declare.

After some time spent in debate upon the Articles, it was resolved upon the
question, and voted, That it was the opinion of the House, That Bishop WRENNE
was unworthy and unfit to hold or exercise any Office or Dignity in Church or
Commonwealth; And further voted, That there be a Message sent to the Lords, to
desire them to join with the Commons, in petitioning His Majesty to remove the
said Bishop both from his Person and Service.

About the same time also the Charges against those Judges before mentioned,
who gave their extrajudiciall opinions for leavying of Ship Money, being five
in number, Judge BRAMSTON, Baron TREVER, Baron WESTON, Baron DAVENPORT, Judge
CRAWLEY, were read in the House of Commons, and several Members appointed to
present those particular Charges against every Judge, which they all did,
making large Speeches in aggravation of their Crimes: Against Judge BERKLEY
there was a higher Charge, so great as amounted to High Treason.

The King was now wholly intent upon his journey into Scotland, which he
determined to take upon the tenth of August, to which both Houses had once
agreed; but afterward upon mature consideration, desired the King to defer
it fourteen days longer for diverse reasons.

That the distempers of the Kingdom were such, as could not well be composed,
unless His Majesty would stay the desired time, there being many weighty
affairs to be taken into consideration, and no course yet set down for the
Government of the Kingdom in his absence.

The King, notwithstanding their often and earnest pressing this suit, was
steadfast to the first day, alleging that the affairs of Scotland did
necessarily require his presennce there at that time, and that he would pass
any thing of just concern before he went, and that he had to the same purpose
many times desired them to hasten their businesses for him before such a time.

The King accordingly upon the tenth of August departed out of London toward
Scotland; but the same day before he took his journey, coming to the Lords
House, he passed diverse Bills which the Houses had prepared for him; some
concerning the public, as the Bill for Knighthood, the Bill for free making of
Gunpowder and Saltpeter; and others concerning the Estates and affairs of
private men.

He likewise signed the Commission for passing of Bills in his absence; the
Commissioners appointed were the Lord Keeper, the Lord Privy Seal, the Earl
of Lindsey, the Earl of Essex, Marquess Hartford, the Earl of Bath, and the
Earl of Dorset.

He signed them also another Bill, whereby he made the Earl of Essex General
of all his Forces on this side Trent, by which he had power to ra^^e Forces in
case of necessity.

But to another request, which both Houses had made to him the day before,
which was, That the Earl of Pembrooke might be made Lord Steward, in the Earl
of Arundels place, during his absence, (for the Earl of Arundell was then
going over with the Queen Mother) and that the Earl of Salisbury might be
appointed Lord Treasurer; he said he would take further time to consider of it.

By this time many jealousies began to arise in the hearts of people, many
divisions, and differences of opinions, concerning the Parliament, which being
by degrees formented by such persons as were disaffected to it, by reason of
their own losses, and particular interests, whose number could not be small,
did fatally prepare the way to that miserable confusion which after followed.

Bishops had been much listed at, though not yet taken away, whereby a great
party whose livelihood and fortunes depended on them, and far more, whose
hopes of preferment looked that way; most of the Clergy, and both the
Universities, began to be daily more disaffected to the Parliament;
complaining that all rewards of learning would be taken away, which wrought
deeply in the hearts of the young, and most ambitious of that Coat.

Another thing which seemed to trouble some, who were not bad men, was that
extreme License, which the Common People, almost from the very beginning of
the Parliament, took to themselves, of reforming, without Authority, Order, or
decency, rudely disturbing Church Service, whilst the Common Prayer was
reading, tearing those Books, Surplaces, and such things: which the
parliament, either too much busied in variety of affairs, of (perchance too
much) fearing the loss of a considerable Party, whom they might have need of
against a real and potent Enemy, did not so far restrain as was expected,
or desired by those men.

To this were added those daily reports of ridiculous Conventicles, and
preachings made by Tradesmen, and illitterate people of the lowest rank, to
the scandal and offense of many: Which some in a merry way would put off,
considering the precedent times, that these Tradesmen did but take up that
which Prelates and the great Doctors had let fall, preaching the Gospel; That
it was but a reciprocal invasion of each other callings, that Chandlers,
Salters, Weavers, and such like preached, when the Archbishop himself, instead
of preaching, was daily busied in Projects about Leather Salt, Soap, and such
commodities as belonged to those Tradesmen.

Many people by degrees grew disaffected to the Parliament, being daily
poisoned by the discourses of the friends, kindred, and retainers to so many
great Delinquents, as must needs fear such a Parliament; who, though they be
no considerable party, in respect of the whole Commonwealth; yet ply their
particular interests, with more eagerness then most do the public.

Some are taken off by time and their own inconstancy, when they have looked
for quicker redress of grievances, then the great concurrence of so many
weighty businesses (in a long discontinued and reforming Parliament) can
possibly admit, how industrious soever they be, distracted with so great a
variety; those people, after some time spent, grew weary again of what before
they had so long wished to see; not considering that a Prince, if he be averse
from such a Parliament, can find power enough to retard their proceedings, and
keep off for a long time the cure of State; when that happens, the people
tired with expectation of such a cure, do usually by degrees forget the
sharpness of those diseases which before required it; or else in the
redressing of many and long disorders, and to secure them for the future, there
being for the most part a necessity of laying heavy Taxes, and draining of much
Money from the people, they grow extremely sensible of that present smart,
feeling more pain by the Cure for a time, then they did by the lingering
disease before, not considering that the causes of all which they now endure,
were precedent, and their present suffering is for their future security.

It was the general opinion of all Gentlemen at that time, That a Parliament
so much and long desired, as this was, after so great and constant a violation
of the Laws and Liberties of England in the Kings former Government, could
scarce in possibility ever grow into the dislike of the people, or at least so
great a part of the people, as might be able (which within one year was after
seen) to make a War against it, and endanger the utter ruin and subversion
of it. But I have spoken before of some causes, which might seem strong enough
to engage a part of the people against the Parliament; whose particular
interests and livelihoods were nearly touched; how far any proceeding might
distaste others, who were uninterested in their private fortunes or callings, I
cannot tell any certain reason: But I remember within the compass of a year
after, when this Civil War began to break out over all the Kingdom, and men
in all companies began to vent their opinions in an argumentative way, either
opposing or defending the Parliament Cause; and Treatises were printed on both
sides: Many Gentlemen who forsook the Parliament, were very bitter against it
for the proceedings in Religion, in countenancing, or not suppressing, the
rudeness of people in Churches (which I related before) acting those things
which seemed to be against the Discipline of the English Church, and might
introduce all kinds of Sects and Schisms. Neither did those of the Parliament
side agree in opinions concerning that point; some said it was wisely done of
the Parliament, not to proceed against any such persons, for fear of losing a
considerable party, as is said before. Others thought and said, That by so
doing they would lose a far more considerable party of Gentlemen, then could
be gained of the other. They also affirmed, That Laws and Liberties having
been so much violated by the King, if the Parliament had not so far drawn
Religion also into their cause, it might have sped better; for the Parliament
frequently at that time, in all their expressions, whenever they charged the
corrupt Statesmen of injustice and Tyranny, would put Popery, or a suspicion of
it, into the first place against them. I remember, when the War was begun,
among those little Treatises, which were then published, as many there were
without any names to them, I found one, in which the case is thus expressed, to
recite the words of it. Perchance (says he) too much insisting upon Religion,
and taxing the King for affecting Popery, has by accident weakened the
Parliament, and brought Parties to the King. It may seem a great Paradox that
the best and only necessary of all things, Religion, being added into the
scale of Laws and Liberties, should make the scale lighter then before.
Neither can it be true but by accident; as thus: The strange intercourse
betwixt Rome and the English Court; The Kings own Letters to the Pope; His
favoring of Priests, and such things; though they may give a State just cause
of susspition, that their Religion is undermining: Yet because it cannot be so
absolutely proved to the sight of all the people, that the King favored
Popery, as that he violated the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; which
latter was visible to all; the former, concerning Religion, remains in the
peoples reason, as a controverted question (the King still protesting for
Religion) and the disputes about that amusing the People, make them by degrees
forget that crime of the Kings, which was without controversy, and evident,
the violation of Laws and Liberties: And more then so; for some supposing that
the Parliament unjustly taxed him in Religion, did in time believe, that he was
not so guilty of the other, as they would make him; which I have heard some of
late maintain. From whence may follow a strange conclusion; That the Kings
dealing so much with Rome, to the disadvantage of the Protestant Religion,
should now turn to his own advantage in a Protestant Kingdom. And we may
make this as paradoxicall a supposition, That if the King had never done any
thing prejudicial to the Protestant Religion, he would have found fewer
Protestants this Parliament to take his part. For then, there being no dispute
at all about Religion, the crimes of his State mis-government had plainly and
inexcusably appeared to all; as we have seen that some of our former Kings,
for the like violation of Laws and Liberties, when there was but one Religion,
and therefore no dispute about it, have been heavily censured in Parliament, no
man appearing in their justification. And why should not a Parliament think
that such things are cause enough to be stood upon, and to justify their
quarrel before God? as if the Almighty did not adhorre Injustice, Oppression,
Tyranny, and the like, in any Kingdom, unless the pr^fession of Religion were
also depraved. Nay, he abhors it more in that place where the purest
profession of Religion is.

Besides, that frequent naming of Religion, as if it were the only quarrel,
has caused a great mistake of the question in some, by reason of ignorance, in
others of subtilty; whilst they wilfully mistake, to abuse the Parliaments
Cause, writing whole Volumes in a wrong stated case; as, instead of disputing
whether the Parliament of England lawfully assembled, where the King virtually
is, may by Arms defend the Religion established by the same power, together
with the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, against Delinquents, detaining with
them the Kings seduced Person: They make it the question, Whether Subjects,
taken in a general notion, may make War against their King for Religions
sake?

Such was the sense of many Gentlemen at that time, which adhered to the
Parliament. But to proceed in the Narration.

The Parliament had been of late sensible of the loss of some from them, and
having detected diverse Conspiracies and Machinations of disaffected people
against them, and fearing more, had in May last ^ramed a Protestation, which
was solemnly taken by all the Members of both Houses, and sent through England
to be taken by the people; the form of it was in these words:

I A.B. in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest, to
maintain and desend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovotions within this
Realm, contrary to the said Doctrine; and according to the duty of my
Allegiance, I will maintain and defend his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and
Estate, as also the Power and Privilege of Parliaments, the lawful Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects, and every Person that shall make this Protestation,
in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same; and to my
power, as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and
means endeavor to bring condign punishment on all such as shall by force,
practice, counsels, plots, conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the
contrary, in this present Protestation contained: And further, That I shall in
all just and honorable ways, endeavor to preserve the union and peace
betwixt the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and neither for
hope, fear, or any other respects, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and
Protestation.

It were not amiss in this place briefly to mention some alterations, which
had been made before the time that the King took his journey into Scotland;
though they were not done immediately about that time, but some weeks or
Months before, because they concern some Noble men, of whom we shall have
occasion hereafter to make mention in the course of this History.

The Lord COTTINGTON upon the 17. of May, 1641. had resigned his place, Master
of the Wards, the Lord Viscount SAY and SEAL succeeded him in that Office.

Within few days after the Lord Treasurer, Doctor JUCKSON Bishop of London,
resigned his Staff, and the Office was committed to five Commissioners. About
that time the Earl of Leicester, lately come from being Ambassador in France,
was by the King made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The Earl of Newcastle was
removed from being Governor to the Prince, and the Marquess of Hartford
appointed in his room.

THE HISTORY OF THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
A Standing Committee during the Recesse of ^oth Houses of Parliament. The
Rebellion of the Irish, and Massacre of the Protestants there. Some endeavors
of the English Parliament for relief of that Kingdom.
THE business of England by this absence of the King was at a great stand. In
such a concurrence of high affairs and so great an expectation to find redress
of pressing Grievances, nothing was so irksome to the People as delay. To
retard the cure, was little better then to destroy. And the Sequel within a
short time, proved worse, then the wisest men could imagine, or the most
jealous possibly suspect; though jealousies and fears were then grown to a
great height, and the Parliament of England less then ever, assured of the
Kings real affection to them. Nothing of State was transacted in Parliament,
during the Kings absence. Some debates there were only about Church Service,
and alterations to be made in the Book of Common Prayer, in which
notwithstanding nothing was concluded. One business only came to be discussed;
of which the King himself gave occasion; who within few days after his arrival
in Scotland, signified by a Letter to the Lords, That he was engaged to the
Spaniard by promise to let him have four thousand soldiers out of that lately
disbanded Irish Army, which the Earl of Strafford had before raised; his
desire was to make good his promise by consent of Parliament. But the House of
Commons whom the Lords had invited to a Conference for that purpose, would not
consent that any Irish should go to assist the Spaniard; some reasons were then
given, but more particular cause was showed about ten days after, when a
second Letter came from the King, in which his Majesty declared, That the
Spanish Ambassador claimed his promise, from which in honor he could not
recede. Notwithstanding since he had found that Ambassador so reasonable, as
that he was content to accept of two thousand; he hoped the Parliamnnt would
not deny that. The House took it into consideration; and within two days, the
Lord of FAWKLAND a Member of the House of Commons at a conference delivered to
the Lords, gave reasons in the name of that House, why it was very unfit to
grant the Kings desire, because the Spaniard was not only an Ally, and
confederate, but an assistant to the Emperor against the Prince Elector, his
Majesty's Nephew; who by the power and oppression of that Emperor had bin long
deprived of his inheritance; And at this time, when the King had published a
Manifesto in behalf of his Nephew, and to that purpose sent an Ambassador to
the Diet of Ratisbone, it would seem a contradiction in the King to assist the
Enemies of the said Prince Elector, and a drawing of his own Sword against
himself: besides the great prejudice it must needs bring to the Protestant
cause, which this present Parliament so much intended, and labored to promote.
Upon these reasons it was thought fit not to consent to the Kings desire in
that point. And immediately the two Houses of Parliament rejourned themselves
from that day, being the eighth of September, till the twentieth of October,
and appointed a standing Committee of fifty Members during that recesse.

Before the Access and meeting again of the Parliament, Letters came from the
English Committee in Scotland, and were read before that standing Committee of
Westminster, importing the discovery of a Treasonable plot against the lives of
Marquess HAMILTON, and others, the greatest Pe^res of Scotland; the
conspirators being the Earl of Crayford, and some others. How it was
discovered, or how prevented, or whether the King had any privity to it (though
one of that country have since written very plainly charging the King with it)
because the State of Scotland were very silent in it, the Parliament of England
took the less notice of it: Only the standing Committee, for avoiding the like
attempts at London, and fearing that such might flow from the same spring,
appointed strong guards to be placed in many parts of the City, till further
directions might be given from the two Houses at their Access. The malignancy,
which at that time began to appear in people, of that condition and quality,
which we before mentioned, and was not only expressed in usual discourse among
their companions, but vented in scurrilous and bitter Libels against those
Lords and Commons, who were generally reputed the most Sedulous for the
commonwealth, was cause sufficient to increase the fears and jealousies of
the Parliament.

But that fatal fire, which so sadly wasted the three Kingdoms, broke out
there, where it was least feared; and those that seemed most secure, were the
first sufferers. About the end of October 1641 during the Kings abode in
Scotland, the most barbarous and bloody Rebellion that ever any age, or Nation
were guilty of, broke out in Ireland. The atrocity of it is without a parallel,
and as full of wonder was the close carriage of so black and far-reaching a
Design. The innocent Protestants were upon a sudden disseised of their
Estates, and the persons of above two hundred thousand men, women, and children
murdered, many of them with exquisite and unheard of tortures, within the
space of one month.

That which increased the amazement of most men, was, The consideration that
the ancient hatred, which the Irish (a thing incident to conquered Nations) had
borne to the English, did now seem to be quite buried and forgotten; forty
years of peace had compacted those two Nations into one body, and cemented them
together by all conjunctures of alliance, intermarriages, and consanguinity,
which was in outward appearance strengthened by frequent entertainments, and all
kinds of friendly neighborhood. There seemed in many places a mutual
transmigration (as was observed by a noble Gentleman, Sir Ioh. Temple.
whose place in that Kingdom gave him means to know it, out of whose faithful
relation of that Rebellion and Massacre, I have partly collected my discourse
of it) into each others manners. Many English strangely degenerating into the
Irish manners and customers; and many Irish, especially of the better sort,
having taken up the English language, apparel, and decency of living in their
private houses. The present Government was full of lenity and moderation; and
some redress of former grievances had then been newly granted by the King to
his Irish subjects; The same Gentleman in his History of the Irish Rebellion
(where the Reader may more fully inform himself of particulars) affirms, that
he could never hear of any one Englishman that received any certain notice of
this conspiracy, till that very evening before which it was to be put in
execution. Some intimations had been given by Sir WILLIAM COLE in a Letter to
the Lords Justices Sir WILLIAM PARSONS, and Sir JOHN BURLACE, with the rest of
the Council, concerning dangerous resorts, and meetings of some persons who
were judged fit instruments for such a mischief.

This horrid plot contrived with so much secrecy was to take effect upon the 23
of October. The Castle of Dublin, the chief strength of that Kingdom, and
principal Magazine of the Kings Arms and Ammunition, where all those Arms
which were taken from the late disbanded Irish Army, and others which the Earl
of Strafford had provided, were deposited, was to be seized by nine of the
clock that day by the Rebels; to which purpose many of the Irish Gentry of
great quality were the night before come to Dublin, to be in readiness for the
performing of that exploit. It was further agreed among those conspirators,
that upon the same day, all other his Majesty's Forts and Magazines of Arms
and Ammunition in that Kingdom should be surprised, and all Protestants and
English that would not join with them, should be cut off. But it pleased God to
prevent the seizure of that Castle, and so to save the Kingdom from being
wholly lost in one day, and that by a means strange and unexpected. HUGH MAC
MAHON Esquire, grandson to the famous Rebel TYRONE, a Gentleman of a
plentiful fortune in the county of Monagan, and one that had served in Arms
under the King of Spain as Leiutenant Colonel, a principal Agent in this
Rebellion, and coming with others (as aforesaid) into Dublin the day before
that great Design was to be put in execution, being the 22 of October,
admitted into his company at a Tavern in that City, one OWEN CONALLY, of Irish
extract, but a protestant, and servant to Sir JOHN CLOTWORTHY a Member of the
English Parliament. To this OWEN he revealed so much, as they were drinking,
that the honest man escaping from him, though not without great danger to
himself, at the present, informed the Lord Justice PARSONS that night about
nine of the clock, of a dangerous Design upon the whole Kingdom; which being
taken into present consideration, MAC MAHON was apprehended, and after his
examination, the Lord MAQUIRE also, another principal actor; who were both
committed to close custody, and the Castle secured with all diligence. But many
conspirators of great note escaped that night out of Dublin, as BIRNE, MORE,
PLUNKET, and others.

The Lords of the Counsel, amazed at the discovery of so horrid a Treason, did
notwithstanding endeavor (since there was no prevention; for MAC MAHON had
plainly told them, when he was examined, that by that time all the counties of
Ireland were risen) to use the best remedies to that desperate disease; and
hoping that perchance the news how the plot for seizing of Dublin castle was
disappointed, might somewhat dishearten the conspirators in remote parts, and
encourage the good Subjects, with more confidence to stand upon their guard;
issued forth a Proclamation presently, and by careful messengers spread it
into as many parts of the Kingdom as they could. The effect of which
proclamation was to signify the discovery of the Treason, and exhort all men
to their duty in suppressing of it.

But the general Design was past prevention; and that very day came in some
poor English protestants, and others in a short time, every day, and almost
every hour; showing how they had been robbed, their houses surprised by the
Rebels, whose outrage daily increased in rapine and murdering, and fireing
Towns and Villages in diverse counties. To oppose therefore the growth of that
desperate malady, the Lord Justices (dispatching Letters to the King in
Scotland, and the Earl of Leicester, lately made Lieutenant of Ireland by the
King, and yet resident at London, of their lamentable condition) examined with
all diligence how they were provided for such a War. They found in Dublin
Stores, Arms for ten thousand, with Artillery, Powder, Match and Lead
proportionable, laid in by the late Earl of Strafford, though designed by him
another way, yet reserved by Gods providence for this service. But the Officers
and soldiers of the old standing army were so much dispersed into remote
places of the Kingdom for the guard of other Forts; that there was scarce any
possibility of drawing a considerable company together to defend Dublin, or
make head against the Rebels in the North. The greatest mischief to the State,
and advantage to the Rebels, was, That there was no Money in the Exchequer;
besides, the Kings Revenues, and Rents of English Gentlemen due for that half
year, were either in Tenants, or Collectors hands in the country, and must
unadvoidablly fall into the Rebels power; so that although their disease were
present, the only means of cure was remote, which was a dependence upon some
supplies from the Parliament of England.

Upon the very day designed for surprisall of the Castle at Dublin, the 23 of
October, the Northren Rebels broke out in the Province of Vlster, and in few
days got possession of so many Towns, Forts, and Gentlemen's Houses, within the
counties of that Province, as might seem almost incredible, if we consider
only the chief actors, men of no great skill in Martial affairs, or any
policy: such as Sir PHELIM ONEALE, and his Brother, with the rest; and not
rather (which indeed was the true reason) the general engagements of the
Irish, and their deep dissimulation, concurring with the great credulity of the
English, upon the causes aforementioned, of so long intermixed cohabitation,
and friendly Relations betwixt them. Both these were the causes which afterward
increased the Massacre of the English, who when the fire brake out, implored
the friendship of their Irish neighbors, Landlords, or Tenants; committing into
their hands and protection their treasure, wives and children, with all that
was dear unto them, in hope that former friendship might prevail. But they
generally either betrayed them into the power of other Rebels, or perfidiously,
and cruelly murdered them with their own hands: which extreme falsehood, and
cruelty in the Irish was thought to be much increased by the charmings of their
Priests, who told them, That it was a mortal sin to protect, or relieve any of
the English.

That intermixture of the Nations, did also at this sad time, make the English
less able to defend themselves, then if they had lived singly by parties of
their own. For where the English were able to make any head, or stand upon
their guard (though in such an amazement and sudden surprisal) they defended
themselves beyond belief, till the Irish (principled by their Priests) offered
them fair Quarter; with assurance of lives and goods, safe conduct, and free
passage to what places they pleased; confirming such covenants with deep
oaths, and protestations, and sometimes their hands and Seals. But when they
had the deceived English in their power; the Soldiers spoiled, stripped, and
murdered them at their pleasure. So were many served, as at Armagh by Sir
PHELIM ONEALE, and his Brother; at Belterbert by PHILIP ORELLEY; at Longford,
Tullough, and other Castles in the County of Fermanagh by other of those
Rebels. But if the English, who stood to defend their private houses, and so
were the more easily cut off, could have deserted their habitations at the
first rising, and joined themselves into bodies, they might happily have made a
better resistance. Whilst these inhumane cruelties and Massacres were acting
in miserable Ireland, and daily spreading themselves in every part of that
Kingdom; many Counties in several Provinces declaring themselves, and following
the barbarous example of those in Vlster; the sad news was brought to the
Parliament of England.

The first Letters, which before were mentioned, sent from the Lords Justices
upon the 25 of October, were carried, and delivered at London on the last day
of that month by OWEN O CONALLY the happy discoverer of the first Plot; with a
full information of all particulars within his knowledge: which by the Lords,
who were first acquainted with it, was delivered at a Conference to the House
of Commons; who presently ordered, That the House forthwith should be resolved
into a Commit, to consider the matter offered concerning the Rebellion in
Ireland, as likewise to provide for the safety of England. By which Committee
it was agreed that 50000 pound should presently be provided; and that the Loan
of it should be entreated from the City of London upon Public security. 2 That
a Select Committee of both Houses be named to consider the affairs of Ireland.
3 That OWEN O CONALLY, who discovered this great Treason, should have 500 pound
presently paid him; and 200 pound per annum Pension, till Provision in Land of
a greater value be made for him. 4 That Papists of quality be secured in their
several Counties within England. 5 That no persons whatsoever, except those,
who are Merchants, shall be admitted to go over into Ireland, without
Certificate from the Committee of both Houses appointed for the affairs of
Ireland.

These things were reported to both Houses, and willingly assented too, within
two days after the discovery first made unto them of that Rebellion. And
(notwithstanding those present distractions in England, which began then to
appear) part of every day, during that November, was allotted to the
consideration of Ireland. Within four days after the beginning of which month,
they ordered many particulars of great import for the releif of it, consisting
of supplies of Money, Magazines of Victuals, Ammunition of all sorts, courses
to be taken for raising Forces for the occasions of that Kingdom; and shipping
for guard of their Sea coasts; as more particularly appears in the records of
Parliament.

Whilst the English Parliament were thus ordering the affairs of bleeding
Ireland; other Letters from the Lords Justices bearing date the fifth of
November were brought, and communicated to both Houses. Who in earnest zeal to
the promotion of that business, voted two hundred thousand pounds to be raised
for suppressing the Irish Rebellion, securing England, and payment of the
Public debts. For which, the City of London must of necessity be made use of,
(collections through the Kingdom being too slow for such an urgency) And to
encourage the City in it, an Order was made to secure them for moneys formerly
lent, and to allow them the full Interest of eight per cent. for altogether.

Whilst the English Parliament were thus busied about the releif of Ireland;
the horrid Rebellion with a swift motion run throughout that unhappy Kingdom,
many Counties daily joining with them, and diverse Lords and Gentlemen, who for
many days had lived unsuspected in Dublin, went into the Country to side with
the Rebels, and act their parts in those inhumane outrages; the Lords Justices,
and Privy Counsel were enough troubled to secure Dublin, to victual the
Castle, and prepare defense against those dangers, which threatened the City,
and were made much more by the fears of spoiled people resorting thither.

But the care of the Privy Council extended further (notwithstanding the
troubles there) then to the City of Dublin; and having a Magazine of Arms
within the Castle, resolved so to dispose of them, as that resistance might be
made against the Rebels in other parts. Some Arms were happily disposed to
such Gentlemen (Sir HENRY TI^HBORNE, Sir CHARLES COOTE, and others, of whom
more hereafter) as to their lasting honor did excellent service. But another
part were worse then loss, those which were distributed to the Lords and
Gentlemen of the English Pale; who afterward declared themselves for the
Rebels, and used the Arms to the destruction of those, who put them into their
hands. That English Pale is a large circuit of Land possessed at the first
conquest of Ireland by the English, and ever since inhabited by them;
containing diverse Counties, as Dublin, Meth, Lowth, Kildare, etc.

The Lords of the Council thought fit to trust those Lords and Gentlemen of the
Pale both with Commissions and Arms (though many of them professed Papists)
hoping that this great confidence would work so far upon their hearts, if any
truth or loyalty were left there, as to keep them at least, from joining with
the Enemy; but if they were honest, would enable them to oppose the threatening
incursions of the Northren Rebels. This great Trust the Council were more
encouraged to repose in these perfidious Lords and Gentlemen of the Pale,
because themselves had appeared at Dublin of their own accords, professing
truth and loyalty, with deep and solemn Protestations, and that they were most
forward, and ready to concur with their Lordships in that service.

But so great an affliction was to fall upon unhappy Ireland, that all those
Lords that were Papists, after they had received Commissions, and Arms,
notwithstanding all their deep vows, did most perfidiously soon after desert
their houses, and openly declare themselves in actual Rebellion: such as were
Viscount MONGANNET, GORMANSTON, and COSTELOE, DILLON, BIRNE, BELLER, TALBOT,
and many others.

The Condition of Dublin was more lamentable every day then other; and not so
much afflicted were they with fears, and dangers, which threatened themselves,
as that extreme sorrow, which compassion must needs work in them, toward all
the suffering English which resorted thither. Dublin was the Sanctuary of all
the despoiled Protestants; and by that means, the sad stage, upon which all
horror was represented; and what mischeifes soever were acted in other parts,
were there discovered and lamented. Their eyes were sad witnesses of the Rebels
cruelty, in those despoiled English which daily resorted to the City; but their
ears much more afflicted with relation of those horrid tortures which had been
used to those who died in other parts. Their eyes could not but extremly suffer
from such wretched Spectacles as daily from all parts presented themselves;
People of all conditions, and qualities, of every age and Sex spoiled, and
stripped, with no coverings, but rags, or twisted straw, to hide their
privities; some wounded almost to death, others frozen with cold, some tired
with travel, and so surbated that they came creeping on their knees; others
famished beyond all releif. And besides the miseries of their bodies, their
minds tortured with the loss of all their fortunes, and sad remembrance of
their husbands, wives, or children most barbarously murdered before their
faces. In this most lamentable plight, with wasted bodies and distracted minds
did they arrive at Dublin; some to be releived, some entombed (which was more
then their murdered friends could obtain from the Rebels) insomuch as they
appeared like walking ghosts in every street, and all the Barnes, Stables, and
outhouses were filled with them, where they soon died after they had recovered
the City, in so great numbers, that all the Churchyards of Dublin could not
contain them: but the Lords were enforced to take in large pieces of ground on
both sides of the River, to set apart for burying places.

But that part of this woeful Tragedy, which was presented to their eyes, was
the least, and but the shadow of that other, which was related to their ears,
of which the Readers and all posterity may share the sorrow. Many hundreds of
those which had escaped under their oaths, lawfully taken upon examination,
and recorded with all particulars, (as may be seen at large in the Records)
delivered to the Council what horrid Massacres the bloody villains had made of
men, women, and children; and what cruel inventions they had to torture those,
whom they murdered; scarce to be equalized by any the most black, and balefull
story of any age.

Many thousands of them at several places (too many to be here inserted) after
all despites exercised upon them living, put to the worst of deaths; some
burned on set purpose, others drowned for sport and pastime; and if they swam,
kept from landing with poles, or shot, and murdered in the water; many were
buried quick, and some set into the earth breast-high, and there left to
famish. But most barbarous (as appears in very many examinations) was that
cruelty, which was showed to great bellied women; whom the villains were not
content to murder, but ripped up their bellies, and many times took delight to
see the Hogs eat the abortive Infants. But I am loath to dwell upon so sad a
narration.

The greatest part of these inhumane cruelties were acted by the Irish upon the
poor unarmed Britains, before any provocation given unto them: and the blood
of so many thousand innocent persons sacrificed to their mere malice, as many
afterward were sacrificed to their revenge; as whenever the Irish received
any blow from English Forces, the English Protestants that lived among them,
were murdered in great numbers.

By this time the Lords of the Council had armed as many as they were able,
and given Commissions for raising of several Regiments, which were put into
the hands (for the most part) of gallant men, as their actions after testified
to the world; Sir CHARLES COOTE an active, and valiant man, (who was also made
Governor of Dublin) with great speed made up his Regiment out of the poor,
robbed, and stripped English, which had fled to Dublin; Sir HENRY TICHBORNE, a
worthy Commander was dispatched away with a Regiment of Foot, to keep Tredagh
from the approaching Rebels: The Lord LAMBERT also, Sir THOMAS LUCAS, Captain
ARMESTRONG, Captain YARNER, with others raised by Commissions soldiers there.

This was done about the middle of November; at which time also the Earl of
Ormond with his well armed Troop of Horse came to Dublin; where within few
days after he was by a Commission sent from the Earl of Leicester, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland (as likewise by the Kings approbation from Scotland
signified in a Letter) made Lieutenant General of all the Forces there.

For the Earl of Lecister at that time was not enabled so far with necessaries
for the service of Ireland, as to repair thither in person.

The Earl also sent over to the Lords at Dublin (together with an Order of the
Lords and Commons of the Parliament in England) comfortable Letters in this
time of distress, to let them know that the King had referred the whole
business of Ireland to the Parliament of England; who had undertaken the
charge, and management of the War, had declared a speedy, and vigorous
assistance, had designed for their present supplies the sum of 50000 pound,
and taken order for all further provisions necessary.

But that they might not be altogether destitute of real comfort, the
Parliament of England sent them over at the same time Twenty thousand pound,
which arrived most seasonably at Dublin (their treasure beginning utterly to
fail) for paying those new Companies which they had raised.

About the end of November, the Lords Justices, and Council of Ireland
considering the miserable desolations brought upon that whole Kingdom, and what
miseries were further threatened, Commanded by Proclamation a Public, and
religious Fast, to be weekly observed upon Friday in the City of Dublin, to
implore the mercy and assistance of Almighty God, and divert his heavy
indignation from them.

CHAP. II.
The King returns out of Scotland, and is pompously entertained by the City
of London. The Remonstrance is published by the Parliament. The King enters
into the House of Commons. The Protestation of the twelve Bishops; and how it
was censured by the Lords and Commons. Diverse unhappy obstructions of the
releif of Ireland.
BUT to leave Ireland struggling against her sad and woeful calamities, and
return again to the Affairs of England; at that same time about the end of
November 1641 the King returned from Scotland, was by the City of London
entertained, feasted, and conducted to his Palace at White Hall, with as
pompous Solemnity, and costly expressions of Love and Duty, as ever any King of
England was.

Of which extraordinary testimonies of affection toward him, the King seemed
very sensible, and returned Thanks to the City; inviting, within few days
after, the chief of them to Hampton Court, where they were feasted, and diverse
Aldermen knighted by his Majesty.

While the King resided at Hampton Court, the House of Commons presented to him
a Remonstrance or Declaration of the state of the Kingdom; wherein all the
chief grievances, and oppressions, which the Nation had groaned under, since
the beginning of his Reign until that time, were recited; but with as much
tenderness of expression, and respect to his Person (for such care they took,
as it appeared in that Petition of theirs which accompanied the Remonstrance)
as so much truth could possibly be uttered. For all the fault is laid upon ill
Ministers, who are there called a Malignant Party.

That Remonstrance, some little time before the Kings return out of Scotland,
had bin with much earnestness debated in the House of Commons: and at that
time when it was Voted, so much divided was the House, that not above nine
voices carried it.

So fierce, and long were the disputations about it, and arguments urged on
both sides, that not only the day, but a great part of night was spent in it.
For the House arose not until two of the clock in the morning.

The prevailing part alleged for it (as it was afterward expressed in their
Petition to the King) that Their intention was only to inform his Majesty, his
Peers, and all other his loyal Subjects; with no purpose at all of laying the
least blemish upon his Person, but to represent how much his Royal Authority
and Trust had been abused, to the great prejudice and danger of his Majesty,
and all his good Subjects.

It was alleged by many Gentlemen in ordinary discourses, who were of the
same opinion that the prevailing Voters in Parliament were, That such a
Remonstrance might be of good use, and that the King having perchance been
ignorant in some degree, of how much evil had formerly been wrought, might by
this Remonstrance be not only brought to a knowledge of his past Errors, but a
salubrious fear of offending again, by considering how public and manifest to
the World the defaults of Princes in point of Government must needs appear.

The other side were of opinion, That this Remonstrance in stead of directing
him for the future, would teach him only to hate the makers of it, as
upbraiders of his crimes, and those that went about to lessen or blemish (and
so the King seemed to relish it, as appeared in his Answer printed) his
Reputation with the people. They h^ld it ^itter at such a time, when the Kings
Affections were dubious toward the Parliament, to win him by the sweeter way of
concealing his Errors, then by publishing of them, to hazard the provocation of
him, with whom it was not behoveful to contest, unless they were in hope to
change his disposition for the future, or ascertained of their own power, and
resolved to make full use of it.

For mine own part, I will make no judgment at all upon it; nor can we truly
judge by the success of things. But such an unhappy Genius ruled those times
(for Historians have observed a Genius of times, as well as of climates, or
men) that no endeavors proved successful; nor did any actions produce the
right (though probable) effects.

Who would not in probability have judged that the forementioned costly, and
splendid entertainment, which the City of London gave to the King, would have
exceedingly endeared them unto him, and produced no effects but of love and
concord? Yet accidentally it proved otherwise. For many people, ill-affected to
the Parliament, gave it out in ordinary discourse ( Non ignota loquor, it is a
known truth) that the City were weary of the Parliaments tedious proceedings,
and would be ready to join with the King against them. Whether it began the
same opinion in the King or not, I cannot tell; but certainly some conceived
so, by actions which immediately followed, expressing a greater confidence
against the Parliament then before, displacing some from such Trusts, as they
had conferred on them: Insomuch that the City presently after, finding what ill
use was made of these expressions, were enforced to declare themselves in a
Petition to both Houses; That since some ill-affected People had interpreted
their Loyal and affectionate entertainment of the King, as a sign that they
would wholly adhere to him, and desert the Parliament; they openly professed
the contrary; and that they would live and die with them for the good of the
Commonwealth.

After which, the City, no less then the Parliament, did seem to be distasted
both by the King and Queen.

The fears and jealousies that now reigned, were of a sadder nature then the
fears of any former times had been; two years before, the people feared, that
whilst this King lived, they should never see a Parliament; but now they began
to fear that no Parliament could do them good.

At this time began that fatal breach between King and Parliament to appear
visibly, and wax daily wider, never to be closed, until the whole Kingdom was
by sad degrees brought into a ruinous War.

From henceforth no true confidence appeared between him and that high Court;
every day almost contributed somewhat to the division, and Declarations upon
several occasions were published to the world; of which, though the language
for the most part were fairly couched, and sweetened with frequent
intermixtures of gracious expressions from the King, and affectionate
professions from the Parliament; yet the substance was matter of expostulation,
and many intervening actions (which we shall endeavor to express
particularly) did so far heighten them, and sharpen by degrees the style, till
those Paper-contestations became a fatal Prologue to that bloody, and
unnatural War, which afterward ensued.

The King to answer that Remonstrance before mentioned, published a Declaration
to justify his own Honor and Government; and at the same time sent a Message
to the Common Council of London, complaining of tumultuary assemblies of
People from the City, daily resorting to Westminster, to the disturbance of
that place, and his Palace of White Hall.

For people about that time in great numbers used to present Petitions to the
Parliament, and make Protestations of their fidelity to them, in these times of
fears and jealousies, which grew now so great, that the House of Commons, upon
the same day that the King sent that complaining Message to the City,
Petitioned him to allow them a Guard for security of their Persons while they
sat: alleging in the Petition that there was a Malignant Party bitterly
envenomed against them, who did daily gather strength and confidence, and were
now come to that height of boldness, as to give out insolent, and menacing
speeches against the Parliament it self. It was therefore their humble desires
that they might have a Guard out of the City, commanded by the Earl of ESSEX,
Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, of whose fidelity to King and
Common wealth no question was ever made.

Which Petition was denied by the King; but with a solemn engagement of himself
by the Word of a King, that the security of all, and every one of them from
violence was, and ever should be as much his care, as the preservation of
himself and his Children, and if this general assurance would not suffice to
remove these apprehensions, he would command such a Guard to wait upon them,
as he would be responsible for to Almighty God.

The next day after that the King had thus answered the Petition of the House,
being the fourth of January 1641 he gave unhappily a just occasion for all men
to think that their fears and jealousies were not causeless. For upon that day
the King came to the Parliament in Person, attended with a great number of
Gentlemen, Soldiers, and others armed with Swords and Pistols to the number of
about three hundred, who came up to the very door of the House of Commons, and
placed themselves there, and in all passages near unto it: The King in Person
entered the House of Commons, and demanded five Members of that House to be
delivered to him. The manner of it was, seating himself in the Speakers Chair,
he asked him whether those five Members were there or not? The Speaker Mr.
WILLIAM LENTHALL, returned to his Majesty an humble and discreet answer, That
he had neither eyes to see, nor tongue to answer any thing, but what he was
commanded by the House.

The names of those Members whom he demanded were Mr. DENZILL HOLLIS second
Son to the Earl of Clare, Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG, Mr. PYM, Mr. HAMDEN, and Mr.
STRODE: All Gentlemen of great esteem, and reputation in the House. Two of them
Mr. HOLLIS, and Mr. STRODE having before suffered many years of sharp and harsh
imprisonment from the King after the dissolution of that Parliament in the
fourth year of his Reign, for matters done in Parliament contrary to the
Privileges of that High Court. The King had the day before by his Attourny
General Sir EDWARD HERBERT, a Member also of the House of Commons, demanded
the deliverance of those five forementioned Gentlemen; and sent a Sergeant at
Arms to apprehend them, pretending that he meant to charge them, and together
with them, the Lord MANDEVILE eldest son to the Earl of MANCHESTER a Member of
the House of Lords, with Articles of high Treason, and other misdemeanors:
which Articles were to this purpose; 1 That they had endeavored to subvert the
Government, to deprive the King of his legal power, and to place on Subjects
an arbitrary and tyrannical power. 2 That they had endeavored by foul
aspersions upon his Majesty's Government, to alienate the affections of his
people from him. 3 That they endeavored to draw His late Army from His
Obedience, to side with them in traitorous Designs. 4 That they traitorously
invited and encouraged a foreign power to invade His Majesty's kingdom of
England. 5 That they traitorously endeavored to subvert the very Rights and
Beeings of Parliament. 6 That they have endeavored by force, and terror to
compel the Parliament to join with them in their traiterous designs, and to
that end have actually raised and countenanced tumults against the King and
Parliament. 7 That they have traitorously conspired to Leavy, and actually have
Leavyed War against the King.


But the House of Commons hearing this demand, to prevent such further breaches
of Parliament Privileges as might ensue, upon the same day ordered upon the
Quest^on; That if any persons should come to the lodgings of any Member of that
House, and there offer to seal their Trunkes or Doors, or to seize upon their
Persons, That then such Members should require the a^de of the Constable to
keep such persons in safe custody, ^^ll the House did give further Order. And
they further declared, That if any Person should offer to arrest, or d^tain the
Person of any Member of that House, without first a^^uainting the House
therewith, and receiving further order from thence; that it should be lawful
for such a Member, or any Person in his assistance, to stand upon his, and
their guard of defense, and to make resistance, according to the Protestation
taken, to defend the Privileges of Parliaments.

These things had passed the day before that the King had so entered into the
House of Commons. His Majesty finding that those five Members were not there
(for they by consent of the House, upon some informations of what would happen,
had absented themselves) from the Speakers Chair, where he ^ate, made a Speech
to the House, wherein he told them, That he was very sorry for that occasion;
but yet, no King of England that ever was, should be more careful to maintain
the Privileges of Parliament then he would be; that those five Members were
dangerous men; but he protested in the word of a King, That he nev^r intended
any force; but to proceed against them in a legal and fair way. But sithence
he could not now do that, which he came for, he would trouble them no more: but
expected, as soon as those five Members came to the House, that the House would
send them to him: or else he would take his own course to find them.

But this great breach of Privileges of Parliament was increased by many
circumstances. For the day before being the third of January, contrary to the
forementioned order of the House of Commons, the Chambers, Studies, and Trunks
of those five Members by a Warrant from the King were sealed up; Sir WILLIAM
KILLIGREW, and Sir WILLIAM FLEMEN, with others being employed in that service.
And within two days after, upon the sixth of January, a Proclamation was made
by the King for the apprehending and imprisoning of those five Members; wherein
it was suggested, that through the conscience of their own guilt, they were
absent, and fled, not willing to submit themselves to Justice.

Whereupon the House of Commons in vindication of their own Privileges, and
those five Gentlemen, published within a few days after, a Declaration; in
which that Proclamation of the Kings (entitled there, A Printed Paper) is
declared to be false, scandalous, and illegal; and that notwithstanding the
said Printed Paper, or any Warrant issued out, or any other matter yet
appearing against them, or any of them, they may and ought to attend the
service of the said House of Commons, and the several Committees then on foot:
And that it was lawful for all Persons to lodge, harbor, or converse with
them, or any of them; and whosoever should be questioned for the same, should
be under the protection, and Privilege of Parliament.

The House of Commons further declared, That the publishing of several
Articles purporting a form of a Charge of high Treason against the Lord
MANDEVILL, and the forenamed five Members, by Sir WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Sir
WILLIAM FLEMEN, and others in the Innes of Court, and else where, in the Kings
name, was an high breach of the privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to
his Majesty, and his Government, a seditious act manifestly tending to the
subversion of the Peace of the Kingdom, and an injury, and dishonor to the
said Members, there being no legal charge, or accusation against them.

Whereas there is mention made in the late recited words of this Declaration,
concerning the Innes of Court, we cannot omit, that about the same time (so
unhappy a Genius of division reigned among all sorts) there wanted not some men
disaffected to the Parliament, who went up and down, persuading the young
Gentlemen of the Innes of Court to make offer of their service to the King, as
a guard of defense, if any danger threatened his Person. Upon which, diverse of
those young Gentlemen, to ingratiate themselves, repaired to the Court, and
were kindly received by the King and Queen.

The Parliament at that time further declared, That the Privileges of
Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject so violated and broken, could not
be fully and sufficiently vindicated, unless his Majesty would be p^eased to
discover the names of those persons, who advised his Majesty to issue out such
Warrants for sealing of the Chambers and Studies of the said five Members; to
send a Sergeant at Arms to the house of Commons to demand those members; to
issue out Warrants for their apprehension; to come thither himself in Person;
to publish Articles in the form of a Proclamation against the said Members in
the foredeclared manner; to the end that all such persons, who advised him to
these actions, might receive condign punishment.

According to this, the Houses humbly desired his Majesty that he would so far
satisfy their just and legal request, as to let them know those informers
(for the Law in two several Statutes provides that satisfaction, that if in
time of Parliament, the King accuse a Member of the same, of what crime soever,
he ought to signify to the Parliament, who were the informers) but the King
refused to do it. Upon which the House of Commons examined his Atturny General
Sir EDWARD HERBERT, who had preferred the aforesaid Articles; he confessed
nothing to them concerning any other Person, or informer; but only that he
received the Command from the King himself, and knew nothing further of it. The
same the King testified concerning his said Attourny in a Letter to the Lord
Keeper; wherein he justifies the Atturny his action, as being no otherwise
then the duty of a servant required. But the Parliament made another judgment
of it, as namely that Sir EDWARD HERBERT had broken the Privilege of
Parliament in preferring the said Articles, and done an illegal act; upon which
he was committed to prison.

These actions of the King, did exceedingly afflict all honest Protestants,
especially at such a time, when the affairs of bleeding Ireland did so much and
so speedily require the assistance of England; which must needs by these
unhappy distractions be retarded, and the total loss of the Protestant Cause
there much endangered. But the City of London was not the least sensible of it;
who in a deep and sorrowful apprehension of this design, Petitioned the King
with an expression of all the fears and dangers which they conceived themselves
in at that time. The things which they enumerate in their Petition are, That
his Majesty had put out a Person of Honor and Trust from being Lieutenant of
the Tower; That he had lately fortified White Hall with men and munition in an
unusual manner: Some of which men had abused with provoking language, and with
drawn swords wounded diverse unarmed Citizens passing by. To explain this branch
of their Petition, the Reader must be informed, That the King the very next day
after he had entered the House of Commons, as aforesaid, went in his Coach into
the City of London, whither he had heard that those five Members had retired
themselves; and was every where humbly entreated by the Citizens, in flocks
about his Coach, That he would be pleased to agree with his Parliament, and not
infringe the Privilege thereof. The King perceiving which way the affections
of the City went, returned again to White Hall, where he staid about a week
after. During which time (by what advice, or to what intention I cannot tell)
he built there a little Court of Guard, and entertained some Gentlemen, and
others, who, as the Petition declares, gave those affronts to diverse Citizens
that passed by. They complain likewise in the Petition of the late endeavors
used to the Innes of Court: the calling in diverse Canoniers, and other
assistants into the Tower: the late discovery of diverse Fireworks in the hands
of a Papist. But most of all (say they) our fears are increased by your
Majesty's late going into the House of Commons attended with a great number of
armed men, besides your ordinary Guard, for apprehending diverse Members of that
House, to the endangering of your sacred Person, and of the Persons and
Privileges of that Honorable Assembly. The effects of all which fears tend,
not only to the overthrow of the whole trade of this City and Kingdom; which
your Petitioners already feel in a deep measure; but also to the utter ruin of
the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and Liberties of all your loyal
Subjects. The Petitioners therefore most humbly pray your sacred Majesty, that
by the advice of your great Council in Parliament, the Protestants in Ireland
may be speedily relieved, the Tower put into the hands of Persons of Trust,
that by removal of doubtful, and unknown Persons from about White Hall, and
Westminster, a known and approved Guard may be appointed for the safety of your
Majesty, and Parliament; and that the Lord MANDEVILL and the five Members of
the House of Commons lately accused, may not be restrained of Liberty, or
proceeded against otherwise then according to the Privileges of Parliament.

The King, though he conceived this Petition (as himself expressed) of an
unusual nature, yet willing to give content to the City, returned a Gracious
Answer to their particulars; That for Ireland, he conceived he had expressed as
much care on his part, as possibly he could, and would not fa^l for the future.
What he had done concerning the Tower, had been to satisfy their fear^ before,
in displacing one or good Trust, and putting in another of unquestionable
Reputation; and what preparation of strength soever he made there, was with as
great an eye of safety and advantage to the City, as to his own Person. For his
Guard entertained at White Hall, he alleged the disorderly and tumultuous
conflux of people to Westminster, to the danger of his Royal Person, not
punished at all by course of Law; and if any Citizens were wounded, he was
assured it happened by their own ill demeanours: that he knew no other
endeavors to the Innes of Court, then a gracious Intimation, that he accepted
the tender of their loyal affections, encouraging them to continue the same
upon all occasions. That he knew of no Fireworks in the hands of Papists. For
his going to the House of Commons, that he intended no course of violence,
though that way had been justifiable; for he was assured that no Privilege of
Parliament could extend to Treason; which he knew would be proved against them
upon clear grounds, and they in due time should be acquainted with it; and that
his proceedings against them should be according to the Laws.

The King presently after his answering of that Petition, sent another Message
to the Parliament, that for the present he would wave his proceedings against
those five Members; and returned a gentle Answer at that time to the
Petitioners of Buckinghamshire, who came to the number of about 2000 in behalf
of their Knight Mr. HAMDEN, a Gentleman much honored by them, and by most of
the whole Kingdom; in which Petition they prayed that Mr. HAMDEN, and the rest,
that lie under the burden of that accusation, might enjoy the just privileges
of Parliament.

It was then grown a custom, which proved accidentally very unhappie to the
Kingdom, however it were meant, to come in great numbers to Westminster, when
they presented Pe^itions to the Parliament; though the people petitioning were
unarmed, and no just fear from them in the opinion of those who affected the
Parliament; yet those who thought themselves not well relli^hed by the people
in general, took occasion from thence, either to fear indeed, or at least to
pretend fear, alleging that the Parliament was disturbed by such a numerous
confluence of people, and the freedom of the Houses in some degree infringed,
that some of the meaner sort were too apt to cast out rude words against such
as they thought to be no good members of the Commonwealth, of what degree
soever they were.

From hence was occasion taken by some, to justify that Guard about
White Hall, and afterward to excuse the Kings absenting himself from the
Parliament: And from this ground did the twelve Bishops, about a week before
this City-Petition, frame their Petition and Protestation (for so it was
called) to His Majesty and the Peers, which was to this purpose:

They protested themselves to abominate all actions or opinions tending to
Popery, or any Malignity against the State; but were willing and ready to
perform their duties in Parliament: But whereas, coming to perform that duty
and service, they have been rudely menaced, affronted, and put in fear of their
lives by multitudes of people, and can find no redress or protection upon
complaint made, they therefore humbly protest before His Majesty and the noble
Peers, that saving to themselves all their Rights and Interests of sitting and
voting in that House at other times, they dare not sit or vote in the House of
Peers, until His Majesty shall further secure them. And because their fears
are not vain, but upon true grounds and objects, they do in all duty and
humility therefore protest before His Majesty and the Peers, against all Laws,
Orders, Votes, Resolutions and Determinations, as in themselves null, and of
none effect, which in their absence since the 27 of this instant December 1641
have already passed, as likewise against all such as shall hereafter pass,
during this their enforced absence from the said House. Which Protestation they
desired the King to command the Clerk of that House to record.

The Lords of Parliament immediately delivered by the mouth of the Lord Keeper
at a Conference, to the House of Commons, That seeing this Protestation was of
dangerous consequence, and deeply entrenching upon the fundamental Privileges
and Being of Parliament, therefore they thought fit to communicate it to the
house of Commons. The Commons thanked their Lordships for imparting it to them
with so much affection and speed, and for expressing their sense thereof; and
came to this resolution, To accuse those twelve Bishops of high Treason.

Master GLYNN therefore was sent to the Lords; who at their Bar, in the name of
all the Commons of England, accused those twelve Prelates of high Treason, for
endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, and the very Being
of Parliaments; and to desire the Lords that they might be forthwith sequestered
from Parliament, and put into safe custody; and that their Lordships would
appoint a speedy day for the Commons to charge them. The Lords instantly sent
the Black-Rod to find out these Bishops, and apprehend them: so that by eight
of the clock at night they were all taken, and brought upon their knees to the
Bar, and ten of them committed to the Tower: two of them, in regard of their
age, were committed to the Black-Rod. The twelve Bishops were these: JO.
Eborac. THOMAS Duresme, ROBERT Coven. and Lichfield, JOS. Norwich, JO. Asaph,
GUIL. Bath and Wells, GEO. Hereford, ROB. Oxon. MATTHEW. Ely, GODFREY Gloucester,
JO. Peterborough, MOR. Landaff.

Such work as this was daily made to the Parliament of England; whereby not
only the relief of Ireland was wholly obstructed, but all redress of the
grievances of England, and settlement of the State there, was so long retarded,
till both Kingdoms were at last involved in the same War and Confusion. It was
a strange thing that so barbarous and bloody a Rebellion should break out in
Ireland, without any the least suspicion or fear of such a Calamity, without
any cause given by the innocent English Protestants: and surely it may seem as
strange a thing, if well considered, that the revenge of so horrid and inhumane
a Massacre should be thus hindered; and indeed might be thought almost
impossible, unless the raising of the one, and hindering the other, proceeded
from the same cause.

There was a great hope about the beginning of December, that Ireland would
speedily be relieved, and Forces transported out of Scotland within a short
time to that purpose, considering what careful provisions the Parliament of
England (as is before related) had made upon the first notice of it. But at
that time the King was returned from Scotland; and in a Speech to the
Parliament, in which he conjured them to proceed in the business of relieving
Ireland, he likewise took notice of a Bill for pressing of Soldiers for
Ireland, depending in the House of Peers, and declared his dislike of putting
it in that way; being, as he said, a great infringement and diminution of his
Royal Prerogative; telling them withal, that he was little beholding to that
man, who began such a dispute concerning the bounds of his ancient and
undoubted Prerogative. But he offered at last that the Bill might pass with a
Salvo jure both to King and People, leaving such debates to a time that might
better bear it.

This Speech of the King's was much distasted by both Houses, as a great breach
of Parliament-priviledge, insomuch as they framed a Petition to him, wherein
they express, That the King, by taking notice of the debate in the House of
Lords concerning a Bill for pressing of Soldiers, had broken the fundamental
Privilege of Parliament, which is, that he ought not to take notice of any
matter in agitation or debate in either House, but by their information and
agreement; and that he ought not to propound any condition or limitation to a
Bill in debate and preparation, or to manifest his approbation or dislike of
the same, until it be presented to his Majesty in due course of Parliament;
and that every particular Member of either House has free liberty of speech,
to propound or debate matters according to Order of Parliament; and that the
King ought not to conceive displeasure against him for such opinions or
propositions. They entreated likewise a reparation for that great breach of
Privilege; and for prevention of the like, that the King would make known who
they were, by whose misinformation and evil counsel he had done it, that they
might receive conding punishment.

This business took up some time, and was one unhappie impediment to the
sudden relief of Ireland, notwithstanding the high necessities of that Kingdom,
and the affections of England in general to it; and so heavily went on all
preparations, that it was long before the House of Commons could find means to
enable the Lord Lieutenant to send over so much as one Regiment, for defense of
the Castle and City of Dublin, which was commanded by a worthy Gentleman Sir
SIMON HARCOUT; who being designed Governor of the City of Dublin, was sent
away by Order of Parliament with his Regiment, and landed there on the last day
of December 1641, to the great comfort of that City, being much distressed and
terrified by the near approach of the Irish Rebels.

Another obstruction of the relief of Ireland happened about three weeks after,
when the Scots delivered eight Propositions to the English Parliament, touching
the sending over of Two thousand five hundred Scots, which were then in
readiness, into the north of Ireland. Both Houses of Parliament consented to
all the Propositions; but the King excepted against one of them, being the
third, which was, That the Scots desired to have the keeping of the Town and
Castle of Carricksergus, with power to remain there, or enlarge their Quarters
at discretion; and if any Regiments or Troops in that Province should join with
them, that they receive Orders from the chief Commander of the Scottish Forces.
Against this Article the King took exceptions, and desired the Houses to take
it again into consideration, as a thing of importance, which he doubted might
be prejudicial to England: But if the House desired it should be so, himself
would speak with the Scottish Commissioners, to see what satisfaction he could
give them therein. The Scots told his Majesty, that since it was agreed upon
by both Houses of Parliament, and that the strength of his Majesty's argument
was, That Article implied too great a Trust for Auxiliary Forces, they were in
good hope that his Majesty, being their native King, would not show less
trust in them, then their neighbour-Nation had freely done. Upon which the King
at last was content to admit the Article, and the advice of his Parliament.

This fatal obstruction of Ireland's relief, did but second another immediately
before: For at the first, the Commissioners of Scotland had not power given
them from the State there, to treat for sending over a less number then ten
thousand men; which the Lords were unwilling to yield to. But that obstacle
seemed to be removed by the zealous affection of the House of Commons; who
according to those Instructions of the State of Scotland to their
Commissioners, voted the sending over of ten tho^sand Scots. But the House of
Lords, after long debate, would not yield unto it, unless the House of Commons
would give assurance that ten thousand English might be as speedily sent over:
which the Commons as much desired, and promised their endeavor in it; but that
the English then could not be so soon raised, much less transported, as the
Scots, every man understood. There was no other reason given, that ever I
understood, but only That it was dishonorable for England, that Ireland should
be reduced by the Scots: and this was the discourse of Papists, and other
persons disaffected to the Cause, among the people every where.

Though it were much wondered at by all good Protestants, that so nice a point
of Honor should be stood upon, when their Religion and Cause lay bleeding in
Ireland after so sad and deplorable a kind; which began to deject the spirits
of the poor Protestants in Ireland, and make them suspect some secret workings
underhand against the good affections expressed by the House of Commons, and
those Lords who were well-affected to the State: for they by the greater number
were over-voted, so many Popish and ill-affected Lords, besides four and twenty
Bishops (for the Bishops voices in Parliament were not then taken away) sitting
in that House.

It was then also generally talked, and much complained of among the
well-affected people, that the King had been so backward in proclaiming those
barbarous Irish, Rebels: and not only talked among the people, but alleged
by the Parliament it self (in their own Declaration afterward, when the breach
between King and Parliament grew greater) as a sign that those inhumane Rebels
had been countenanced by the Court of England, in that the Proclamation whereby
they were declared Traitors, was so long with held, as till the first of
January, though the Rebellion broke forth in October before; and then no more
then forty Copies were appointed to be printed, with a special command from
His Majesty not to exceed that number; and that none of them should be
published, till the Kings pleasure were further signified, as by the Warrant
appears, a true copy whereof was printed: so that a few only could take
notice of it. And this (say they) was made more observable by the late contrary
proceedings against the Scots, who were in a very quick and sharp manner
proclaimed, and those Proclamations forthwith dispersed with as much diligence
as might he, through all the Kingdom; and ordered to be read in every Church,
accompanied with public Prayers and Execrations.

That Declaration of the Lords and Commons, in which this is expressed
concerning the Kings slow proclaiming of the Irish Rebels, was published when
the King was gone to York; at which he was much distasted in many particulars,
and returned Answer to them. Among others, because that of Ireland seemed to
lie heavy upon his reputation, it is just that the Reader should see the
King's own Answer to that point, that he may the more fairly judge; which shall
be therefore inserted, in the very words of the Kings Declaration.

To countenance those unhandsome expressions whereby usually they have implied
Our connivence at, or want of zeal against the Rebellion of Ireland (so odious
to to all good men) they have found a new way of exprobation, That the
Proclamation against those bloody Traitors came not out till the beginning of
January, though that Rebellion broke out in October; and then by special
Command from Us, but forty Copies were appointed to be printed. It is well
known where we were at that time, when that Rebellion broke forth, in Scotland;
that we immediately from thence recommended the care of that business to both
Houses of Parliament here, after We had provided for all fitting Supplies from
our Kingdom of Scotland; that after Our return hither, We observed all those
Forms for that service, which We were advised to by Our Council of Ireland, or
both Houses of Parliament here: and if no Proclamation issued out sooner (of
which for the present We are not certain, but think that others before that
time were issued by Our directions) it was, because the Lords Justices of that
Kingdom desired them no sooner; and when they did, the number they disired was
but twenty, which they advised might be signed by Us; which We for expedition
of the service, commanded to be printed (a circumstance not desired by them)
thereupon We signed more of them then Our Justices desired: all which was very
well known to some Members of one or both Houses of Parliament, who have the
more to answer, if they forbore to express it at the passing of this
Declaration; and if they did express it, We have the greater reason to
complain, that so envious an aspersion should be cast upon Us to Our People,
when they knew well how to answer their own Objection.

This was the Kings Answer to that point of the Parliaments Declaration
concerning Ireland. But the House of Commons in another Declaration, though
long after, charge the King upon the same particular, with more circumstances
of aggravation: as, That although the Rebels had most impudently styled
themselves The Queens Army, and professed that the cause of their rising was,
To maintain the King's Prerogative, and the Queens Religion, against the
Puritan Parliament of England; and thereupon both Houses of Parliament did
humbly and earnestly advise His Majesty to wipe away this dangerous Scandal,
by proclaiming them Rebels and Traitors to His Majesty and the Crown of
England, which then would have mated and weakened the Conspirators in the
beginning, and have encouraged both the Parliaments here, and good people
there, the more vigorously to have opposed their proceedings: yet such was the
power of evil counsel about him, that no Proclamation was set forth to that
purpose, till almost three months after the breaking out of this Rebellion; and
then Command given that but forty should be printed, nor they published, till
further direction should be given by His Majesty. But the business of Ireland
was more particularly touched in subsequent Declarations, which in their due
time and place may hereafter be related.

That Proclamation against the Irish Rebels, came not out above two days before
the King entered the House of Commons, as is before expressed; by which act so
great a disturbance was made, and the relief of Ireland so much retarded.

It was likewise complained of to the King by the House of Commons, within
three weeks after, that since the Ports by order of both Houses (as is before
mentioned) had been stopped against all Irish Papists, many of the chief
Commanders, then in the Head of the Rebels, had been suffered to pass by His
Majesty's immediate Warrant. Of which the King cleared himself in Answer to
them, that by examining his own memory, and the notes of his Secretaries, he
could not find himself guilty of granting any such Warrants.

CHAP. III
The Queen passes into Holland, with her daughter the Princess MARY.
Difference between the King and Parliament concerning the Militia. The King
goes toward York, and is followed with a Petition from the Lords and Commons
to Theobalds, and another Declaration to Newmarket. The King is denied entrance
into Hull by Sir JOHN HOTHAM.
IT was wonderful that nothing at all could advance or further this great and
necessary work of reducing Ireland, when so many courses were propounded and
undertaken: as about the middle of February, both Houses of Parliament had
found a way, which they conceived to be most substantial and firm to carry on
that War; namely, by adventuring for proportions of Land in Ireland; there
being, by their account, within the four Provinces of Vlster, Connaught,
Munster and Leinster two millions and an half of Acres of Land forfeitable from
the Rebels in those Provinces, to be shared among those Adventurers in the City
of London, or other Counties thereabout, that would bring in or subscribe such
Sums of money as were thought fit, and which were upon good and serious
consideration set down in particular; whereby, if an happy Conquest were made
upon those bloody Rebels, a large recompense might be made to all those English
who either in Person of Purse had contributed to so good a work. The King was
well contented with these Propositions, off^ring withal to go himself in Person
into Ireland (but that was not thought sitting by the Parliament); and so far
it passed, that an Act was made to that purpose, enabling the Parliament with
power to carry on that War, until Ireland should be declared to be wholly
subdued; and that no Peace or Cessation of Arms should be at any time made with
those Rebels, unless both Houses of Parliament assented to it.

But while these things were acting, other business, wherein the safety and
security of England was concerned, fell into debate; which was touching the
Militia of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, to be settled in every
County upon such persons as the Parliament should approve. A Petition to this
purpose was sent to the King, presently after they had received a Message from
him, dated the twentieth of January, wherein the King in fair language desires
the Parliament, since that particular Grievances and Distractions were too
many, and would be too tedious to be presented by themselves, that they would
comprise and digest them into one entire Body, that so His Majesty and
themselves might be able to make the more clear Judgment of them; and that it
should then appear, by what His Majesty would do, how for he has been from
intending or designing any of those things, which the too-great fears and
jealousies of some persons, seem to apprehend; and how ready he would be to
equal or exceed the greatest examples of most indulgent Princes in their Acts
of Grace and Favor to the People.

This Message was received with thanks by the Parliament, who resolved to take
it into speedy and serious consideration. But to enable them with security to
discharge their duties in those affairs, they desired the King to raise up to
them a sure ground of safety and confidence, by putting in the mean time the
Tower, with other principal Forts, and the whole Militia of the Kingdom, into
the hands of such persons as the Parliament might trust, and should be
recommended to him by both Houses. This Petition of theirs was not well
rellished by the King, as appeared by his Answer. But the thing was of so great
consequence, that one Answer could not suffice.

Many reiterated Petitions were presented, and many Answers returned upon this
subject, which are extant upon Record; where the King often promises to be
careful, that no hands, but those who are very faithful to the Commonwealth,
shall be by him entrusted with any part of the Militia; but the nomination of
any persons to those places, he will reserve to himself, it being a principal
and inseparable flower of his Crown, vested in him, and derived to him from his
Ancestors, by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. The Parliament on the other
side affirming, that nothing could enable them to suppress the Rebellion in
Ireland, and secure themselves, but the instant granting of that humble
Petition; which they hoped the King would not absolutely deny: That it was
their duty to him and the Commonwealth, to represent unto him whatsoever they
found so absolutely necessary; for the preservation of both which, the Laws
both of God and man enjoin them to see it put in execution.

During the debate of this business, and before any absolute conclusion was
made of it, the King took a journey to Canterbury, upon what reasons, shall be
anon declared. It was before related, that the King after his entering into the
House of Commons to surprise the five Members, had stayed a week at White Hall,
and then retired to Hampton Court; the next day after, diverse Citizens, with a
great show of Boats, and Guns in them, brought the five Members to Westminster,
with many expressions that they would not forsake them, who sare to defend
their Religion, Laws and Liberties.

The King now resident at Hampton Court, seemed extremely distasted at the
City, and pretended the reasons of his absence from Parliament to be fear for
his Person, by reason of Tumults that might be raised: but true it is, after
this time, he never could be brought near the City or Parliament either in
body or mind.

Within few days after the King had been at Hampton Court, he sent for diverse
of his servants, who were then Members of the Parliament, to leave the House,
and give their attendance upon his Person: But two, the chief of them, ROBERT
Earl of Essex, lately made Lord Chamberlain of this Household, and HENRY Earl of
Holland, Groom of the Stool, chose rather to obey his Writ whereby they were
called to assist in Parliament about the highest affairs of England, then to
obey this private Command of his, to come and attend at Hampton Court,
alleging in excuse, that their attendance in Parliament was truer service to
him as King, then any other could be. For this, the King presently after sent a
Messenger to demand the Staff of the one, and the Key of the other, being the
Ensigns of their Offices; which they willingly resigned to the Messengers
hands.

From Hampton Court, about the midst of February, the King and Queen went to
Canterbury, and so to Dover, with the Princess MARY their eldest daughter,
married, not a year before, to WILLIAM son to the Prince of Orange. The Queen
her self passed from thence into Holland, under pretext of keeping her daughter
company to her husband, (the Lady was then about ten years of age) which was
not at all hindered by the Parliament. But the Queen carried with her all or
the greatest part of the Crown-Jewels of England, which immediately she pawned
in Holland, and with that money bought Arms and Ammunition for that sad War
which ensued not long after, between the King and the Parliament of England.

The King's stay at Canterbury and Dover was not long, nor the places so
remote, but that some business might pass, though with great trouble of those
Lords, and others, Members of the House of Commons, who posted between, upon
all occasions. The greatest thing which was done in that time, was, that the
King at Canterbury signed the Bill for taking away Bishops Votes in Parliament.

When the Queen and her daughter had taken Sail, the King came back to
Greenwich, whither he sent for the Prince and Duke of York to come to him, and
attend him in his journey to the City of York, which was the place which he
intended to reside at, and to that purpose immediately went on his way as far
as Theobalds; to which place he was followed with a Petition from both Houses,
presented to him upon the first of March 1641. The substance of it was, to
entreat his Majesty that be would at last be pleased to grant their necessary
Petition concerning the Militia of England; which if he did refuse, in these
times of distraction, they must be enforced, and did resolve to dispose of it
for the safety of the Kingdom, in such manner as had been propounded to his
Majesty. They likewise entreated him to continue his abode near London, and
his Parliament, and not to take his son the Prince out of those parts: and in
conclusion, desired his Majesty to be informed by them, his great Council,
that by the Laws of England, the power of raising, ordering and disposing of
the Militia within any City, Town, or other place, cannot be granted to any
Corporation by Charter, or otherwise, without the authority and consent of
Parliament.

The King denied to give any other Answer concerning the Militia, then what he
had before done; That he conceived himself not safe in any place near London;
and that he would take such a care of the Prince his son, as should justify
him to God as a Father, and to his Dominions as a King.

The Parliament, upon occasion of that short Answer of the King to their
Petition, voted presently that that Answer was a flat Denial; and that all was
truth which they had averred in their Petition, concerning the danger of his
removal so far from the Parliament, and likewise carrying of his son away. It
was likewise ordered by the Lords and Commons, that the Earl of Northumberland
Lord Admiral, should give speedy directions for all the Ships belonging to the
Navy Royal, to be speedily rigged, and fitted for the service of the
Commonwealth.

A Declaration was drawn then by both Houses, and presented to the King at
Newmarket, upon the ninth of March, by the Earls of Pembroke and Holland, with
some Members of the House of Commons, wherein were represented to him some of
the old Grievances expressed in the first Remonstrance at his return out of
Scotland: as, That the design of altering Religion had been carried on by
those of greatest authority about him, for diverse years: That the War against
Scotland was procured in order to that design: That the Rebellion in Ireland
was contrived here in England, out of many presumptions gathered from several
examinations there. They speak likewise of his attempt for bringing his Army
against the Parliament, of which before mention was made; of his Warrants
granted contrary to promise, for transportation of JERMYN, DIGBY, and other
Delinquents; of that great breach of Parliament-Priviledge, in coming to the
House of Commons to surprise those Members: by all which they endeavor to
prove their fears and jealousies grounded upon true substantial reasons, and
necessary for the safety the Commonwealth entrusted to them; and that the
Kings fear to reside near London, is altogether without ground, and pretended
for nothing but to perplex the Commonwealth, proceeding from evil and
traitorous Counsels; affirming, that His Majesty's absence would cause men to
believe, that it was out of design to discourage the undertakers, and hinder
the other provisions for relieving Ireland; that it would hearten the Rebels
there, and all disaffected persons in this Kingdom.

The King expressed much indignation when he received this Remonstrance,
complaining of the manner of it, that it was only an upbraiding, not an
invitation or persuasion of him to return to the Parliament; and told them,
that in all ARISTOTLE'S Rhetoricks there was no such argument of Persuasion;
and that he would answer it in another Declaration, which within few days after
was drawn up, and published; wherein, with deep protestations, he vindicates
the truth of his Religion, and justifies his other proceedings, denying those
Warrants for transporting Master JERMYN and others, in that manner which they
urge them: taxes them with their needless fears, and uncertain expressions of
advertisements from Rome, Venice, Paris, and other places: recites the many
gracious Acts which he had already passed this Parliament, to satisfy his
People; and protests in conclusion, that he is most desirous to reside near his
Parliament, and would immediately return to London, if he could see or hear of
any provisions made for his security.

The King sent them another Message from Huntingdon on the 15 of March, being
then upon his removal to the City of York; wherein he expresses his care of
Ireland, and not to break the Privilege of Parliament; but chiefly, to let
them know that he understands his own Rights; forbidding them to presume, upon
any pretense of Order or Ordinance (to which he is no party) concerning the
Militia, or any other thing, to do or execute what is not warranted by those
Laws; and withal recommending to them the substance of his Message of the
twentieth of January last; that they compose and digest with all speed such
Acts as they shall think fit, for the present and future establishment of their
Privileges.

These were the heads of some Declarations, Petitions, and Answers: for about
this time, and for three months after, such Messages, Remonstrances, Petitions
and Answers grew so voluminous upon all occasions, as might, recited verbatim,
make a large History.

Thus is the King gone to York, while the Parliament sit at London, declaring
in vain, and voting (as they did upon receipt of his last Message) by consent
of both Houses, 1. That the King's absence so far remote from his Parliament,
is not only an obstruction, but may be a destruction to the affairs of
Ireland. 2. That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall declare what
the Law of the Land is, to have this not only questioned and controverted, but
contradicted, and a Command that it should not be obeyed, is an high breach of
the Privilege of Parliament. 3. That they which advised the King to absent
himself from the Parliament, are enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and
justly to be suspected as favorers of the Rebellion in Ireland.


It may seem strange to a Reader, that the King, without any, but such
bootlesse opposition as Pen and Paper can make against him, even in the sight
and notice of a Parliament, whilst they not only beheld his actions, but
seemed to discern the designs, and foresee the effects which would flow from
them, could be able to carry the work on so clearly and so far, until the whole
Kingdom were thereby involved in a most calamitous and destructive War. I will
not presume to publish any opinion of mine own, how or when this ruin of the
Kingdom should have been prevented; but only relate what was then done, that
posterity hereafter may judge of it.

It was not unknown to the Parliament, at least not unsuspected (for it was
usually talked among the people of that time) that the Queen, when she passed
into Holland, carried with her the Crown-Jewels, to pawn or sell there: which
if she did, they could not be ignorant what the intention was, or what the
effect was like to prove; nor could it be unknown to them how unlawful the act
was, and therefore how fit to be prevented; for they indicted her asterwards of
high Treason for that fact, and were able to tell the world in a Declaration,
how great a crime it is in a King himself to make away the Ornaments of the
Crown, and in particular, the Jewels of it; yea, in such Kings as did it only
to spend or give away, not to maintain War against their own People, for whose
preservation not only those, but whatsoever they possess, was first bestowed
on them.

They seemed to oppose the Prince his departure from Hampton Court, to attend
the King his Father into the North, because it might increase fears and
jealousies in the People: but the King carried him away.

Above all the rest, they were not ignorant how wonderful an obstruction to all
business of Parliament, and to the settling of England, or relieving of
Ireland, that far removal of the Kings Person from the Parliament must needs
prove, and which themselves sufficiently expressed: That the very Journey it
self, though no worse design were in it, was in no kind excusable, as most
inconvenient, for the reasons aforesaid, and convenient in nothing that was
ever alleged for it. Yet the King passed quietly thither.

One design of the King, which indeed was thought the chief of that his
Northern Expedition, was prevented by the Parliament by an open and forcible
way, which was the seizing upon the strong Town and Fort of Hull, with all that
Magazine of Arms which was there deposited. But it was very remarkable what
means had been used on both sides, to prevent, if it had been possible, that
open denial of the King's entrance into Hull, and that the matter should not
have come so far: Which the King conceived so great an affront to him, that it
grew the subject of many large and voluminous Declarations afterward, from
either Part.

For the prevention of that, before it happened, the King from York, had sent a
Message to the Parliament upon the eighth of April 1642, that he intended to go
in Person over into Ireland, to chastise by force of Arms those barbarous and
bloody Rebels; and to that purpose, he thought fit to advertise the Parliament
that he intended to raise forthwith, by his Commissions, in the Counties near
Westchester, a Guard for his own Person (when he should come into Ireland)
consisting of two thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse, which he would arm at
Westchester, from his Magazine of Hull.

But at the same time, the Lords and Commons in Parliament had sent a Petition
to the King, for leave to remove the Magazine at Hull to the Tower of London;
alleging that the Stores of Arms and Ammunition in the Tower were much
diminished, and that the necessity of Supplies for the Kingdom of Ireland (for
which they had been issued from thence) daily increased: That the occasion for
which the Magazine was placed at Hull, was taken away, there being no danger
now from Scotland. They likewise alleged that it would be kept in the Tower
with less charge, and more safety, and transported from thence with much more
convenience for the service of Ireland.

The King seemed very angry at this Petition, alleging, among other things,
that if any of those Arms were designed for Vlster or Leinster, the conveyance
of them would be more easy and convenient from Hull, then from London. But
most of all he seemed to be exasperated (for the Parliament had used timely
prevention) that they had sent to keep out from thence the Earl of Newcastle,
whom the King in that Answer terms A Person of honor, fortune, and
unblemished reputation, and committed that Town and Fort (without his consent)
to the hands of Sir JOHN HOTHAM.

The Parliament, as it appeared by their expression in a Declaration at that
time, were much confirmed in that opinion which they had of the King's aiming
at Hull, when he went Northward, by an intercepted Letter from the Lord GEORGE
DIGBY, dated from Middleborough in Zealand the 20 of January 1641, to Sir LEWIS
DIVES, wherein he writes, that if the King will declare himself, and retire to
a safe place, he should be able to wait upon him from thence, as well as out of
any part of England, over and above the service which he might do for him there
in the mean time. The like expressions he used in another Letter to the Queen,
intercepted in the same Packet, intimating some service he might do her in
those parts; and desired a Cipher, whereby to hold correspondencie with her in
writing. This young Lord, of whom we spoke before about the death of the Earl
of Strafford, a man of excellent parts, and one that had been acceptable to the
Parliament, until his Speech about that business, and some other miscarriage
detected upon the same occasion, was much alienated in heart from the
Parliament, because that Speech of his (which he had printed against Command)
was ordered to be burned by the hands of the Hangman; so that afterward he
became a great cherisher, as appeared in diverse things, of those divisions
which were growing between the King and Parliament, and was voted against in
the House of Commons, as a disturber of the public peace, for appearing armed
at Kingston upon Thames in an unusual and illegal manner, with other
circumstances there to belonging. Whereupon the Lords in Parliament sent for
him; and if he appeared not within twenty days, proclaimed him Traitor. But he
in the mean time was transported by Sir JOHN PENNINGTON into Holland, by a
Warrant under the Kings hand, as the Declaration of the Lords and Commons to
the King in March following expressed.

During the time that the King and Parliament were (as aforesaid) busied about
getting the Magazine of Hull, the Parliament proceeded by degrees in settling
the Militia in diverse Counties, and putting the Commands into such hands as
they reposed confidence in; as likewise to take charge of the Navy, and
provide by that means against any foreign force that might assault the
Kingdom. And because the Earl of Northumberland Lord Admiral, by reason of
indisposition of health, was disenabled then for commanding the Fleet in his
own person, they thereupon recommended to his Lordship the Earl of Warwick (a
man of such ability in Sea-affairs, and such untainted reputation, as they
durst highly trust) to supply his Lordships room in that employment. But
understanding that the King had chosen Sir JOHN PENNINGTON into that Command, a
Message was sent from both Houses to the King on the 28 of March, to entreat
him that the employment might no longer be detained from the Earl of Warwick,
as a noble person chosen by both Houses of Parliament in that Service, the
Charge whereof was to be born by the Commonwealth.

The King refused to admit of the Earl of Warwick, taking great exception at
the Message from both Houses, as appeared by his Letter to the Lord Keeper
concerning it, that they would take upon them the nominating of the chief
Sea-Commander. But the Earl of Warwick, within few months after, though not
without some opposition of diverse Gentlemen, who had before been placed in
Command by the King, and strove to carry away their Ships to His Majesty, was
possessed of the whole Navy: of which some more particulars may hereafter be
related.

Upon the 23 of April 1642, the King, attended by some Noblemen, and no great
train of Gentlemen and Soldiers, came before the walls of Hull, to demand
entrance there; but he found the Gates shut, and the Bridges drawn up, by the
command of Sir JOHN HOTHAM a member of the House of Commons, and by the
Parliament entrusted with the Government of that Town. Sir JOHN HOTHAM appeared
upon the Wall, and kneeling down there, entreated his Majesty that he would be
pleased not to command that, which he must be enforced (though extremely
grieved to disobey his Majesty in any thing) to deny at that time; alleging
that he could not admit his Majesty, without breach of trust to the
Parliament, beseeching the King to give him leave to send to the Parliament, to
acquaint them with his command, and take their direction.

The King, upon this denial, grew into choler, and after some hot words,
seeming not to believe that the Parliament had commanded any such thing; and to
that purpose speaking, demanded of Sir JOHN HOTHAM, that if he had Order from
the Parliament to keep out his Person, he should show it in Writing; for
otherwise he would not believe it. But Sir JOHN HOTHAM, because the Order was
not in those express words, as naming the Kings particular person, though he
knew the sense and meaning of the Parliament, did not produce any Writing;
only beseeching the King not to command him that which he might not do.
Whereupon the King, after some hours spent in vain about the Town, proclaimed
Sir JOHN HOTHAM Traitor; and returned, when he had received out of the Town
his Son the Duke of York, and his Nephew the Prince Electour, whom Sir JOHN the
day before had admitted into the Town, entertained, and lodged there that night.

The next day the King, in a Message to the Parliament, complained of that
affront offered by Sir JOHN HOTHAM, accusing him for that he had traitorously
and seditiously strived to put his disobedience upon the Parliament, the King
seeming to believe that HOTHAM had done it upon his own head, without any
direction or authority from them: And within two days after, sent another
Message to the Parliament, complaining in a sharper manner then before, of that
great indignity, which, if they afforded him no reparation, would make the
World believe that his privileges were less then any Subjects in the Land;
and that it was more lawful to rob him of his proper Goods, then the meanest
Member of the Kingdom. He sent also, at the same time, a Letter to the Mayor of
Hull, commanding him, and all Officers of that Town, to take care that no part
of the Magazine should be removed, or transported out of the Town, under any
pretense of Order or Power whatsoever, without his Royal Assent, under his
Hand. He caused likewise all Passages between Hull and London to be stopped up,
and by that means apprehended a servant of Sir JOHN HOTHAM'S, going with a
Letter to the Parliament concerning the proceedings before mentioned.

The Parliament immediately, upon notice of these things, declared their
reasons for Hull, and that the stopping of Passages, and intercepting of
Messengers or Letters to or from the Parliament, or in their service, was an
high breach of the Privileges of Parliament, which by the Laws of the Land,
and their Protestation, they were bound to defend, and punish the violators;
authorizing, by Ordinance of both Houses, all Sheriffs, Justices, Constables,
and other Officers, to aid them employed in the said service, for their more
speedy, free, and safe passage; giving Order also to the said Officers within
the Counties of York and Lincoln, to suppress any Armies raised to force Hull,
or stop the passages before mentioned, in disturbance of the Kingdom's peace.

It was voted by them, two days after, that Sir JOHN HOTHAM had done nothing
but in obedience to the Command of both Houses of Parliament. Resolved also it
was upon the Question, That this declaring of Sir JOHN HOTHAM Traitor, being a
Member of the House of Commons, was an high breach of the Privilege of
Parliament. Resolved again, That declaring Sir JOHN HOTHAM Traitor, without due
Process of Law, was against the Liberty of the Subject, and Laws of the Land.

An Order of Assistance was then given to the Earl of Stamford, the Lord
WILLOUGHBY of Parham, Sir EDWARD AYSCOUGH, Sir CHRISTOPHER WRAY, Sir SAMUEL
OWFEILD, and Master HATCHER, as Committees of both Houses sent down to Hull,
and the two Counties of York and Lincoln, for service of the Kindom, that all
Sheriffs, Justices, Majors, etc. should be assisting to them upon all occasions.

To that Declaration, Votes, and Orders of Assistance of both Houses of
Parliament, the King, on the fourth of May, returned an Answer, wherein at
large he expresses how heinous the affront was, and how much he accounts
himself injured by the Parliament, in not repairing him against HOTHAM;
laboring to prove by ancient Statutes there cited, that Sir JOHN HOTHAM'S
denial of entance to him, was absolutely high Treason by the Law of the Land.

Upon this subject, within the space of one week, two other Declarations and
Answers passed between the King and both Douses, too large to be here inserted:
but the scope of the King's Declarations in general, are to vindicate his own
Rights and dignity allowed him as King, by the Laws of the Land; wherein he
seems not to take notice of the present occasion, or such things as are
conceived dangers, and thought necessary to prevent, by a Parliament sitting.
The Parliament on the other side, with all humility, and reverent expressions
to the Kings Person, seeming to take no notice of any affront offered or
intended to his Majesty himself, but only of preserving Hull, the Militia,
and Navy, out of the hands of those wicked Counselors, which they conceived
to be too prevalent with him, to the danger of ruining the Kingdom and himself;
both which they labored to preserve, and were lawfully called to it by that
Authority which belongs to Parliaments, by the Fundamental Constitution of
English Government. They desire to inform the King, that his Interest in Towns,
Arms, or the Kingdom it self, is not of that kind that private men have
interest in their Goods, to sell or dispose of at pleasure; but only as
entrusted to him for the good of all: in performance of which trust, none but
the Parliament, while it sits, are or ought to be his Counselors and
directors: that there can be no good or useful disputation, where the
Principles are not granted: and it was ever heretofore taken (say they) for a
certain Principle, That the Parliament sitting is the only Judge of what is
dangerous to the Commonwealth, and what useful, as likewise what is lawful in
those cases; which the King, by advice of no private Counsel whatsoever, ought
to control, or contradict: which Principle till the King will be pleased
rightly to apprehend, Disputations and Declarations are endless, and no true
understanding between him and his people can be begotten.

Of all these things if a Reader desire to be satisfied in particular, he may
sinde the questions all fully stated by the Parliament, and the King's desires
expressed by himself, in two large Declarations; one called the Parliaments
third Remonstrance, dated the 26 of May, 1642; and the King's Answer to that
Remonstrance.

But things began to go on in an high manner; the Parliament authorizing Sir
JOHN HOTHAM to issue out Warrants to Constables, and other Officers, to come
with Arms for the defense of Hull: and the King on the other side, forbidding
any such Warrants, bringing, or training, without an express Authority under
his hand.

The King had summoned the Gentry of that County to attend him at the City of
York, which they accordingly did, upon the 12 of May, 1642; where he caused,
after he had spoken some few words to them, to be read aloud in their hearing,
his Answer to the Declaration of both houses concerning Hull, the Answer of the
Parliament to his two Messages concerning Hull, together with his Reply to the
same, and his Message to both houses, declaring the reasons why he refused to
pass that Bill of the Militia: after which, he proceeded in a Speech to them,
wherein he strove to make them apprehend, that traitorous attempts might be
against his Person; and for that reason he desired a Guard of Horse and Foot to
be levied there for his defense. He complained likewise that the Committee of
Parliament consisting of four Members of the house of Commons, FERDINANDO Lord
FAIRFAX, Sir HUGH CHOLMLEY, Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, and Sir HENRY CHOLMLEY,
refused to obey his Command: for they being there employed in their own Country
by the Parliament, to do service to the State, were commanded by the King to
depart out of the County; which they durst not do, against the intention of the
Parliament, who employed them there. But the King in that Speech to the County,
bade them take heed of those four Gentlemen, not knowing what doctrine of
disobedience they might preach to the people, under color of obeying the
Parliament. The King's Speech and Declaration read, seemed to be much applauded
by many Gentlemen, and their servants: as when those things which came from the
Parliament were read, the same persons expressed much scorn, hissing, and
reviling the language and reason of them.

But diverse of the Gentry, and greatest part of the Freeholders, began with
sorrow to consider that this division of the King from his great Council, could
produce nothing but misery to the Kingdom, and dishonor to himself: and
therefore they humbly answered his Propositions concerning a Guard, Tha^ they
were willing to do any service, or expose their lives to any hazard for the
safety of his Majesty's Royal Person; yet they thought themselves unworthy to
advise him in a thing of so high consequence; but humbly beseeched him to
impart the grounds of his fears and jealousies to his high Court of Parliament,
of whose loyal care and affections to the King's honor and safety, and
prosperity of the whole Kingdom, they were most confident. And in behalf of
the four forementioned Members of Parliament lately employed to attend your
Majesty (said they) from both Houses, being all Gentlemen of quality and
estate in the County; we humbly crave your Majesty's leave to express our
confidence in their unstained loyalty to your Majesty, so far as that you may
securely admit their attendance to negotiate their employments, until they
shall be recalled by the Parliament. And we do all engage our selves for their
fidelity, as being most assured that your Royal Person shall be secure in the
General loyalty of your Subjects in this County, without any extraordinary
Guard.

The King was presented also, the next day, with a Petition from many
thousands, who termed themselves peaceably-affected Subjects in the County of
York, in which expressing their loyalty and affection to him, they speak thus:
We are confident that no so absolute and hearty observance of your Majesty's
just commands can be demonstrated, as when you shall in Parliament declare
them: If they be divided (which God forbid) our hearts even tremble to consider
the danger, and diminution of the honor and safety of your Self and Kingdom;
since it is clear to every understanding, that it is not a divided part of one
or several Counties, can afford that honor and safety to your Majesty, as the
whole Kingdom: Which you may command, no ground of fear or danger remaining, if
a good confidence were begot betwixt your Majesty and the Parliament; whose
grave and loyal Counsels are, as we humbly conceive, the visible way, under
God, to put a speedy end to the troubles in Ireland, and establish your Throne
in Righteousness. And lastly, we humbly supplicate that we may represent our
unfitness to become Judges betwixt your Majesty and Parliament in any thing,
or dispute the Authority of either; which we humbly conceive do fortify each
other, etc.

The king was not well satisfied, or pleased with this Petition, but persisted
still in his former way of raising Forces, under the name of a Guard; whilst
the Parliament were voting to maintain those Gentlemen their Committee in the
North, in such things as they have done, and shall further do in obedience to
their commands, for preservation of the Kingdom's Peace; as also to maintain
their Ordinance concerning the Militia, and to issue out Commissions into all
parts of the Kingdom, and appoint certain days for all the Trained Bands to be
exercised in each County according to that Ordinance; and that some Members
might be sent into the several Counties, to see the Ordinance performed; and
the Magazines of those several Counties in England and Wales to be forthwith
put into the power of the Lord Lieutenants of the said Counties, being such as
were entrusted by the Parliament. And whereas the King had made Proclamation
for all the Gentlemen and others of that County to attend him in Arms as a
Guard; the Parliament three days after declared, that it was against the Laws
and Liberties of the Kingdom, that any of the Subjects thereof should be
commanded by the King to attend him at his pleasure, but such as are bound
thereto by special service; and that whosoever, upon pretense of his command,
shall take Arms, and gather together with others in a warlike manner, to the
terror of the King's people, shall be esteemed disturbers of the public
peace: and that the Sheriffs of those Counties where such raising or drawing of
armed men should be, should immediately raise the power of the County to
suppress them, and keep the King's Peace according to Law.

So different and directly contrary, at this time, were the Commands of the
King and Parliament, in all things, that the Lords in Parliament having been
informed that the King was resolved to adjourn the next Term from Westminster
to York, and had given command to the Lord Keeper to issue Proclamations and
Writs to that purpose, voted that such a removal of the Term, while the
Parliament sat, was illegal; and ordered that the Lord Keeper should not issue
any Writs, or seal any Proclamation tending to that end.

CHAP. IIII.
Many Members of both Houses leave the Parliament, and repair to the King. Nine
of the Lords who first went away, are impeached by the Commons, and censured by
the Peers. The Great Seal is carried away from London to York. Some Votes of
Parliament concerning the King's proceedings. A Petition, with nineteen
Propositions sent from the Parliament to the King.
THe King proceeded in his earnest endeavor of raising Forces, as a Guard for
his Person: which in some measure he had effected, by many fair expressions of
love and grace to the people of those Northern Counties, and serious
Protestations of the clearness of his intent from any violation of Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, or making War against the Parliament. But the Kingdom
was not much affrighted with any Forces which the King could so raise; nor
could any other attempt of his in the Northern parts, make the people fear a
Civil War, until they saw that great defection of the Parliament Members, which
began before the end of April, and continued for the greatest part of that May:
for at that time did the Lords one after another, and sometimes by numbers,
abandon the Parliament sitting, and go to the King at York; insomuch that in a
very short space, those Lords became the greater number; and their departure
began therefore to seem less strange, then the constant sitting of the rest.
The Lords who left the Parliament, were these: the Duke of Richmond, Marquess
Hartford, the Earls of Lindsey, Cumberland, Huntingdon, Bath, Southampton,
Dorset, Salisbury (although Salisbury, within few days after, repenting
himself, made a secret escape from York to London, and joined himself. It again
to the Parliament, with whom he continued constant ever after) Northampton,
Devonshire, Bristol, Westmerland, Barkeshire, Monmouth, Rivers, Newcastle,
Dover, Carnarvan, Newport; the Lords MATREVERS, WILLOUGHBY of Eresby, RICH,
HOWARD of Charleton, NEWA^K, PAGET, CHANDOYS, FAWCONBRIDGE, PAWLET, LOVELA^E,
SAVILE, COVENTRY, MOHUN, DUNSMORE, SEYMOUR, GRAY of Ruthen, CAPEL. Within the
same compass of time, many of the house of Commons, though no great number, in
respect of those who continued in that house, did likewise so far break that
trust which was r^posed in them, as to (...) ^ake their ^ears in Parliament;
some of them, as was r^po^ted, invited by Letters from the King, and others of
their own accord.

At the revolt of so many members from the Parliament, the Kingdom in general
began to fear; and all that loved the Nations Peace, were in an high measure
dismayed; among whom nothing was to be heard, in all meetings and discourses,
but sad presages of misery to the Kingdom, if Almighty God did not in a
miraculous way prevent it: They concluded that no other way could have been
^ound out to endanger the overthrow of that Parliament, which many open
attempts and secret conspiracies could not do^ That as the ruin of England
could not in probability be wrought but by it self; so the Parliament could not
be broken (a Prologue to the other) but by her own Members, and that sentence
verified, Perditio tua ex te. Though the opinions of men differed concerning
the censure of those Members; while some condemned, others in some degree
excused them, according as affection and private interests did lead them: yet
concerning the Effects which that Revolt in all probability must produce, all
rational men concurred in opinion, that nothing but Calamity and Ruin could
flow from it. What else (said they) can this Revolt do, but nourish and
increase the King's disaffection to the Parliament? What, but encourage his
distance from it, and attempts against it? What, but secure the Irish Rebels,
and endanger the loss of that Kingdom; cherish Papists, obstruct Justice, and
give impunity to all Delinquents? Nothing else had power to undermine and shake
the dignity and reverence belonging to that high Court; whilst not only the
People by that diminution of their number, were persuaded to esteem of it as an
imperfect Parliament; but the King might take that advantage of it (which
proved true in his succeeding Declarations and Writings, what he never did
before) as to call them a Faction, or pretended Parliament, and such like.

In censuring those Lords and Commons who deserted the Parliament, the People,
as was said before, did much differ. Some considering how great the number was,
that many of them were of whole estates, of good reputation, and able parts,
began to to think, or at least to say, that the Parliament was not free enough;
that those Members (which was also their own excuse) were curbed by a prevalent
faction in the Houses, and overawed by tumults from the City of London. Upon
that occasion, they called to mind in what manner the names of nine and fifty
Members of the House of Commons had been posted up at the Exchange, for
dissenting from the rest about condemning of the Earl of Strafford; besides
what menacing speeches had been given by rude people to some Lords, whom they
thought ill-affected.

Others answered, that although such things had been rashly and foolishly done
by some unadvised persons, yet it could not be feared that any tumults from the
City would ever violate a Parliament sitting; and that the tumultuous
appearance of such multitudes from the City, was rather intended for
encouragement and security of the Parliament against such invasions as might be
made upon them, to aw their just freedom, and treacherous Conspiracies which by
report were made against them by people disaffected to that high Court; which
that Plot of bringing the Army against them formerly, and late resorts of armed
persons about White Hall, gave them cause to fear: That no fears of danger
could be pretended from the House it self against any Member, but such as that
Member was bound to undergo and suffer, rather then betray so great a trust of
the people: That it was to be presumed, no Member of Parliament who was
well-affected to his Country, could suffer any thing from the house it self;
whose ends and counsels must needs be supposed to tend to the public good, or
else our Ancestors, who constituted that Frame of Government, were much
deceived: That it was very improbable the Liberty of Subjects should be
violated by that Court, which is the only defense and conserver of it, and
without which, it had always suffered from Princes, yea, such Princes as were
not very wicked.

They alleged that it was very dishonorable for those Lords, being the
greater number, to pretend fear for deserting the Parliament: for if it were
upon a true dislike of any proceedings there, they were enough to haved stayed,
and perchance have cured those inconveniences, and too many to have suffered in
a good Cause; though Honor would command one man alone, lawfully called to it,
to maintain a truth with any hazard. On the other side, they were too many to
flee, to encourage the King against his Parliament, and thereby soment that
dissension which could produce no good effect.

It was alleged by many men, that some of those Lords were Noblemen of
honorable and virtuous repute. Though that were not denied, nor could any
certain sign from the former d^meanours of the Lords in general, arise, to
distinguish who were likely to adhere to the Parliament, and who to desert it
(for they were deceived on both sides, in some particulars) yet certainly it
was averred, that those Lords whom the people had most especially trusted in,
as true Patriots, proved to be part of those who continued in the House; and
those whom the people in general distasted or distrusted, happened to be among
those who upon this occasion forsook the Parliament.

It was likewise frequently spoken, that those Members of the House of Commons
who deserted it, were men generally of as able parts as any that continued
there. It was no wonder, (replied others) but very probable that they were such
men, and such as had, or thought they had good parts enough to be looked upon
by a Prince: for those men (though we should esteem them all of equal honesty)
were likeliest to fall off. There is a difference between Wisdom and good
Parts, such as we count Eloquence, Wit, polite Learning, and the like: and that
Wisdom which is least adorned with such dresses as these, is usually at such
times most safe in it self, and freest from being corrupted; as that Beauty is,
which is set off with the least witchery of Attire: for that Beauty which is
curiously decked, as it is most subject to be tempted by others; so it is most
apt to be proud of it self, and by consequence, to betray it self to such a
temptation as is great enough. So it has been often seen in this case (as was
observed by an old Parliament Man) that those Gentlemen of fine parts, when
other men of a plainer wisdom have had the honor in a constant way to do
excellent service for the Commonwealth, have been won from their Countrey's
cause, as soon as Majesty has at all vouchsafed to tempt them, or that
perchance their opinion of themselves has made them meet or seek such a
temptation. Besides that danger of invitation from a King, it has been too
often known, that men of such parts, or that think so of themselves, have been
apter to take pet, and grow angry, when any Speech of theirs has not received
that honor which they expected, or any other affront has been offered to
them; and what such an anger may make proud and ambitious spirits to do, even
against their own Country, and the dictates of their Conscience and Reason, the
world has been taught by many examples, some of high consequence, and very
remarkable, such as CORIOLANUS the Roman, and JULIAN the Spanish General,
which for the eminence of the persons, and extraordinary effects which they
wrought in the world, must needs fall into Record; when the actions of mean and
private men are buried in oblivion. Besides, there are many, whose Callings
make them capable of easier and greater gratifications from the King then other
men; as Lawyers and Divines; who will therefore be apt to lean that way where
the preferment lies. Such discourses were frequent in all companies at that
time, for different affections did at all meetings beget such argumentative
language.

What sense and apprehension the Parliament had of so many Members forsaking
their station, shall appear anon, by a Vote passed in the House of Commons, and
presented to the Lords by Master DENZIL HOLLLS, after some intervening passages
have been related.

Whilst the King encouraged and strengthened by this great accession of
reputation to his side, pursued his design of raising Forces in the North; the
Parliament, after that they had on the twentieth of May peti^ioned the King to
disband such Forces, and rely for his security (as his Predecessors had done)
upon the Laws, and affections of his People, contenting himself with his usual
and ordinary Guards; declared that otherwise they held themselves bound in duty
toward God, and the Trust reposed in them by the People, and by the
Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, to employ their care and
utmost power to secure the Parliament, and preserve the Kingdom's Peace; and
immediately it was voted in Parliament, and resolved upon the Question, That it
appears that the King, seduced by wicked Counsel, intends to make War against
the Parliament, who in all their consultations and actions have proposed no
other end unto themselves, but the care of his Kingdoms, and the performance of
all duty and loyalty to his Person. It was likewise resolved upon the
Question, That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a
breach of the Trust reposed in him by his People, contrary to his Oath, and
tending to the dissolution of this Government. As also, That whosoever shall
serve or assist him in such Wars, are Traitors by the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom, and have been so adjudged in two Acts of Parliament; 11 RICH. 2. and 1
HEN. 4: and that such persons ought to suffer as Traitors.

But those Lords who had forsaken the Parliament continuing still with the King
in the Northern parts, the Parliament by an Order of the 30 of May, summoned
nine of them, who first had gone away, to appear at Westminster; viz. the Earls
of Northampton, Devonshire, Dover, and Monmouth; the Lords HOWARD of Charleton,
RICH, GRAY of Ruthen, COVENTRY, and CAPEL: but they utterly refused to come
away, returning an Answer in writing; which the Parliament judged to be a
slighting and scornful Letter: Upon which, a Vote was passed against them in
the house of Commons, and presented on the 15 of June to the Lords, by Master
HOLLIS; with an Oration of his own concerning the importance of the business;
the greatest part of which Speech being here inserted, may give light to the
Reader concerning the condition of the Kingdom at that time, and the judgment
of the Houses upon it.

His Speech began thus:
My Lords, By command of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the house of
Commons, I come hither to your Lordships in behalf of the Parliament, or rather
in behalf of the whole Kingdom, laboring with much distraction, many fears,
great apprehensions of evil and mischief intended against it, and now hatching
and preparing by that malignant party, which thirsts after the destruction of
Religion, Laws and Liberty; all which are folded up, cherished and preserved in
the careful bosom of the Parliament.

It has ever been the policy of evil Counselors (who are the greatest
enemies we have in the world, or can have) to strike at Parliaments, keep off
Parliaments, break Parliaments, or divide Parliaments, by making Factions,
casting in Diversions and Obstructions, to hinder and interrupt the proceedings
of Parliament; all against the Parliament.

Your Lordships have had experience of this Truth this Parliament; a succession
of designs upon it: First, to aw it, and take away the freedom of it by the
terror of an Army; then, to bring Force against it, actually to assault it,
and with the Sword to cut in sunder this only Band which ties and knits up
King and People, the People among themselves, and the whole frame of this
Government, in one firm, and I hope indissoluble knot of Peace and Unity.

God diverted those designs, did blow upon them; presently, another is set
upon, which was, To obstruct and hinder our proceedings, that in the mean time
the flame of Rebellion might consume the Kingdom of Ireland, and distempers,
distractions and jealousies be somented here at home, to tear out the bowels of
this Kingdom, the Parliament being disabled from helping it, by occasion of so
many diversions, so much business cut out unto it, many obstructions and
difficulties, especially that great one, from whence all the rest receive
countenance and support, his Majesty's absenting himself, not concurring with
us, and so withdrawing both his presence and influence; by which means such
remedies could not be applied as were necessary, and what was done, was done
with infinite trouble to the Parliament, and excessive charge to the Subject,
double, treble, what otherwise would have served the turn: So the Subject is
grieved, and oppressed with charge, and the blame of all is laid upon the
Parliament, and the Parliament unjustly said to be the cause of all these
Evils, which the authors of them had made so great, and so confirmed and
secured by the frequent interruptions of the Parliament, that they could not
suddenly nor easily be suppressed or removed.

Well, by God's infinite blessing, the Parliament was in a fair possibility to
wade through this likewise; and though the Night had been black and stormy, some
Day began to appear: miraculously our Armies have prospered in Ireland, and God
be praised, the malevolent practices of these Vipers at home, as they appeared,
were in some sort mastered; and the Parliament began to act and operate toward
the settling of the great Affairs both of Church and State, and providing for
the defense and safety of this Kingdom, against either foreign Invasion, or
any striving of the disaffected party among themselves.

Then three ways are together assayed for the weakening and invalidating the
proceeding and power of the Parliament, and making way for the utter subversion
of it.

1. Force is gathered together at York, under pretense of a Guard for His
Majesty's Person, to make an opposition against the Parliament, and by strong
hand to support and protect Delinquents, so as no Order of Parliament can be
obeyed, but on the other side is slighted and scorned, to make the Parliament
of no reputation, to be but Imago Parliamenti, a mere shadow, without
substance, without efficacy.

2. To send out in His Majesty's name, and as Declarations and Messages from
him, bitter invectives against the Parliament, to perplex it, and engage it in
expense of time to answer them: and besides, cunningly to insinuate and infuse
into the people by false colors and glosses, a disopinion and dislike of the
Parliament, and if it be possible, to stir up their spirits to rise against it,
to destroy it, (and in it, all other Parliaments) to the ruin of themselves,
their wives and children.

3. The third Plot is: The Members are drawn away, and persuaded to forsake
their duty and attendance here, and go down to York, thereby to blemish the
actions of both Houses, as done by a few and an inconsiderable number, and
rather a Party then a Parliament, and perhaps to raise and set up an
anti-Parliament there.

My Lords, this is now the great Design, whereby they hope by little and
little the Parliament shall even bleed to death, and moulder to nothing, the
members dropping away one after another: a desperate and dangerous practice,
and as your Lordships well observed (when you were pleased to communicate the
business to us) an effect of the evil Counsels now prevailing, and tending to
the dissolution of the Parliament, of this Parliament, which under God must be
the preserver of three Kingdoms, and keep them firm and loyal to their King,
subject to his Crown, save them from being turned into a Chaos of disorder and
confusion, and made a dismal spectacle of misery and desolarion; this
Parliament, which is the last hope of the long-oppressed, and in other
Countries even almost wholly-destroyed Protestant Religion: this Parliment,
which is the only means to continue us to be a Nation of freedom, and not of
slaves; to be owners of any thing: in a word, which must stand in the Gap, to
prevent an inlet and inundation of all misery and confusion.

My Lords, this Parliament they desire to destroy; but I hope it will destroy
the destroyers, and be a wall of Fire to consume them, as it is a wall of
Brass to us, to defend King, and Kingdom, us, and all we have.

Your Lordships wisely foresaw this Mischief, and as wisely have endeavored to
prevent it, by making your Orders to keep your Members here; as that of the
ninth of April, and several other Orders enjoining them all to attend; thereby
restraining them from repairing to York, where the Clouds were observed to
gather so fast, threatening a storm, and such preparations to be made against
the Parliament, that it necessitated both Houses to pass a Vote, That the
King, seduced by wicked Counsel, intended to make War against the Parliament:
and all who shall serve and assist in such Wars, are declared to be Traitors:
which Vote passed the 20 of May: so setting a mark upon that place, and their
opinion concerning those who should at this time resort thither.

Yet now, in such a conjuncture of time, when the Kingdom had never more need
of a Parliament, and the Parliament never more need of all the help and
assistance, of the best endeavor and advice of every Member; the Safety, and
even Being of three Kingdoms depending on it; after such Orders and Commands of
your Lordships House to the contrary; such a Vote of both Houses; and
expressly against their Duty; being called thither by Writ under the Great
Seal, which is the King's greatest and highest Command, and not controllable,
nor to be dispensed with by any other Command from him whatsoever; and called
to treat and consult de arduis Regni, the great urging and pressing affairs of
the Kingdom, never more urgent, never more pressing: notwithstanding all this,
these Lords, the Earls of Northampton, Devonshire, Dover, Monmouth; the Lords,
HOWARD of Charlton, RICH, GRAY, COVENTRY, and CAPEL, have left their stations,
withdrawn themselves, and are gone to York^ and being ^ummoned to appear by an
Order of the 30 of May, in stead of obedience, return r^fusal, by a slighting
and scornful Letter, which has been so adjudged both by your Lordships, and
the House of Commons.

My Lords, the ^ouse of Commons has likewise, upon the consideration and
debate of this business, finding it so much to concern the safety of the
Kingdom, and the very Being of the Parliament, passed this Vote; That the
Departing of these nine Lords from the Parliament without leave, after such a
time as both Houses had declared, That the King, seduced by wicked Counsel,
intended to make War against the Parliament; and their still continuing at
York, notwithstanding their Summons and Command, is an high Affront and
Contempt of both Houses; and that the said Lords did as much as in them lay,
that the service of Parliament might be deserted, and are justly suspected to
promote a War against the Parliament.

The House in further prosecution of their duty in this Particular, and in
pursuance of their Protestation, which obliges them to endeavor to bring to
condign punishment all such high offenders against, not only the Privileges,
but the very Essence of Parliament, have sent me up to impeach these Lords, and
desire that speedy and exemplary Justice may be done upon them.

And accordingly, I do here, in the name of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
of the Commons House assembled in Parliament, and in the name of all the
Commons of England, Impeach SPENCER Earl of Northampton, WILLIAM Earl of
Devonshire, HENRY Earl of Dover, HENRY Earl of Monmouth, CHARLES Lord HOWARD of
Charleton, ROBERT Lord RICH, CHARLES Lord GRAY of Ruthen, THOMAS Lord COVENTRY,
and ARTHUR Lord CAPEL, for these high Crimes and Misdemeanors following; viz.
For that, contrary to their duty, they being Peers of the Realm, and summoned
by Writ to attend the Parliament; and contrary to an Order of the House of
Peers of the ninth of April last, and several other Orders requiring the
attendance of the Members of that House; and after a Vote past in both Houses
the twentieth of May last, That the King, seduced by wicked Counsel, intended
to make War against the Parliament; and that whosoever served or assisted him
in that War, was adjudged a Traitor; did notwithstanding afterward, in the
same month of May, contemptuously, having notice of the said Votes and Orders,
withdraw themselves from the said House of Peers, and repair to the City of
York, where the preparations of the said War were, and yet are, in contrivance
and agitation; they knowing of such preparations: and being by an Order of the
thirtieth of May duly summoned by the House of Peers, to make their appearance
before that House upon the eighth day of June last past, they refused to
appear, and returned a scornful Answer by a Letter under their hands, directed
to the Speaker of the Lords House, and remaining there upon Record.

For which Crimes and Misdemeanors, to the interruption of the proceedings of
Parliament, and great Affairs of the Kingdom, and tending to the dissolution of
the Parliament, and disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; I am commanded, in
the name of the said Commons, to demand of your Lordships that the said Lords
may be forthwith put to their Answer, and receive speedy and exemplary
punishment, according to their demerits. The Commons saving to themselves
liberty at all times hereafter, to exhibit any other or further Impeachment or
Accusation against the said Lords, or any of them.

Upon this Impeachment of the nine Lords, the House of Peers, about a month
after, being in their Robes, entered into debate of the said Impeachment; and
after diverse Speeches made by some Lords, setting forth the greatness of their
Offense, they were censured, 1. Never to sit more as Members of that House. 2.
That they should be utterly incapable of any benefit or privileges of
Parliament. 3. That they should suffer Imprisonment during their pleasure.
After which Censure, it was concluded that the said Lords should be demanded,
in the behalf of both Houses of Parliament, to submit to the said Censure.

About that time, when the Members of both Houses of Parliament did daily
forsake their station, and repair to the King at York, another accident fell
out, which gave a great wound to the Parliament, and much encouragement to the
King in his designs; which was the carrying away of the Great Seal of England
from London to York.

EDWARD Lord LITTLETON, on whom the King, when the Lord Keeper FINCH fled out
of England, as is before related, had conferred the keeping of the Great Seal
(he being before Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and created a Baron of
the Realm) had continued for some space of time, after the rest were gone to
York, firm to the Parliament in all appearance, and upon all occasions voted
according to the sense of those that seemed the best affected that way; and
among other things, gave his Vote for settling the Militia by Ordinance of
Parliament; insomuch that there seemed no doubt at all to be made of his
constancy; till at the last, before the end of the month of June, a young
Gentleman, one Master Thomas Eliot, Groom of the Privy Chamber to the King,
was sent closely from York to him; who being admitted by the Lord Keeper into
his private Chamber, when none else were by, so handled the matter, whether by
persuasions, threats, or promises, or whatsoever, that after three hours time,
he got the great Seal into his hands, and rid post with it away to the King at
York.

The Lord Keeper L^TTLETON, after serious consideration with himself what he
had done, or rather suffered, and not being able to answer it to the
Parliament; the next day, early in the morning, rode after it himself, and went
to the King.

Great was the complaint at London against him for that action; nor did the
King ever show him any great regard afterward. The reason which the Lord
Keeper LITTLETON gave, for parting so with the great Seal, to some friends of
his who went after him to York, was this; That the King, when he made him Lord
Keeper, gave him an Oath in private, which he took, That whenever the King
should send to him for the great Seal, he should forthwith deliver it. This
Oath (as he averred to his friends) his conscience would by no means suffer him
to dispense withal; he only repented (though now too late) that he had
accepted the Office upon those terms.

The Parliament, to prevent so sad a War, sent out two Orders; one, to all
Sheriffs^ Justices, and other Officers within 150 miles of the City of York,
that they should take special care to make stay of all Arms and Ammunition
carrying toward York, until they have given notice thereof to the Lords and
Commons, and received their further direction; and to that purpose, to keep
strict Watches within their several limits, to search for, and seize all such
Arms, and apprehend the persons going with the same: The other was to the
Sheriff of Lancashire, and other adjacent Counties, to suppress the raising
and coming together of any Soldiers, Horse or Foot, by any Warrant from the
King, without the advice of the Lords and Commons in Parliament; as likewise to
declare all that should execute any such Warrant from the King, disturbers of
the peace of the Kingdom; and to command the Trained Bands to be assistant to
the Sheriffs in that service.

These Orders of the Parliament were immediately answered by a Proclamation
from the King, forbidding all his Subjects belonging to the Trained Bands, or
Militia of this Kingdom, to rise, march, muster, or exercise by virtue of any
Order or Ordinance of one or both Houses of Parliament, without Consent or
Warrant from his Majesty. The Parliament notwithstanding proceed in settling
the Militia of the Kingdom (having made on the second of June an Order for
those revolted members to return to their duty again before the 16 of that
month, under the forfeiture of an hundred pound, to be disposed to the Wars in
Ireland, besides undergoing such punishment as the Houses should think fit) and
had by this time at many places began to settle the said Militia.

Upon the same second of June also, the Lords and Commons sent a Petition to
the King, with nineteen Propositions; which the King received with great
indignation, as appeared in his Answer to them both in general, and in diverse
Particulars concerning those Propositions, as esteeming himself injured in
restraint of his Power and Prerogative. The Petition and Propositions were as
follows.

The humble Petition and Advice of both Houses of Parliament; with Nineteen
Propositions, and the Conclusion sent unto His Majesty the second of June,
1642.
YOur Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, having nothing in their thoughts and desires, more precious and of
higher esteem (next to the honor and immediate Service of God) then the just
and faithful performance of their duty to Your Majesty, and this Kingdom; And
being very sensible of the great distractions and distempers, and of the
imminent dangers and calamities which those distractions and distempers are
like to bring upon Your Majesty and Your Subjects; all which have proceeded
from the subtle informations, mischievous practices, add evil counsels of men
disaffected to Gods true Religion, Your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and the
public Peace and Prosperity of Your People, after a serious observation of the
causes of those Mischiefs; Do in al^ humility and sincerity present to Your
Majesty their most dutiful Petition and Advice, that out of Your Princely
Wisdom, for the establishing Your Own Honor and Safety, and gracious
tenderness of the Welfare and Security of Your Subjects and Dominions, You
will be pleased to grant and accept these their humble Desires and
Propositions, as the most necessary effectual Means, through God's blessing, of
removing those Iealousies and Differences which have unhappily fallen betwixt
You and Your People, and procuring both Your Majesty and Them a constant
course of Honor, Peace, and Happiness.

The Propositions.
1. That the Lords and others of Your Majesty's Privy Council, and such great
Officers and Ministers of State, either at home, or beyond the Seas, may be put
from Your Privy Council, and from those Offices and Employments, excepting
such as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament: And that the Persons
put into the Places and Employment of those that are removed, may be approved
of by both Houses of Parliament: And that Privy Counselors shall take an Oath
for the due execution of their places, in such form as shall be agreed upon by
both Houses of Parliament.

2. That the great Affairs of the Kingdom may not be concluded or transacted by
the advice of private men, or by any unknown or unsworn Counselors; but that
such matters as concern the Public, and are proper for the high Court of
Parliament, which is Your Majesty's great and supreme Council, may be debated,
resolved and transacted only in Parliament, and not elsewhere: and such as
shall presume to do any thing to the contrary, shall be reserved to the censure
and judgment of Parliament: And such other matters of State as are proper for
Your Majesty's Privy Council, shall be debated and concluded by such of the
Nobility and others, as shall from time to time be chosen for that place, by
approbation of both Houses of Parliament. And that no public Act concerning
the Affairs of the Kingdom which are proper for Your Privy Council, may be
esteemed of any validity, as proceeding from the Royal Authority, unless it be
done by the Advice and Consent of the major part of Your Council, attested
under their hands. And that Your Council may be limited to a certain number,
not exceeding twenty five, nor under fifteen. And if any Councillors place
happen to be void in the interval of Parliament, it shall not be supplied
without the assent of the major part of the Council; which voice shall be
confirmed at the next sitting of Parliament, or else to be void.

3. That the Lord high Steward of England, Lord high Constable, Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy
Seal, Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, chief Governor
of Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards, Secretaries of
State, two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, may always be chosen with the
approbation of both Houses of Parliament; and in the intervals of Parliaments,
by assent of the major part of the Council, in such manner as is before expressed
in the choice of Counselors.

4. That he or they unto whom the Government and Education of the King's
Children shall be committed, shall be approved of by both houses of Parliament;
and in the intervals of Parliament, by the assent of the major part of the
Council, in such manner as is before expressed in the choice of Counselors: And
that all such Servants as are now about them, against whom both Houses shall
have any just exceptions, shall be removed.

5. That no Marriage shall be concluded or treated for any of the King's
Children, with any foreign Prince, or other person whatsoever abroad or at
home, without the consent of Parliament, under the Penalty of a Praemunire unto
such as shall be concluded, or treat any Marriage as aforesaid: And that the
said Penalty shall not be pardoned or dispensed with, but by the consent of
both houses of Parliament.

6. That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants, be
strictly put in execution, without any Toleration or Dispensation to the
contrary: And that some more effectual course may be enacted by Authority of
Parliament, to disable them from making any disturbance in the State, or
eluding the Law by Trusts on otherwise.

7. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the house of Peers may be taken away, so
long as they continue Papists: And that Your Majesty will consent to such a
Bill as shall be drawn, for the education of the children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

8. That Your Majesty will be pleased to consent that such a Reformation be
made of the Church Government and Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament shall
advise; wherein they intend to have Consultations with Divines, as is expressed
in their Declaration to that purpose: And that Your Majesty will contribute
Your best assistance to them, for the raising of a sufficient Maintenance for
preaching Ministers through the Kingdom: And that Your Majesty will be pleased
to give Your Consent to Laws for the taking away of Innovations, and
Superstition, and of Pluralities, and against scandalous Ministers.

9. That Your Majesty will be pleased to rest satisfied with that course that
the Lords and Commons have appointed for ordering of the Militia, until the
same shall be further settled by a Bill: And that Your Majesty will recall Your
Declarations and Proclamations against the Ordinance made by the Lords and
Commons concerning it.

10. That such Members of either Houses of Parliament as have during this
present Parliament been put out of any Place and Office, may either be restored
to that Place and Office, or otherwise have satisfaction for the same, upon the
Petition of that House whereof he or they are members.

11. That all Privy Councillors and Judges may take an Oath, the Form whereof
to be agreed on and settled by Act of Parliament, for the maintaining of the
Petition of Right, and of certain Statutes made by this Parliament, which shall
be mentioned by both Houses of Parliament: And that an enquiry of all the
breaches and violations of those Laws, may be given in charge by the Justices
of the Kings Bench every Term, and by the Judges of Assize in their Circuits,
and Justices of the Peace at the Sessions, to be presented and punished
according to Law.

12. That all the Judges, and all the Officers placed by approbation of both
houses of Parliament, may hold their places quam diu been se gesserint.

13. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether
they be within the Kingdom, or fled out of it: And that all persons cited by
either House of Parliament, may appear, and abide the censure of Parliament.

14. That the general Pardon offered by Your Majesty, may be granted with such
Exceptions as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament.

15. That the Forts and Castles of this Kingdom may be put under the Command
and Custody of such persons as Your Majesty shall appoint, with the
approbation of Your Parliament; and in the intervals of Parliament, with
approbation of the major part of the Council, in such manner as is before
expressed in the choice of Councillors.

16. That the extraordinary Guards and Military Forces now attending Your
Majesty, may be removed and discharged; and that for the future You will raise
no such Guards or extraordinary Forces, but according to the Law, in case of
actual Rebellion or lavasion.

17. That Your Majesty will be pleased to enter into a more strict Allegiance
with the States of the United Provinces, and other Neighbor Princes and States
of the Protestant Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof against all
designs and attempts of the Pope and his adherents to subvert and suppress
it; whereby Your Majesty will obtain a great access of strength and
reputation, and Your Subjects be much encouraged and enabled in a Parliamentary
way, for Your aid and assistance in restoring Your Royal Sister and her
Princely Issue to those Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and
relieving the other distressed Protestant Princes who have suffered in the same
Cause.

18. That Your Majesty will be pleased, by Act of Parliament, to clear the
Lord Kymbo^ton, and the five Members of the House of Commons, in such manner,
that future Parliaments may be secured from the consequence of that evil
president.

19. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to pass a Bill for
restraining Peers made hereafter from sitting or voting in Parliament, unless
they be admitted thereunto with the consent of both Houses of Parliament.

And these our humble Desires being granted by Your Majesty, we shall
forthwith apply our selves to regulate Your present Revenue in such sort as may
be for Your best advantage, and likewise to settle such an ordinary and
constant increase of it, as shall be sufficient to support Your Royal Dignity
in Honor and Plenty, beyond the proportion of any former Grants of the
Subjects of this Kingdom to Your Majesty's Royal Predecessors. We shall
likewise put the Town of Hull into such hands as Your Majesty shall appoint,
with the consent and approbation of Parliament, and deliver up a just account
of all the Magazine, and cheerfully employ the uttermost of our endeavors in
the real expression and performance of our most dutiful and loyal affections,
to the preserving and maintaining the Royal Honor, Greatness, and Safety of
Your Majesty, and Your Posterity.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
To these Propositions sent from the Parliament, the King returned such an
Answer, as showed that he was much displeased with the whole Business: For
before his particular Answers to the several Propositions, he complains in
general, and those very sharp, expressions of the method of their proceedings
against him: and that the Cabalists of this business (for so he calls them)
have used great art and subtilty against him, first to strengthen themselves
with unlawful power, before they make their illegal demands. He taxes them,
that first they had removed the Law it self, as a rub in their way, and pressed
their own Orders and Ordinances upon the people (tending to a pure arbitrary
power) as Laws, and required obedience to them, without the consent or
concurrence of himself. That they had wrested from him the command of the
Militia, (a thing inherent in his Crown) countenanced the Treason of HOTHAM
against him, and directed to the people invectives against his Government, to
weaken his just authority and due esteem among his Subjects; casting upon him
aspersions of a strange nature, as, that he should favor a Rebellion in the
bowels of his Kingdom. He complains likewise that they had broached (for so he
calls it) a new Doctrine, namely, that the King is bound to pass all Laws that
shall be offered to him by both Houses of Parliament: a point of policy fit
for their present business, as destructive to all his Rights. That they have
overawed his Subjects, in stifling all Petitions that did not please them; and
filled the peoples ears with needless fears, and jealousies, and such like
things, before they thought his Majesty sufficiently prepared to take those
bitter Pills. For (says he) if they had unseasonably vented such Propositions,
as the wisdom and modesty of their Predecessors never thought fit to offer to
any of Our Progenitors, nor We in honor or regard to Our Regal Authority
(which God has entrusted Us with for the good of Our People) could receive
without just indignation (for such many of the present Propositions are) their
hopes would soon have been blasted, and those persons to whom Offices, Honors,
Power, and Commands were designed, by such ill timing of their business, would
have failed of their expectation, not without a brand upon the Attempt.
Therefore he says, that they had made beforehand those forenamed
preparations. The King seems to doubt likewise, because the Parliament have not
told him that this is all they desire of him, that these Propositions are
probably intended to make way for a Superfetation of a (yet) higher nature. And
in the Propositions in general he observes, that the Contrivers of them (the
better to advance their true ends) disguised as much as they could, their
intents with a mixture of some things really to be approved by every honest
man, others specious and popular, and some already granted by him: All which
(says he) are cunningly twisted, and mixed with other things of their main
design of ambition and private interest.

But the King desires not to be understood so, as if he intended to fix this
design upon both or either House of Parliament: for he utterly professes
against it, being most confident of the loyalty, good affections, and integrity
of the intentions of that great Body, and knowing well that very many of both
Houses were absent, and many dissented from all those particulars of which he
complains: but that he believes, and accordingly professes to all the world,
that the malignity of this design has proceeded from the subtle informations,
mischievous practices, and evil counsels of some ambitious turbulent spirits,
disaffected to God's true Religion (using their own language) the Unity of the
professors thereof, his Honor and Safety, and the public peace and
prosperity of the people. (And such other like General expressions.)

In particular, the King expressed himself with great indignation against ten
of their Propositions, which were the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 15, 16, 19:
averring, that if they did intend the establishment of his honor, together
with the security of his people (as their profession is) they would not offer
him such Propositions: for that Profession, joined to these Propositions,
appeared to his judgment as a mockery and scorn.

He averreth further, that their Demands are such, as that he were unworthy of
that Royal descent from so many famous Ancestors, unworthy of the Trust
reposed in him by the Laws, if he should divest himself of such a power so
inherent in his Crown, and assume others into it; protesting, that if he were
both vanquished, and a prisoner, in worse condition then any the most
unfortunate of his predecessors had ever been reduced unto, he would never
stoop so low as to grant those demands, and to make himself of a King of
England, a Duke of Venice.

The several Answers that the King made, and Arguments that he used to each
several branch of those Propositions, are too large to be here inserted, and
may be read by those that would be further informed, in the printed Book of
Parliament-Declarations and Ordinances.

CHAP. V.
An Order for the bringing in of Plate and Money into Guild Hall. The King's
Declaration to the Lords about him: Their Profession and Protestation to him.
The King lays Siege to Hull; but raises it again. The Earl of Warwick takes
possession of the Navy, as Lord Admiral. The Earl of Essex is voted in
Parliament to be Lord General of all their Forces.
ON the tenth day of June following, an Order was made by both Houses of
Parliament for bringing in of Money and Plate, to maintain Horse, Horsemen and
Arms for Preservation of the Public Peace, and defense of the King's Person
(for that the Parliament in their expressions always joined together with their
own safety) and both Houses of Parliament. Wherein it was expressed, that
whosoever should bring in any Money or Plate, or furnish any Horsemen and Arms
for that purpose, should have their Money repayed with Interest, according to
eight in the hundred; for which both Houses of Parliament did engage the
Public Faith.

Four Treasurers were ordained, whose Acquittances for the receipt of any Sum,
should be a sufficient ground to the Lenders to demand their Money and Plate
again with the Interest belonging thereunto. The Treasurers were Sir JOHN
WOLLASTON Knight and Alderman of London, Alderman TOWES, Alderman WARNER, and
Alderman ANDREWS. Commissaries also were appointed to value the Horse and Arms
which should be furnished for that service.

It was desired in that Order, that all men resident in or about London, or
within 80 miles, would bring in their money, Plate, or Horse within a fortnight
after notice; and they that dwell farther off, within three weeks: and that
those who intended to contribute within the time limited, but were not for the
present provided of money or Horse, should subscribe, that it might be soon
known what provision would be for effecting of that great and important
Service. And in conclusion, it was declared, that whatsoever was brought in,
should be employed to no other purposes but those before mentioned; the
maintenance of the Protestant Religion, the King's Person, dignity and
authority, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and Privileges of
Parliament.

Whilst this Order was drawing up, advertisement by Letters was given to the
Parliament, that the Crown-Jewels were pawned at Amsteldam, and other places of
the Netherlands; upon which money was taken up, and Warlike Ammunition provided
in those Parts, as Battering-pieces, Culverins, Fieldpieces, Morter-pieces,
Grenades, with great store of powder, pistols, carabines, great saddles, and
such like. Whereby the Parliament thought they could not otherwise judge, then
that the King did plainly intend a War against them, and had designed it long
before.

They received intelligence at the same time, that the King had sent a
Commission of Array into Leicestershire, directed to the Earl of Huntington,
the Earl of Devonshire, and Mr HENRY HASTINGS, second son to the Earl of
Huntington (for the Lord HASTINGS eldest son to that Earl, did then adhere to
the Parliament) which three were chief in the Commission; but many other
Knights and Gentlemen of that County were named in it. Together with this
Commission of Array, the King sent a Letter also, containing the reasons of it,
wherein he complains that the Parliament, by their Ordinance for the Militia,
would divest him of that power which is properly inherent in his Crown. And for
the occasion and reason of that Commission, he urges a Declaration of their
own, using their very expressions and words in his Letter; that whereas it has
been declared by Votes of both Houses of Parliament, the fifteenth of March
last, that the Kingdom has of late been, and still is in evident and imminent
danger, both from enemies abroad, and a Popish disconted party at home; he
concludes, that for the safeguard both of his own Person and People, there is
an urgent and inevitable necessity of putting his people into a posture of
defense, etc. Thus did the Parliaments Prologue to their Ordinance of Militia,
serve the King's turn for his Commission of Array, totidem verbis. The copy of
which Commission and Letter coming into the hands of the Parliament, it was
resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
that this Commission of Array for Leicester is against Law, and against the
Liberty and Property of the Subject: and resolved again upon the Question,
within two days after, That all those that are actours in putting the
Commission of Array in execution, shall be esteemed as disturbers of the
Kingdoms Peace, and betrayers of the Liberty of the Subject. It was also
ordered by both Houses, that this Commission of Array, and the forementioned
Votes, should be forthwith printed, and published through the Kingdom.

The King was not wanting to his own design in the mean time, and whatsoever
might give countenance to the business he had in hand: but made a short
Declaration to the Lords who then attended him at York, and others his Privy
Council there, in these words:

We do declare, that We will require no obedience from you, but what is
warranted by the known Laws, as We expect that you shall not yield to any
Commands not legally grounded, or imposed by any other. We will defend all you,
and all such as shall refuse any such Commands, whether they proceed from Votes
and Orders of both Houses, or any other way, from all danger whatsoever. We
will defend the true Protestant Religion established by the Laws, the lawful
Liberties of the Subjects of England, and just Privileges of all the three
Estates of Parliament; and shall require no further obedience from you, then as
We accordingly shall perform the same. We will not (as is falsely pretended)
engage you in any War against the Parliament, except it be for Our necessary
defense against such as do insolently invade, or attempt against Us and Our
Adherents.

Upon this Declaration of the King, those Lords and others of his Council made
a Promise to him, and subscribed it with their hands, as follows.

We do engage our selves not to obey any Orders or Commands whatsoever, not
warranted by the known Laws of the Land. We engage our selves to defend Your
Majesty's Person, Crown and Dignity, with Your just and legal Prerogative,
against all Persons and Power whatsoever. We will defend the true Protestant
Religion established by the Law of the land, the lawful Liberties of the
Subjects of England, and just Privileges of Your Majesty, and both Houses of
Parliament. Lastly, we engage our selves not to obey any Rule, Order or
Ordinance whatsoever, concerning any Militia, that has not the Royal Assent.

Subscribed by L. Keeper, D. of Richmond, Ma. Hertford, E. of Linsey, E. of
Cumberland, E. of Huntington, E. of Bath, E. of Southampton, E of Dorset, E. of
Salisbury, E. of Northampton, E. of Devonshire, E. of Bristol, E. of
Westmerland, E of Barkeshire, E. of Monmouth, E. of Rivers, E. of Newcastle, E.
of Dover, E. of Carnarvan, E. of Newport, L. MOWBRAY and MATREVERS, L.
WILLOUGHBY of Eresby, L. RICH, L. CHARLES HOWARD of Charleton, L. NEWARK, L.
PAGET, L. CHANDOYS, L. FALCONBRIDGE, L. PAULET, L. LOVELACE, L. COVENTRY, L.
SAVILE, L. MOHUN, L. DUNSMORE, L. SEYMOUR, L. GRAY of Ruthen, L. FAWLKLAND, the
Controller, Secretary NICHOLAS, Sir JOHN CULPEPER, Lord Chief Justice BANKS.

The King immediately wrote a Letter to the Lord Mayor of London, the Aldermen
and Sheriffs, forbidding by express Command any Contribution of Money or
Plate, toward the raising of any Arms whatsover for the Parliament; and that
they should lend no Money, unless toward the relief of Ireland, or payment of
the Scots. He published then a Declaration to all his Subjects, inveighing
bitterly against the Parliament, for laying a false and scandalous imputation
upon him of raising War against the Parliament, or levying Forces to that end:
in which he invites all his loving Subjects, to prevent his own danger, and the
danger of the Kingdom from a malignant party (taking up the Parliaments
language) to contribute Money or Plate to him, and they shall be repayed, with
consideration of eight in the hundred. And immediately upon it made a
Profession before those forementioned Lords and Councillors about him (calling
God to witness in it) disavowing any preparations or intentions to levy War
against the Parliament: upon which, those forementioned Lords, and others, then
present at York, made this Declaration and Profession, subscribed under their
hands.

We whose names are underwritten, in obedience to His Majesty's Desire, and
out of the Duty which we owe to His Majesty's Honor, and to Truth, being here
upon the place, and witnesses of His Majesty's frequent and earnest
Declarations and Professions of His abhorring all designs of making War upon
the Parliament; and not seeing any color of Preparations or Counsels that
might reasonably beget the belief of any such Design, do profess before God,
and testify to all the world, that we are fully persuaded that His Majesty
has no such intention; but that all his endeavors tend to the firm and
constant settlement of the true Protestant Religion, and the just Privileges
of Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, the Law, Peace and Prosperity of
this Kingdom.

The King strengthened with Arms and Ammunition from Holland, and more
strengthened (for as yet he wanted hands to weild those Arms) by this
Protestation of Lords in his behalf concerning his intention of not making War
against the Parliament, whereby the people might more easily be drawn to side
with him, proceeded in his business with great policy and indefatigable
industry. His Pen was quick in giving answer to all Petitions or Declarations
which came from the Parliament; and with many sharp expostulations, in a
well-compiled Discourse, on the 17 of June, answered a Petition of the
Parliament; which Petition was to this effect, that he would not disjoyn his
Subjects in their duty to himself and Parliament, destroying the Essence of
that high Court; which was presented to him at York by the Lord HOWARD, Sir
HUGH CHOLMELY, and Sir PHILIP STAPLETON: And within three weeks, both in his
own Person, and by his Messengers, with Speeches, Proclamations, and
Declarations, advanced his business in a wonderful manner. At Newark he made a
Speech to the Gentry of Nottinghamshire in a loving and winning way, commending
their affections toward him; which was a great part of persuasion for the
future, coming from a King himself. Another Speech he made at Lincoln, to the
Gentry of that County, full of Protestations concerning his good intentions,
not only to them, but to the whole Kingdom, the Laws and Liberties of it. In
that short time also, by the help of many subtle Lawyers, whom he had about
him, he returned a very long and particular Answer, with arguing the case in
all points, to a Declaration which the Parliament had before made against the
Commission of Array, expounding that Statute 5 HEN. 4, whereupon that
Commission was supposed to be warranted. The proofs and arguments on both
sides, are to be read at large in the Records, or in the printed Book of
Ordinances and Declarations, where a Reader may satisfy his own judgment.
Within that time also the King sent out a Proclamation against levying Forces
without his Command, urging Laws and Statutes for it: And another long
Proclamation to inform the people of the legality of his Commissions of Array,
and to command obedience to them. Another he sent forth against the forcible
seizing or removing any Magazine of Ammunition of any County; and another,
forbidding all relieving or succouring of Hull against him. Upon which, the
Parliament declared, that those Proclamations, without their assent, were
illegal; and forbade all Sheriffs, Majors, etc. to proclaim them, and all
Parsons and Curates to or publish them.

From York the King removed to Beverley; from whence he sent a Message to both
Houses, and a Proclamation concerning his going to Hull, to take it in;
requiring, before his journey, that it might be delivered up to him. But that
Message of his came to the House of Peers, after they had agreed upon a
Petition, which was drawn up, to move the King to a good accord with his
Parliament, to prevent a Civil War; to be carried to him, and presented at
Beverley, by the Earl of Holland, Sir JOHN HOLLAND, and Sir PHILIP STAPLETON.
That very Petition seemed to them so full an answer to the King's Message, that
both Houses resolved to give no other answer to that Message, but the said
Petition. But immediately after, a Declaration was published by both Houses of
Parliament, for the preservation and safety of the Kingdom, and the Town of
Hull; with assurance of both Houses to satisfy all loss sustained by any
service done for the safety of the said Town, by reason of overflowing of water
upon the grounds there, to all persons who should be found faithful in their
several services.

The King continued resolu^e in his intention of gaining Hull: By what means he
attempted it, and how those attempts proved to be frustrate, is now the subject
of a short Discourse.

The Town of Hull was not more considerable to the Kingdom as a Maritime and
strong place, then it was now made remarkable to the world in many high and
famous circumstances of this Civil War: for which cause, I shall the more
particularly insist upon it.

Hull was the place which (being entrusted with so rich a Magazine of
Ammunition) did probably allure the King to forsake a Parliament sitting at
London, and visit the North. Hull was the place where the King in person did
first find his Commands denied, and his attempts resisted in an actual way;
which proved the subject of so many Declarations and Disputations of State and
Government: and Hull is the place which must now bear the first brunt of his
armed indignation.

The King with an Army of three thousand foot, and one thousand horse, was
removed from York to Beverley, a Town distant from Hull six miles; and
intending to besiege Hull by Land (expecting also that Sir JOHN PENINGTON with
some of his ships should stop the passages, and cut of provisions from
relieving the Town by Sea, though that expectation were made frustrate by the
Earl of Warwick his seizing on the Navy Royal) proclaimed that none, on pain
of death, should convey any provision or relief thither. He disposed many men
in cutting of Trenches, to divert the current of fresh water that ran to Hull,
and sent two hundred horse into Lincolnshire under the command of the Lord
WILLOUGHBY son to the Earl of Lindsey, and Sir THOMAS GLENHAM, to stop all
relief of it from Burton upon Humber.

Sir JOHN HOTHAM perceiving the King's intentions and endeavors, and knowing
him to be in person within an hour and halfs march of the Town, having first
sent three Messengers, one after another, with humble Petitions to him, who
were all laid fast by the King, and not suffered to return; called a Council of
War, in which it was debated, Whether or not they should permit the enemies to
march near the Town with their Ordnance, holding them play from off the Walls
and Outworks, until the Tide came to its hight, and then draw up the Sluice,
and let them swim for their lives. But a more merciful advice prevailed, which
was, (for prevention of so many deaths) to draw up the Sluice presently, having
the advantage of a Springtide, and drown all the Country about Hull. But Sir
JOHN HOTHAM, before it was done, gave the inhabitants and owners of land
thereabout sufficient and timely notice to remove their Cattle, and all their
goods, and assured them (which was ratified by the Parliament upon the Public
Faith) that whatsoever damage they received thereby, should be repaired by the
authority of Parliament, out of the estates of those persons who had been most
active and assistant to the King in that design.

Sir JOHN by Letters informed the Parliament in what condition the Town was,
desiring only (so it might speedily be done) a supply of Money and Victuals,
with five hundred men. Upon which, by command of Parliament, Drums were beat up
in London, and other adjacent places, for Soldiers to be sent to Hull by Sea.
The Earl of Warwick was desired by the Houses to send two of the King's ships
from the Downs to Hull, to do as Sir JOHN HOTHAM should direct for his best
assistance. And Sir JOHN MELDRUM a Scottish Gentleman, an expert and brave
Commander, was appointed to assist Sir JOHN in that service.

The King's Army were not confident to carry the Town by plain force, making
their approaches with great difficulty and disadvantage, and those for the most
part in the nightime, when undiscovered they burnt two Mills about the Town;
they therefore had recourse to subtilty; and knowing some within the Walls sit
for their purpose, a Plot was therefore laid to fire the town in four places,
which whilst the soldiers and inhabitants were busy in quenching, two
thousand of the King's Army should assault the walls. The sign to those within
the town, when to fire those places, was, when they discerned a fire on
Beverley-Minster, this should be assurance to them within the town that they
without were ready for the assault. But this treason had no success, being
discovered by one of the instruments, and confessed to Sir JOHN HOTHAM. Many
particular services were done both by Land and Water, by Barks and Boats upon
the River Humber.

The towns men of Hull were so far provoked by this treacherous design of
their enemies, and so much animated against them, that they all entered into
Pay; and now the Walls could not contain them; but five hundred of the town,
conducted by Sir JOHN MELDRUM, issued out, about the end of July, upon their
besiegers; who seeing their approach, prepared courageously to receive and
encounter them: but they were but a small part of the King's Forces which were
resolute to fight; the other part, which consisted of the Trained Bands of that
Country, were not forward to be engaged against their neighbors: the King's
Horse, and most resolute assistants, seeing themselves deserted by the Foot,
retired as fast as they could to Beverley: but Sir JOHN MELDRUM pursued them,
slew two, and took thirty prisoners in the pursuit. And not long after, when
the supplies from London arrived at Hull, Sir JOHN MELDRUM, with a greater
Force, made so fierce a sally upon his enemies, as caused most of the Leaguer
to retire disorderly, one and twenty of them being slain, and fifteen taken
prisoners. Sir JOHN MELDRUM following the advantage of his success with a
swift motion, arrived suddenly at a Leaguer-town called Aulby, between three
and four miles from Hull; where the King's magazine was kept in a Barn, in
which was a great quantity of Ammunition, Powder, and Fire-bals, and certain
Engineers employed there for making of Fireworks: Sir JOHN suddenly set upon
it in the night, drove away the Guard, who consisted most of Trained Bands, and
other Yorkshire men, bearing no great affection to the War, and therefore ran
more speedily away, leaving their Arms behind them: mu of the Ammunition and
other Arms they took away with them, fired the Barn, the Powder, and Fireworks,
and what else they could not carry with them, and returned safely again into
Hull.

The King calling a Council of War, and considering the ill success of his
proceedings, and the preciousnesse of that time which he consumed there, by
their advice resolved to break up his siege before Hull, and march away; the
chief men about him laying the fault of this failing upon the unskilfulnesse of
the Country Captains, and cowardice of the Trained Bands. The King probably
might have sped better, if Sir JOHN PENINGTON could have brought part of the
Navy to his assistance: but that was seized by the Earl of Warwick; of which
it will be now time to speak more particularly.

The Earl of Warwick had in former times been so great a lover of the
Sea-service, and so well experienced in those affairs, being besides a man of
Courage, of Religious life, and known Fidelity to his Country, that among all
the Noblemen at this time, he was esteemed by the Parliament ( in this
important business of settling their Militia by Land and Sea) the fittest man
to take Command of the Navy as Lord Admiral. According to that, an Ordinance
of both Houses was drawn up, to confer the Office on him.

The King had given the employment to Sir JOHN PENINGTON, a man who had long
been Vice Admiral, and a successeful Commander; and had written his Letters to
the Earl of Warwick, with a strict Command to quit the Place. The Earl of
Warwick was in a great straight between two such high Commands, being gone down
to take possession of the Navy, and therefore called a Council of War,
acquainting them all both with the Ordinance of Parliament, and the King's
Letters. But the Earl himself was swayed in conscience to give obedience rather
to the Ordinance of Parliament; and the reason of it himself gives in a Letter
directed to a Lord of the House. When I considered (says he) the great care
which I have seen in the Parliaments of this Kingdom, for the good and safety
both of King and Kingdom, and every man's particular in them; and that they are
the great Council, by whose authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to
their Subjects; I was resolved to continue in this employment, until I shall be
revoked by that Authority that has entrusted me with it.

Most of the Captains took up unanimously the same resolution that the Earl
did, excepting five, which were the R^^^-Admiral, Captain FOGGE, Captain BAILY,
Captain S^INGSBY, and Captain WAKE, who alleged that they had the King's
Command to obey Sir JOHN PENINGTON, whom he had appointed Admiral in stead of
the Earl of Northumberland. These five had gotten together round, to make
defense against the Earl: but he came to Archor about them, and having begi^^
them, summoned them again; upon which three of them came in, and submitted: two
only, Captain S^INGSBY and Captain WAKE stood out. The Earl let (...) a Gun
over them, and turned up the Glass upon them, sending his Boat, and most of
the Boats in the (...), to let them know their danger, if they came not within
that space. But so peremptory was their answer, that the Masters and Sailors
grew impatient; and although they had no Arms, assaulted them, seized upon
those Captains, being armed with their Pistols and swords, struck their Yards
and Top-masts, and brought them to the Fa^l. Thus by the wonderful courage of
these unarmed men, the business was ended without e^^usion of any blood, when
the Earl was ready to give fire upon them.

Within few days after, another addition of strength was brought to the Earl of
Warwick by an accident. A great and strong ship of the King's, called The Lion,
putting to Sea from Holland, and bound for Newcastle, being much distressed
with soul weather, was driven into the Downs. Captain FOX, who commanded that
ship, saluted the Earl of Warwick, who presently acquainted the Captain with
the Ordinance of Parliament, whereby his Lordship had commanded of those ships,
requiring his submission thereunto. The Captain at first refused to yield
obedience to the Ordinance, and thereupon was presently clapped in hold: but all
his Officers in the ship submitted themselves, and struck their Sails and
Top-yards in token of obedience to the said Ordinance. This ship was very
considerable, carrying two and forty great Pieces of brass Ordnance; besides,
a little Vessel laden with Gunpowder of a great value, was taken also together
with this ship. The Earl was informed by some of her men, that young Prince
RUPERT and Prince MAURICE, with diverse other Commanders, intended to have come
from Holland in this ship, the Lion. But after three days and three nights
storm at Sea, those two Princes (in a sick and weak condition) landed again in
Holland.

The King hearing of the surprisal of the Lion, sent a Messenger to the Earl of
Warwick, to demand her again, with all the goods therein, and that she should
be brought to Scarborough. But the Earl returned an Answer to this effect, that
the Parliament had entrusted him with the Care of the Fleet, and that that ship
was a part thereof: therefore he humbly besought his Majesty to pardon him;
for without their consent he might not part with her; and that he knew of no
goods within her belonging to his Majesty.

But leaving the Earl of Warwick to his Sea-employments, it is time to return
to those warlike Levies and Preparations which were made by Land: for now the
fatal time was come, when those long and tedious Paper-conflicts of
Declarations, Petitions, and Proclamations, were turned into actual and bloody
Wars, and the Pens seconded by drawn swords.

On the twelfth of July 1642, the Parliament voted that an Army should be
raised for the safety of the King's Person, and defense of the Parliament; for
so they called it, desiring to join together what seemed to be at so great a
distance and enmity.

The Earl of Essex was by a great and unanimous consent of both Houses chosen
General of that Army, and of all Forces raised for the Parliament; with whom
they protested to live and die in that Cause.

The Earl of Essex was a Gentleman of a noble and most untainted reputation, of
undoubted loyalty to his Country and Prince; having always (what course soever
the Court steered) served in an honorable way, the right Interest of the
English Nation, and the Protestant Religion; and to that end had formerly
engaged himself in the Palatine War, and service of the Netherland United
Provinces: insomuch as at this time, when they sought a Lord to undertake the
high charge of commanding in chief, there seemed to be no choice at all; but we
may say of this Election, as PATERCULUS did of another, Non quaerendus erat
quem eligerent, sed eligendus qui eminebat.

The Parliament at that time were very able to raise Forces, and arm them well,
by reason of the great mass of Money and Plate which to that purpose was
heaped up in Guild Hall, and daily increased by the free Contribution of those
that were well-affected to the Parliament Cause: where not only the wealthiest
Citizens and Gentlemen who were neer-dwellers, brought in their large bags and
goblets; but the poorer sort, like that widow in the Gospel, presented their
mites also; insomuch that it was a common Jeer of men disaffected to the Cause,
to call it the Thimble and Bodk in-Army.

The Earl of Essex was very careful and industrious in raising of his Army; in
which he desired to have as great a Body of Horse as could conveniently be
gotten, by reason that he conceived his chief work was to seek out the King's
Forces, and prevent their spoiling of the Country, and disarming several
Counties, to furnish themselves. And indeed, his Forces, considering the long
Peace of England, and unreadinesse of Arms, were not only raised, but well
armed in a short time. Many of the Lords who then sat in the House of Peers
(besides those Lords who went into diverse Counties to settle the Militia, and
therefore raised Forces for safety of those several Places) listed themselves
in the Lord General's Army, and took Commissions as Colonels; the Lord ROBERTS,
the Lord SAINT-JOHN eldest son to the Earl of Bullenbrook, the Lord of Rochford
eldest son to the Earl of Dover: and many Gentlemen of the House of Commons, of
greatest tank and quality there, took Commissions for Horse and Foot-service in
that Army; of whom these were some: Sir JOHN MERRICK, who was made
Serjeant-Major-General of that Army; the Lord GRAY of Grooby, son to the Earl
of Stamford; Master DENZIL HOLLIS, Master HAMDEN, Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, Sir
WILLIAM WALLER, Sir SAMUEL LUKE, Sir HENRY CHOLMLY, Master GRANTHAM, Master
WHITLOCK, with diverse others. The Earl of Bedford, within two days after that
the Earl of Essex was chosen Generalissimo, was voted to be General of the
Horse.

CHAP. VI.
A brief Relation of the condition of diverse Counties in England, when the
Parliaments Ordinance for the Militia, and the Kings Commission of Array were
put in execution. With a mention of some Lords and others who were actors on
either side. The Lord Mayor of London committed to the Tower, and sentenced by
the Parliament. A mention of some Declarations, Messages, and Answers that
passed between the King and the two Houses of Parliament.
DUring the time that this Army was raising for the Parliament, to be conducted
by his Excellency in person, the King with small strength as yet, was removing
from place to place to gather Forces, and draw people to his side. Of whose
proceedings, and by what degrees he increased in power, I shall speak hereafter
in a continued Series, to avoid confusion in the Story. But in the mean time,
the Parliaments Ordinance of Militia, and the King's Commission of Array, were
justling together almost in every County: the greatest of the English Nobility
on both sides appearing personally, to seize upon those places which were
deputed to them either by the King or by the Parliament. No Ordinances from the
One, or Proclamations from the Other, could now give any further stop to this
general and spreading Mischief. God was not pleased that one Chimney should
contain this Civil fire; but small sparks of it were daily kindling in every
part of the Land.

Let it not therefore seem amiss, if in the first place I make a brief
Relation into what posture every particular County, or most of them, had
endeavored to put themselves, during that time, which was since the twelfth of
July, when the first apparent denouncing of War began, and the General was
elected in Parliament; till the three and twentieth of October, when it broke
out into a fierce and cruel Battle. But let not the Reader expect any full or
perfect Narration of this, which would take up too great a time, and prove as
tedious as unnecessary. The only reason why I have entered into it, is to
inform the Reader what Lords and Gentlemen did first appear in action on either
side, in those particular Counties, that in the progress of the Story he may
be better acquainted with those names, whose Actions proved of so high
concernment in the future War. Nor can any perfect Judgment be made of the
affections or condition of any one County in this brief Narration of so short a
time: for scarce was there any City or Shire, but endured in process of time
many Changes, and became altered from their first condition, either by
unconstancy of affections, or else enforced to take a new side, as they were
threatened by approaching Armies of either party, when the War grew to a greater
height.

In some Counties there was no struggling at all, one side wholly prevailing,
and the Peoples affections bending the same way: as it appeared in Lincolnshire
at the first, (which was the first account given to the Parliament of their
Militia, and where some circumstances are of that note, as to make it justly
deserve a more particular recital then other places) when the Lord WILLOUGHBY
of Parham went down thither, being chosen by the Parliament Lord Lieutenant of
that County. This young Lord being come to Lincoln, expresses to the
Parliament what cheerful and hearty obedience he found from the Captains and
Officers of the Trained Bands, and in how good a posture they were, beyond all
expectation; considering the unhappiness of the Plague being then in the Town,
which hindered the appearance of some: but that was fully supplied by a Company
of Volunteers, equal in number and goodness of Arms to the Trained Bands. Yet
that Change which I spoke of before, did afterward sadly appear in this
County, which was afterward as much divided in it self as any part of England,
and by that means a most unhappie seat of War, often gained and regained by
either side. Lincolnshire was then very forward for the Lord WILLOUGHBY
(however afterward he found some resistance from the Earl of Lindsey, who sided
with the King) as he wrote up to the Parliament, and sent also to them the
King's Letter, and his own Answer: Which are both fit to be inserted into the
Story, being the first of that kind, and much unfolding the nature of the
business.

The King's Letter to the Lord WILLOUHBY of Parham.
CHARLES REX.
Right Trusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well.
Whereas We understand that you have begun to assemble, train and muster the
Trained Bands of Our County of Lincoln, under pretense of an Ordinance of
Parliament whereto We have not given Our consent, which is not only contrary
to the Law, but to Our Command and Pleasure, signified by Our Proclamation sent
to Our high Sheriff of that Our County. Wherefore, that you may not hereafter
plead ignorance of such Our Prohibition, We do by these Our Letters command and
charge you, upon your Allegiance, to desist and forbear to raise, train,
exercise, or assemble together any part of the Trained Bands of Our County,
either by your self, or by any others employed under you, or by warrant from
you. And because you may, for what you have already done concerning the Militia
of that Our County, plead, that you had not so particular a Command, We shall
pass by what you have already done therein, so as presently, upon your receipt
hereof, you shall desist and give over meddling any further with any thing
concerning the Militia of that Our County. But if you shall not presently
desist, and forbear meddling therewith, We are resolved to call you to a strict
account for your disobedience therein, after so many particular and legal
Commands given you, upon your Allegiance, to the contrary; and shall esteem and
proceed against you, as a disturber of the Peace of the Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at York the fourth of June, 1642.

To Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved, the Lord WILLOUGHBY of Parham.
The Lord WILLOUGHBY of Parham his Letter, in Answer to His Majesty.
SIR,
As there can be nothing of greater unhappiness to me, then to receive a
Command from Your Majesty whereunto my endeavors cannot give so ready an
obedience as my affections; so I must confess the difficulty at this time not
a little, how to express that Duty which I owe to Your Majesty's late
Commands, and not falsify that Trust reposed in me by Your high Court of
Parliament; through whose particular directions I am now come into this County
to settle the Militia, according to the Ordinance of Parliament, which by the
Votes of my Lord LITTLETON, and others in the House of Peers, better versed in
the Laws then my self, passed as a legal thing; and has since been confirmed
(if I mistake not) by his example, and Your Majesty's Chief Justice Sir JOHN
BANKS, both in accepting their Ordinance, and nominating their
Deputy Lieutenants: how much further they proceeded, I know not.

But, Sir, if the opinions of those great Lawyers drew me into an act unsuitable
to Your Majesty's liking, I hope the want of years will excuse my want of
judgment. And since by the Command of the Parliament, I am now so far engaged
in their Service, as the sending out Warrants to summon the County to meet me
this day at Lincoln, and afterward in other places; I do most humbly beseech
Your Majesty not to impose that Command on me, which must needs render me
false to those that rely on me, and so make me more unhappie then any other
misery that can fall upon me.

These things, Sir, I once more humbly beseech Your Majesty may be taken into
Your Gracious consideration; and that You would never be pleased to harbor any
misconceit of me, or of this Action; since nothing has yet passed by my
Commands here, or ever shall, but what shall tend to the honor and safety of
Your Majesty's Person, to the preservation of the Peace of Your Kingdoms, and
to the content (I hope) of all Your Majesty's Subjects in these parts, amongst
whom I remain

Your Majesty's most humble and most dutiful Subject and Servant, FRA.
WILLOUGHBY.


Upon the receipt of these Letters, the Lords sent a Message to the House of
Commons, in which they expressed how much they did value and approve the
endeavors of this Lord, in a service so much importing the safety of this
Kingdom, not doubting of their readiness to concur with them, upon all
occasions to manifest the sense they have, and shall retain of his deservings;
which appear the greater, by how much the difficulties (appearing by the
circumstances of those Letters) have been greater. The Lords therefore, as they
resolved to make his Interest their own, in this Service for the public good
and safety of the Kingdom; so they desired the Commons to join with them in so
just and necessary a work. To this the House of Commons consented, and resolved
to join with the Lords in this Vote, making the like resolution also for the
Deputy Lieutenants for the County of Lincoln, and desired the Lords concurrence
therein. Upon which it was ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that they agree
with the House of Commons for the resolution concerning the Deputy Lieutenants
of the County of Lincoln.

In Essex also, which proved a most unanimous County, and by that means
continued in peace and happiness, the Earl of Warwick (whose care and action
was not confined only to the Sea) chosen Lord Lieutenant by the Parliament,
when he went down to muster and exercise the Country, was received with great
applause. The Trained Bands were not only complete, but increased by
Volunteers to unusual numbers; and so affectionate to that Cause they were in
general, that they presented a Petition to the Earl of Warwick and the
Deputy Lieutenants, in the name of all the Captains and Lieutenants of the
several Companies, and in the name of all persons belonging to the Trained
Bands. To which Petition, when it was read in the field, they expressed a full
consent by their general acclamations and applause in every Company. The Earl
of Warwick therefore sent the Petition to the Parliament, to let them see the
extraordinary alacrity and affection of that County of Essex to them: which was
in these words which follow.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Lord Lieutenant of the County
of Essex; and to the worthy Gentlemen the Deputy Lieutenants of the same
County, confided in by the most Honorable the high Court of Parliament.
We the Captains and Lieutenants, with the full consent of the Trained Bands
and Volunteers of the County now assembled, having, before the access of this
present Parliament, seen our Religion, our Laws and Liberties brought to the
brink of ruin and subversion, by the results of most desperate and wicked
Counsels, could not but with ex^^ding joy behold the assembling and continuance
of so great and faithful a Council (the Representative Body of this Kingdom)
and with most certain confidence commit thereto all that was dear unto us.

And having also seen the late hellish designs and actings of a malignant
party in this Kingdom, and the bloody Rebellion in Ireland, all working to
retard the progress, or subvert the being of this worthy Parliament, and
therein to bereave us of all our hopes of Reformation, or future peace and
happiness to this Church or State; we cannot but ascribe all glory and praise
unto the Lord of lords, and express most hearty thankfulness to his blessed
Instruments, that great Assembly, for their undaunted resolutions,
unparalleled endeavors, and happy proceedings for the common good. And
herein (as not the least means of our safety) for the most necessary and
seasonable Ordinance of theirs touching the Militia, whereby we are put under
the Command and Guidance of so noble a Lord, and such worthy Gentlemen,
whereunto we humbly desire this present day and meeting may be an evidence and
pledge of our free and willing obedience.

Having entrusted our Religion, our Laws, and all, into the hands of that great
and most faithful Council the Parliament, whose care and fidelity we have so
abundantly found, we even bleed to see the heart and actions of our Royal King
(contrary to his own Royal expressions) declining from the Counsels of his
Parliament, and carried after other Counsels, whom, as the Laws and
Constitutions of this Land have not known nor reposed upon; so we (for our own
parts) neither will nor dare entrust with our Religion or Laws: and whom, we
verily believe, could they prevail against that highest Court, (under God our
chiefest Bulwark and Defense) would soon deprive us both of Religion and Law,
and (notwithstanding all their specious pretenses) reduce us to a condition no
less miserable then slavish.

From the deep apprehensions of all which, we do freely and heartily promise
and tender our persons and estates to assist and defend (to the uttermost) the
high Court of Parliament now assembled, the Members, Power and Privileges
thereof; and therein, his Majesty's Person and Authority, and the Kingdoms
Peace, (according to our late Protestation) against all contrary Counsels,
Power, or force of Arms whatsoever, which shall be reared up or attempted
against them.

And this our humble Acknowledgement and Resolution, (which, we doubt not, will
be accorded unto by all good Subjects) we humbly desire your Honor and
Worships to tender, on our behalf, to that most honorable Assembly of
Parliament: for whose happy progress and success we shall daily pray.

Subscribed, J. KITELEY, HENRY FAR, JOHN BALLET, JOHN FLEMMING, WILLIAM
MARSHAM, ROBERT BARRINGTON, Captains. THO. HARPER, JOHN WOODCOCK, RICH.
LAWRENCE, GEORGE COLWEL, THO. CLARK, WIMLIAM BURLS, Lieutenants.

The Parliament were very forward to express their approbation of this most
affectionate Declaration of the Essex men, and returned them an Answer; part of
which was in this manner.

This just and faithful resolution of theirs to the public good, the Lords and
Commons do not only approve, but commend; assuring them, that as their
endeavors have been for the Peace and Happiness of the King and Kingdom; so
they will persist in discharge of the great and public Trust which lies upon
them; to go through all difficulties which may oppose the public Peace and
Welfare of this Kingdom; and will upon all occasions be ready to express
particularly to those persons, that respect which is due to persons from whom
they have received so great assurance of affection and fidelity.

In Kent there was cheerful obedience (without any open opposition) showed to
the Ordinance of the Militia; as it appeared by their Petition and
Proclamation, and more by their real and constant actions. True it is, that
some Gentlemen of that County were not much affected to the Parliaments Cause,
who did accordingly frame a displeasing Petition to the Houses, and brought it
up to London, accompanied with many Gentlemen of that County: but the
Parliament having notice of it, sent Officers, and disarmed those Gentlemen who
brought the Petition, before they passed over London Bridge: and the two which
presented it to the House of Commons, Sir WILLIAM BUTLER and M. RICHARD
LOVELACE, were both committed. Those in Kent who favored the King's party and
Commission of Array, were not a number considerable enough to bring that County
into any combustion; the Gentlemen which adhered to the Parliament used so
great a care and industry in settling the Militia, in disarming those few (but
great) Papists among them, in raising Arms, and taxing themselves at high rates
for the ser^vice of the Parliament, that they not only preserved their own
County in quiet, but gave great assistance to the Parliament-Armies in other
places, as will appear in the sequel of this Story.

The Eastern end of Sussex (it being a long and narrow County lying for many
miles upon the Sea) stood firm to the Parliament, and were very industrious in
settling of the Militia, by which means they were so happy, as to preserve
themselves in peace and qu^e^nesse. But the Western part of that County, by
means of many revolted Members of the Parliament, inhabitants there, together
with their Allies and friends, was at the first in some distraction, though it
continued not very long.

Surrey and Middlesex, by fortune of their situation, could not but side with,
and by consequence be protected by the Parliament.

The Eastern Counties, Suffolk, Norfolk, and Cambridgeshire, once the Kingdom
of the East Angles, were happily kept from the beginning without any great
combustion; though it were certain that many of the chief Gentry in those
Counties, bended in their affections to the King's Commission of Array: but
they were not a part strong enough to engage their Countries in a War: For the
Free holders and Yeomen in general adhered to the Parliament; and those
Gentlemen who attempted to raise men, or draw Forces together, or provide Arms
for the King, were soon curbed, and all their endeavors crushed at the
beginning, by those of the other side; especially by the great wisdom and
indefatigable industry of Master OLIVER CRUMWEL, a Member of the House of
Commons, who had taken a Commission for Colonel of Horse from the Parliament:
of whose particular actions, there will be high occasion to discourse hereafter.

The County of Southampton began at the first to be divided, and continued so,
being long and variously perplexed with the changing fortunes of either side.
Colonel GORING, eldest son to the Lord GORING, who had been, the year before, a
means to detect that Conspiracy of bringing the Northern Army against the
Parliament, (of which already has been spoken) and by that, grown into some
Trust with the Parliament, of which he was a Member, was sent down to
Portsmouth, to keep that place for them, and three thousand pounds allowed him
for the charges of Fortification. He receiving that money from the Parliament,
broke his Trust, and kept the Place for the King against them; with what
success, shall hereafter be declared. But immediately after his revolt, the
Earl of Portland, Governor of the Isle of Wight, a man suspected by the
Parliament, was committed to custody in London, for security of his person,
lest he should comply with Colonel GORING, and command that Island for the
King's party. The Government of Wight was then committed to the Earl of
P^mbrook, a man of whose fidelity the Parliament doubted not.

Though the Southern and Eastern parts of England enjoyed some show of rest,
the Counties more remote from London, toward the North and West, could not at
all partake of that happiness.

In Lancashire the Lord STRANGE, son to the Earl of Derby, who was made Lord
Lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire by the King, seeking to put the
Commission of Array in execution, found great resistance from the Parliamentary
Gentlemen, Sir THOMAS STANLEY, Master HOLLAND, Master HOLCRAFT, Master EGERTON,
Master BOOTH, as also Master ASHTON, and Master MOOR, both Members of the House
of Commons; by whom, within the space of few months, he was quite driven out of
the County, and that Shire wholly ruled by the Parliament, though it abounded
more with Papists then any other.

The Lord STRANGE upon the fifteenth day of July had made an attempt to gain
Manchester, and by those Gentlemen was repulsed; where one man was slain; which
was the first blood shed in these Civil Wars. But this Lord was not at all
fortunate in service against the Parliament; who not long after, returned again
with a great Force, consisting of three thousand men, to the Town of
Manchester; where, after he had sharply besieged it for the space of two whole
weeks, he was at last quite beaten, with the loss of many of his men.

In Cheshire also, the other County of which he was made Lieutenant by the
King, his fortune was no better; where he was resisted by Sir WILLIAM BRERETON
and other Gentlemen, and hindered from seizing the Magazine of that County, as
he intended. Nor could the Earl of Rivers, whom the King had put into the
Commission of Array (being a Papist) assist him sufficiently to make good that
County for the King, but that the Papists were all disarmed there by those
Protestant Gentlemen that adhered to the Parliament.

Further North, the Countries were more full of variance. The Earl of
Newcastle, with a strong Garrison, kept for the King the Town of Newcastle. And
the Earl of Cumberland, made Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire by the King, was
active in putting the Commission of Array in execution: but resisted they were
by the Lord FAIRFAX, and others of the Parliamentary Gentlemen. But this
business of the North shall now be passed over, deserving a larger Story
hereafter, when time shall require, to speak of the Earl of Newcastle's
greatness, and the various fortunes of the Lord FAIRFAX, and his son Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.

In Derbyshire, where many great Lords and Gentlemen inhabited, none at all of
note stood for the Parliament, but Sir JOHN GELL and his brother: of whose
actions it will be seasonable to speak in another place.

Staffordshire and Nottinghamshire were in no less combustion.

In Leicestershire the troubles were far greater, and early begun by Master
HENRY HASTINGS, second son to the Earl of Huntingdon, whom the King had made
Sheriff of that County, and put into the Commission of Array; who raised great
Forces to seize upon the Magazine of that County. Against whom the Earl of
Stamford was sent by the Parliament, as Lord Lieutenant, with a considerable
strength: who arriving there, did much curb the proceedings of Master HASTINGS,
and took possession of the Town of Leicester.

Great was the Contention about that time in Warwickshire, between the Earl of
Northampton for the King, and the Lord BROOK for the Parliament, not without
sharp encounters, and slaughter on either side. The Earl having seized the
Ordnance at Banbury, marched with great fury into Warwickshire, spoiling the
Country as he went, though not without opposition of the people, and the Lord
BROOK'S Forces; against whom he could not at all prevail.

The Earl of Pembrook had settled the Militia in Wil^shire with small ado,
though it continued not long so. And the Earl of Holland in Berk-shire, being
but saintly resisted by the Earl of Berk-shire, the Lord LOVELACE, and others.
For soon after, the Earl of Berk-shire, together with Sir JOHN CURSON, Sir
ROBERT DORMER, and others for the Commission of Array, who came to Watlington
in Oxfordshire, to seize the Magazine of that part of the County, which was
laid up in that Town, were there taken prisoners, and sent up to the Parliament
by Colonel HAMDEN and Colonel GOODWIN, two Members of the House of Commons, and
Knights of the Shire for Buckingham.

But the further that this Discourse travels Westward, the greater and more
remarkable you shall find such contestations; especially considering the
number of Lords and Gentlemen of great rank, and many of them Members of
Parliament, who sided with the King against the Parliament, and were therefore
afterward voted out of the House. One great Head there was of all those Western
Counties, WILLIAM Marquess of Hartford, whom the King, by his Commission of
Array, had appointed Chief, and made him Lord Lieutenant General of Devon,
Cornwall, Somerset, Dorset, Wilts, Southampton, Gloucester, Berks, Oxford,
Hereford, and seven Counties within the Principality of Wales: who,
notwithstanding his high Command, was never able to atchieve any great matter
for the King's side; so much were the common people of the West at that time
inclined to the Parliament, and so active were those Gentlemen who stood for
it; such as were the sons of Sir FRANCIS POPHAM, Master ALEXANDER POPHAM, HUGH,
and EDWARD, who were more animated by the example of their aged father; Master
STRODE a Deputy-Lieutenant, and others, against all those frequent attempts
which the Marquess made.

Great was the number of considerable men in those Countries, which took part
with the Marquess against the Parliament, and very industrious in their
several Stations, to put in execution the Commission of Array; as the Lord
PAWLET, Sir RALPH HOPTON, and Sir JOHN STOWEL, both Members of the House of
Commons, and for that reason put out of the House. Sir RICHARD SLANY in
Cornwall, another Member, put out also for the same cause; as likewise were Sir
EDWARD RODNEY and Master COVENTRY, both Parliament Men, who followed the
Marquess in some of his actions. Sir BEVILE GREENVILE an active man, another
Member of Parliament, was very industrious for the Array, both in Cornwall and
Devon, joining himself with the Earl of Bath, who came for that purpose to his
house at Tastock in Devonshire, and assisted by many Gentlemen, as Master
CULINS, Sheriff of that County, M. BAMFIELD, M. ASHFORD, M. GIFFORD, M.
SAINTHIL, Baronet SEYMOUR, and M. COURTNEY; to whose assistance Squire ROGERS
came with Forces out of Dorsetshire.

Various were the Successes which Marquess Hartford, assisted by so many of
the Gentry, found in his several Enterprises; sometimes prevailing, but more
often distressed. In one Skirmish, which about the beginning of August,
himself, the Lord PAWLET, Sir RALPH HOPTON, Sir JOHN STOWEL, and M. SMITH,
another Member of the House of Commons, made against the Deputy Lieutenants in
Somersetshire, he prevailed against them, and possessed himself of the Town of
Shepton-Mallet: Ten men were slain, and many wounded. Going afterward to
Wells, he had been besieged by many thousands of the People, who arose against
him; but that having timely notice of their coming, he escaped a back-way out
of the Town. About which time, the Earl of Bedford was sent down by the
Parliament against him with three hundred Horse: by whom the Lord Marquess,
the Lord PAWLET, Sir RALPH HOPTON, Colonel LUNSFORD, and many other
considerable men, were besieged in Sherburn. For great numbers out of the
Country came daily to the assistance of the Earl of Bedford. Many weeks did
that Siege continue; many Sallies were made out, and sharp encounters on both
sides performed with great courage: the Parliament side being in firm hope to
have taken them at last; which was conceived a thing of great moment, and
advantage to their affairs, if they could have possessed the persons of so many
men, considerable both in their Fortunes and Valor; and who proved afterward
very strong and cruel enemies. Yet that hope was frustrate: for about the
beginning of October, they all escaped out of Sherburn: the Earl nevertheless
pursued after them, and in the Chase took M. PALLART, Sir HENRY, Sir JOHN, and
Sir CHARLES BARCLAY prisoners. Within a week after, the Earl of Bath was
apprehended, and brought up a prisoner to the Parliament.

It cannot be much wondered at, that Division was found in Countrey-Towns and
Villages so far remote from the Parliament, where the people were variously
wrought upon by persuasions or fears from either side: when London it self, the
Seat of that great Council, and chiefest Bulwark of their defense, was not
without some taste of these Distractions. Which, besides the actions of some
private Citizens, too petty to be here rehearsed, may appear to the Reader in
one thing, which cannot be omitted: The Lord Major of London was at this time a
prisoner in the Tower, committed by the Parliament.

Sir RICHARD GURNEY, Lord Mayor of London for that year, was charged by the
House of Commons on the seventh of July, for being a mover of Sedition in the
Kingdom, in causing the King's Proclamation concerning the Commission of Array
(which was declared by both Houses to be illegal) to be proclaimed in the City.
And the Charge being perfected, was sent up to the Lords, desiring that he
might forthwith be called to his Answer; which was accordingly granted.

Four days after, while the Lord Mayor was attending the Lords House upon this
Charge, and additional Impeachment was read against him in the House of
Commons, brought in by the Common Counsel of London, for diverse breaches of his
Oath in execution of his Office, for proclaiming diverse illegal Proclamations,
and contemning the Orders of Parliament.

This Impeachment was forthwith sent up, and read in the Lords House. Upon the
reading of which, it was ordered that he should be sent to the Tower, from
thence to be brought to a legal Trial upon his Impeachment.

Many days, during the space of a whole month, was this Lord Mayor brought from
the Tower to Westminster, to attend the Lords of Parliament, and many times
returned back without being heard, by reason of so great a multiplicity of
Businesses as the Houses were then in.

At last, after some hearings, he was brought, on the twelfth of August, to the
House of Lords, to receive his Censure: The effect whereof was, that he should
be put from his Majorality, never bear Office in the City or Commonwealth, be
incapable of all Honor or Dignity to be conferred on him by the King, and
stand committed prisoner to the Tower, during the pleasure of both Houses.

During the time of these contentions between the Ordinance of the Militia and
Commission of Array, which is briefly touched by it self; it will not be amiss
to return to the King's proceedings in his own Person, by what degrees he came
to increase in strength, and what contestations happened betwixt Himself and
the Parliament: wherein, that which concerned the Pen, shall be first briefly
touched, and then his other actions. But those Declarations, Petitions, and
Proclamations, which upon all occasions were then published, are too many and
too long to be recited in a Story: in the Records, and printed Books of
Ordinances, they may be read. I shall only mention some of the chief, and
excerp the most material contents of them.

The Parliament, about the end of July, had petitioned the King to forbear all
preparations of War, and remove his Garrisons. To which he gave Answer, and
upbraided them with their preparations of War, for appointing the Earl of Essex
to be their General, and the Earl of Warwick Admiral. In that Answer, he
descants at large upon particulars, commanding his said Answer and their
Petition to be read in all Churches. To which the Parliament reply, as they had
done before, that they cannot lay down Arms, nor rejourn the Parliament to any
other place, as he would have them, unless he leave off those Warlike
preparations, and comply with that Council, to which only he ought to adhere,
by the Constitution of this Government. They likewise command the Petition,
Answer, and Reply to be read in all Churches.

But things proceeding still higher, the King, being returned to the City of
York, from thence sent forth a Proclamation, to suppress (as he there styles
it) the present Rebellion under command of ROBERT Earl of Essex; offering
withal free pardon to him, and all such as shall within six days after the date
thereof, being the ninth of August, lay down their Arms. In which Proclamation
also he commanded the Marquess Hartford to raise speedily what Forces he
could, within all those Counties whereof he had made him Lieutenant General in
the Commission of Array (of which before was spoken) and to march against,
destroy, or apprehend the said Earl of Essex.

The Parliament, upon this Proclamation, make a Declaration, wherein they
briefly recount all the King's former proceedings against them and the Kingdom:
All which they attribute (after their usual manner) to his wicked Council; and
promise still to make him great and happy, if he will return to his great
Council.

But the next day after his former Proclamation, the King, continuing still at
York, sent forth another, declaring that no Papist should serve him in his
Army, and that his Soldiers should commit no rapine upon the people. And
within two days after that, he published a Discourse, called A Declaration to
all his loving Subjects concerning the proceedings of this present Parliament.
This Declaration was of a great length, containing fifty pages in a large
Quarto. In which was comprised a kind of History touching all former passages
betwixt himself and them, from the beginning of these divisions: which is to be
read in the printed Book of Parliament-Ordinances. Toward the end of that
Declaration, he protests a wonderful love to Parliaments, and to the peace
and happiness of the Kingdom: but he requires that some persons (as disturbers
of the public peace) may be delivered into the hands of Justice, to be tried
by their Peers, naming the Lord of Kymbolton, and those five Members of the
House of Commons whom before he came to surprise in that House, Master HOLLIS,
Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG, M. PYM, M. HAMBDEN, and M. STRODE; as likewise M. HENRY
MARTIN and Sir HENRY LUDLOW, two Members also of the House of Commons, for
speaking some bold Speeches in that House. He also desires to have delivered up
to him Alderman PENINGTON, who succeeded in the Majorality to the forenamed
Sir KICHARD GURNEY, and Captain VENN, one of the City-Captains: those two last
he accuses of bringing tumults from the City, to terrify the Parliament at
Westminster. Another desire of the King's is, that Inditements of high Treason
upon the Statute of the 23 year of King EDWARD the third, may be drawn against
the Earls of Essex, Warwick, and Stamford, the Lord BROOK, Sir JOHN HOTHAM, and
Serjeant-Major-General SKIPPON, an expert and religious Soldier, a man of high
action in the succeeding War, whom the City had employed in exercising of their
Militia; as likewise against all those who shall hereafter exercise the Militia
by virtue of the Ordinance of Parliament.

The Pen was very quick upon all occasions: and the King, the next day after
the publication of this long forementioned Declaration, sent a Message to the
Parliament, upbraiding both Houses with an Order which they had then made, for
the borrowing of an hundred thousand pounds out of that money which the
Adventurers had raised for reducing of Ireland, and subduing the Rebels there;
affirming, that out of his Princely care and piety toward distressed Ireland,
he cannot but take notice of it; commanding them immediately to retract that
mischievous and unjust Order (for so he calls it) as they would answer the
contrary to Almighty God, himself, and those that have trusted them: Wherein he
expects their speedy Answer and Obedience; and the rather, that he may
thereby be secured, that such part of the four hundred thousand pounds as is or
shall be collected from his good Subjects of England by virtue of the late Act
of Parliament whereby the same is granted, may not likewise (under false
pretenses) be diverted from the proper use to which it was intended, and
misemployed to the disturbance of the Kingdoms peace, in a War against him.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament make Answer to this Message, expressing
what caution there was in the very Order (which upon that very occasion was
printed) for speedy repayment of that Sum, and disposing of it to the right
use. But first they tell the King, that this very Message of his to them, is an
high breach of the Privilege of Parliament: and upon that occasion, they call
to remembrance and declare many particulars of their care for the relief of
Ireland, and the King's hindering of it. Those particulars there expressed, are
as follows. They declare, that this bloody Rebellion was first raised by the
same Counsels that had before brought two Armies within the bowels of this
Kingdom, and two Protestant Nations ready to welter in each others blood, which
were both defrayed a long time at the charge of the poor Commons of England,
and quietly at last disbanded; by Gods blessing upon the Parliaments
endeavors. That this design failing, the same wicked Councels who had caused
that impious War, raised this barbarous Rebellion in Ireland; and recommended
the suppressing thereof (for the better color) to the Parliaments care: who
out of a fellow-feeling of the unspeakable miseries of their Protestant
Brethren there (not suspecting this horrid Plot, now too apparent) did
cheerfully undertake that great work, and do really intend and endeavor to
settle the Protestant Religion and a permanent Peace in that Realm, to the
glory of God, the honor and profit of his Majesty, and security of his three
Kingdoms. But how they have been discouraged, retarded, diverted in and from
this pious and glorious Work, by those traitorous Counsels about his Majesty,
will appear by many particulars.

They there mention the sending over at first of twenty thousand pounds by the
Parliament, and that good way found out to reduce Ireland by the Adventure of
private men, without charging the Subject in general, which would probably have
brought in a Million of money, had the King continued in or near London, and
not, by leaving his Parliament, and making War upon it, so intimidated and
discouraged the Adventurers, and others who would have adventured, that that
good Bill is rendered in a manner ineffectual.

They mention, that when at the sole charge of the Adventurers, five thousand
Foot and five hundred Horse were designed for the relief of Munster, under the
command of the Lord WHARTON, and nothing was wanting but a Commission to enable
that Lord for the Service, such was the power of wicked Counsel, that no
Commission could be obtained from the King; by reason whereof, Lymrick was
wholly lost, and the Province of Munster since in very great distress.

That when well-affected persons, at their own charge, by way of Adventure, had
prepared twelve Ships, and six Pinnaces, with a thousand Landforces, for the
service of Ireland, desiring nothing but a Commission from his Majesty; that
Commission, after twice sending to York for it, and the Ships lying ready to
set Sail, three weeks together, at the charge of near three hundred pounds a
day, was likewise denied. And those Adventurers (rather then lose their
Expedition) were constrained to go by virtue of an Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament.

That, though the Lords Justices of Ireland earnestly desired to have two
Pieces of Battery sent over, as necessary for that Service; yet such commands
were given to the Officers of the Tower, that none of the King's Ordnance must
be sent, to save his Kingdom.

That CHARLES FLOYD, Engineer and Quartermaster-General of the Army in Ireland,
and in actual employment there against the Rebels, was called away from that
important Service, by express command of the King.

That Captain GREEN, Controller of the Artillery, a man in Pay, and principally
employed and trusted here by the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland for providing and
ordering the Train of Artillery which was to be sent to Dublin, and who had
received great sums of money for that purpose, was commanded from that
employment and trust, to serve the King in this unnatural War against his
Parliament. And when the Parliament had provided six hundred suits of Clothes
for present relief of the poor Soldiers in Ireland, and sent them toward
Chester, WILLIAM WHITAKER that undertook the carriage of them, was assaulted by
the King's soldiers lying about Coventry; who took away the six hundred suits
of Clothes, and the poor man, his Wagon and Horses, though they were told that
the Clothes were for the soldiers in Ireland, and though the poor Carrier was
five times with the Earl of Northampton, to beg a release of his Wagon.

That three hundred suits of Clothes sent likewise by the Parliament for
Ireland, with a Chirurgion's Chest of Medicaments, toward Chester, were taken
all away by the King's Troopers under command of one Captain MIDDLETON,
together with the poor Carrier's Horses and Wagon, for the King's service. As
likewise, that a great number of Draught-horses prepared by the Parliament for
the Artillery and Baggage of the Irish Army, and sent to Chester for that
purpose, being there, attending a passage, are now required by the King for his
present service in England; whose forces are so quartered about the Roads to
Ireland, that no Provision can pass thither by Land with any safety.

That Captain KETTLEBY and Sir HENRY STRADLING, the Admiral and Vice Admiral of
the Ships appointed to lie upon the coast of Ireland, to annoy the Rebels, and
to prevent the bringing of Ammunition and relief from foreign parts, are both
called away from that employment by the King's command: and by reason of their
departure from the coast of Munster, to which they were designed, the Rebels
there have received Powder, Ammunition, and other relief from foreign parts.

By which particulars (say they) it may seem that those Rebels are countenanced
there, upon design to assist the enemies of the Parliament here: especially
considering that those confident Rebels have presumed, very lately, to send a
Petition to the King, intituling themselves his Majesty's Catholic Subjects of
Ireland, and complaining of the Puritan Parliament of England; and desiring,
that since his Majesty comes not thither, according to their expectation, they
may come into England to his Majesty.

The Parliament therefore, finding what danger both Kingdoms are in, by the
designs of cruel enemies, thought fit to provide for the safety of both, by
preparing a competent Army for the defense of King and Kingdom. But in regard
that the Plate brought in by so many well-affected men, could not be co^^ed to
suddenly as the service required; and well knowing that one hundred thousand
pounds might for a short time be borrowed out of the Adventurers money for
Ireland, without any prejudice to the affairs of that Kingdom, whose
Subsistence depends upon the Welfare of this, and resolving to make a speedy
repayment of that money, made this Order: which that it may appear (say they)
to all the world to be neither mischievous, illegal, nor unjust (as the King
calls it) the House of Commons thought fit to recite it in haec verba; and
instead of retracting the Order, to repay that money with all possible speed.

The Order. July 30.
It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Treasurers
appointed to receive the Moneys come in upon the Subscriptions for Ireland, do
forthwith furnish, by way of Loan, unto the Committee of Lords and Commons for
the defense of the Kingdom, the sum of one hundred thousand pounds, for the
supply of the public necessity, for defense of the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom, upon the public Faith, to be repayed duly and carefully within so
short a time, that it shall not be diverted from that purpose for which it was
intended, or any way frustrate the Acts already made in the behalf of that
Adventure.

During the time of these Paper-conflicts, the King in person had often
removed, and visited many places. To the Gentry of Leicestershire he made a
Speech on the 20 of July, after his usual manner, with Protestations of his
great love to the people, and care of the Kingdom. And from thence removing
Northward, on the fourth of August he made a Speech after the same manner to
the Gentry of Yorkshire; from whence he returned back to Nottingham, and there
set up his Standard Royal. Very few people resorted to it. Nor had the King at
this time a considerable strength to guard his Person, if any attempts had been
to have seized upon him. From Nottingham, on the 25 of August, the King sent a
Message to the Parliament by the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, and Sir JOHN
CULPEPER, one of the Members of the House of Commons, who had deserted the
Parliament, and went to the King at York; having not long before been made by
him Chancellor of the Exchequer.

The King's Message to both Houses of Parliament from Nottingham, Aug. 25. 1642.
We have with unspeakable grief of heart long beheld the Distractions of this
Our Kingdom. Our very Soul is full of Anguish, until We may find some Remedy
to prevent the Miseries which are ready to overwhelm this whole Nation by a
Civil War. And though all Our endeavors tending to the composing of those
unhappie Differences betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament (though
pursued by Us with all Zeal and Sincerity) have been hitherto without that
Success we hoped for; yet such is Our constant and earnest care to preserve
the public Peace, that We shall not be discouraged from using any Expedient,
which by the blessing of the God of mercy may lay a firm foundation of Peace
and Happiness to all Our good Subjects. To this end observing that many
Mistakes have arisen by the Messages, Petitions and Answers betwixt Us and Our
two Houses of Parliament; which happily may be prevented by some other way of
Treaty, wherein the matters in difference may be more clearly understood, and
more freely transacted: We have thought fit to propound to you, That some fit
persons may be by you enabled to treat with the like number to be authorized by
Us, in such a manner, and with such freedom of Debate, as may best tend to that
happy Conclusion which all good men desire, The Peace of the Kingdom. Wherein,
as We promise in the word of a King, all safety and encouragement to such as
shall be sent unto Us, if you shall choose the place where We are for the
Treaty, which we wholly leave to you, presuming the like care of the safety of
those We shall employ, if you shall name another place: So We assure you and
all Our good Subjects, that (to the best of Our understanding) nothing shall be
therein wanting on our part, which may advance the true Protestant Religion,
oppose Popery and Superstition, secure the Law of the Land (upon which is built
as well Our just Prerogative, as the Propriety and Liberty of the Subject)
confirm all just Power and Privileges of Parliament, and render Us and Our
people truly happy, by a true understanding betwixt Us and Our two Houses of
Parliament. Bring with you as firm resolutions to do your duty, and let all Our
People join with Us in Our prayers to Almighty God for his blessing upon this
Work.

If this Proposition shall be rejected by you, We have done, Our duty so amply,
that God will absolve Us from the guilt of any of that blood which must be
spilt. And what opinion soever other men may have of Our Power, We assure you,
nothing but Our Christian and pious care to prevent the effusion of blood, has
begot this motion; Our provision of Men, Arms and Money being such, as may
secure Us from further violence, till it please God to open the eyes of Our
People.

The Answer of the Lords and Commons to the King's Message of the 25 of August,
1642.
May it please Your Majesty:
The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled having received Your Majesty's
Message of the 25 of August, do with much grief resent the dangerous and
distracted state of this Kingdom, which we have by all means endeavored to
prevent, both by our several Advices and Petitions to Your Majesty, which have
been not only without success, but there has followed that, which no evil
Counsel in former times has produced, or any age has seen, Those several
Proclamations and Declarations against both the Houses of Parliament, whereby
their Actions are declared Treasonable, and their Persons Traitors; and
thereupon Your Majesty has set up Your Standard against them, whereby you
have put the two Houses of Parliament, and in them this whole Kingdom, out of
Your Protection: So that until Your Majesty shall recall those Proclamations
and Declarations whereby the Earl of Essex and both Houses of Parliament, their
adherents and assistants, and all such as have obeyed and executed their
Commands and Directions, according to their duties, are declared Traitors, or
otherwise Delinquents; and until the Standard, set up in pursuance of the said
Proclamations, be taken down, Your Majesty has put us into such a condition,
that, whilst we so remain, we cannot by the Fundamental Privileges of
Parliament, the public Trust reposed in us, or with the general good and
safety of this Kingdom, give Your Majesty any other Answer to this Message.

Within few days after, the King sent Instructions under his Privy Signet to
his Commissioners of Array for the several Counties of England and Wales; as to
Marquess Hartford, whom the King had made Lieutetenant-General of all the
Western Counties, as is before expressed; to the Earl of Cumberland,
Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire; and the Lord STRANGE, Lieutenant for Lancashire
and Cheshire: in which Instructions he commands them to pursue the Earl of
Essex, whom he again calls Rebel and Traitor.

Immediately after, the King sent a Reply to that Answer of the Parliament to
his last Message of the 25 of August; which being short, that the Reader may
the more truly inform himself of the nature of this strange division, I shall
wholly insert in the very words.

We will not repeat what means We have used to prevent the dangerous and
distracted estate of the Kingdom, nor how those means have been interpreted,
because, being desirous to avoid effusion of blood, We are willing to decline
all memory of former Bitterness, that might make Our offer of a Treaty less
readily accepted. We never did declare, nor ever intended to declare both Our
Houses of Parliament Traitors, or set up Our Standard against them; and much
less to put them and this Kingdom out of Our protection: We utterly profess
against it before God and the world. And further, to remove all possible
Scruples which may hinder the Treaty so much desired by Us; We hereby promise,
so that a day be appointed by you for the revoking of your Declarations against
all persons as Traitors or otherwise for assisting Us, We shall with all
cheerfulness upon the same day recall our Proclamations and Declarations, and
take down Our Standard. In which Treaty, We shall be ready to grant any thing
that shall be really for the good of Our subjects: conjuring you to consider
the bleeding condition of Ireland, and the dangerous condition of England, in
as high a degree, as by these Our Offers We have declared Our Self to do: and
assuring you, that Our chief desire in the world, is to beget a good
understanding and mutual confidence betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: The humble Answer and Petition of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament to the King's last Message.
May it please Your Majesty:
If we the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled should repeat all the ways
we have taken, the endeavors we have used, and the expressions we have made
unto Your Majesty, to prevent those distractions and dangers Your Majesty
speaks of, we should too much enlarge this Reply therefore as we Humbly, so
shall we Only let Your Majesty know, that we cannot recede from our former
Answer, for the reasons therein expressed: for that Your Majesty has not
taken down Your Standard, recalled Your Proclamations and Declarations whereby
You have declared the Actions of both Houses of Parliament to be Treasonable,
and their Persons Traitors: And You have published the same since Your Message
the 25 of August, by Your late Instructions to Your Commissioners of Array.
Which Standard being taken down, and the Declarations, Proclamations and
Instructions recalled; if Your Majesty shall then upon this our humble
Petition, leaving your Forces, return unto Your Parliament, and receive their
faithful advice, Your Majesty shall find such expressions of our fidelities
and duties, as shall assure You that Your Safety, Honor and Greatness can
only be found in the affections of Your People, and the sincere Counsels of
Your Parliament, whose constant and undiscouraged endeavors and consultations
have passed through difficulties unheard of, only to secure Your Kingdoms from
the violent mischiefs and dangers now ready to fall upon them; who deserve
better of Your Majesty, and can never allow themselves (representing likewise
Your whole Kingdom) to be balanced with those persons whose desperate
dispositions and counsels prevail still so to interrupt all our endeavors for
the relieving of bleeding Ireland, as we may fear our labors and vast expenses
will be fruitless to that distressed Kingdom. As Your Presence is thus humbly
desired by us; so it is in our hopes that Your Majesty will in Your Reason
believe, There is no other way then this, to make Your Majesty's Self happy,
and Your Kingdoms safe.

The Parliament, immediately after, published a Declaration, that the Arms
which they were enforced to take up for the preservation of the Kingdom, Laws
and Liberties, could not be laid down, until the King should withdraw his
Protection from such persons as had been voted Delinquents by both Houses, and
leave them to the Justice of Parliament.

The King, within few days after, made another Reply to the last Answer of the
Parliament. The substance of it was, that he could neither do nor offer any
more then he had already: and that he should think himself clear and innocent
from any blood that might be spilt in this Quarrel; praying God so to deal with
him and his posterity, as he desired to preserve Religion, Law, and Liberty of
the Subjects, and Privilege of Parliament. The Parliament returned Answer,
that while the King thinks himself bound in Honor to protect such Delinquents,
in whose preservation the Kingdom cannot be safe, nor the Rights of Parliament
at all maintained, but must needs fall into utter contempt; they must needs
think he has not done what he can o^ ought to do. They tell him it is
impossible that any reasonable man should believe him to be so tender of
bleeding Ireland, when at the same time diverse of the Irish Traitors, the
known favorers of them, and agents for them, are admitted into his Presence
with grace and favor, and some of them employed in his service.

THE HISTORY OF THE PARLIAMENT OF England.
The third Book.
CHAP. I.
Prince RUPERT and Prince MAURICE arrive in England. The Earl of ESSEX taking
leave of the Parliament, goes to his Command. The King increases in strength
at Shrewsbury. A Skirmish at Worcester. The great Battle of Keynton is fought.
ABout the beginning of this September Prince RUPERT, second Son to FREDERICK
Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhene, who had long been detained Prisoner of
War by the Emperor, and newly released, arrived in England, to offer his
Service to the King his Uncle in those Wars, which were now visibly begun in
this unhappy Kingdom; together with him came his younger Brother Prince
MAURICE, an addition rather of Gallantry then strength to the Kings side, being
both young and unexperienced Soldiers. Neither indeed, though they were near
in birth to the Crown of England, were they near enough to add any security
to the King, by purchasing the Peoples hatred to themselves; though that were
imagined, and talked of by many, as the cause why they were sent for. Their
elder Brother, CHARLES, Prince Elector, might have served more fitly to play
that part: But he, having long remained in the Court of England, had lately
left the King, not above two Months before the arrival of his Brothers; The
reasons why he went away were partly expressed by himself afterward in a
Message, which he sent out of Holland to the Houses of Parliament, wherein he
professed sorrow for these distractions, and protested that whilst he was in
the Court of England, he had by all means endeavored to bring the King into a
good opinion of his Parliament; acknowledging that his own interest, and that
of the Protestant Religion in Germany, did more depend upon the happiness of
the English Parliament, then upon any thing else under God. True it is, that
this Prince left not the King, until he saw the rent between him and his
Parliament too great to close; and having before been exposed by the King to
some probability of envy, as when he attended his Majesty to the House of
Commons for surprizall of the five Members; and with him afterward, when some
things unpleasing to the people had been done; he might in likelihood, being of
that opinion that he was of this cause, think it the wisest way to take a
fair leave in time of the King.

These two young Princes arrived in England, were soon put into employment and
Command under the King their Uncle, in which they showed themselves very
forward and active, as will appear afterward, and if more hot and furious then
the tender beginnings of a Civil War would seem to require, it may be
imputed to the fervor of their youth, and great desire which they had to
ingratiate themselves to the King; upon whom, as being no more then Soldiers
of fortune, their hopes of advancement wholly depended.

Prince RUPERT, the elder brother, and most furious of the two, within a
fortnight after his arrival, commanded a small party of those Forces which the
King had at that time gathered together, which were not of so great a body as
to be termed an Army, with which he marched into diverse Counties, to roll
himself like a snow ball, into a larger bulk, by the accession of Forces in
every place: Through diverse parts of Warwickshire, Nottingham-shire,
Leicestershire, Worcestershire, and Cheshire, did this young Prince fly with
those Troops which he had, not inviting the people so much by fair demeanor
(for such was the report to the Houses of Parliament) as compelling them by
extreme rigor to follow that side which he had taken. Many Towns and Villages
he plundered, which is to say robbed (for at that time first was the word
plunder used in England, being borne in Germany, when that stately Country was
so miserably wasted and pillaged by foreign Armies) and committed other
outrages upon those who stood affected to the Parliament, executing some, and
hanging up servants at their Masters doors, for not discovering of their
Masters. Upon which news, the Houses of Parliament fell into a serious debate,
and agreed that a Charge of High Treason should be drawn up against him, for
endeavoring the destruction of this State, which was voted a great breach of
the Kingdoms Laws, and breach of the privilege of that great Council,
representing the whole state of it.

Let it not seem amiss in this place to insert a passage, happening at the
same time, which cannot be omitted by reason of the eminence of that person
whom it concerns, in the succeeding Wars.

Colonel GORING, who was before spoken of to keep the Town of Portsmouth
against the Parliament, being now no longer able to hold it out, was permitted
by Captain MERRICK, not without allowance from the Earl of Warwick, to leave
the place, and to be conveyed to the Brill in Holland, according to his own
desire: This the Parliament were contented with, because the Captain was
necessitated to agree to it, for preservation of that Town, and many persons
therein well affected to the Parliament; for GORING had threatened to destroy
the Town with wilde-fire, if he might not preserve his own life by a
peaceable surrender.

Whilst Prince RUPERT was thus active with a flying Party, the King himself
was moving with those Forces which he had, but in a gentler and calmer way; for
the reverence which the people bare to his Person, made him find less
resistance; as winds lose their fury when they meet no opposition; but
howsoever, the King desired to go in such a way, as to be taken for a Father of
his Country, and a Prince injured by the Parliament; professions of love,
persuasions, and Protestations of his affection to the people, were the chief
instruments which he used to raise himself a strength, and complaints against
the proceedings and actions of the Parliament; as when he was marching toward
Shrewsbury, where he intended to make his chief Rendezvouze, being a place
convenient to receive and entertain such Forces as should come to him out of
Wales: Which place (as will appear afterward) failed not his expectation,
though it were more then the Parliament could suspect. As he was marching
thither with a small Army, he made a Speech between Stafford and Wellington,
on the 19. of September, and caused his Protestation to be then also read in
the head of his Army; wherein among other things, he tells them (for their
comfort and hope to prevail) that they should meet no Enemies but Traitors,
most of them Brownists, Anabaptists, and Atheists, who would destroy both
Church and Commonwealth. And in this Protestation, with deep vows, and
imprecations upon himself and his posterity, he declares his whole care and
intentions to be for the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, the Laws and
property of the Subject, together with the Privilege of Parliament, as he was
accustomed to do in his former Speeches.

But the King not many days before, had taken a more harsh and coercive way;
for marching through Derbyshire, Leicestershire, and Nottinghamshire, he
commanded the Trained Bands of those Counties to attend and guard his Person;
and when they were met, disarmed the greatest part of them, taking as many
Arms as served for 2000. men, besides good sums of Money, which, not without
some constraint, he borrowed from them.

But to leave the Kings proceedings for a while, it is time to return to the
Lord General for the Parliament, and the Army raised under his conduct, which
at that time, when Prince RUPERT began to march, was grown to a considerable
body, consisting of about ^4 thousand Horse and Foot; their general
Rendezvouze was at Northampton, where many of the chief Commanders, as the
Lord BROOK, Lord ROBERTS, Colonel HAMDEN, and others, stayed with them,
expecting the presence of his Excellence, who on the ninth of September taking
his leave of the Parliament and City of London, bent his journey toward
Northampton, and was waited on by the Trained Bands, and a great number of
armed Gentlemen from Essex House to the end of the City with great solemnity.
But the love and wishes of the people that did attend him, were far greater
then any outward signification could express: To whom he seemed at that time,
though going to a Civil War, as much an English man, and as true a Patriot,
as if he had gone against a foreign Enemy. Great was the love and honor
which the people in general bore to his Person, in regard of his own virtue,
and honorable demeanor; and much increased by the Memory of his noble Father,
the highest example that ever I yet read, of a Favorite both to Prince and
people; of whom that was most true, which VELLEIUS PATERCULUS speaks with
flattery and falsehood of SEJANUS, In quo cum judicio Principis certabant studia
populi, The peoples love strived to match the Prince his judgment. That Cause,
wherein the Earl of ESSEX had engaged himself, seemed to them religious
enough to require their prayers for the success of it: For the Parliament,
though they raised an Army, expressed much humility and reverence to the Kings
Person; for not many days after the departure of the Lord General, by consent
of both Houses, a Petition to the King was drawn up, to be carried by Sir
PHILIP STAPLETON, a Member of the House of Commons, often spoken of before, and
at this time a Colonel in the Lord Generals Army. This Petition he carried to
Northampton to the General, to be by him presented (according to the
Parliaments desire) to His Majesty, in a safe and honorable way: In which
Petition nothing at all (according to their former Declarations) is charged
upon the King himself, but only upon his wicked Council, and the former
mis-governments briefly mentioned; and that this wicked Council have raised an
horrid Rebellion and Massacre in Ireland; and ever since, by opposition against
the Parliament, hindered the relief of that Kingdom, and at last drawn his
Majesty to make a War upon his Parliament, leading an Army in Person, to the
destruction of his people, depriving his good Subjects of his Majesty's
protection, and protecting those Traitors against the Justice and Authority of
Parliament.

WE the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, have ( for these are the
words of the Petition) for the just and necessary defense of the Protestant
Religion, of your Majesty's Person, Crown, and Dignity, of the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Privileges and power of Parliaments, taken
up Arms, appointed and authorized ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, to be Captain
General of all the Forces by us raised, to conduct the same against those
Rebels and Traitors, to subdue and bring them to condign punishment: And we do
most humbly beseech your Majesty, to withdraw your Royal Presence and
Countenance from these wicked persons; and if they shall stand out in defense
of their rebellious and unlawful attempts, that your Majesty will leave them
to be suppressed by that Power which we have sent against them; And that your
Majesty will not mix your own dangers with theirs, but in peace and safety,
without your Forces, forthwith return to your Parliament, and by their
faithful advice compose the present distempers and confusions abounding in
both your Kingdoms, and provide for the security and honor of your self and
Royal Posterity, and the prosperous estate of all your Subjects. Wherein if
your Majesty please to yield to our most humble and earnest desires; We do in
the presence of Almighty God profess, That we will receive your Majesty with
all Honor, yield you all due obedience and subjection, and faithfully
endeavor to secure your Person and Estate from all dangers; and to the
uttermost of our Power, to procure and establish to your self, and to your
People, all the blessings of a glorious and happy Reign.

According to this Petition were those Directions from the Parliament to the
Lord General sent at the same time; wherein the Lord General is required by
the Houses, to use his utmost endeavor by Battle or otherwise, to rescue the
Kings Person, the Persons of the Prince, and Duke of York, out of the hands of
those desperate persons now about them. Another Direction was, That if his
Majesty upon this humble Petition, should be pleased to withdraw himself from
the persons now about him, and return to the Parliament, that then the Lord
General should disband, and should serve and defend his Majesty with a
sufficient strength in his return. Another Direction was, That his Excellency
should proclaim pardon to all those who were at that time seduced against
their Parliament and Country, if within ten days after that Proclamation they
would return to their duty, doing no hostile act within the time limited:
Provided that this should not extend to admit any man into either House of
Parliament, who stands suspended, without giving satisfaction to that House
whereof he was a Member; and excepting all persons impeached for Delinquency by
either House, and those persons who have been eminent Actors in these Treasons,
and therefore impeached in Parliament of High Treason; such as were at that
time declared, and there named; the Earls of Bristoll, Cumberland, Newcastle,
and Rivers, Secretary NICHOLAS, Master ENDYMION PORTER, Master EDWARD HIDE, the
Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Carnarvan, Viscount Newarke, and Viscount
Fawkland; These were the persons at that time voted against, and declared
Traitors, though afterward others were added to the number of them, and many
of these left out, as occasions altered.

Such Directions, and others for the advantage of the Army, and behoose of the
Countries, through which he was to march, were given by the Parliament to his
Excellency; but above all things to restrain carefully all impieties,
prophannesse, and disorders in his Army.

The General arriving at Northampton, was there possessed of a great and
gallant Army, well furnished at all points, consisting of about twenty
thousand, with those that within few days were to come thither: An Army too
great to find resistance at that time from any Forces a foot in England; for
the Kings side had then small strength: What they had, consisted of Horse, who
in small Parties roved up and down, to make Provision, and force Contribution
in several places. Prince RUPERT especially, like a perpetual motion, with
those Horse which he commanded, was in short time heard of at many places of
great distance. The care therefore which his Excellency especially took, was
so to divide his great Army, as to make the several parts of it useful, both
to annoy the straggling Troops of the Enemy, and ptotect those Counties that
stood affected to the Parliament, as also to possess himself, either in his
own Person, or by his Lieutenants, of such Towns as he thought might be of
best import, if this sad War should happen to continue.

From Northampton he marched to Coventry, to make that considerable City a
Garrison for the Parliament; and from thence to Warwick; and having fortified
that Town, marched away toward Worcester, upon intelligence that the King
himself intended to come thither with his Forces; for his desire was to find
out the King; and the Parliament, to whom he imparted his design by Letter,
approved well of his advance toward Worcester.

The City of Worcester, as well as the whole County, had been in great
distractions, by reason not only of the dissenting affections of the
Inhabitants, but the frequent invitations from both sides; if we may call that
an invitation, which is made by armed force. Sir JOHN BYRON had first entered
Worcester for the Kings side, whom Master FIENNES Son to the Lord SAY, had
opposed for the Parliament; and afterward Prince RUPERT with five hundred
Horse, not far from the City, was encountered by Master FIENNES, who commanded
another Body about that number; the skirmish was but small, and not above
twelve men slain, as the report was made at London. But before the Lord
General could arrive at Worcester, (who was marching thither from Warwick, as
was before expressed) there happened a fight there, not to be omitted, in
regard of the persons that were there slain or wounded, though the number of
men in general that fell were small. Prince RUPERT was then at Worcester with
twelve Troops of Horse, when about that City diverse of the Parliaments Forces
were, though not joined in one Body, but dispersed: The Prince marched out of
the City into a green Meadow, and there set his men in Battle Array, to
encounter whom he could first light upon. Within half a mile of that Field
were the Parliament Troops, Colonel SANDYS with his Regiment of Horse,
Captain HALES, and Captain WINGATE, who made toward the Prince; but their
passage was very disadvantagious, as being through a narrow Lane, where only
four of a breast could march: Colonel SANDYS, whose fault was too much
courage, charging with his own Regiment through that Lane, too soon, before
the rest of the Parliament Forces could come up (for besides the forenamed
Captains, HALES and WINGATE, Captain FIENNES, and Captain AUSTIN, were not
far off, and marching apace to their assistance) made notwithstanding some
slaughter of the Prince his men, and maintained the Fight until the mentioned
Forces approached the place; but then the Prince, the two sides growing into
some equality of number, fearing, perchance, to be too long engaged in a Fight,
until the Lord Generals Army might approach, some of the forerunners not
being far off, retreated back into the City of Worcester, through which he
marched away with as much speed as he could, the Parliament Forces following
him through the Town, and so over a Bridge, about which some of the Parliament
Dragoneers were placed, who cut off twenty of the Prince his Troopers, and
took thirty Prisoners. There were sound dead at the place of their first
encounter 13. men. There were slain of the Parliament side of note, Colonel
SANDS his Cornet, who first of all fell, and Sergeant Major DOUGLAS; Colonel
SANDS himself was desperately wounded, of which wounds he died about a Month
after. It was reported that Colonel WILMOT, of whom we have spoken before, and
who was afterward an eminent Champion on the Kings side, was in this conflict
run through the body by Colonel SANDS.

His Excellency immediately after this fight, came to Worcester with his Army,
where he resolved to quarter a while, as a place convenient to send out Parties
upon all occasions, and watch the motion of the Kings Forces. This discourse
shall here leave him, and relate the passages of the other Armies.

Prince RUPERT having left Worcester, marched with his Troops to Ludlow, twenty
miles distant thence; and the King with a small Body of Horse, passed into
Wales, and having made a Speech full of Protestations, to the Inhabitants of
Denbigh and Flintshire, and gained some Parties there, the next day he marched
to Shr^wsbury, where he intended to quarter for a time, as a fit Rendezvouze
for those Forces expected from Wales, and other near adjacent parts. To
Shrewsbury the King caused a Mint to be brought, and there coined all the Plate
which he then had, or was then and soon after presented to him; for many
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, about that time had furnished the King, not
only with Horses and Arms, but Money and Plate, as the Citizens of London,
and other Gentlemen had done to the Parliament, upon their Public Faith, as is
before expressed. It is a wonderful thing, almost beyond what himself could
hope, or the Parliament suspect, how much and how suddenly the King grew in
strength, in that little time that he quartered at Shrewsbury; The King, within
few days after his coming thither, had in public, to the Gentry, Freeholders,
and other Inhabitants of that County, made an Oration full of persuasive Art,
and such winning expressions, as fitted the purpose he had in hand, such as
might render him to the thoughts of those people, an injured Prince, and move
compassionate affections toward him. Which Speech of his, as it was reported
and printed in London, I shall here insert.

Gentlemen:

IT is some benefit to me, from the insolences and misfortunes which have
driven me about, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom,
and to so faithful a part of my People: I hope neither you nor I shall repent
my coming hither; I will do my part that you may not; and of you I was
confident before I came. The residence of an Army is not usually pleasant to
any place; and mine may carry more fear with it, since it may be thought
(being robbed and spoiled of all mine own, and such terror used to fright and
keep all men from supplying of me) I must only live upon the aid and relief
of my people. But be not afraid; I would to God my poor Subjects suffered no
more by the insolence and violence of that Army raised against me (though they
have made themselves wanton even with plenty) then you shall do by mine; and
yet I fear I cannot prevent all disorders; I will do my best: And this I
promise you, No man shall be a looser by me, if I can help it.

I have sent hither for a Mint; I will melt down all my own Plate, and expose
all my Land to sale or morgage, that if it be possible, I may bring the least
pressure upon you: In the mean time, I have summoned you hither to do that for
me and your selves, for the maintenance of your Religion, and the Law of the
Land (by which you enjoy all that you have) which other men do against us. Do
not suffer so good a Cause to be lost, for want of supplying me with that,
which will be taken from you by those who pursue me with this violence. And
whilst these ill men sacrifice their Money, Plate, and utmost industry to
destroy the Commonwealth, be you no less liberal to preserve it. Assure your
selves, if it please God to bless me with success, I shall remember the
assistance that every particular man here gives me, to his advantage. However,
it will hereafter (how furiously soever the minds of men are now possessed) be
honor and comfort to you, that with some charge and trouble to your selves,
you did your part to support your King, and preserve the Kingdom.

But with such skill had the King managed his affairs there, and so much had
fortune crowned his endeavors, that before the middle of October, which was
about three weeks after his first coming to Shrewsbury, with an
inconsiderable Body of an Army, he was grown to a great strength, consisting
of about six thousand Foot, three thousand brave Horse, and almost two thousand
Dragoneers; And purposing about that time to remove from thence, he issued out
Warrants to the Inhabitants of Shrewsbury, and other adjacent Towns and
Villages, to send Horses and Carts for his removal.

The King marched a long within the view of Coventry, but not intending to lose
any time there in sitting down before it, unless the Town had been freely
surrendered to him: But that was denied, though in a very humble Message, by the
Governor of it. Marching on, he came and lay at Southam, when the Lord
General Essex was not many miles distant from him. So much was the King now
grown in strength, that he was able, at so great a distance, to strike some
terror into the City of London it self, and provoke their sedulous endeavor
for a defense against his feared approach, though the Lord General Essex with
as great an Army, were then abroad to attend his Marches. The Parliament it
self took the business into their strict care: For both Houses conceiving
that the City was in imminent danger of the Kings Forces, ordered, That the
Trained Bands thereof should be speedily raised for a Guard; That such
Fortifications as could suddenly be made, should not be wanting; That a
Committee should be appointed to consider of the present setting up Courts of
Guard, and raising Works, for planting of Ordnance in special places about the
City and Suburbs. According to which Order many hundreds of men fell presently
to work, in digging of Trenches, and other Bulwarks. It was Ordered likewise,
That the Trained Bands of London, Middlesex, and Surrey, should be put into a
readiness; And that the close Committee, by help of the Lord Mayor, should
with all diligence search out, and secure the persons of all the ill-affected
Citizens, or the chief of them, that were suspected to be most able, or
active, to raise a Party against the Parliament.

Twelve Companies of London, were by Order of Parliament sent to Windsor, to
possess and secure that Castle; and many Seamen raised to guard the passages
of the River Thames.

The Parliament about that time considering how much these Civil distractions
increased over the whole Kingdom, passed a Vote, That it was and should be
lawful for all Counties in England to enter into an Association, for mutual
defense of each other, of their Religion, Laws, and Liberties. Whereupon,
within a short time after, Buckingham, Hartford, and Nottinghamshire, began to
associate after that manner, raised Forces for the Parliament, and advanced
both Plate and Money upon their Propositions.

The danger that seemed to threaten London at that time, though distant in
place, yet in reason was near. For the Kings Army was judged to be nearer to
it, then the Lord Generals was; and it was probable enough, that his desires
would rather lead him to attempt the City, then to engage against the Army; and
it was thought and spoken by some, that London was a place where he had many
friends, who upon the approach of such an Army, would appear for him, and to
facilitate his achievements, would fill the City with intestine tumults and
seditions. That London was the only place where the Parliament was to be
totally suppressed, and his Army enriched to the height of their desires. But
others were of opinion, that such an attempt, as it was preposterous, would
prove frustrate, and that the City could not be gained, unless the Army were
first subdued. For besides the consideration, that the supposed Party for the
King in London, were not in probability of power enough to accomplish his ends,
it might be thought they were not so desperately inclined to him, as to throw
themselves and estates into such hazard, as must be undergone in the confused
rage of a licentious Army. The maine reason against it was, That the Lord
General Essex, with an Army as strong as the Kings, would follow his March
near at hand, and by the help of those Forces which the City of London would
power forth upon him, utterly ruin his enclosed Army. But howsoever the
counsels were, it pleased God that it was brought to a Battle, to which
probably the King might be the more invited by that advantage of the absence of
a great part of the Parliaments Army.

This famous Battle, called by some the Battle of Edgehill, by others the
Battle of Keynton (that Keynton is a little Town in Warwickshire, almost in
the mid way between Stratford upon Avon and Banbury) was fought on a Sunday,
being the 23. day of October. The King on Saturday the 22. of October, came
within six miles of Keynton, and that night at Cropredy, and Edgecot lodged his
great Army, consisting of about 14000. Foot, and about 4000. Horse and
Dragoneers; a far greater number then the Lord General Essex had together at
that time (though his whole Army consisted of more,) for that opportunity the
King took of the absence of many Regiments of the Parliament. The Lord
General Essex on that Saturday night quartered at Keynton with his Army,
consisting then but of 12. Regiments, and about 40. Troops of Horse, little in
all exceeding the number of 10000. men; the reason why his Forces at that time
were no more in number, was, besides that by reason of the suddenness of his
march, and diligence to follow the Kings Army, he had left behind two
Regiments of his Foot, one under the Command of Colonel HAMDEN, the other of
Colonel GRANTHAM, together with 11. Troops of Horse, behind but one days
March, and left to bring on the Artillery, which was seven Pieces of Canon,
with great store of Ammunition, and came not to Keynton till the Battle was
quite ended; the Lord General also had before left for preservation of the
Countries thereabout (and whom on such a sudden he could not call together to
his Assistance) one Regiment of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, under command of
the Earl of Stamford, at Hereford, that the power of Wales might not fall into
Glocestershire; another Regiment was left at Worcester, another at Coventry,
for the safety of that Town, and one Regiment occasionally lodged then in
Banbury.

In Keynton the Lord General intended to rest Sunday, to expect the residue of
his Forces and Artillery, but in the morning the Enemy was discovered not far
off, which made him give present order for drawing that Army which he had there
into the field; the Kings Forces had gotten the advantage of a very high and
steep ascent, called Edgehill, from whence they were discovered that morning;
not far from the foot of that hill, was a broad Champion, called, The vale of
the red Horse, a name suitable to the color which that day was to bestow upon
it, for there happened the greatest part of the encounter. Into that field the
Lord General was forced presently to march, making a stand about half a mile
distant from the foot of Edgehill, where he drew his Army into Battalia, and
saw the Kings Forces descending the Hill, ready for their encounter; that Army
at the first having two advantages, of the hill, and of the wind; it was full
of skillful Commanders, and well ordered; their greatest Body of Horse was on
the right wing, on the left were some Horse and Dragoneers.

The Parliament Army was drawn up, and put into Battalia upon a little rising
ground in the forenamed Vale, the Foot being, many of them, a good space behind
the Horse, when the Charge began. Three Regiments of Horse were on the right
wing, the Lord Generals own Regiment, commanded by Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, Sir
WILLIAM BA^FORES Regiment, who was Lieutenant General of the Horse; and the
Lord FIELDINGS Regiment, which stood behind the other two, in the way of a
Reserve, Sir JOHN MELDRUMS Brigado had the Van; Colonel ESSEX was in the
middle; the Lord Generals Regiment, the Lord BROOK, and Colonel HOLLIS, were
in the Rear; in the left wing were about 20. Troops of Horse, commanded by Sir
JAMES RAMSEY their Commissary General. In this posture they stood, when the
other Army advanced toward them, the strength of their Horse being (as
aforesaid) on their right wing, opposite to the left wing of the Parliament
Army.

The Canon on both sides with a loud thunder began the Fight, in which the
success was not equal, the Parliaments Canon doing great execution upon their
Enemies, but theirs very little.

The Earl of Lindsey, General for the King, with a Pike in his hand, led on
the maine Body of that Army, in which was the Kings own Regiment, incountred
by the Lord General Essex, who exposed himself to all the danger that a
Battle could make, first leading on his Troop, then his own Regiment of
Foot, and breathing courage into them, till being dissuaded by diverse from
engaging himself too far, he returned to the rest of the Army, to draw them
on. The chief Regiments having begun the Battle, Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, with a
brave Troop of Gentlemen (which were the Generals Life Guard, and commanded by
him) charged the Kings Regiment on their right flank within their Pikes, and
came off without any great hurt, though those Pikemen stoutly defended
themselves, and the Musketeers being good firemen, played fiercely upon them.
The Battle was hot at that place, and so many of the Kings side slain, that
the Parliament Army began to be victorious there; they took the Standard
Royal, the bearer thereof Sir EDMUND VARNEY, being slain, and the General
the Earl of Lindsey sore wounded, was taken Prisoner. But the same fortune was
not in every part; for the Kings right wing, led by Prince RUPERT, charged
fiercely upon the left wing of the other (consisting most of Horse) and
prevailed altogether, for the Parliament Troops ran almost all away in that
Wing, and many of their Foot Companies, dismayed with their flight, fled all
away, before they had stood one Charge; Colonel ESSEX being utterly forsaken
by that whole Brigade which he commanded, went himself into the Van, where he
performed excellent service, both by direction and execution, till at the last
he was shot in the thigh, of which he shortly after died; (some part of their
disheartning was caused by the revolt of their own side; for Sir FAITHFUL
FORTESCUE, at the beginning of the Fight, instead of charging the Enemy,
discharged his Pistol to the ground, and with his Troop, wheeling about,
ran to the Kings Army, to whom he had formerly given notice thereof by his
Cornet.) The Parliament Army had undoubtedly been ruined that day, and an
absolute Victory gained on the Kings side, if Prince RUPERT, and his pursuing
Troops had been more temperate in plundering so untimely as they did, and had
wheeled about to assist their distressed friends in other parts of the Army;
for Prince RUPERT followed the chase to Keynton Town, where the Carriages of
the Army were, which they presently pillaged, using great cruelty, as was
afterward related, to the unarmed Waggoners, and laboring men; A great number
of the flying Parliament Soldiers were slain in that Chase, which lasted two
miles beyond Keynton; and so far, till the Pursuers were forced to retire,
having met with Colonel HAMBDEN, who marched with the other Brigado of the
Army, that brought on the Artillery and Ammunition, before spoken of, Colonel
HAMBDEN discharged five Pieces of Canon against them, some were slain, and the
rest ceasing the pursuit, retired hastily to the field, where they found all
their Infantry, excepting two Regiments, quite defeated; for in the mean time,
Sir WILLIAM BALFORE, Lieutenant General of the Horse, with a Regiment of
Horse, charged a Regiment of the Kings Foot, before any Foot of his own side
could come up to him, and breaking most bravely into it, had cut most of them
off; and afterward, by the assistance of some Foot, who were come up to him, he
defeated another Regiment, and so got up to the greatest part of the Kings
Ordinance, taking some of them, cutting off the Geeres of the Horses that drew
them, and killing the Gunners, but was enforced to leave them without any
Guard, by reason that he labored most to make good the day against several
Regiments of the Kings Foot, who still fought with much resolution, especially
that which was of the Kings Guard, where his Standard was; by which Sir WILLIAM
BALFORES Regiment rode, when they came back from taking the Ordnance, and were
by them mistaken for their own side, passing without any Hostility, was the
cause, that immediately afterward, Sir WILLIAM riding up toward the Lord
General ESSEX his Regiment of Horse, they gave fire upon Sir WILLIAM BALFORES
men, supposing them to be Enemies, but soon discovering each other, they
joined Companies, and were led up with half the Lord Generals Regiment, by his
Excellency himself, against the Kings maine strength, where a terrible and
bloody encounter happened: At the same time Colonel BALLARD, who led a Brigado
there of the Lord Generals Regiment, and the Lord BROOKS his, forced a stand of
the Kings Pikes, and brook through two of his Regiments.

In this great conflict the Standard Royal (as aforesaid) was taken, and Sir
EDMUND VARNEY slain, the Earl of Lindsey, with his Son, taken Prisoners,
together with Colonel VAVASOR, Lieutenant Colonel of that Regiment, Colonel
MUNROE also was there slain.

The Standard thus taken, and put into the Lord Generals hand, was by him
delivered to his Secretary Master CHAMBERS; but the Secretary, after he had
carried it some time in his hand, suffered it to be taken from him by an
unknown person, and so privately it was conveyed away. There also was great
service performed by the Lord GRAY, Son to the Earl of Stamford, and Sir
ARTHUR HASLERIG, and a considerable help given to the turning of the day, by
defeating a Regiment of the Kings, called the blew Regiment.

By this time all the Kings Foot, excepting two Regiments, were dispersed, and
the Parliamentarians had gotten the advantage of the wind, and that ground
which their Enemies had fought upon. Those two Regiments of the Kings, retiring
themselves, and finding their Ordnance behind them without any guard, took
stand there, and made use of their Canon, discharging many shot against their
Enemies. But at that time the Parliament Foot began to want powder, otherwise
(as was observed by a Commander in that Army) they had charged them both with
Horse and Foot; which in all probability would have utterly ruined the Kings
Infantry, consisting in a manner but of two Regiments.

Thus the Parliament Army, partly for want of Ammunition, and partly being
tired with so long a fight (for the whole brunt of the Battle had been
sustained by two Regiments of their Horse, and four or five of their Foot)
made no great haste to charge any more.

The Kings Horse, who had been long pillaging about Keynton, by this time had
leisure to come about on both hands, and join themselves to their Foot; but as
they came back on the left hand of their Enemies, Sir PHILIP STAPLETON with his
Horse, gave them a terrible Charge, which they were not long able to endure,
but finding a gap in an hedge, got from him upon the Spur as fast as they
could, to the rest of their broken Troops, and so at last joined with their
Foot that stood by the Ordinance. And now on both sides the Horse were gathered
to their own Foot, and so stood together both Horse and Foot, one against
another, till it was night.

The Parliament Army being wholly possessed of the ground which their Enemies
had chosen to fight upon, stood upon it all night, and in the morning returned
to a warmer place near Keynton, where they had quartered the night before; for
they were much pinched with cold, and the whole Army in extreme want of
Victuals.

The Kings Army had withdrawn to the top of the hill, for their more security,
where they made great fires all the night long.

About nine of the clock the next morning the Parliament Army drew out again
into Battalia, and so stood about three hours, until the other Army was quite
gone from the hill, and then they withdrew themselves into their Quarter
toward Keynton, and to their other Brigado, Artillery, and Ammunition, which
being commanded by Colonel HAMBDEN and Colonel GRANTHAM (as aforesaid) was
now come to Keynton, and lodged there. The King had drawn out his Horse upon
the further side of the hill, where he stayed till toward night, whilst his
Foot were retiring behind the Hill, and marching away. A little before night,
his Horse also withdrew themselves; and about an hour after, the Parliament
Horse marched quite away, and went with the rest of the Army to Warwick to
refresh themselves.

That going to Warwick was thought by a noble Gentleman of the Parliament side
to be ill designed, For (says he) had the Army, instead of going to Warwick,
marched toward Banbury, we should have found more Victuals, and had, in
probability, dispersed all the Foot of the Kings Army, taken his Canons and
Carriages, and sent his Horse farther off, whereas now, because we did not
follow them, though they quitted the field whereon they fought, and left their
Quarter before us, yet they began soon after to question who had the day.
Howsoever it were, true it is, that the King, no less then the Parliament,
pretended to be victorious in that Battle; and so far ascribed the Victory
to his own side, that a Prayer of thanksgiving to God was made at Oxford for
it. A thanksgiving was also on the Parliament side for the Victory of that day.
And it is certain, that there were many marks of Victory on both Armies,
Colors and Canon were taken on both sides, without any great difference of the
number of them And though in Speeches made afterward by either Party, and
Books printed, there is no consent at all concerning the number of men slain,
but so great a discrepancy, as it is almost a shame to insert into an History;
yet surely by the best account there were more slain on the Kings side, then
on the other; Those of quality that were lost on both Parties, were of the
Kings, the Earl of Lindsey, Lord General of his Army, the Lord AUBIGNY,
brother to the Duke of Lenox, Sir EDWARD VARNEY Standard Bearer, Colonel Sir
EDMUND MONROY, a Scottish Gentleman, and Colonel LUNSFORD his Brother, with
other Gentlemen and Commanders, besides Common Soldiers, whose number (as is
before said) would not be agreed upon; yet I have heard, that the Country
people thereabouts, by burying of the naked bodies, found the number to be
about six thousand that fell on both sides, besides those which died afterward
of their wounds. There were taken Prisoners of the Kings side, the Lord
WILLOUGHBY, Son and Heir to the Earl of Lindsey, Colonel VAVASOR, Colonel
LUNSFORD, Sir EDWARD STRADLING, with others of less note; a George, the Badge
of a Knight of the Garter, was found in the field by a Common Soldier (besides
that which the Lord General Lindsey wore, and had about his neck when he was
slain) and bought of him by a Captain, which was sent up to the Parliament,
there viewed, and restored again to the Captain.

On the Parliament side were slain only these of mark and quality, the Lord
St. JOHN, eldest Son to the Earl of BULLENBROOKE, Colonel CHARLES ESSEX,
and Lieutenant Colonel RAMSEY, and none of any great note taken Prisoners.

The Battle was fought with great courage on both sides, both by the Generals
and other Commanders, besides some particular Regiments of Soldiers, who were
observed to perform their parts with great courage and bravery, such as
Colonel HOLLIS his Regiment of Redcoats, and others, too many to be all named
in a short Discourse.

It could not but fall into the observation of many men, that the year before,
upon the same day of the Month, namely, the 23. of October, that this famous
Battle of Keynton was fought, the bloody Rebellion of the Irish broke out,
with that inhumane Massacre of the English Protestants in that Kingdom, where
the English by their own loss and bleeding, were sadly put in mind, that
they had too long deferred the revenge of their butchered Brethren in Ireland.

It was likewise observed by many men of the Parliament side (who seemed to
make no question but that the Victory was on their side, as a further blessing
of God to the Protestant Cause) that on the very same day that this Battle was
won in England, the Sweads obtained a very great and notable Victory against
the Imperialists, and those of the Roman Religion in Germany.

But the King, supposing himself victorious at Keynton ^ield, immediately
published a Declaration, To all his loving Subjects (for so it is styled) after
his Victory against the Rebels. Wherein, though the expostulation be very
bitter, yet he indeavoureth that it should not seem to be made against the
Parliament it self, but against some of them, whom he terms malignant,
malicious, with such like Epithites, as have labored to lay aspersions upon
him of things, whereof he professes himself altogether innocent. Those
aspersions he makes of two sorts, the first is, concerning his favoring of
Popery, and employing Papists in his Army; the second, of raising that Army
against the Parliament. Both which he labors to wipe off, with a recrimination
against the Parliament. For the first, after a great Protestation of the truth
of his Religion, and his past, present, and future care for the better
establishing of it in his Dominions, with the extirpation of Popery; though he
cannot but acknowledge, that some eminent men of that Religion are armed in his
Service, which he thinks excusable in so gteat a necessity and danger as he was
in; yet he tells the Parliament, That in their Army there are more Papists
Commanders and others then in his.

For the second, That he leavyed his Army against the Parliament. He seems to
hope, That none of his good Subjects will believe it, unless they will
believe, that a dozen or twenty factious and seditious persons be the high
Court of Parliament, which consists of King, Lords and Commons. For the
Privileges of Parliament, he averres, That whosoever will not believe the
raising of an Army to kill their King; To alter the government and Laws by
extravagant Votes of either or both Houses; To force the Members to submit to
their Faction, and take away freedom of consultation from them, to be the
Privilege, of Parliament; must confess, That the Army now raised by the King,
is no less for the vindication and preservation of Parliaments, then for his
own necessary defense.

The King charge them likewise with uncharity, That they have endeavored to
raise an implacable hatred between the Gentry and Commonalty of the Kingdom,
by rendering all persons of Honor odious to the Common People under the style
of Cavaliers; and to persuade the people, that there was an intention by the
Commission of Array, to take away a part of their Estates from them. Which he
denies, and concludes with Protestations to the contrary.

The Parliament returned answer to this Declaration, but not as being the Kings
(according to their often mentioned custom) but coming from wicked and
malicious contrivers of falsehood and scandals, Who (say they) to our
unspeakable sorrows, have gained so much power with his Majesty, as to vent
the same under the Title of his own Royal Name.

For the first objection; They do not affirm that the King favors Popery
himself, but justify that things have been carried in the favor of it by
some about him, according to the particular instances in many of their former
Declarations. They seem to be amazed at the strange boldness of the
Contrivers of that Declaration, in averring that there are more Papists in
their Army, then in the Kings; whereas they cannot, or at least, do not name
any one, which they desire may be done, if there be any such, that the
Parliament may know how to displace them. But the Parliament in their Answer
name many of greatest rank and quality of that Religion in the Kings Army, who
have raised him in some Counties the most considerable Forces which he has;
and many Commissions granted by himself to Papists, acknowledged so. That it
were senseless to think that any Papists favored the Parliaments Cause at
all; whereas it is certain, that there are none of that Religion, but are
either openly or secretly assistant to that cause which the King has taken.

For the second objection; That the Kings Forces are not leavyed against the
Parliament it self, but a few seditious persons. They think it an impossible
thing, that twelve or twenty such persons (as they are termed) should have
power to compel the rest of that Body to s^bmit to their Faction, and to have
their freedom of consultation taken from them.

The truth is (say they) not a few persons, but the Parliament it self, is the
thorn that lies in these men's sides; which heretofore, when it was wont to
prick them, was with much ^ase, by a sudden dissolution, pulled out: But now
that it is more deeply fastened by an Act of continuance, they would force it
out by the power of an Army.

That whosoever will read the Speeches and Declarations made upon the breaking
up of all former Parliaments, ever since the beginning of this Kings Reign,
will find the pretenses of those unjust dissolutions, to be grounded upon
exceptions against particular Members, under the name of a few factious and
seditious persons; so that the aspersing and wounding of the Parliament through
the sides of a few Members, is no new invention.

But (say they) those former Declarations in the Kings name, being groundless
invectives, not against particular Members, but against the Votes and
Proceedings of both Houses; and declaring the Earl of Essex, General of the
Forces raised by them, to be a Traitor; and that all those which assist him,
thereby comprehending both Houses of Parliament, by whose Command and Authority
he bears that place, to be Rebels, and guilty of High Treason, is argument
sufficient (no groundless accusation) to prove the Kings Army to be raised
against the Parliament, or to take away the Privileges thereof.

Those Privileges of Parliament, consisting in three things: 1. As they are a
Council to advise. 2. A Court to judge. 3. A representative body of the
Realm, to make, repeal, or alter Laws. These Privileges have (say they)
during the sitting of this Parliament, been all apparently broken, to the view
of all men, by the Kings wicked Council. Their advice scarce at all hearkened
unto by the King, but other counsels of unknown persons preferred before them.
For the second, as a Court to judge; The Delinquents, so pronounced by the
Parliament, have bin p^o^ected by the King against them; of which they give
many particular instances. Touching the third, for making Laws; They instance
his refusal of many wholesome Bills for Church and State, besides the breaking
of their Privileges, they produce some attempts utterly to subvert them, as
the forementioned endeavor of bringing up the Northern Army, to force
Conditions upon the Parliament; the Kings Letters and Commands to Members of
both Houses to attend him at York, leaving their true and legal station;
which when they obeyed, it was scandalously alleged that they were driven
away.

For any violence intended to the Kings Person, as they utterly deny it, so
they refer it to indifferent men to judge, by all their long sufferings, and
humble Petitions to him, to avoid those indangerings of his Person. But for
that imputation laid upon them, of an endeavor to raise an implacable malice
and hatred between the Gentry and Commonalty of the Kingdom; They conceive it
a Charge of a strange nature, that they should endeavor to raise the hatred of
the Commonalty against themselves. For so it must follow, unless the
Contrivers of that Declaration will deny the Parliament to be Gentlemen. But
though we know (say they) well, there are too many of the Gentry of this
Kingdom, who, to satisfy the lusts of their own ambition, are content to
sell their birthright, to render themselves and their posterity to perpetual
slavery, and to submit themselves to any arbitrary and unlimited power of
Government, so they may for their own time partake of that Power, to trample
and insult over others; Yet we are certain that there are many true hearted
Gentlemen, who are ready to lay down their lives and fortunes (and of late
have given ample testimony thereof) for maintenance of their Laws, Liberties,
and Religion, with whom, and others of their resolution, we shall be ready to
live and dye.

Lastly, they prove by particular instances, that in the Kings Commission of
Array, there is not only an intention to take away part of men's Estates, but
that it has been put into real execution; with many other things in
justification of all their proceedings and Declarations; which may be read more
at large in the Records. This was the effect of that verbal Skirmish, which
immediately followed the great and bloody Battle of Keynton.

CHAP. II.
The Parliament send to the King, concerning an Accommodation. A fight at
Branford. Another Treaty with the King begun, and broken off. Reading besieged
by the Lord General ESSEX, and surrendered to him. A Conspiracy to betray
Bristoll. A treacherous Plot against the Parliament and City of London,
discovered and prevented.
AT the famous Battle of Edgehill, the great cause of English Liberty, (with a
vast expense of blood and Treasure) was tried, but not decided, which did
therefore prove unhappy, even to that side, which seemed victorious, the
Parliament Army.

For though the Kings Forces were much broken by it, yet his strength grew
accidentally greater, and more formidable then before; to whom it proved a
kind of victory, not to be easily or totally overthrown.

For the greatest Gentlemen of diverse Counties began then to consider of the
King, as one that in possibility might prove a Conqueror against the
Parliament; and many of them, who before as Neuters had stood at gaze, in hope
that one quick blow might clear the doubt, and save them the danger of
declaring themselves, came now in, and readily adhered to that side, where
there seemed to be least fears, and greatest hopes, which was the Kings Party;
for on the Parliament side the encouragements were only public, and nothing
promised but the free enjoyment of their native Liberty; no particular honors,
preferments, or Estates of Enemies; and on the other side, no such total ruin
could be threatened from a victorious Parliament, being a body as it were of
themselves, as from an incensed Prince, and such hungry followers, as usually
go along with Princes in those ways. And how much private interest will
oversway public nations, Books of History, rather then Philosophy, will truly
inform you; for concerning humane actions and dispositions, there is nothing
under the Sun which is absolutely new. Look upon the Discourse of one
Historian in that subject, DION CASSIUS, a Writer of as little bias, in the
opinion of all Critics, as any among the Ancients, when he relates the last
War about Roman Liberty, after which (as himself speaks) that People never
again looked back toward it. Which was the War of BRUTUS and CASSIUS against
CAESAR and ANTONY; Etsi ante hanc pugnam civilibus bellis, etc. Although (says
DION) before this War they had many Civil Wars, yet in others they fought who
should oppress the Roman Liberty; in this War, one side fought to vindicate
Liberty, the other to bring in Tyranny, yet the side of Tyranny prevailed, and
drew most to it: Of what quality they were, the same Historian speaks also: The
Armies of BRUTUS and CASSIUS, that stood for Liberty, consisted of the lower
sort of people, and Ex subditis Romanorum, the other that stood for Tyranny,
consisted (says he) Ex Romany Nobilibus, and Fortibus. BRUTUS and CASSIUS,
two chief Soldiers, before the Battle making Orations, encouraged them to
fight for their ancient freedom, and Roman Laws. CAESAR and ANTONY promised to
their Soldiers the Estates of their Enemies, Et imperium in omnes Gentiles
suos, and power to rule over their own Countrymen; which proved, it seems,
better Oratory then the other, and more persuasive. BRUTUS and CASSIUS delayed
the Battle, as loath to waste so much blood, if by any other stratagem they
might have subdued; because they were (says DION) good men, and pittyed their
Countrymen, loving the safety, and striving for the Liberty even of those men,
who fought against them, to overthrow that Liberty; Yet that delay proved ill,
and many Noblemen in that time forsook them, and turned to the other side,
whither their private hopes or fears led them. Whether the parrallel will in
some measure fit this occasion or not, I leave it to the Reader, and return to
the Narration.

The Earl of Essex, the next day after Keynton Battle, marched with his Army
toward Warwick, to which Town he arrived safe, disposing of the Prisoners,
Wagons, and Ordnance, which he had taken, into that Castle, with resolution
after some short refreshment of his men there, to march nearer to the King: But
the King returned toward Oxford, seizing by the way upon Banbury, from whence
he took 1500. Arms, and turned out the Parliament Soldiers that were
quartered there.

His Army, consisting especially of Horse, was divided into several Bodies,
and Prince RUPERT with part of it, visited the Towns near adjacent, as
Abingdon, Henley, and other places; from whence he returned with great booty.

Within few days he made a nearer approach toward London, but with a flying
Army, resting in no place, sometimes as far as Stanes and Egham, which made
the City of London careful to provide for their safety against sudden
incursions, and send Forces to possess and fortify Windsor Castle.

In the mean time, to secure London, and free those parts from greater fears,
the Earl of Essex had marched with his Army nearer to that City, and on the
seventh day of November came himself to Westminster (his Army being billitted
about Acton, and other near places) and was welcomed by both Houses of
Parliament, who presented him with a gift of 5000 l. as an acknowledgement of
their thanks, in behalf of the Kingdom, for his care, pains, and valor, in
the actions already passed.

But before the Earl of Essex departed from London, another bloody tragedy was
acted, and the scene no farther then Brainford, about eight miles distance, the
King himself being there, or not far off in Person. The manner and occasion
of it shall be in brief related.

The Parliament expressing great grief for this unnatural War and
bloodshed, that this endangered Kingdom might be saved from ruin, and the
better means made to recover Ireland, had agreed upon a Petition for
Accommodation, to be presented to the King, then at Colebrooke, by the Earls
of Northumberland and Pembrooke, with four Commons, the Lord WAINMAN, Master
PERPOINT, Sir JOHN EVELIN, and Sir JOHN IPSLEY; Sir PETER KILLIGREW was sent
before to procure a safe Conduct. But the King refused to admit of Sir JOHN
EVELYN, because he was one whom himself had named Traitor the day before.
Which exception of the Kings was extremely distasted by the Parliament; yet so
great was their desire of Accommodation, that although this excepting of Sir
JOHN EVELIN, were voted by them a breach of Privilege, and a flat denial from
the King, the Petition was sent by the five forenamed Lords and Gentlemen, Sir
JOHN EVELIN being very willing to be left out.

The King being then at Colebrooke, fifteen miles distant, seemed to receive
the Petition with great willingness, and returned them a fair Answer, calling
God to witness in many Protestations, that he was tenderly compassionate of
his bleeding people, and more desirous of nothing, then a speedy peace; to
which purpose he was most willing, at any place where he should reside, not
far from London, to receive such Propositions of Peace as they should send,
and to treat with them.

As soon as the Parliament Lords returned with this Answer, the Kings
Artillery (according to all relations) advanced forwards with diverse Troops of
Horse, through that Town of Colebrooke, after them toward London; and taking
advantage of a great mist which happened that Friday night, they marched to
Brainford, and fell upon the Parliament Forces which were there quartered,
which were a broken Regiment of Colonel HOLLIS, but stout men, who had before
done great service. Of them the Kings Forces killed many, and had quite
destroyed all in probability, if the Lord BROOKS, and Colonel HAM^DENS
Regiments, billitted not far off, had not made haste to their relief, who
coming in, maintained a great and bloody fight against the Kings Forces, where
many were slain on both sides, and many taken Prisoners; both Parties, as
before it happened at Keynton Battle, esteeming themselves conquerors, and so
reporting afterward. The news of this unexpected fight was soon brought to
London, whither also the noise of the great Artillery was easily heard.

The Lord General Essex, then sitting at Westminster, in the House of Peers,
took Horse immediately, and with what strength he could call together on such
a sudden, came in to the rescue of his engaged Regiments; but night had parted
them, and the King was retired to his best advantages; all that night the City
of London powered out men toward Brainford, who every hour marched thither, and
all the Lords and Gentlemen that belonged to the Army, were there ready on the
Sunday morning, being the 14. of November, a force great enough to have
swallowed up a far greater Army then the King had. Besides, the Kings Forces
were encompassed on every side; insomuch as great hope was conceived by most
men, that the period of this sad War was now come. But God was not yet
appeased toward this Nation; a fatal door was opened to let out the enclosed
King: Three thousand of the Parliament Soldiers were then at Kingstone upon
Thames, a Town about ten miles distant from the City; which Soldiers were all
(as it happened) commanded to leave that Town, and march through Surrey, with
what speed they could, and over London Bridge, so through the City toward
Brainford, to prevent the Enemies passage to London. The reason of that Command
was afterward given, for that the Lord General was not assured of strength
enough to stop the Enemy from London, nor could before hand be assured of so
great an Army, as came thither before morning. But this was the event of it;
and through Kingstone thus abandoned the King retreated; and leaving some Troops
to face his Enemies, brought all his Foot and Artillery over that Bridge, which
drawing up afterward, he had time enough securely to plunder many places of
that Country, and retire safely to Oxford, where he intended to take up his
winter Quarters.

The Parliament, upon this Action of the King, began to be out of hope of doing
any good by Treaties, resolving that the Lord General, with all speed that
might be, should pursue the Kings Forces, and fall upon them about Oxford and
Reading, for news was daily brought them how active his Parties were under the
conduct of Prince RUPERT and others, in plundering all the places thereabouts.
And the City of London, to encourage the Parliament with a free tender of their
service, framed a Petition to them, to entreat them, That they would proceed no
further in the business of Accommodation, because evil Counsel was so
prevalent with the King; That he would but delude them; That they had heard his
Forces are weak, and that if his Excellency would follow and fall upon them,
and that no delays be made for fear of foreign Forces coming over, the
City, as heretofore; would with all willingness spend their lives and fortunes
to assist the Parliament.

The City was thanked for their Petition and Protestation, and the Lord
General moved by the Parliament to advance, who, though the season of the
year were not very fit for so great a Body to march, was very desirous to obey
their Commands. The best way was thought to divide his Army, and send several
parties to several places, to restrain the Enemies from annoying the
Countries, as to Buckingham, Marlow, Reading, and other parts, until himself
with his whole force could be well accommodated to march from Windsor (where he
lay that winter) toward the King. But it so fell out, either by reason of ill
weather at some times, and at other for want of Money or fit accommodation,
that the General himself, with his maine Army, marched not forth until the
spring, whose first business was to lay siege to Reading, which was fortified
by the Kings Forces, and maintained by a Garrison of 3000. Soldiers, and 20.
Piece of Ordnance; before which Town he sat down upon the five and twentieth
day of April, 1643. with an Army of about 16000. Foot, and 3000. Horse.

Now (leaving the Lord General before Reading with his Army) in the mean time
we will show one maine reason why he did no sooner advance; The expectation of
another Treaty, which the Parliament had desired to have with the King, for
settling of the Kingdoms Peace, which proved fruitless, in debate lasted a
long time. Propositions were drawn up by the Parliament, and sent to Oxford on
the 31. of January, 1642. by four Lords and eight Commoners, the Earls of
Northumberland, Pembrooke, Sarum, and Holland, Lord WAINMAN, Lord DUNGARUAN,
Sir JOHN HOLLAND, Sir WILLIAM LITTON, Master PERPOINT, Master WALLER, Master
WHITLOCK, Master WINHOOD; the Propositions were: 1. That the King would pass
those Bills which the Houses had made ready. 2. To pass a Bill for settling
Parliament Privileges and Liberties. 3. For bringing to trial those
Delinquents whom the Houses had impeached since January last. 4. For clearing
the six Members before mentioned. 5. For restoring all Judges and Officers of
State lately removed. 6. To pass a Bill for re-paying the charge of the
Kingdom. 7. A Bill for an Act of Oblivion. 8. An Act for a general pardon
without exception. 9. That there may be a Cessation of Arms for fourteen
days, to agree upon these Propositions.


The King not liking, nor yet utterly refusing these Propositions, sent the
Commissioners home to their Parliament, within a week after they came, to
carry six Propositions from him to the Houses; which were: 1. That his Revenue,
Magazines, Towns, Forts, and Ships, may be delivered to him. 2. That all
Orders and Ordinances of Parliament wanting his assent, may be recalled. 3.
That all power exercised over his Subjects by Assessements, and imprisoning
their persons, may be disclaimed. 4. That he will yield to the execution of the
Laws against Papists, provided that the Book of Common Prayer be confirmed. 5.
That such persons as upon the Treaty shall be excepted out of the general
Pardon, shall be tried by their Pe^res only. 6. That there be a Cessation of
Arms during the Treaty.


The Houses, upon receiving of these Propositions, though at first it were the
opinion of many, not to send any Answer at all to them; yet at last, to show
respect to the King, entered into a further debate about treating with him
concerning the Propositions on both sides, and concerning the Cessation of
Arms, or disbanding; with such limitations and restrictions touching the order
of treating, as would perchance seem too tedious to be here related; and on
the 20. of March the Earl of Northumberland, Sir JOHN HOLLAND, Sir WILLIAM
ARMINE, Master PERPOINT, and Master WHITLOCK (the Lord SAY should have been
one, but the King excepted against him, as formely against Sir JOHN EVELIN,
upon the same ground, which though the Parliament took ill at the first, yet
they proceeded in the business) were sent to Oxford as Treaters upon those
Propositions. In vain was this Treaty; so high the demands were judged to be
on both sides, that there seemed no possibility of ever meeting; where the
fault lay I judge not; but the Parliament, after many Messages between London
and Oxford, at last sent for their Commissioners home again; who returned to
London upon the 17. of April; upon which the Lord General immediately advanced
with his Army (as aforesaid) to besiege Reading.

Reading was not able to hold out long, but the Lord General was loath to
storm it for fear of destroying so many innocent people as remained in the
Town; which compassion of his was well approved of by the Parliament;
therefore upon composition it was rendered within sixteen days to his
Excellency, by the Deputy Governor Colonel FIELDING, for the Governor Sir
ARTHUR ASTON, was before wounded by an accident, and could not perform the
Office: The Terms were easy, for they all marched out with bag and baggage.
This siege had not at all advantaged the Parliament, if another business had
not fallen out during that short siege; which may also be thought a reason, why
the Town was so soon rendered. A good Body of the Kings Forces, both Horse and
Foot (the King himself in Person not far from them) came to relieve Reading,
assaulting one Quarter of the Parliament Army at Causum Bridge, within a mile
of the Town, and were beaten back with great slaughter, which fell especially
upon Gentlemen of quality, of whom the King at that encounter lost a
considerable number; but how many they were, or their particular names, I find
not mentioned.

The gaining of Reading might seem an addition of strength to the Parliament
side; it proved otherwise: Nothing was gotten but a bare Town, which had been
happier, had it been only so: The Town was infected, and caused afterward a
great mortality in the Parliament Army. The Soldiers besides were
discontented, that being already much behind in pay, they were not suffered to
plunder, or make any benefit of their victory. For the Parliament, before
Reading was delivered up, had approved of the Conditions, and promised to the
Lord Generals Soldiers, to forbear plundering, twelve shillings a man,
besides their pay. But neither of these were then performed; money began
already to be wanting, and the great Magazine of Treasure in Guild Hall quite
consumed. While they stayed there, expecting money, the sickness and mortality
daily increased, and the Lord General, by advice of his Council of War,
intended to march thence for better air. But such a general mutiny was raised
for want of Moan, that his Excellency, though with much courage and just
severity he began to suppress it, was advised by his Council of War to
desist, for fear of a general defection, till money might come from the City.
Notwithstanding upon this discontent in the Army, whilst his Excellency
removed to Causum House, to avoid the infection, many of the Soldiers
disbanded, and went away. Then began a tide of misfortune to flow in upon the
Parliament side; and their strength almost in every place to decrease at one
time; for during the time of these six mo^eths, since the Battle of Keynton,
until this present distress of the Lord Generals Army about Causum, which was
about the beginning of May, the War had gone on with great sury and heat,
almost through every part of England; the particulars of which shall hereafter
be related by themselves, to avoid confusion in the Story: The Lord General
had at that time intelligence that Sir RALPH HOPTON had given a great defeat to
the Parliament Forces of Devonshire; and that Prince MAURICE, and Marquess
HARTFORD were designed that way, to possess themselves wholly of the West.

Leaving therefore the Lord General a while, I shall proceed to speak of some
things which happened at other places in that Month of May. The Kings Armies
were then in fair possibility of gaining the whole West; and seemed of
strength enough to archieve it by open War, without the assistance of secret
treacheries and conspiracies; which notwithstanding were then in agitation,
though they proved not successful against the Parliament, but destructive to
the contrivers. As at Bristoll, a place of great import, and much desired by
the Kings Forces, when the plot of betraying that City to Prince RUPERT, was
set on foot; which I here relate, as falling out about the beginning of May,
1643.

The City of Bristoll was then in the Parliaments protection, and governed by
Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES, second Son to the Viscount SAY and SEAL, though
many of the Inhabitants there, as appeared by this design, were disaffected
to the Parliaments side.

This design was very bloody, and many of that City had perished in it, had
not the Conspirators been discovered and apprehended a Little before they were
to put it in execution.

ROBERT YEOMANS, late Sheriff of Bristoll, WILLIAM YEOMANS his brother, GEORGE
BOURCHIER, and EDWARD DACRES, were the chief managers of this Design; who,
with many others of that opinion, had secretly provided themselves of Arms,
intending to kill the Sentinels by night, and possess the maine Guard, (with
other particulars, to be found in the Records of their examinations, and
proofs against them) whereby to master the greatest part of the other side
within the Town, to kill the Mayor, and many others that were known to stand
affected to the Parliament; and by that means to betray the City to the Kings
Forces. In expectation of which act, Prince RUPERT with other Commanders, and
about 4000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, stayed upon Durdam Downs, about two miles
from the City. But the Plot was discovered, the Conspirators apprehended, and
brought to trial by a Council of War, where the four forenamed were
condemned, and two of them hanged at Bristoll, namely, ROBERT YEOMANS, and
GEORGE BOURCHIER; although great means had been made to save them, and
Colonel FIENNES to that purpose had been threatened from Oxford, by General
RIVEN (created by the King Earl of Forth) in a Letter unto him; which being of
great consequence, for the clear understanding of this War, and the nature of
it, I thought fit to insert here, together with the Answer thereunto.

PATRICK Earl of Forth, Lord ETTERICK, and Lord Lieutenant of all His
Majesty's Forces.
I Having been informed, that lately at a Council of War you have condemned
to death Robert Yeomans, late Sheriff of Bristoll, who has His Majesty's
Commission for raising a Regiment for his Service, William Yeomans his
brothers, George Bourchier, and Edward Dacres, all for expressing their Loyalty
to His Majesty, and endeavoring his Service, according to their Allegiance;
and that you intend to proceed speedily against diverse others in the like
manner: Do therefore signify to you, that I intend speedily to put Master
George, Master Stevens, Captain Huntley, and others, taken in Rebellion
against His Majesty at Cicester, into the same condition. I do further advise
you, that if you offer by that unjust Judgment, to execute any of them you
have so condemned; that those here in custody, Master George, Master Stevens,
and Captain Huntley, must expect no favor or mercy.

Given under my hand at Oxford, this 16. of May. 1643. To the Commander in
FORTH. Chief of the Council of War in Bristoll.

The Answer to this Letter was as follows: NATHANIEL FIENNES Governor, and
the Council of War in the City of Bristoll.
HAving received a Writing from your Lordship, wherein it is declared, that
upon information of our late proceedings against Robert Yeomans, William
Yeomans, and others, you intend speedily to put Master George, Master Stevens,
Captain Huntley, and others into the same condition; We care well assured,
that neither your Lordship, nor any other mortal man, can put them into the
same condition; for whether they live or dye, they will always be accounted
true and honest men, faithful to their King and Country, and such as in a
fair and open way have always prosecuted that Cause, which in their
judgment, guided by the judgment of the highest Court, they held the justest;
whereas the Conspirators of this City, must both in life and death, carry
perpetually with them the brand of Treachery and Conspiracy: And if Robert
Yeomans had made use of his Commission in an open way, he should be put into no
worse condition, then others in the like kind had been; but the Law of nature
among all men, and the law of Arms among Soldiers make a difference between
open Enemies, and secret Spies and Conspirators. And if you shall not make the
like distinction, we do signify unto you, that we will not only proceed to
the execution of the persons already condemned, but also of diverse others of
the Conspirators, unto whom we had some thoughts of extending mercy. And do
further advertise you, that if by any inhumane and un-Souldier-like sentence,
you shall proceed to the execution of the persons by you named, or any other of
our friends in your custody, that have been taken in a fair and open way of
War; then Sir Walter Pie, Sir William Crofts, and Colonel Connebey, with
diverse others taken in open Rebellion, and actual War against the King and
Kingdom, whom we have here in custody, must expect no favor or mercy. And by
Gods blessing upon our most just Cause, we have powers enough, for our friends
security, without taking in any that have gotten out of our reach and power,
although diverse of yours, of no mean quality and condition, have bin released
by us.

Given under our hand the 18 of May, 1643. To patrick Earl of Forth, Lord
Lieut. General. Nathaniel Fiennes, President, Clement Walker, etc.


The King also at that time writ a very sharp command to the Mayor and
Citizens of Bristoll, to raise what power they could to hinder the execution of
those men, which he terms the murder of his loyal Subjects: But nothing
availed to save their lives, for the forenamed ROBERT YEOMANS, and GEORGE
BOURCHIER, according to the sentence, were both executed. The loss of Bristoll
from the Parliament, a place of great import, was thus by the detection and
prevention of this Conspiracy, respited for a while only. For not long after
it was surrendered to Prince RUPERT, and happier it was for the Prince himself,
to gain that City in a more honorable way, and less effusion of English
blood.

At the same time that these Conspirators against Bristoll were by sentence of
a Council of War put to death; another Plot of higher nature, and more full
of horror, was detected at London; a Plot, which if not discovered, had quite
ruined the Parliament it self, and struck at the very head, and chief
residence of it, the Cities of London and Westminster; which cannot be omitted
in this Relation, though with as much brevity as can be possible, it shall be
touched.

The scope of it was to have put in execution the Commission of Array within
London and Westminster, and so to have raised a sufficient force for the Kings
side to ruin the Parliament. Many Citizens of London were in the Plot,
together with some Gentlemen besides, who had taken an Oath of secrecy among
themselves; and were the more animated in it, upon promises; which Master
WALLER, the chief man in eminence among them (a Member of the House of
Commons) had made to some of the rest, that many Members of both Houses of
Parliament were engaged in the Plot, and would in due time be assistants to it.
Though it proved in conclusion, that Master WALLER was not able to make good so
much as he had promised. The Plot was horrid, and could not possibly have been
put in execution, without great effusion of blood, as must needs appear by the
particular branches of it, which were confessed upon the Examinations of Master
WALLER, Master TOMKINS, Master CHALLENOR, Master HASELL Master BLINKHORNE,
Master WHITE, and others the chief Actors in it.

That which appeared by the Narrative Declaration, published by Authority of
Parliament, was to this effect: That 1. They should seize into their custody
the Kings Children. 2. To seize upon several Members of both Houses of
Parliament, upon the Lord Mayor of London, and the Committee of the Militia
there, under pretense of bringing them to legal trial. 3. To seize upon all
the Cities Outworks and Forts, upon the Tower of London, and all the
Magazines, Gates, and other places of importance in the City. 4. To let in the
Kings Forces, to surprise the City with their assistance; and to destroy all
those, who should by Authority of Parliament, be their opposers; and by force
of Arms to resist all payments imposed by the Authority of both Houses, for
support of those Armies employed in their defense.


Many other particulars there were, too tedious to relate at large, as what
signals should have been given to the Kings Forces of Horse, to invade the
City; what Colors for difference, those of the Plot should wear, to be known
to their fellows, and such like. Much heartened they were in this business by
a Commission of Array sent from Oxford at that time, from the King to them, and
brought secretly to London by a Lady, the Lady AUBIGNY, Daughter to the Earl
of Suffolk, a Widow ever since the Battle of Keynton; where the Lord AUBIGNY
her husband was slain.

That Commission of Array was directed from the King to Sir NICHOLAS CRISPE,
Sir GEORGE STROUD Knights, to Sir THOMAS GARDENER Knight, Recorder of London,
Sir GEORGE BINION, Knight, RICHARD EDES, and MARMADUKE ROYDEN Esquires, THOMAS
BROWN, PETER PAGGON, CHARLES GENNINGS, EDWARD CARLETON, ROBERT ABBOT, ANDREW
KING, WILLIAM WHITE, STEVEN BOLTON, ROBERT ALDEM, EDMUND FOSTER, THOMAS
BLINKHORNE, of London Gentlemen; and to all such other persons, as according to
the true intent and purport of that Commission, should be nominated and
appointed to be Generals, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeant Majors, or
other Officers of that Council of War. The Commission it self is to be read
at large in the Parliament Records.

But this Conspiracy was prevented, and proved fatal to some of the
Contrivers; being detected upon the last day of May (which happened at that
time to be the day of the Monthly Fast) and Master WALLER, Master TOMKINS,
with other of the forenamed Conspirators, being apprehended, were that night
examined by diverse grave Members of the Parliament, of whom Master PYM was one;
and afterward reserved in custody for a Trial. They were arraigned in
Guild Hall, and Master WALLER, Master TOMKINS, Master CHALLONER, Master HASELL,
Master WHITE, and Master BLINKHORNE, were all condemned; none were executed but
Master TOMKINS, and Master CHALLONER, being both hanged, Master TOMKINS in
Holborne, and Master CHALLONER in Cornhill, both within sight of their own
dwelling houses; Master HASELL dyed in Prison, BLINKHORNE, and the other, were
by the mercy of the Parliament, and the Lord General Essex, reprived, and
saved afterward; Master WALLER, the chief of them, was long detained Prisoner
in the Tower, and about a year after, upon payment of a Fine of ten thousand
pounds, was pardoned, and released to go travel abroad. It was much wondered
at, and accordingly discoursed of by many at that time, what the reason should
be, why Master WALLER, being the principal Agent in that Conspiracy, (where
Master TOMKINS and Master CHALLONER, who had been drawn in by him, as their
own Confessions, even at their deaths expressed, were both executed) did escape
with life. The only reason which I could ever hear given for it, was, That
Master WALLER had been so free in his Confessions at the first, without which
the Plot could not have been clearly detected; That Master PYM, and other of
the Examiners, had engaged their promise, to do whatever they could to preserve
his life. He seemed also much smitten in conscience, and desired the comfort of
godly Minister, being extremely penitent for that soul offense; and afterward
in his Speech to the House (when he came to be put out of it) much be wailed
his offense, thanking God that so mischievous, and bloody a Conspiracy was
discovered, before it could take effect.

CHAP. III.
Matters of State trans-acted in Parliament, touching the Assembly of Divines.
The making of a new Great Seal. Impeaching the Queen of High Treason, and
other things. The Lord General Essex, after some Marches, returns to quarter
his wasted and sick Army about Kingston. The Kings Forces Masters of the West.
The Earl of Newcastle, his greatness in the North. Some mention of the Earl
of Cumberland, and the Lord FAIRFAX.
AT the same time that these Conspiracies were closely working to undermine the
Parliament, and War was raging in highest fury throughout the Kingdom; many
State-businesses of an unusual nature had been trans-acted in the Parliament
sitting. For things were grown beyond any president of former ages, and the
very foundations of Government were shaken; according to the sense of that
Vote, which the Lords and Commons had passed a year before, That whenever
the King makes War against the Parliament, it tends to the dissolution of
this Government.

Three things of that unusual nature fell into debate in one month, which was
May, 1643. and were then, or soon after fully passed; one was at the beginning
of that month, concerning the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Among other
Bills which had passed both Houses, and wanted only the Royal Assent, that was
one; That a Synod of Divines should be chosen and established, for the good and
right settlement of Religion, with a fit Government for the Church of England.
This Bill was often tendered to the King to pass, but utterly refused by him: The
matter therefore was fully argued, what in such cases might be done by
Authority of Parliament, when the Kingdoms good is so much concerned, when a
King refuses, and wholly absenteth himself from the Parliament. And at last
it was brought to this conclusion; That an Ordinance of Parliament, where the
King is so absent, and refusing, is by the Laws of the Land of as good
Authority to bind the people, for the time present, as an Act of Parliament it
self can be.

It was therefore Voted by the Lords and Commons, That the Act for an Assembly
of Divines, to settle Religion, and a form of Government for the Church of
England, (which the King had often refused to pass) should forthwith be turned
into an Ordinance of Parliament; and the Assembly thereby called, debate such
things for the settlement of Religion, as should be propounded to them by both
Houses; which not long after was accordingly put in execution.

The case seemed of the same nature with that of Scotland, in the year 1639.
when the Scottish Covenanters (as is before mentioned in this History) upon the
Kings delay in calling their National Synod, published a writing to that
purpose; That the power of calling a Synod, in case the Prince be an Enemy to
the truth, or negligent in promoting the Churches good, is in the Church it
self.

In the same month, and within few days after, another business of great
consequence, was by the Lords and Commons taken into consideration, which was
the making of a new Great Seal, to supply the place of that which had been
carried away from the Parliament, as before is mentioned. This business had
been fully debated in the House of Commons, and the Month following, at a
Conference between both Houses, the Commons declared to the Lords what great
prejudice the Parliament and whole Kingdom suffered by the absence of the
Great Seal; and thereupon desired their speedy compliance in Votes for the
making of a new one.

The matter was debated in the House of Peers, put to Votes, and carried for
the negative. The only reason which they alleged against the making of a new
Seal; was this, That they have hitherto dispatched all business since the
absence of the Seal, by virtue of Ordinances of Parliament, and they conceived
that the same course might still be kept in what matters soever were necessary
to be expedited for the good of the Kingdom, without a Seal. Yet the Lords
gave a respective answer, That if the House of Commons would inform them in
any particular cases, wherein the Kingdoms prejudice, by absence of the Great
Seal, could not be remedied by virtue of an Ordinance, they would take it into
further consideration, to induce compliance accordingly.

Neither was it long before the Lords, upon reasons showed, concurred with the
House of Commons; who about the beginning of July, presented to the Lords at a
Conference the Votes, Which had before passed in their House, together with the
reasons for making of a new Great Seal. The Votes were these:

Resolved upon the Question. June 14. and 26.

1. THat the Great Seal of England ought to attend the Parliament. 2. That the
absence of it has been a cause of great mischief to the Commonwealth. 3.
That a remedy ought to be provided for these mischiefs. 4. That the proper
remedy is by making a new Great Sale.
The reasons which they gave, were divided into two branches; The first
declaring those mischiefs which were occasioned by conveying away the Great
Seal from the Parliament: The second expressing those inconveniences and
mischiefs which proceeded from the want of the Great Seal with them. The
reasons of the first kind were thus:

1. It was secretly and unlawfully carried away by the Lord Keeper, contrary to
the duty of his place, who ought himself to have attended the Parliament, and
not to have departed without leave; nor should have been suffered to convey
away the Great Seal, if his intentions had been discovered.

2. It has been since taken away from him, and put into the hands of other
dangerous and ill-affected persons; so as the Lord Keeper, being sent unto by
the Parliament, for the sealing of some Writs, returned answer, That he could
not Seal the same, because he had not the Seal in his keeping.

3. Those who have had the managing thereof, have employed it to the hurt and
destruction of the Kingdom many ways; as by making new Sheriffs in an
unusual and unlawful manner, to be as so many Generals, or Commanders, of
Forces raised against the Parliament; by issuing out illegal Commissions of
Array, with other unlawful Commissions for the same purpose; By sending sorth
Proclamations against both Houses of Parliament, and several Members thereof,
proclaiming them Traitors, against the Privileges of Parliament, and Laws of
the Land, By sealing Commission of Oyer and Terminer to proceed against them,
and other of His Majesty's good Subjects, adhering to the Parliament, as
Traitors; By sending Commissions into Ireland, to treat a peace with the Rebels
there, contrary to an Act of Parliament, made this Session. Besides diverse
other dangerous Acts passed under it, since it was secretly conveyed away from
the Parliament; whereby great calamities and mischiefs have ensued, to the
prejudice of the Kingdom.

Mischiefs arising through want of the Great Seal.

1. The Terms have been adjourned; the course of Justice obstructed.

2. No original Writs can be sued forth without going to Oxford; which none
who holds with the Parliament can do, without peril of his life or Liberty.

3. Proclamations in Parliament cannot issue out, for bringing in Delinquents
impeached of High Treason or other crimes; under pain of forfeiting their
Estates, according to the ancient course.

4. No Writs of Error can be brought in Parliament, to reverse erroneous
judgments; nor Writs of Election sued out for choosing new Members upon death,
or removal of any; whereby the number of the Members is much lessened, and the
Houses in time like to be dissolved, if speedy supply be not had, contrary to
the very Act for continuance of this Parliament.

5. Every other Court of Justice has a peculiar Seal; and the Parliament, the
Supreme Court of England, has no other but the Great Seal of England; which
being kept away from it, has now no Seal at all; and therefore a new Seal
ought to be made.

6. This Seal is Clavis Regni, and therefore ought to be resident with the
Parliament (which is the representative Body of the whole Kingdom) whilst it
continues sitting; the King, as well as the Kingdom, being always legally
present in it, during the Session thereof.

The Lords upon these reasons concurred with the House of Commons, and order
was given, that a new Great Seal, should forthwith be made, which was
accordingly done.

It should seem the King was not well pleased with this action of the
Parliament, as appeared by what was done at Oxford above a year after, when
the King assembled together the Lords which were with him, and all those
Gentlemen that had been Members of the House of Commons, and had deserted the
Parliament at Westminster, whom the King called his Parliament at Oxford, and
propounded many things for them to debate upon; amongst which it was taken into
debate, and resolved upon the Question by that Assembly at Oxford, That this
very action (which they style counterfeiting the Great Seal) was Treason, and
the whole Parliament at Westminster, eo facto, guilty of High Treason. But this
was passed at Oxford long after; of which occasion may be to speak further
hereafter.

But at the time when the Parliament made their new Great Seal, the people
stood at gaze, and many wondered what might be the consequence of so unusual a
thing. Some that wholly adhered to the Parliament, and liked well, that an
action so convenient and useful to the present state, was done by them, looked
notwithstanding upon it, as a sad mark of the Kingdoms distraction, and a
sign how irreconcilable the difference might grow between the Parliament and
the Kings Person. For the legality or justness of making of the Seal, there
was little dispute or argument among those who were not disaffected to the
Parliament; and though there were no direct or plain precedent for it (for the
case of a Kings being personally in War against the Parliament sitting, was
never before) yet by comparison with other times, when the necessities of State
have required such a thing, it was not only allowed, but thought requisite. I
do not know of any thing written against it by any Lawyers, or other of the
Kings Party; but Master PRYNNE, a learned Lawyer, and great Antiquary, of the
Parliament side, has written a copious discourse in justification of it, both
by arguments of reason, and many neere-resembling precedents of former times)
called, The opening of the Great Seal of England, which is extant to be read
by any that would be satisfied, what power from time to time Parliaments have
challenged and been allowed, over that Seal, both in making of it in the
infancy or absence of Princes, and disposing of it in the dotage or wilfulness
of others.

But before this business was fully concluded, another thing, which seemed as
great a sign how wide the rent was grown, fell into debate in the House of
Commons: Some time was spent in consultation about it, and much arguing on both
sides. The matter was about charging the Queen of High Treason. To that
purpose many Articles of an high nature were drawn up against her; some of
them were, That she had pawned the Crown Jewels in Holland; That she had
raised the Rebellion in Ireland; That she had endeavored to raise a Party in
Scotland against the Parliament; That she had gone in the head of a Popish Army
in England: For not long before this time, the Queen with Arms and Ammunition
from the Low Countries, and Commanders of War from thence, had landed in the
North of England, been entertained there by the Earl of Newcastle, and by him
and others, with strong Forces conveyed to the King at Oxford, whereof more
particulars will be related hereafter. Diverse other Articles were framed
against the Queen, upon which within few Months after, she was impeached of
High Treason by the House of Commons, and the Impeachment carried up by Master
PYMME to the House of Peers, where it stuck for many months, but was
afterward passed there also; and may be further discoursed of in the due time.

It had been likewise before Ordered by both Houses, and was now accordingly
put in execution, that the King and Queens Revenue coming into the Exchequer,
should be detained, and employed to the Public Service of the Commonwealth; a
Committee was chosen of Lords and Commons to dispose of it to the best uses.
Diverse necessary charges of the State were defrayed by it, and among others
(which seemed a kind of just retalliation) many Members of both Houses of
Parliament, whose whole Estates had been seized upon by the Kings Armies, were
in some measure relieved at London, out of his Revenue, and thereby enabled to
subsist in that Public Service, to which they had been called.

But so exceeding great by this time, were the charges grown for supportation
of so spreading a War, that no Contributions nor Taxes whatsoever, were
thought sufficient, unless an Excize were imposed upon Commodities (according
to the way of the Netherlanders) such as Beer, Wine, Tobacco, and Meat; which
was taken into consideration by both Houses, and this Summer agreed upon. But
the Excize was laid with much gentleness, especially upon all Victuals of
most common and necessary use, insomuch that it was little felt either by the
rich, or poor people, and yet amounted monthly to a very considerable sum,
though the Kings Quarters were then the greatest part of England; for the City
of London was within the Parliament Quarters.

To return again to the Lord General ESSEX; His Excellency in May, 1643.
having, as aforesaid, received intelligence of the defeat given to the
Parliament Army in the West, and in what condition things there stood; not
being able with his own Forces to give them relief, sent order to Sir WILLIAM
WALLER (whose actions shall be anon mentioned in a Series by themselves) to
march thither in assistance of the Devonshire Forces; and writ his Command to
the Governor of Bristoll, to aid him with such Horse and Foot, as he could
conveniently spare out of his Garrison. But things could not at that time be
put in execution according to his desires; and before Sir WILLIAM WALLER could
get far into the West, Prince MAURICE, Marquess HARTFORD, and Sir RALPH
HOPTON were joined all together.

The Lord General, since it was much desired by the City of London, from whom
the supplies of money were to come, that he should move with his whole Army
toward Oxford, was content, though somewhat against his judgment, to proceed
in that Design; and marched with the maine Body to Them, to meet there with
the Forces sent from the associated Counties to his assistance; from whence (as
a person, whose care and Command extended over the whole Kingdom, which was
now overspread with a general War, and wasted by many Armies at once) he
granted a Commission, by direction of the Parliament, to the Lord FIELDING,
(now Earl of Denbigh by the late death of his Father, who was slain in a
Skirmish, fighting against the Parliament) to be General of four Counties,
Shropshire, Worcester, Stafford, and Warwickshire; to leavy Forces there, and
conduct them into any part of the Kingdom, against the Kings Power, according
to directions from the Parliament, or Lord General. He granted also at the
same time another Commission in the like manner to Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON, to
raise Forces as General of all North Wales.

At Them the hand of God, in an extreme increase of sickness (hundreds in a
day desperately ill) did visit the Lord Generals Army; and by strange
unseasonablenesse of weather, and great rain continuing fourteen days, the
place being upon a flat, moist, and clayie ground, made it impossible for him
to advance from that Quarter. In which time the Army was by sickness, and
departure of most of the Auxiliary Forces, brought to a number utterly unable
to attempt the former design, without certain ruin, the situation of Oxford
upon the River of Thames considered; for the Lord General conceived it
impossible (as himself expressed) to block up the Town, without a double
number to what he then had.

But when the rain ceased, and the waters were so much abated, as to make the
ways passable, intelligence was brought that Prince RUPERT had drawn out his
Horse and Foot toward Buckingham, with his Canon also; and had called in the
Country, making open profession before them, that he would give Battle to the
General: The General marched with some speed toward Buckingham, to fight with
him. When he came within two miles of that Town, he found the case far
otherwise, and had intelligence that the Prince had quitted Buckingham in a
kind of disorderly manner; that the night before, he had horsed his Foot, and
marched away, leaving some of his Provisions behind him.

The Lord General understood well, that it was not possible for him with his
Train of Artillery and Foot Companies, to follow the Enemy to any advantage.
For if he had been at that time strong enough in Horse, his desire was to have
hindered Prince RUPERT from joining with the Queen, who then was marching with
a good Convoy of Horse from the Northern parts of England, (where she had
arrived from the Netherlands) toward Oxford. But being not able to follow that
design, he desisted from his march to Buckingham, sending into the Town a
Party of his Horse, to quarter there that night, and to bring away that
Provision which the Enemy had left there. He himself, with the rest of his
Army, marched to great Brickhill, a place most convenient to lie between the
Enemy and London, to defend the Associated Counties, to assist or join with
the Forces of the Lord GRAY of Grooby, Sir JOHN MELDRUM, and Colonel CROMWELL,
to whom he had before written, that if they could possibly, they should fight
with the Queens Forces, and stop her passage to the King. But it seemed that
the business could not be done; that the Queen and Prince RUPERT were
suffered to join together with all their Forces. Sir WILLIAM WALLER had been
long victorious in the West, yet now the Parliaments fortune, almost in every
place, began to fail; and intelligence was brought to the Lord General, that
Sir WILLIAM having almost gained the whole West, and besieging Sir RALPH HOPTON
in the Devizes, a Town of Devonshire, was on a sudden by unexpected Forces
from Oxford, under the conduct of the Lord WILMOT, totally routed and forced
into Bristoll. The Lord General intending at the first report of this news,
to have marched himself for relieving of the West; upon more particular
information, that Sir WILLIAM WALLERS Forces were so far broken, that no
assistance at all could be given by them, was enforced to desist from that
enterprise; considering also that his own Army was shrunk, through the
continual increase of violent sickness, want of pay, clothing, and other
necessaries, to a most unconsiderable number, he resolved to proceed no
further, nor to engage that weak Army to the ruin of it self, and danger of
the Kingdom; especially since the Forces of the Associated Counties could not
with safety be commanded so far from home. He therefore returned toward
London, quartering that poor remainder of an Army at Kingston upon Thames, and
other places near adjacent. In this distressed condition I must a while leave
that great General, until some few weeks time shall recruit his power, and
enable him to make that famous and honorable expedition to the relief of
Gloucester.

So great at this time were the successes which in all parts crowned the Kings
Armies, that they seemed to possess an absolute Victory, and the Parliament in
probability quite ruined; on one side the Lord Generals Army mouldered away by
long sickness, and other wants; the long successful Sir WILLIAM WALLER,
quite broken in the West; and about the same time the Lord FAIRFAX, and his
Son Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX (though reserved by divine Providence for a
transcendent height of honor in the future) with all the Gentlemen almost
which served the Parliament in those Northern parts, being defeated by the
Earl of Newcastle; and the Lord FAIRFAX, with his Son, driven into the Town
of Hull: On the other side, the Kings Armies were full and strong; Sir RALPH
HOPTON, whom for his valor and industry the King had honored with the Title
of a Baron, was possessed of a gallant Army in the West, and seemed to want
nothing so much as a considerable Enemy; the Kings other Forces were free to
choose what stage they pleased, to act their parts upon. Prince RUPERT was sent
to besiege Bristoll, where Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES, second Son to the
Viscount SAY, was Governor; which City in this low ebb of the Parliament,
could not long hold out, but was soon delivered ^o the Prince, a place of as
much concernment as any in the Kingdom. Prince MAURICE with another Army came
to besiege the City of Excester, into which the Earl of Stamford was retreated
after his defeat at Stretton in Cornwall, a Nobleman who had long strugled with
various success, and in sharp encounters against Sir RALPH HOPTON, and other
Commanders of the Kings side in those Western Counties, ruined at last by the
treacherous revolt of some, who had taken the same cause with him at the first.
This City was likewise after a long siege, for want of supplies, delivered upon
Articles to the Prince that besieged it.

But the great cloud, which not only overshadowed the Parliament in the North,
but threatened to power out storms upon parts far remote, was the Earl of
Newcastle, with his mighty Army, who was grown formidable to the Associated
Counties, and many other places of the Kingdom. His Army was at that time the
greatest of any in England, which he maintained in brave equipage, by large
Contributions enforced from the Country, and seemed of strength enough, not
only to master any opposition of English Forces, but to serve as a Bulwark
against the greatest Army which the Kingdom of Scotland could be able to send
in aid of the English Parliament. For the Parliament had then sent into
Scotland, for the brotherly assistance of that Kingdom, and agreed upon entering
into a Covenant with them for defense of Religion, and the common Liberty of
both Nations.

It pleased the Divine Providence (whose workings are many times beyond the
reach of humane conjectures) that this strong Army, before the entrance of the
Scots, found an Enemy in England worthy of their fear; and were by the
personal valor and successful conduct of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, who seemed
lately in a low condition, so far broken (together with other defeats given
to parts of it sent abroad) that the passage for the Scots into England was
much facilitated, as shall hereafter appear in more particular.

But it is worthy consideration (and therefore cannot but deserve a mention)
with what unwearied constancy, and wondrous magnanimity, the two FAIRFAXES,
Father and Son, did labor to preserve those Northern parts for the
Parliament, especially observing what great Enemies they dealt withal; how
many unexpected disadvantages happened to them, and accessions of power to
their Foes at several times; which, though it cannot be here related with full
circumstances or particulars, yet may be touched in a general way.

The Lord FAIRFAX, ever since that there was any appearance of this unhappy
War; and that the Kings Commission of Array began to justle with the
Parliaments Ordinance of Militia, had been very industrious in raising
strength; and joined himself most unanimously in that cause with Sir JOHN
HOTHAM, and his Son Master JOHN HOTHAM, a Member also of the House of
Commons, and a Gentleman, not only active but prosperous, whilst he continued
faithful to that side which he had chosen. And since the War broke out into
action, the Lord FAIRFAX, either singly by himself, or some times joined with
Master HOTHAM, had taken and fortified many Towns and Forts for the
Parliament, and made many sharp and fierce encounters against potent Enemies.
The Earl of Cumberland, who was first made Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire by
the King, was not able to suppress them, nor scarce maintain the War
against that power which they had raised: Maugre whose Forces, they took and
fortified Cawood Castle, and the Town of Selby, in the Month of October,
1642. and surprised presently after the Town of Leedes, where part of the
Earls Forces were quartered, of whom they took diverse Prisoners, Knights and
Gentlemen of good quality, one of which was Sir GEORGE DETHERICK, together with
his whole Troop.

The Earl of Cumberland himself, within few days after was driven into the
City of York, and there besieged, and summoned by the Lord FAIRFAX and Master
HOTHAM; which happened about the same time that the famous Battle between the
King and the Lord General Essex, was fought at Keynton.

But the Earl of Newcastle with a greater force, entered into York, whilst
the Lord FAIRFAX and Captain HOTHAM, lay not far off; who, notwithstanding
his great strength when he marched out of York, was encountered by them at
Tadcaster, upon the 7. of December, the Fight or several Skirmishes continuing
about five hours; in which the Parliament Forces did so well take their
advantages, that they slew (as was reported to the Parliament) 200 of the
Earls men, with the loss of eight Soldiers of their own, of whom Captain
LISTER was one, whose death was much lamented in the Country, being esteemed a
brave and religious man. After several Skirmishes, the Parliament Army had the
fortune to make a fair retreat to Cawood Castle, and Selby, and leave all to
the Earl, whose Forces were reported to be about eight thousand Horse and
Foot, the Lord FAIRFAX and Captain HOTHAM having not above 2100. Foot, and
seven Troops of Horse; their number had bin greater, if Sir HUGH CHOLMELY and
Colonel BAINTON, with their Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse (who
were expected) had accordingly come in to them.

The Earl of Newcastle was now grown, not only master of the field there, but
formidable to all the adjacent Counties; who did therefore implore aid from the
Parliament. The Parliament upon that occasion, hastened the Association of
those Counties which lay nearer to them, that they might be the more able to
supply their remoter friends.

The Kings side received then an addition of strength in the North, by the
landing of Colonel GORING at Newcastle, with 200. Commanders from Holland, and
other Provisions for the War.

The Earl of Newcastle marching from Tadcaster, surprised Leedes, in which
Town he took many Gentlemen Prisoners, and forced them to ransom themselves
at high rates; whereby he was further enabled to pay his great Army. Then also
he gave Commissions to Papists in that Country to arm themselves in the Kings
Service, which he justified by writings published upon that occasion; and at
the same time proclaimed the Lord FAIRFAX Traitor.

The Lord FAIRFAX notwithstanding, marched with such Forces as he had gotten
together, and proved successful in diverse attempts, against several parts of
the Earl of Newcastles Forces, one of them happening at Sherburne, between
Tadcaster and Doncaster, and another at Bradford, against a party of the Earl
of Newcastles Army, under the conduct of Colonel GORING, Colonel EVERS, Sir
WILLIAM SAVILE, and Sir JOHN GOTHERICK, who came with a good strength of Horse
and Dragoneers to surprise on a sudden that Town of Bradford; but were by
Forces timely sent to the relief of it, forced to retire with some loss;
which, though it were not a Victory against Colonel GORING and the rest, may
notwithstanding be termed a successful Action, in being able to repel an
Enemy too potent for them in all probability.

CHAP. IV.
Some Actions of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX in the North. The Queen lands in England.
The revolt of Sir HUGH CHOLMELY, and the two HOTHAMS. The state of this War
in the Western parts. The condition of the Associated Counties. A short
relation of Sir WILLIAM WALLER his Actions; of Colonel CROMWELL, Sir WILLIAM
BRERETON, and Sir JOHN GELL.
GReat were the achievements of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX in that month of January
and the following February; for no season of the year, nor storms of winter,
could quench the rage of this Civil Fire. Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX on the 23. of
January, 1642. marched from Bradford (six miles distant from Loedes) with six
Troops of Horse, and three Companies of Dragoones, under the command of Sir
HENRY FOULIS Baronet, his Lieutenant General of his Horse, and near 1000.
Musketeers, with 2000. Clubmen, under the Command of Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX
Colonel, and Lieutenant General of the Foot. When Sir THOMAS approached the
Town of Leeds, he dispatched a Trumpeter to Sir WILLIAM SAVILE, Commander in
chief there, under the Earl of Newcastle, requiring the Town to be delivered
to him for the King and Parliament. But receiving a resolute, and
seeming-scornefull answer from Sir WILLIAM SAVILE, he drew nearer, and prepared
to make an Assault, though there were great strength in the Town, namely, 1500
Foot, and 500. Horse and Dragoones, with two Brass Sakers. Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX
drew out five Companies of his most expert Soldiers, whom he disposed of at a
fit side of the Town, under the command of Major FORBES, Captains, BRIGGS,
LEE, FRANK, and PALMER. Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX, at the head of his Regiment, and
the face of the Enemy, stormed the Town with great skill and courage, whilst
Major FORBES did the like in his place, and Sir THOMAS himself every where
encouraging, and teaching valor by his own example, brought on his men; so
that after two hours of hot fight, though the besieged behaved themselves
well, the Town was entered by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX, and Sir
HENRY FOWLS, on one side, and Major FORBES, with his fellow Captains, on the
other. They toooke within the Town their two Brass Sakers, with good store of
Arms and Ammunition, four Colors, and 500. Prisoners, among whom were six
Commanders: The Common Soldiers, upon taking of an Oath, never to fight in
this cause against the King and Parliament, were set at liberty, and suffered
to depart, but without their Arms. There were slain about forty men, of which
number the besieged lost the greater half. Sergeant Major BEAMONT,
endeavoring in the flight to save his life, by crossing the River, so lost it,
being drowned therein; and Sir WILLIAM SAVILE himself, crossing in flight the
same River, hardly escaped the same fate. Public thanksgiving to Almighty God
was given at London for this Victory.

Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX with his victorious Forces, immediately marched to another
Quarter of the Earl of Newcastles Army at Wakefield, from whence the chief
Commander, Sir GEORGE WENTWORTH sled, and left it to him. Not long after, he
marched to Tadcaster; at whose approach the Earls Forces, though a
considerable number, fled away, and forsook their Works.

From that time scarce any one fortnight of all the following Spring, passed
without some remarkable addition of strength to the Kings side, in those
Northern parts. In February General KING, a Scottish Commander, of great
experience in Military affairs, came out of Holland, landed at Newcastle,
joined himself with the Earl of Newcastle, and passed to York with 6000.
Arms. In the same Month also the Queen landing from Holland, near to
Sunderland, with great Provision of Arms and Ammunition, and many Commanders
of note in her Retinew, was convoyed by the Earl of Newcastle to the City of
York.

The Earl of Montrosse about the same time, a young Lord of great esteem in
Scotland, who before in the Scottish War (as is there mentioned) had showed
himself one of the most active and zealous Covenanters of that Nation,
forsook his Party there, and with the Lord OGLESBY fled out of Scotland with
120. Horse, to the Queen at York. Upon which both those Lords were proclaimed
at Edinburgh Traitors to their King and Country, for that, contrary to their
Covenant, they stole out of Scotland, to assist the Popish Army, (for so they
called that of the Earl of Newcastles) against the Parliament of England.

Another great wound to the Parliament, not long after, was the revolt of Sir
HUGH CHOLMELY, a Member of the House of Commons, and one that had carried a
good esteem among them, who had before (as is already mentioned) been employed
by the Parliament, as a Commissioner in the North, together with the Lord
FAIRFAX, and Sir PHILIP STAPLETON; and was at this time highly entrusted by
them; for he was Governor of Scarborough, a place of great importance. He
falsely betrayed his Trust, and forsook the Cause he had undertaken, going to
the Queen with 300. men. Upon which he was impeached of High Treason by the
Parliament; but it was not his fortune to suffer for that offense, as others
did, who about the same time failed in their Trusts. The Town of Scarborough
was left in possession of a Parliament Captain, who was usually called Brown
Bushel, a man that some thought would have kept it to the Parliaments use; he
likewise revolted, and delivered it to their Enemies.

Upon the landing of General KING, and the Queen presently after, a suspicion
began to arise, by some circumstances, that the two unfortunate HOTHAMS, the
father and the son, were false to the Parliament. Which by the strict
observation of some vigilant men on that side, was further discovered, and
began at last to be discoursed of, with as little belief for a long time, as
CASSANDRAES Prophecies; and when it came more plainly to appear, with as much,
not only wonder, but sorrow of honest men, that so much unconstancy should be
found. The particulars of this discovery, and how much the Parliament, if not
timely prevented, had suffered by it, there will be time hereafter to discourse
of more at large. But they were both accused to the Parliament, seized upon at
Hull, and sent up to London, where they long remained Prisoners in the Tower,
before the time of their Trial and Execution.

Not all these disadvantages, by the growth of Enemies, and revolt of friends,
could dishearten the Lord FAIRFAX and his Son, who still persisted with great
courage, and raising the Clubmen of the Country, to piece up those small Forces
which remained with them, were able for a while to make considerable
resistance, and perform diverse services against some parts of the Earl of
Newcastles vast Army. But one Victory was gained by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX at
Wakefield, which may be termed rather miraculous then strange; though I shall
relate nothing save known truth, such a Victory, against so much odds, and so
many disadvantages, as may serve to teach how much success may possibly crown
bold attempts, and justify that old saying, Audaces fortuna juvat.

The Lord FAIRFAX, General of the Parliaments Forces in the North, on the 20.
of May gave Order for a Party to be drawn out from the Garrisons of Leedes,
Bradford, Halifax, and Howley: They marched, 1000. Foot, three Companies of
Dragoneers, and eight Troops of Horse; Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX commanded in Chief;
the Foot were commanded by Sir WILLIAM FAIRFAX, and Sergeant Major General
GIFFORD; the Horse divided into two Bodies, four Troops whereof were commanded
by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX himself, the other four by Sir HENRY FOWLYS. From
Howley, which was their rend^zvouze, they marched away, and by four a clock in
the morning came before Wakefield: Those of the Town were ready for them, and
sent out some of their Horse to encounter with theirs, and Musketeers to line
some hedges, even to the very Town. There were in Wakefield 3000. Foot, and
seven Troops of Horse, besides Colonel LAMPTONS Regiment, which came into the
Town after that the Parliaments Forces entered into it. But at the first
encounter the Parliaments Forces beat their Enemies Horse back; and their Foot
also drove those Musketeers from the hedges, even into the Town; which they
assaulted in two places, called Wrengate, and Northgate. After an hour and an
half fighting, recovered one of their Enemies Pieces, and turned it upon them;
and withal entered the Town in both places at the same time. When the
Baracadoes were opened, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX with the Horse, also fell into the
Town, and cleared the street, there was a cruel and fierce encounter; in
which place Colonel GORING was taken Prisoner by Lieutenant MATTHEW ALURED
(brother to Captain JOHN ALURED, a Member of the House of Commons;) yet in the
Market place stood three Troops of Horse, and Colonel LAMPTONS Regiment; to
whom Major General GIFFORD sent a Trumpet, with proffer of Quarter, if they
would lay down their Arms. To which when they returned a scornful Answer, he
fired a Piece of their own Ordnance upon them, and the Horse also falling in
with great fury, soon beat them out of the Town, and took all their Officers
Prisoners. They took withal 27. Colors of Foot, three Cornets of Horse, and
about 1500. Common Soldiers. They were likewise forced when they fled, to
leave behind them four Pieces of Ordnance, with Ammunition, which the
Parliament Forces carried away with them. For when they had thus taken the
Town, they found their number and strength too weak to keep it, and their
Prisoners too. And therefore they quitted the place, and marched away with this
brave booty.

This great Victory at Wakefield, seemed (according to the common saying) like
a lightening before death; for not long after, these Forces were quite broken
by the Earl of Newcastle, whose greatness overspread those Countries, and was
never incountered by any Enemy, but in parts of his Army. He had managed the
whole business, and attained his height of power by great skill and policy;
and now having no near Enemy in the field, was gone to besiege the Lord
FAIRFAX in Hull, which was by some talked of as an error in him, no less then
besieging Gloucester soon after, by the King was censured.

Such a continual and sad War had the Northern parts been forced to endure
all the winter. Nor was it their case alone; scarce any County of England was
free from it. The whole West, consisting of so many rich and flourishing
Shires, had been as sad a stage of civil Tragedies. Many Armies and small
Parties of either side (too many for one History to describe at large, or give
particular due to the actions of every Gentleman) had been engaged, without any
intermission in those parts.

Of all Commanders there, that sided with the King against the Parliament, Sir
RALPH HOPTON, by his unwearied industry, and great reputation among the people,
had raised himself to the most considerable height, and continued the longest
a Leader of Armies, as the sequel of the Story will hereafter declare: But his
successes, through the whole course of his Actions, were very various, and many
ebbs and flows were in his fortune.

The Marquess HARTFORD, though far higher in Dignity, and greater by power
of his large Commission from the King (of which before is spoken) was not able
to act so largely in the field as Sir RALPH did, though he were seldom idle,
but busy about Towns, and in small Parties. They were both opposed in their
beginnings, not so much by any Noblemen, or great Commanders employed by the
Parliaments Commissions, as by private Gentlemen of those Counties; the chief
of which were Sir FRANCIS POPHAM, and his Sons, Master STRODE a Deputy
Lieutenant there, with others before named, besides plain Freeholders of the
Country, who seemed to understand their own Liberties and interest, which they
had in the Commonwealth. Until at the last the Earl of Stamford, a stout
Gentleman, (who had been before employed about Leicester, against Master
HASTINGS, with a Commission from the Parliament, as General of Some Counties)
was sent into the West.

The Earl of Stamford was by the Parliament made Lord General of all
South Wales, and the four next adjacent Counties, as Gloucester, Worcester,
Hereford, and Cheshire; with power to raise Forces in all those Counties, to
appoint Officers and Commanders over them, to train and exercise the men, and
to fight with all that should oppose him. The Lord GRAY, Son and Heir to the
Earl of Stamford, was appointed to succeed his Father, in his former Charge,
and made Lord Lieutenant of five Counties, Leicester, Nottingham, Derby,
Rutland, and Lincoln, to continue the War against Master HASTINGS, the Earl
of Chesterfield, and others, who opposed the Parliament in those parts.

The Earl of Stamford, at his first coming into the West, was successful
against Sir RALPH HOPTON, whom he raised from the siege of Plymouth, but Sir
RALPH HOPTON not long after, by a stratagem of faining flight, entrapped many
of the Earls men, conducted by a Lieutenant of his, and gave an overthrow to
the Parliament Forces; betwixt whom, and the Earl of Stamford, upon the
fifteenth of March, 1642. a Truce was made for twenty days. The Earl, after
the expiration of that Truce, again taking the field, with a competent Army,
was a while prosperous against Sir RALPH HOPTON; but not long after overthrown
by the revolt of young CHUDLEY, Son to Sir JOHN CHUDLEY, by whose assistance
before, those Parliament Forces had been victorious. The Earl of Stamford was
then enforced to betake himself to the City of Excester, whither HOPTON and
CHUDLEY followed him, to lay siege to the place. But Prince MAURICE was soon
after sent thither to command in chief; to whom at last (as is before
expressed) it was upon fair Articles surrendered by the Earl of Stamford.

Notwithstanding so many misfortunes, as had then fallen upon the Parliament
side; about the end of May, 1643. they did not despair of regaining the whole
West, by the active valor of Sir WILLIAM WALLER, who about that time was very
prosperous in those Counties, and some parts of the Principality of Wales, and
whose name was grown to be a great terror to his Enemies. Of his actions, and
by what degrees he grew into esteem and strength, it will not be amiss to
relate in a continued Series, considering how great a General he became
afterward in these Wars, and in what low Command he began. He was a
Gentleman of fair experience in Military affairs by former travels, and
services abroad, of good judgment, and great industry, of which he gave many
testimonies to the Kingdom.

Sir WILLIAM WALLER, about the time of the Battle of Keynton, received a
Commission to be Colonel of Horse; and moving that winter following, as
occasions of the present War required, performed many exploits; he took in
Farnham Castle, and passed Southward, after that Portsmouth by his assistance
had been taken from Colonel GORING, and some other quick services at
Winchester, and in the Country thereabouts, which he had performed, joining
himself with Colonel BROWN, a Citizen of London (who took up Arms at the
beginning of this Civil War, and continued till the very end, in high
Commands, and reputation as high; of whose actions more must be delivered in
the sequel of this History.) Colonel HURREY, and some others, passing into
the Western part of Sussex, he laid siege to the City of Chichester; in that
City many Gentlemen of rank and quality had fortified themselves, and gathered
together much Arms and Ammunition for service of the King against the
Parliament.

About the middle of December appearing before Chichester, he was there met
with some Forces, Troops of Horse and Dragoniers, that came to his assistance
from Kent and Sussex, under the conduct of Colonel MORLEY, a Member of the
House of Commons, a Gentleman of good rank in Sussex, and great activity in
the Parliament Service, and Sir MICHAEL LE^VESEY, a Kentish Knight. The Battery
was placed by Sir WILLIAM at fit places, and all things ordered with great
skill; but before the battery began, to save effusion of blood, Sir WILLIAM, by
the consent of all his Officers, summoned the Town by a Trumpet, with such
Conditions offered, which were judged too high by the besieged, and therefore
at first not accepted of; yet after eight days it was rendered to him upon no
other Conditions then only Quarter and fair usage. The Prisoners which were
taken there of note, were immediately sent toward London to the Parliament, who
were Sir EDWARD FORD, high Sheriff of Sussex, Sir JOHN MORLEY, Colonel
SHELLEY, Master LEAUKNER, Colonel LINDSEY, Lieutenant Colonel PORTER, Major
DAWSON, and Major GORDON, with Doctor KING, then Bishop of Chichester, and many
other Officers and Commanders in Arms, to the number of 60. about 400.
Dragoniers, and almost as many Foot Soldiers. In the March following, his
employment was in the Western parts of England, where he raised Forces. The
next in command under him, who continued with him in almost all his actions,
was Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG, another Member of the House of Commons, serving as
Knight for Leicestershire, a man that in all Battles and Skirmishes gave great
proofs of his prowess and personal valor. Sir WILLIAM WALLER having now
raised a competent force, and marching out of Bristoll on the nineteenth of
March, within two days after approached Malmesbury. Colonel HERBERT LUNSFORD
a stout Gentleman, and a good Soldier, Brother to Sir THOMAS LUNSFORD, that
was taken at Keynton Battle, was then Governor of Malmesbury; who upon the
first approach sent out seven Troops of Horse, to begin an encounter with him;
but they were no ways able to endure the force of those Horse which Sir
WILLIAM had drawn out against them, but fled immediately, some of them back
into the Town; many of them conceiving that there was small safety in the
Town for them, fled quite away.

Sir WILLIAM assaulted the Town the same day, but not prevailing then, he
lodged there all night, preparing the next morning for another, and more fierce
assault. But the besieged conceiving the place unteneble, desired a Parley, and
yielded upon Quarter. He took at Malmesbury one Piece of Ordnance, about three
hundred Prisoners, whereof Colonel LUNSFORD, and Colonel COOK were the
chief, with almost twenty Officers great and small; good store of rich prize
and Ammunition; the Conquest was bloodlesse, and very few slain on either side.

Within few days after he obtained a very considerable Victory near to
Gloucester, against the Lord HERBERT of Ragland, Son to the Earl of
Worcester, who with a great Army of Welchmen lay against that Town; which, for
the manner of it, in brief was thus: Sir WILLIAM with his Forces, coming
near to Cirencester, made show (the better to conceal his purpose) as if he
intended to fall upon that Town; but his design was for Gloucester, and had
taken such provident care, that the men in Gloucester had notice of his
purpose; and that with the help of his flat-bottomed Barges, which thence were
brought to him in the nature of Wagons (useful both by land and water) he
would transport his Forces over the River Severne, beyond Gloucester, and fall
upon the Rear of the Lord HERBERTS Welsh Forces, when he was least feared or
expected; withal, he gave notice to the Gloucester Forces to fall upon the
Front of that Army, as he would upon their Rear. The Plot, as it was wisely
contrived, was successful in the event, and took so good effect for him,
that when the Lord HERBERT was in skirmish with the Forces of Gloucester, and
confident to cut them all off, being very few in comparison of his own; Sir
WILLIAM with his Army, near High^am their Quarter, fell suddenly upon the
Rear of the Lord HERBERTS men, with such fury, that they were all routed, and
would gladly have fled, if they had known any way to escape. There were slame
of that Welsh Army about 500. upon the place, near a thousand taken Prisoners,
with all their Arms and Ammunition, the rest wholly dispersed and scattered,
the Lord HERBERT himself escaped by flight, and got to Oxford.

Sir WILLIAM WALLER, after this great Victory, marched from thence to
Tewkesbury; at whose approach, those of the Kings Soldiers, that were
Garrisoned there, fled away, and left it to him; from whence marching further
into the Country, he surprised diverse straggling Troopers of the other side,
with some Arms, Pistols, and Carbines, together with sixteen thousand pound
in Money, and carried away his booty to Gloucester.

Within as short a distance of time, he took Chepstow in Monmouthshire, and
seized upon diverse of those that were Conspirators for the betraying of
Bristoll (of which Treason I have spoken before) and who, upon the discovery of
it, had fled from thence. At that place he took a Ship called the Dragon of
Bristoll, and great store of wealth in her, belonging to those who were his
Enemies; which he seized, as a just booty, and much to his advantage.

From Chepstow he marched with a swift pace to Monmouth; the Town upon
composition was soon rendered to him; from whence, after he had put a Garrison
into it, he marched to Vske, and summoned the Country; where diverse Forces came
in to him; among others Sir WILLIAM MORGAN his Son, of Tredegan, brought him
five hundred armed men, and some Money; where also Master HERBERT of Colebrooke
raised a thousand men, and seized on Abergaine for the Parliament.

Sir WILLIAM WALLER in this high carriere of his fortune, was commanded back
from the West by the Lord General Essex, to come to the chief Army: Which
being soon understood among those of the Kings Army, he was way-layed by
Prince MAURICE. The intention of Sir WILLIAM WALLER was to get to Gloucester
with his Forces; having therefore sent away his Ordnance and Baggage, with his
Foot to guard it over Wye to Aust; himself with his Horse and Dragoones,
resolved to fall upon Prince MAURICE his Army, and force a passage through,
which he did with great success, and small loss; and as he marched afterward,
cut down all the Bridges behind him; whereby he hindered Prince MAURICE from
marchimg after him. This course if the Prince had taken before him, Sir WILLIAM
WALLER might have been kept in Wales to his great disadvantage. But by that
means of cutting down the Bridges, Prince MAURICE his pursuit being hindered,
Sir WILLIAM WALLER, by assistance of the Governor MASSEY, regained many Towns
possessed by the Kings Forces, especially Tewkesbury, Sir MATTHEW CAREW being
fled from thence. But there he took many Prisoners, much Arms and Riches; he
placed a Garrison there; and from thence, according to his first design,
arrived safe at the City of Gloucester.

Sir WILLIAM WALLER continued not long at Gloucester, but (being now dispensed
with for returning to the Lord General) according to his usual celerity, he
flew to Hereford, before any fear or expectation of his coming. He took that
Town upon Quarter, and in it many Prisoners of great rank and quality, among
whom was the Lord SCUDMORE, with five revolted Members of the House of Commons,
viz. The Lord SCUDMORES Son, Colonel HERBERT PRICE, Sir RICHARD CAVE,
Lieutenant Colonel CONISBY, Master CONISBY, and besides them, Sir WALTER PIE,
Sir WILLIAM CROFTS, Lieutenant Colonel THOMAS PRICE, Sergeant Major MINTRIDGE,
Sir SAMUEL AMBY, Sergeant Major DALTON, Captain SOMERSET, Captain SCLATER,
Doctor ROGERS, Doctor GOODWIN, Doctor EVANS, and diverse others; who were all
carried away to Gloucester.

Within three days after that service, he surprised the Town of Leinster in
that County, twelve miles distant from Hereford, where he took good prize,
disarmed many of the Kings Party there, and placed a Garrison in the Town.

It was feared at that time by those of the Kings side, that Sir WILLIAM
WALLER, going on in so prosperous a way, might perchance surprise Worcester and
Ludlow: To prevent therefore his further proceedings, Prince MAURICE, with a
good strength of Horse, was sent from Oxford, with whom also the Marquess of
Hartford was joined, to fall upon him. But Sir WILLIAM scowring the Countries
thereabouts with his active Forces, and having disarmed many of the other side
in Wilts and Somersetshire, came to Bath with an Army much increased of late
both in number and reputation; at which place Sir EDWARD HUNGERFORD, Sir JOHN
HORNER, and Master STRODE, joined with him to oppose Prince MAURICE and the
Marquess Hartford. About that part of the Country were frequent and fierce
encounters, which lasted for a long time, and many retreats with great skill
and courage were made on both sides, when night parted the fury of their
sights. But Sir WILLIAM WALLER proved for the most part victorious (whose
particular actions there deserve a more peculiar relation) and at last became
Master of the field, chasing his Enemies so far as a Town called the
Devizes, to which place he followed and besieged them. The losses in all those
several encounters were very uncertain, and variously reported, by reason
that both Parties had many times liberty to bury their dead; but on the
Parliament side were lost one Major, one Lieutenant, and two Cornets. Sir
ARTHUR HASLERIG was there wounded, but the danger was not very great. On the
other side, besides the uncertain number of Common Soldiers, some of quality
were slain, among whom was Sir BEVILE GREENVILE, Lieutenant Colonel WARD,
Major LOWRE, with five or six Captains, Sir RALPH HOPTON, the Earl of
Carnarvan, and the Lord MOHUN were reported to be wounded.

Sir RALPH HOPTON was besieged in the Devizes by Sir WILLIAM WALLER, and began
to treat about the surrender of it; for Prince MAURICE and the Marquess of
Hartford were retired toward Oxford, where suddenly the fortune of war
changed, and Sir WILLIAM WALLERS Army, by an unexpected party of fresh Forces,
which came from Oxford (for the Lord General ESSEX his Army was so much wasted
by sickness, and other distresses, that he could not at all straiten Oxford,
nor hinder any Forces from issuing thence) under the conduct of the Lord
VVILMOT, was utterly defeated, scattered, and ruined, as was before mentioned.
He himself for security at the present, retired into the City of Bristoll,
from whence within few days he rode, accompanied with some Gentlemen toward
London, and was there received with great affection, and many promises of their
best endeavor to set him forth with another Army.

The Kings Forces seemed now to have done the greatest part of their work,
being in a manner sole Masters of the West, and most Northern Counties of
England, and having ruined the Lord FAIRFAX and Sir WILLIAM WALLERS Armies. Yet
in all Counties the fortune was not alike; in many places those Gentlemen which
adhered to the Parliament, were able not only to guard themselves, but get
ground upon their enemies, though those actions were for the most part
performed in skirmishes between small parties, in preserving their own
strengths, or taking Towns from the other side, such as had been in Cheshire,
Lancashire, Staffordshire, Derby, Leicester, Notingham, and other places, which
I shall briefly touch anon, after I have related in how contrary a condition to
the North and West, which had been the seat of a fierce war, and a prey to
the greatest and most potent Armies of either side; and how much happier then
those other Counties, which had been always molested with Alarms and
Skirmishes, and suffered by pillaging on both Parties; the Eastern Counties of
England had remained all the foregoing VVinter, and continued so during the
whole progress of this bloody War, which were the Counties of Suffolk,
Norfolk, Cambridge, Essex, Hartford, Huntingdon. etc. who never were made the
seat of any part of this civil War. These parts of the Kingdom had joined
themselves in an Association by Authority of Parliament, with power to defened
each other, and leavy Forces against all enemies to that cause; this great
happiness of peace and quiet that they enjoyed, may be supposed to flow from
the unanimity of their affections, which carried them all the same way; and
true it is, that there was as much unanimity of opinion and affection in those
Counties among the people in general, as was to be found in any part of
England, but it was especially among the common people; for a great and
considerable number of the Gentry, and those of highest rank among them, were
disaffected to the Parliament, and were not sparing in their utmost endeavors
to promote the Kings Cause, and assist his Force against it; which might have
thrown those Countries (if not wholly carried them to the other side) into as
much distraction, and sad calamity, as any other part of the Land had felt; nor
could that Association have been possibly made, if those Gentlemen had not been
curbed and suppressed by that timely care which the Parliament took, and more
particularly by the successful services of one Gentleman, Master OLIVER
CROMWELL of Huntington, a Member of the House of Commons; whose wisdom, valor,
and vigilance, was no less availeable in this important business, then
remarkable afterward in the highest services, and greatest battles, of the
whole War. Of this man's Actions (because it pleased God to raise him
afterward into the greatest commands, and prosper in so high a measure all his
undertakings, that he became within few years one of the chief props, on
which the Parliament leaned, and greatest scourges of the other sid) let it not
seem amiss if I discourse in a continued Ser^es, during those Months that
intervened the Battle of Keynton; and that low ebb of the Parliament which
preceded the siege of Gloucester.

The first Action that CROMWELL undertook, was to secure the Town of
Cambridge for the Parliament, about the middle of January. Universities were of
all places most apt to adhere to the Kings party, esteeming Parliaments, and
especially this, the greatest depressors of that Ecclesiastical Dignity, in
hope of which they are there nurtured.

Upon which reason they were packing up a large quantity of the Plate that
belonged to all the Coledges, to send it away to the King, which would have
made a considerable sum. This was foreseen by CROMWELL; who by a Commission
from the Parliament, and Lord General Essex had raised a Troop of Horse, and
came down into that Country, with authority to raise more Forces as occasion
served; he came to Cambridge soon enough to seize upon that plate, which was
going to Oxford; but before his arrival there, he performed by the way another
service: Sir THOMAS CONESBY, lately made High Sheriff of Hartfordshire, had
received a Proclamation from the King, to proclaim the Earl of Essex, and all
his adherents Traitors; and was then at St. Albons upon a Market day,
proclaiming of the same; CROMWELL with his Troop seized upon him, and sent him
up to the Parliament.

Not long after he collected in convenient time the Forces of that County, and
invited the neighbor Counties of Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, to their
assistance, against an invasion of the Lord CAPELL, who should have been
seconded by Prince RUPERT also, to invade that place, and hinder the
Association; which had been done, if that timely prevention had not been used.
This made them forbear their intended invasion, and retire to other parts.

About the beginning of March CROMWELL having raised a Regiment of Horse,
consisting of 1000. marched into Suffolk with much celerity, upon intelligence
of a great and considerable confederacy held among those Gentlemen which
adhered to the Kings Party, at a Town in that County called Lowerstost, a
place of great consequence: He surprised them unawares, gained the Town with
small difficulty, and no shot at all. In which he took Prisoners Sir THOMAS
BARKER, and his Brother Sir JOHN PETTUS, Master THOMAS KNEVET, two of the
CATLINES, Captain HAMMOND, Master COREY, Master TURRILL, Master PRESTON, and
about 20. others of quality and substance. In that Town he gained good store
of Ammunition, Saddles, Pistols, Powder, Shot, and several Engines for War,
enough to have served a considerable Force. And certain it was, that if
CROMWELL had not surprised them in that nick of time, it had proved a matter of
great danger to the County; for within one day after, as many more Knights and
Gentlemen, that were listed before, had met at the same place. This was a
timely service to the Parliament, and a great discouragement to all that Party
in Suffolk and Norfolk, which adhered to the Kings side.

But when the Spring grew fur^her on, and it was seasonable to make longer
Marches, about the beginning of April, CROMWELL having well settled the
businesses of those Associated Counties, for the Parliaments use, and not
confining his care and services within those parts only, raised a greater
Force, of such as came freely and heartily in to him; with whom he marched
along toward Lincolneshire, with purpose to assist those of his side, that
warred against Newarke. Newarke was one of the strongest Garrisons, which was
then held of the Kings side, replenished with many Gentlemen of Lincolneshire,
and other Shires, and some expert Soldiers, who enforced large Contributions
from the adjacent Country, and made rodes often times even to the Walls of
Lincoln. Colonel CROMWELL in his March thither, as he passed through the
County of Humingdon, disarmed many that were ill affected to the Parliament,
and increased by that means his strength so far, that he was grown above
two thousand strong; and before he came to Newarke, receiving an addition of
Horse from Captain HOTHAM, he also joined with some Forces of Lincolneshire.
At his first approach near to Newarke, it was his fortune to perform a good
service for his side; for when Captain WRAY with his Lincolneshire Horse, had
too rashly quartered within a little of that Town, he was set upon in the night
time by a strong Party from the Town; where after some little bickering, nor
being able to resist so great a number, he was surprised with his whole Troop;
but the Alarm coming to CROMWELL, he advanced, and at ten a clock at night
fell upon the Newarkers, rescued Captain WRAYS Troop, and took three Troops
of theirs, with the slaughter of many of them.

After this, when he sat down before the Town, he was so vigilant upon all
Sallyes that were made out, and so successful, that he took many men and
Colors at several times; and with his Horse, watching all occasions, he once
defeated a strong Party of the Newarkers, near to Grantham, where the odds of
number was so great on their side, that it seemed almost a miraculous Victory.
At another time he fell upon a Party of the Earl of Newcastles Army sent
toward Newarke, and quartering between that Town and Grantham, of whom he
slew many, took an hundred Horse, and forty Prisoners.

Such things as these were the beginnings of CROMWELL, at his first entrance
into the Soldiery; those that must be called his deeds; were in the following
years of this unhappy War, and will require a larger and more full
expression.

In those other Counties which were named before this Discourse of the
Association, the fortune of War, during the aforesaid Months, had been very
various, and daily contestations happened, being for the most part betwixt
small Parties, and in besieging, taking, and re-taking of Towns and Forts. In
Cheshire Sir WILLIAM BRERETON, a wise and vigilant man, who from the beginning
of these troubles had taken charge of that County, serving in Parliament as
Knight thereof, had so well acted his part against the Earl of Darby (made by
the King Lord Lieutenant of that County, as well as of Lancashire) that he was
the chief instrument of delivering Cheshire out of his hands, and preserving
it for the Parliament, though the greater part of Gentry there adhered to the
King: But it pleased God to give many Victories to Sir WILLIAM BRERETON against
them.

He obtained about the beginning of March, a great Victory against those of the
Kings Party at Middlewich in Cheshire; which Town, after a sharp encounter in
the fields before it, he finally took, with 500. Prisoners, whereof many were
Commanders and Gentlemen of great worth; which Victory did much advance the
Parliaments Cause in those parts.

He resisted with great success the Lord CHOLMELY, and Sir THOMAS ASTON, two
powerful men, and zealous for the Kings Party.

Having settled in some measure, by extraordinary care and wisdom, his own
County for the Parliament, and raised many stout and well armed men there, he
was forward to give assistance to other parts; and advancing into Shropshire
against the Lord CAPELL, he surprised a Town called Dreyton, in which Sir
VINCENT CORBET, a Commander of the Kings side, was quartered: But Sir WILLIAM
BRERETON with small opposition entered the Town, and took two complete Troops
of Horse, and six Companies of Dragoneers. Sir VINCENT CORBET escaped by flight.

He marched thence along through those Counties, and took some places of great
import, as the affairs of both Parties stood at that time.

Sir WILLIAM went on prosperously, and within a short time after took
Whitchurch, upon the edge of Shropshire, with great store of Arms and
Ammunition, and many Prisoners of the Lord CAPELS Forces.

But Sir WILLIAM BRERETON, when he joined Forces with other men, or came in
opportunely to the relief or rescue of engaged friends, performed diverse great
and advantageous services to the side he took, especially when he joined in
Action with Sir JOHN GELL of Derbyshire, a constant and successful Actor for
the Parliament; of whom by himself, and together with Sir WILLIAM BRERETON, I
shall make a further mention.

The County of Derby, full of Nobility and Gentry, was much swayed, even from
the beginning of these distractions, against the Parliament; for scarce did any
Gentleman in all that County, but Sir JOHN GELL, appear for it at the first.
He, with his brother, and some of his kindred, by the help of those Freeholders
and Yeomen that inclined that way, made a Party to resist those great ones, at
such a time, as must needs renown his courage and constancy. And it pleased
God to make him prosperous in that great and hazardous undertakings, and to
carry it so during the whole War.

After the Battle at Keynton, he took a Commission from the Earl of Essex,
with great care and cost he provided Arms, and timely seized upon the Town of
Derby; which Town he so well fortified, that it proved a sufficient defense
against the assaults of potent Enemies, and a refuge upon all occasions to the
Parliaments friends; it was likewise, no doubt, a great encouragement to many
of the neighboring Counties, to stand upon their guard in the like kind.

But the Walls of Derby could not immure Sir JOHN GELL, nor hinder him from
acting his part abroad. In many Services he joined himself (not without good
success) with Sir WILLIAM BRERETON, with Colonel CROMWELL, and marched
sometimes with the Lord GRAY of Grooby (before mentioned, Lord Lieutenant of
those Counties) against Master HASTINGS, and against the Town of Newarke.

In the Month of February he marched with those Forces which he had, under the
conduct of the Lord BROOK, into Staffordshire, to take in Lichfield, which was
then possessed by a Garrison of the Kings side. Having entered the Town, they
found hot and sharp resistance, from a place of great strength, called the
Close, or Cathedral yard, a place famous in the succeeding War, as being
often gained and re-gained, with the loss of much blood on either side.

CHAP. V.
The death of the Lord BROOK, and of the Earl of Northampton. A short mention
of some Actions in diverse Counties. The low condition of the Parliament at that
time. The siege of Gloucester.
WHile the Parliament Army continued at the siege of Lichfield Close, their
General the Lord BROOK, as he looked out of a window, was unfortunately shot
into the head, and dyed immediately; a man as much lamented by the Parliament,
as any that ever fell on that side, and as much honored for his Piety, Valor,
and Fidelity.

After his death, Sir JOHN GELL succeeded in that Command, and about the
beginning of March took the Close, with very little loss of blood, though they
had their Mines ready prepared to blow up the Walls of the Close, and had
thrown Grenades into it; which made the besieged cry out for Quarter, which
they obtained; for the Soldiers thought it not honorable (being in cold
blood) to revenge their Generals death, by putting them to the Sword. But they
took a good and rich booty of Money, Bag, and Baggage, about a thousand
Arms, and very considerable Prisoners, the Earl of Chesterfield, with his
Son, and diverse other Gentlemen of Rank.

About the middle of that March, Sir JOHN GELL with an Army of fifteen hundred
Horse and Foot, advanced from Lichfield toward the Town of Stafford; where it
was his fortune to meet with the Earl of Northampton and his Forces,
consisting of about twelve hundred Horse, at a place called Cranock-Greene, or
Salt-Heath, almost four miles from Stafford: The Earl gave a brave and
furious Charge upon them, and being stronger in Horse, made Sir JOHN GELLS
Horse to retreat and disorder at this first Charge; in which he took diverse of
them Prisoners, and surprised two Drakes. After that, he wheeled twice about
their Foot, seeking his best advantage where to break them: But Sir JOHN GELL,
and his Commanders, did so well order their Battalia, that the Foot kept
unbroken, and made good the field again together with their Horse, and
re-saluted their hot Assailants, fighting Pell mell for a long time.

At this fierce encounter the Earl of Northampton himself was slain in the
place, one Master LUCY and Captain BAGOT, with many more, about whose number
relations did not agree; a Cornet of the Kings also was here slain, and his
Colors taken, having on it a Crown, and this Inscription, Carolus Rex. Two
other Cornets were there taken, of which one was the Princes, for the King, and
Prince his Troops were both there. They took Prisoner one of the Earl of
Chesterfields younger Sons; and Sir JOHN GELL, by the timely coming in of Sir
WILLIAM BRERETON to his assistance, before the sight was ended, obtained a
great Victory, and drove his Enemies quite out of the field. Among the rest,
Master HASTINGS (as was then reported) having been once taken Prisoner, and
rescued, fled away wounded.

Thus it fell out, that these two Peers, the Earl of Northampton, and the
Lord BROOK, who first of all the Nobility, at the breaking out of this Civil
Distraction, had personally contested in one County, about the Parliament
Ordinance of Militia, and the Kings Commision of Array, within a small distance
both of place and time, ended their days by this unhappy War. They were both
much lamented by their own Parties, both men of worth and courage, though much
different in the manner of their lives and conversations.

As Cheshire, though a County where many Papists inhabited, was by the
successful care of Sir WILLIAM BRERETON and other Gentlemen, kept from
deserting the Parliament, and able to resist the Earl of Darby, the Kings
Lieutenant there: So her sister Lancashire, more full of Papists, and more
fiercely assaulted by that Earl, under the same authority, being the place of
his chief residence and power, was able not only to resist him, but finally
beat him out of the Country by the courage and industry of diverse Protestant
Gentlemen of that Shire; of whom I have named many in the precedent Book. But
it is fit to give a little touch of the chief actions.

The Parliament, in midst of winter, when that County was in the greatest
distraction, had sent down Sir JOHN SEATON, a Scottish Knight, an experienced
and stout Commander, as Major General of the Forces in that Shire, that he
might direct the unskilful valor of that people, though many of those
Gentlemen had done great services before, as appeared at Manchester, and some
other places.

One of his exploits was at Preston: Sir JOHN SEATON having settled himself at
Manchester, marched from thence about the beginning of February toward Preston,
with Major General SPARROW, Colonel HOLLAND, Captain BOOTH, Sergeant Major
BIRCH, Master NOWELL of Mearkley, and some other, with about ten Companies, and
almost two thousand Clubmen, to take in Preston, a Town well fortified, and
very stoutly defended; but it was so furiously assaulted (Captain BOOTH in
person first sealing the Walls) by the Parliament Forces, that after two hours
of extreme hot fight, the Parliament Forces were Masters of it: The Town was
taken with small loss of the assailant side, which was wonderful; not one
Officer, and not above seven or eight Common Soldiers. On the other side many
fell, the Mayor of the Town, ADAM MORTE, with his Son, Sir GILBERT HOUGHTONS
Brother, a Captain of Horse, with diverse others of quality; Sir GILBERT
himself fled to WIGHAM. They took two hundred Prisoners, whereof many were
Gentlemen of good rank in the Country. They took three Pieces of Ordnance,
many Muskets, and other Arms, with two or three Colors. The taking of this
Town was of great consequence, both toward the maintenance of the Parliament
Forces, and also to stop the passage from Newcastle to Chester and Shrewsbury.

Shortly after Sergeant Major BIRCH was sent from Preston to Lancaster Town;
who without any great opposition (for he came suddenly and unexpected) soon
entered the Town with his whole Company; and being entered, the Townsmen
assisted him very freely to win the Castle there; which he took into his
possession for the Parliament.

Wiggon also in Lancashire, was taken in, with great store of Arms and
Prisoners, by Sir JOHN SEATON, with those Gentlemen that followed him, together
with the Townsmen of Manchester, and other Clubmen of the Country, whom they
had gotten together.

The Earl of Darby desisted not from his endeavors to reduce that County; but
marched with a considerable strength to take in Whaley, which he had almost
accomplished, but was notwithstanding repelled from thence by the Forces of the
Country.

The same Earl had likewise possessed himself of Warrington, a considerable
Town in Lancashire; and left a Garrison in it; but at the beginning of June,
that Town was regained by the Forces of Manchester, with eight Pieces of
Ordnance, and five or six hundred Prisoners; by which all Lancashire seemed to
be reduced to the obedience of the Parliament, scarce any place of considerable
strength being left in the power of the Early of Darby.

The Lord GRAY of Grooby, had been long possessed of Leicester, as the chief
quarter where he resided; and besides his actions at other parts about that
place, with various fortunes had opposed the Forces of Master HASTINGS, who
kept a Garrison at Ashby de la zouch, and acted with great fervor and
constancy for the Kings Cause.

Hampshire had been much distressed by both Parties; but the Kings Garrison of
Winchester, and that of Basing-House, the dwelling place of Marquess
Winchester, were there predominant, and at their pleasure forced Contribution
from the adjacent Country; Wales was almost wholly at the Kings dispose, except
very few places, which with much difficulty preserved themselves for the
Parliament; and some Gentlemen, who with much hazard continued their fidelity
to that side, such as Colonel GLYNN, Colonel MITTEN, and LAUGHERNE, with
other private Gentlemen. But indeed the Parliament was then in a low ebb; and
before the end of that July, 1643. they had no Forces at all to keep the Field;
their maine Armies (as is before touched) being quite ruined, and no hope in
appearance left, but to preserve a while those Forts and Towns which they then
possessed; nor could they long hope to preserve them, unless the fortune of
the field should change.

Thus seemed the Parliament to be quite sunk beyond any hope of recovery, and
was so believed by many men. The King was possessed of all the Western
Countries, from the farthest part of Cornwall, and from thence Northward as
far as the Borders of Scotland. His Armies were full and flourishing, free to
march whither they pleased, and enough to be divided for several exploits; one
part was sent to take in Exe^er, where the Earl of Stamford was shut up, not
able long to hold the place. The King in Person with a gallant Army, designed
his March toward Gloucester, the only considerable Town in those parts,
which the Parliament held. What the Kings Party conceived then of the other
side, was expressed in many Writings, one in the nature of a jeering Epigram,
was made at Oxford, which I thought fit to insert, because of the particular
expressions of the Parliaments low Condition: The thing is written in an odd
manner, and the names of the Parliament Commanders, FAIRFAX and WALLER,
expressed by a rebus way of Latin, as likewise those of the Kings side,
Marquess of Hartford, and Earl of Newcastle. I leave it to the Reader without
either Translation or Comment.

EXtincta Castro Fax pulchra novo est;
Nec Nautae postea nec militi
Sit nota Pharos, Auster disparem
Hand tulit casum: Murus, cui addita est
Canina littera, mersa est suis
Cum turmis nuper Leporis vado.
Euri (...) Bristonia
Leporinos horrescens vortices.
Anglica Claudii timet pares
Vrbs casus; Herois Teutonici
Myrmidones astant magno cum Duce.
Pacata Thule est; nec Noto timor
Popello aut Regi. Nihil relictum est
Britanicum domare Caesarem
Ni (...) preces Gregis.
Haec Sphinges raptim Oedipo suo.
Iulii 20. 1643.
London was then altogether unfortified, no Works were raised; nor could they,
if their Enemies, then Masters of the field, had come upon them, have opposed
any Walls, but such as old SPARTA used for their Guard, the hearts of
courageous Citizens. But at that time London began her large intrenchment;
which encompassed not only the City, but the whole Suburbs on every side,
containing about twelve miles in circuit. That great work was by many hands
completed in a short time, it being then a custom every day to go out by
thousands to dig, all Professions, Trades, and Occupations, taking their
turns; and not only inferior Tradesmen, but Gentlemen of the best quality,
Knights, and Ladies themselves, for the encouragement of others, resorted daily
to the Works, not as spectators but assistors in it; carrying themselves
Spades, Mattoks, and other instruments of digging, so that it became a pleasing
sight at London, to see them going out in such order and numbers, with Drums
beating before them; and put life into the drooping people (being taken for an
happy Omen) that in so low a condition they seemed not to despair. But
bootlesse in probability had that labor proved, and not timely enough to save
London, if the King had marched thither instead of Gloucester.

But that storm of Fortune was strong enough to shake off diverse of the loose
leaves, that seemed to grow on the Parliament side, and unsettle the
resolutions of such, as were not enough rooted in that Cause which they had
chosen: For diverse men of great quality, and Members of both Houses, some
Lords, and many of the Commons, did at that time desert the Parliament, and fly
to Oxford: Whose names (though the Lords were named, who first deserted it) are
here spared, because this-latter revolt must needs carry the face of a crime;
as being no matter of opinion or conscience, by which the first justified
themselves; but proceeding, in all probability, from weakness, and fear for
their private fortunes. They therefore lost much of their esteem on both
sides; becoming like a foil to set off the constancy of those few Members who
durst yet continue there, and remain firm to their first Principle (...)
public Interest; wading through more difficulty and dangers, then any former
Parliament had been enforced to do.

But in the Parliament it self there appeared no show of despair, as they
observed who were then witnesses of their proceedings; and the City of London
expressed much forwardness and alacrity in recruiting the Lord General Essex
both with their persons and purses; besides their great endeavor to raise
another Army for Sir WILLIAM WALLER, to be as a Reserve to the other, upon the
great occasion then in hand.

The Earl of Manchester, to his lasting Honor, chose that very time to begin
his Martial employment; and raising Forces through the Eastern Associated
Counties (of which he was then made General by the Parliament, those Counties
having been before prepared for that Association, by the wisdom and activity of
the forementioned Colonel CROMWELL) performed that year and the next great
services for the Parliament.

While the Parliament and City of London were thus busied in recruiting their
decayed Armies, Gloucester began to be made the chief Seen, on which this
Civil Tragedy was acted, and place of great concernment in the Kingdom, where
the first turn of Fortune grew. The City of Gloucester was then governed by
Colonel EDWARD MASSEY, a man of excellent skill to defend it; of such a
courage, as no threats of a powerful Enemy could shake; and such a fidelity,
as no promises of a King could overcome. This MASSEY was brought to Gloucester
by the Earl of Stamford, under whom he had served as Lieutenant Colonel, and
by deputation from that Earl, had for many Months governed that City.

Now there was no more expectation of the Earls return thither; and therefore
MASSEY, as the fittest man, by consent both of Citizens and Soldiers, was
appointed Governor, and made a Colonel by Commission from the General.

The surrender of Bristoll to the Kings Forces (which was more sudden then
could be feared, and for which afterward the Governor Master FIENNES was
questioned, and condemned by a Council of War) must needs strike a great
terror, and sad amazement into Gloucester, which now seemed to stand forlorn,
and without hope of any rescue, in the midst of a large Country, possessed by
their victorious Enemies.

It cannot be denied, that the resolution which this City had taken up, of
resisting the King at such a time, was very admirable, if a man consider the
small strength they had within; the many discouragements round about them; the
great distance of any aid that could be sent to them. Their strength within was
very small; the whole number of Soldiers, Horse, Foot, and Dragoones, together
with the Trained Bands, and those Horse and Dragoones, which on a sudden they
got from Barclay Castle, consisting of few more then fifteen hundred; forty
Barrels of Powder was all their store, with a very mean and slender Artillery
for such a Service: The Works were of a vast compass, and little more then
half perfected, when this rough storm did first threaten them.

The whole Country round about them, instead of encouraging this resolution of
theirs, did rather endeavor to shake and weaken it, by intimations of the
danger, and persuasions to make Peace with such an Enemy: For they had revolted
from the Parliament, or resolved so to do; and wished, for their own private
Interests, that the King were quietly possessed of that City; for they
conceived (not without reason) that the standing out of Gloucester would be
unhappy for that Country; because by the falling down of a great Army, they
could not but expect a destruction of their Corn, Cattle, and all other
Provisions; and at the last, if it should so fall out, that the King should
fail of taking in that Town, they must be enforced to stoop perpetually
under two burdens, and be cast into a sadd condition of povety and misery.
Whereas if that Army did prevail, they were sure to rest in the heart of the
Kings Country, far from spoil and plunder, and for an easy Contribution,
enjoy free and ample Trade.

The succor which the City could expect, was as far off as London, and in
what condition the Parliament Armies then were, is before related.
Notwithstanding all this, the Citizens of Gloucester, together with examining
what strength they had, examined also the grounds of their perseverance. A
Common Council was held, where the Officers of the Soldiery were present;
their late Protestation was called to remembrance, and read there; by which
they were all obliged, never to act or comply with the adverse Faction. Upon
which consideration they heightened their courages, and unanimously resolved to
refuse the tender of peace. Privare cares were then forgotten, and not only
men, but women and children, acted their parts, in making up those defects that
were in the Fortifications.

In this condition stood Gloucester, when the King in Person attended with a
great and gallant Army, full of the flower of English Nobility and Gentry, was
come to besiege it, being the tenth of August, 1643.

Part of the Kings Forces, some days before, had been discerned hovering on
the top of the hills; and a Summons had been sent from Prince RUPERT to the
City: To which the Major gave answer, That he kept the Town for His Majesty's
behoof, and could not render it. Which Answer, though laughed at by those of
the Army, the Major conceived very justifiable, and that he did truly hold it
for the use of His Majesty, but according to the sense of both Houses of
Parliament.

The King was full of indignation, that such a forlorn City should stand out
against him; yet he desired to gain it without blood, and loss of time, which
seemed then precious in his full carriere of Victory. To that purpose he came
in Person before it, that the reverence or terror of his presence might
prevail with them; and being come before the City, he gave this honorable
Summons by two Heralds of Arms.

CHARLES REX.

OVt of our tender compassion to our City of Gloucester, and that it may not
receive prejudice by our Army, which we cannot prevent, if we be compelled to
assault it: We are Personally come before it, to require the same, and are
graciously pleased to let all the Inhabitants of, and all other persons within
that City, as well Soldiers as others, know, That if they shall immediately
submit themselves, and deliver this City to us, we are contented freely and
absolutely to pardon every one of them without exception; and do assure them in
the word of a King, That they nor any of them, shall receive the least damage
or prejudice by our Army, in their Persons or Estates: But that we will appoint
such a Governor, and a moderate Garrison to reside there, as shall be both for
the ease and security of that City, and the whole Country. But if they shall
neglect this offer of Grace and Favor, and compel us by the power of our Army
to reduce that place (which by the help of God we shall easily and shortly be
able to do) they must thank themselves for all the calamities and miseries
which shall befall them. To this Message we expect a clear and positive
Answer, within two hours after the publishing hereof; and by these Presents do
give leave to any persons safely to repair to, and return from us, whom that
City shall desire to employ unto us in that business. And we do require all
the Officers and Soldiers of our Army, quietly to suffer them to pass
accordingly.

After some debate upon this Message, an Answer was drawn and consented unto,
both by the Citizens and the Soldiers; which was presented to the King by
Sergeant Major PUDSEY, and a Citizen; as follows:

WE the Inhabitants, Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers within this Garrison
of Gloucester, unto his Majesty's Gracious Message return this humble Answer,
That we do keep this City, according to our Oath and Allegiance, to and for
the use of his Majesty, and his Royal Posterity; and do accordingly conceive
our selves wholly bound to obey the Commands of His Majesty signified by both
Houses of Parliament; and are resolved, by Gods help, to keep this City
accordingly.

The King received this Answer to his Summons, without any expression of
choler or indignation, seeming only to wonder at their great confidence, and
from what hope of relief it should proceed, using these words before the
Messengers, WALLER is extinct, and ESSEX cannot come. But by this time the
Kings Army was drawn into the fields about Gloucester, Prince RUPERT and
General RIVEN facing it on one side with about six thousand Horse and Foot,
and two thousand Horse on the other; and immediately after this Answer,
advanced forward into the Suburbs, on the East side of the City; but were there
entertained with an hot Skirmish, and fired out. For upon the return of the
Messengers, the Suburbs were set on fire, and flaming round about, became an
object of great terror; by which the Citizens seemed more engaged to pursue
their resolution; and the Kings Army to settle themselves for gaining by force
what they perceived would not be yielded on other terms.

That very night the Kings Army began their Intrenchments within Musket shot of
the Walls, on two sides of the City, taking advantage for their security, of
the shadow and shelter of some few Houses which the flames had not catched.
Which being perceived, the Musketeers plied them from the Walls, but could do
little hurt so against the Pyoneers; which caused the besieged to make several
Sallyes by small Parties into those Trenches, and at some places beat them out,
gaining both Arms and Prisoners, and retreating safe.

Sir WILLIAM VAVASOR had advanced with his Welsh Forces on the West side, and
made near approach that way, intending to join with other Forces that came
from Worcester, and had drawn themselves together on the North-West side. On
the South side General RIVEN placed his Leaguer, taking advantage of a rising
ground in the midst, to shelter himself from the shot of the besieged. Sir
JACOB ASHLEY, who in the first Skirmishes had received a wound, was quartered
with a strong Brigado at the East side of the City.

Thus was Gloucester on all sides blocked up, and nothing expected but a most
furious and bloody business. The Kings Commanders, being many of them
Gentlemen of great skill, and experience of Conduct, had made their approaches
(by the confession of all) with as much advantage as could be; and placed their
Batteries accordingly; the Soldiers on that side had showed themselves very
swift and indefatigable in their Intrenchments, and as bold in all attempts
which they made upon the Town. Nor were the besieged behind hand in courage,
patience, and activity; as appeared not only in their defenses, but frequent
Sallyes; the Governor MASSEY being admired by his Enemies, for the great skill
and dexterity which he showed upon all occasions: Of which I shall discourse
(...) particularly and at large, by reason of the great importance of this
famous Siege; the condition of the whole Kingdom depending so much upon the
success of it.

Many strange and successful Sallyes were made by the besieged.

Three days after the Siege was laid, an hundred and fifty Musketeers,
commanded by Captain GRAY, fallyed over the Works, upon the Worcester Forces,
with whom the Welsh had not yet joined, sell into their Quarters, marched up to
their Maine Guard, killed a Captain, with eight or nine Common Soldiers,
took five Prisoners, diverse Arms, burnt their Guard, and retreated without
the loss of any. Captain MALLERY, with the like number of Musketeers, within
a day after was commanded forth, to surprise some Ordnance of their Enemies,
which were suspected to lie at a certain place; but finding none, retreated
without loss, having killed some, taken a few Prisoners, and fired part of
their Quarters. Within a week after, another Party of an hundred and fifty
Musketeers, commanded by Captain CRISPE, sallyed forth, and fell into their
Enemies Trenches under the Town Wall, marched above half way through them,
performed strangely, and killed above an hundred men, as was confessed by some
of that side, and by the help of the Musketeers on the City Walls, retreated
safe, without the loss of any, only two wounded.

The Besiegers proceeded with great skill and industry in making their
Batteries, and undermining at several places; which labor of undermining, at
some places was made frustrate by water springs, and in others by the extreme
hardness of rocky ground; and where the business was more feasible, the skill
of the Governor prevented them by countermining. Many Grenades were shot of
great bigness from their Morterpieces into the Town, but guided by a strange
hand of providence into such byplaces, that they did very little hurt. One
thing is worthy the relating; when the Welsh and Worcester Forces of the King
came up, and four Pieces of Ordnance were drawn a good distance before the
place of their Leaguer, and one of them planted for battery; a Party of about
four hundred Musketeers, commanded by Major PUDSEY, and Captain GRAY,
assisted by Captain FAULKNER, and Captain MASSEY, fallied forth of one of the
Gates; mean while a Lieutenant with fifty Musketeers, was sent over the Works
to give them an Alarm, whilst the greater Party got behind their Canon and
Breast-Works; fell upon their maine Guard, slew many Officers, two Canoniers,
slew, or mortally wounded, about an hundred Common Soldiers; took a
Lieutenant, with four more Prisoners, nailed their Canon; and retreated with
the loss only of two slain, and four taken Prisoners.

Two Sallyes of such Parties were not long after made, though not with the same
success altogether (by reason of some mis-guidance) yet so much, as that they
retreated without any sensible loss; and were enough to amaze their Enemies,
that such small Parties should run up to their head Quarters, force their
men, and be able in that manner to recover back. And it was observed by those
who well understood War, that it was a more then ordinary providence, which
did preserve and bring off those many several Parties, when the vanquishing of
any one of them, must needs run the City into extreme hazard; whose whole
strength remained upon the Works day and night, except the reserve of an
hundred and twenty men at the maine Guard. One rare and slender rank were to
receive all the storm without seconds: Yet it was the opinion of best
Soldiers, that the safety of the whole did require those frequent Sallyes, as
the best remedies for so desperate a disease: Which did not only retard their
Enemies Preparations, but put them into an Amaze, that the besieged should
continue in such an height of resolution; which resolution was to be kept up by
the heat of Action. And it was the Governors care, to keep his Enemies waking
by continual Alarms, to wast and weary them.

The Kings Army were still preparing for a general storm, and striving in the
mean time to waste the Magazine of the Town, which they hoped would soon
fail, they spent their own store, and daily acted to the terror of the
besieged; shooting Grenades and Fire-bals out of their Morter-Peeces; and from
one Battery which they had planted, shot in one night above twenty fiery
bullets, which flew through the air like so many falling Stars, some eighteen
pound weight, others two and twenty; some of them passing through Stables and
Hay-ricks, did notwithstanding by their swift motion, fail of kindling; and,
which seemed strange, could not set one house on fire. Many Mines and
Countermynes were every day working with great industry on both sides, the
Governor MASSEY, striving to animate his men, and prevent the Towns
despairng, by showing the probability of a sudden relief; withal adding, that
their so late yielding would not at all mollify the Kings Army. On the other
side, the King seemed loath to invite them to yield solemnly by public
Summons, least he should detract from the honor of his enterprise. Yet many
dealt with them underhand, by advertisements of the Kings displeasure, using
also persuasions, and some intimations of the possibility of Grace.

CHAP. VI.
The Expedition of the Lord General ESSEX for relief of Gloucester. The great
Battle of Newbury described.
Whilst Gloucester was thus besieged, and the Siege so straight, that no
intelligence could possibly arrive at it; the Parliament, who after serious
considerations and debates, had for the present resolved upon the relief of
that City, as the only means to preserve the Kingdom; were as much
straightned how to proceed in the business, with that expedition which was
required. To recruit an Army so much wasted as the Lord Generals was, seemed
too slow for this Service; and therefore the Trained Bands of London, and their
Auxiliaries, must of necessity be made use of: Those that were well affected to
the Parliament encouraged each other to the Work: The disaffected on the other
side, labored in all discourses to breed despair of the Achievement, and to
discourage the Lord General from marching; false reports were every day raised
in London, that Gloucester was taken. The Lord General Essex was fourscore
miles off, with no present or visible Army at that time; his March lying through
those Countries which were already harrowed by the Enemy: Insomuch that all
considered, it was a question which was more wonderful, that he undertook it,
or that he did it. The Parliament was at that time so far sunk, both in
strength and reputation, and so much forsaken by those who followed fortune,
that nothing but an extraordinary providence could make it again emergent. The
Cause, and very being of it, was now at stake; by the success only of this
Expedition to be redeemed or quite lost. But it pleased God, that according to
that extremity, the resolutions of men were fitted. The City Regiments and
Auxiliaries came cheerfully in, to perform the Service; and that poor
remainder of the Lord Generals old Army was with all speed recruited. An Army
was likewise intended to be speedily raised for Sir WILLIAM WALLER to march
after, as a Reserve. But that was not so suddenly done as the occasion
required; if it had, and that Sir WILLIAM could (as was intended) have come in
with a supply at Newbury, it was the opinion of most men, that the Kings side
had received an irrecoverable Defeat.

On the 24. of August the Lord General Essex on Hownslow Heath, ten miles from
London, mustered his men; where almost all the Members of both Houses of
Parliament rode with him to survey the Army; and toward evening took leave of
their General, who marched on, and that night lodged at Colebrooke.

Upon intelligence of this Armies advance, Prince RUPERT, with the greatest
part of the Kings Horse, drew off from Gloucester, to oppose their March, and
take what advantages he could against it: But the King with his maine Army
continued the Siege, resolving so to do till the last hour; hoping that every
moment might work somewhat for his end; either by failing of the Towns store
of Ammunition, or some other want that might happen. Neither was that hope
without reason. And so much more wonderful was the fortune of that Town, to
be relieved at such a nick of time, when their Ammunition was so far
consumed, that but three single Barrels of Powder were left in their Magazine.

On Saturday the 26. of August 1643. the Lord General Essex began his March
from Colebrooke to Beckensfield, and so forward to Beerton, where he clothed
his Army, and marched on. The City Regiments and Auxiliaries joined not with
the Lord Generals Army till the first of September, when the general
Rendezvouze was on Brackley Heath. But before the joining of all their Forces,
a small Party of the Kings Army, consisting of 400. Horse, had faced a part of
the Parliament Army, and skirmished with them about Bicister, but soon
retreated upon the approach of greater numbers. The General taking up his Head
Quarter at Aynow, sent a Regiment to quarter that night at Deddington under the
Conduct of Colonel MIDDLETON; who hearing there of two Regiments of the Kings
Horse, sent two Companies of Dragoones, and a Party of Horse to approach the
Town. But the Kings Horse retreated to a passage toward Oxford, where the Lord
WILMOT was with 50. Troops more. The next morning two Parliament Regiments,
conducted by MIDDLETON and Sir JAMES RAMSEY advanced to that pass; where their
Enemies stood in two great Bodies, and after some Skirmish gained the pass,
placing Dragoneers to maintain it. But the Kings Forces drew up again toward
it, and were received with a very hot Skirmish, which lasted many hours, till
at last the Kings Forces made a retreat; but perceiving that Colonel MIDDLETON
marched back toward the maine Army (which he did by the Lord Generals Command)
they sent a Party of Horse to fall on his Rear, who followed them through
Deddington but were beaten back through the Town in some confusion. The loss
of men in these Skirmishes was not much on either side; neither could it
certainly be known, but was imagined by the Parliament side to be more on
their Enemies Party then on theirs.

The Lord General with his own Regiment of Horse, and the Lord GRAY,
quartering at Adderbury, upon intelligence that some of the Kings Horse from
Banbury were abroad, sent out a Party from both Regiments, who beat them in
again, and pursued them into Banbury Town, whence they took diverse Horses
and Prisoners, those in the Castle not daring to stir out. The General
marched from thence to Chipping Norton, where some of the Kings Forces appeared
again, but soon retreated, as they did almost every day, during the March of
that Army.

On the fourth of September, when the Lord General marched toward Stow the
old, he sent Colonel HARVEY with his Regiment of Horse, and two Regiments of
Foot, to advance a little before toward the right hand, and the City Regiments
upon the left, under the Conduct of Lieutenant Colonel BAILY, General
Adjutant of the Foot. Prince RUPERT appeared with about 4000. Horse, drawn up
on the Hills, facing the Parliament Forces, and sent a strong Party of Horse
into a bottom near Stow on the old, to incompasse Colonel HARVEYS Regiments.
Which being perceived, three Regiments from the Vanne of the Parliament Army
advanced to his rescue, and made that Party of the Kings Forces retreat to
their maine Body: Many Skirmishes there happened, but little loss on either
side.

From thence the General marched in the Foot of his Infantry, Sir JAMES RAMSEY
in the Rear, and Sir PHILIP STAPLETON had the Van Guard. When the Kings Horse
again appeared, and were by Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, and others of that Army
encountered with diverse Skirmishes; but they retreated in a great Body, and
still appeared before the Parliament Army, as they marched on, for the space of
seven miles.

On the fifth of September the Lord General advanced, and came to Presbury
Hills; where he drew up his whole Army in view of the City of Gloucester, and
discharged four Pieces of great Ordnance, to give them notice of his approach.
Soon after he might discover the Kings Quarters on fire: For upon the Lord
General his advance, they deserted the Siege, and marched away all night. The
Reere-Guard of the Lord Generals Army, some Ordnance and Ammunition, stayed on
the top of the Hill, by reason of the steepness thereof, darkness of the
night, and tempestuousnes of the weather, whereby (besides a famine of
Victuals) the whole Army had for three days March before extremely suffered,
through a Country that their Enemies had already destroyed. But the Lord
General marched from thence to Cheltenham, though during his March, the Kings
Forces skirmished with some Parts of his Army, and diverse times beat up his
Quarters whilst he stayed at Cheltenham, which was two days, till the eight
of September, when he marched with his whole Army to Gloucester; and was there
with great expressions of joy, and much honor, received by that long besieged,
and now rescued City; The General much extolling the skillful valor, and
indefatigable industry of Colonel MASSEY, and praising the patient constancy
of the City; They on the other side highly honoring his Excellency for
bringing them this relief, through so many difficulties, discouragements, and
disadvantages; both joining in thanks to Almighty God, for his divine
providence over them, and great mercy in sending so timely a deliverance.

The Lord General lodged two nights in Gloucester, furnishing the City with
Ammunition, Money, and other necessaries; and from thence marched to Tewksbury,
staying betwixt the Kings Forces and that Garrison four days, to give them
more time to furnish themselves better with Provision of Victual; which was to
be brought from Herefordshire, and parts beyond the Severne, since the other
parts had been before ransacked by the Kings Forces.

When the General with his whole Army arose from Tewkesbury, and intended to
quarter at Cheltenham, he was advertised, that a Body of the Kings Army were
then in Cirencester (which were reported to be Prince MAURICE his Forces) and
had there laid in great store of Provision for their Army. Upon that
advertisement the General, his want of Victuals and necessaries still
continuing, and miserably increasing upon his whole Army, made a long March
with the Vanguard of his Army to fall upon them, which he did about one of the
clock in the night, sending in a Party of Horse to seize upon the Sentinels and
Guards, whilst himself, with the rest of the Horse begirt the Town; and a
Forlorn hope of Foot, with his own Foot Regiment, entered the Town, and
surprised two Regiments of Horse (belonging to Sir NICHOLAS CRISPE, and
Colonel SPENCER) which were by the confession of some Prisoners taken,
intended for raising a Commotion in Kent. The Lord General at that Town of
Cirencester took forty Loads of Victual, which, under Gods providence, was the
preservation of his Army, until the day that the great Battle of Nembury was
fought. He took there likewise six Standards, all the Officers, except the two
Colonels, which were absent, with diverse other Gentlemen of quality; above 300.
Common Soldiers, and 400. Horse.

The General from Cirencester, in short Marches, not above five miles a day,
went to Cricklade, and to Swinden, from thence intending to pass to
Hungerford. But when the Van and Body of his Army had marched almost all over
A^burne Chase, a gallant Body of the Kings Horse, consisting of about 6000.
approached hard to the Reere-guard of his Army; which not being a sufficient
number to resist them, endeavored to make an orderly retreat to the Body of
their Army. But the Kings Horse pursued so hotly both on Reere and Flank, that
those Horse Regiments of the Generals Reere-guard could not retreat but with
confusion, and some loss. But being come to the Body of the Foot, they were
drawn up again into order, and faced their Enemies, until all the Foot were
marched. Nevertheless the Kings Horse again advancing, put their Enemies the
second time into the like disorder; till some of the Generals Regiments facing
about toward them, charged the Forlorn Hope of the Kings Forces, consisting
of 500. Horse, and put them wholly into disorder; and then charging the two
Regiments which seconded that Forlorn Hope, they routed them likewise; but the
Kings Horse came on bravely with fresh Bodies, and stopped their Enemies further
pursuit. Immediately followed a brave Charge, made by two of the Parliaments
Regiments, which was incountered with as much Gallantry on the other side, so
that they both retreated at one time. Another Charge was made by some Regiments
of the Parliament Army, and so answered by the other, that they were forced to
retreat to their maine Body; at which time S^r PHILIP STAPLETON (who had the
Vanguard of the Parliament Army that day) came purposely back, and drew up his
Regiment to succor his friends, which caused the Kings Forces to reti^e
altogether; and the night stopped any further proceedings.

On the Kings Party in these hot encounters, were slain the Marquess De Vieu
Ville, with other Officers of good quality, whose worth and valor appeared
highly, though I find not their names recorded. Many Common Soldiers were
there slain, and one Lieutenant Colonel; two Lieutenants and a Cornet taken
Prisoners. On the Parliaments side were slain of Officers, Captain MIDDLETON,
and Captain HACKET; diverse Officers were wounded, some Common Soldiers
slain, and Co^onell SHEFFIELD lost a Standard. The Lord General Essex marched
that night with his Army to Hungerford; Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, who before had
the Van, bringing up the Reere.

The next day the famous Battle of Newbury was fought; which Battle may
deserve (because the condition of the whole Kingdom so much depended on the
success of it) to be related in a large and particular manner. But because I
have found nothing written of it by those of the Kings Party; and that there
was a punctual Narrative published by some Colonels of the Parliament Army,
Gentlemen of great and unstained Reputation, concerning this Battle; which
Narrative I have heard some of their Enemies confess to be full, not only of
modesty, but truth in the General, or for the most part; let the Reader be
pleased to take it from their Relation. If any thing may hereafter appear of
greater truth, it will not trouble any honest man to see it published. Neither
is it a thing unheard of, for men to describe their own actions with
impartial truth; since JULIUS CAESAR is acknowledged to have written his own
Commentaries, not only of the Gallike but Civil War, with so much clear
integrity, that his Enemies had nothing to blame in it. Take it therefore in
their Language.

On Tuesday the nineteenth of September, 1643. we marched from Hungerford
toward Newbury; and when we approached within two miles of the Town, we might
discover the Enemies Forces upon an hill; their whole Army having prevented us,
were gotten to Newbury, and possessed the Town. But the next morning, being
Wednesday, by break of day order was given for our March to an Hill called
Biggs Hill, near to Newbury, and the only convenient place for us to gain,
that we might with better security force our passage. But when his Excellency
perceived that the Enemies Forces had possessed themselves of that hill, marching
himself upon the head of his own Regiment, Colonel BARCLAYS, and Colonel
HOLBOURNES Brigades, he charged so fiercely, that he beat them from the hill,
and kept it (rather gaining then losing ground) the whole day. His Excellencies
Regiment, and those other Brigades, all the while they continued there, were
hotly charged by the Enemies Horse and Foot, whilst much prowess was showed
on both sides. The General in Person bestirred himself, giving directions
wherever there was occasion, and present in all places of danger, discharged
the part of an excellent General, as the Enemies themselves witnessed. But he
considered not the danger of his Person, whilst he labored to maintain that
place, which of all others was most advantageous for his prospect. By this time
came up the two Trained Bands of London, who, though they were often charged by
the Horse and Foot, stood to it with undaunted resolution.

The Battle thus begun by the Foot, Sir PHILIP STAPLETON, with his Excellency
his Guard and Regiment of Horse, advanced upon the plain of the Hill; when he
had no sooner drawn up out of the Lanes end, seconded by Colonel DALBEIRES
Regiment of Horse (no other Horse being advanced to the place) but the Enemy
perceiving this advantage, being all drawn already in several great Bodies of
Horse, part of them advanced immediately, and charged our Horse; whom we so
well received (giving no fire till we joined close with them) that the Enemy
was wholly routed, and pursued with much execution near to the place where
their whole Body of Horse stood. From thence by order we drew back to our first
ground; by occasion whereof, opportunity was gained to bring up the remainder
of our Horse, which had the Vanguard that day: whereupon the Enemy drew out
some fresh Regiments of his Horse, and with all possible speed advanced again
upon Sir PHILIP, but received no bettter entertainment then before, being
again routed by him. By that time that he had drawn up his Regiment again
into some order, the other Regiments (RAMSEY, HARVEY, GOODWIN) were come up to
him, when the Enemy with their whole Body charged upon them bravely, and were
as well received. Sir PHILIP STAPLETON was here charged both in Front and
Flank, his whole Regiment having spent both their Pistols, and was so
encompassed, that the Enemy and ours, with both our whole Bodies, were all
mixed together; and in this confusion many were slain on both sides, and our
men at last were forced toward the Lanes end, where they first came in; which
being near our Foot, the Enemies endeavored to dis-ingage themselves, and
drew back to their own Forces. Those that entered the Lane with ours were most
of them slain.

We took three Colors of Horse complete, and a piece of another Colors. In
the first Charge Colonel DALBEIRE, and Commissary COPLEY, charging stoutly,
were both wounded. In the third Charge Captain HAMOND, Captain FLEETWOOD,
Captain PYM, and Cornet DOILY, were all wounded. Captain DRAPER, who had a
Forlorn Hope of Sir PHILIP STAPLETONS men, did good Service; as Captain
ABERCROMY, and Captain SHIBBORNE did with their Dragoones. The left wing of our
Horse, commanded by Colonel MIDDLETON, and the right wing of the Enemies
Horse, could not be engaged, but in small Parties, by reason of the hedges.

The actions of our Horse thus described wholly (because we were loath to
interupt the Series, for the Readers clearer understanding) return we to the
Foot. Major General SKIPPON in the morning, when his Excellency (as aforesaid)
was engaged upon the hill, hastened to the top of the hill, where our Vanguard
was in fight; having before ordered the March of our Train of Artillery, and
those that attended it (which were the Lord ROBERTS his Brigade, and his own,
Sir WILLIAM SPRINGERS, Colonel MANWARINGS, and the red and blew Auxiliary
Regiments) to be near to his Excellency. Looking from the Hill toward Newbury,
he perceived a great strength of the Enemy, both Horse and Foot, in diverse
great Bodies advancing directly toward the way which all our Train was of
necessity to march. To prevent therefore what he suspected, which was, that the
Enemy would fall upon our Train, or upon the Rear of those that fought on the
hill, or gain that hill behind us, our last nights Quarter, or all; he
speedily disposed (which his Excellency did also send him a Command to do)
Forces in places most convenient: Mean while the General sending for more
Foot, that Brigade wherein his Regiment and SPRINGERS were, with the red
Auxiliaries, were sent up; placing the Lord ROBERTS his Brigade, with four
small Pieces, just where the Enemy advanced, who gave them so warm an
entertainment, that they made them run; and the Lord ROBERTS possessed the
ground, which the Enemy came first up unto: His Lieutenant Colonel was shot in
the face.

That Forlorn Hope which he had commanded the night before, being now
strengthened with 300. Musketeers, and led by Major FORTESCUE, Major General
SKIPPON placed on the left of the Lord ROBERTS his Brigade, upon the high way
that came from Newbury just upon us; upon which way four Drakes were likewise
placed, and well defended, though the Enemies came up so close, that they took
away a Limmer of one of our Pieces, but it was with loss of many of their
lives.

Colonel MANWARINGS Regiment was placed on the right hand, between the hill
and the Lord ROBERTS his Brigade. This Regiment his Excellency a while after
commanded away, to the relief of his own Regiment, Colonel BARCLAYS, and
Colonel HOLBORNES Brigades, which had been four hours upon very hot Service.
It fortuned that this Regiment was no sooner brought on, but they were
overcharged with two great Bodies of Horse and Foot so, that they were forced
to retreat, and lose that ground which the forenamed Forces had gotten; which
Colonel HOLBORNE perceiving, with his Brigade gave the Enemy a Round Salvo,
and instantly his own, and Colonel BARCLAYS Brigades, and the Generals
Regiment again advancing, beat back the Enemy, regained the ground, and made
good the place all the day after.

The blew Auxiliary Regiment was commanded to relieve and assist the Forlorn
Hope, which had been three or four times in their turns at the point. The
Fight all along the Valley (more then half a mile in lenth) was continued as
long as in any other part of the Army, which was till ten a clock at night;
about which time the Enemy gave a good Round Salvo upon Colonel BARCLAY, and
Colonel HOLBORNS Posts. These things ordered, the Major General rode up to
the top of the hill, where he espied an advantage to bestow eitht or nine
Demi-Culvering shot upon the Enemy; who out of an house pelted the forenamed
Gentlemen at near distance. Then he rallyed the two Train-Band Regiments into
one Body, drew them up, and placed them before, where the Train of Artillery
did afterward draw up to the top of the hill, and desired Major BOTELER to
draw the Musketeers of his Regiment on the right hand before the two
Demy-Culverings that were placed at the end of the Lane, on the top of the
Hill; and the red Auxiliaries he placed on the left hand of those Pieces, which
before were slenderly guarded. The Artillery was well ordered that day, by the
skill and care of Sir JOHN MERRICK.

While this was acting, two Pieces which belonged to the Major Generals
Regiment, and one Drake of Sir WILLIAM BROOKS, were by the Generals Regiment,
under the Command of Major BOTELER, with the assistance of 200. Musketeers
recovered; and the Enemy drew away from their Pikes (which with their Colors
kept standing, with many great Bodies of Horse to guard them) five or six
hundred Musketeers, besides Dragoones, to encompasse our men on the right hand
among the hedges; just at which time his Excellency sent to have 300.
Musketeers of the Forlorn Hope, to go to the relief of Colonel BARCLAY, and
Colonel HOLBORNES Soldiers. But then the Enemy falling on upon our right
hand, diverted them, who with other of our Musketeers thereabouts, beat the
Enemy off, who else had done us great mischief. This was about four a clock in
the afternoon, when all our whole Army of Foot was engaged in the Fight. But
then he also caused some of the red Auxiliary Regiment to draw nearer to
Colonel BARCLAYS Post, as he himself required. At length night drew on, when
the Enemy, both Horse and Foot, stood in good order on the further side of the
Green, where we expected their stay till next morning, and that they were
working (as was reported) to place their Canon, to make use of them against us
when day should break: Against which supposed encounter we encouraged our
Soldiers before hand, and resolved by Gods help the next day to force our way
through them or dye. But it pleased God to make our passage without blows; for
the Enemy was gone by night; so that the next morning we marched quietly over
the same ground where the Battle was fought, and where the Enemy stood; for on
Thursday early, his Excellency gave Command for the Armies March toward
Reading; to which purpose it was all drawn up upon the Heath, where the
Battle was fought; and after that his Excellency had given order for burying
the dead, about ten a clock we began to march. Colonel MIDDLETON, with his
own, and three Regiments more (Lord GRAY, SHEFFIELD, MELDRUM) and 400.
commanded Musketeers under Colonel BARCLAY, had the Reere-guard: During which
March, the Enemy at a great distance shot from several hedges, but troubled us
not. When we came to a long Heath, we drew up the whole Army several times,
and no Enemy appeared. But at the entrance of a narrow Lane toward the evening,
the Enemy fell upon us with 800. commanded Musketeers, and most of their Horse,
who caused our Horse then in the Rear, to make a very disorderly and confused
retreat But when Colonel MIDDLETON, with the rest of the Commanders in the
Rear, hasted to charge the Enemy with our Foot, he made them retreat with as
much confusion over the Heath, as they had us before; the loss not great on
either side. Lieutenant BROWN was taken Prisoner.

After this, the same evening the Lord General drew up the Army to Theale, and
taking some refreshment there, marched the next morning, being Friday, with the
whole Army to Reading; where he stayed till the Sabbath was past, and gave
public thanks for the great Victory.

This was a Victory not denied to the Parliament, nor at all disputed; although
the Lord General Essex, for want of Victuals, marched away to the necessary
relief of his Army, and could not stay to pursue the Victory which he had
gotten. The number of slain in that Battle, were judged to be, by those who
speak most moderately, four times as many of the Kings Party as of the
Parliaments; but others have spoken of a far greater difference Diverse
Captains, as Captain MASSY, and Captain HUNT, with others, were slain on the
Parliament side; but scarce any of higher rank. Three of the Nobility fell on
the Kings side, the Earl of Carnarvan, the Lord SPENCER (newly made by the
King Earl of Sunderland) and the Lord Viscount Fawlkland.

After this Victory, the Lord General was received at London with great joy
and Honor. The Trained Bands and Auxiliaries of London marched home in full
Companies, and were welcomed by their friends; and met by the Lord May or and
Aldermen at Temple Bar: And now the face of things seemed much to change, and
the reputation of the Parliament rise higher.

At the time of this Expedition for relief of Gloucester, a Cessation of Arms
was made by the King with the Irish Rebels; of which, together with the great
Victories which small numbers of the English Forces obtained over great
multitudes of those Irish Rebels, before the time of that Cessation (which was
here omitted, as not to interupt the Relation of proceedings in the English
Wars) there may be a larger Discourse in the continuation of this History; as
also of the Covenant which the Parliament, and that part of the Nation which
adhered to them, about this time entered into with their Brethren of Scotland,
for maintenance of the Religion, Laws and Liberties of both Kingdoms.

FINIS.

