EPISCOPACIE NOT ABIVRED IN HIS MAJESTY'S REALM OF SCOTLAND.

CONTAINING MANY Remarkable passages.

NEWLY PVBLISHED.

The Contents of the several Chapters follow in the next page.

Printed 1641.

The Contents of the several Chapters in this BOOK.
CHAP. I.
COntaining a Comparison betwixt this Assembly and the Council of Trent.

1. They agree in like subtle policy in their proceedings, specified in 6.
points. 2. They disagree, in that the Council of Trent, in external order was
more formal than this, and more substantial in discussing the Articles.
CHAP. II.
Containing two reasons why we intend to speak only against the Act condemning
Episcopacie.

1. Because the rest of the Acts are established upon the same grounds. 2.
Because their principal purpose in desiring this Assembly was to suppress
Episcopacie. 3. The Act it self is set down verbatim, as it was set down in
their printed Coppie subscribed by the Clerk*
CHAP. III.
Discussing their four Considerations in their preface, whereby they allege
they were moved to make this Act.

1. The Consideration of the great mercy of God in the work of the
reformation; wherein three notable falsehoods are remarked. 2. That many evil
innovations were obtruded upon the Church: wherein also three notable falsehoods
are rem^rked. 3. That by the Kings urging the book of Common Prayer, they were
moved of Necessity to make their Covenant: wherein are remarked 7. notable
falsehoods. 4. That many having subscribed the Covenant without their
applications, yet according to the meaning it had 1580. therefore it is
necessary, that the Assembly should declare the true meaning: wherein are shown
diverse falsehoods and impertinencies.
CHAP. IIII.
Containing the state of the Question, as it was proponed to be voyced in the
Assembly.

1. The necessity of right stating the Question. 2. That their proposition is
captious and confused, including three several Questions of diverse natures,
whereunto no one Categoricall answer could be given. 3. That they set it down in
many ambiguous words and terms. 4. It is sophistically and subtly drawn a
Thes^ad Hypothesin. 5. That being proposed in that manner it could not possibly
resolve the doubts, but rather increase them. 6. The Question simply proposed
had been fitter to resolve doubts. 7. There are two points which they intend to
prove unlawful in Episcopacie. 1. That they have charge over mo^ particular
^^ocks than one. 2. That they have power and pre-eminence over their Brethren.
CHAP. V.
That this power and pre-eminence is not contrary to the Confession of Faith
in the Church of Scotland, but most conform thereto, and to the first book of
Discipline, and continual practice of the Church of Scotland.

1. A distinction of the Confessions of Faith so called, in a positive and
negative, and that the positive is the only proper Confession of the Church of
Scotland. 2. That there is no Article of this Confession condemning this power
and pre-eminence, 3. That the meaning of this Confession, concerning the point
of Government, set down in the first book of Discipline, and long practice of
the Church does expressly approve the same. 4. A parallel betwixt
Superintendents and Bishops, wherein is shown that the power of Superintendents
was no less than that which Bishops require now. 5. That Bishops, retaining
the office, title and Benefice of Bishops, had the power for 20. years after
the reformation, and that by approbation both of the Church and Civil estate.
CHAP. VI.
That this power and pre-eminence of Bishops was not abjured by the negative
Confession or Covenant.

1. That this negative Confession is not the proper Confession of the Church of
Scotland, but an Appendix thereof. 2. That it is only the first Confession
whereunto all were sworn to adhere. 3. Two reasons showing that by the oath of
the Covenant or negative Confession Episcopacie was not abjured. 1. Because it
cannot have a meaning contrary to that whereof it is an Appendix. 2. Because it
belongs only to the King, and not to an Assembly of the Church without the
King, to declare in what sense the oath was required.
CHAP. VII.
An Answer to those passages alleged in the Act out of the Abjuration.

1. Answered in General by Consideration of the words themselves. 2. By the
confession of the Moderator and his associats. 3. A particular answer to the
first passage, showing it to be cited falsely and impertinently.
CHAP. VIII.
An Answer to the second passage of the Covenant, wherein is shown clearly.

1. A notable falsehood in the citation both by chang^ng words, and adding
others not contained in the original. 2. Diverse reasons why this passage does
prove nothing to their purpose.
CHAP. IX.
An Answer to the third passage wherein are these particulars.

1. It is shown to be impertinent. 2. What is meaned by the word Hierarchy. 3.
That there may be an Hierarchy, neither Antichristian nor wicked, proved by
the testimony of Calvin. 4. Their first reason to prove that Episcopal
Government is the Antichristian, wicked Hierarchy, is by* a false Syllogism,
ex omnibus particularibus and affirmantibus in secunda figura. 5. This reason
passable amongst themselves because no man durst examine it, under pain of the
censure of the Church. 6. Their second reason childish and Sophistical. 7.
Their third reason impertinently applied. 8. Their fourth reason has no
consequence and far from the purpose. 9. Their last reason is grounded upon a
place in the second book of Discipline falsely related.
CHAP. X.
An Answer to the fourth passage containing three particulars.

1. An explaining of the words. 2. That the Doctrine and Discipline whereunto
we are sworn to join our selves, is not all the doctrine and discipline taught
and practiced in the Church of Scotland. 3. That this Doctrine is expressly
limitated in the Covenant by four limitations, by every one of which it is
cleared, that this power and pre-eminence of Bishops is not abjured. 4. The
first limitation, that we swear only to adhere to that which is taught by Gods
Word; wherein there is nothing contrary to this point, but all is conform
thereto. 5. The second limitation is, that Doctrine which is professed by many
notable Realms and Churches: no Realm nor Church did condemn this, except
Gene^a, and that not absolutely, but many Churches did approve it expressly. 6.
The third limitation is, the doctrine particularly expressed in the first
Confession of Faith: but no doctrine is expressed therein contrary to this
point. 7. The fourth limitation is, that Doctrine which was for a long time
before professed by the King and whole body of the Kingdom: But the King and
body of the Kingdom did expressly profess that they did approve this point
here damned. 8. The discipline is limitated by the same limitation. 9. The
discipline is either taken in a strict and proper sense for the censures of the
Church, or else in a large sense, signifying the whole policy of the Church.
10. In the first sense, it was as yet retained precisely in the Church of
Scotland under Episcopal Government; and therefore the oath is not broken. 11.
Discipline is again distinguished in these points which are essential and
perpetual, and those which are accidental and mutable. 12. The first sort are
prescribed by Gods Word, and were not abolished by Episcopal government, but
observed inviolable. 13. The other sort is left to the liberty of the Church,
and therefore alterable by the Church. 14. To the observation of those, the
Oath binds so long as the Constitution of the Church stands in force; but
being abrogate by a new Constitution, the Oath thereto is dissolved. 15.
Whosoever does not follow the Church in those Alterations do against their
oath.
CHAP. XI.
An Answer to the Acts of the general Assemblies alleged contrary to this
point until the year 1580. wherein are these particulars.

1. That no Act of Assembly is, nor can be produced before that year 1575. 2.
The occasion of impugning Episcopacie at that time. 1. some fiery humors
lately come from Geneva, and zealous of Geneva Discipline. 2. The Kings
minority. 3. Factions amongst the Nobility and Courtiers. 4. The Sacrilegious
greediness of those gaping after the Church rents, who for their own ends
abused the simplicity of some Ministers, and pride of others. 3. That Bishops
were not only tolerate, but approved by the Church until this year 1575. 4.
At this Assembly in August 1575. was the first motion against Episcopacie in
the Church of Scotland. 5. The proceeding of this Assembly declared at length,
whereby it is cleared that this point here in controversy was not challenged
therein, but expressly approved by all. 6. Nothing in substance concluded
against Episcopacie for five years after. 7. A notable dissimulation of our
Covenanters in citing an Act of this Assembly.
CHAP. XII.
Answering to the Acts of General Assemblies for establishing the second book
of Discipline, wherein are these particulars.

1. This book was brought in by the same occasions whereby Episcopacie began to
be challenged. 2. This Discipline was never fully agreed unto by the Church,
some points thereof never practiced, and those which were practiced but of
short continuance. 3. They do not themselves, nor will not approve some points
in this book, but refuse obedience thereto, instanced in three particulars. 4.
This book nor any part thereof had any strength of a Law before the injoyning
of the Oath. 5. It is defective in the most substantial points of Discipline,
and superabundant in points not pertaining to Ecclesiastical discipline. 6.
And therefore the Discipline therein contained cannot be that, whereunto we are
sworn to join our selves precisely.
CHAP. XIII.
Answering to the Act of the Assembly at Dundee 1580. condemning Episcopacie,
together with the Act at Glasgo 1581. explaining the same containing these
particulars.

1. Albeit they condemned in these Acts Episcopacie (as it was then used in
Scotland) as unlawful in it self, yet did they not condemn these points here
controverted. 2. Neither did the Church then condemn any substantial point of
Episcopacie, except they did contradict themselves, instanced in six principal
points of that Doctrine. 3. They condemn only the corruptions which were at
that time in Bishops themselves, whereof some are only supposed corruptions;
some corruptions indeed, but only personal, and not essential to the office.
4. The principal point they condemn in Bishops is, that they received not
their Commission from the Church to exercise their charge: and yet it is
evidently proved, that they had Commission from the Church to exercise all the
points of their function.
CHAP. XIIII.
Answering to the rest of the Acts here cited.

1. Their Acts can be of no greater force than the former whereupon they are
grounded, and therefore refuted by the same reasons. 2. Some particular
observations upon these Acts, whereby it is showed that they make more against
them, nor for them. 3. Many of these Acts shows that they were concluded
expressly against the Kings Majesty's intention. 4. The reason why that Act of
Parliament 1592. Establishing Presbyteries, was suffered to pass by the King
and the three Estates. 5. It was not because they did approve the same, but for
eschewing of greater evils which were justly feared. 6. That Presbyteriall
Government in Scotland did not endure in full force above ten years. 7. An Act
of that Assembly 1589. disgraceful to the Church of Scotland.
CHAP. XV.
Discussing the Conclusion of this Act, wherein are contained these particulars.

1. Their Hyperbolicall magnifying of their accurate proceeding in concluding
this Act, not like to be true. 2. The proposition of the Question by the
Moderator, informall, obscure, ambiguous, sophysticall, and such as could not
be answered Categorically. 3. The causes why they did so unanimously agree in
their voycing was, because all were debarred whom they suspected would make any
contradiction. 4. The voices, as they are here declared, do neither fully
answer to their proposition, nor condemn any thing in Episcopacie, as it is now
in Scotland. 5. They cannot excuse this but by laying the fault upon the
Printer, which is not like to be true for many reasons.
EPISCOPACY NOT ABIVRED IN SCOTLAND.
CHAP. I.
A Comparison betwixt this Assembly and the Council of Trent.
THat turbulent and seditious Conventicle of Covenanting Ministers and
mis-ruling Elders assembled at Glasgow, November. 1638. can be compared to none
of that kind so well, as to that infamous Council of Trent; which as it has
for a long time troubled the whole world, Emperors, Kings and Princes: fo this
has vexed mightily the Kings Majesty our dread Sovereign, disturbed both
Church and Commonwealth, and has led all his Subjects in Scotland blindfold
to Rebellion, given evil example to other Kingdoms, and brought an evident
Scandal upon the reformed Religion. There has been no less humane or rather
Satanicall policy, and subtle close conveyance practiced by the chief Rulers
in that Assembly of Glasgow, both in the Preparation, Prosecution, and
Conclusion thereof, (yet in this more malice, and less respect to the Supreme
Magistrate, and present established estate of the Church) than in that of Trent.

First, as the Pope and his Cardinals in the Consistory professed, that they
desired a general Council, and did openly exhort the Emperor, Kings, Princes,
and Republiques to concur with them: yet they declared evidently by their
dealing that they desired, either not at all a Council, or not such an one as
should be assembled by the Authority of the Emperor and Kings, or that any of
them or their Ambassadors should have suffrage therein, and much less
presidencie according to the ancient Custom of the Church, esteeming that
their Authority, suffrage, or presence would cross their particular ends: Even
so our Covenanters, albeit they often petitioned his Majesty for the liberty
of a general Assembly, yet they declared plainly by their proceedings, that
they did not desire such an one, as should be either convocated by his
Majesty's Authority, or wherein he, his Commission or Council should preside,
or give suffrage, or be present, if it had been in their choice, accounting it
so not to be a free Assembly.

Secondly, as the Pope and his Cardinals in the Consistory used Politic
means, that none or few of these Prelates, whom they supposed in any ways
would cross their designs, should appear in the Council: although publikly
they did admonish all, yet by private threatenings and distastes, hindered from
coming many of the Bishops of Germany, France and Spain: but on the contrary,
allured by diverse means those whom they supposed would favor their designs,
as all the Bishops of Italy: so that when the Council was at the greatest,
there were above 150. Italian Bishops, whereof many were at the Popes charges,
yet not above 60. of all other Nations. So in this at Glasgow, politic means
were used that none should be chosen Commissioners, except Covenanters; and of
those, only the strongest and most obstinate, who had solemnly already sworn
unto these things they intended to conclude: and on the other part, means were
used that all those, who were suspected to be averse from their designs, or
not forward enough, shoud be excluded: as is evident by the particular
Instructions sent from the Tables of the Covenant unto all the Presbyteries of
Scotland, which were discovered by the care and diligence of his Majesty's
Commissioner* and produced in open Assembly to their great confusion, whereby
it was appointed that care should be taken that none should be chosen as
Commissioner, for the Ministers or ruling Elders, but Covenanters, and those
well-affected to the business; And if that any other happen to be chosen by the
greater part, that all the best affected protest against them, and process
them before the Assembly that they might be excluded from voycing, and for that
effect also directed an informall and illegal Citations against all the
Bishops, to exclude them from having place or voice in their assembly, who
ought to have been (by the present laws of the Church of Scotland, and
continual practice of the universal Church in all ages) the principal
members thereof.

Thirdly, as in the Council of Trent, the Pope of Rome to have more voices
favoring his designs, did create many titular Bishops, who had no Christian
slock, and had never so much as seen that Church which they did represent. So
likewise in this Assembly were brought in many Titular Lay Elders, as
Commissioners from Presbyteries, wherein they had no habitations, nor ever did
sit therein to exercise their rule of Elder-ship before the day of their
election to be Commissioners to the Assembly.

Fourthly, the Pope and his Cardinals did complain that the Emperor and Kings
would have prelimitate* the Council by their directions: yet the Ambassadors
and Prelates did in every Session and Congregation complain more justly, that
the Council was not free, being strangely prelimitate by the Pope and
Consistory of Rome, both in the members and matters to be proposed, as also in
framing of the Canons. So our Covenanters did require a free assembly,
affirming, that as far as the assembly should be prelimitate either in the
members or matters to be treated, so far the necessary ends of the Assembly
and good of the Church was hindered, accounting it a most dangerous usurpation
to any person or Iudicatori^ whatsoever, to impose any such limitations, except
an Assembly it self; And therefore did most grievously complain against his
Majesty, (although unjustly) for he required no limitations, but such as were
prescribed by former lawful assemblies. Yet his Majesty and the whole
Kingdom may more justly complain of them, who refusing the reasonable
prelimitations of other former assemblies; did neverthesse admit strange
limitations from the Tables of the Covenant, (which was neither a lawful
Assembly of the Church, nor had any authority over the same) and those also
against the established Constitutions of former general Assemblies and Laws
of the Kingdom, as appears evidently by those four papers of Instructions
sent to every Presbytery, according to the which the Assembly was limitate both
in the members and matters.

Fifthly, as in the Council of Trent nothing was admitted to Consultation, but
Proponentibus Legatis, which gave occasion of offense to many: no Bishop, no
Prelate, no Regal Ambassador, nor any good Christian had liberty to propose
any thing, only the Popes Legates had this Power, who did propose every thing
as they received instructions from (...): even so in this Assembly, nothing
was admitted to De^^beration, but Proponente Mo^^rator^; And he likewise was
confined to the Ordinance of the Tables, who had before set down every Article
which was to be treated: All propositions of any other whatsoever, though
flowing from his Majesty, by his Commissioner or Council, were contemptuously
rejected.

Sixthly, as in the Council of Trent, let the Fathers and Doctors deliberate
and reason Pro and Contra as they pleased, yet nothing was concluded, until it
was first agreed unto by the Pope and his Cardinals at Rome, and their
determination, who never heard the reasoning* was sent to Trent to be enacted,
and that no otherwise then it was set down by them; which gave occasion to that
common proverb, That the holy Spirit, whereby the Council was directed, came
from Rome in a C^og-bag. So likewise all that which was done in this Assembly
was foreordained by the Tables of the Covenant in Edinburgh: For there were all
the members of the Assembly constituted, though contrary to the perpetual
practice of the Church; there were all the Commissions framed, and a Cople
thereof sent to every Presbytery, as appeared by the production, since never
one of them was different in one Syllable from another; there also was the
whole order of the Assembly set down, and accordingly observed; there were all
things which were to be proposed in the Assembly, discussed and concluded by
the Rulers of the Covenant, who for the most part were Lay-persons, Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Burge^^es, and some few Ministers most forward in the cause:
therefore it may be justly said, that the Spirit, whereby those holy Brethren
of the Assembly were ruled, came not from Heaven* but directly from Edinburgh.
I leave you to imagine by the effects what Spirit that was, which has stirred
up such Sedition, Rebellion, Disorder and Confusion both in Church and
Commonwealth.

Then although in these points of Corruptions, and many other which for
shortness we omit, this Assembly at Glasgow was not unlike that Council of
Trest; yet I will be bold to say, and that truly, that in some substantial
points, that Council was more formal than this Assembly.

For the Council of Trent in the External order and Constitution of the
members thereof, kept more formality and decency according to the order of
the Church many ages before. 1. There was none admitted to that Council except
Prelates of the Church, Ambassadors of Princes, and the most learned Doctors
in all Europe for the time; And such as the Prelates thought fit in the bounds
of their Jurisdiction to reason in weighty points of Doctrine. 2. In their
Congregations and Sessions, they did sit every man in his own place according
to his degree, with such gravitie, modesty and decency, as did become
Reverend Fathers, distinguished one from another by their habits, appointed by
the Canons of the Church, making it appear to the beholders, a Venerable
Assembly. 3. In their proceedings were appointed the wisest of the Bishops,
and most learned amongst the Doctors to frame the Articles, and being framed,
were particularly one by one discussed, by weighty reasons maturely in several
days and diets, all doubts particularly moved, and Objections solidly answered
according to their grounds, using not only the testimony of former approved
Councels, Fathers and learned Schoolmen, but also very frequently the
Authority of Sacred Scriptures: So that if in their conclusions they had
pondered well the reasons alleged, and had concluded according to the same,
and not according to the Popes sole Authority; that Council might have had a
more happy event for the weell and peace of the Christian Church.

But in this Assembly at Glasgow was not observed that form, order or
decency, which did become a venerable Ecclesiastic meeting: for first, these,
who were ever esteemed the Principal members of all general or National
Councels, to wit, the Reverend Bishops of the Church, were excluded; a company
of Laymen, Earls, Lords, Gentlemen and Burgesses, without warrant,
Authority, or example of the ancient Church were thrust in their rooms,
bearing chief Sway in the Assembie, carrying all matters violently for their
own ends; so that it was remarked by wise and grave men, that one Earl and one
Lord made more speech in the Assembly, than all the Clergy, except the
Moderator. 2. In their Sessions, no order or decency observed, all sitting
pel-mell, without distinction of Degrees, save only that Lay-Noblemen and
Gentlemen occupied the chiefest rooms with their swords and pistolls by their
sides; The Ministers mixed amongst Burgesses, Merchants, and Noblemens servants,
hardly to be discerned from them by their Habit or Carriage; Many of the
Ministers in colored clothes, all in short cloakes, except the Ministers of
Glasgow who had their Gowns; so that unless one had known their persons
before, they should scarcely have discerned the Ministers from the Merchant or
Tailor. 3. The Ministers were not there by the approbation of their Bishops
according to the custom of the Primitive Church, and Acts of the general
Assemblies of Scotland long after the Reformation, as for instance, in that
Assembly at Edinburgh July 1568. It was expressly ordained, that no Minister
should leave his Flock, except such as were chosen by their Superintendants:
but by Commissions from their new invented form of Presbyteries, wherein
Laymen had the greatest rule, or rather from the Tables of the Covenant, who
did not choose the most wise, modest and learned Brethren; but the most
turbulent, seditious, and bold to oppose Authority: fit members indeed of such
an Assembly. 4. In discussing of the matters which were concluded, no
reasoning but superficial; no careful pondering of the Reasons, but all taken
Implicit fide, which had any show; no exact distinguishing of the Articles, but
many matters of different nature were h^dled up together confusedly, and with
great precipitation were voyced and concluded. The Assembly continued only a
month, and a great part of that time (to wit from the 21. of November to the
4. of December) was consumed in circumstantiall points concerning the persons
to be admitted to have voice in receiving and discussing their Commissions, in
Contestations betwixt the Commissioner and the Covenanters, in excluding some
of his Majesty's Counselors authorized by him to have voice in the Assembly,
contrary to the Practice of all Ancient approved Councels, either General or
National; in rejecting most just protestations of diverse Presbyteries against
this Assembly, as that of the Presbyteries of Glasgow, of P^ables, of
Aberdeine, of the Channonry of Rosse; in refusing to hear read the most just
declinature and protestations of the Bishops. And finally, in declaring
certain books of the former Assemblies to be Authentic registers.

At last, the fourth of December they enter to the principal matters for which
this Assembly was required, beginning at the condemnation of the six last
general Assemblies, conveened, continued, and concluded by the Kings Majesty's
Authority, and full consent of the Church, and ratified by the whole body of
the Kingdom in Parliament: which they did in shorter space then could suffice
to read them over; so precipitate were they in condemning absolutely so many
grave Assemblies with such unanimous consent, as never one was called, but
(without reason or judgment) condemned them all in one word, by implicit
faith given to some few, neither of the most wise, or learned of the company,
who had a Committee to invent some apparent reasons to anull the same: and that
is most certain that the two part of those who voyced against them, had never
seen the Acts and the proceedings of these Assemblies, or at least had never
read nor perused them; But out of a blind zeal and Jesuitical obedience, did
it only, because they were so directed by the Tables of the Covenant, and their
rebellious Leaders.

In another Session they deposed and excommunicated summarily fourteen Bishops,
upon a pretended false Libell produced before the Presbytery of Edinburgh
against them (which by no law or reason could be competent Judges to their
process) without lawful citation, contrary to the Acts of many general
Assemblies, the Books of Discipline and perpetual practice of the Church; For
the Church of Scotland was never accustomed, no, not in the most strict times
of Presbyteriall government, to proceed so summarily to the sentence of
excommunication against most notorious offenders, without mature deliberation
and long space granted to the Accused, either to justify himself, or declare
his repentance. 1. There was used three private personal Citations to appear
before the Presbytery; next, if those were not obeyed, three publik Citations
one three several Sabbaths. 3. Followed three publik prayers for their
conversion, and if at any of these times they did appear, either to purge
themselves of the crime imputed to them, or submitting themselves to the
censure of the Church; The sentence of excommunication was not pronounced
against them.

In another Session, they condemned with one voice the Book of Common Prayer;
the Book of Canons, the Book of Ordination of Ministers, and Consecration of
Bishops; together with the Court of the High Commission: which space was not
sufficient to have read over all those books, muchlesse to peruse them
thoroughly, and discuss the controverted points therein, which was necessarily
requisite to be done before they had been absolutely rejected.

But this is strange, that the principal and most weighty point, for the which
chiefly they did procure this Assembly, should have been so slightly, and with
such precipitation handled, to wit, whether Bishops should be retained or
removed forth of the Church of Scotland: A Doctrine so universally approven by
the whole Christian Church, even in her purest time since the Apostles days,
and allowed in Substance by the reformed Church of Scotland, for many years
after the reformation; And though repressed for a time, yet re-established
again by diverse more lawful Assemblies than this, ratified by diverse Act of
Parliament, and continued now for many years by-gon; there behoved to be many
and weighty reasons why such a Doctrine should be conversed, with a serious
deliberation to ponder and consider them; yet nevertheless in this Assembly in
one short Session, the whole matter was proponed, discussed, voiced, concluded,
and a large Act past thereupon.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Act against Episcopacie.
ALbeit it were an easy matter to refute all the controverted Acts of this
Assembly, yet leaving the rest at this time, we intend only to examine that
Act, Sess. 26. December. 8. Against Episcopacie, And that for two reasons
especially:

First, because the grounds whereupon this Act is concluded, are the self-same
whereupon all the rest of the controverted Acts are grounded; and therefore
these grounds being declared evidently to be infirm and weak, it will also
appear that together with this Act of Episcopacie, All the rest of their Acts
depending thereupon shall be found to be ruinous, as I trust their fall shall
be sudden.

Secondly, because the principal aim of the most and chiefest of these, who
were members of that Conventicle, was to suppress Bishops, because they
esteemed them chiefly to have crossed their Sacrilegious and ambitious (...): I
or, before Bishops were re-established, the Noblemen and Barons both possessed
the substance of the Church ren^s, and also ruled the whole E^tate at their
pleasure in Council and Parliament, by their own voices, and voices of the
Gentry and Borroughs, whom those factious (...) did depend for the most part
upon one Noble man or other: then finding that by the re-establishing of
Bishops, their rents were taken out of their hands, and that they were like to
loose their Abbeyes, and Prio^ies also; and finally, that their particular ends
(not always tending to the weell of the Church* or Kingdom, or Honor of the
Prince,) were crossed by the estate of Bishops: no marvel then, though they be
moved by all means possible to suppress them; and for that effect have
labored to make use of the simplicity of some of the Ministry, and proud
humors of others impatient of Subjection to lawful Authority, of whom some
having aimed in vain at Bishoprics (as is well known of diverse of the
Ringleaders of that Faction) thought it best for their credit, to declare a
great contempt of that estate, which they had with much labor sought after,
without the desired effect, according to the fable of the Fox* others by their
former misdemeanors both against the Church and Regal Authority, being past
hope of further advancement, did easily condescend to shake off that yoke,
which their turbulent humors could never suffer them patiently to bear; those
were made to blow the trumpet of Rebellion, both in their Pulpits and private
conferences, drawing the people after them, and the simplest sort of Ministers
also, who did not judiciously remark their secret ends, cloaked under the
color of Religion, and liberty of the Church, by which means this condemning
of Episcopacie was brought in head with all the consequences thereof.

This is the point we mean to examine for the present, and that you may see the
weakness of their reasons the better, we shall set down verbatim the Act it
self, as it was conceived by them.

Act of the Assembly at Glasgow, Sess. 16. December. 8. 1638. Declaring
Episcopacie to have been adjured by the Confession of Faith, 1580. And to be
removed out of this Kirk.
THe Assembly taking to their most grave and serious Consideration, first, the
unspeakable goodness and great mercy of God manifested to this Nation, in
that so necessary, so difficult, and so excellent and divine work of
Reformation, which was at last brought to such perfection, that this Kirk was
reformed, not only in Doctrine and Worship, but also after many conferences
and publik reasonings in diverse National Assemblies, joined with solemn
humiliations and prayers to God, the Discipline and Government of the Kirk, as
the hedge and guard of the doctrine and worship, was prescribed according to
the rule of Gods word, in the book of Policy and Discipline, agreed upon in
the Assembly 1578. and insert in the Register 1581. established by the Acts of
the Assemblies, by the confession of Faith, sworn and subscribed at the
direction of the Assembly, and by continual practice of this Kirk. Secondly,
that by men seeking their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ;
diverse. Novations have been introduced to the great disturbance of this Kirk,
so firmly once compacted, and to the endangering of Religion, and many gross
evils obtruded, to the utter (...) of the work of Reformation^ and change of
the whole form of worship and f^ce of this Kirk, commanded to receive with
reverence a new Book of Common prayer, as the only form to be used in Gods
publik worship, and (...) Contraveeners to be condignely censured, and
punished: and after many supplications and complaints, knowing no other way for
the preservation of Religion, were moved by God, and drawn by necessity, to
(...) the National Covenant of this Kirk and kingdom, which the Lord since
has blessed from Heaven, and to subscribe the confession of faith, with an
Application thereof abjuring the great evils wherewith they were now pressed,
and suspending the practice of all Novations formerly introduced, till they
should be tried in a free general Assembly: lastly, that some of his Majesty's
Subjects of sundry ranks have by his Majesty's command subscribed and renewed
the confession of Faith, without the former explication; And that both the one
and the other Subscribers have subscribed the said Confession in this year, as
it was professed, and according to the meaning that it had in this Kingdom,
when it was first subscribed, ^581. and afterward: The Assembly therefore (...)
by the Subscription of his Majesty's high Commissioner, (...) of the Lords of
secret Council, Sept. 22. 1638. and by the Acts of Council of the date
foresaid, bearing that they should subscribe the said Confession, and ordaining
all his Majesty's Subjects to subscribe the same; according to the foresaid
date and tenor, and as it was then professed within this Kingdom; As likewise
by the protestation of some of the Senators of the College of Justice, when
they were required to subscribe, and by the many doubtings of his Majesty's
good subjects, especially because the Subscribers of the Confession in February
1638. are bound to suspend the approbations of the corruptions of the
Government of the Kirk* (...) they be tried in a free general Assembly;
finding it proper for them, and most necessary and incumbent to them, to give
out the true meaning thereof, as it was at first professed, that all his Majesty's
Subjects in a matter so important, as is the publik Confession of Faith, so
solemnly sworn and subscribed, may be of one mind and one heart, and have (...)
satisfaction to all their doubts; and that the posterity afterward may be
fully persuaded of the true meaning thereof, after earnest calling upon the
Name of God, so religiously ^^tested in the said Confession, have entered into a
diligent search of the Registers of the Kirk, and books of the General
Assembly, which the greatest part of the Assembli^^ had not (...) before, and
which by the special providence of God were ^reserved, brought to their hands,
and publikly acknowledged to be authentic, and have found that in the l^ter*
Confession of the Kirk of Scotland; We profess 1. That we detest ^ll
Traditions brought into the Kirk, without or against the Word of God, and
Doctrine of this reformed Kirk. Next, We abhor and detest all contrary
Religion and Doctrine, but chiefly, all kind of Papistry in general, and part
(...) heads; as they were then damned and (...) by the Word of God, and Kirk of
(...) when the said Confession was sworn and subscribed, Anno 1580. and 1581.
1590. and 1591. Thirdly, That we detest (...) Antichrist, his worldly
Monarchy, and wi^^ed Hierchie^. Fourthly; That we join (...) selves to this
reformed Kirk in Doctrine Faith, Religion, and Discipline; promising and
swearing by the great Name of God, that we shall continue in the doctrine and
discipline of this Kirk, and defend the same according to Vocation and Power,
all the days of our life.

But so it is that Episcopal government is abhorred and detested, and the
Government by Ministers and Elders, in Assemblies General and Provincial, and
Presbyteries was sworn to and subscribed, in subscribing that Confession, and
ought to be holden by Us, if we adhere to the meaning of the Kirk, when that
Confession was framed, sword to, and subscribed; unto which we are obliged by
the National o^th and subscription of this Kirk, as is evident by the Acts of
General Assemblies, agreed upon both before, (...) after the swearing and
subscribing of the said Confessions; in the year above mentioned, and the book
of Policy agreed upon in the Assembly which was holden at Edinburgh the ^4.
of April, and 24. of October* Anno 1578. (...) in the Register of the Kirk by
Ordinance of the Assembly holden as Glasgow 1581. and to be subscribed by all
Ministers that then did bear, or thereafter were to bear office in this Kirk,
by ordinance of the Assemblis holden the 4. of August at Edinburgh 1500. and at
Edinburgh the 2. of July 1591. but specially in the 2. 3. 4. 6. 7. and 11.
Chapters of the said Book.

The Bishops being tolerate from the year 1572. till the Assembly holden in
August 1575. And all this time the Assembly being wearied with the Complaints
made against them, did enter in search of the office it self, and did agree in
this, that the name of a Bishop is common to every one of them that has a
particular flock, over which he has a particular charge, as well to preach the
Word, as to minister the Sacraments.

At the next Assembly which was holden in April 1576. such Bishops were
censured, us had not taken them to a particular flock, in the general
Assembly conveened in April, the year of God 1578. Sess. 4. Intimation was
(...) as follows.

For so much as the heads of the Policy being concluded and agreed upon in the
lust Assembly, by the most part of the Brethren: certain of the Brethren had
some difficulty in the head, de Diacon^t^; whereupon further reasoning was
reserved to this Assembly. It is therefore required, if any of the Brethren
have any reasonable doubt or argument to propone, that he be ready the morrow,
and then shall be heard and resolved. In the 6. Sess. April 26. According to
the Ordinance made the day before; all persons that had any doubt or argument
to propone, were required to propone the same: But none offered to propone any
argument on the contrary. In the Assembly holden at Edinburgh, in October 1578.
It was shown^ by the Moderator thereof to the Noble, who were present, viz. My
Lord Chancellor, the Earl of (...), my Lord Seat^n, and my Lord Lind^ey, What
care and (...) die the Assembly had taken to entertain and keep the purity
of the sincere Word of God, unmixed with the inventions of their own heads; and
to preserve it to the posterity hereafter, and seeing that the true Religion
is not able to continue, not enduce king without a good discipline and policy,
in that part also have they employed their wit and study, and drawn forth out
of the pure fountain of Gods Word, such a Discipline as is meet to remain in
the Kirk.

In the same Assembly, the special Corruptions were set down, which they
craved such of the Bishops as would submit themselves to the Assembly to
remove, with pr^mise that if the general Assembly hereafter shall find
further corruptions in the said Estate, then hitherto are expressed, that they
be content to be reformed by the said Assembly, according to the Word of God,
when they shall be required thereto. First, That they be content to be Pastors
and Ministers of one flock: that they usurp no criminal Jurisdiction, that
they vote not in Parliament in the Name of the Kirk, that they take not up for
the maintenance of their Ambition and Riotousnesse, the Emoluments of the Kirk,
which may sustain many Pastors, the Schools, and the poor; but be content
with reasonable Livings according to their office: that they claim not to
themselves the titles of Lords Temporal, neither usurp temporal
Jurisdictions, whereby they are abstracted from their office; that they empire
not above the particular Elder-ships, but be subject to the same: that they
usurp not the power of the Presbyteries.

The Question being propounded by the Synod of Lowthian in the Assembly holden
in July 1579. a^ent a general order to be taken for the erecting of
Presbyteries, in places where public exercise is used, until the time the
Policy of the Kirk be established by a Law: It is answered, The exercise may
be judged to be a Presbytery. In the Assembly holden at Dundie in July 1580.
Sess. 4. The office of a Bishop was abolished by a particular Act; as appears
by the tenor of the Act following.

For so much as the office of a Bishop, as it is now used and commonly taken
within this Realm, has no sure warrant, Authority, nor good ground in the
Scriptures, but is brought in by the folly and corruption of man's inventions,
to the great overthrow of the Kirk of God, the whole Assembly of the Kirk in
one voice, after liberty given to all men to reason in the matter, none
opponing himself in defending the said pretended office, finds and declares
the said pretended office, used and termed, as is abovesaid, unlawful in it
self, as having neither fundament, ground, nor warrant in the Word of God; And
ordains that all such persons as brook or shall brook hereafter the said
office, shall be charged simply to dimit, quit, and leave off the same, as an
office whereunto they are not called by God: And such like to desist and cease
from all preaching, ministration of the Sacraments, or using any way the office
of Pastors, while they receive de ^ov^, Admission from the general Assembly,
under the pain of excommunication to be used against them, wherein if they be
found disobedient, or contradict this Act in any point, the sentence of
Excommunication, after due admonition, to be executed against them.

In the same Assembly holden Anno 1580. Sess. 10. This Article was appointed to
be propounded to the King and Council* that the book of Policy might be
established by (...) Act of privy Council, while a Parliament be holden,
(...) which it might be confirmed by a Law.

The extent of the Act ma^e at Dundie, was interpreted and explained in the
Assembly holden at Glasgow, in April 1581. Sess. 6. as follows. Anent the Act
made in the Assembly holden at Dundie against Bishops, because some difficulty
appeared to some Brethren to arise out of the word (Office) contained in the
said Act, what should be meaned thereby, the Assembly consisting far the most
part of such as voted, and were present in the Assembly at Dundie, to take away
the said difficulty, resolving upon the true meaning and understanding of the
said Act, declare that they meaned wholly to condemn the whole estate of
Bishops, as they are now in Scotland; and that the same was the determination
and conclusion of the Assembly at this time, because some Brethren doubted
whether the former Act was to be understood of the Spiritual function only,
and others alleged that the whole office of a Bishop, as it was used, was
damnable, and that by the said Act, the Bishops should be charged to dimit the
same: this Assembly declares that they meaned wholly to condemn the whole
estate of Bishops, as they were then in Scotland, And that this was the meaning
of the Assembly at that time.

The Kings Commissioner presented unto this Assembly the Confession of Faith,
subscribed by the King and his household, not long before together with a plot
of the Presbyteries to be erected, which is Registrate in the books of the
Assembly, with a Letter to be directed from his Majesty to the Noblemen, and
Gentlemen of the Country, for their action of Presbyteries, consisting of
Pastors and Elders, and dissolutions of Prelacies, and with an offer to set
forward the Policy until it were established by Parliament: The Kings letter
subscribed by his hand, to the Noblemen and Gentlemen, was read in open
audience of the whole Assembly.

This Assembly ordained the book of Policy to be insert in the Register by the
Act following.

For as much as travel has been taken in the framing of the Policy of the
Kirk, and diverse suits have been made by the Magistrate for Approbation
thereof, which yet has not taken the happy effect, which good men would wish,
yet that the posterity may judge well of the present Age, and of the meaning
of the Kirk; the Assembly has concluded, that the book of Policy agreed to
in diverse Assemblies before, should be registrate in the Acts of the Kirk, and
remain therein ad perpetuam rei memoriam: And the Copies thereof to be taken
to every Presbytery; of which book the Tenor follows, etc.

Immediately after the inserting of the book of Policy, called ther^ the book
of Discipline; The Assembly ordained that the Confession of Faith be subscribed
as follows.

Anent the Confession of Faith lately set forth by the Kings Majesty, and
subscribed by his Highness: the Assembly in one voice acknowledges the said
Confession to be a true, Christian, and faithful Confession, to be agreed unto
by such as truly profess Christ, and have a care of Religion, and the tenor
thereof to be followed out efoldly, as the same is laid out in the said
Proclamation, wherein that Discipline is sworn to.

In the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh in October 1581. Sess. 10. Mr.
Robert Montgomery is accused for teaching that discipline is a thing
indifferent; Sess. 23. The Assembly gave Commission to the Presbytery of
Stirling, to charge Mr. Robert Montgomery to continue in the Ministry of
Stirling, and not to meddle with any other office or function of the Kirk;
namely, in aspiring to the Bishopric of Glasgow, against the Word of God, and
Acts of the Kirk, under the pain of Excommunication.

In the same Assembly it is acknowledged that the estate of Bishops is
condemned by the Kirk, Commission for erection of more Presbyteries was renewed:
and a new Ordinance made for subscribing the Confession of Faith, and to
proceed against whatsoever persons that would not aknowledge and subscribe the
same.

In the Assembly holden in April 1582. there was a new Commission for erection
of Presbyteries where none was at yet erected: Mr. Robert Montgomery,
pretending to be Bishop of Glasgow, was ordained to be deposed and
excommunicate, except he gave evident t^kens of Repentance, and promise to
superseed, which he did not: and therefore was excommunicate shortly after,
according to the ordinance of this Assembly.

In the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh 1582. The General Assembly gave
Commission to some Presbyteries to try and censure such as were called Bishops,
for the great slander arising by their impunitie. Commission was given at this
Assembly to present some Articles to the Council and estates, for approving
and establishing by their authority the Presbyteries, the Synodall and
General Assemblies in the 19. Sess. the Assembly declared that (...) Bishop
may ^it upon the Council in name of the Kirk.

In the Assembly holden Anno 1586. these two Articles were agreed upon. First,
It is found that all such as the Scripture appoints Governors of the Kirk, to
wit, Pastors, Doctors, and Elders may conveene to the general Assemblies, and
vote in Ecclesiastical matters. Secondly, There are four Office-bearers set
down to us by the Scriptures, to wit, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and De^cons,
and the name of Bishop ought not to be taken, as it has been in the time of
Papistry, but is common to all Pastors and Ministers.

In the Assembly holden Anno 1587. Sess. 8. It was ordained that the admission
of Mr. Robert Montgomery by the Presbytery of Glasgow, suppose to the
Temporalitie of the Bishopric only, be undone and anulled with all possible
diligence, to the effect Slander might be removed from the Kirk. In Sess. 15.
Mr. Rob. Pont she^ed the Kings presentation to the Bishopric of Cathnes, and
desired the Judgment of the Assembly. The Assembly in their Letter to the
Kings Majesty, declared that they judged the said Mr. Rob* to be a Bishop
already, according to the doctrine of S. Paul: but as to that corrupt estate or
office of these who has been termed Bishops heretofore, they found it not
agreeable to the word of God, and that it has been (...) in diverse Assemblies
before.

In the Instructions given to such as were appointed to wait^ upon the
Parliament, it was ordained in the same Assembly, Sess. 17. that they be
careful that nothing b^ admitted prejudicial to the liberties of this Kirk,
as it wa^ concluded according to the Word of God in the general Assemblies,
preceding the year 1584. but precisely to seek the same to be ratified in the
Assembly holden in March 1589. where the Articles were made for the
subscribing the confession of Faith with a (...), it was (...) as followe^^*

For so much as the Neighbor Kirk in England is understood to be heavily
troubled for maintaining of the true discipline and government, whose griefs
ought to move us: therefore the Presbytery of Edi^burgh was ordained to
comfort the said Kirk in the said matter.

In the Assembly holden 1590. when the Confession of Faith was subscribed
universally de novo, A ratification of the liberties of the Kirk in her
Jurisdiction, Discipline, Presbyteries, Synods, and general Assemblies, and an
abrogation of all things contrary thereunto; was ordained to (...) sought both
of the Council and Parliament. In the next Session, it was ordained that the
book of Discipline, specially the controverted heads, should be subscribed by
all Ministers that bear, or hereafter were to bear office in this Kirk, and
that they be charged by the Presbyteries under the pain of Excommunication:
seeing the Word of God cannot be kept in sincerity, unless the holy
Discipline be preserved. The Presbyteries were ordained to get a Copy under
the ^lerks hand; there was sundry Copies subscrib^d by the Ministers in the
Presbyteries yet extant, as Haddington, (...), etc. produced before the
Assembly.

In the Assembly 1591. Sess. 4. The former Act anent the subscription to the
book of Policy is renewed, and penattis imposed upon the Moderator, in case it
be not put in ex^cution.

In the Assembly 22. May 1592. Sess. 2. These articles were drawn up, That the
Acts of Parliament made 1584. against the Discipline, Liberty, and Authority
of the Kirk be (...), and the same Discipline, whereof the Kirk has been in
practice, precisely ratified; that Ab^^ts, Pryo^ies, and other Prelates
pretending the title of the Kirk, be not suffered in time coming. In the
eleventh Session, the number of the Presbyteries were given up, and (...) in
the Parliament immediately following. The fifth of Inn 1592. The Liberty,
Discipline and Jurisdiction of the (...) Kirk in her Sessions, Presbyteries,
(...) and general Assemblies is largely ratified, as the same was used and
exercised within this Realm, and all the Acts contrary thereto abrogate: the
Kings prerogative declared not to be prejudicial to the same privileges
grounded upon the Word of God: the former Commissions to Bishops 1584.
rescinded, and all ecclesiastical matters subjected to Presbyteries, according
to the discipline of this Kirk. Anno 1595. the Book of Policy with other Acts
is ratified and ordained to be printed.

It was also cleared that Episcopacie was condemned in these words of the
Confession, His wicked Hierarchy. For the Popish Hierarchy does consist of
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, that is Baptizing and Preaching Deacons: for
so it is determined in the Council of Trent, in the 4. Chap. De Sacramento
ordinis, Cant. 6. Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia Catholica non esse Hierarchiam
divina ordinatione institutam, quae constat ex Episcopis, Presbyteris and
Ministris, anathema sit. Bellarmine likewise in his Book De Clericis cap. 11.
says, That there are three Hierarchies in the Militant Kirk: The first of
Bishops, the second of Priests, the third of Deacons; and that the Decons are
also Princes, if they be compared with the people: This proposition following;
Hierarchia ecclesiastica constat ex Pontifice, Cardinalibus, Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis and Regularibus, was censured by the faculty of Theology in the
University at Paris, as follows; In ista prima propositione enumeratio
membrorum Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae seu sacri Principatus, divina ordinatione
instituti est manca and redundans atque inducens in errorem contrarium
determinationi sacrae Synodi Tridentinae: The proposition was defective,
because it pretermitted the Presbyters and Deacons; it was censured as
redund^nt, because it made the Hierarchy to consist of the Pope. Cardinals,
Archbishops and Regulars; the Pope is not within the Hierarchy, Primats,
Metropolitanes, and Archbishops, but as they are Bishops. Furthermore, this
Hierarchy is distinguished in the Confession from the Popes Monarchy, and
howbeit this Hierarchy be called the Antichrists Hierarchy, yet it is not to
distinguish betwixt the Hierarchy in the Popish Kirk, and any other as
lawful: but the Hierarchy wheresoever it is, is called his; as the rest of
the Popish corruption are called his, to wit, Invocation of Saints,
Cannonization of Saints, Dedication of Altars, etc. are called his, not that
there is another lawful Cannonization, Invocation or Dedication of Altars*
whatsoever corruption was in the Kirk, either in Doctrine, worship, or
Government, since the Mystery of Iniquity began to work, and is retained, and
maintained by the Pope, and obtruded upon the Kirk by his Authority are his. A
passage also out of the History of the Council of Trent was alleged, where it
is related, that the Council would not define the Hierarchy by the seven
Orders: we have in our Confession of Faith the manifold Orders set a part and
distinguished from the Hierarchy, but as it is set down in the Cannon above
cited: we have in the book of Policy or second book of Discipline, in the end
of the second Chapter, this Conclusion agreed upon. Therefore all the ambitious
Titles invented in the Kingdom of Antichrist, and in his usurped Hierarchy,
which are not of one of these four sorts, to wit, Pastors, Doctors, Elders and
Deacons: together with the offices depending thereupon, in one word ought to be
rejected.

All which and many other Warrants being publikly read, and particularly at
great length examined, and all objections answered in face of the Assembly,
all the members of the Assembly being many times de^^red and required to
propon^ their doubts and (...), and every one being heard to the full, and
after much ^gitation as fully satisfied; The Moderator at last exh^rting every
one to declare his mind did put the master to voy^ing in these terms: Whether
according to the Confession of Taith, as it was professed in the year 1580.
1581. and 1590. there be any other Bishop, but a Pastou^ of a particular flock,
having no power nor pre-eminence nor power over his Brethren, and whether by
that Confession, as it was then professed, all other Episcopacie is abjured,
and ought to be removed out of this Kirk.

The whole Assembly most unanimously, without contradiction of any one (and
with the (...) of one (...)) professing full persuasion of mind, did voice,
That all Episcopacie different from that of a pastor over a particular flock,
was abjured in this Kirk, and to be removed out of it. And therefore prohibits
under Ecclesiastical (...) any to usurp, accept, defend, or obey the
pretended authority thereof in time coming.

Collected, visied, and extracted forth of the Register of the Acts of
Assembly by me Mr. A. Iohnstone Clerk thereto, under my sign and subscription
manual. A. Iohnstone Cler. Eccl.
Edinburgh, the 12* of Ian* 1639.
CHAP. III.
Discussing the four Considerations whereby they were moved to make this Act.
OUr Covenanters before they come to the point, in the beginning of the Act,
have set down four considerations whereby they allege they were moved, yea
forced of Necessity to conclude this Act against Bishops: and albeit they do
not directly appertain to the substance of the Controversy, yet we will
shortly observe some few notes thereupon, to show upon what impertinent
Considerations this Act has been grounded.

Their first Consideration is of the unspeakable goodness and great mercy of
God, manifested to this Nation in that excellent and divine work of
Reformation, brought to perfection, not only in Doctrine and worship, but also
in Discipline and Government, etc.

Whereupon first we must remark, that if they had soriously considered that
excellent work of Reformation, with due respect toward these worthy Reformers;
(whom God used as instruments in effectuating that work) they should never have
been moved thereby to have concluded such an Act as this, so directly contrary
to their mind; for they at the Reformation did establish such a discipline and
government in the Church according to Gods Word, as whereby one Pastor under
the Name of Superintendent might lawfully have power and pre-eminence over
other Brethren of the Ministry, and over more particular flock than one; which
discipline and government continued with happy success in the Church of
Scotland, above thirty years after the Reformation: but they have made this Act
quite contr^dictorie thereto, That it is not (...) for one Pastor (...) have
power and pre-eminence over other Brethren, nor over more particular flock than
one.

2. That which they allege that the second Book of Discipline is the
perfection of the work of Reformation, can no wise be true; for that cannot
rightly be called the perfection of any thing, which does reverse and destroy
the substance and nature thereof: but so it is that the Government established
by the second book of Discipline, which was presbyteriall, including an
absolute paritie amongst Pastors, did reverse and destroy the nature of the
government established by the Reformation, which was Episcopal, including
directly Superiority of one Pastor over others; and therefore it could no
ways truly be called the perfection thereof.

3. It is false that this Discipline was established by the Confession of
Faith, as shall be hereafter qualified by discussing all the passages falsely
and impertinently alleged for the same: As likewise I see not how it can be
true, that this book of Discipline was established by the continual practice
of the Church; for some points thereof were never practiced in the Church of
Scotland, and those which were practiced contrary to the estate of Bishops,
were not o^ long continuance; the practice of 8. or 10. or 15. years (which is
the most I can reckon) cannot be accounted such a continued practice, as may
make prescription against the continual practice of the whole Christian Church
for many hundred years before, and above six and thirty years since the
approved practice of the principal points of their Discipline were
discontinued, as we shall show more particularly hereafter.

Their second Consideration is, that by men's seeking their own things and not
the things of Christ, many Innovations and great evils have been obtruded upon
the Church, to the utter undoing of the work of reformation, and change of the
whole form of worship and face of the Church.

To this we answer, that those Constitutions of the Church (which they call
Novations and Evils, such as the establishing of Bishops; Baptism in private
places in ^ase of Necessity; reverent Kneeling in the Act of receiving the
Supper of the Lord; not refusing to give it to the sick who earnestly desire
it; the thankful remembrance of Gods special benefits by prayer; and
preaching of the Word upon certain appointed days; the Cate^hizing of young
children; and presenting of them to the Bishop to bless them by prayer for
increase of knowledge and continuance of Gods grace) are neither evils in
themselves, but tending to the removal of evils from the worship of God: as
irreverence and contempt of the Sacraments, neglect of a thankful remembrance
of Gods special benefits, and ignorance in youth, and to the establishing of
great good in the Church, as sound Government, Reverence in the worship of God,
thankfulness for Gods benefits, increase of knowledge in the younger sort, and
Spiritual comfort to Christian souls in Distress: Neither are they to be
accounted Novations, but rather a restoring of the ancient Constitutions and
Customs of the Primitive Church in her purest times.

2. These things cannot be said to be obtruded upon the Church, which were
received by the Consent both of the Church in General Assemblies, and by the
whole body of the Kingdom in Parliament, as all those Constitutions which they
challenge have been: but on the contrary, those things are said more truly to
be obtruded upon the Church, which are not brought in either by Assembly or
Parliament, yea directly against the Acts of both standing in force are
violently urged upon the people, not only to receive them simply, but likewise
to swear solemnly to the truth thereof by the great name of God, and that not
by any having authority or lawful calling thereunto, but by certain seditious
private persons: and such are their seditious Covenant and impertinent
applications, or false interpretations of the Confession of Faith; whereby many
persons of sundry estates were by false allurements and violent threatenings,
forced against their minds, to swear directly disobedience to the Kings Laws
and Constitutions of the Church.

Finally, it is also false, that those things which they call Nova^ions, have
undone the work of Reformation, and changed the whole form of Gods worship or
face of the Church: For the work of Reformation is rather restored by the
establishing of Bishops, which was destroyed in that point by their
Presbyteriall Government, and absolute paritie of Pastors; as we have touched
already, and shall be more fully cleared hereafter. Then albeit some
Circumstances and Ceremonies in Gods worship, and external apparel of the
Church have been changed, yet the substance and form of Faith, Religion,
worship, and the Beautiful face of the Spouse of Christ, the Church, does
notwithstanding remain still without change or alteration; which S. Austin
Epist. 86. expresses fitly, speaking of the like Novations in these words, Vna
fides often universa Ecclesiae, tametsi ipsa fidei unitas quibusdam diversis
observationibus celebratur, quibus nullo modo quod in fide verum est impeditur,
omnis enim pulchritudo filia regis intrinsecus, illa autem observationes quae
vary celebrantur, in ejus vest intelliguntur. That is to say, The faith of
the universal Church is one, although the unity of the Faith it self be
celebrated by some diversity of observations, whereby the truth of faith is
not hindered; for all the Beauty of the Kings daughter is within, But these
observations which are diversely celebrated are in her apparel. And Tortullian
lib. de virg. vela^d. faith, Regula quidem fidei una omnino est sola immobilis
and irreformabilis, etc. And a little after, Hac lege fidei manente, caetera
jam disciplinae and conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis, operante
and proficiente usque in finem gratia Dei. That is to say, The rule of Faith is
altogether one only, unchangeable, and such as admits no reformation; this
Law of Faith standing firm, the rest that concern discipline and reformation
may admit the Noveltie of Correction by the grace of God, which works a
profitable progress even to the end.

Their third Consideration is, that by the Kings urging of the Book of Common
Prayer, they knowing no other way to preserve Religion, were moved by GOD, and
urged by Necessity to renew the National Covenant, which the Lord since has
blessed from heaven, and to subscribe the Confession of Faith with an
Application, abjuring and suspending all Novations formerly introduced, till
they should be tried in a free general Assembly.

To this I answer, first, that the Kings urging of the Book of Common prayer
was not the true essential cause of their rebellious Covenant, but only an
occasion greedily apprehended by the Ringleaders, to make that a pretext to
stir up the people to follow them in their Rebellion, which they had before
purposed in their heart: For, if it had been the true cause when the King
discharged that book, their Rebellion had there ceased; for sublata vera causa
tollitur effectus, the true cause being taken away the effect must needs cease:
But so it is that their Rebellion did never show it self in so damnable
effects, as it did after the discharge of the book of Common prayer, and
granting of all their petitions. 2. The urging of that Book containing no
impious thing against God, nor hurtful to true Religion, could not be a just
motive to move them by any Necessity to such an action, as by the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom is declared to be high Treason; when as Subjects without
permission or knowledge of the Kings Majesty, do combine themselves in a
mutual band of maintenance against all persons whatsoever, not excepting the
King their Sovereign; yea, it is most evident that this Rebellious Covenant
was intended against the Kings Majesty directly, and against him only; albeit
they cunningly dissemble and pretend the contrary; for from whom could so many
potent Noblemen and gentlemen of such worth, with so great a number of their
followers, possibly or by any liklihood fear any danger or harm in their
persons or estates, for refusing the Book of Common prayer, or other things
which they call Innovations, urged chiefly by the Kings Authority and special
Command, if it were not from the King himself; Could they fear any harm from
thirteen or foureteen Bishops, for the most part old decrepit and impotent men?
or was there any, the smallest appearance of external Invasion, or inward
Conspiracy in the Kingdom, before they made it by their Covenant? so it is
manifest that it was from the King only they feared danger, being conscious to
themselves of their mis-demeanors and Rebellious intentions, by which it is
more than evident, that the band of mutual defense was only intended against
the Kings Majesty's self.

3. Was there no other way to preserve Religion, but by Disobedience and
Rebellion? it is a dangerous and harmefull physic, which prescribes a remedy
worse than the disease it self: the greatest danger which could come to
Religion by this Book, was only in circumstances, Ceremonies, and some
mis-interpreted words, which being rightly understood could not have been
rejected by peaceable, wise and understanding men, they might have been better
interpreted or otherwise corrected, than by open disobedience to God and his
Anointed: as Obedience (according to the saying of the Prophet) is better than
sacrifice: so Disobedience and Rebellion brings more danger and harm to
Religion, than the alteration of some indifferent Ceremonies and Circumstances
can be able to do, as any wise man may consider by the miserable effects which
ordinarily accompanies Rebellion.

4 It is false also that they were moved thereto by God. For God is the God of
order, and the God of peace, the author and commander of obedience unto
Superiors; and therefore cannot be called without blasphemy, the author of
Rebellion, Disobedience, Disorder, and Confusion in Church or Commonwealth,
such as this Covenant is in it self, and has produced all those evils as the
proper effects thereof: It is the doctrine of Anabaptists and fanaticall
Libertines to ascribe all the foolish conceits of their brains to the motion
of Gods Spirit: But certainly, it is more probable that they have been moved to
this Rebellious Covenant by that Spirit, whereby Chore, Dathan, and Abiram were
moved to make insurrection, drawing all the Congregation of Israel to Rebellion
against Moses and Aar^n, since both the Acts are very like one to another, as
is evident by considering the circumstances. That Traitor Raviliack who killed
Henry the Fourth of France, was a confident in his imagination; affirming, even
to the very death, that he was not moved to that Fact by any par^^^ular
respect, or instigation of another person, but only by God and the Virgin Mary.

5. It is false also that they were thereto drawn by Necessity; it was thought
indeed that those of Lower Germany were drawn by some Necessity, to confederate
themselves together against the King of Spain, (who was their Prince indeed)
yet neither he, nor any of his Predecessors had such absolute Soveraigntie over
them, as our King has over Scotland; because he violented their conciences,
compelling them not only to forsake, but also to forswear the true Religion,
and embrace Popish Idolatry; not by Proclamations only, but by fire and
sword, and cruel torments in the Inquisition; whereby many thousands of them
were put to death most cruelly, before ever they made any combination amongst
themselves, or refused due Obedience to their Prince. Although nevertheless
many wise and learned men are of opinion, that their rising in Arms against
their Prince, was not altogether justifiable before God: much less then can
our Covenanters allege truly, that they were drawn by any Necessity to this
Rebellious combination; since for the refusal of that book, never a man in
Scotland had lost his life or estate, or a drop of his blood, or was fined in a
farthing, or had his body imprisoned, or a hair of his head touched before
that Covenant.

6. They allege that this was a renewing of the National Covenant enjoined by
King James, which is most false; for it was a plain contracting of a new one,
different in Substance from that which was sworn either the year 1580. or 1590.
as they know well, and their own conscience bears them witness. The substance
of a Covenant consists 1. in the Authority whereby it is concluded. 2. In the
parties betwixt whom. 3. In the matter or Articles whereunto they bind
themselves. 4. In the end for the which it is contracted; but in all these
points, this Covenant is different from the former enjoined by King James of
h^ppy memory.

First, the Kings Covenant was enjoined by the Authority of the King and his
Council, who only under God has power to bind all his Subjects: but this was
only framed and urged by private men, upon those, over whom they had no
lawful Authority civil or ecclesiastical.

Secondly, in that Covenant the parties were the Kings Majesty our dread
Sovereign on the one part, and all his Subjects on the other part: in this, the
parties are some particular private persons, Noblemen, Barrons, Gentlemen,
Ministers, Burgesses, and Commons amongst themselves, excluding the Kings
Majesty.

Thirdly, the matter and Articles whereunto all are bound in the first
Covenant, are the maintenance of true Religion according to the Confession of
Faith, Abjuration of all Antichristian and Popish errors, the defense of the
Kings Majesty's person, Authority and estate; but in this, albeit they pretend
to bind themselves by oath to the defense of all these, yet is it but a pretext
to cover their Rebellion, and Protestatio contra factum: for it is evident that
they have in this very Fact, many ways incroached upon the Kings Majesty's
Authority and estate, contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; but
the principal Articles whereto they bind themselves is, 1. To stand together
in the mutual defense one of another against all persons whatsoever. 2. To the
maintenance of their false Applications of the Confession of Faith added
thereunto, like the Gloss of Orleans, destroying the meaning of the Text. 3.
To forbear the practice of all those things which they call Novations,
constituted by the consent of the Church, ratified in Parliament, and commanded
by the King, which is directly to swear disobedience both to the King and the
Church, and consequently to God also. 4. To reject the present Government of
the Church established by the Kings authority, consent of the Church in diverse
general Assemblies, and of the whole estates in Parliament: finally, to
suppress one of the three estates o^ Parliament, thereby destroying the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Fourthly, the end of the first Covenant was to maintain peace and concord
both in Church and Commonwealth (which was many ways disturbed in those times)
and defense of the Kingdom from external Invasions and inward Seditions,
which were upon too evident grounds then feared: but in this their Covenant the
chief intended end was to disturb the peace both in the Church and Kingdom,
by stirring up seditious factions therein against the King and his Loyal
Subjects, that in those troubles (as fishing in troubled waters) they might
work their own particular ends: and not to exclude external invasions, but
rather to open a gate for strangers to enter, and if their secret practices
with the King of France, and the Estates of Holland could have prevailed (as
they were confident they should) to have brought in foreign forces within the
bowels of the Kingdom; But praised be God, those Estates were wiser than so,
as to assist Subjects in their unjust Rebellion against their natural Prince.

Finally, we must not omit their foolish and vain boasting here, and in their
other pamphlets often repeated usque a^ Nauseam, that their Rebellious Covenant
has been by the Lord blessed from Heaven; they conceive so, because of the
great appla^se it has had amongst themselves, and the prosperous succe^^e they
have found in their enterprises against the Kings Castles, in putting their
Armies to the field, and harming the Kings loyal Subjects without present
damage to themselves: but let not him that puts on his Armor boast himself,
as he that puts it off; Chore, Dathan and Abirars had good success at the
first, and drew after them in their Rebellious Covenant two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, and men of Renoune* as it
is written, Numb. 16. 2. And a great many of the people against Moses and
Aaron, the Prince of the people, and the high Priest of the Lord whom God had
set over them; So that Moses being greatly astonished, fell down most abjectly
upon his face before them, and could not know how to repress that Sedition,
except the Lord had comforted and directed him: these men might have thought as
our Covenanters do, that the Lord had blessed their enterprise from Heaven;
yet ere it was long they found Gods just Judgment and Curse both from Heaven
and Earth, for the Earth swallowed up some of them quick, and others were
destroyed by fire from Heaven: Let all Seditious Rebels therefore learn by
this example to repent in time, and not to boast too confidently of their
present success, but fear the end.

The fourth and last Consideration is, because his Majesty's Commissioners and
Council, by the Kings Commandment, and others of his Subjects by ordinance of
the Council, had subscribed the Confession of Faith without their
Applications; and that both the one and the other Subscribers had done it
according to the date, tenor and mea^ing it had An. 1581. there, for they
considered that it was expedient and proper for the general Assembly to
declare the true meaning thereof, as it was at first professed, to the end that
all his Majesty's Subjects may be one mind and heart, and have full
satisfaction to all their doubts.

Concerning this Consideration, we must observe that howsoever the subscribers
of that rebellious Covenant did understand the Confession of Faith, yet those
who did subscribe the Kings Covenant at his Majesty's command, both first and
last, could not lawfully swear to it in any other sense than the King who
required the oath did understand the same; for this is most certain, That all
oaths required by a magistrate should be taken in the direct and explained
meaning of him who required the oath: But it is evident that his Majesty
declared himself plainly enough, that he did not require his Council, nor his
other subjects, to sweat this Confession in such meaning as thereby either
Episcopacy* or the other established Constitutions of the Church should be
abjured; for otherwise, it had been a deluding of his Majesty's Command by a
Jesuitical equivocation, who teach their Supposts that Axiom, Unto dangerous
interrogatories one may frame to himself a safe sense, and swear thereto,
thought it be contrary to the meaning of him who required the Oath. Therefore I
cannot conceive, that those judicious and discreet Noblemen would practice
Jesuitical tricks to elude his Majesty's Command, in swearing that Confession
and Covenant in another sense than they knew his Majesty intended.

2. Albeit, that in their subscribing and swearing they had all added expressly
that restriction, According to the meaning it had Anno 1581. yet will it not
follow that they had any doubt of the true meaning, for we must presuppone that
all the Kings loyal Subjects did conceive, that that Covenant was no otherwise
understood at that time by King James of happy memory, than it is now by King
Charles; to wit, in such a sense as might stand with Episcopacie, neither could
it be otherwise understood as we shall declare more fully hereafter: and
therefore, those needed not this Act of Assembly to resolve them of their
doubt in this point; and certainly, this Assembly has casten more doubts and
scruples in the hearts of men, than ever they shall be able to resolve, until
it shall be declared Null, as indeed it is already really null in it self. It
were an infinite labor to examine all the falsehoods of these Considerations,
since there is scarce a line or a sentence therein, which does not contain
diverse falsehoods; yet those which we have remarked are sufficient to declare
how unfirme those considerations are to ground thereupon a Necessity of
concluding this Act.

CHAP. IIII.
Containing the state of the Question concerning Episcopacie, as it is here
condemned.
HAving already discussed the falsehood and impertinencie of those four
considerations, laid down for grounds in their preface to the Act; we must now
come to discuss the Act it self: But first of all, before we enter to the
reasons pr^ or contra, the state of the Controversy must be first set down,
for there is nothing more requisite to the clear deciding of any Controversy,
than the right stating of the Question; but chiefly in these Controversies
which are to be determined by voices or suffrages in a grave Assembly of the
Church, wherein every one ought to give his voice, not according to the example
or injunction of other men, but according to a certain knowledge and
conscience before God: therefore the Question must be clear without ambiguitie,
either in the matter, or in the words and phrases; It is a trick of Sophisters
to propose a Question or determine it in obscure and ambiguous terms, which
may be drawn to contrary senses; all such Questions ought to be plain, clear
and simple, and such as one may easily conceive, and answer thereto directly
and Categorically.

But in this Act of the Assembly the proposition of the Question is set down,
in such ambiguous words and intricate phrases, that one can hardly either
understand the meaning, or give a direct answer* And albeit the proposition of
the Question be set down in the end of the Act after all the Reasons, yet we
must consider it in the beginning, to the end we may try how pertinently or
impertinently the reasons alleged, do conclude the determination of the
Assembly: It is proposed therefore by the Moderator in these words, Whether
according to the Confession of Faith, as it was professed in the year 1580.
1581. and 1590. there be any other Bishop, but a Pastor of a particular flock,
having no pre-eminence nor power over his Brethren; and whether by that
Confession, as it was then professed, all other Episcopacie is abjured, and
ought to be removed out of this Kirk.

First, this proposition of the Question is altogether captious, including a
Sophisme a multis interrogatis; for there are three several Questions expressly
included therein, which are so different in Nature, that one cannot possibly
answer to all in one manner, 1 Whether according to the Confession of faith, as
it was professed in the year 1580. 1581. and 1590. there be any other Bishop,
but a Pastor of a particular flock, having no pre-eminence (...) power over his
Brethren: to this, the voycers according to the meaning of the Covenanters
behoved to answer negative, that there was no other Bishop. 2. Whether by that
Confession, as it was then professed, all other Episcopacie is abjured:
Certainly, all Covenanters keeping their own grounds behoved to answer to this
affirmative, that all other was abjured. 3. Whether all other Episcopacie
behoved to be removed out of this Kirk, To this Question also they could not
answer but affirma^^ve.

Is it not then evident? that such a question as this ^ould not be put to
voycing, except by those who had a mind to entangle simple men by a
Sophysticall proposition; for in all matters which are to be determined by
voices, the question ought to be so proposed, as the voicers may answer by a
simple affirmation, or by a simple negation, and as it is called in the Schools
Categorice; otherwise, there behoved to be a strange confusion in
di^tinguishing the voices. But to this Question as it was proposed, no one
Categoricall answer could be given by any, but they behoved of necessity to
answer negative to one part, and affirmative to another. I have known the
Moderator to have been a quick and solid Logician, and I should marvel what
could make him oversee himself so grossly in such a weighty business against all
true Logic, if I did know that passions and affections will often miscarry
wise and learned men into great absurdities: or, that perhaps the Question was
so framed at the tables of the Covenant, and appointed to be thus proposed at
the Assembly; therefore he could not alter nor change the form, because of his
Oath of obedience to them as his Superiors, although he knew it was against all
Logic and good reason.

But lest they should object, that if the Questions though many in number, have
such a necessary and essential co-herence together, that the one being
granted, the rest must be necessarily granted also, or that upon the Negative
of the one, the affirmative of the other depends by necessary consequence;
then it is not captious, but one answer may suffice for all. To this we answer,
that these Questions have no such necessary Cohesion together, for although the
answer of the first were granted to be true, yet the answer to the second may
be false, and albeit the second be granted, the third may be false: for first,
although it were granted that by the Confession of Faith, there were no other
Bishops but such as were Pastors over a particular flock, and had no
pre-eminence over their Brethren; yet is it not necessary to grant, that all
others were abjured; for albeit there be no other Bishops expressed in the
Confession of Faith, yet that will not exclude all others that are not
expressed, yea even in divine Scripture; although in matters necessary to
Salvation, Argumentum negativum a Scripturis be good and valid, it is not
written, Ergo it is not necessary to Salvation; yet is it not so in all other
particulars, not necessary to Salvation, it is not written Ergo it is not;
much less can such a reason be necessary in humane writs, such as the
Confession of Faith is. First, because all humane writs are subject to error,
and not infallibly true; then because confessions do not comprehend every
point, which may by any be called in controversy, but those only which are
chiefly controverted with their principal Adversaries: Now this point of the
preheminencie of Bishops, etc. was not a point controverted, betwixt the
reformers of Religion who set down the Confession, and their Adversaries the
Papists; And therefore needed not to be mentioned in the Confession, and by
consequent, albeit there was no such Bishops according to the Confession; yet
it is not necessary that they should be abjured. Then there is as little
coherence betwixt the last two questions, for although it had been abjured at
that time, yet will it not follow necessarily, that it be now removed out of
the Church for two reasons; first, because then it might have been abjured
wrongfully and out of Ignorance; but afterward men coming to better and
sounder knowledge, that which rashly has been abjured before, may be lawfully
restored now. Next, because if there had been a Law and Constitution against
it, for certain reasons of not expediencie, the Church might have abjured it
for that time; yet that Law being abrogated by lawful Authority, it may be
received again by the Church: for it is holden as granted by all, that Oaths
given to humane positive Laws, either Civil or Ecclesiastic, obliges no
longer than the Law stands in force; Now therefore since the Law forbidding
preheminencie of one Pastor over others (if any such Law was) being now
abrogated, and the contrary established, this preheminencie ought not to be
removed now, though formerly abjured.

Secondly, There is great Ambiguities in the terms of the proposition
themselves, yea, almost every word has its own Ambiguitie: for 1. the word
Confession is ambiguous, for although there be two writs which by some are
called Confessions, yet there is one only proper and perfect profession of
Faith of the Church of Scotland, neither ought there to be any more in one
Church; to wit that large Confession set down at the beginning of the
reformation, wherein is contained all the positive Doctrine maintained by that
Church, which was acknowledged and received in the general Assembly, An. 1560.
and ratified by the whole body of the kingdom in Parliament, 1567. and inserted
verbatim in the body of the Act: that other which is called the negative
Confession is only an Appendix of the former, containing an abjuration of
certain special Errors of the Roman Church, so it is doubtful which of
those Confessions is here understood. 2. There is likewise an Ambiguity in that
word, According to the Confession; because it may be understood diversely, for
either it implies that it is expressly contained therein, and so it is properly
according to the same; or otherwise it may signify only that it is not
contrary thereunto, though not particularly expressed: now Episcopacie in the
first sense perhaps is not according to the Confession, because it is not
expressly mentioned therein, which is no absurdity as we have shown before;
yet is it according to it in the second sense, because not contrary thereunto.
3. There is ambiguitie in the words (As it is professed Anno 1580. etc.) For
either it must be signified as it was then proposed in writ or print, and so
certainly it was no otherwise professed at that time than it was from the
beginning, and is now at this present* but has been ever conserved unaltered,
or uncorrupted in the Registers of the Church and Kingdom, so that the
particular restriction to those years 1580. 1581. 1590. is needless and
superfluous: or by (Profession) is signified the sense or interpretation
thereof, as it was understood and interpreted An. 1580. and thus also that
restriction of the profession to those years, is no less superfluous; for it
could not be, or at least ought not to have been by any otherwise interpreted
in these years, or now, then it was understood at the beginning by those who
set it down, for (as we say) unusquisque est optimus suorum verborum interpres,
and the first Reformers, who framed that Confession, did interpret it in the
first book of Discipline, and Acts of diverse Assemblies thereafter, so as it
did approve the power of one Pastor over others: Therefore, if any did
interpret it in a contrary sense, they wronged greatly the worthy Reformers of
the Religion, and we are not now obliged to imitate them in their wrongful
dealing. 4. There is Ambiguitie likewise in the word (Bishop) which sometimes
is taken in a general sense, as it is attributed to every Pastor in the Church
who has power to oversee the actions of the people in Spiritual affairs:
sometimes more particularly, as it signifies those that have Jurisdiction both
over more pastors and people of a certain bounds called a Diocese, as it has
been taken in all Churches since the Apostles days, until this former age,
but because this is discussed in the Question it self I speak no more of it.

Finally, there is Ambiguities in those words (A particular flock,) for a
Diocese is the particular flock of a Bishop, as well as a Parish is the
particular flock of a Minister: many more Ambiguities might be remarked in the
words of this Question, which for briefues we omit here, but shall be (God
willing) discussed as occasion serves in the subsequent discourse.

Thirdly, it is also subtle Sophysticall dealing, that they have drawn the
Question a Thesi ad Hypothesin; they do not ask whether Episcopacie be
lawful in it self or not, but whether it should be retained or removed, in
regard of the Confession of Faith, and of the Covenant, and that only as the
Confession was understood An. 1580. 1581. and 1590. involving the Question in
diverse intricate suppositions, which they have done subtly for their own
ends: first, because they were not able to bring any solid testimony of
Scripture, or approved Fathers, or practice of true antiquity, to prove the
unlawfulness of that office; and therefore, neither in this Act, nor in any
other Act of this Assembly is there one syllable produced out of Gods Word to
approve their conclusions, but all their proofs are from their Negative
Confession of Faith, impudently wrested from the true meaning thereof, from the
Oath of the Covenant strangely mis-applyed, and from certain Acts of late
General Assemblies; which all at the best are but humane testimonies, and such
manner of proofs is not consonant to their ordinary exclamations against
humane ordinances and Traditions of men, continually pretending to all their
speeches and actions, Gods Word, and Conscience which only is to be grounded
thereupon. 2. They have framed the Question so, restricting the meaning of the
Confession to the year 1580. etc. because it is evident that from the
reformation until that time, they could not allege any Act of Assembly or
Book of Discipline, showing that the Church had any such intention as
absolutely to condemn Episcopacie: but by the contrary, the Church had
declared both by the first book of Discipline, and Acts of diverse Assemblies
(as shall be fully made clear) that she did so explain her meaning in the
Confession of Faith concerning the point of Government, as she did approve
expressly this power and pre-eminence, and charge over more particular ^^ocks
condemned by this Act. 3. They framed the question in this manner, to strike a
terror of a fearful perjurie upon the weak Consciences of these who could not
discern rightly either the quality of the Oath or the matter thereof; to make
them more pliable to their Rebellious projects, persuading them, that the
swearers themselves and all their posterity were bound to the observation of
that Oath, according to their false interpretation, notwithstanding of any
interveening Law or Constitution absolving them from it; and that this fearful
perjurie could never be expiated, except they renewed their Oath to that
Covenant, together with their false Applications and perverse interpretations,
far different, yea flat contrary to their meaning who framed the Confession
of Faith and enjoined the Oath, which as we shall show, is but an Imaginary
fear.

It had been more plain dealing, and fitter to have removed all doubts, if
they had proposed the Question more simply, and in more perspicuous terms,
asking, Whether the Office of a Bishop be lawful in it self or not; for, if it
had been solidly proven by Gods Word to be unlawful, then it had been evident
also, that the Oath whereby it was abjured, was lawful; and no man could have
doubted but that Oath did bind, both the Actual swearers and all their
posterity to the observation thereof: but if it had been found by clear
Scripture that the Office of a Bishop had been lawful, then no man could have
doubted but the Oath whereby they did abjure it was unlawful; and therefore,
that no man was bound to the observation thereof, but by the contrary, all were
bound in Conscience to break such an Oath: or, if it had been found of middle
nature, neither simply unlawful, nor necessarily lawful at all times, but a
thing indifferent, in the power of the Church and Supreme Magistrate, to make a
Law either establishing or abolishing the same, who might also require an Oath
of all to observe that Law: then certainly, no man could have doubted but that
so long as that positive Law stood in force, that Oath did bind all Subjects to
the observation of it; as likewise that the Law being abolished by lawful
Authority, no man was further bound, but was ipso facto absolved from the
Oath. So the Question being propounded in this manner, and resolved any other
ways it had cleared all doubts and moved all to be of One mind and one heart;
but being propounded in their manner, no resolution did take away all doubts
(as they promised to do by this Act) but rather did multiply them and make
them greater: For albeit it had been cleared, that Episcopacie had been abjured
by the Oath of the Covenant (which notwithstanding is not done) yet a greater
doubt remained, whether that Abjuration was lawful or not; which could not be
resolved except it had been first made manifest, that Episcopacie was unlawful
in it self by Gods Word.

Yet that we may follow them in their own method, and reason upon their own
grounds, we shall leave at this time the probations which may be brought for
the office of a Bishop from Gods Word, and practice of the Primitive Church,
which has been sufficiently performed by diverse learned Divines, to the which
the best of that Sect could never sufficiently answer. Taking then the Question
as it is set down by them, there are two points which they only here condemn
in that office; first, that they have charge over more Parishes than one,
secondly, that they have power and preheminencie over their Brethren, we shall
make it therefore evident, 1. That by the Confession of Faith, Books of
Discipline, Acts of General Assemblies, and long continued practice of the
Church of Scotland at the reformation and many years after, this pre-eminence
and power of one Pastor over others, and charge over more parishes than one,
has been acknowledged to be lawful. Secondly, we shall show that none of
those passages brought by them, at length in the Act it self, (which doubtless
were the strongest they could find) forth of the abjuration in the Covenant,
books of Discipline, and Acts of former general assemblies, do prove their
conclusion; but that all of them are either falsely or impertinently cited,
far by, or contrary to the meaning of the Authors, and therefore that all of
them are Sophystically alleged.

CHAP. V.
That this pre-eminence and power of Bishops here questioned is conform to the
true Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, to the first Book of
Discipline and the long continued practice of the Church.
FIrst, we must observe that there are two Confessions of Faith so called in
the Church of Scotland, as we have remarked before, to wit, that large
Confession, established at the first reformation, framed by John Knox, and
other faithful Ministers Anno 1560. Confirmed by diverse general Assemblies,
received by the whole body of the Kingdom, ratified by Act of Parliament 1567.
and inserted in the body of the Act, which is the only proper Confession of the
Church of Scotland, containing all the positive grounds of the Reformed
Religion, especially in matters of Faith, controverted betwixt us and the
Papists, and other Heretics; the other called commonly the Negative
Confession, which is not properly a perfe^t Confession, but an Appendix of the
former, framed not by any Ordinance of the Assembly of the Church, but by the
appointment of the Kings Majesty and Council; first sworn and subscribed by
the Kings Majesty himself and his household, then by an Act of Council dated
the 5. of March 1580. It was ordained that all persons within the Kingdom
should swear the same; and for more commodious doing thereof, it was presented
by his Majesty's Commissioners to the Assembly holden at Glasgow, 1581. that
they might approve it, and injoyne every Minister to see the Oath taken by all
their Parishioners, and it did contain an abjuration of most special gross
errors of Popery: the same abju^ation was again commanded by the King to be
renewed in the year 1590. (when as that Conspiracy of some Papists trafficking
with the King of Spain was discovered) having annexed thereto a general band
or Covenant, whereby all the Subjects binds themselves with the Kings Majesty
for maintenance of true Religion, according to the Confession of Faith set down
at the first reformation, and for the defense of the Kings Majesty's person,
Authority and estate, against all Enemies within and without the Kingdom; to
the end that true professors, and his Majesty's loyal Subjects might more
easily be discerned from hypocritical Papists and seditious Rebels.

Now as for that only perfect Confession there is no clause nor Article
therein, which either expressly, or by any probable consequence condemns this
power and preheminencie here controverted: neither have they been so bold, as
to allege any passage out of the same; nor was it the meaning of those godly
and learned persons who set it down, and proposed it to be received by the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland; nor the meaning of the Church and Kingdom who
accepted and approved the same, as the true Doctrine proved by Gods Word,
thereby to condemn any such thing: yea, it is most evident that they had a
quite contrary meaning, as they themselves did publikly declare in the first
book of Discipline, showing therein what manner of Government and Policy they
do require in the true reformed Church; to wit, that it should be governed by
Superintendents in every Province, having power and pre-eminence over all the
Ministers and all the Parishes within their bounds: for this book of Discipline
was framed by the same persons who set down that confession of Faith, and at
the same very time or shortly thereafter; and that by the command and direction
of the great Council of Scotland, admitted to the Government, by common
cons^nt of the whole estates, in ^he Queens absence, (being for the time in
France) and ratifi^^^ by Act of Council, and manual subscriptions of the
Counselors, and of diverse other men of worth the 17. of January 1560. approved
by many general Assemblies, and the continual practice of the Church for
twice as many years thereafter, as Presbyteriall Governmental remained in force.

Then that we may see how far this power of Superintendents did extend, we
must consider that the first Reformers of Religion, (because of the detestable
enormities of Papisticall Bishops, which made their persons, offices, and very
names to be detested) out of a certain zealous scrupulositie, would not at
first give the title of Bishops to the rulers of the Church; yet nevertheless
by the example of many other reformed Churches, gave to those who were
appointed to their charge a title of the same signification, calling them
(Superintendents:) So changing a proper Greek word into a barbarous Latin, for
the Greek word (...), and the Latin word Superintendens do both signify one
thing; to wit, such a one as is set over others to oversee their actions.

Albeit by this book of Discipline, the whole Kingdom was divided in ten
Dioceses, expressly so called) and over every Diocese a Superintendent appointed
to be set; yet in all the books of Assemblies we find only four who carried
expressly this title, to wit, M^. John Spotswood (father to the late deceased
John Archbishop of St. An^^^ws) called Superintendent of L^^thran, or
Edinburgh: John Areskin of Diune Superintendent of Angus and Mearnes, or of
Brechin: Mr. John Wonram Superintendent of Fyfe or S. Andrews: M. John W^llocks
Superintendent of the West or Glasgow: those who were set over the rest of the
Dioceses were called Commissioners, either because at that time they could not
fi^d so many sufficient men, or for lack of sufficient means to maintain the
estate of Superintendents, or as some rather think, because they esteemed this
too absolute a Title, and near in signification to the title of Bishop;
therefore they thought it more fit to call them Commissioners, as importing
morse a dependencie upon the general Assembly of the Church, from which they
received Commission to exercise their charge, not for any definite time, but ad
vitam or ad culpam. Those same are at sometimes called Visitores by a word of
the like signification with Episcopus, for (...) signifies likewise a Visitor,
and (...) Visitation, as 1 Pet. ^. 12. (...) is translated by all interpreters
in dievisitationis, and so the Hebrew word (...) from the known word (...)
visitavit by the Septuagints is translated (...), and by Latins Inspector,
Visitator or Praefectus: Howsoever they were diversely named they had all a like
power and Jurisdiction, which was no less then in the Church of Scotland, than
the power which the Bishops had in the ancient Church; or in the Church of
Scotland these many years bygone, as may appear by this parallel, betwixt the
power of Bishops and the power of Superintendents.

A Parallel betwixt the power of Bishops and the power of Superintendents.
FIrst, as every Bishop has his own Diocese, over the which he has
Superiority and Jurisdiction, and therein a special City, for his sea and
place of Residence, called the Metropolitan or Cathedral City. So every (...)
by the first book of Discipline Cap. 5. Art. 2. (...) pointed to him his own
Diocese, to have (...) power over all persons both pastors and people (...)
that bounds, and therein a certain place of ordinary residence, called there
the Superintendents town; which for the most part were the same Cities, from
which the Bishops of Scotland are now denominated.

Secondly, As all the Clergy in every Diocese are bound to give (...)
obedience to their ordinary Bishop, according to (...) Canons of the Church.
Right so by a special (...) General Assembly at Edinburgh, July 30. 1562. It
is concluded by the whole ministers there Assembled, that all Ministers shall
be Sub^^ct to their Superintendents in all lawful (...) as well in the book of
Discipline, as in (...) Election of Superintendents; which is no other (...)
but Canonical obedience.

Thirdly, As all Bishops are to be (...) of General or National Councels,
(...) been in all ages, and needed not any (...) thereto, from the time that
they were (...) consecrated to that office. So likewise in all (...)
Superintendents and Commission^^ (...) were constant principal members of
(...) Assemblies, and needed not any particular Commission thereto, but being
once admitted to the office, were ever acknowledged thereafter, and received
without any other Commission; as is evident by that Assembly at Edinburgh July
1568. wherein the members of the General Assembly are divided in two Ranks,
some are appointed to be ordinary and perpetual members, as Superintendents
and Commissioners of Provinces; the other sort are mutable, as Commissioners of
Churches, Universities, Towns, and Provinces; the first had no need of
particular Commission, but were perpetual and first called in the Roll, the
other were changeable from Assembly to Assembly, and had new particular
Commissions from those by whom they were directed. In the Assembly at
Edinburgh 1563. that every Superintendent shall appear the first day of the
Assembly: at Edinburgh March 1578. the same Act is renewed, and Bishops also
are appointed to be present at all Assemblies, or else to be accounted unworthy
of the office, and by diverse other Acts: yea, after that the othee of Bishops
begun to be questioned in the Assembly 1579. July 7. Sess. 9. It is ordained
That Bishops and Com^iss^ouers of Provinces who abjent themselves from (...)
Assemblies shall be censured according to the Act, august 12. 1575. and that
Act to be understood not only (...) Bishops having power of Visitation from
the Church, but also of such as have not that office.

Fourthly, As all Bishops have power to hold their Synods twice in the year,
when and where it shall please them within their own Diocese, and there all the
Clergy of the Diocese are bound to conveene, and all matters which concern
the Diocese are therein to be determined by the Bishop. So likewise albeit that
in the first book of Discipline, there is no mention of Synodall or Provincial
Assemblies: yet after by Acts of General Assemblies, it is appointed that
every Superintendent and Commissioner shall hold Synods in their own bounds,
wherein all matters pertaining particularly to their own Diocese or Province
shall be determined, as appears by the Assembly at Edinburgh March 5. 1570.
wherein these two Acts are set down: first, It is ordained that offenders in
heinous crimes shall not appear before the general Assembly, but shall be
called before the Superintendents, and Commissioners of Provinces to appear
before them in their Synodall Conventions, and there to receive their
injunctions, conform to the order used before in General Assemblies. Itein,
It is ordained that all Question^ concerning the Province shall be propounded
first to the Superintendent et Commissioner, to receive resolution in their
Synodall conventions; and if they be diffieile, to be propounded to the next
general Assembly by the Superiatendent or Commissioner; with certification
that no Question shall be received hereafter from any private Minister. So
likewise in the Assembly at Edinburgh 1568. It is ordained that no Minister
exhort or read, or other person shall trouble the General Assembly with such
matters as Superintendents may and ought to decide in their Synods; And if they
do so their Letters shall be rejected.

Fifthly, As no Pastor ought to have place in National Assemblies, except such
as are authorized thereunto by their Ordinary Bishop, according to the custom
of the ancient Church: Although our Bishops in Scotland, since they were
re-established, did never usurp this power to themselves, but left the
Election of the Commissioner in the power of the Brethren of the Presbytery:
So likewise it was ordained in the Assembly at Edinburgh 1568. That no
Minister should have voice in General Assemblies, nor leave their flocks to
attend thereat, unless they be chosen by their Superintendent, as men known
able to reason, and of knowledge to judge in matters of weight. The same
likewise we see testified to have been the Custom of the Church of Scotland,
by a Letter written by the Lord Glames then Chancellor of Scotland unto Beza,
about the year 1575. when Episcopacie began to be quarrelled, wherein Quaest.
2. he says, Post reformatam Religionem consuetudine receptum est, ut Episcopi
(under which word he comprehends the Superintendents) and ex Ministris,
Pastoribus, ac Senioribus, tot, quot ijde^ Episcopi jusserint, unum in locum
conveniant, cum praecipuis Barronibus, ac Nobilibus, Religionem veram
profitentibus, and de doctrina and de moribus inquisituri.

Sixthly, As all the presentation of Benefices vacant were to be directed to the
Bishop of the Diocese where the Benefice lies; so that if the person presented
be found qualified, he may enjoy the same. So is it appointed at the Assembly
holden at St. Iohnstone June 1563. That when any Benefice shall chance to
vaick, or is now vacant, that a qualified person be presented to the
Superintendent of that Province where the Benefice lies, and that he being
found sufficient, be admitted Minister to that Kirk, etc. Likewise in the
Assembly at Edinburgh, 1578. (wherein they allege the second book of
Discipline was agreed unto) one of the Petitions of the Assembly preferred to
the King and Council was, That all presentations to Benefices may be directed
to the Commissioner or Superintendent where the Benefice lies.

Seventhly, As the Ordination of Ministers appertains peculiarly to the Bishop
of the Diocese. So likewise the Ordination (which by the style of Scotland is
called Admission or Conftirmation) not only of Ministers, but also of Readers,
Schoolmasters and Principalls of Colleges, did appertain to the
Superintendents in their own bounds, as is evident by the fifth Chapter of the
book of Discipline, in the Article of Superintendents, and in the Article of
Schools and Universities.

Eighthly, As Bishops have at all times had power to examine the life, doctrine
and behavior of the Clergy of his own Diocese, and to admonish, correct, or
censure them accordingly. So likewise in the same book of Discipline, Cap. 5.
the Superintendents received power and authority to visit the Churches of
their bounds, so often as they may, and therein not only to preach, But also to
exmine the life, diligence and behavior of all the Ministers, as likewise the
orders of the Kirks, and manners of the people, and to admonish where
admonition needs, and to correct them by the censures of the Kirk, etc.

Ninthly, As Bishops have power of suspension or deposition of Ministers, who
are either scandalous in their lives, or heretical in their doctrine. So by
the book of Discipline, and diverse Acts of the Assemblies, that power does
appertain to Superintendents, Commissioners or Visitors, as is manifest by
that place of the book of Disciplince, cited by us in the former Article: and
by the Assembly holden at Edinburgh, April 1576. wherein it is said, Anent the
demand made by Mr. Andrew Hay Parson of Ranthrow, if every Commissioner or
Visitor in his own bounds has alike power and Jurisdiction to plant Ministers,
suspend and depose for reasonable causes: the Assembly resolved affirmative,
that they have alike power and Jurisdiction therein, as is contained in the
particular Acts concerning the Jurisdiction of Visitors.

Tenthly, As Bishops, because of their places and great charges in overseeing
all the Churches, have greater rents appointed to them than to other Pastors.
So likewise by the book of Disciplie, Cap. 5. in the Article for the provision
of Ministers, is appointed almost four times as much stipend for the
Superintendent, as for other private Ministers.

Moreover, it is evident by many Acts of General Assemblies, that those
Bishops who had joined themselves to the reformed Church, retaining still the
office and title of Bishops, did by approbation of the general Assemblies,
exercise their Jurisdiction over the Ministry and people of their own Diocese,
even from the beginning of the Reformation almost; for in the Assembly at
Edinburgh, 1582. Alexander Gordon Bishop of Galloway was authorized to plant
Ministers, exhorters and readers, and to do such other things as has been
heretofore accustomed to be done by Superintendents or Commissioners. In the
Assembly at S. Iohnstone, Iunc 1563. the Bishops of Orknay and Kai^hnes are
allowed to exercise the same Jurisdiction; and to show that they did not this
by compulsion of Superior Authority, but of their own voluntary motion, in
that Assembly it is appointed, that a Supplication shall be preferred in name
of the whole Assembly to the Queens Majesty, that she would be pleased to
remit the thirds of the Bishoprics (which were then in the Queens hands) to
the Bishops, who were allowed by the Church to be Commissioners, for planting
of Churches within the bounds of their own Diocese: and thereafter Anno 1572.
All Bishops were by special Act of the General Assembly restored to the
function, at the desire of the Earl of Lenox then Regent of Scotland: and the
next year in the Assembly at Edinburgh 1573. certain limitations of their
power were added, not very strict which no Bishop can refuse; 1. That the
Jurisdiction of Bishops in their Ecclesiastical function, should not exceed
the Jurisdiction of the Superintendents, which heretofore they had and
presently have; which Jurisdiction, as we have declared, was no less than that
which the Bishops require now. 2. That they should be willingly subject to the
Discipline appointed by the General Assembly as members thereof: This
likewise is reasonable, and no Bishop will think himself exeemed from the
censure of a National Assembly lawfully constituted, according to the
established and approved orders of the Church. 3. That no Bishops give
co^^ation of Benefices within the bounds of Superintendents without their
consent and testimonial subscribed by their hands: This was also reasonable,
for Superintendents were also Bishops, and it is conform to the ancient Canons
of the Church, That no Bishop should give ordination or collation to any within
the Diocese of another Bishop without his consent and testimonial. 4. That
Bishops in their own Diocese visit by themselves, where no Superintend^nts
are: which indeed is their duty, if they be not impedited either by infirmity,
or by some weightier affairs of the Church. 5. That they give no collation of
Benefices without the advice of three qualified Ministers: The Bishops of
Scotland heretofore did astrict themselves further, for they were not
accustomed to give collation of Benefices (except (...) were to men of known
worth in the exercise of the ministry before) without the advice of the whole
Brethren of the Exercise in the bounds where the Benefice lies, committing the
whole trial both of their life and doctrine to them, and according to their
Testificate did accept or reject him who was presented.

By this then which we have truly related out of the book of Discipline, and
Acts of General Assemblies of the Church, it is manifest, that the true
Confession of faith, as it was professed at the Reformation, and many years
thereafter, had no such meaning as condemn or ^bjure the power and
pre-eminence of One Pastor over others, or over more particular flocks than
one: But on the contrary did approve the same, as it is explained (concerning
the point of Government) by the book of Discipline and practice of the Church,
under the title of Superintendent until the year 1590. and under the title of
Bishop until the year 1580. for until those years neither the one nor the
other were abrogated by the Assembly of the Church, the first Act condemning
that Jurisdiction under the title of Bishops was in that Assembly at Dundie
1580. and the first Act abolishing the office and title of Superintendents was
in that Assembly at Edinburgh, August 1590. wherein it is declared that since
Presbyteries were fully established, that Superintendents and Commissioners
were neither necessary nor expedient. What regard should be had to those Acts
we shall show hereafter.

Is it not therefore too impudent and manifest a calumny, and a scandalous
impurtation laid by our Covenainers upon the worthy reformers of the Church of
Scotland; and those who did prosecute the same for many years, that their
meaning in the Confession of Faith was to condemn that as unlawful, which
they did approve by their plain and public declaration and continual
practice? As it is also a subtle and hypocritical dissimulation of the
Ringleaders of this Rebellion (against the knowledge and conscience ^f those
who knows the history of that Church since the Reformation) to profess and
persuade people that their upright intentions is to reduce the Church to her
former purity wherein she was constituted by the Reformations, and to abolish
all novation^, since they are manifestly doing the quite contrary; abolishing,
violently that order of Government which was established by the Reformation,
and establishing in place thereof a most dangerous Novation, never heard of in
many Christian Church since the beginning until this (...) age, and whereof
the Church of Scotland never thought of, nor dreamed at the Reformation or many
years thereafter; until it was brought by a violent wind from Geneva, bringing
therewith great trouble and disturbance to the Church of Scotland, and whole
Kingdom both first and last.

CHAP. VI.
Showing that this power and pre-eminence of Bishops was not abjured by the
Negative Confession or Covenant.
HAving shown that this power and pre-eminence of Bishops was not condemned by
the principal and proper Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland. It
follows also, that we show that it was not condemned by that abjuration in the
Covenant called the Negative Confession; which by them improperly and (...) is
called a Confession: For it is absurd, and almost repugnans in adjecto, to say
that it should be the Confession of Faith in any Church, which does not declare
any positive point of Doctrine to be believed, but consists only of mere
Negatives, which are not to be believed. It was only therefore set down as an
Appendix of the true Confession, for that end which we declared before: For
this is the ordinary manner both of public Confessions of Churches, and
private Confessions of particular persons, first to set down the positive
Doctrine in certain Articles and propositions, which are properly the
Confession of Faith; and then by way of Appendix deduced from thence, to
adjoyne damning and abjuring of the contrary errors: so we see it done in most
of the Confessions of reformed Churches, collected together in that book called
Syntagma Confessionum. So does befa in his Confession, and learned Zanchius in
his: right so we must conceive the matter, that those abjurations of Popish
errors set down in the Covenant, are but Appendices deduced from the Articles
and propositions which comprehend the Confession of Faith: yea, the very words
of that Covenant make it clear and evident, for therein it is first said, We
believe with our hearts and confess with our mouths, that this is the true
Christion, Faith and Religion, which is particularly expressed in the
Confession of our Faith, established and confirmed by diverse Acts of
Parliament, etc. To the which Confession and form of Religion we agree in all
points, etc. In these words is the proposition and sum of the Confession, the
Appendix follows thereafter in these words, And therefore we abhor and
detest all contrary Doctrine and Religion, but chiefly Papistrie and particular
heads thereof, etc. whereby it is evident, that it is only the proper ancient
Confession of Faith set down at the Reformation, whereunto they did directly
swear in that Covenant; but unto the abjuration of errors they did only swear
indirectly, and by consequent, as they were contrary to the doctrine contained
in the Confession of Faith.

From this then that we have shown to be true, we may bring a forcible argument
to prove, that by this abjuration the power and pre-eminence of Bishops is not
abjured: For this abjuration being but an Appendix deduced by necessary
consequence, it could not of it self have another meaning, or at least not a
contrary sense to that Confession whereupon it depends; but so it is that the
meaning of the Confession of Faith, as it was explained by the Church, was no
other, but that it was lawful for one Pastor to have this power and
preheminencie over others, etc. Therefore the abjuration could not have a
contrary meaning, towit, that this power and preheminencie was unlawful in it
self. The assumption of this argument is already sufficiently qualified in the
former Chapter by the book of Discipline, Acts of diverse general Assemblies,
and long continued practice of the Church. The proposition is evident in it
self, for it is an absurd thing to say, that an Appendix should have a contrary
sense to the principal proposition, from whence it is deduced by necessary
consequence: all good Logicians know this, of which number to my knowledge the
Moderator is one, who has in his time composed many accurate propositions with
their Appendices; and would not have suffered one of his Scholars with
patience to set down their Thesis with so evil knit consequences, as they
would make us believe, is betwixt the confession of Faith, and the Abjuration
of the Covenant depending thereupon. I can find no reason why he and other
learned men of that Assembly should be so far misled against all true Logic
and sound reason; except it be (as appears) that they have captivated their
understanding to the Tables of the Covenant, that for obedience thereto they
have forgot all rules of Logic, to advance per fas and nefas their Idol of
Presbyteriall Government.

But our Covenanters objects, that albeit the Confession of Faith might have
been understood so by those who have set it down, and so interpreted by the
Church for a long time, as that thereby this power and preheminency was not
condemned; yet the General Assembly of the Church (to whom it appertains to
interpret the Confession of Faith) might understand and interpret it otherwise,
as it did in that Assembly at Dundie 1580. wherein Episcopacie was condemned,
and now in this Assembly at Glasgow, 1639.

To this we answer first, It is possible indeed, that men might understand it
otherwise then it was understood at the beginning, yea in a contrary sense as
the Covenanters do interpret it now: But the Question is, whether both those
contrary sense can be the true meaning of the Confession; I hope they will not
judge so, except they would make the Confession of Faith like a nose of wax,
(as some blasphemous Papists speak of the Scripture) or that they would make
the Confession (which ought to be a firm and constant rule, to try the
doctrine of all within the Church) like a Lesbian rule, which may be applied
both to crooked and straight lines, or to contrary and contradictory senses.
Then if it be so, it may be asked which of those is the true meaning?
Certainly, there is no reasonable man but will esteem that to be the true
meaning which is intended and expressed by the author thereof; For as we say,
Vnusquique est su^ru^^ verborum optimus interpres, except such a one as
speaks nonsense: but so it is, that they that framed the Confession of the
Church of Scotland, and the Church who received the same, did declare their
meaning therein to be such, as that thereby this power and preheminencie was
not damned, but directly approved; Therefore that contrary meaning which they
ascribe to the Church in the year 1580. 1581. 1590. must needs be false.

Secondly, This Covenant and abjuration therein was neither framed by the
Authority of the Church or general Assembly, nor was the Oath required by
their Authority: but both was done by the Authority of the King and Council,
at whose direction this Covenant and abjuration was framed, and the Oath and
subscription thereto required of all his Subjects by his Commandment; therefore
it appertains only to his Majesty and Council to declare the meaning
thereof, and in what sense he did require the Oath of all his Subjects: For
this is a most true Axiom agreed unto by all orthodox writers, That all Oaths
required by a Magistrate should be taken according to the direct and plain
meaning of him who requires the same: But it is most manifest that neither the
King nor Council did require that oath in such a sense, as thereby Episcopacie
should be condemned; for he and his Council did plainly declare before that
time, at that same very time, and many times afterward, that his express
meaning, purpose, and constant intention was, to continue the estate and office
of a Bishop in the Church of Scotland; and to withstand all motions tending to
the overthrow thereof, as we shall show more particularly. For first, that this
abjuration was set forth by the King and Councels appointment, and that by his
Authority only the Oath was required, is manifest both by that Act of
Council, March 5. 1580. which they have prefixed before their Rebellious
Covenant pressing thereby to make people believe, that it was authorized by the
King: as likewise by the Acts of Assembly cited here by themselves, wherein is
declared, That the Kings Commissioner presented to the Assembly in April 1581.
the Confession of Faith subscribed by the King and his household not long
before, and in that Act approving this Confession cited here by them it is
expressly acknowledged that it was set forth by the Kings Majesty. Next that it
was to be understood according to the Kings Majesty's meaning, appears also
by the same Act where it is said, That it should be followed out efoldly, as
the same is laid out in the Kings Proclamation, for that word Efoldly
signifies, that they should follow not only the words, but likewise the sense
and meaning which was intended in his Majesty's proclamation, not in a twofold
sense, as if the Assembly would intend one sense and the King another, but
simply and sincerely by all in the same words and meaning which his Majesty
did express in his Proclamation. Thirdly, that his Majesty did not intend,
that it should be sworn and subscribed in such a sense or meaning, as that
thereby Episcopacie should be condemned is also most manifest. 1. By his
Majesty and Council often rejecting the instant petitions of diverse
Assemblies, for establishing the second book of Discipline, whereby the power
of Bishops is impaired, and absolute paritie of all Pastors established; as
they acknowledge themselves by that Act of the Assembly at Glasgow 1581. cited
here by them, wherein are these words, Because diverse suits have been made to
the Magistrate for approbation to the book of Policy, which yet have taken no
great effect. Then because his Majesty both before this time, at this time,
and after, did show evidently that he did approve the office of a Bishop, as he
testified by his diverse protestations against those Assemblies which pressed to
suppress the same, and by his presentation of Bishops to the places,
whenever they happened to be vacant; as he did at that same very time, present
M. Rob. Montgomery to the Archbishopric of Glasgow: and by that Act of
Parliament 1584. whereby the whole Jurisdiction of Bishops was ratified by his
Majesty with consent of the whole estates of the Kingdom.

Seeing then that this Abjuration or Confession (call it as they please) was
framed by the Kings Majesty, appointed to be subscribed and sworn by his
Authority, and that in such a sense, as that thereby Episcopacie was not
understood to be abjured; It must be also presupponed, that all those who did
swear or subscribe the same, did it in no other sense or meaning, otherwise
they did swear falsely, sophystically, and by Equivocation: therefore it must
necessarily be concluded, that by that Oath of the Covenant 1580. 1581. 1590.
and 1591. Episcopacie, nor the power and pre-eminence of one pastor over
others, or more particular flocks than one, was not abjured by honest men, who
had an efold and upright meaning in taking their Oath. Neither can the
interpretation of this Assembly at Glasgow 1639. give any fure warrant to
those who has sworn in a sense contrary to the Kings meaning; for if this
Abjuration or Covenant had been the Act of the Church properly, there had been
some appearance that a lawful general Assembly now might give forth the true
interpretation thereof; but since it is the King and Councels Act, and the Oath
thereto required of all the Subjects by his Authority, it does not appertain
to the General assembly, especially such an unformall and unlawful one as
this, to declare in what sense it should be understood.

So that it is but false and vain fear, wherewith they would burden the
consciences of all the Kingdom of Scotland, as being fearfully perjured, by
establishing contrary to the pretended oath of the Covenant, the office of
Bishops in Scotland, and giving obedience unto them: But on the contrary, they
are rather forsworn and perjured, who contrary to the meaning of their first
oath, have by their new rebellious Covenant and ordinance of their Assembly
abjured Episcopacie. And of this no man needs to doubt, but that all those
who have acknowledged Bishops, and have taken their oath of Canonical
obedience, and now by persuasion of their Leaders have broken their solemn
Oath, in disobeying and contemning their authority, and ratifying their
disobedience by another Oath, are evidently forsworn, as most of the Ministers
of that Assembly have done; Let them in sincerity of mind search their own
consciences in this point, and I doubt not, that if it have any life therein,
they will find themselves sensibly pricked thereby.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is answered to their Argument taken from four several sentences of
the Abjuration, and particularly to the first.
HAving now shown that neither by the principal Confession of Faith, nor by
the Appendix thereof called Abjuration, nor by the first book of Discipline,
nor by any Acts of Assemblies, nor practice of the Church many years after the
reformation, this power and preheminency of Bishops here controverted is
condemned; it rests that we answer to those Arguments which are brought by them
in the body of the Act, to prove the determination of the Assembly, which are
neither brought from the Word of God, nor from the testimony or practice of
the primitive Church immediately after the Apostles days, nor from any words
of the perfect Confession of Faith in the Church of Scotland, but all their
Arguments are of a later foundation, and may be in sum reduced to three
sorts; first, they bring certain broken sentences ^ut of the Abjuration in the
Covenant, which they call the Confession, then some Acts of their late General
Assemblies, and thirdly, some passages out of the second book of Discipline to
the which we shall answer in their own order.

And first they bring four several sentences out of the Abjuration or
negative Confession, falsifying and wresting them strangely, as to make them
appear to have some show of proving their determination: The first passage is
in these words, We profess that we detest all Traditions brought into the
Kirk, without, or against the Word of God, and Doctrine of this reformed Kirk.
The second is, We abhor and detest all contrary Religion and Doctrine, but
chiefly, all kind of Papistry in general, and particular heads; as they were
then damned and confuted by the Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland, when the
said Confession was sworn and subscribed, Anno 1580. and 1581. 1590. and 1591.
The third is, That we detest the Roman Antichrist, his worldly Monarchy and
wicked Hierarchy. The fourth is, That we join our selves to this reformed
Kirk, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion and Discipline, promising and swearing by
the great name of God, that we shall continue in the Doctrine and Discipline of
this Kirk, and defend the same according to our vocation and power.

We answer first in general to all these passages, that by none of them is
either Episcopal Government abjured, for first in the words themselves, there
is no mention either of Bishops or their power and preheminency over others, or
their charge over moc particular flocks, or of Presbyteries of absolute parity
of Pastors: Therefore except they have recourse to some secret meaning, these
passage can serve nothing to their purposes: and we have shown before both by
the meaning of the principal Confession of Faith, whereof this Abjuration is
an Appendix, and by the explained meaning of his Majesty by whose appointment
this abjuration is framed, and who required the oath and subscription
thereunto, that it cannot be understood in such a sense as that this power and
preheminencie of Bishops should be thereby abjured, and therefore neither the
words nor the s^nse can be able to p^ove their purpose.

Secondly, we prove the same by the Confession of the Moderator M. Alexander
Henrison, and his Associats the Apostles of the Covenant; for they in their
Disputes with the Doctors of Aberdeene do confess plainly, that by swearing
this Confession of Faith, Episcopacie was not abjured, and that any man might
safely swear that Confession and their Covenant also, without abjuring
Episcopacie; and by this profession they entised many to sweat and subscribe
their Covenant, who otherwise would not have done it. Now either they spoke
sincerely at that time according to their knowledge and conscience, and so did
flatly contradict this position, That by swearing the Confession of Faith
Episcopacie was abjured: or else by dissembling policy they did so profess,
contrary to their own mind, to serve their own designs in advancing (per fas
and nefas) their rebellious Covenant; And so did show themselves Jesuitical
temporizers and time-servers (En grain) abusing people most impudently to
promote their own ends. Albeit this that we have spoken, already may suffice to
clear that Abjuration and Coven^^t, or any part thereof, of any such meaning as
they pretend, yet that the matter may be more evident, we shall examine
particularly every one of these four sentences cited by them, showing that all
of them are either falsely or impertinently alleged by them to prove such a
conclusion.

As to the first sentence here produced, by it we may judge (tanquam ex ungue
Leonem) what we may expects of the rest of these reverend Fathers (...): they
begin with a manifest falsehood, and we (...) diverse more in that kind; the
words according to that citation are, We profess that we detest all traditions
brought into the Kirk, without, or against Gods Word, and Doctrine of this
Reformed Kirk. Whereas in the Covenant it self it is otherwise, for there the
words are, And finally we detest all his (to wit the Roman Antichrists)
Traditions without or against Gods Word.

First, we answer that there is a great difference betwixt All Traditions
absolutely, and the Roman Antichrists traditions; for albeit we detest as
sincerely as they do all Antichristian traditions, yet do we not so detest
all traditions absolutely, which have not express or particular warrant from
Gods Word, if they be not repugnant thereto: the Traditions of the Roman
Antichrist are those which are invented by him, for upholding his tyranny over
the consciences of men, made equal to Gods word, and intruded upon the Church
as parts of Gods worship, those we detest and abhor from our very heart; but
to abjure absolutely all Traditions which are not expressed in Gods Word, it
was never the meaning of the reformed Church of Scotland, nor of any well
reformed Church; for all the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, and all
Neoterick, Orthodox writers do teach, that some Apostolical and
Ecclesiastical traditions are not only profitable, but also almost necessary
to be retained in the Chruch; Necessary I say, if not ad esse simplicter, yet
ad been esse, such as are according to these general rules of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14. According to decency and good order, and tending to Edification: and
such as are according to that rule of S. Austin lib. 4. contra Donat. cap. 41.
Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec concilijs constitutum semper retentum est,
non nisi Apostolica authoritate traditum, rectissime crediture: of which there
are many profitably retained in the Church, both concerning doctrine, manners,
government, and circumstances of Gods worship, as the distinction of Canonical
books from Apocrypha, the Constitutions of the Apostolic Creed, the manner of
the celebration of Marriage before the Church, the sprinkling of water upon the
head of the Child in Baptism to be sufficient, the gesture of kneeling in the
Supper of the Lord, the time and place of the ordinary Celebration thereof in
the morning, and in the Church; and such likewise are the Appropriating of the
name and title of Bishops, to these Pastors who are set in Authority over
others, and diverse Ecclesiastical Canons concerning the manner of their
Government.

Secondly, albeit it had been so that all Traditions had been simply abjured,
(which men of understanding would not have done) yet this sentence could not
have served to prove their Conclusion; for although some of the points of the
office of a Bishop, now appertaining thereto, be by Apostolic tradition or
Ecclesiastical constitution, yet this point here called in Question, that one
Pastor may have power and preheminencie over others, or over more particular
flocks, is not a Tradition either against or without Gods Word, and Doctrine of
this reformed Church; but first it is a most certain written verity approved
by Gods Word expressly, and the Constant practice of the Church of God, from the
very first Constitution of the visible Church and publik exercise of Gods
worship, not only under the old Testament, but under the new also, continued in
all Churches until this lust age, which cannot be denied without great
impudencic: then it is not against the doctrine of the reformed Church of
Scotland, but most conformable thereunto, as we have sufficiently declared
before; therefore it is manifest, that this passage can prove nothing for their
purpose, but is both falsely and impertinently produced by them.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is answered the second Passage of the Covenant.
THe second passage cited from the Negative Confession or Abjuration, is no
less falsified than the former, both in the change of words, and addition of
others not contained in the Original: the words of their citation are, We
abhor and detest all contrary Religion and Doctrine, but chiefly all kind of
Papistrie in general, and particular heads, as they were then damned and
confuted by the Word of God and Chruch of Scotland, when the said Confession
was sworn and subscribed, Anno 1580. and 1581. 1590. and 1591. But the words in
the Original are only these, As they are now dawned and confuted by the Word
of God and Kirk of Scotland: So that they change that particle (now) in (then)
and add more which is not in the Original, when the Confession was sworn and
subscribed Anno 1580. and 1581. 1590. and 1591. Albeit this Alteration seems
but small to change (now) in (then,) yet in effect, it is very matteriall and
subtly made to wrest the meaning of the words to their own purpose, contrary
to the intention of those who framed this Abjuration, in making this (Now)
relative to the damning of Episcopacie in that Assembly at Dundie 1580. and
others thereafter, albeit it be evident, that there was no such thing intended
in the framing of this Abjuration for diverse reasons.

First, that (now) in the Kings Covenant, is not to be understood of that
present definite time then, when the Covenant was framed or subscribed, but as
it is expressly exponed a little before, Now for along time, to wit, from that
time when the large Confession of Faith was set forth Anno 1560. and approved
by the General Assembly, and ratified in Parliament 1567. By the which
Confession those particular heads of Papistrie were condemned and confuted, and
the true Doctrine opposite thereunto, Now for a long time openly professed by
the King, and whole body of the Kingdom, as it is expressly set down in the
same place of the Covenant: therefore it is manifest that this (Now) is not
relative to that Condemnation of Episcopacie 1580. which was not then for a
long time condemned, but only for that present year.

Secondly, albeit we should grant that this (Now) was not to be understood of
that definite time, yet does it not serve to prove the point in Controversy;
for albeit by that Assembly 1580. Episcopacie as it was then used in Scotland
was condemned, yet this power and pre-eminence, by approbation and practice of
the Church of Scotland, were standing in force in the persons of
Superintendents, Commissioners or Visitors, and not abrogated until the year
1590. towit, ten years after* the setting down, and swearing of this
Abjuration: And therefore this power and pre-eminence, which is the point in
controversy, cannot be understood to have been then condemned in the
Abjuration 1580. and 1581. for otherwise the Church should have condemned that
which in the mean time they did approve and practice.

Thirdly, notwithstanding that Act 1580. condemning Episcopacie, as it was then
used in Scotland, yet these points of the power and pre-eminence of one Pastor
over others, and charge over more particular flocks was not condemned, but
expressly acknowledged to be lawful by that whole Assembly, wherein Episcopacie
was called in Question Anno 1575. 1576. as shall be evidently cleared when we
shall come to discuss the Acts of those Assemblies.

Fourthly, those points of Papistrie in general, and the particular heads
damned and confuted by Gods Word and Kirk of Scotland, were only such as were
opposite to the doctrine contained in the principal Confession of the Church
of Scotland, then of a long time professed by the Kings Majesty, and whole
body of the Kingdom, as it is expressly set down in the same place of the
Covenant: But so it is, that there was no Doctrine contained either in the
Confession of Faith, or professed now for a long time by the King and whole
body of the Kingdom, contrary to these points of power and pre-eminence of one
Pastor over other Brethren, or more particular flocks: therefore these are not
points of Papistrie abjured by the Covenant, as being damned then by Gods Word,
or the Church of Scotland, and so this passage does not more serve to prove
their purpose than the former.

CHAP. IX.
Containing an Answer to the third Passage.
THe third Passage is in those words We detest the Roman Antichrist, his
worldly Monarchy and wicked Hierarchy. In this passage indeed there is no
false citation as in the former two; yet is there as great impertinencie in
applying it to their purpose: for I cannot see what they can assume upon this
proposition to conclude the point in Controversy, except they would say, that
all power and pre-eminence of one Pastor over his Brethren, or over more
particular flocks is an Antichristian worldly Monarchy, and all degrees of
Ecclesiastical persons is an Antichristian wicked Hierarchy, and therefore
detested and abjured: But if this Assumption were true, then the high priest in
Jerusalem constituted by God himself had been an Antichristian Monarch, and the
diverse degrees of Ecclesiastical persons distinguished by God himself had been
an Antichristian wicked Hierarchy; for it is most certain, that the High
priest had power and preheminencie over his Brethren, and charge over all the
particular flocks in Judea. The Apostles likewise in the Christian Church, and
their fellow laborers, Tit^u, Timothy, and others had been Antichristian
wordly Monarchs, for it is most certain, that they had power and prehe^ninence
over their Brethren, and charge over more particular flocks, as Bishops have
now; which may be qualified by the writings of the Apostles, and the testimony
of all the Venerable Fathers of the Primitive Church, who lived either in the
days of the Apostles, or near to them. So likewise those Reverend ^^thers
themselves, as Polycarpus, Ignatius, Cyprian, Austin, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
etc. should be esteemed no better: yea likewise our Superintendents or
Com^issioners of Provinces should have been Antichristian worldly Monarchs. So
that the worthy Instruments of God in the reformation of the Church of
Scotland, must be thought to have (instead of a laudable reformation) brought
in an Antichristian worldly Monarchy in the Church of Scotland.

But the principal words which they do most urge is the last c^^^se of this
passage, His wicked Hierarchy, by which words it was made clear (as they
allege) in the Assembly that Episcopacie was abjured: what was made clear in
the Assembly we know not, but we shall make it clear (God willing) to (...)
(whose eyes are not blinded with partial affection) that those reasons
produced in the Act in the end thereof at length (which doubtless were the
most weighty they could bring) are foolish, childish and ridiculous, unworthy
of such men as they would be accounted amongst the people.

But before we enter to discuss their reasons, we must first explain the word
Hierarchy, and show what Hierarchy is here condemned: first, the word (...)
amongst the ancient Grocians was used to signify a certain Magistracy, the
charge whereof was to have a (...) of Sacred and Holy things, as of Temples,
Altars, and Sacrifices; and from thence was translated by an^ient Christian
writers to signify the sacred orders of Rulers in the Church: Now that there
is an holy order of Rulers in the Church I think no man can deny, even in
Presbyteriall Government, there are three orders of Ecclesiastical persons who
bear rule in the Church, and have charge of sacred things, of distinct power
and authority, towit, Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, and so those orders may be
^afely called an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; they who understand the Greek
word, knows perfectly that it signifies no other thing, but (...) of sacred
things, or a holy Government: they cannot deny but these Ecclesiastical
functions have every one their own point of Government, and that about sacred
and holy things, why then should they abhor the word, since they acknowledge
the thing signified thereby to be competent to their Ecclesiastical functions?
Is it because the word is borrowed from Ethnicks? It should not be abhorred for
this cause, more than the words Episcopus, Presbyter, and Pastor, which did
signify also amongst the Ethnicks certain offices, or magistracies, as is
well known to those who are versed in their writings. Or is it because it has
been abused by the Papists? neither can it for this cause be rejected, taken in
a right sense, and separating Papisticall corruptions from it, more then the
other titles given to Ecclesiastical officers, which all have been abused in
the Popish Church: and that this word Hierarchy may be used to signify the
orders of Ecclesiastical rulers in the Christian Church, I will bring no other
testimony than that of Calvin, who was the first Author of Presbyteriall
Government, he in his Treatise De N^cessitat^ ref^rmanda Ecclesia, speaking of
the Popish Hierarchy, says; If they will set us down such an Hierarchy,
wherein Bishops have so pre-eminence, that they refuse not to be subject to
Christ, depending from him as from their head, and referring all to him;
wherein they do so entertain Society amongst themselves, that they be no
otherwise bound but by his truth: Then I must acknowledge that th^se are worthy
to be called ex^crable, who will not reverence such an Hierarchy, and with all
humble obedience receive the same. Where we see that Calvin does acknowledge,
that there may be a lawful Hierarchy neither wicked nor Antichristian, and
such was this Hierarchy in the Church of Scotland; consisting of Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, wherein Bishops have so pre-eminence over others, as
they refuse not to be subject to Christ, and depend upon him, as from their
head, and not from the Pope of Rome, etc. And therefore in the judgment of
Calvin, those who will not reverence such an Hierarchy, are worthy to be
accounted execrable and accursed; and since our Covenanters profess, that they
reverence the judgment of Calvin more than all Antiquity, I marvel how they
can bless themselves in this, wherein he accounts them accursed.

To the same purpose likewise speaks Beza, the chief promoter of
Presbyteriall government in his Answer to Saravia De diverse. grad. Minist. cap.
21. Albeit he does not name Hierarchy, yet speaking of the Orders in the Roman
Church, whereof the Hierarchy does consist, he concludes in these words,
Neither do we accuse of this Tyranny, all those who are called Archbishops or
Bishops, for what Arrogancy were this? yea, we do acknowledge all those who
are so called, as faithful Pastors of the Christian Church, providing, they
imitate the example of those holy Bishops, in reforming the house of God so
miserably, deformed; according to the rule of Gods Word; and obey them, and
with all reverence receive them: so far are we from that whereof some do most
impudently accuse us, that we should prescribe to any our particular example to
be followed like to those impertinent men, who esteem nothing well done except
that which they do themselves, etc. By the judgment then of these two learned
men, whose judgments they can hardly contemn, all Hierarchy is not
condemned, nor all Episcopacie under the name of Hierarchy is to be abjured,
but only in so far as it is Antichristian and wicked; that is to say, the
manifold corruptions and abuses in the orders of Ecclesiastical rulers brought
in by the Pope to fortify his usurped Tyranny; Those with you we also abjure
and detest from our very heart. But so it is, that one Pastor to have power and
pre-eminence over others, is not to be reckoned amongst these corruptions which
were brought in by the Pope or Antichrist, but was appointed by God himself,
and practiced in the Church by those whom Beza does acknowledge to have been
faithful Pastors of the Christian Church.

Now to come to the reasons which they set down at length in the end of the
Act; the first reason whereby they press to prove that the order of Government
under Bishops, having power and pre-eminence over other Pastors, as Presbyters
and Deacons, is the P^pish Hierarchy, is in these words: The Popis^ Hierarchy
does consist of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, that is, Baptizing and
Preaching Deacons, which they prove first by a Canon of the Council of Trent.
2. By a testimony of Bellarmine. 3. By a Censure of the University of Paris,
of certain Articles sent out of Ireland; which tedious probation was
needless, for we do not deny their proposition, but grant that the Popish
Hierarchy does consist of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons; But what then? they
suppress the Assumption and Conclusion, yet according to Logical Rules we may
find them out, their Conclusion is known, towit, that Episcopal Government is
the Antichristian wicked Hierarchy. So to infer this Conclusion upon their
proposition as it is set down, nothing can be assumed for the minor, but that
Episcopal Government consists of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. So the
whole Syllogism must be.

The Popish Hierarchy does consist of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons.

But Episcopal Government consists of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons:

Ergo, Episcopal government is the Popish wicked Hierarchy.

But by their leave, this is a Syllogism, Ex omnibus particularibus and
affirmantibus in secunda figura, which concludes not, as they who have learned
the first rudiment of Logic knows; such as that, Asinus habet aures, tu habes
aures, ergo, tu es Asinus. I confess that this may be reduced to a syllogism
in prima figura, by converting the terms of the proposition, and making it
universal, as Quic quid habet aures est Asinus, tu habes aures, Ergo, etc. But
thus the Major is evidently false, and so likewise their Syllogism may be
deduced in the same manner, by converting the Major, and making it universal,
but so it is no more their proposition, thus;

All Orders of Ecclesiastical Rulers consisting of Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons is the Antichristian wicked Hierarchy.

But the orders of Ecclesiastical rulers in Episcopal

Government consists of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons.

Ergo, etc.

But so the major is evidently also false, neither does their reasons any ways
prove it, for if it were true, we might as well prove thereby that the orders in
the Ecclesiastical Rulers in the Apostles days, and Primitive Church after
them, was the Popish wicked Hierarchy; for they cannot deny but therein were
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. As likewise that their Presbyteriall
Government is the Antichristian wicked Hierarchy, for they grant that their
Pastors are Bishops, their Elders Presbyters, and their Deacons are
Ecclesiastical Rulers also.

But they seem to object, that their Deacons are not preaching and baptizing
Deacons as ours are, and those of the Roman Church, but only distributers of
the Ecclesiastical goods: I answer, their Deacons are so much the worse, as
unlike to Apostolic Deacons; and therefore our Deacons and Popish Deacons more
Christian, and liker to those who were appointed by the Apostles, for Stephen
who was the first of these Deacons was a Preacher, and for his preaching
suffered Martyrdom. Act. 7. Philip was a Deacon, and yet both a Preacher and
Baptizer, Act. 8. 5. and 12. And so we must esteem that all the rest of the
Deacons had the same power, nor are they able to show the contrary. We will not
be ashamed therefore in this point, rather to join with Papists, wherein they
adhere to Gods Word and sound Antiquity, than to their new invented opinion
disagreeing from both.

This reason, notwithstanding the gross informalitie thereof, was good enough
for the Common people, who are well pleased, with any show of reason coming
from the mouths of their Leaders, and men of learning amongst them either
would not or durst not enquire the strength of it: or if they did enquire in
their own minds, durst not publish their opinion either by word or writ,
because of an Act of this Assembly, Sess. 23. Act. 17. prohibiting any person
of whatsoever quality or degree to speak or write against this Assembly, or
any Act thereof under pain of incurring the censure of the Kirk.

Therefore leaving the informality of this Argument, I answer to the substance
of the matter; that all orders of Ecclesiastical Rulers are and may be called
an Hierarchy we grant, in that sense which we have declared, but that all such
is wicked and Antichristian we deny, and have even Calvin (the first founder of
Presbyteriall Discipline) for our warrant, as we have shown already* and
therefore that exception they make, That this Hierarchy is called the
Antichristian Hierarchy, not to distinguish the Hierarchy in the Popish
Church from any other as lawful, But that the Hierarchy wheresoever it is, is
called His: is most false, and all the reasons they bring to prove it are as
false and impertinent.

First, they say, as Invocation of Saints, Canonization of Saints, etc. are
called his, not that there is any lawful Invocation or Canonization of Saints,
but wheresoever they are, they are his; even so (would they say) the Hierarchy
is called his, not as if there were any other Hierarchy lawful, but all
Hierarchy wheresoever it is, is the Popes, therefore abjured. A solid reason
indeed, and worthy of such an Assembly: for first they may as well conclude that
all wordly Monarchy is abjured, because the Popes worldly Monarchy is abjured,
and so be of the Anabaptists opinion, that there ought to be no King in a
Christian Church; and indeed it is to be lamented that their words, writings
and practice do bewray their mind, that they approach too near to those
damnable opinions.

Secondly, this is a manifest putid Sophis^^^, A dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter; All Antichristian wicked Hierarchy is abjured, Ergo, All
Hierarchy is abjured simpliciter. A child or an ignorant that knew never a
word of Logic, may see by natural reason evidently the absurdity of this
Argument, for albeit all wicked and Antichristian Hierarchy is unlawful, and
therefore to be abjured: but since there may be a lawful Hierarchy in the
Church as we have shown, which therefore needs not to be abjured simpliciter;
as if one should reason thus; God hates all wicked men, ergo He hates all men
simpliciter. This Sophisme is like that which is in their next Act against the
Articles of Perths Assembly, to prove that Confirmation of Children is abjured,
The Popish five bastard Sacraments are abjured, but Confirmation is one of the
five bastard Sacraments, ergo abjured: It is abjured indeed to be a Sacrament,
but not therefore simply, for so they may conclude as well upon that ground that
Marriage is abjured, because Marriage is one of these five bastard Sacraments;
albeit perhaps the Moderator has abjured marriage, yet I hope all the rest of
the Brethren of the Assembly will not do so. I marvel indeed, that men
esteemed for learned and wise should have blotted paper with such trash, and
put such childish Arguments in print, as if they had to deal with none but
fools or Ignorants. Thirdly, there is a great difference betwixt Canonization
or Invocation of Saints, and an Hierarchy: for Invocation and Canonization are
sunply evil in themselves, as against Gods Word, albeit they had never had the
Pope for their Author. But an Hierarchy or order of sacred Rulers in the
Church is not in it self evil, but only in regard of the Corruptions thereof
in the Roman Church, for which respect it is called Antichristian and wicked,
and therefore only abjured; though in it self separating these corruptions from
it, it may be lawful and retained:

Secondly, they bring a reason to prove this, that all Hierarchy is the Popes
in these words, Whatsoever corruption was in the Kirk, either in Doctrine,
Worship, or Government, since the mystery of iniquity began to work, and is
retained and maintained by the Pope, and obtruded upon the Church by his
Authority, is his, but all Hierarchy is such; Ergo, etc. I answer, that
neither the Hierarchy in it self, that is the order of Ecclesiastical Rulers,
nor the power and preheminencie of one of these orders above others, is a
corruption of the Church, but a perfection thereof, as we have shown before,
nor was it brought in since the mystery of Iniquity began to work, but
established by God himself long before that mystery of Iniquity; And albeit
it was retained and maintained by the Pope, yet for that is it not to be
rejected more than diverse sound points of Doctrine, which are as yet retained
and maintained by the Pope; God forbid we should think, that all which the Pope
retains and maintains were wicked and properly Antichristian; finally,
neither is it obtruded now upon the reformed Church by the Popes Authority,
but restored to the former perfection by the lawful Authority of the Kings
Majesty, with consent both of Civil and Ecclesiastical Supreme ^udicatorie
of General Assemblies and Parliaments: Therefore this Hierarchy in our Church
is neither to be accounted the Popes nor Antichristian.

Thirdly, they allege a passage out of the History of the Council of Trent
to prove this, Where it is related that the Council would not define the
Hierarchye by the seven Orders* and that we have in our Confession the manifold
orders set apart, and distinguished from the Hierarchy: Ergo, Gl^ke. I
profess I do not understand what they would conclude upon these words, but of
this I am assured, they can conclude nothing that serves to prove their
conclusion; It has need of a sharp wit to find any clear consequence thereof
pertinent to the purpose, and since they have set down no consequence
themselves, it were an idle thing for me to trouble my brains to search it
out, and therefore until it be better explained, I leave it.

Lastly, they allege a passage out of their second book of Discipline, Cap. 2.
in the end thereof: Therefore all the ambitious titles invented in the Kingdom
of Antichrists, and in his usurped Hierarchy which are not of one of these
four sorts, towit, Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons: together with the
offices depending thereupon in one word ought to be rejected. If they would
conclude upon this, that the ambitious title of Bishop, and the office
depending thereupon is therefore to be rejected, (for I can see no other
consequence that can be deduced of these words pertinent to the purpose in
hand.) I answer, first that they have used as great falsehood in this citation,
as they have done in diverse others before, for in that same very place cited by
them, the title of Bishop is one of these which they acknowledge is given to
signify a Pastor of the Church, for a little before, they number these titles
to be Pastor, Minister, Bishop, Doctor, Presbyter, Elder and Deacon; and yet
they here in their citation, reckon only four titles, whereas in the book it
self in the Chapter cited by them seven are reckoned, whereof the title of
Bishop is one, and therefore not to be rejected as an ambitio^s title, nor the
office depending thereupon. Secondly, the title of Bishop is not an ambitious
title invented in the Kingdom of the Antichrist, or the Popes usurped
Hierarchy, but is a title given by the Spirit of God in the Scripture to
signify a Spiritual function in the Church, Acts 1. 20. Acts 20. 28. 1 Timothy
3. 1, 2. And therefore this Citation out of the Book of Discipline is both
false and impertinent. Thirdly, Albeit it were truly alleged, and did prove
the point directly, yet we account not the Authority of that Book so
authentic, asto make it an Article of our Belief whatsoever is said there.

CHAP. X.
Containing an Answer to the fourth place cited out of the Abjuration.
THe fourth and last passage of the Abjuration or Negative Confession, whereby
they allege that Episcopacie is abjured, is, We profess that we join our
selves to this reformed Kirk, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion, and Discipline;
promising and swearing by the great Name of God, that we shall continue in the
Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk, and defend the same according to our
Vocation and power all the days of our life.

First, we must remark that by these four distinct terms are not signified
four several distinct things, but by doctrine, Faith and Religion is
signified one and the self-same thing, for Doctrine to be believed is the
object of Faith and Religion consists in the practice of this Doctrine, and
Discipline is the means to conserve Doctrine, Faith and Religion, and so we
see in the next words, containing the promissary part of the Oath, they are all
reduceed to two, Doctrine and Discipline.

Secondly, we must consider what doctrine and discipline this is whereunto they
swear; It is not every point of doctrine which has been taught in the pulpits
of Scotland, nor every point of Discipline which has been practiced in their
Sessions, Presbyteries and Assemblies; for then (God knows) how doubtsome and
uncertain an Oath this should have been, because those points have been often
changed, and some directly contrary to other: the matter of an Oath should be
so clearly and particularly set down as is possible; for it be set down
indefinitely, men may involve themselves rashly in a contradictory Oath: And
therefore those who framed this Oath, have wisely and considerately set down
diverse limitations of the matter of the Oath, whereby it is made clear and
evident, what doctrine and discipline it is whereunto they promise by their
oath to join themselves: But our Covenanters have dissembled subtly those
necessary limitations, and set it down in general and indefinite terms, only
naming in general the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Scotland.

Now that we may know more evidently what Doctrine and Discipline is here
meaned, I shall set down at more length the words of the Oath as they be in the
Original: We believe with our hearts and confess with our mo^thes, etc. that
this is the only true Faith and Religion, pleasing God and bringing salvation
to man, which is now by the mercy of God revealed to us by the preaching of the
blessed Evangel, and received, believed and defended by many notable Churches
and Realms, and chiefly by the Church of Scotland; particularly expressed in
the Confession of Faith, established and publicly confirmed by diverse Acts of
Parliament, and now of along time publicly professed by the King and whole
body of the Kingdom. In these words are comprehended four necessary
limitations of the matter of this Oath, without the bounds of which, it is not
to be extended; Albeit it were sufficient to show that Episcopacie was not
abjured by this Oath, if we prove that by any one of these limitations it can
be excluded, yet to make the probation more full we shall make it evident, that
not by one only, but by all these four limitations, this point (That it is
not lawful for one Pastor to have power and pre-eminence over his Brethren, or
over more particular flocks than one) is excluded from this Oath, and therefore
not abjured as a Popish error.

The first limitation is, that they only did swear to adhere to that Doctrine,
which is revealed by the preaching of the blessed Evangel, or by Gods Word: But
so it is that no doctrine condemning this power and preheminencie, is revealed
by the Gospel, or expressed by Gods Word, or depending thereupon by necessary
consequence, therefore by that Oath, none was sworn to adhere to any such
Doctrine condemning that point: But the contrary doctrine is so clearly
testified by the whole course of Scripture, both in the old and new Testament,
that it is lawful for one Pastor to have power and pre-eminence over others,
or over more particular flocks, that we much admire why men so versed in
Scripture can be so blinded as not to so so clear a Truth, or if they see it
to be so impudent, and without conscience to abjure it as a damnable Heresy,
compelling others to abjure the same by so solemn and fearful an Oath, wherein
they move them really to perjure themselves for eschewing a supposed perjury.

The second limitation is, that the Doctrine whereunto they swear to adhere was
that, Which was received, believed, and defended by many notable Churches and
Realms, then when this Oath was first made: But so it is that this Doctrine
declaring it to be unlawful, that one Pastor should have power and
pre-eminence over others etc. was not received, believed, and defended by many
notable Churches and Realms at that time; for we can show that the most of the
reformed Churches and Realms at that time did profess and practice the
contrary, as all the Churches of High-Germany, Rohemia, Denmark, Sweden,
Norway, Poland, Hungaria, Helvetia, England, Ireland, and our own Church of
Scotland: they cannot produce one Realm, nor any Church that had at that time
embraced fully presbyteriall Government, except one City of Geneva, which
notwithstanding did not so absolutely condemn Episcopacie as they do, as we
have shown by the Testimony of the two chiefest members of that Church, Calvin
and Beza. There are now some Churches which have received the Geneva
Discipline, as the Palatinate in High-Germany, the consederate Provinces of
Lower-Germany, and the reformed Church of France, which notwithstanding had not
that Discipline, nor a full established Church amongst them at that time: for
the Palatinate continued in the Doctrine and Discipline of the August^ne
Confession, until the year 1584. when John Cassitmere Prince Elector after his
Brother L^d^wick's death brought in Calvinisme, as Lucus O^iander in his
Epitom, Histor, Eccles. Ce^t. 26. lib. 4. cap. 20. does testify. In the Low
Countries, albeit there were many protestants before, yet had they not an
established Church until the year 1583. when as they renounced the Authority
of the King of Spain: neither had they of France an established Church until
the reign of Henry the Fourth. Read over all the Confessions of Reformed
Churches contained in that Sy^tag^^^ ^onfessionum, you shall not find one of
them condemning this power and pre-eminence, or Episcopacie absolutely. But on
the contrary, many of them do expressly approve it: Therefore since there was
not many notable Churches and Realms, which received, believed and defended,
that it was unlawful for one Pastor to have power and pre-eminence over
others, or over more particular flocks, it is manifest that this point was not
abjured by the Oath of the Covenant.

Thirdly, the matter of the Oath is expressly restricted to that Doctrine and
Discipline, Which is particularly expressed in the Confession of Faith, set
down Anno 1560. And ratified publikly by diverse Acts of Parliament before this
Abjuration was sworn: by which limitation is excluded from this oath all points
of Doctrine and Discipline added since, either by Acts of General Assemblies,
Synods or Presbyteries since that Confession was received, as that Act of the
Assembly at D^ndie, 1580. and at Gl^sgow, 1581. Condemning Episcopacie, and
others of that kind; and such are our Covenanters Additions or Applications of
the Confession of Faith, expressed in their Rebellio^s Covenant: And the truth
is, that they neither have nor can produce one word of that Confession
condemning this power and pre-eminence, neither had the Church who established
it any such purpose or intention to do so. But on the contrary, the same
Church, at the same very time, in setting down the first book of Discipline,
did approve that power and preheminencie under the title of Superintendents;
therefore this point was not abjured by the Oath.

Fourthly, the matter of this Oath is determined to be that doctrine and
discipline, Which was for a long time before, the first framing of this Oath,
professed by the King and whole body of this Kingdom. But so it is that no
point of Doctrine condemning this power and pre-eminence, was professed for a
long time before this, by the King or body of the Kingdom: therefore that
power and pre-eminence was not abjured by that Oath. For the Kings profession
we have shown Cap. 6. what it was at that time, and both before and after; then
the profession of the whole body of the Kingdom cannot be determined by
particular men's opinions, but by publik Acts either by the Supreme, Civil or
Ecclesiastic Court. And they have not produced any Act of either of those
Courts long before, showing such a profession; and therefore, it is to be
presupposed that there was none such: But on the contrary, we can produce Acts
of both those Courts, not only long before, but also continually since the
Reformation, yea at that same very time when this Abjuration was first made,
and some years after standing in force, approving this power and pre-eminence:
the first Act they can produce, having any appearance of condemning Episcopacie
as unlawful, is that Act of the Assembly at Dundee 1580. which
notwithstanding does not serve their purpose, first, because this Act was not
long before (if not after) this Abjuration was first framed, being even that
same very year about that same time. Secondly, albeit the office of a Bishop,
as it was then in Scotland, be condemned, yet notwithstanding this point, that
it was lawful that one Pastor might have power and pre-eminence given him, was
agreed unto by the whole Assembly, as we have signified before, and shall more
fully declare hereafter. Thirdly, long before this the power and preheminencie
of Superintendents and Commissioners was publikly approved by the first book of
Discipline, and by diverse Acts of General Assemblies, even then, and some
years after standing in force unrepealed, which we have before faithfully cited
cap. 5. And as for the civil Courts both of Council and Parliament, they
declared their profession by rejecting of diverse suits made for ratifying the
second book of Discipline, which seemed to condemn this power and pre-eminence
as in the Assemblies, 1578. 1579. and 1580. cited here by themselves; It is
declared that diverse suits were made for establishing the second book of
Discipline by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, if that could not be obtained,
by Act of Council, but both the one and the other were often refused.

Moreover, it was declared by the King and whole body of the Kingdom assembled
in Parliament at Edinburgh May 22. 1584. that they had no such profession: but
on the contrary, in the 129. Act of that Parliament representing the whole body
of the Kingdom, the whole power, pre-eminence and Jurisdiction of Bishops was
ratified and confirmed in most ample form. By which it is evident, that there
was no point of Doctrine long before the swearing of this Covenant received,
believed and defended by the King and whole body of the Kingdom, condemning
this power and pre-eminence now in question; And therefore that it was not
abjured by the Oath of the Covenant. And since it is so, it is strange with
what face or conscience they can so (...) abuse Christian people, as to impose
falsely ^uch a burden upon the Consciences of all persons within the Kingdom,
both King and Subjects, Pastors and people, in pressing to persuade them
against so many evident reasons, that they are all by virtue of that Oath so
fearfully perjured, who have consented to the (...) of Episcopacie.

But, because this point of Episcopacie is understood by them rather to be
abjured under the name of Discipline, than under the name of Doctrine:
therefore to take away all way of Escape or subt^rfuge, we shall examine the
point of Discipline also, and show how far it is included in the Oath; and
albeit it be by all those former limitations excluded also, for these
limitations are to be applied as well to the Discipline as to the Doctrine.

Yet for further resolution, we must consider that the word (Discipline) is
taken in diverse significations, first strictly and properly, for that part of
the Policy which concerns the censures of the Church, to be practiced upon
those who do err either in doctrine, or in manners of life. And so
Episcopacie, or power and pre-eminence of one Pastor over others is not
contrary thereto, but may very well subsist therewith, and has subsisted
actually both during the Government under Superintendents or Commissioners, as
also under the Government of Bishops since they were re-established: for the
same censures which were established by the book of Discipline, by the order
set down before our Psalm books, and by diverse Acts of General Assemblies long
before Bishops were re-established, did still remain the same admo^itions
private and publik, the same sentence of excom^unication, and manner of
proceeding therein, by three private and three publik Citations before
Ecclesiastical Indicatories, the same publik prayers ^ppointed by order of the
Church of repentance to the delinquent, upon three several Sabbath days, the
same form of pronouncing the sentence, and enjoining private or publik
satisfaction, the same manner of receiving and absolving of the pen^tent. As
all within the Church of Scotland do know: And therefore it is evident, that
this power and preh^minence of Bishops is not contrary to the Discipl^^e of the
Church of Scotland taken in this ^eale; (...) apparently it is taken in the
Oath for in ^ll speeches or w^^^s of con^sequenc^ chi^^^ those which are see
down for a sol^^^ oath, which ought to be plain and clear,) the words (...) be
taken in their proper and most usual sense, rather than in an unproper and
figurative, except by some evident reason it appear that it must be taken
improperly. And this certainly is the most proper and usual meaning of this
word (Discipline,) as it is taken in the order set down before our Psalm books,
in the second book of Discipline cap. 7. entitled of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, in the second book of Discipline every where, and most frequently
by all Ecclesiastical writers: and therefore those who have obeyed and
received Bishops are not perjured, nor have broken that oath, whereby they did
swear to adhere to the Discipline of the Church of Scotland. But on the
contrary, those of this Assembly who have deposed and excommunicated with such
precipitation so many Bishops and Ministers, without observing in their process
these forms prescribed by the Discipline of the Church of Scotland, are
evidently perjured according to their own grounds.

Secondly, the word Discipline is taken at some times in a more large and ample
signification, for the whole Policy of the Church, which in the second book of
Discipline cap. 1. is defined to be An order or form of Spiritual Government,
which is exercised by the members thereto appointed by the Word of God, for the
we ^ll of the whole body: which policy cap. 2. is divided, first in regard of
the persons, in that part which concerns Rulers, and that which concerns
them who are ruled; secondly, in regard of the thing subject to this Policy in
three parts. 1. The policy which concerns the preaching of the Word, and the
administration of the Sacraments. 2 That which concerns the censures of the
Church or Discipline so properly called. 3. In that which concerns the
collecting and distributions of Alms and ^ent of the Church.

Now if any will be so obstinate as to contend, that the word Discipline is
taken in this large sense in the Oath of the Covenant; for their satisfaction
likewise, we must consider that in this Discipline or Policy, it is requisite
that we distinguish the points which are essential and perpetual, from the
points accidental and mutable; or as it is expressly distinguished in the first
book of Discipline cap. 9. Entitled of the Policy of the Church in things
utterly necessary, without the which there is no face of a visible Church, and
in things profitable and not merely necessary: the points utterly necessary
are those which are prescribed by Gods Word to endure perpetually, as that
there be Pastors, Teachers and Rulers in the Church, that Gods Word be truly
taught, and Sacraments administered according to Christ's Institutions, and that
the censures of the Church be exercised against scandalous persons, and such
other like things. The points not merely necessary but profitable are those,
which are not particularly prescribed by Gods Word, but left to the liberty of
the Church to constitute by Ecclesiastical Canons, setting down the forms,
Ceremonies and Orders to be observed in Gods worship, and ruling of the Church,
according as the diverse circumstances of time, place, and persons do require:
Such as, how many Pastors under what names and titles they ought to bear rule
in the Church, over what bounds or what particular persons they ought to have
charge, when, where, in what order, gesture, or what habit they ought to
preach, pray, or administer Sacraments, and exercise their Authority, and
diverse other Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning their particular manner
of Government.

The first sort ought not to be altered or changed in substance, since they are
appointed by God to be perpetual in the Church, and the oath taken in
Baptism, or entr^e to a calling, does oblige every one within the Church
according to their place and station therein, to observe them perpetually,
albeit there had been no other Oath. But so it is that this power and
preheminencie here condemned, is not contrary to any of these essential points
of the policy of the Church appointed by Gods word, but most conform thereto,
according to the practice of the Church both under the Old and New Testament;
And therefore in swearing to adhere to these points of Discipline none have
abjured this power and pre-eminence, but therewith have retained those
essential points without change or Alteration.

There be other points of Episcopacie, which are comprehended under the
accidental parts of the Policy of the Church, such as are by what titles or
names those who bear chief rule in the Church ought to be called, Whether
Bishops, or Superintendents, or Commissioners, or Presidents, or (...), or
Moderatores, by whose advice they should exercise their Authority, whether by
Chapters* or Synods, or Presbyteries, or by other wise, godly and learned men,
assumed by their own choice to be their C^uncell: Albeit indeed it be more
expedient to use these titles and names, which have ever been used in the
Apostolic and Primitive Church, and continued by long prescription in after
ages, than those new invented titles, by men affecting Singularity.

These points being alterable in their own nature, as not being precisely
commanded in Gods word, may be changed by the Church in whose liberty they
were left: and therefore no Oath could bind any man to the perpetual
observation thereof, in case it pleased the Church for reasons of expediency to
alter them; for according to that Common Regula Iuris, Iuramentum sequitur
naturam actus super quo interponitur, if the things we swear unto be of their
own nature perpetui Iuris, the oath taken thereupon bi^des to the perpetual
observation, and no Creature is able to absolve us of that Oath. But if it be
Iuris positivi, and only a Constitution of the Church or Commonwealth
concerning these things (...) are left to the liberty of the Church or Supreme
(...) then certainly, the oath taken thereupon, (...) longer than the
Constitution stands in force, but being altered by that same lawful
Authority whereby it was established, all are ipso facto loosed from the bond
of that Oath: yea all those who have sworn to adhere to the Discipline of the
Church of Scotland, are bound by virtue of that oath to follow the Church in
the alteration she makes in those mutable points, and to obey the new Acts and
Constitutions that concern the same. Although they be different or contrary to
the former Acts, and all those who disobey therein contemptuously, are guilty
of perjurie: Therefore since the Church has altered upon good and grave
reasons those forms and Constitutions of Presbyteriall Government, established
for a time not upon so good grounds unto the ancient approved manner of
Episcopal Government; all those within the Church are obliged notwithstanding
of their former oath to follow the Church in her change without fear of
perjurie. And on the contrary all our Covenanters, who before the lawful
abrogation of the Constitutions of the Church established by lawful
Authority, have not conformed themselves thereto, but disobeying them in their
own persons, and by their exemplary practice intised, yea compelled others to
disobey and rebel to the disgrace of their mother their Church, and breaking
of the bond of peace, whereby the Unity of the Spirit is conserved do lie
under a fearful perjurie until they do seriously repent.

CHAP. XI.
Answering to the Acts of the General Assemblies produced against Bishops
until that Act at Dundee, 1580.
HAving disoussed those passages alleged out of the Abjuration of the
Covenant, it rests that we answer in like manner to the Acts of diverse general
Assemblies, produced to prove that the Church has condemned this power and
pre-eminence of one Pastor over another and over more particular flocks: albeit
a sufficient answer may easily be gathered by the judicious Reader; out of that
which we have said already, yet because many are moved by the Authority of
those Assemblies, who do not understand the manner of their proceedings, we
must consider them more particularly, to the end than we may show what weight
and force they ought to have in the Church.

Those Acts here cited by them for the more commodious answering without
Tautologie may be disposed in three Ranks, first, some of them contain only
preparations to the condemning of Episcopacie, as those from the year 1575. to
the 1580. next there are some that tend directly to the establishing of the
second book of Discipline, transferring the power of Bishops to Presbyteries;
thirdly, others are such as condemn Episcopacie, which all we shall examine
particularly in their own order.

And first we must observe, that they never allege one word of any Assembly
since the Reformation until that at Edinburgh 1575. albeit there were thirty
general Assemblies in Scotland before that time, more incorrupt, holy and
venerable, than any of those which are alleged of them; for why they were not
able to show by any probability, that before that time the Church of Scotland
did think any evil of this power and preheminencie, but did continually and
constantly approve the same both by her Constitutions and practice.

Next we must consider the causes and occasions moving the Ministers at that
time to alter their judgments in this point, and if we remark the estate of
the Church and Kingdom of Scotland at that time, as it is known to all these
who have taken pains to understand the true history of the Church and Kingdom
of Scotland in those days, we shall find evidently the occasions of this
alteration of Judgment.

First, there were at that time some men of learning, but of fiery and violent
humors, come into Scotland from Geneva, who because of their travels abroad
and learning were had in great esteem; and they being themselves greatly in
love with Geneva discipline, did labor by all manner of persuasions to move
others to like both of the Clergy and Laity, especially Noblemen, to a liking
thereof also; at lest by entreaties, persuasions, and some show of reason made
secretly amongst themselves a reasonable number both of Nobility and Ministry,
who carried a great sway in general Assemblies, and were able to make a party
if the former Government were called in Question.

Secondly, they thought the time fit to further their design, in regard of the
Kings Majesty's minority, being then about ten years of age at most, and
therefore not capable of the knowledge of that which was most fit for the
Government either of the Civil or Ecclesiastic estate, governed himself by
diverse men of diverse humors.

Thirdly, there was a great furtherance to this Alteration, in regard of the
great troubles, divisions and factions at that time, amongst the Nobility and
Courtiers, every one striving to thrust out his Neighbor from that employment
he had about the King and Court, as witness the violent death of three Regents,
and the fourth, like enough, had gone the same way (if his Govermne^t had
endured longer) and many of the Nobility cut off by particular quarrels, some
justly, some unjustly under color of legal proceeding: as witness likewise an
Act of the Assembly at Edinburgh 1578. whereby a solemn Fast was enjoined for
diverse reasons, Especially because of the ^ivill and intestine, ungodly
S^ditions and Divisions within the Bowels of the Kingdom: Some Noblemen
therefore and Courtiers in those factious times, as fishing in troubled waters,
to further their own ends did labor to make some pretext of Religion, and
therefore did strive to have the Church upon their side, abusing the
simplicity of some of the Ministry zealous of the new Discipline, and the
pride of others impatient of subjection to their Bishops or Superintendents
stirring them up to cast off their yoke: knowing that they by their Sermons and
private practices might do much, to make the people incline to which faction
they pleased best; And by that means to force the Kings Majesty for fear of a
general insurrection to grant them whatsoever they desired, which policy our
Covenanting Noblemen have carefully practiced now with great but a dangerous
effect: there was never yet in those times so bold a Traitor, but he found
Ministers of that sect to Countenance him, and approve his doings both
privately and publikly, as witness their applauding the Earl of Bothwell in his
treasonable attempts, for it is certainly known that of those moneys which was
collected by the Ministers for the relief of Geneva, a part was employed to
wage soldiers for him, I know and could name if I pleased both the deliverers
and Receivers thereof: It is known also that Ministers of that Sect had a chief
hand in all those attempts which commonly are called Roads, as at the road of
Stritilling, the road of Leith, and the Abbey road, and at the 17. day of
December the Earl of Gowry found one of the prime Ministers of that Sect to
justify his cause, and refuse to give thanks to God for the Kings Deliverie
from that treasonable Attempt. Finally, it is well known how King James of
happy memory was vehemently troubled and vexed most unjustly by that Sect,
during the time of that Anarchie of the Church, as he himself left in record in
his Basilicon Doron.

Fourthly, to those occasions another was joined to further the ruin of
Episcopacie, towit, the Sacrilegious greed of some of the Nobility and
Courtiers gaping after the Church-rents, which they perceived they could never
obtain so long as the Authority of Bishops did subsist, and therefore did use
the uttermost of their endeavor to bear down that estate, pushing forward the
Ministers to cry out against the Bishops, and to blue abroad their personal
faults both in their Assemblies, Pulpits and private conference, to make the
very office it self (...) to the people.

It is therefore more than manifest* that those troublesome and factio^s times
cannot be accounted a good pr^sident for the Government of the Church in after
ages; for shall a few turbulent Assemblies backed and (...) forward by factious
humors and sacrilegious greed of Noblemen and Courtiers? in the mi^orage of
the Supreme Magistrate constituting a new Discipline, by the example of one
small City of Geneva, confirmed only by the practice of fourteen or fifteen
years at most, be able to counterpoize Gods Word, the continual practice of
the Church of God both under the old and new Testament, and the example of the
blessed Apostles and their Successors, the venerable Pastors of the Primitive
Church, continued in after ages in all Christian Nations until this last age;
yea retained by the first reformers of the Church of Scotland, and approved by
the Church therein for many years thereafter. So that the Authority of these
Assemblies ought not to move judicious men judging without partial affection:
This much in general concerning those Assemblies whereby the estate of Bishops
was oppressed in those days, yet to remove all scruple, we shall discuss
particularly all the Acts alleged here out of these assemblies, showing that
they serve little or nothing to the present purpose.

First, they allege that Bishops were tolerated from the year 1572. until
this year 1575.. But by their leave, they were tolerated from the very first
years of the Reformation, for so many of them as did join themselves to the
reformed Religion, retaining the title, office, and Benefice of a Bishop, did
exercise their jurisdiction (...) all the Pastors and people within their
Diocese by approbation of the general Assemblies of the Church, as we have
shown before, Cap. 5. So that this was not as they allege a mere tolleration,
but a full consent and approbation, at least in regard of their power and
pre-eminence above Ministers, and charge over more particular parishes. It is
true that Anno 1572. there were diverse Bishoprics vacant, and that my Lord
Regent did excuse himself to the Assembly, that they had been so long void; as
appears by an Act of that Assembly at Edinburgh, August 1572. wherein it is
recorded, that Alexander Hay Clark of the Council presented some Articles in
name of the Regent to the Assembly, whereof one is My Lord Regent his grace
minds, that with all convenient diligence, qualified persons shall be
presented to the Bishoprics now vacant, the delay whereof has not been by his
own default, but by reason that some enteresse ^as made to those livings in
favor of some Noblemen, before his acceptance of the Regencie; yet his Grace
is persuaded that qualified persons shall be speedily presented, and in case of
fail^i^, will not fail without the others knowledge or consent to present. So
it appears by his excuse, and promise of diligence in times to come, that this
was not a tolleration only, but an earnest suit of the Church, that qualified
persons should be presented as they were shortly after and accepted by the
Assembly: The Regent at this time was the worthy Matthew Earl of Lenox, a man
of a noble and generous disposition, who bent himself to wrest the Church
Livings out of the Noblemens hands, and to establish the Church in her proper
luster, which doubtless he had effectuate if he had been suffered longer to
live, and so settled things therein, as King James of happy memory, and King
Charles now reigning should not have had so much trouble and turmoile in
redressing the estate thereof again: But not long after this, he was
traitorously murdered at (...), and after his death another wind blowing, all
his designs were reversed, Episcopacie born down, and the Church brought to
miserable poverty.

The first Assembly alleged to prove their conclusion is that in August 1575.
which notwithstanding does nothing make for them, but against them rather, as
we shall make manifest by the proceeding of that Assembly and Conclusion
thereof, according as we have faithfully extracted them out of the Register of
the Assemblies. At this Assembly indeed was made the first publik motion
against Episcopacie (although they had before laid privately their plots in
their own conventicles) at the very beginning of the Assembly, when they were
calling the Roll of their names, the Bishops (according to the accustomed order
in former Assemblies) being first called, the promoters of Geneva discipline
set forward one John Durie, a man neither of the wisest nor most learned of the
Ministry, but of great boldness, which happily he had learned in the
Cloister, having been sometime (as I have heard) a Monk in Dumfermling; he
rising up made a Protestation, That the calling of the Bishops in the Assembly
should not prejudge the opinions and reasons which he and other Brethren of his
mind had to oppone against the office and name of Bishops; this Protestation
being vehemently seconded by others, the question was proposed to the Assembly
in these terms, Whether the Bishops, as they are now in Scotland, have their
function of the word of God, or not: a more formal proposition indeed than
this in the Assembly of the Covenanters, albeit it have some ambiguitie also:
they thought it not sit to put the matter presently to the voycing, until it
were sufficiently discussed by reasoning pro and contra; and for that effect
there are three appointed upon every part to reason the matter, and to report
their judgment and opinion to the Assembly, and how far they could agree:
the reasoners against Episcopacie were M^. Andrew Meltin Principal of the
College of Glasgow, who was the chief man in this cause, M^. James Lawson
Minister at Edinburgh, and M. John Craig Minister at Aberdeene: on the other
part for Bishops were appointed M. George Hay Commissioner of Caithnes, M.
David Lyndsay Minister at Leith, M. John Ro^^ Minister at P^rth; they together
having conferred and reasoned the matter at length, could not agree upon the
Principal question, and therefore the Assembly determined by an Act, That they
think it not expedient presently to answer to the Principal question: yet they
who were appointed to reason the matter, reported to the Assembly that they had
agreed altogether in certain points, First, that the name of Bishop is common
to all them which have charge of a particular flock, to preach the Word and
administer the Sacrament, which is their chief function by the Word of God.
Secondly, That out of this number may be chosen one to have power to visit
such reasonable bounds as the Assembly shall appoint. Thirdly, That he may
have power in these bounds to appoint Ministers, with consent of the Ministers
of that province, and of the flock to which they are appointed. Fourthly, That
he may have power to appoint Elders, and Deacons in every particular
Congregation with consent of the people. Fifthly, That he may have power to
suspend and depose Ministers for reasonable causes, with consent of the
Ministers aforesaid. The which points of agreement were ratified and approved
by the next General Assembly in April, 1576. whereby it is evident that they
did not intend to diminish that power and pre-eminence, which Superintendents
had before over private Ministers, or over the particular Congregations within
their bounds, which as we have shown before was no less than tha^ which
Bishops now do require to have in the Church: And therefore that this
Assembly concluded directly against them, who condemn the power and
pre-eminence of Bishops over Ministers and over more particular flocks than one.

Secondly, we must remark a subtle dissimulation of our Covenanters, who in
the Citation of this Act remember only one point of this Agreement towit, That
the Name of a Bishop is common to every one of them that has a particular
flock; but dissembles the other points of agreement which we have rehearsed
importing this power and pre-eminence, because they found them directly
contrary to their Conclusion.

Thirdly, albeit they intended at this Assembly presently to have thrown down
Episcopacie to the ground, yet because many wise, learned and godly Brethren
did oppose them, standing firmly for the ancient discipline of the Church,
there passed five or six years in these contestations before the final
sentence was pronounced; in the mean time those Episcopomastiges ceased not to
labor diligently by all means to draw others to their judgment, using
likewise the persuasions of men of special note beyond Seas; as in the time of
the Contestation, the Lord Glames then Chancellor of Scotland was moved by our
Genevating Ministers to write to Beza, craving his opinion concerning the
present Government under Bishops and Superintendents, to the which letter Beza
made a large answer condemning the present Government, and setting down a plot
of that Policy and Discipline which he desired them to embrace, according to
the which they did frame their second book of Discipline, and that in many
points ipsissimis verbis, as may appear by conferring the Book with his Epistle.

That second citation from the Assembly, April 1576. serves nothing to their
purpose, for albeit Some Bishops were censured because they had not betaken
themselves to a particular flock: yet this might consist with power and
pre-eminence over other as is clear in the Superindents, who albeit they had
particular flocks wherein they were specially bound to attend in preaching the
Word, and administration of Sacraments, yet that did not hinder but that they
might have charge over other Pastors and more Parishes.

Finally, those corruptions of the estate of Bishops which are set down in the
Assembly at Edinburgh, 1578. were not fully concluded in that Assembly to be
damned absolutely, but only proposed by some and craved to be considered.

CHAP. XII.
Answering to the Acts for establishing of the second Book of Discipline.
THe second Rank of Acts cited out of General Assemblies are those which
concern the establishing of the second Book of Discipline, such as are that Act
of the Assembly in April 1578. Sess. 4. that in April 1578. July 1579. July
1580. Sess. 10. April 1581. 1590. 1591. Sess. 4. to the which they need no
particular Answer, but Generally concerning this book of Discipline, we answer,
first, that this Book of Discipline was brought in head, and urged by the same
means and occasions whereof we spoke before, to subvert the former established
Government, and to bear down Bishops, that the Church the more easy might be
robbed of her patrimony by Noblemen and Courtiers gaping after the
Church-rents, and factious humors striving to singularity, contrary to the
mind of the wisest and gravest and most modest of the Ministry, and opposed
continually by the King and Council and whole body of the Kingdom, as the very
Acts themselves here produced by them do evidently declare.

Secondly, the Acts of those Assemblies can be of no greater force than the
book it self, for the establishing whereof they were made. But so it is, that
this Book is not in it self that Discipline whereunto we swear to join our
selves in the Oath of the Covenant, first, because at this time the book of
Discipline was but only a thing in fieri, not as yet concluded when the Oath
was made, and therefore could not be accounted to be comprehended therein; for
that Ordinance of the Assembly at Glasgow, 1581. whereby that Discipline was
appointed to be registrated in the Assembly books, did not make it a binding
Law, neither was it intended for that end, but as it is expressly set down in
the Act it self ad perpetuam rei memoriam, and that the posterity should think
well of the intention of the Church. So it was but a thing intended by the
Church, but not effected: as likewise that Ordinance of the Assembly at Glasgow
1590. concerning the subscription to that book, did not extend it self to all,
but to actual Ministers only, and yet of those many did resist it; as
particularly the Ministers of Angus and Mear^es, and diverse other parts of the
Kingdom, for the which cause it was thought needful that a new Act should be
made Anno 1591. injoyning again the subscription under a penalty, and
particularly to those of Angus and Mear^es. This book was never ratified by any
Act of Estate either in Council or Parliament, without the which they
themselves confess it could not be a Law, as they do in that Assembly July
1579. and that Assembly 1580 Sess. 10. As for that Act of Parliament 1592. here
alleged, first, it was after the last urging of the swearing of the Covenant
1591. and therefore could not be included in the Oath. Secondly, it was but a
partial ratification, not of the whole book, but of General, Synodall, and of
Presbyteriall Assemblies, and Parish Sessions, which did still remain under
Episcopal government with greater regularitie than they were before.

2. This book of Discipline many years after the first motion thereof, could
not be agreed unto by the greatest and best part of the Ministry, finding it
for the most part but an Imaginary plot, which could be hardly effectuate or
endure long in the Church without great corruption, as the event proved. Some
of it never put in practice either in the Church of Scotland, or any other
Church in the world, like to the frame of Policy in Plato's Republik, or of
Outopia, as those points de Diaconatu, concerning the collecting and
distribution of the rents of the Church: in some points the contrary has ever
been practiced, as it is appointed by that Book Cap. 7. That Landward Churches
should not nor could not have particular Elderships, and yet ever after there
was not so small a Landward Church, but had their particular Sessions
consisting of the Ministers, Elders and Deacons. It is likewise there appointed
that Elders once lawfully called to the office may never leave it again; and
yet it has ever been an use that he who was Elder this year should be
casheered the next, and every year a new Election made. Item, it is ordained
Cap. 3. That all Ecclesiastical Parsons, as Pastors, Elders, and Deacons
should receive the Ceremony of ordination to their office, which are declared
to be Fasting and Prayer, and imposition of hands of Elderships, and yet they
did never practice imposition of hands upon Elders or Deacons, but only in the
Ordination of Pastors: many other points might be brought which either were
never practiced, or the contrary practice brought in.

3. If this Book of Discipline be a declaration of the meaning of Church,
whereby the negative Confession in the Covenant should be interpreted, then
those who have sworn the Covenant, have sworn also to this Book of Discipline;
if it be so then, which of all the Covenanters can free themselves of perjurie,
for I am assured, that the greatest part are not persuaded in their Conscience
of the truth of all this Book of Discipline, nor will swear to adhere thereto
all the days of their lives: let them put their Covenanting Noblemen, and
other Gentlemen possessors of the Church Rents, to an assay to swear that point
of this Book ca. 9. That to take any part of the patrimony of the Church
(consisting of Tithes, Manses, Glaebs, Possessions, Lands, Biggings, Annual
rents, and any other thing which has been at any time before, or shall be in
times coming, given for the use and utilitie of the Church) and convert it to
the particular and profane use of any person, we hold it a detestable
Sacrilege before God. Or that point Cap. 12. That this order which Gods Word
craves, cannot stand with patronages, or power of presentation, etc. put them
(I say) to this Oath particularly, and make them understand, that by swearing
to the discipline of the Church of Scotland, they are sworn also to this point;
and then you shall find that they will rather renounce your Covenant before
they take such an Oath: Or if they have so bad a Conscience as to swear so
directly against their mind, before they perform really that which they swear,
by restitution of the patrimony of the Church and quieting the Right of
Patronage, they shall rather revolt from your Covenant, and conform themselves
to the Book of Common Prayer, Book of Canons, and high Commission likewise. So
if you should put many of the Ministry, especially those who possess rich
Parsonages, to swear particularly that point of the Policy appointed by this
Book, Cap. 9. and Cap. 12. To suffer the Deacons to intromet with all their
Church Rents, and to distribute the same by the direction of the ruling Elders,
giving one fourth part for the maintenance of their Lay Elders and Deacons,
another to their poor Hospitals and Schools: another for upholding the fabric
of the Church and other extraordinary affairs, and only a fourth part to be
given to the Minister; they should find few of them who would embrace their
Covenant upon those Conditions. So then to persuade people that by swearing to
adhere to the discipline of the Church of Scotland, they swear also to this
book and to all the points therein, (whereunto the whole Church did agree fully
in that Assembly 1578. as they allege) either it is a false deluding of the
whole Kingdom, in drawing upon their consciences the burden of a fearful
perjurie, or else the Covenanters themselves remain as yet under that fearful
perjurie, notwithstanding of the renewing of their Covenant, whereby they think
that their perjurie is expiate; for they have not as yet renounced those things
which they are bound to renounce by their oath.

4. This Book of Discipline is deficient in the principal points of Church
discipline; there is no order set down therein of the censures of the Church,
nor of the manner of proceeding to the sentence of excommunication against
offenders, or in the absolution of the penitent, or of receiving them again
into the Church who has been excommunicated: in which points that which
properly is called the Discipline of the Church does consist. Every Church has
her Ecclesiastical Canons, whereby those things are directed, but this book
omitting those Canons has done, as that Painter, who having portraied every
Nation in its proper habit, did paint the French man naked with a pair of
Tailors sheers in his hand to shape to himself a fashion of Habit, because he
changes yearly according to his fancy: even so this book of Discipline has
given to the Ministers, and Lay Elders in their Elderships, a power to shape to
themselves a new form of Discipline every year as they please; so that as I
know perfectly, there were few Presbyteries or Sessions in Scotland, but had
different manner of proceeding in these things, as I could instance in diverse
particulars, having seen and perused many Presbyteriall and Session books. And
there is none amongst themselves, who frequented diverse Presbyteries, but they
know this to be true.

Finally, this Book is superabundant also, meddling with those things which do
not appertain to Ecclesiastical discipline, as setting down rules restraining
the civil and supreme Magistrate in the execution of his charge committed to
him by God, debarring him from meddling with Ecclesiastical matters, and not
giving him so much power therein, as to a Shoemaker or Tailor being a ruling
Elder, and giving him no definitive power, but only to be an executioner of
that which they define, and such other points of Jesuitical doctrine.

Seeing therefore this book of Discipline was never fully approved, nor
practiced by the Church, nor fully ratified by the estate and kingdom, nor
received fully by the Covenanters themselves, and since it is de^icient in
principal points of Discipline, and superabundant in meddling wit^things
impertinent, it cannot be accounted that discipline whereunto all are sworn by
the oath of the Covenant: And therefore that all those Acts of Assemblies cited
here for the establishing thereof are impertinent to prove their conclusion.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is discussed that Act of the General Assembly at Dundee 1580.
Condemning Episcopacie, as it was then in Scotland.
THe principal Act whereupon they chiefly insist, and ground this abjuration
and meaning of the Church in these years when the Covenant was sworn, is that
Act of the General Assembly at Dundee July 1580. whereby The office of a
Bishop (as it was then used in Scotland) is condemned as unlawful in it self:
and that Act at Glasgow in April 1581. explaining the same, declaring it to be
understood not of the spiritual function only, but of the whole office of a
Bishop, as it was then used. Albeit the Church appears wholly to have
condemned by those Acts all the points of the function of a Bishop, yet if we
consider rightly, we shall find nothing in them which proves directly the
determination of this Assembly; for I cannot see how the whole Church of
Scotland did agree at that time in condemning as unlawful in it self, either
this point of Episcopacie which is condemned by this Assembly of Covenanters
1638. or any Substantial point either of the Spiritual or temporal function
thereof, except they grant that the Church at that time did contradict it self.

First, I am assured they intended not to condemn in Bishops, as unlawful it
self, the preaching of the Word, the Administration of the Sacraments, and the
exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline, since they acknowledge themselves that
these are the principal points of their spiritual function in that Act of the
Assembly 1575. discussed here before.

Secondly, neither did they condemn as unlawful in it self, the name and title
of a Bishop to be appropriated to some Pastors by others, for first, they did
allow the title of Superintendent to be appropriated to some pastors, which is
a word of the same sense and signification, and importing as great Authority
and Jurisdiction as the other; And therefore it were but a foolish Logomachie,
or strife about words to allow the one title, and condemn the other. Secondly,
it may as well be condemned as unlawful, to appropriate the name of Minister to
the degree of preaching Pastors, which is common to all those who have charge
in the Church: or to appropriate the name of Elder to their ruling Elders only,
which is common to all Pastors, Apostles, Evangelists, and Bishops.

Thirdly, neither did they condemn as unlawful in it self, their power and
pre-eminence over the Ministers in their Diocese, or charge over more particular
Parishes, first, because there were points agreed upon by both parties before
this Assembly, and approved by a special Act as we have shown before, Cap.
11. Secondly, because this power was as yet still remaining in the persons of
Superintendents, Commissioners and Visitors, and long after this time.

Fourthly, neither did they condemn as unlawful in it self, their power of
Convocation of Synodall Assemblies and their moderation therein, for the Church
acknowledged this power to be lawful in Superintendents, as we have shown by
diverse Acts of Assemblies, Cap. 5. for if it were unlawful in it self, it
could not be thought lawful under any title whatsoever.

Fifthly, neither did they condemn as unlawful in it self their sitting and
voycing in Council or Parliament, or other Civil Iudicatories; for they
acknowledge in the second book of Discipline, Cap. 11. That Pastors may and
should assist their Princes when they be required in all things agreeable to
Gods Word, whether it be in Council or Parliament, or otherwise. So a little
before this time M. Robert Pont, who was a Pastor and Commissioner of
Caithenes, had license from the Assembly to exercise the office of a Senator
of the College of Justice, which was a civil Iudicatorie: That proviso which
is added to this does not import any unlawfulnes in the office, Providing they
neglect not their own charge, nor by flattery of Princes hurt the publik
estate of the Church; if any do so, it is but a personal fault, and not
essential to the office, for Bishops may do more good in those places for the
publik weal of the Church, than their Apostles of the Covenant by their long
staying in Edinburgh far from their own particular charges, attending the
tables of the Covenant, and gadding up and down the Country to stir up the
Kings Subjects to rebellion against him, and to disturb the estate of the
Church and Kingdom, as many of the Covenanting Ministers have done.

These are the principal points both of the Spiritual and temporal functions
of the Bishops, and since they were not accounted by the Church unlawful in
themselves, how can this be that this Assembly has justly condemned The whole
estate of Bishops as unlawful in it self; except the Ambiguitie lurk in these
words which are there added and often repeated, As it is now used in Scotland,
signifying that it was only the corruptions which were in those who were
Bishops at that time which they did condemn, and not Episcopacie absolutely. It
may be true indeed, that there were some corruptions at that time in those who
had the office of Bishops, or that they did not exercise their office aright,
retaining some corruptions of the Roman Church, but for these personal faults,
the office should not have been condemned of it self, since these corruptions
might have been separated from the office, as they were indeed by the new
re-establishment of Bishops in the year 1606. 1608.

And certainly, they understood those corruptions which are remaked to have
been in the Bishops by the book of discipline, Cap. 11. whereof some are
corruptions indeed, but not competent to that office, as it was now established
in Scotland by general Assemblies and Acts of Parliament: others of them are
only supposed corruptions, which cannot be convinced to be such indeed, either
by Gods Word, or testimony of approved Fathers, or practice, or example of the
primitive Church. 1. They say, it is a corruption that the name of Bishop
should be appropriated to some few: we have answered to this a little before,
showing that this is only a proud doting about questions and strife of words,
as the Apostle says, 1* Tim* 6. 4. 2. They account it a corruption, that they
addict not themselves to a particular flock: I answer, that they do so, for
their Diocese is their particular flock; Then it is neither necessary nor
expedient, that he to whom the general charge of many parishes is committed,
should astrict himself to one Parish only, nor can the contrary be convinced
from Gods Word, wherein we find no such divisions of Parishes as is now. 3.
They challenge them that they are called Lords over their brethren, and over
the inheritance of the Lord: But first we say, that they are not called Lords
in regard of their rule over their Brethren, but in regard of their temporal
Lordships bestowed upon them by the Liberality of Princes, and in regard of
their place in Parliament and Council: then this title of Lord, like as
Dominus in Latin, and (...) in Greek is sometimes a word signifying absolute
and illimitated Dominion. So we see that diverse Emperors, albeit in effect they
had absolute dominion, yet did they refuse often the title of Dominus because
it was odious to people, and in this sense Bishops are not called Lords,
neither do they arrogate to themselves such absolute and unlimited dominion,
as to do what they pleased, but they must be ruled by the Canons of the
Church. But otherwise the title of Lord is only a word of honor competent to
every man of respect, to whom it pleases the Prince, or custom of the Country
to give that title, as in France we see the Bishops are no otherwise intituted
than other ordinary Gentlemen, calling them Mounsieur; so likewise in Spain
and Italy Seignior, which title is also given to any other man of worth; it is
only the custom of the Country of England and Scotland, whereby this title of
Lord is given to Bishops, and not for any absolute Dominion they arrogate
thereby. 4. They account it a corruption that Bishops should have further
bounds to visit then they may lawfully (they would say conveniently:) but that
corruption may easily be amended by division of the Diocese, as is lately done
in the Diocese of St. Andrews, without abolishing the whole office. 5. That a
Pastor should have criminal Jurisdiction: we answer they have not this as
Pastors or Bishops, but as a privilege by the Laws of the Country annexed to
their temporal lands, which notwithstanding they do not exercise in their own
person, but by their Stewards or Bailif^es. 6. They count it a corruption, that
Bishops would not subject themselves to the correction and censures of the
particular Elderships or Presbyteries: this is but a supposed corruption, and
if it were so, it were a great corruption indeed, and a most uncomely and
confused disorder, to give liberty to the inferior members to correct the
head; it is true indeed, that Bishops ought to be subject to the censures of
General or National Councels, and none of them will think themselves exeemed
from such a one as is lawfully constituted. Albeit the Bishops did decline upon
many just reasons this Assembly of Covenanters, which are at length expressed
in their declinature, yet if that the Assembly had been constituted according
to the present established order of the Church, they would never have declined
from the same. The last corruptions, they remark in the Bishops as they were
then in Scotland, is, that they did not instruct their people in Gods Word,
which is a corruption indeed, but not essential to the office of a Bishop, or
allowed by a Law: if any omit that duty, let them be censured for their
personal fault, it is great iniquity to condemn the whole office as unlawful
in it self, for the personal fault of one or two.

But I perceive that the chief thing which was then condemned in Episcopacie
is, that they did not receive their Commission to exercise their charge from
the Church, or that every Minister had not his voice in the Nomination or
Election of Bishops, but that they were nominated and presented by the King,
elected by those of the Chapton only, and consecrated by other Bishops, and
this was the thing which moved them ^o despitefully to condemn that estate, in
the constitution whereof every one of them had not a hand, and in all their
proceedings both in the book of Discipline and Acts of Assemblies it appears,
that this was the chief thing they required, that if they had had their
Commission only from the Church or general Assembly, they would have
condescended to all other points of their function.

1. In the second book of Discipline, Cap. 11. they confess that albeit Pastors
as pastors have not power over more ^locks than one, yet if it be given them by
the Church they may exercise it lawfully. 2. In the Assembly 1575. it is
agreed by both parties as we have declared, that amongst the pastors one may be
chosen by the Church to visit certain bounds comprehending many particular
parishes, and therein to plant Ministers, to suspend and depose them for
reasonable causes. 3. In the Assembly at Edinburgh 1578. one of the principal
petitions they make to the Regent, was that none should be admitted to vote in
Parliament in name of the Church, excep^ such as have Commission from the
Church. 4. In the second book of Discipline, Cap. 11. It is said that no person
under whatsoever title ought to attempt any Act in name of the Church either in
Council or Parliament, having no Commission from the Church; so that if that
had been done, we see that they acknowledge both their power and pre-eminence
over other Pastors, their charge over more particular flocks, their sitting in
Council, and voting in Parliament to have been lawful, which are the
principal points both of the Spiritual and temporal function of Bishops,
which they challenge in this Assembly to be unlawful.

If then we can show that the Bishops have received from the Church such a
Commission, to exercise all these points of their office, how can it be denied
but they may exercise them lawfully, since this is the only exception against
them in these things: Therefore we shall make it appear that Bishops have
received from the Church this Commission. 1. Christ himself who is the head of
the Church having all power, gave to the Apostles this Commission to exercise
power and pre-eminence in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, over all
both Pastors and people throughout the whole world. 2. The Apostles who were at
the beginning the representative Church, gave the like Commission to Bishops
over certain bounds over the which they received Jurisdiction, as Paul gave to
Timothy in Ephesus, and the bounds of Asia minor thereabout, Commission to
plant Churches, to ordain Presbyters and Deacons, to have Jurisdiction and
Rule over them being ordained, to receive or repel accusations given in
against them, and by consequent to judge and correct, or censure them: the same
Commission received Titus in the Kingdom of Creta; neither can it be doubted,
but the rest of the Apostles gave the like Commission unto others in these
Nations where they traveled to preach the Gospel, who were to succeed them in
the rule and Government of the Churches, wherein they had not only the Name, but
also the office, and that power of Bishops which is here called in
Controversy; as none can deny, except those who will impudently deny all t^rue
records of Antiquity, since all the o^thodox Fathers who succeeded the
Apostles, and lived in the same age with them, do with unanimous consent
testify the same. The which Commission was derived from the Primitive Church
(who received it from the Apostles) to those of succeeding ages, confirmed by
continual practice uncontrouled for the space of fifteen hundred years by any
Orthodox writers, until this last age that some of the Church of Geneva began
to call it in question. 3. The Commission to vote in Parliament they could not
have at the beginning, when there was no Christian Magistrates or
Commonwealths, yet so soon as Kingdoms and Commonwealths received the
publik exercise of Christian Religion authorized by Laws, then the Church
considering that many of the Civil Laws did either directly or indirectly
reflect upon Ecclesiastical matters and Religion; and that it was very
expedient, that Ecclesiastical Constitutions for better obedience thereto
should be strengthened by the Laws of the Kingdom, they did earnestly
supplicate Emperors, Kings and Magistrates that some Commissioners from the
Church might have place in their Sovereign Courts, whereby Laws were
established to further therein the cause of God and the Church, and to take
heed Ne Ecclesia aliquid detrimenti capiat: the which supplications Christian
Emperors, Kings and Magistrates out of a pious zeal did grant, And therefore
did authorize the Bishops and Prelates to sit in their Sovereign Courts in
name of the Church; this privilege many godly and learned Prelates did enjoy
to the unspeakable good of the Church, and advancement of Christian Religion:
so that it is no less, but rather a great deal mo^e wicked Sacrilege to rob
the Church of this so profitable a privilege, than to rob her of her
patrimony: and therefore no marvel, though these who make no scruple in
Conscience to be sacrilegious in the one, be also sacrilegious in the other.

4. To come nearer to our Church of Scotland it is evident by all histories,
that since there were Christian Princes therein, the reverend Bishops did not
only rule the Ecclesiastic affairs, but also had a great hand in the
affairs of the Civil estate, and did much good by their wise Counsel to the
King, the Church and whole Kingdom, before Popish tyranny had place therein;
and that since there were any formal Parliament in Scotland, the Prelates made
up the third Estate, and did represent the whole Church therein, both by the
consent of the Church and fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, so that to the
enacting of any Law, the consent of Prelates was ever thought as necessary as
any of the other two Estates. And therefore since by the fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom, no Act in Civil or Ecclesiastical matters ever had the
strength of a binding Law without the consent of all the three Estates,
whosoever will prease to suppress the estate of Prelates do reverse and
destroy the very fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. 5. To come yet nearer to
the reformed Church of Scotland, at the very first reformation, those who were
appointed in the place of Bishops called Superintendents, had by Commission
from the Church as great power and pre-eminence over other Pastors, and all the
Parishes within the bounds of the charge committed to them, as Bishops do now
require in their Diocese. It is true, the Superintendents had not vote in
Parliament, nor could have; for why the Bishops retained still their possession
in those places upon their ancient Commission, often ratified in Parliament
both before and after the Reformation, never quarrelled by any General
Assembly of the Church, until that Assembly at Edinburgh in October 1578.
wherein the Bishops are required only, not to vote in Parliament in name of the
Church without special Commission there^ra. And a few years before, to wit, at
the Assembly at Edi^burgh 1573. the whole Jurisdiction and power of Bishops is
expressly allowed by the Church, with some exceptious not very material as we
remarked before, and yet there is no mention of excepting this power, to vote
in Parliament in name of the Church, whereby they do tacitly at the least
approve this the ancient Commission of the Bishops to vote in Parliament in
name of the Church.

Finally, at the last re-establishing of Bishops, Thu Commission to vote in
Parliament in name of the Church was expressly given to them by the Church; for
first, by that Assembly at Montrosse 1600. the Church gave Commission to a
certain number of Ministers (though not under the title of Bishops) to have a
care of the General affairs of the Church, and to voice in Parliament in name
of the Church: then the general Assemblies at Glasgo^ and Lithgow in the year
1606. 1608. 1610. they did under the very title of Bishops receive full
Commission from the Church, not only to vote in Parliament, but likewise to
exercise their whole Jurisdiction, power and and pre-eminence over all Pastors
and people within the bounds of their Diocese, and so every Bishop particularly
by their election and consecration receives power to use this Commission,
whenever occasion shall be offered: neither is it necessary, that for every
several Act they do in name of the Church, they have a new particular
Commission for that effect; but it is sufficient, that by the consent of the
Church and Estates of the Kingdom, this power is annexed to the office of a
Bishop for ever, so that whosoever should be elected to that office, should
have this Commission once for all during his life time, or until by his
malversation in his charge he be lawfully and legally deprived.

It is true indeed, that the Church may add new Articles to their Commission,
as times and occasions requires; as is done in England and Ireland where the
Convocation of the Clergy sits ever in the time of Parliament, to consider
upon such Articles as are thought by common consent to serve for the weel of
the Church, and by them are presented to the Bishops, that by their care they
may receive due ratification: but the turbulent behavior of some Ministers in
Scotland, who scorns to have their petitions proposed orderly by the Bishops,
has as yet barred the Clergy of Scotland from that privilege.

Now to conclude this point, since for ought we can see, the only exception
that the Church of Scotland has made against any point of the function of
Bishops, at that time when Episcopacie was condemned as unlawful, Anno 1580.
and 1581. is that they had not their power and pre-eminence by Commission from
the Church or general Assembly, and since that exception, as we have shown,
is now removed, it is evident that those Acts of the Assemblies at Dundee,
1580. and at Glasgow, 1581. do not serve to prove the Conclusion of this
Assembly, and therefore are impertinently alleged.

CHAP. XIIII.
Discussing the rest of the Acts of Assemblies here cited.
SInce all the rest of the Acts in the subsequent Assemblies against Bishops
are grounded upon these two former Acts, whereby the office of a Bishop was
condemned, and since we have shown in the former Chapter that they do not
serve to prove the Conclusion of this Assembly, and therefore the rest of the
Acts depending thereupon must have as little strength as they, so that we need
not to insist in the particular discussing of every one of them: yet lest it be
thought that we have over past them altogether, we shall remark some few
particular observations upon them, whereby it may be perceived that if they
serve not for their purpose here* yet that they serve in diverse points against
them. First, those Acts cited here concerning the presentation by the King, and
admission by the Presbytery of Glasgow of M. Robert Montgomerie to the office
of the Archbishop of Glasgow. and of M. Robert Po^s to be Bishop of Caith^es,
and the diverse ineffectuall suits made by the General Assemblies to the King,
Council and Parliament, for advancing of their Presbyteriall Discipline, and
suppression of Bishops, to wit, those presented by the Assemblies 1580. 1581.
and 1587. serves against them in so far as they declare, that their violent
proceedings against Bishops, and for establishing of their new discipline, was
not allowed by the Kings Majesty and Council, and whole body of the Kingdom
in Parliament all this time, but directly resisted, as contrary to their wills
and manifest intentions, whereby it is evident, that neither the King nor the
Council, nor the whole body of the Kingdom had any such meaning or intention,
as by that oath of the Covenant, to abjure Episcopacie. 2. Although that the
King and estate suffered an Act to pass in Parliament 1592. establishing in a
part their new discipline, yet was it not their meaning to approve the same
directly. But for a pregnant reason of estate, they did tolerate lesser evils,
that greater might be eschewed: for at that time it is well known, that the
King and estate were mightily astonished by the late discovery of a dangerous
conspiracy of sundry Noblemen of greatest power in the Kingdom, by the
practice of some tras^ieking Jesuits and Gentlemen affected to the Popish
Religion, such as Father Creightou, father Abercromy, Sir William Graham of
Fentry, M. George Carr, and others who brought in great sums of Spanish gold,
and promised greater, whereby those Noblemen and many others of their Faction
were corrupted to betray their Native Country, promising by their letters, and
subscription of blank papers, to give way and assistance to the King of Spaines
Navy to enter within the bowels of the Kingdom: No marvel therefore,
although (in so perilous a time, when a total ruin both of Church and
Kingdom, of Policy and Religion was feared and threatened) the King and estate
thought it fit for eschewing the present danger, to give way at that time to
those new Disciplinarians, suffering that Act of Parliament to pass in their
favor; fearing that if they should have resisted their present importunity,
turbulent spirits (as some of them were) might have made a further distraction,
even amongst these who adhered to the true Religion, whereby an other gate
might have been opened for the entry of foreign enemies, and so the estate
being thus divided should have been less able to resist the common enemy.

This was the very true reason whereby his Majesty was in a manner forced to
condescend to this Act, whereof they brag so much, contrary to his own
judgment and constant intention: as is evident by that which followed, for no
sooner was that blast past, and that Conspiracy repressed, but King James of
happy memory did set himself more earnestly than ever he did before, to
re-establish Episcopal government, and bear down that new discipline, the
evils and corruptions whereof disturbing both Church and Commonwealth he
perceived daily more and more.

3 We must remark that this Act of Parliament 1592. was the first that ever did
allow presbyteriall Government by a Law, and therefore ought to be accounted
the first establishment thereof in the Kingdom of Scotland, whereby it
appears, how short a continuance it had in this Church, and how soon it became
loathsome to all estates of persons, Spuria, putamina non agunt altas radices:
For not full eight years after this, in the Assembly at Montrosse, 1600. it
received a great blow, and Episcopacie was by one step more advanced, wherein
it was concluded that a certain number of ministers who were nominated by the
King, should supply the place of Bishops, by voycing in Parliament in name of
the Church, and to have a care of the general affairs thereof under the name.
of Commissioners, whose power was enlarged by that Assembly at Haliru^house,
1602. and Bishops thereafter under their own proper title were established in
their full power and Jurisdiction by the general Assemblies of the Church
1606. 1608. 1610. and solemnly ratified by consent of the three Estates in
Parliament, 1612.

4. We cannot omit that Act cited out of the Assembly March 1589. wherein it
is said for as much as the Neighbor Kirk in England is understood to be heavily
troubled for maintaining of the true Discipline and Government, whose griefs
ought to move us: therefore the Presbytery of Edinburgh was ordained to
comfort the said Church in the said matter. I cannot conceive whom they call
The Church of England here, except it be some few Schismatics, who a little
before this time were challenged before the Star Chamber, for disturbing the
Church and Kingdom, by promoting unto the people a new form of Discipline,
different in many points both from the Scottish Discipline, and that of Geneva;
who because they did obstinately refuse to answer to some interrogatories
proposed to them by the Council of England, were committed to prison; of which
number was one Wigintone, who stirred up three fanaticall fellows, Edmund
Coppinger, William Hacket and Henry Arthington to labor for their relief,
persuading them that they were extraordinarily called thereto, Hacket being
mightily possessed by this humor did give out that Christ was descended from
heaven with his fan in his hand, and had called him extraordinarily to purge
both Church and Commonwealth, he sent out before him his two principal
Prophets Coppinger and Arthington, to whom he assigned a diverse charge, that
Coppinger should offer grace and mercy to the people, if they would believe
and follow him, for the relief of the faithful servants of God, and
Arthingtone should denounce Gods wrath and eternal damnation to unbeleevers
who would not adhere to them: those two being sent by Hacket came to the
streets of London, and did preach according to their charge, railing impudently
against the Queen and Council, declaring openly that she was fallen from her
right to the Crown, and that Hacket was their King whom they ought to obey,
being placed in Christ's stead; whereby they moved great multitudes of the
Common people to follow them, but before they could effectuate their purpose,
they were prevented by certain of the Council sent by the Queen, who
apprehended them in the very Act at Cheapside the 16. of July 1591. for the
which cause Hacket was executed as a Traitor, Coppinger killed himself in
prison, and Arthington repenting him of his madness did confess their whole
proceedings: in whose Confession it was declared that they had received an
encouragement to this attempt from Scotland by the means of one Penry, who
having been a certain space a Preacher in Scotland, wa^ returned a little
before this enterprise, and was lurking then in the City of London, or in some
place thereabouts: this Penry was chiefly the man who procured these
consolatorie letters from the Assembly to his Companions, to the great disgrace
of the Church of Scotland, as having given encouragement to further such a
treasonable attempt: and apparently that letter written from Scotland by one
Gibson to Coppinger was one of these consolatorie letters ordained by the
Assembly to be written to them; wherein he says, The best of our Ministers
are most careful of your estate, and have sent for that effect a Preacher of
our Church (to wit Penry) this last summer (1590.) of purpose to confer with
the best affected Ministers of your Church, to lay down a plot how our Church
might best travel for ^our relief. I have heard some of the wisest and gravest
of the Ministry of Scotland at that time, who did heavily regrate that the
Church of Scotland was mightily abused by this Penry, who although he was for a
time in great estimation amongst the people, and some of the chief Ministers
likewise, yet they found him at last an arrant K^ave.

I am sorry that the Brethren of this Assembly have been so inconsiderate, as
to refricare ban^ scabie^, in calling to remembrance again, that oppro^ric of
the Church of Scotland in these times, as having had two deep a hand in that
attempt, to stir up a Combustion in our Neighbor Kingdom and Church, but
our Covenanters are so far from being ashamed thereof, as they cease not as
yet to use all means to do the like, if they could find in England such
fanaticall fellows, as Hacket and Coppinger.

CHAP. XV.
Discussing the Conclusion of the Act.
NOw after they have set down their confused rapsody of Reasons for proving the
determination of their Assembly, they conclude in these Hyperbolicall terms,
All which and many other reasons being publikly read, and particularly at great
length examined, and all objections answered in the face of the Assembly, all
the members of the Assembly, being many times required to propone their doubts
and scruples, and every one being heard to the full, and after much agitation
as fully satisfied, etc. Magnifick words indeed. Dare pondus idonea fumo. able
to give weight to the light smoke of their reasons: it is a strange matter if
it be true that in one only Session, in the shortest day almost in the whole
year the 8. of December, so many things could be done to the full, that all
these reasons and many others could be particularly at great length examined in
so short a space, All objections that could be proponed exactly answered Every
member of the Assembly heard to the full, Every member of the Assembly being
many times desired and required to propound not only their great Doubts, but
their small scruples also; and after much agitation all being fully satisfied:
certainly, the perswaders had need of great volubilitie of tongue, to repeat so
many reasons in so short a time, to propose and to answer to many so strong
objections, as might have been alleged against their Conclusions, and the
Eloquence of Cicero or Demosthenes, yea, the tongues of Angels to persuade to
the full all their hearers of the truth of their reasons and answers: and these
who were contrary minded had need of pregnant wits to conceive all their
persuasions so quickly, yea of some secret Enthusiasme and divine inspiration
to change their hearts, who not long ago were fully persuaded to the contrary,
and had confirmed their per^wasion by their oath of Canonical obedience to
their Bishops, and had practiced accordingly for a long time: all these things
alleged here to have been done, had required a greater space to have done them
Exactly to the full than the space of a whole month, which was the whole time
this Assembly did sit in determining with this point many other Articles of no
small consequence; so precipitate were they in their determinations, fearing
les^ they should have been prevented, before they had vented their great malice
against Moses and Aaron, the King, and the Bishops to the Full.

Secondly, after this Bravado the Moderator did put the matter to voycing in
these terms, Whether according to the Confession of Faith, as it was professed
in the year, 1580. 1581. and 1590. there be any other Bishop, but a pastor of a
particular ^^ock, having no pre-eminence nor power over his Brethren, and
whether by that Confession, as it was then professed, all other Episcopacie is
abjured, and ought to be removed out of this Kirk.

This proposition we have discussed before at the beginning in stating the
question as was most fit, to the end we might more easily perceive whether the
reasons alleged did conclude directly the point in Controversy: where we have
shown evidently, that this proposition, as it is here set down, was informall,
obscure, ambiguous, sophistical, and such a one as it was impossible to answer
Categoric^, either affirmative or negative, as all voy^es ought to be given and
are accustomed to be in any orderly meeting, therefore we need not to insist
further therein in this place.

Thirdly, when it comes to the voycing, they say, The whole Assembly most
unanimously without contradiction of any one (and with the hesitation of one
alla^erly) professing full persuasion of ^ind did voice, etc. No marvel,
though all these who were present and admitted to give voice, did so without
contradiction, since all those whom they suspected, would make any
contradiction were either excluded from being Commissioners, or if they were
chosen Commissioners, were debarred from voycing by the Rulers of the Covenant,
according to the instructions sent from their Tables at Edinburgh, and directed
to every Presbytery, some publikly to all, some secretly to those of every
Presbytery, who were most affected to the cause; and to make this evident, it
shall not be amiss to set down some of their instructions verbatim. 1. Order
must be taken that none be chosen ruling-Elders but Covenanters, and those
well-affected to the business. 2. That where the Minister is not well affected,
the ruling-Elder be chosen by the Commissioners of the Shire, and spoken to
particularly to that effect. 3. That they be careful that no Chapter-men,
Chappel-men, or Ministers, Justices of peace, be chosen Commissioners although
they be Covenanters. 4. That the Commissioners of the Shire cause conveen
before them the ruling-Elder of every Church before the day of the election,
and injoyne them upon their oath that they give vote to none to be
Commissioner, but to those who are named already at the meeting at Edinburgh.
5. That such as are erroneous in doctrine or scand^lous (...) life (and such
only they account those who are contrary to their Covenant) be presently
processed, that they be not chosen Commissioners, and if they shall happen to
be chosen by the greater part, that all the best affected protest against them,
and come to the Assembly to testify the same. There were diverse likewise who
were chosen and admitted Commissoners, and yet did remove themselves when the
Assembly was discharged by the Kings Authority, out of conscience of
obedience to the Sover^igne Majesty and detestation of Rebellion before this
point was put to voycing: Therefore none remaining except these who were
resolved to be partakers of Rebellion, no marvel, though none of them did
contradict their rebellious Leaders.

We see indeed this same unanimous consent in all the rest of the Articles
which were put to voycing in this Assembly, whereby it may be clearly
discerned, that all of them before this time were resolved upon amongst
themselves, by a sensible preagreement at their Tables at Edinburgh, to the
which agreement, they did astrict all the Commissioners before they were
admitted to have voice in this Assembly: and for that effect it is enjoined
both by their secret and publik instru^tions. That every Presbytery shall send
their Commissioners to Edinburgh before the first of October (which was seven
weeks before the day appointed to the beginning of the Assembly) to the end
they may know their own strength the better at their next meeting. So that
these Acts cannot be accounted the Acts of the general Assembly of the Church
at Glasgow, but rather Acts of those seditious tables of Covenanters at
Edinburgh, and only repeated here at Glasgow for the fashion.

Fourthly, wherein was this unanimous consent of their suffrages? It was (say
they) That all Episcopacie different from that of a Pastor over a particular
flock, was abjured in this Kirk, and to be removed out of the same. If this was
their unanimous suffrage and no more, I marvel not that there were no
contradiction: Yea, I believe, that if all the Bishops in Scotland, and all
those who had refused to subscribe their Covenant, had been admitted to give
their voice, they should not have contradicted this: for neither do these
words answer to the propositon of the Moderator, nor do they condemn
Episcopacie in any point, as it was then used in Scotland, or in the primitive
Church.

As for the first, that it does not answer directly to the proposition, I prove
it in two substantial points: for first (as we declared before in setting down
of the state of the question) the Moderators proposition included three
distinct questions. 1. Whether according to the confession of Faith, as it was
professed anno 1580. 1581. and 1590. there be any other Bishop but a Pastor of
a particular flock, having no pre-eminence nor power over his Brethren. 2.
Whether by the confession of Faith, as it was then professed, all other be
abjured. 3. Whether all other ought to be removed out of this Kirk or not. But
in voycing they answer only to the last two, omitting altogether the the first,
which notwithstanding is the ground of both the other: And indeed considering
the informalitie of the proposition, I esteem that they had good reason to
answer so, for if they had done otherwise, their voices had been as informall
and intricate as the proposition was, because they could not answer
Categorically to all three at once, for why, according to their grounds they
behooved to answer to the first Negati^^, and to the other two affirmative; and
therefore lest their answers should have been obscure and intricate, including
both a negative and affirmative voice, they did wisely to answer to those
questions only, to the which one affirma^ive voice might serve. 2. The
propo^ition contains two points of Episc^pacie, to wit, Charge over more
particular flocks, and power and pre-eminence over other Brethren, demanding,
if both these points be abjured or not, and both to be removed: But in voycing
they determine only the first point concerning their charge over more particular
^locks than one, not a word of their abjuring or removing their power and
pre-eminence over their (...), which notwithstanding is the chief point that
does most grieve our ^ovenenters, and for removing whereof they have raised all
this trou^l^ Be it therefore known to all, that this Assembly which was (...)
conve^ned to condemn Episcopacie* did (...) this power and pre-eminence over
their (...) therefore that this standing still in force in the Church of
Scotland, whosoever yields not due obedience to the Bishops according to
their oath, are evidently perjured, and are not absolved from their oath by
this Assembly except they would say that they have extended the Conclusion
further then all their unanimous voices could suffer; which as they must
confess is the greatest iniquity which can be committed by any Assembly
whatsoever.

Finally, if it be so, that no episcopacie is here condemned, except that which
is different from a Pastor of a particular flock; there is nothing here
condemned in the Bishops, either as they were of old in the p^imitive Church,
or were of late in Scotland, and are as yet in England and Ireland, yea, no
Episcopacie is here abjured, except that of the Bishop of Rome, who only
arrogats to himself to be the Pastor of the universal flock: all other Bishops
requires no more, but to be a Pastor of a particular flock, and as Cyprian
faith, Episcopatus (...) est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur: there
is no bounds prescribed by Gods word of a particular ^lock, but the Church by
the Authority of the Magistrates, for the more commodious ruling of the Church,
and for conserving unity, have divided Kingdoms in provinces, and provinces in
particular Dioceses, and Dioceses in particular parishes, appointing to every
part their own rulers, so that as a parish is the particular flock of a
Presbyter or Minister; even so a Diocese is the particular flock of a Bishop,
the province the particular flock of an Archbishop, and the Nation or Kingdom
in regard of the universal Church is the particular flock of a Primate.
Neither may any Bishop lawfully usurp charge over the particular flock of
another Bishop without his consent. Their Apostles of the Covenant who went
through the Country to preach, not the Gospel of peace, but their seditious
Covenant and mortal war against the King and all his Loyal Subjects, albeit
they pretend to be Pastors only of a particular parish, yet did violently
intrude themselves to exercise charge in the parishes of other pastors, without
warrant or Authority, or lawful calling from the Church, and contrary to the
Constitutions of the Church of Scotland, established even then when
presbyteriall government was in greatest force, drawing after them many
thousands of people to disobedience and open Rebellion, and by consequent to
perdition, except they repent; and yet who dare be so bold as to say to any of
them cur ita facis?

I cannot see what they can answer to this gross and absurd escape in not
answering by their voices fully to the proposition, and extending the
determination of the Assembly further than the voices can suffer, except that
they would allege that it is a fault in the Printer, and that it was otherwise
in the original Register, which is not like to be true for these reasons:
first, because if it had been so that they had answered fully to the
proposition, their suffrages should not have been Categoricall, but very
informall and intricate, including both a negative and an affirmative voice. 2.
Their Clerk M. Archibald Iohnstone has testified the contrary, by adding to
this printed Coppie, and all other which I have seen his sign and Manual
subscription, testifying thereby that they are printed according to the
original Acts contained in the Authentic Register, out of the which he
affirms, he has not only collected and extracted these Acts, but also visied
them, to see if the extract was according to the original; if he had committed
such an absurd escape in omitting the very principal point whereupon the whole
Act does depend, and being that Act also for the which the Assembly was chiefly
conveened: he has certainly shown himself a very Ass, unworthy of that trust
which the whole Assembly did commit unto him by an express Act, constituting
him the only visitor and approver of all things that are to be printed
concerning the Church or Religion. 3. Albeit it had been true that Iohnstone
might ^ave overseen himself so far, yet how could it be possible that the
Moderator, and others committed to visit the Acts should have suffered such a
fault, as reverseth the whole Act about the which greatest care was taken to
pass forth before it was diligently corrected.

Therefore I cannot but believe assuredly that there was no fault committed by
the Printer, but that the Act was printed according to the original Register,
and that it was so written in the Register, as it was voyced unanimously in the
Assembly, and that the voycers had no other meaning then their words did
express: and therefore that nothing in effect was concluded in this Act
against Episcopacie, as the title of the Act bears. And so we may conclude
justly in these words of the Satyrick. Poet: Parturiunt moutes and nascitur
ridiculus mus.

FINIS.

