The Project for Repealing the Penal Laws and Tests, with the Honorable Means
used to effect it. Being a Preface to a Treatise concerning the Penal Laws and
Tests.
IT is now some years since the noble Enterprise of Removing the Penal Laws and
Tests, has been carried on by incredible Vigor and Application; and yet to the
great Grief of the Catholic Undertakers, the Success does not hitherto seem to
answer the measure of their Diligence or Expectation. All sorts of Men, and all
kinds of Arguments have been tried, and yet it is scarce to be perceived that
the Cause is any thing advanced. The Church of England Men had the Honor of the
first Solicitation; and the Nobility and Gentry of that Communion, in
consideration of Former Services, such as the Western Action, etc. had the
offer of engrossing to themselves the sole Merit and Glory of Betraying their
Religion and Country: the Court Arguments of Honor and Profit, heretofore
accounted irresistible, were not wanting on this occasion. But this had no
other Effect than the innumerable Vacancies of Civil and Military Employments
that fell upon those stiff Gentlemen as a Judgment for their refusal. And some,
whose whole Subsistence depended upon the Court, chose rather to be deprived of
all, and to be reduced from some of the chief Places of the Kingdom, to the
utmost hardships of Life, than to join in this warlike Enterprise against the
Laws. The Clergy who now seem to be in a state of Reprobation, were smiled upon
as long as the Court had any hopes of them, and offered this great grace of
ruining their own Church: and to encourage them to this pious Work, Preferments
were promised; and because none of any Reputation could be gained, the
Black-Guard of the Church is called up Stairs, and admitted to the Closet, and
Dung-hills are raked for Vermin to stink Men out of the Church. Saul was in
great distress, when for want of a Prophet, he put his Questions to the Devil;
for my part I cannot but look upon it as direct Necromancy to consult Bishop
Talgol, since by the smell of the Carrion, it must be concluded to be more than
four days dead; and it is not doubted by Men curious in secret Sciences, but
that the Devil has somewhere or other robbed a Gibbet to furnish this
apparition of a Prelat.

When the Nobility and Clergy declined this Romantic Adventure against the
Laws, a Press goes forth upon the Commonalty; in Corporations this was the
Word, Give up the Penal Laws or your Charter, and Mr. Alderman, lay aside the
Test or your Fur-Gown. Nay this diligence descended so low, and grew so minute,
that a blind Alehouse could not escape the Questions; Why should any one enjoy
a Royal License to draw Ale, that would not stand by the Prerogative and
Dispensing Power? Yet after all, the success of this admirable negotiation was
so unsatisfactory, that B. H. swore to his Landlord at Winchester, That the
Disobedience of his Brethren of the Blue Apron had brought upon them the
Proclamation against Debauchery. Nay, so great was the Condescension, as not to
pass by the very Goals: Where

(...) Trusted, because it was against their principle to keep their Faith with
Heretics. Dear Friend William, how shall we reconcile these things with the
new Expedient? How is it that sweet and bitter proceed from the some Fountain?
And since these Lights lead different ways, for Gods sake tell us which we
shall follow.

Many other Writers of lesser Note, showed their good Will and Learning upon
this great Subject, and gave the Penal Laws such hard Names, as Draconica,
Cannibal, Blood-sucking, Sanguinary, Barbarous, Inhuman, etc. that a Sergeant
of the last Call is said to be so far transported, as to tear all those Acts
out of his Statute-Book, when he had first of all-desired a Friend to show him
which they were. But of all that have signalliz'd themselves by their
opposition to the Penal Laws and Tests, commend me to the Reverend Judges, who
in these Circuits have done wonders, and astonished all the Kingdom. The
Atchievments of these Knights Errants, deserve a particular Relation, and I
hope they themselves will please so far to comply with the public Curiosity,
as to permit their several Charges to be printed, and by this means make some
amends for the disappointment of the World, which has waited so long in vain
for the Bishops Trial: In the mean time who can pass by Alibone the Wise, who
in his Charge recommended to the Country the Belief of Transubstantiation, and
what is almost as repugnant to common sense, he maintained that the Bishops
Petition was a Libel: It was kindly done of a Popish Judge to take the pains to
recommend Protestant Bishops to the Esteem of the Country, by expressing his
Indignation against them in so high a measure; surely every Protestant would be
apt to believe that those Bishops had given some notable Check to the progress
of Popery, that should occasion this pretended Judge to be so much enraged.
After the Bishops, he fell unmercifully upon the Laws, and said many things
against them of as much weight as his Commission; but some of the Gentlemen
present thought all this Harangue very impertinent; for they were of opinion,
that his sitting upon that Bench, took away the Laws more effectually than all
the Reasons he could alledg against them. What shall we do now the Laws and
Judges are so desperately fallen out? When the Laws are against the Judges, what
wonder is it if the Judges are against the Laws? Tyburn had of old the Right
and the good Fortune of ending such Controversies by silencing the Judges, and
I do not despair but this may expire together the Revilers of our Laws under
the same fatal Tree, which without imputation of Superstition, I may I hope,
thus accost in Verse: Old Reverend Tripos, Guardian of the Law,
Sacred to Justice, Treasons greatest awe:
Do thou decide the Nations weighty Cause,
And judge between the Judges and the Laws.
So shall no guiltless Blood thy Timber ever pollute,
And righteous Laws shall vouch all thou shall execute.


FINIS.

