LOVE to the LIFE, Or, some MEDITATIONS UPON LOVING, and WASHING In the Blood
of Christ; TOGETHER, With a Taste of Gospel-Promises, as the CHURCHES STOCK, or,
BELIEVERS PATRIMONY.

By R. M. the Benjamin of his Fathers house.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my Love, Jo.
15.9. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me, Jo. 13 8. If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs, according to the promise, Gal.
3.29. Mala mea, pure mala sunt, and mea sunt; Bona autem mea, nec pure bona
sunt, nec mea sunt. London, Printed for B. Harris, at the Stationers Arms in
Swithins Alley. Anno 1674.

To the Christian, and Candid Reader.
READER,
THou may wonder to see Me (the Benjamin of my Fathers House) to add to the
Heap, and Pile of Books; If (my wickedly-wicked heart, deceive me not) not
Glory (unless of God,) nor Gain (unless of Souls) have been the wheels on which
I have moved, and the grand Incentives to Midwife the Babe into the World. A
Book may preach when the Author dare not; when the Author cannot; yea (which is
more) when the Author is not. I hope I can say (without a Flourish) that this
Babe had been stifflled in the womb, and not seen the Light, had not my highest
Ambition (notwithstanding Brotherly Solicitation) been my Fathers Glory, and my
Fellow Creatures Good. Eccl. 12 12
Though, of making Books, there is no end, and much reading is a weariness to
the Flesh; Yet, there are some Books, of which I may say, as some Phisicians
speak of their Pills, there are Pilula sine quibus; that is, sine quibus esse
nolo, without which they would not be: It Is true, the Bible, is the Book of
Books, for that is Gods Book: yet there are some Libelli sine quibus; some
little Books without which I would not be. (...)
If this little Tract, have been preached to the Ear, and shall be pre^ented to
the Eye, then the strength of Israel imprint it upon the Heart.

Reader, If thou find not in this Book (Much in a Little) yet wonder not,
Job 8.9.
for I am but of yesterday, and know nothing; or not, according to the Margent.
If any say, why do this Dwarf trouble the World, that is under a Glut of Books
already? I shall modestly reply, that, though wordly praise, and profit, be the
two Lackeys of most men's Labors, yet (through Grace) I have been hunting after
neither.

The Pen (by far) spreads it self farther, then the Voice can reach, the Pen,
is an artificial Tongue, and sheaks to the Absent, as well as the present; yea,
it speaks not to the present Age only, but to the succeeding Ages also: The
Pen, is a kind of Image of Eternity, and will make a Man live, when He is dead:
Zach. 1.5.
Though the Prophets do not live for ever, yet their Labors may; Heb. 11.4.
ana Abel (though dead) yet speaks; or, is spoken off.

What Solon saia concerning Laws (that there were many good Laws made, but
there wanted one Law, to make them put all those Laws in Execution;) So, I may
^ay concerning Books; there are many good Book: written, but there wants one
Book, to make us put those ^ood Books in practice: O^ such a Book were worth
writing, and worth reading. Augustine, with Ciceroes Hortensius.
I have read of one, that was much taken with the Book of anoth^r* but not
finding the name of Christ in it, he could not cordyally affect it.

Reader, I doubt not, but the Name of Christ (who has a Name above every Name)
will be Legible in this little little Book, for it is a Narrative (according to
my Stature) of Christ's Loving, and Washing out of Love.

I would hope, I shall never have cause to say concerning this Book, as Nero
did concerning a piece of his, (ultinum nescissem Literas) wishing, it had
never been written. God has two Books, his Works, and his Word; the Book of
the Creatures, and the Book of the Scriptures; As for this latter Book (the
Holy Scriptures of Truth) they are Christ's Letters of Credence; that when a
poor desponding, doubting, and drooping Souls cannot see Christ, it may read of
a Christ; and hear of a Christ, and so hear from a Christ. Now, (though, for
this Book (especially) we are to ble^s God for) as there is a different
Reading, and what is said of a part, is tr^e of the whole; Rev. 1.3.
Blessed is he (or she) that rea^eth, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those sayings, which are written therein; Yet, there are
many other good Books, for which I can bless God especially where there is much
of a Christ; most of a Christ, as Savior, and Sovereign.

Reader, Was not that a sad day, when the Apostles (who were so good Preachers)
were forbidden preaching? Acts 4.17.18.
They called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the
name of Jesus. So, was not that a sad, and sinful day, in the time of Justin
Martyr? Clarks Eccles. Hist. 7.
The Proconsul in Asia forbad, that Christians should read any Books that spoke
of Christ.

In this little little Book, thou may read of a Jesus; the Loving of a
Jesus; the Washing of a Jesus; whose Name is Honey to the Mouth; Melody to the
Ear, and Music to the Heart.

Paul's Epistles, and Peter's Epistles, are Ours, though not in their
Inscriptions, yet in their Benefit. Words pass away, and are forgotten, when
writing remain: Every new Tide, blots out a writing in the Sand; and every new
Term, shows the former forgotten; but writing deceives even Death it self.

If this Book should turn to the Good of None, yet shall I sing but to the same
Tune, that others of Gods Servants have done before Me; witness this place
among others: Isa. 49.4
Then I said, I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for naught, and
in vain, yet surely my Judgment is with the Lord, and my work (or reward) with
God.

Reader, A pretention to satisfy every Reader, were as ridiculous, as his
Attempt, who studied to make a Vestement for the Moon, that might fit her for
every Interchange. If (therefore) thou be curious, and critical, I cannot
pretend to the least hope of pleasing Thee, for thou will (I fear) be finding
faults, besides the faults that are to be found.

But, least this Epistle should swell, and become tympanious, I will give it a
timely Check.

As it is true, there is a (so) believing, for there must be a believing with
the Heart; yea, Acts 8.37.
with the whole Heart; If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may:
And, as there is a (so) repenting, (...)
for there must be sorrowing after a godly manner; or (as the Greek is) a
sorrowing according to God: And, 2 Cor. 7.9.
as there is a (so) running; So run, 2 Cor. 9.24
that ye may obtain: And, as there is a (so) doing; Matthew. 24.46.
Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing;
It is as true, there is a (so) reading; Acts 8.30.
Understandest thou what thou read? Mar. 13.14.
And let him that reads, understand. If, therefore, thou would (so) read,
look unto Christ; For, Jo. 15.5.
without him, thou can do nothing; And to the Spirit; For that searches all
things, yea, 1 Cor. 2.10
the Depths of God.

Now, Isa. 50.4.
that (he) who has the Tongue of the learned, and knows how to speak a word in
season to him that is weary, may signally bless thy Reading, unto Receiving,
and Rellishing, and Remembering; humbly, and heartily prays,

READER, Thy Friend, and Servant, for Jesus sake, Richard Mayhew.

Vox audita perit, sed Litera scripta manebit.
LOVING and WASHING.
Rev. 1.5. part thereof. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins,
in his own Blood.
BEloved! As Genesis begins, so the Revelation ends, this Book of God, the holy
Scriptures of Truth.

The ending part of this Book, is called Apocalypse, (...)
(which is the revelation of a secret) from a greek word, which signify to
reveal a secret. Though the Old, and New Testament, make but one Book, yet
there are many Books in the Old, and the New Testament, that contribute to the
making up of this one Book. Now, this Book of the Revelation, is the last (but
not the least) of the New Testament.

In the Title of this Book, you have an Account of the matter contained
therein: Verse. 1.
It Is called a Revelation: The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto
him; that is, which God committed unto him as man, for he had it of himself, as
God.

In the Context, you have the Person saluting; the Persons saluted; and the
Salutation it self.

The Person saluting. John. But what John was He? It was that John, that had
such intimacy with Jesus; that John that lay so much in the Bosom of Jesus, as
if he could not live out of it; that John, that appeared to be an Evangelist in
his Gospel; an Apostle, in his Epistles; and a Prophet in this Book of the
Revelation. John,

The Persons saluted. Asiatick Churches. John, To the seven Churches in Asia.

The Salutation it self.

The Matter of it. Grace,

Peace; peace of Conscience, and that is an Anticipation of Glory, a Heaven
begun here. Grace, be unto you, and Peace; the Sun, and the Light too; the
Fire, and the Heat too; Grace, and Peace too; that is the subject Matter of the
Salutation.

The Original of this Matter. Rev. 1.4. former part
whence are they derived? where do they Center? from whom are they
communicated? from the Trinity in Unity; and Unity in Trinity, Father, Son, and
Spirit.

From the Father, Rev. 1.4. mid part.
from him which is, and which was, and which is to come (i. e.) from the
Father; from him, whose name is Jehovah; Exodus 6.3.
But, by my name Jehovah, was I not made known unto them. Which name Jehovah,
signify no less then this, which was, and is, and will be.

From the Spirit. the seven Spirits, Rev. 1.4. later part.
which are before the Throne. That is (if I mistake not) from the Spirit,
called seven Spirits, in regard of his manifold graces, which wrought so
powerfully in those seven Churches, as if a particular Spirit had been in each
Church. Seven Spirits; seven, is a note of perfection. John (speaking of the
Lamb, Rev. 5.6.
Christ Jesus) says, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven
Spirits of God, sent forth into all the Earth.

From the Son.

He is (thee) faithful witness.

He is (thee) first begotten of the dead. Enoch, and Elias, saw not death; the
first death; they made a leap over the Grave, and were translated; they were
taken into Heaven, but they dyed not. Others were raised, and lived here, but
died after; neither are their Bodies yet in Heaven: Christ, therefore, is
called the first begotten, because, the bodily life, which we had by
Generation, is restored by the Resurrection; And he is called, the first
begotten of the dead, because, he had the first corporal Resurrection given, as
Head of the Body the Church. There are some that dyed, and went to Heaven, as
to Soul, but not as to Body; there are two ( Enoch, and Elias) that dyed not,
and are gone to Heaven Soul, and Body; but for one that dyed, Christ is that
only one that is gone to Heaven, Soul, and Body.

He is (thee) Prince of the Kings of the Earth. John, speak of Jesus, by way of
Emphasis, Eminency, and Excellency, concerning Grace, and Peace; they being
both in him formally, R^v. 1.5.
as in the Subject of them; and causally, as in the Fountain of them, that is,
in short; Christ is the God, and Giver, of Grace, and Peace; which arrives me
at my Text, Unto him who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own
Blood.

Beloved! in this Text, you have the Person and the Praedicate.

The Person.

The Praedicate.

The great Affection of the Person;

The greatest Demonstration of this Affection;

The Persons that are washed. Us. But who are these? These (properly) are the
seven Churches, for (unto) these do John write; and (of) these do John speak;
Us: I say, these (expressively) but not (exclusively;) that is, Us, and all
that have obtained like precious Faith with us, as the grand Apostle of the
Circumcision wordeth it. 2 Petr. 1.1.


That (from which) they are washed. Sin; yea, Sins.

That (by which) they are washed. Blood; not water, (...)
his own Blood; or, the Blood of himself; in his own Blood; or, the Blood of
himself. Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood.

The words (thus) divided, from (them) these Meditations may be deduced.

That Christ has a peculiar People, Meditations.


That Christ washes,

That Christ has a peculiar People, Meditat. 1.
and a peculiar Love for this peculiar People.

I begin with this, and shall engage it as I am more, or less, under a divine
Gale, and Gust. Now, if the most excellent Glory please to smile a Methodical
Discourse unto spiritual Advantage, I shall digest my Discourse into this
Method; Inquiring

Whether Christ has a peculiar People?

Whether Christ has a peculiar Love,

What use may be made of this,

Whether Christ has a peculiar People?

Thou art a holy People unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to
be a peculiar People unto himself, ab^ve all the Nations that are upon the
Earth, Deuteronomy. 14.2.

The Lord has avouched thee this day, to be his peculiar People, as he has
promised thee, and that thou should keep all his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 26.18.

Thus God, and Christ (also) had under the New Testament, wisness these places.

Who gave himself for us, that he might reaeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.

But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar People, that ye
should show forth the praises (or virtues) of him, (...)
who has called you out of darkness, into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9.

But take one place more, which comprehend the peculiar People of God, and
Christ, both under the Old, and New Testament. For Jah has chosen to himself
Jacob, and Israel for his inheritance, Psalm. 135.4. So that what was promised
under the Old Testament, is performed by Christ, in redeeming, and purifying
his peculiar People under the New.

Whether Christ has a peculiar Love, But, 2.
for this peculiar People. Beloved! I shall endeavor an evincement of this
Truth, in giving you a Taste of what manner of Love Christ has to his People.
As Christ has a peculiar People, which I have already proved, so he has a
peculiar Love to this peculiar People; now, this will appear by the Quantity,
or Measure of it; and by the Quality, or Manner of it.

There Is the Affection of Love, natural Affection to the Wise, and Children?
Has not the Wife a natural Affection to the Husband, and Children? The Apostle
( Romans 1.31.) reckons, and ranks those among capital, and cardinal Sinners,
that are without natural Affection.

There Is the Grace of Love,

Formally. 1 Jo. 4.8.
he is the God of it. God is Love. Not only lovely, and loving, but Love in
the Abstract. God, is Love. Jo. 1.1.
Christ, is God. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. As is the Height of the Lover, so is the Height of the Love.
The Moralists judge of the Magnitude of Crimes, by the Persons against whom
they are committed: And, as it was said of Gideon, as the Man is, so is his
Strength; Thus, it may be said of Christ, as He is, Isa. 9.6.
so is his Love; but he is wonderful, his name shall be called wonderful; so
is his Love; as his name is wonderful, so is his Love. Christ is a Bundle of
Love; all the dispersed Excellencies, and Loves, that are in the World, meet in
him, as all the Lines meet in the Center.

Causally. Love, is in Christ,

In reference to the Manner of it. But 2.
As this appears by the Quantity, or Measure of it; so it appears by the
Quality, or Manner of it. Now, in a Discussion of the Manner of Christ's Love,
to his peculiar People, there will be a Discourry of it to be a peculiar Love.

But what Manner of Love,

What manner of Love, What manner of Love.
Give me leave (then) to say, it is much more easy to say, what it is not, then
what it is: My Line is too short to sound this Bottom; what is a Muscleshel to
empty an Ocean! In Christ, there are deep Riches that cannot be sounded; and
rich Deeps that cannot be exhausted; I shall therefore, promise but a Taste of
this Love.

Christ's Love, Attracting
It Is no more connatural to the Loadstone, to draw Iron to it; then for the
Love of Christ, to draw Love out of the Christian. It Is said of Mary Magdalene,
Luke 7.4.7.
that much was forgiven her, for she loved much. Not that her much Loving, was
the cause of her much Forgiving; but Christ forgiving her much, she loved much.
Hos. 11.4.
I drew them with Cords of a man, with bands of Love. As the Banner Christ
display, so the Cord by which he draw, is Love. His Love has a Magnetic
virtue.

Christ's Love, Abounding.
Had David a Cup running over? Oh what has Christ then the Lord of David! But,
David says, Psalm. 23.5.
Thou preparest a Table before me, in the presence of mine Enemies: thou
anointest mine head with Oil; my Cup runs over. Beloved! The Cup of Christ's
Love, is not only full, but it runs over; This Nilus overflows her Banks in
Winter, as well as Summer. Christ, loves his, as he loves himself; Yea, he
seems to love his above himself, for, he loves them, and out of Love dies
for them. I lay down my life for the Sheep. Je. 10.15.
Now, has not Christ a peculiar People? and is not this a peculiar Love, that
he has for this peculiar People?

Christ's Love, Abiding.
does not carry it toward a Christian, as Ammon toward Tamar (2 Samuel 13.15.)
who seemed to love one day, and hate another, who (seemingly) loved one hour,
and (really) hated another. It Is said, the Man was sick for her, till he had
satisfied his Lust upon her, but then he hated her exceedingly; or (according
to the Margent) he hated her with great hatred greatly; So that the h^tred,
wherewith he hated her, was greater then the Love, wherewith he loved her: But
Christ's Love, is an abiding Love; Jo. 13.1.
Having loved his own which were in the World, he loved them unto the end; that
is, World without end. Christ's Love, is a ^asting, yea, an everlasting Love;
this Love will last, as long as the Christian lasts; as long as Christ
lasts. Semel and Simul.
ONCE and EVER, is Loves Motto. Christ, (once) loving (ever) loves; is not
this (then) a peculiar Love?

Christ's Love, Constraining. 2 Cor. 5.14.
The Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge: that if one dyed
for all, then were all dead. The Love of Christ constrains; or, hemmeth in;
keeps in. The Love of Christ has a mighty Influence, it hemmeth in; (...)
keepneth in, as the Greek word signifies. It is a Metaphor taken from a
Creature that is hemmed in, so that there is no evasion. Go into the high
ways, Luke 14.23.
and hedge^ and compel them to come in, the my House may be filled. Not i^ a
way of hasty violence, but (...) a way of gracious Influence: O^ go, and preach
my Love, an^ this shall have a singular, and (...) signal Influence! Is not the
(then) a peculiar Love?

Christ's Love, Delighting.
is a delightin^ Love. Love, is Christ's Element and he is in his Element when
he is loving, and manifestin^ his Love. Pro. 8.31.
His Delights were wi^^ the Sons of Men There is (...) Love of pity; thus
Christ be held the profound Moralist, an^ loved him: There is (also) (...) Love
of Complacence, and De^ light. Mich. ult. 18.
He retains not his Ange^ for ever, because he delighted i^ Mercy. Is not
this (now) a peculiar Love?

Christ's Love, Overcomming.
is overcome ming Love. If Christ lay Seige to a Soul in a way of Mercy; in
(...) way of tender Mercy; in a way ^f Bowels of tender Mercy, he ^^kes the
Soul captive. Belov^d! Christ has a better way to ^ke Souls, then Generals
have ^o take Castles, etc. they lay ^eige, and are necessitated many ^imes to
storm the Castle; to ^cals the Walls etc. But Christ, when he lays Siege in a
way of ^iscriminating Love, he pre^ently works the Souls unto a ^endition; he
makes the Soul willing to give up it self to him ^y way of Surrender; as it
takes Christ for Savior, so it gives ^p it self to Christ as Sovereign. A
Roman General, besieging a Town, a Friend of his asked ^n Account of his
proceedings; ^o whom he replied in three words: I came; beheld, Veni; Vidi:
Vici.
and overcame. Thus Christ, make a quick Dispatch with the Soul; He did but
speak for Matthew, an^ he had him: Matthew, was gathering the Emperors Tolls,
an^ Tributs; now Christ did bu^ say to him, Mat. 9.9.
Follow me, but h^ arose, and followed him. N^ sooner did Christ lay siege to
Zacheus, but he made a Conquest upon him, and made him a Captive to his Love;
Luke 19.5, 6.
Mak^ have (says Christ) and come down, for I must abide at thy house (...)
And he made have, and came down, and received him joyfully. Christ soon made
his way into the house of Zacheus, and into the heart of Zacheus too. Amor
omnia vincit.
The Love of Man may overcome many things, as Hunger, and Thirst, and
Nakedness, etc. but the Love of Christ (who is God-Man) overcome all things;
this make a Conquest upon the heart, and make that a Captive to God, and Grace;
is not this (then) a peculiar Love.

Christ's Love, Preventing. Psalm. 59.10.
is preventing Love. The God of my mercy shall prevent me. Mark the expression;
It Is the God of Mercy that prevent, and he prevent in a way of Mercy. Beloved!
To be delivered out of an evil, is a Mercy; but to be prevented from falling
into any evil, is a greater Mercy: To be delivered out of an sickness is good;
but to be prevented from falling into sickness, is better: To be delivered in
great danger, is a great Mercy; but to be prevented from being endangered, is
greater Mercy. Ps. 79.8.
Oh remember not against us former Iniquities, let thy tender Mercies speedily
prevent us, for we are brought very low. It Is the God of Mercy and the Mercy of
God, that prevent, and is not this (then) peculiar Mercy?

Christ's Love, Preserving.
Christ's Love, is preservative Amulet; the best preservative in the World
against poisoning; against infecting; against destroying. Neah, and those with
him are Arcked. Genesis 7.1.
Come thou, and all thy house into the Arc. God, prepared them an Arc, that
they rode securely, when the waters covered all the Mountains: Arked, they
were, and so preserved they were: Peter, while upon the water, has his head
kept above water: Christ out of Love to Peter, preserve Peter. God (if I may so
speak) rains Hell, out of Heaven upon Sodom, but Lot is preserved: Though the
lot of Lo^, was cast in So^om, Vivus in sepulchro; Basil.
the Man is preserved, Zoar opens unto him. As Peter was preserved above water,
so Jonah was preserved under water; a Whale (the greatest wonder in the Deep)
houseth him. And, as Lo^ was preserved from flames, Dan. 3.21.27.
so the Three Children were preserved in flames. Oh my Soul, glut thy self with
a ho^y, and a heavenly wonderment! what, preserved above water, and under
water! what, preserved from flames, and under flames! Is not this peculiar Love?

Christ's Love, is Posing Love. P^sing.
Beloved! Christ's Love, is above expression; the greatest Cicero, and
Demosthen^s in the World; the greatest Logician, and Rhetorician in the World;
the greatest Oracle, and Orator in the World, is not able to express Christ's
Love to the Life. Yea Sirs, let me say, Christ's Love, is not only above
Expression, but above Apprehension, and Conception. We use to say, Man is
vaster in Conception, then in Expression; but Christ's Love poseth not only
Expression, but Conception. Eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear keard, neither has it entered into the heart, the things that God has
prepared for them that love him. Christ's Love, is a Love that passes
knowledge. And to know the Love of Christ, that passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3 19.
that ye might be filled with all the Fullness of God. The Line of Nature; Yea,
the Line of Grace, is not able to sound this Depth; Is not this (then) a
peculiar Love?

Christ's Love, Lastly. Surpassing.
is surpassing Love. Oh Souls! Christ's Love out-bids, and out-vies all other
Loves, and that in a manifold Respect. Suffer me to give you (who have tasted
that the Lord is gracious) a Taste of the Incomparableness of Christ's Love.

it. Wine, and Milk; yea, Grace, and Glory, may be had, Psa 84 11.
with out Money, and without price. He gives Grace, and Glory. Beloved! You
have (and that to the Life) the Portraiture of a person in his Naturals ( Ezeck
16 6) When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own Blood; or
according to the Margent) trodden under Foot in thine own Blood; is not this a
sad state, for a man to be trodden under Foot? for a man to be tumbling, and
wallowing in his own Blood? But what then? Did Christ leave the Man as he found
him? No; I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, live; Yea, I said unto
thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. There was no Merit here; nor Motive
here; there was nothing but free grace here; mere Mercy here. Now, was the time
of the Creatures greatest defilement, Ezeck. 16.8.
and deformity; and yet this was the time of Christ's Love. Now, when I passed
by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of Love; and I
spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; Yea, I swear unto thee,
and entered into a Covenant with thee, says Jehovah God, and thou becammest
Mine; Is not this a peculiar Love?

In respect of the firstness of it. 1 Jo. 4.19.
We love him; why? because he first loved us. Christ's Love is primary; Ours
secundary: His, the cause; Ours, but the effect. Had not Christ fired our
hearts with Love, we had never bestowed a spark of spiritual Affection upon
him. Had not Christ (first) loved us, we lived, and dyed, without loving him.
Christ loves before loved; is not this (then) peculiar Love?

In respect of the Sameness of it. Jo. 17.26.
I have declared unto them thy name, and I will declare it, that the love where
with thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Is not this (now)
peculiar Love?

In respect of the Sureness of it. As it is the (same) Love, Isa. 55.3.
Incline your ears, and come unto me; hear, and your Souls shall live; but what
then? and I will make an, even lasting Covenant with you. even the (sure)
mercies of David; Thou may loose thy Wifeloose thy Child; loose thy Estate;
yea, loose thy Life, but thou can not loose this Love; Is it not (then) a
peculiar Love?

In respect of the Goodness of it. Psalm. 30.5.
This Love, is Life; In thy Favor is Life. Yea, Sirs, this Love, is better
then Life; better then Life's; Psa. 63.3.
so the Hebrew: Because thy loving kindness is better then Life's, Mechajim.
my lips shall praise Thee. Christ's Love, is better then Life; then Lives; that
is, it is better then Life it self, and all sorts of Life whatsoever: It Is
better then Life, and all the concerns of Life; it is better then many; better
then all Lives bundled together; bound up together. Is natural Life nothing? Is
not life the best Monosyllabe in the World? but, this is a spiritual Life; yea,
this is an eternal Life; And, is not this (then) a peculiar Love?

In respect of the Greatness of it. to three Heads; Carnal; Moral; Spiritual;
And yet Christ's Love out-bids any of these; out-vies all these. But, to these
distinctly,

Carnal.

The World. Souls! 1 Jo 2.15.
If any Man, (any one, so the Greek) Man or Woman, love the World, the Love of
the Father is not in him; or her. Tim. 6.10.
The love of Money is called the root of all evil. But now, Christ's love to
Thee, is greater then thy love have been to the world; so say my Text, Who
loved us, and washed us. Here Is washing, as well as loving; yea, washing, the
Effect, and Consequent of loving; Is not this (then) a peculiar Love?

Self. Mat. 16.24.
If any Man will come after Me let him deny himself. But now, Christ's Love to
Thee, is greater then thy Love has been to thy Self; witness my Text: Who
loved us, and washed us. Here is loving, and washing out of Love; it is (now) a
peculiar Love.

Sin. Lovers of pleasure, 2 Timothy 3.4.
more then Lovers of God. Thou have served diverse lusts, and pleasures; thy
Soul have been a Vessel of Sin, and a Vassal unto Satan; but now Christ's love
to Thee, is greater then thy love have been to Sin; witness the Text: Who loved
us, and washed us, but from what? From our Sins in his own Blood. Is not this
(then) a peculiar Love?

Moral. For 1.
The Centurions Love, was great to his Servant; it is expressly said, that he had
a Servant, who was dear unto him, but he was sick, and ready to dye; Now,
hearing of Jesus, Luke 7.2, 3.
he sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come,
and heal his Servant. The Masters Love was great, desiring his Servant might be
healed; but Christ's was greater, Luke 7.10.
for he healed the Servant. They found the Servant whole.

Christ's Love is greater then the Love of the Father to the Child. Jacob Love
to Benjamin was great; the Fathers life, was bound up in the Lads life. David's
love to Absalom was great; 2 Samuel 18.33.
if not too great: That I had ayed for thee, oh Absalom, my Son, my Son! But
Christ's is greater. When my Father, and my Mother forsake me then Jehovah will
gather me. Psa. 27.10.
When my Father cast me out of his Arms, and my Mother cast me off her knees,
then Jehovah will gather me into the Arms of beginningless, and endless Mercy.

Christ's Love is greater then the Love of the Mother to the Child. great Love;
if not the greatest Love. Isa 49.15.
Can a Woman forget her sucking child, from having compassion on the child of
her womb? Is there such a Women among Women? Yea, they may forget, yet will I
not forget Thee.

Christ's Love is greater then the Love of the Husband to the Wife. Conjug^l
Love, Abraham, to Sarah was great; of Isaac to Rebecca was great; of Jacob to
Rackel was great; of Elkanah, to Hannah was great; of Augustus to his Livia was
great, who dyed in the Embraceme is of her, with these words: Livia, nostri
Conjugii memoresto, vive, and vale; which may thus be Englished: Livia,
remember we were one, live, and farewell. Man, and Wife, are one flesh; and (if
both be living) one Spirit, so that this Love must needs be great; but Christ's
is greater. Husbands, Ephesians. 5.25.
love your Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Where is
there a Husband, that gives himself for his Wife? that gives himself to death
for his Wife? Or, if he should, what would it signify? She could never say
(with the Text) who loved me, and washed me, from my Sins in his Blood: This
must not be said, of any blood, but Christ's; is not this (then) a peculiar Love?

Spiritual. Jonathans love to David was great; and David's love to Jonathan was
great; but Christ's is greater: what is a spark to the Furnace? a drop to the
Ocean? Such, is the Love of Man, to the Love of Christ, God manifest in the
flesh. It Is true, David speaks very honorably of Jonathans Love: 2 Samuel 1.26.
Thy Love to me have been wonderful, passing the Love of Women: But Christ's
Love is greater; Christ's Love is greatest. Jo. 14.13.
Greater Love has no Man then this, that a Man lay down his life for his
Friend. Christ laid down his life for Enemies; as Enemies; when, and while
Enemies; Is not this (now) a peculiar Love?

What use may be made of this, Lastly.
that Christ has a peculiar Love, for his peculiar People?

Has Christ a peculiar Love for his peculiar People? USE.
This (then) may be useful by way of Caution; by way of Comfort; by way of
Council.

Is Christ's Love, By way of Caution.
take heed (then) of turning Love into Lust; and loving kindness, into
lasciviousness. To do evil, that good may come; and to be sinful, because God
is merciful; and to be lustful, because Christ is Love-ful, is the Sophistry of
the Prince of Darkness. Do argue from Grace to Sin? from Love to Lust? from
Mercy, to Iniquity? from Immunity, unto Impiety? this is the Dialect of Hell,
and the Sophistry of the Prince of Darkness. Romans 3.8.
Oh how do the Apostle thunder against such! we are slanderously reported, and
some affirm that we say: Let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is
just.

Art loved: By way of Comfort.
Oh you that have the Love of Christ, shed abroad in your hearts by the Spirit
of Christ, this Text as a Cordial under your fainting Fits: Who loved us. Art
tempted, or troubled? pained, or panged? distressed, or disserted? yet loved;
Me Duce, vinces. Romans 8.37.
who loved us. Nay, in all these things we are more then Conquerors; but how?
through him that loved us. Not only Conquerors, but more then Conquerors. It is
a compound word, and signifies more then simply to overcome: (...)
we greatly overcome; we over, and above overcome; we overcome above measure,
or exceeding gloriously: we do more then overcome; we do Over-overcome, as the
Greek seem to read it: It may well be read thus. But in all these things we
Over-overcome through him that loved us. In all these things; but what things
were these? These things, ye may run, and read ( Romans 8.35) What shall separate
us from the Love of God? shall Tribulation? or Distress? or Persecution? or
Famine? or Nakedness? or Peril? or Sword? Here are seven bitter Dishes, and
shall these? No; In all these things we do Over-overcome. Is not any one of
these Dishes enough for any palate in the World? yet, not one of these; not
any of these; yea, not all these, shall separate from the Love of God; But, in
all these things we do Over-overcome; but how? through him that loved us. Now,
that thy Cup may be filled with Joy, and Peace, like the water pots of Galilee,
up to the very Brim; suffer me to tell thee, that Christ's Love is the most
suitable, and sovereign Cordial.

Christ's Love, Gal. 2.20.
Christ's Love, is the Christians Life. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. Christ's Love, falls in with the Life of a Christian, and therefore most
suitable.

Christ's Love, Jo. 3.16.
So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son. So Christ's Love
(when Christians get comfort) is put for all Cordials. Is not that a lofty, as
well as a lovely Expression, of the great Doctor of the Gentiles? Romans 8.38, 39.
For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels; nor
Principalities, nor Powers, Nor things present, nor things to come, Nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Soul! Christ's Love, contain in it
the sum of the Gospel, Christ being the sum of the Gospel, and Love the sum of
Christ. God, so loved the World, that he gave Christ, and Christ so loved the
World, that he gave himself, contain in it the Pith, and Marrow, of all the
Gospel. This little word (Love) written in the golden letters of Free Grace in
the blood of Jesus Christ, is an Epitomy of the Gospel. The Life of Christ, was
a perfect Mirror of his Love; every action of it was full of Love; and if we
put all the Actions of his life together we may conclude, that he was not born
so much to Live, as to Love. Was there a word that dropped from his Lips, but
was sull of Love? And, as for his works, they all speak Love so loud, that the
deafest ear may hear it. Should we begin at the Temple, where Christ disputed
with the Doctors, and ^low him to the Mount, where (...) was crucified by the
Soul^ers, we should see all the way ^ewed with Love-Reses. Now, (...) loved?
then (this) Christ, is ^hy) Christ; and (this) Love* ^hy) Love* and is not this
^^tter of Joy? Go away (then) ^^d be filled with Joy, and ^ace, through
Believing.

Oh but there are Achans with^^! Saul's within! the Sons of ^erviab within! Oh
there are ^any Blots in my Scutcheon! ^any Weeds in my Garden! ^uch Rubbish in
my House! ^any Holes in my Coat! much ^e^ven in my Heart! Oh no ^eart like unto
Mine!

Soul! Lo^^ is greater ^en thy Lust, and his Mercy, ^en thine Iniquity. If the
Sun, ^e not fuller of Light, nor the ^ce^n fuller of Water, then (thy) ^eart,
and (my) heart, of the Remains of Sin, yet Christ Love balanced against this,
w^^ weigh it down. Ex. 34.6.7
Th^ugh God ^^sits Iniquity to the third, a^^ fourth Ge^eration, yet he ke^^
Mercy for thousands; for the sands of Generations.

Oh but if things be so,

Endeavor thy Souls Resu^ rection by a serious Conside^tion.

Consider; Gal. 2.20.
what then? and ga^^ himself for us.

Consider; 1 J^ 5.20.
for He is the true God, and eternal life. O^ how may you sing like Larks ^^at
have been mourning like ^^ves, and groaning like Tur^^ that can (in truth) say,
and ^^l this Truth, who loved us!

Has Christ a peculiar People? By way of Counsel.
and a peculiar love for this ^culiar People? suffer then the ^ords of
Exhortation. Now, ^is use, has a double Aspect, ^^d looks to those that are
not ^ved; and then to those that are ^ved.

Art not loved? To the Vnloved.
a ^eculiar Love? such a Love as ^ath been preached, and infini^ly more? and
art not thou ^oncerned in it? Have not thou (...) Taste of it? Oh how can thou
^at, or drink? Oh how can ^hou rest day, or night? I knew ^he time, when I
feared every Drop would poison me, and every Crum choke me; when I feared the
Earth would op^^ and swallow me up in the D^^ and that my Bea would beco^^ my
Grave at Night, and t^^ because I had not a Taste of t^^ peculiar Love. Oh Soul!
h^ may that Scripture (which ^^gins sweetly, Romans 9.13.
but ends sharp ^ring in thine ears? Jacob, (...) I loved but Esau have I but
It seems all are not loved w^^ the same love; but, as some a^ Objects of
infinite Love, (...) others are Objects of infini^ Hatred. Oh how amazing, a^
amuzing would this be, if Chr^^^ should say concerning Thee, (...) Ahab did
concerning the Prephet? There is one Mi^^jab^ but I hate him. There is such
Man, but I hate him; and sud^ a Woman, but I hate her (...) There is such a
Child, but I hat^ him; and such a Servant, bu^ I hate her. No more are loved,
then are washed; at least, shall be washed; which is implied, if not expressed
in this Text, and Truth, Who loved us, and washed us from our Sins, in the
Blood of Himself.

Art loved by Christ? To the loved.
Be much more (then) in Love with Christ! Oh Soul, love Christ more! Love
Christ most! There can be no excess in Love to Christ; there may be a sinful
excess of Love to a Husband; of Love to a Wife; of love to a Child; but there
cannot be a sinful excess in love to a Christ. May not Christ say to Thee, as
he did to Peter? Jo. 21.15
Peter love skou me more then these? Love thou me more then thou love
these? Or, love thou me more then these love me?

Art loved by Christ? that are Christ's. Do love the Father, and not the
Child? Do love the Head, and not the Body? Do love the Mediator, and not
the Member? Do love Christ, and not those that are Christ's. 1 Jo. 4.11.
The Apostle (who seems to me to be as it were) a compound of Love, and whose
Love seemed to be his Master-Grace, has made this use to my hands. Beloved! if
God so loved us, we ought (also) to love one another.

Art loved by Christ? Looks are Loves, whose Love, is Life! Yea, better then
Life! As this Love cannot be sinned away, so it should not be sinned against. A
subject of Love, is most suitable, both to the Hand, and Pen of Christ; he
wishes rather to write in Honey, then in Gall; and to draw golden lines of
Love, then to draw bloody lines of wrath; now, shall this Love be sinned
against? what Use, therefore, the Apostle makes of the Day of Christ, I may
make of the Love of Christ, what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation, and godliness?

Art loved by Christ?

Art afflicted? yet loved. Gad, a Troop comes! a Troop of affliction comes!
I am the Man that have seen affliction, Lam. 3.1.
by the Rod of his wrath. Well, art afflicted? yet loved. In all their
affliction he was afflicted, Isa. 69.9.
and the Angel of his presence saved them. In all their affliction, he was
afflicted: That is, he was affected with their affliction; and they had his
Affection, under their Affliction.

Art tempted? Curse God, Job 2.9.
and die! Oh my Temptations are wanton, and wicked! brutish, and blasphemous!
horrid, and sordid! Well, art tempted? yet loved. Christ loves under
Temptation, as well as out of Temptation. Heb. 2.18.
For, in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted.

Art reproached? yet loved. Psa. 35.11.
and they lay to my charge, things that I know not. Well, art reproached? yet
loved. Mat. 5.11.
Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil against
you, falsty for my sake.

Art persecuted? 1 Samuel 24.11.
Saul is in the pursuit of Me, and he hunts after my Soul to take it! Well, art
persecuted? yet loved. Persecuted, 2 Cor. 4.9.
but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.

Art dispossessed? yet loved. a Common! and have short Commons! Oh, I am crying
concerning Bread, as Rachel cried concerning Children? Children, Genesis 30.1.
or I dye! So, Bread, or I die! Well, art dispossessed? 2 Cor 6.10.
yet loved. As having nothine, and yet possessing all things.

Art unbelieving? Mat. 6.30.
O thou of little Faith! Well, art unbelieving? yet loved. 2 Timothy 2.13.
If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.

Art hated? 2 Cro. 18.7.
I am hated! hated by the World! hated by Neighbors! hated by Relations! Oh
say the Soul, I am hated! hated by these! and one says concerning Me, as the
false King, said concerning the true Prophet! There is yet one Man, by whom we
may enquire of the Lord, the same is Mecajah, but I hate him. Well, art hated?
yet loved. It is thus with Thee? so it is with Me: Art hated by Man? yet loved
by God-Man. Ye shall be hated of all Nations, Mark 13.13.
for my names sake: but he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved

Art hardened? yet loved. blood will soften it! Oh, my Heart is hard! hard as a
stone! hard as a Mil-stone! hard as a piece of the nether millstone! Well, art
hardened? yet loved. I will take away thy stony Heart out of your Flesh, and
will give you a Heart of Flesh. I, that (can) do it, (will) do it.

Art distressed? in Grace! wanting in every Grace! Oh Sir! may not I say
concerning any Grace? yea I do say concerning every Grace, as the great Doctor
of the Gentiles says, concerning the Churches Faith: Night, and Day, 1 Thessalonians.
3.10.
praying exceedingly, that we might see your Face, and might perfect that which
is lacking in your Faith. Well, art distressed? yet loved: art wanting in
Grace? in every Grace? yet loved. My God shall supply all your need, Phil. 4.19
according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus.

Art disserted? yet loved. Lastly.
Oh say the Soul, it is Night with Me! I am in the dark! yea, walking in
darkness, and have no light! Oh, there is a cloud interposing between my Soul,
and my Savior! The Face of God is eclipsed, and he seems to cover my Soul with
a cloud in his anger! Oh say the Soul, as it is said, Nic. 3 6.
the Sun shall go down over the Prophets; so the Sun of righteousness is gone
done upon my Soul! Oh Sir, the Lord has forsaken me, Isa. 49.14.
and my God has forgotten me! Oh, I am not (only) out of the (hand) of God,
but (also) out of the heart of God! Oh, I am not (forsaken) only, but
(forgotten also! Well, Soul art disserted, Isa. 54.7.
yet loved. For a small Moment have I forsaken Thee, but with great Mercies will
I gather Thee. Beloved! Dissertion, is the lowest Dreg of a Believers Cup: All
the Hell that he shall have, he has here; he shall have Heaven, but nothing
but Heaven hereafter.

Thus Soul, balance Christ's Love, against all thy SORROWS, under all thy
SOLITUDES.

But, as I did begin, so I must end; and where I did begin, there I shall end.
If Christ has a peculiar People, and a peculiar Love, for this peculiar
People, suffer (then) the words of Exhortation, and hold fast this Truth, this
Text, Who loved us. Let the World go, and Sin go; let Self go, and Satan go:
But let not this Text go; this Truth go; Who loved us.

Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. And washed us
from our Sins, i^ his own Blood.
THat Christ Loving his, Meditation.
out of Love washes his, and that from their Sins, in his own Blood. Beloved!
If the Master of the Assembly, please to influence a methodical Discourse to
Edification, suffer (then) an innocent Inquiry after these six things.

1. What this washing is, that is, by Christ's own Blood.

2. What this Sins is, that is washed from, in Christ's own Blood.

3. Whether Christ washes from Sin, in his own Blood.

4. How Christ washes from Sin, in his own Blood.

5. Why Christ washes from Sin, in his own Blood.

6. What use may be made of this, that Christ washes from Sin, in his own
Blood.

What this washing is, that is, Method.
by Christ's own Blood.

To this Negatively, and then Positively.

What this washing is not; Negatively.
to this generaly, and then partilarly.

To wash, is to purge, Generally.
and make clean. Thus, the Fishermen were gone out of their Ships, washing
their Nets. Luke 5.2.
That is, making clean their Nets; for Nets by washing, are made clean; but
thus you are not to understand it here.

There Is a Natural washing. Particularly.
Matthew. 15.20) To eat with unwashed hands, defiles not a Man. But thus you are
not to understand it here, in the Text, And washed us.

There Is a Moral washing, Psa. 26.6.) I will wash my hands in Innocence, so
will I compass thine Altar., Jehovah, But, thus, you are not to understand it
here; And washed us

There Is a Ceremonial washing. Heb. 9.10.) Which stood only in Meats and Drinks
and diverse washings, until the time of Reformation. But, thus, you are not to
understand it here; And washed us.

There Is a superstitious washing. Matthew 15.2.) Why do thy Disciples transgress
the Traditions of the Elders: for they wash their Hands, when they eat Bread?
But thus, you are not to understand it here; And washed us.

There Is a Miraculous washing. John 9.11) Go, and wash; and I went, and washed,
and I received sight. But, thus, you are not to understand it here; And washed
us.

There Is a Spiritual washing. Positively.
There Is a washing from the Guilt of Sin; and from the Filth of Sin: There Is a
Deliverance from a Conscience of Sin, and from a Conversation of Sin: There Is a
washing Sin from off the Soul, and so justifying it; and a washing the Soul
from off Sin, and so sanctifying it. To these distinctly.

To wash, is to justify. Revel. 5 9.) Thou art worthy to take the Book, and
open the Seals thereof; why? for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

To wash, is to Sanctify. to wash, is to redeem, and restore, so, to
regenerate, and renew; As, to pardon, so to purify; As, to deliver from the
Guilt, so, from the Filth of Sin, Thus ( Tit. 3.5.) Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Spirit. But, both these
(justifying, and Sanctifying) you have connected, and connexed (1 Cor. 6.11.)
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Now,
thus, (if I mistake not) you are to understand it in the Text, who washed us;
that is, who justified us from the Guilt, and sanctified us from the Filth of
our Sins, in his own Blood. And washed us from our Sins, in his own Blood.

What this Sin is, Romans 4.15.
For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression: But, where there is Sin,
there is a Law, and a Transgression of that Law. 1 Jo. 3.4.
Whosoever commits sin, transgresses the Law; for sin is a Transgression of
the Law. Yea, Sin is not only the Transgression of a Law, but of a good Law;
Romans 7.12.
For the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good. Yea, the
Transgression not only of a good Law, but of Gods Law. Psa. 89.30, 31.
If his Children forsake (my) Law, and walk not in (my) Commandments; If they
break (my) Statutes, and keep not (my) Commandments. Now, the Law, not (only)
forbids the doing of evil (whether in thought, word, or deed) but (also)
commands the doing of Good; so that to omit the Good commanded, as well as to
commit the Sin forbidden, is Sin: whatever, therefore, does transgress the Law
of God (in whole, or in part) is Sin; whether it break an Affirmative, or a
Negative precept; that is, whether it be the Omission of Good, or the
Commission of Evil. From this; all this, Christ's blood washes; And washed us
from our Sins, in his own Blood.

Whether Christ washes from Sin, nor on Earth, nor under the Earth, can
justify a guilty Soul, and sanctify a filthy Soul, but Christ; unto this my
text speaks, Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. Eze.
16.9.
Then washed I thee with water; yea, I thoroughly washed away thy Blood from
thee; thy Bloods from thee, according to the Margent. Then; when? when I passed
by thee. Eze. 16 6.
When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted (or trodden under foot) in thine
own Blood. I said unto thee. Live; Yea, when thou wast in thy blood, I said
unto thee, Live. But what (I) is this? This Jehovah God. Thus says. Jehovah,
Eze. 16.3.
God unto Jerusalem etc. Now this Je^ovah, is God; or Christ; for the Son has
the same name with the Father; Jer. 23.6.
This is the name whereby he shall be called, Jehovah our Righteousness It Is
Christ that washes. Eze. 36.25 26, 27.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart, will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments, and do them. But, in short; If to wash, be to
justify, then Souls are washed in Christ's own Blood. Romans 3.24.
Being justified freely by his grace; but how? through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus And, if to wash, be to sanctify, then Souls are washed in
Christ's own Blood. H^b 13.12
Christ, that he might sanctify the People with his own blood, suffered
without the Gate.

Sin, in his own Blood.

Christ washes three ways: by his Word; by his Spirit; and by his Blood.

By his Word. Christ, Jo. 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy word is Truth. As to wash, is to
justify, so to sanctify; Now, though the word can do nothing without Christ,
no more then the Instrument can without the hand; yet, this Instrument,
together with the hand, can justify a condemned Creature, and sanctify a
cont^minated Creature.

By his Spirit The word, the proper work of the F^ther to elect; and, of the
Son to redeem; so of the Spirit to sanctify those Elected, and Redeemed. It Is,
therefore, called the Sanctification of the Spirit. Ye are chosen unto
Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
through Sanctification of the Spirit.

By his Blood. Word; and through his Spirit; so through his Blood.

But how may Christ be said,

There is a virtual, actual washing, in Christ's blood. That is, there is a
Satis^action given to God (for) Man; and a sanctification wrought (in) Man.

Virtual. Obedience of Christ; concerning his Active, himself speaks: I have
finished the work, Jo. 17.4.
which thou gave me to do. Concerning his Passive, himself (also) speaks: It
is finished. Jo. 19.30.
Here was the Cross, and Crucifixtion of Christ, as the Complement of All.
These two, his Active, and Passive Obedience, were (jointly) and (equally)
concerned, in giving Satisfaction to infinite Justice: Now, concerning these
two, his Action, and Passion (if I mistake not) God says: Mat. 3.17. (...)
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Or, (according to the
Greek) in whom I acquiesce. God, did acquiesce in him as Son; as Mediator of
the promise; as one that did, and dyed, and so satisfied. Christ, himself, did
not only arrive at a Satisfaction, by his Action, and Passion; but (if I may
speak it without Levity, and with a holy Reverence) arrived God at a
Satisfaction, by his Doing and Dying, and that for All for whom he gave
himself: and unto whom he has given, and shall give himself. Both which (I
think) are legible in that o^ the Prophet: Isa. 53.11.
He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be ^atisfied; by his knowledge,
shall m^ righteous Servant justify many for he shall bear their Iniquities.

Actual. Heb. 9.13, 14.
Ho^ much more shall the blood (...) Christ, who through the etern^ Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God? Here Is purging, and purifying; here is sanctifying, and
spiriting unto Service; but how? through blood; That is, through an Application
of Christ's blood; and this application is through Faith; For the Apostle
wordeth it; Romans 3.25.
Whom (speaking of Christ) God has set forth (or so ordained) to be a
propitiation (or mercy-seat;) but how? through Faith in the Blood. So that all
arrive at a Satisfaction (with respect to Justification, and Sanctification)
concerning this Blood: Christ, was satisfied, in shedding his Blood; God, was
satisfied, in Christ's shedding his Blood; And Man, is satisfied, because
interessed in this Blood that was shed; being delivered, not from a Conscience
of Sin (only), but from a Conversation of Sin (also). And washed us from our
Sins, in his own Blood.

Why Christ washes from Sin,

In respect of the Necessity of it.

Because Man had sinned. Bartimeus (the Son of the unclean) as the word
signifies. Oh Soul, here is thy pedigree, though an Emperor was thy Father, yet
Adam was thy Grandfather! To this purpose the Apostle speaks: Wherefore, Rom
5.12.
as by one Man sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so death passed
upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Or, in whom all have sinned; so the
Greek. (...)
Every Man, and Woman, living in the Region of depraved Nature, is a Nero, (a
Sinner) as the word signify. Man, is defiled, and that from Head, A Capitead
Calcew.
to Foot; that (as the Philosopher says, concerning the Soul, it is in every
part; where there is Life, there is the Soul: Tota in toto; and ^ota in
qualibet part.
for the Soul is the Life; so, what ever is in us, and comes from us, and is
acted by us, receive a defilement from us. Sin, is like a Leprosy, over the
whole man; like a Gangrene, spreading over the whole Soul. There is, therefore,
a necessity of Christ's Blood, in order to Pardon, and in order to Purity.

Because God would be satisfied. 1 Cor. 15.21.
By Man came Death, by man came (also) the Resurrection of the dead.

In respect of the Commodity by it.

The Blood of Christ is advantageous in a manisold respect.

At this Door of Christ's Blood, Mercy? This is through Christ's Blood. Ephesians. 1.7.
In whom we have Redemption; but how? through his Blood.

At this Door of Christ's Blood, Heb. 9.22.
this Remission is through Christ's blood. Without shedding of blood, no
Remission.

At this Door of Christ's Blood, joins this, Ephesians. 2.17, 18.
For, through him, we both have an Access by one Spirit unto the Father.

At this Door of Christ's Blood,

There is (through Christ's Blood) an Acceptance as to Person. Ephesians. 1.6.
Ye are bought with a price: Christ's Blood went for pay. To the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved.

There is (through Christ's Blood) an Acceptance as to Performance. Abel, so to
the Oblation of an Abel; but, respect to both, through Christ. Christ, is a
merciful, and faithful high Priest, Heb. 2.17.
in things partaining to God, to make riconciliation for the Sin of the People.

At this Door of Christ's Blood, Wrath, and from (...).

(...). Romans 4.25.
Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification.

From Sin. their Sins. Mat. 1.21.
As Christ is a Savior (for) Sin, so (from) Sin.

What Use may be made of this, Lastly.
that Christ wash^th from Sin, in his own Blood.

Here are three uses; USE.
Caution; Comfort; Counsel.

Now this Use has a double Aspect, By way of Caution.
and looks unto the washed, and unwashed; Now, if so, there must be a distinct
discussion, in a way of Caution.

Art loved? To the washed.
and washed? be cautioned (then) against sinning, for Christ's Blood must go for
washing.

Beloved! what all the water in the Sea cannot do, the Blood of Christ can do.
If thou be washed from Sin, it is by Christ's Blood. What Man in his wits,
will be lavish of his blood! Oh, what Soul, in love with Christ, being loved of
Christ, will be lavish of Christ's Blood! Soul! if there be sinning by Thee, and
Me, his Blood must go for washing. Has not Christ bled enough already, when
he has bled to death, to an accursed death, but must he bleed again? That, as
he was pierced again, must he bleed again? Jo. 20.27.
Come. Thomas, reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side. I was once
pierced, and will thou pierce me (by thy unbelief) a second time? So, shall we
bleed Christ again? Oh take heed of sinning, for Christ's Blood must go for
washing! That, as it is said, Take ^eed to thy self, Diut. 4.9.
and keep thy Soul diligently. So, take heed of sinning, for Christ's Blood go
for washing. Oh Soul! if thou have any love for thy Savior, love for thy
Sovereign, love for thy Soul, when thou find any Corruption bubling within,
then let this Text ring i^ thine ears: Who loved us, and w^shed us, from our
Sins, in his own Blood. Oh Soul! when thou find a Temptation presented; A
Snare on Mizpah, Hos. 5.1.
and a Net spread upon Tabor; then say with Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Did Christ do? and
shall I sin? Did Christ dye? and shall I fin? Is Christ washing? and shall I be
sinning? Oh who should sin, and cause Christ to pay so dear for it! Who loved
us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood.

Art not washed? To the unwashed.
As the Papists lead from the Blood of Christ, to the blood of Hales, and
Becket; So, there is a Generation, of a late Edition, (Cousin-Germans to the
Papists) who lead from the blood of Christ, to the blood in themselves. They
say, Haldo's Key, etc. p. 63.
that the blood of Christ, is the Life of Christ; that is, the power of the
light in them. They say, that Salvation, Purification, and Reconniliation, they
are not by that Blood of Christ, shed on the Cross, but by that blood of the
Spiritual Body of flesh, blood, and bones, which (they say) Christ descended
in; and which (they say) is in every one of them, as really, as in (that) Man,
who was the Son of Mary. By this (it seems) that Salvation is by no other
blood, but what is in themselves: But, let God be true, and every Man (in this
matter) a Liar. The Blood of Christ, must needs be efficacious, for it is called
the Blood of God. Feed the Church of God, Act. 10.28.
which he lead purchased with his own Blood. It Is not (then) a blood in
themselves, but was a blood in Himself, and this was the Blood which was let
out, and trickled down upon the Cross. One little Drop (says Luther) of Christ's
blood, is of more worth then Heaven, and Earth. What is the blood of a Grape?
the blood of a Son? yea, of an only Son, to the blood of the only begotten Son
of God? yea, to the blood of that Christ, 1 Timothy 3.16.
who is, God manifest in the flesh? The Soul may feel; yea, the Soul must feel
himself to stand in excessive need, even of the least drop of Christ's blood,
for the washing away of his Sins. And washed us, from our Sins, in his own
Blood.

Art loved? By way of Comfert.
in Christ's Blood. Christ says to every believing Saint, and sanctified
Believer, as he did to Peter: He that is washed, needs not one to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit; and ye are clean, Jo. 13 10.
but not all. Is clean every whit; is wholly, or universally clean, (...)
according to the Greek. Now, Soul, art loved? and (out of love) washed, and
that universally? go not (then) away with thy Countenance sad.

Oh but (as Rebecca said) I may say! If things be so, Genesis 25.12.
why am I thus? If I be universally washed, what mean those corrupt Inmates,
and cursed makebates within? what mean that pride, and passion within? what
mean that wantonness, and worldliness within? what mean that Unbelief, and
Misbelief within? Oh Sir! if I be universally washed, what mean these vain, and
vile Thoughts within? what mean those hard, and high Thoughts within? what mean
those brutish, and blasphemous Thoughts within? If things be so,

A Soul, washed by Christ, may be considered two ways; in his Justification,
and in his Sanctification.

In his Justification. Thou art all fair, Cant. 4.7.
my Love, and there is no spot in thee. Thus, a loved Soul, is presented (by
Christ) without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; For this is the Doctrine
which the Apostle preaches, Ephesians. 5.25.
and (I bless God) that I do believe what he preach.

In his Sanctification. Thus, Cant. 1.5.
I am black, but comely, oh Daughters of Jerusalem! Comely, as to
Justification; black, as to Sanctification. Look not upon me, because I am
black; Cant. 1.6.
because the Sun has looked upon me. A loved Soul, is compared to the Sun
(which is without spots) as to his Justification; but unto the Moon (which is
full of Spots) as to his Sanctification.

Oh, but I cannot believe, this lay near my heart! Romans 7.19.21.
The good I would do, I do not; but the evil that I would not do, that do I!

Can not believe an universal washing? Heb. 12.2.
Looking unto Jesus, the Author, and Finisher of our Faith. Here, Faith, being
a principal grace, is Synecdochically put for all Grace. Christ, must not only
work Faith, but set Faith a work, or thou will not believe an universal washing.

When thou would do good, Joh. 8.7.
He that is without Sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. So, that
Person, that do not find evil present with him, when he would do good, let him
first cast a stone at Me; and at Thee.

Thou art universally washed, (washed) from all Sin, in point of Justification;
and thou art (washing) from all Sin, in point of Sanctification. Christ's blood,
extend, to the washing away of all Sin. 1 Jo. 1.7.
If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have Fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sins.

Oh, but, be adversity ere long! Oh, though it be Summer now, it may be Winter
ere long!

Though the Woman be in the Wilderness, Cant. 8.5.
leaning upon her Beloved. Soul, art loved? though thou be, or should be
in Tribulation; yea, in great Tribulation, yet thou may come out of that
great Tribulation. These are they that came out of great Tribulation, Rev. 7.14.
having washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Now,
will thou, that art loved, and universally washed, from thy Sins in Christ's own
blood, go away with thy countenance sad? Oh Soul! pluck a Cluster from this
Vine; and take a Drop from this honeycomb: Who loved us, and washed us, from
our Sins, in his own Blood.

Does Christ wash from Sin, in his own Blood? By way of Counsel.
Suffer (then) the words of Exhortation.

Now, here, I would speak to the unwashed, and the washed.

Art not washed? To the unwashed.
No more, shall have a Crown, then have a Christ; shall have Glory, then have
Grace; and shall have Happiness, then have Holiness. If, therefore, thou
would be justified before God, and sanctified before Man, go to Christ. If I
wash thee not, Jo. 13 8.
(and it is Christ that speaks it) thou have no part with Me. Whether, would ye
go? whether should ye go? whether, will ye go? whether, can ye go, but unto
Christ, who loves, and washes from Sin, in his own Blood? Art unwashed? go
(then) to Christ for washing.

But, is it Christ's will, us Christ's work, that I should go to him, to be
washed?

As it is Christ's work to wash, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
This is the will of God, even your sanctification. Now, God, and Christ will,
and nill, the same things.

But may those that are unwashed,

As unto whom, Ulcers, and Uncleanness) will go to Christ to be washed. Mat
9.12.
The whole need no Physician (that is, see no need of a Physician) but those
that are sick,

But did ever a Soul, Gehazi^ he was no fuller of Leprosy (...) then I am of
Sin; and yet he went out of his Masters presence, a Leper as white as Snow.

A Sinner thou art, Luke 19.
The Son of Man is come to seek, and to save, that which was lost.

Beloved! My Line,

Christ's Blood, but Goats-blood will soften it. Oh Soul, though thy heart be
like an Adamant-stone; yea, like the nether Millstone, yet the blood of Christ
can soften it. I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, Eze. 11.19.
and will give them a heart of flesh.

Christ's Blood, That being justified by his blood, Romans 5.9.
we should be saved from wrath through him

Christ's Blood; which is the death of your Sin. Our old Man is crucified with
him, Romans 6.6.
that the body of Sin may be destroyed.

Christ's Blood, Ye are not redeemed with corruptable things; 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
there is the Negative part; but what are these? Silver, and Gold: But, if
Silver; and Gold cannot, what can? the blood of Christ can: but, with the
precious blood of Christ. Ye are not redeemed with corruptable things, as
Silver, and Gold, but with the precious blood of Christ. The blood of Christ,
is the price of Redemption.

Christ's Blood, Souls! but what is the reason? they want a pardon. Do not these
say at night, oh that it were morning? And, in the morning, oh that it were
night! Oh how can you rest day, or night, that are without a pardon! Christ's
blood, is pardoning blood. Col. 1.14.
In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of Sins.

Christ Blood, Abels blood, did plead against the Offender, but Christ's blood
plead for the Believer. Abels blood, did cry for vengeance, Heb. 12.24
but Christ's blood cry for Mercy. It Is called the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then that of Abel.

Christ's Blood, Atonement. No sooner was Haman executed, but Ahasuerus was
appeased. No sooner was Christ crucified, but God was pacified. And you, Col.
1.21, 22.
that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet
now has he reconciled; but how? in the body of the flesh through death.

Christ's Blood, David, opening, and no man shutting; shutting, and no man
opening Loved ones have boldness to enter into the holiest; Heb. 10.19.
but how? by the blood of Jesus.

Christ's Blood, is pure blood. Blots, in our Scutcheons; our Weeds, in our
Gardent; our Rubbish, in our Houses; our Leaven, in our Hearts; our Holes, in
our Coats; but Christ, had none in His. Impure blood, run in our veins; but
only pure blood run in His. He, Heb. 4.15.
was in all points tempted, like as we are, yet without Sin.

Christ's Blood, Lastly.
is purifying blood. As the blood of Christ, is a blood of value, and of Merit;
so, it is a blood of Virtue, and Spirit. This blood is a Laver, to wash in; it
washes a Crimson Sinner, Milk-white. Now, this is (if I mistake not) a part of
the washing in the Text: And washed us, form our Sins, in his own Blood.

Does Christ wash from Sin, To the washed.
in his own Blood? sense (then) thy Heart, with the Nature of Sin. Sin,
defiles the Soul, and Christ's Blood must go to wash it. Sin, makes man a
perfect Black, and it is Christ's Blood must make him perfectly White. Tit. 1.15.
Unto the pure, all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their Mind, and Cinscience is defiled

Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? Man; any man,
must live in his ulcers; lie in his ulcers; dye in his ulcers, and be damned
for his ulcers, if Christ (in his own Blood) wash him not from his ulcers.

Oh trust not in Man that shall dye, Earl of Strafford.
nor in the Son of Man, that shall be made as Grass! There Is no Confidence in
Princes; the only thing that stands by a man is the Blood of Christ, and the
Testimony of a good Conscience. And, I have read of another, Mr. Herbert
whose saying was (when he heard any of his good works mentioned) Ah! it is a
good work, if it be washed in the Blood of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Of this blood, the Apopostle speaks; And sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus
Christ.

Who loved Me, and gave himself for Me. That is, Gal. 2.20.
who loved Me, and (out of love) gave himself to Death for Me.

Does Christ wash from Sin, his own Blood? Improve (then) this Text, and Truth,
as an Antidote to expel Poison. May not this Text serve, and be improved as a
Counter-poyson? And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. May not this
Text, and Truth, be improved, as an Electuary for the Soul? And washed us, from
our Sins, in his own Blood. For instance

Art tempted? yet washed. Job 2.9) Art tempted? yet washed; here is an Antidote
for this poison; And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood.

Art troubled? yet washed. side; and my Troubles come like waves (2 Cor. 4.8.)
Art troubled? yet washed; And washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood.

Art reproached? Achan, 1 Cro. 2.7.
the Troubler of Israel! Art reproached? yet washed. And washed us.

Art hardened? Ezech. 3.9.) Art hardened? yet washed. And washed us.

Art hated? Ammon, concerning Tamar (2 Samuel 13.15.) That the hatred, where with
they hate me, is greater then the love where with they have loved Me. Art
hated? yet washed And washed us.

Art poor? yet washed. Oh, Mark 12.42.) that had her two Mites, which made but
a Farthing? Art poor? yet washed. And washed us.

Art persecuted? yet washed. I am hunted! hunted as a Partridge in the
mountains! (1 Samuel 26 20.) Art persecuted? yet washed. And washed us.

Art unbelieving? yet washed. Jo. 4, 47.) at the point of death! Art
unbelieving? yet washed. And washed us.

Art weak? yet washed. Oh, weakens greatly! Oh, I may say with the Apostle, the
time of my departure is at hand! (2 Timothy 4.6.) Art weak? yet washed. And washed
us.

Art disserted? Lastly.
yet washed. Oh, say the Soul, it is Night now! Midnight now! Oh, the Face of
God is hid now! not a smile, and a shine now! not a glimps, and a glaunce now!
Oh, I may say, as the Psalmist does ( Psalm. 30.7.) thou did hide thy Facc,
and I was troubled! Art disserted? yet washed; And washed us. May not (now)
this Text, and Truth, be improved as an Antidote? Christ loving his, washes
his; yea, out of love to his, washes his, and that from Sin, in his own Blood.

Who loved us, and washed us, from our Sins, in his own Blood. THE Churches
Stock, OR, Believers Patrimony.
Gal. 3.16. (former part.) But to Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises
made.
IF there be a Context, I shall humbly take leave of that. In the Text, you
have the Persons, and the Predicate.

The Persons: Abraham, His Seed; what Seed? His Believing Seed; his Spiritual
Seed; his Seed by the Freewoman. And, that this is the Seed, you may run, and
read, in the words following the Text: He says not, And to Seeds, as of many,
but as of one; and to thy Seed, which is Christ. Not Ishmael, and Isaac; but
Isaac, and not Ishmael: Not Esau and Jacob; but Jacob, and not Esau: not those
born after the Flesh, but those born after the Spirit. And to thy Seed, which
is Christ; of whom Isaac was a lively, and a lovely Type. To Abraham, and his
Seed; And to thy Seed, which is Christ. Now, in that complete Genealogy of
Christ (Luke the third) you have (among other things) this, Luke 3 34.
who was the Son of Abraham. And to thy Seed, which is Christ; that is, Christ,
and all that are Christ's; Christ, and all that are chosen, and called, in, and
by Christ, both Jews and Gentiles. And, that this is (thee) Seed of Abraham
(who is styled the Father of the Faithful) is evidently evident, Romans 9. from
the sixth to the fourterth Verse.

The Predicate. To Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. The Persons,
are Believers, and the Promises are their Patrimony Now, to Abraham, and his
Seed were the promises made.

That those; all those; Meditation.
and only those, who are Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-right, to
Gospel-promises.

That Abraham was a Believer, who doubts? And, that (this) Seed, which are
called (his) Seed, are Believers, none need to doubt, by what (I think) I have
already written. So that what I have made the matter of my Meditation, and
presented as the Doctrinal-Truth, does (without straining) arise out of the
Text. That Gospelbelievers, have a Gospel-right, to Gospel promises.

In the prosecution of this proposition, suffer an innocent inquiry after these
six things.

What these Gospel-Believers are, Method. 1.
that have a Gospel-right to promises.

What these promises are,

Whether Gospel.

How,

Why,

What use may be made of this, have a Gospel-right, to Gospelpromises.

What these Gospel-Believers are,

I would hope to arrive thee at a Discovery of a Gospel-Believer, under a
Discussion of a Gospel-Faith. There is the Habit of Faith, and the Act of Faith.

There Is the Habit of Faith. Being born again, 1 Petr. 1.23.
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible. Grace, is the Seed; Faith, is
(a) Grace, if no (thee) Grace, for it is the leading Grace; the Grace that lead
the Van of all other Graces. Grace, is the Seed, and this is incorruptible. As
there is no Grace in Sin, so, there is no Sin in Grace.

There Is the Act of Faith. Gal. 5.6.
As there is the work of Faith, so there is a working-Faith. But Faith, which
works by Love.

But what manner of Faith,

It Is a Faith that has Christ for Object. Rom 3.26.
and the justifier of him that believes in (Jesus.) This Faith, has Christ
(but not the lying vision of the heart) for its Object.

It Is a Faith of the Operation of God. Col. 2.12.
It Is (expressly) called a Faith of the Operation of God. As Faith is Gods will,
so it is Gods work.

It Is a Faith that is wrought not only by the power of God, the super-eminent
magnitude of his power to usward, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
who believe, according to the working of the might of his power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. There is concerned in the
working of Faith, a power aequivalent unto, and aequipollent with that power,
which gave a Resurrection to Christ Jesus.

It Is a Faith that has a Train of good works. Jam. 2 18.
Show me thy Faith without thy works, and I will show thee my Faith by my works
By works, I mean, works from a right Principle, to right Ends; that is, works,
from a gracious Principle, to a gracious end; works, from a Principle of the
Grace of God, to a promotion of the Glory of God. Now, though such works are
not Essential unto Faith, yet they are Evidential unto Faith; though, they are
not the Essence of a lively Faith, yet, they are the Evidence that Faith lives;
Jam. 2.26.
For, as the Body, without the Spirit is dead; so Faith, without works, is dead
also. This, is a Gospel-Faith, and he, or she, that has this Faith, is a
Gospel-Believer.

What these promises are,

Absolute promises, Absolute.
and Caelestial; As Grace, and Glory; Redemption, and Remission;
Sanctification, and Salvation.

Conditional promises, Conditional.
and corporal; As Health, and Honor; Prosperity, and Plenty; Seed, and
Substance, etc.

But in short, there is a three fold promise: Civil, Religious, and Divine.

Civil. Civil.
A Civil promise, is a word passed from Man, to Man, for the performance of
some lawful thing, as in Contracts, and in other affairs. Thus, Laban, made
promise to Jacob, to give him his Daughters. Thus, Saul, made promise to David,
not to hurt him, and hunt his Soul, to take it. Thus (also) Jonathan, made
promise to David, 1 Samuel 19.1, 2, 3.

Religious. Religious.
A religious promise, is a word passed from Man, to God, concerning some Duty,
relating to his Honor. This, is called a Vow. If a Woman (also) vow a vow unto
the Lord. Thus, the Psalmist: Psa 66.13, 14.
I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings, I will pay thee my vows, Which
my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble.

Divine. Divine.
A divine promise, is a word passed from God, to Man, concerning the fulfilling
of some Good, or removing of some Evil, Spiritual, Psa. 119.38, 49, 50.
or Temporal. Stablish thy word unto thy Servant, who is devoted to thy Fear.
Remember thy word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has quickened me

Now, Gods promises, are Legal, or Evangelical.

Legal. Do this, and live. Thus God passed his word, Legal.
to give eternal life, and Creature Comforts, upon condition of performing the
Law. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, which is the first Commandment with
promise. But, these, are not the promises, Ephesians. 6.2.
spoken off in the Text: To Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made.

Evangelical. Thus, Evangelical.
freely to give Christ, and (together with Christ) all things freely to give.
Whereby are given unto us; but what? promises; yea, precious promises, yea,
great, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and precious promises; yea, exceeding great, and precious promises. Now, these
are they; they are Gospelpromises, unto which Gospel-Believers, have a
Gospel-Right; Of these my Text speak: To Abraham, and his Seed were the
promises m^de

Whether Gospel-Believers, It were no hard Task, to produce a cloud of
witnesses. But in the mouth of two, or three, shall every word be established.
Gal. 3.22.
For instance: The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
the Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Gal. 3.29.
If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs, according to the
promise. Now, Gal. 4.28.
we, Brothren, as Isaac was, are the Children of promise.

How Gospel-Believers,

Through Grace. Through Grace.
Promises, are Donatives; they are free gifts. Gal. 3.18.
If the Inheritance be of the Law, then it is no more by promise; but God gave
it to Abraham by promise. Here, the Inheritance is given, that is under
promise; and the promise is given, under which the inheritance is. God gave it
to Abraeham by promise.

Through Christ. Christ, Through Christ.
he is Heir of all things, and through ^im Believers inherit the pronise. It Is
the Prince of life, that gives a propriety in the promise of life. For this
cause, Heb. 9.15.
^e is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, ^or the
Redemption of the Transgressions, that were under the first Testament, they
which are called, might receive the promise of eternal. Inheritance. Here is an
eternal inheritance under promise, but this is through the death of Christ.

Through the Spirit. Through the Spirit. Ephesians. 1.13.
is called the Spirit of promise. After ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise. And, as there is the Spirit of promise, so there the
promise of the Spirit. The we might receive the promis^ of the Spirit. It Is
called the promise of the Spirit, not (only) because a greater efflux^ the
Spirit is under promise, b^ (also) because the Spirit is the Author, and
Applyer of the promise.

Through Faith. Through Faith. Gal. 3.14.
is the Souls hand to receive the promise. That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentile^ that we might receive the prom^^ of the Spirit; but how?
through Faith. Here is Faith, but 't^ Faith from Christ; here is Faith but it is
Faith in Christ; 't^^ Faith that has Christ for Object, as well as Author, an^
Actor; So that Grace, an^ Christ; the Spirit, and Faith i^ Christ, give a
Gospel-Right, t^ Gospel-promises.

Why Gospel-Believers, Rule for Obedience, so ^e promise, is a Ground for
^aith. The promises of God, ^ad of the Gospel, they are ^f I may speak it
without Le^ity, and with a holy Reve^ence) the swaddling Clothes of Christ, and
they carry a Christ ^rapped up in them. Gospel-promisses, they are full
Breasts, and God delight that Faith should draw them.

Oh Soul! when Time goes unto Eternity, then Faith will ^o into Vision; it must
therefore be conversant about the truth of the promise here. It Is said of
Abraham, Romans 4.20, 21.
that he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong
in Faith, giving glory to God being fully persuaded, that wh^^ God has
promised, he was ab^ also to perform.

In order to the Exercise of^ Believers Hope. Ipse dixit; 'T^^ not Pythagoras,
but God tha^ has spoken it; And he is not (...) Man that he should repent, no^
the Son of Man that he should ly^ So Hope looks at the (Good) of the promise;
at the Goo^ couched, and lodged in the promise, whether it be a promise of the
life that now is, or o^ that which is to come. About the Good couched, and
lodged in the promise, is Hope conversant; whether it be the Removing of evil,
or the obtaining of good. 1 Jo. 2 25.
This is the promise which he has promised us, ^even eternal life. Eternal
life, is under promise, and this is the (Good) of the promise. But let the
Apostle (who was a far better Orator then my self) speak, as to the Good, and
Truth of the promise. In hope of eternal life, Tit. 1.2.
which God that cannot lie, pro^ised before the World began. In hope of Eternal
life, there is the (Good) of the promise; which God that cannot lie, promised
before the World began. There Is the (Truth) of the promise; Hope, is conversant
about the one, and Faith is conversant about the other. Now, Gospel-Believers,
have a Gospel-right, to Gospel-promises, that Hope may be excercised; for, when
Time goes into Eternity, then Hope will go into Possession, as Faith will go
into Vision. Is it not proverbial, were it not for Hope, the heart would break?
The Proverb (metaphysically understood) is innocent; for, had Believers hope
only in this life, 1 Cor. 15.19.
they were of all Creatures the most miserable. Gospel-Believers, have
something in Hope, though nothing in Hand; much in the Promise, though little
in the Purse Hope (in some sense) excels Faith; for the Devils believe, Jam.
2.19.
and tremble; yea, the Devils pray; They besought Jesus, to send them into the
Deep. The Devils believe, Luke 8.30.31.
and tremble, and pray: what want they then? they want Hope, which is a
constant, and a confident expectation of a promised good; this Devils can never
have; they are under Torture, and Torment, and that without Hope of redemption.
Romans 4.18.
A life of Hope, is the life of Believers; Abraham believed in Hope, against
Hope. This Hope, Devils can never have, and do not this want here of make
Devils?

In order to a Believers Peace, Pardon, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right
to Gospel-promises, that in (them) they may read their Peace, and Pardon. Now
the God of Hope, fill you with Joy, and Peace; but how? through believing (
Romans 15.13.) That is, through believing the Peace, and the Pardon, laid up in
the promise. The Gospel, is a golden Mine of gracious Promises; the least
promise (there) is worth a World, a thousand Worlds, if there were so many:
Gal. 1.7.
It Is called the Gospel of Christ. It Is called the Gospel of God. Romans 1.1.
It Is called the Gospel of Grace; and it is called the Gospel of Peace. Acts
22.28
Your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. The Gospel, is
Christ's Letter of Credence, that when a poor drooping, doubting, and desponding
Sou^ cannot see him, it may (in the promises thereof, and therein I read of
him, and hear from him. The Wife is in Englaud, the Husband in India; oh how
welcome is a Letter from him when she cannot look upon him! Oh what a Lift to
the Wife, is a Letter from the Husband under her poreing up on his Absence, and
Distance Oh say the Wife, though cannot look upon my Husband yet I have a
Letter from m^ Husband! And, though I can not see him, yet I hear from him, and
read of him. 'Ti^ thus here; to hear of a Christ, and hear from a Christ, when
the Believer cannot see him is a Believers Mercy, and this is the promises of
the Gospel. Now, Gospel-Believers, have a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises, in
order to their Peace, and Pardon. Whom, 1 Pet. 1.8.
having not seen, ye love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing,
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

In order to a Believers strength, and support. It shall come to pass, 1 Kings
19 17.
that him which escapes the sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay; and him that
escapes the sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay. Oh, say the Soul, if I do not
fall by the hands of this Saul, I may by the hands of that Achan! If I do not
fall by the hands of this Achan, I may by the hands of that Goliath! Oh! If I do
not fall by the hands of this Corruption, I may fall by the hands of that
Temptation; And, if I fall not by the hands of that Temptation, I may fall by
the hands of this Corruption. But, Soul, art a Gospel-Believer? then thou have
a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises, that (in the promises) thou may read a
promised Strength, and Support under Temptation, under Corruption. God (by the
Prophet) speaking of Abraham his Friend, and his Seed, makes, and leaves a
precious promise: Fear thou not; Isa. 41.8.10.
why? for I am with thee: be not dismayed; why? for I am thy God; but what then?
I will strengthen Thee; yea, I will help Thee; yea, I will uphold Thee, by the
right hand of my righteousness. Here, ye may read (under promise) the presence,
and the power of God; Strength, and Support from God; Now, to Abraham, and his
Seed, were the promises made. Oh, say the Soul, I am weak! weak as water! says
God, I will strengthen. Oh, say the Soul, the work is too hard for me! and too
much for me! says God, I will help. Oh, say the Soul, I may flay by the way!
fail by the way! fall by way! No, says God, I will uphold thee, ane that by
the right hand of my righteousness.

What use may be made of this, that Gospel-Believers,

These are three Uses: Terror; Trial; Triumph.

Art an Unbeliever? By way of Terror.
Right, to Gospel-promises. Oh Soul! thou can never look upon the (promise)
of life as thine, until thou can look upon (Prince) of life as thine.
Providential Mercies, fall upon all Creatures, but the promises of Mercies, and
Mercies in the promises, are settled upon the Spouse as her proper, and peculiar
Dowry. If, therefore, to have no Gospel-propriety to the Prince, and Savior;
thou have no Gospel-propriety, to the promise of Life, and Salvation. Art in a
state of Unbelief? Oh how may trembling (then) take hold upon thee, for thou
have no Gospel-right, to any Gospel-promise. Whether thou have a decretive
right, I know not, but a declarative right thou have not, for, to Abraham, and
his Seed, were the promises made Is not that a sad word? At that time, Ephesians.
2.12.
ye were without Christ; without Christ! what then? Soul, is it nothing to be
without Christ? To be without the Prince of Life, is to be without the promise
of life: Christ is the first, and grand promise, the seed of the woman; all
after promises, are but as so many Comments upon this first, and grand promise,
Christ. Is it nothing (then) to be without Christ? But what follows? Being
aliens of the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the World. Did Spira say (when his
Friends were reading of comfortable promises, about the death of Christ) read
no more; read no more; read no more; they are Cordials to others, they are
Corrasives to me. Oh what may thou then say, that art in a state of unbelief!
I would have more Charity for him, then for thee, if thou be an Unbeliever,
for, to Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made.

Have Gospel-Believers, By way of T^ial.
to Gospel-promises? Try (then) whether thou have a Gospel-right.

The Questions (now) will be these.

But how shall I know,

Have Christ? Christus meus, and omnia.
Antiqua mea, Christus meus: my Antiquity, is my Christ; I may say of
propriety, proprietas mea, Christus meus; propriety is my Christ. Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him (also) freely give unto us all things?

But how shall I know that Christ is mine?

Have the Spirit? 1 Jo. 3.24.
By this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.
This is an infallible Evidence.

But how shall I know that I have the Spirit?

Have the Fruits of the Spirit? Gal. 5.22, 23.
goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; it (also) bears Rarity, Faith, Love,
etc. such Fruit as this.

I will take but one of the Top-fruits of this Tree, and that is Faith. Have
Faith? a Faith, that has Christ, for Object? Christ, for Author? Christ for
Actor? then thou have the Spirit, and a Gospel-Right, to Gospel-promises. To
Abraham, and his Seed, were the promises made. He that believes on the Son of
God, 1 Jo 5 10.
has the witness in himself. Where this Faith is, there is the Spirit; he that
has the Spirit, has Christ; and he that has Christ, has a Gospel-Right, to
Gospel-promises.

But how shall I know when a promise is given from God?

Then a promise is given of God, ^^lut. 1.
when it comes not in word only. A promise, from God, comes in word, 1 Th^s 1.5
but not in word only, but in power, and in the hely Spirit. Our Gospel, came
not to you in word only, but also in power, and in the holy Spirit, and in much
ass^rance. A promise come in word; there must be a word; yea, this the written
word; or, (at least) something aequivalent unto the written Word; yet it comes
not in words only, but also in power.

Then a promise comes from God, when the Soul is enabled, J^. 1.12.
To as many us received him, to them gave he power (or privilege) to become
the Sons of God; but who are these? Even to as many as believe to his Name. For
the Soul to say, this is the word of God, and (through Grace) I believe it;
when the Soul can say, concerning a promise, as Paul said concerning the safety
of the Souls, under the loss of the Ship, I believe God, that it shall be as it
was told me; So, when the Soul can believe the promise; this promise is mine,
etc. then it is given from God.

Then a promise is given from God, I remember the days of old, it looks (then)
as if it were given from God. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.
Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, known, and read read of all Men; For
as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by
us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables
of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart. Are there not some of you here,
that remember the very first promise, wherein Christ, and your Souls met? and
you cannot forget that, and other promises, also.

Then a promise is given from God,

Art tempted? Oh, Blessed, is the Man, Jam. 1.12.
that endures Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
life, which God has promised to them that love him. Now, this suit is the
Souls condition.

Art afflicted? Gad, a Troop comes! My afflictions come like waves, no sooner
is one affliction over, but another comes. Isa. 63.9.
In all their affliction, he was afflicted. He was affected, with their
affliction, and they had his Affection, under their Affliction. This word suits
the present Condition.

Art persecuted? 2 Cor. 4.9.
Saul hunts after my Soul to take it! Persecuted, but not forsaken. Though
persecuted of Man, yet not forsaken by God. This falls in with the Souls
condition, and so looks like a word given from God.

Art disserted? there is a Cloud interposing between my Soul, and my Savior!
Isa. 54.7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee. Does not this suit the Condition of the Soul?

Art reproached? Oh, Mat. 5.11.
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil
against you (falsely) for my sake. Is not this word suitable?

Art impoverished? Oh, Ps. 34.10.
The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord, shall
not want any good thing.

They shall not want any thing that is good, that is for their good. Is not
this promise suitable, and seasonale?

Art Unbelieving? Oh, the Soul, my Faith is at a low Ebb, and I cannot make
conclusion of Light in Darkness, of Life in Death, which is the true Logic of
Faith? 2 Timothy 2.12.
If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. If not
this a suitable word?

Art mourning? I, Isa. 51.12.
even I am he that comfort thee. Not I, and another; not I, or another; but
I, even I am he that comfort thee. This falls in with the present state.

Do want Pardon? Isa. 43.25.
I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy Sins. Is not this proper?

Have back-sliden? Oh, Hos. 15.4.
I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely. Is not this a proper
promise?

Do fear? Oh, say the Soul, Lastly.
I fear I shall fall by the strength of this Temptation! or this Corruption! 2
Cor. 12.9.
My Grace is sufficient for Thee, for my power is made perfect in weakness. A
promise (thus coming) suits the Souls condition, and seems (to me) to be a
promise given from God.

Art a Believer? By way of Triumph.
though Salvation be a great thing; though it be a Soul-Salvation; a Spiritual
Salvation; an eternal Salvation, yet, this Salvation is under promise, and is
entailed upon believing. 1 Pet. 1 9.
Receiving the End of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls. As Faith shall
have an End, so there is the end of Faith, and that is Salvation; receiving the
end of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls.

There must be believing, till Faith come to an end, if (at the End) you would
receive the End of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls. When Faith
shall have an End, then shall the Soul have the End of Faith, and that is
Salvation; Receiving the end of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls.
Soul, take a Drop into thy Bucket; pluck a Cluster from this Vine,
Gospel-Promises, they are (as it were) the Veins of Christ, whereby his Blood
is carried into all his body, the Church. Gospel-promises, they are the
Treasures of Comforts; they are the Churches Stock; they are the Believers
Patrimony; To Abraham, and his Seed, were ^he Promises made. Heb. 6.17.
It is the Privilege and Dignity of true Believers, to be called heirs of the
Promise.

Oh,

Make Judgment of Gods Faithfulness, not according to his Providence, but
according to his Promises. God, has promised to keep his People, and he will
keep his Promise. Providence, may work counter, but Promises are the same, and
are sure. Whatever is uncertain, the promise is sure. An Estate may be lost;
Relations may dye, and go to the Grave of Silence, but the Promise is sure, and
the same Therefore it is of Faith, Romans 4.16.
that (...) might be by Grace; why? to the end the promise might be sure t^ all
the Seed. To all the Seed but what Seed is this? not (...) that (only) which
is of the Law but to that (also) which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the
Father of us all. Now, that the Soul may be filled (like the water pots of
Galilee) up t^ the very Brim, with Joy, and Peace, through believing, su^fer me
to tell thee, that the promises are sure, and the same For

That the Gentiles should be fe^low heirs, Ephesians. 3.6.
and of the same body and partakers of his promise; but how? through the Gospel.

With the heart man believes unto Righteousuess, Romans 10.12.
and with the mouth ^onfession is made unto Salvation.

They are hid in Christ. All ^^e Promises of God, 2 Cor. 1.20
in Him that is, in Christ) are YEA, and in him AMEN, unto the ^lory of God by
us.

But, to end, as I did begin; Divine Promises, they are hid ^n the Scripture;
but should that be made a Sacrifice, then they are hid in the Heart:
Gospel-Promises, they are hid in the Heart; but should that be made a
Sacrifice, then they are ^id in Christ, and are they not sure enough there? Oh,
Soul! ^ am sure, there they are sure. Now, Gospel-Believers, have (...)
Gospel-Right, to Gospel-Promises. Art a Believer of ^he right Stamp? these
Promises (then) are thine, and will thou go away with a Count^nance sad? Oh
Soul! open thy mouth wide, that it man be filled with Grace, and Peace For, To
Abraham, and his Sec^ were the Promises made.

(...) Luke 2.14
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Books to be Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the Sign of the Stationers Arms, in
Swithins Alley, in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange.
WAr with the Devil, or, The Young Man's Conflict with the Powers of Darkness.
By B. K. 8. p. Bound, is. A Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven: Or, An Exposition
of the first 13 ver. of the 25th. Chap. of St. Matthew, By Mr. Knowllis, 8.
Price bound 1 s. Loving, and Washing; Or some Meditations upon Loving, and
Washing in the Blood of Christ, by Richard Mayhew; Price bound 10. d.

