Upon the Death of His Late Highness, OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging.
AN ELEGY.
AS (sometime) falls the lofty Cedar down,
And knocks the Earth with his Cloud-neighbor Crown;
Or those tall Elms, which by a fatal Gust
Late forced, their Stations left, and kissed the dust;
Presaging sure (as at Romes Founders Fate
The Eclipse and Storm) a Breach upon this State,
Too soon ( alas!) fulfilled: So fell this Prince,
Great, as Virtue's or Valor's Excellence
Could form an Hero; whose successes filled
The world with Terror; whose Exploits excelled
Those Chiefs of Greece and Rome, and spoke a fame
Of louder accents then Gustavus name;
Whose Fortunes such, his Foes as well might stem
The current of the Baltique Sea, as them;
Whose Victories taught Civil wars to cease,
And laid three Nations in the arms of Peace;
Who those high mighty States, that by the sword
Redeemed their Freedom from their Spanish Lord,
Even in their height, subdued, and made them loer
Their tattred Topsails to his English power:
Proud Romes idol'trous Son his Enlsigns next
A stonied, and in his bosom vexed;
Witness those Cacus-dens (rich by the harms
Of England) won by his Herculean Arms:
But Heaven decreed that Conquest, so begun,
Should finished be by His Illustrious Son.
For now, to teach Earths Potentates, that Fate
Will ride triumphant in the Palace gate;
(Stern and impartial Fate!) whose strict Commands
Not Virtue, walled with Arts and Arms, withstands;
This meager Sergeant comes to act his part,
Arrests his Life, and stabs his generous heart;
Who by resignment of his dearest Breath
Proclaims aloud the authority of Death.
That day which twice his Victor-brows with Bays,
Had crowned, crowns now the period of his days:
That signal day which twice renowns his story,
Now the third time consummates his Glory.
The Heavens seemed hung with black, grief Veiled the world,
Tears deluged Earth, the Globe feared to be hurld
Back to its Chaos load, Confusion stood
A tiptoe, threatening a fresh Sea of Blood;
The broaken Roof presaged the Fabrics fall,
And mighty ruin laid a claim to all.
But ( sacred Providence!) there did appear
A morning Sun, to gild our Hemisphere
With new and vigorous Light, to clear the skies,
Dispel those clouds of Fear, and dry our eyes?
Wise Joshua arose in Moses steed,
Elisha here Elijah did succeed.
Thus warlike David gaind the Hebrew Crown,
And for Successor left a Solomon.
Mira cano: Sol occubuit, Nox nulla secuta est.
T. Mayhew.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Golden-Dragon in Fleetstreet, 1658.


