ARCHIMAGIRUS ANGLO-GALLICUS: OR, Excellent and Approved Receipts and
Experiments in COOKERY.

Together with the best way of PRESERVING.

As also, Rare Forms of SUGAR-WORKS: According to the French Mode, and English
Manner.

Copied from a choice Manuscript of Sir Theodore Mayerne Knight, Physician to
the late K. CHARLES.

Magistro Artis, Edere est Esse.

Printed for G. Bedell, and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their shop at the
Middle-Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street, 1658.

The Publisher TO THE READER.
IT was an odd saying of a mad Fellow, who having well dined, clapped his hand
upon the board, and protested, That this eating and drinking was a very pretty
Invention, who ever first found it out. But it is a sober saying, that (...)
(as Plato calls it, lib. 1. de Reipub.) The Art of Cookery, and Teaching men to
eat, not like Canniballs, but, like men, is none of the lowest Requisites in a
well governed Commonwealth. The Cook in Plautus (Pseudol.) therefore did not
account it sauciness to call himself Hominum servatorem, The preserver of
mankind.

The Great Author of this small Enchiridion shows you the Excellency of
Kitchin-physick, beyond all Gally pots, and their Adherents. He does in this
Book teach you, Ex parvis componore magna, To improve a Porters dinner into a
Dish fit for a Princes Table, To make badde meat good, and good meat better.
This Book is a Save-all; It suffers nothing to be lost. It will teach you to
keep good houses, by keeping good things in them.

But here I must take leave to complain (in the words of a grave Person) of the
too Epidemicall humor of these Times: The Pedlars, Attire-women, and
Mountebankes of Counterfeit wares, Periwigges and Paintings, do like so many
Butter flies swarm over all our Shires, haunt all good houses, and so draine
the purses of substantial men inclined to Hospitality, as that the very
Beefepot is now dwindled into a sorrowful Skillet, and the old trusty and
welbeloved Blacke-Jacke turned into a fine Venice-Glasse. Thus is the Kitchen
and Celler eaten out of doors by the Wardrobe and Cabbinets: -- Difficile est
Satyram non scribere, -- It Is hard to keep my pen from wormwood.

But I have sweeter stuff to tell you of. After Dinner, comes the Banquet: and
after the Doctour's Cook, enters his Confectioner; who will show, you such
Rarities, that therein Art seems to out-doe her self.

I confess, it may well be laid in my Dish, that I am no fit Cook to dress
an Epistle, and to set it forth in the Kick-shaw Language, which these
Chamaeleon-Times love to feed on: And, indeed, I am utterly unfit to write of
Cookerie, who am not able to give an account of the very terms of their Art:
If therefore I bestow an Apothegme upon you to this purpose, you will thank me
for Registring, and preserving it in this Paper.

It chanced that Doctor Butler, (that famous Physician of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge) being at a great Feast, with the, no less, Lawyer Sir Edward Cook:
The Lawyer would needs undertake the Doctor in his own Art; The Doctor, in
defense of his Opinion, quoted some words out of Galen; The Lawyer cries out,
Whereabouts in Galen are these words, I pray? The Doctor answered, In Decimo
Tertio Henrici Octavi. -- After this most accute reply, I have nothing more to
do, but to sit down and lay by my pen.(...)

Receipts for Cookerie.
PYES:
1 The London Pie.
TAke of Marrow-bons eight, cock-Sparrowes, or Larks, eighteen, Potato-roots,
onepound, Eringoroots, a quarter of a pound, Lattice-stalks two ounces,
Chestnuts forty, Dates half a pound, Oysters, a peck, Citron-rindes preserved, a
quarter of a pound, Hartichokes, two or three, Yelks of hard Eggs, twelve,
Lemmons sliced two, Barbaries picled one handful, Gross Pepper, a quarter of
an ounce, Nutmeg sliced, one half ounce, Cinnamon whole, half an ounce, Cloves
whole a quarter of an ounce, Large mace half an ounce, Corrents a quarter of a
pound. Liquor it when it is baked with white wind, butter and suagr.

2 For a Pie.
Take eight Eggs and boil them hard, half a pound of beef suet, mince them all
together very small. Take three quarters of a pound of Corans, season these
with Cynnamon, Nutmegs and Sugar; put all in the crust and bake it.

3 To bake a breast of Veal in Puff paste.
Take the Veal and par-boyl it, the bones being broken, season your Veal with
nutmegs, mace, cloves, a little pepper and salt; mince the tops of young Time
and Lemmon, sliced, a pound and a half of butter: Put these in your
Puffe-paste, being wet with the yolks of four Eggs to bind it; when the paste
is baked, put in a Cawdle made of Ver juice.

4 To make Puffe-paste.
Take a quantity of fine flower, the yolks of four Eggs, and the whites of two,
and a little cold water, and so make it up into perfect paste, then roll it
abroad with your roulling-pin, and take little pieces of cold butter made
round, and so fold it over again: in like sort fold it, roll it and butter it
seven times; then you may bake any pretty cleictures, florentine or made dish
with this paste.

5 To bake a Hare.
Take the Hare and par-boyl him, then take all the flesh from the bone, and
beat it in a mortar, then season it with pepper, salt, nutmegs and ginger, with
two or three cloves beaten among them; when you have seasoned the flesh with
these spices, souce it with wine vinegar, then lard it thick and bake it in a
Coffine; before you close it put sweet butter into it, and when it is baked,
put into it at the vent hole a little nutmeg, vinegar, butter and sugar, and
that will make the flesh have a delicate taste; in the like sort you may make
redd Deer of the Phillet of beef.

6 To make a Pallat pie.
Take Oxe-pallats and boil them tender, that you may thrust a straw in them,
and sheep-tongues six to three pallets, and sweet-breads of Calves; the tongues
must be boiled with the pallets, when they be boiled enough, then put in the
sweet-breads and the yolks of four hard Eggs; then season it with pepper and
salt, parsley and time, stirred small, slice the meat as you please, and as the
season of the year; put into it sparagus, hartichoks, chestnuts, or any thing
you will; then when ye have put them in paste put in a pound of melted butter,
when it is baked make a sauce with vinegar, and the yolks of raw Eggs; then
put in that sauce.

7 To make an Hartichoke Pie.
Boil your Hartichokes as you would butter them, pull off the leaves and burres
from it, then cut the bottom in thin broad slices, then put them in the Pie
and put whole Cinnamond and slices of preserved Oranges, Marrow, Dates and
Butter; then close the Pie and leave a hole open in the lid: then set it in the
Oven, and when it is a little hardened put some rose water in it, and bake it
and serve it into the table

8 To make a Lamb-stone Pie.
Take them and par-boyl them, pull of their skins, then season them with
pepper, salt, nutmegs, mace and some Dates and some Lemmon sliced, marrow, some
sugar: when it is made fill it up with butter, and when it is almost baked fill
it up with a galantine made with rhennish wine, and Dates, Mace, some yolks of
Eggs hard roasted, some Potato roots, some Eringoe roots; and if the stones be
toward the latter end of the year: then you must steep them all night before
you par-boil them in vinegar.

9 To bake redd Deer.
First, par-boil your Deer, then lay it in steep all night in Claret wine and
vinegar, then lard it and season it with vinegar, nutmeg pepper, salt and some
mace, some Lemmon sliced between, the lard must be seasoned before you stuff
it, then put it in your paste with butter and some bay leaves on the top, then
when it is baked make a galentine of Claret Wine and Cinnamond and sugar, and
pour it on the Pie, and then set it in again for the space of an hour or two;
within less than a quarter of an hour after it is taken out, fill it up with
melted butter: approved by my Lady Vidd.

10 To bake a steake Pie with a French pudding in the Pie, Printed.
Season your steaks with pepper, salt and nutmegs, and let it stand in a tray
an hour, then take a piece of the leanest of a leg of mutton, and mince it
small with Ox suet, and a few sweet herbs, tops of young time and a branch of
Penniroyall, two or three of redd Sage, grated bread, yolks of Eggs, sweet
Cream, Raisons of the Sun, work altogether like a pudding with your hand,
stiff and roll it like balls, and put them in the steakes in a deep Coffin
with a good piece of sweet butter; sprinkle a little Verjuyce on it, and bake
it, then cut it up and roll Sage leaves in butter, and frye them, and stick
them upright in the walls, and serve the Pie without a cover with the juice of
an Orange or Lemmon.

11. To Bake a Neats tongue.
First powder it a month, then boil it two or three hours, then blanch it,
and whilst it is hot, season it with pepper and salt; lard it, and lay it in a
pie made of rice-flower, then strew upon your tongue a good quantity of cloves
and mace beaten small, and lay upon that a pound of butter and more, then close
your pie, and leave a hole in the top of it. Prick your pie full of holes then
set it in the oven, and let it stand four or five hours, then take it out, and
put in at the hole a pint or more of vinegar, which may not be very sharp;
delay it with Gascoigne wine, then stop up the hole with a piece of past very
close, and put it in the oven again, and so let it stand eight hours in
soking, or else as your oven is hot, if it be very hot, let it not stand so
long; for then it will be too airy, then for the space of three or four days,
shake it between your hands twice or thrice, and sometimes turn the bottom
upward, when you shake.

12. To bake fallow deer in the best manner.
Bake it first in his own blood only, wipe it clean, but wash not it, bone it
and skin it, and season it with pepper and salt, then bake it in fine paste
afterward, either puffe-paste, or short paste.

13. To bake a wild Boar.
Take the buttocks of brawn, and a Phillet, parboyle it and mince it small, and
stamp it in a mortar till it come like paste all in a lump, then lard it, and
use it like the red deer, the Phillets also of Beef for a need will serve very
well.

14. To make Capon pyes Spanish fashion.
Take a great flesh Capon parboyl him; then cut of the flesh and mince it with
a pound of beef suet, and the marrow of 3. bones, a little cloves and mace, a
little pepper, and a few currants; put all this meat into Paste made with
butter, marrow melted, and sugar; and when it comes out of the oven, season it
with clarret wine, juice of Orange, and sugar and beaten Amber, and stir all
the meat and this together.

15. To make a Calfes-head pie.
Take your Calfs-head, being parboyled, and cut it into handsome slices as you
can, then season it with Nutmegs, a little pepper and salt, and lay it in the
Coffen, and put to it some pieces of marrow, some quartered dates, some whole
mace, barberies, grapes, lettice, some fresh butter; and so do it up, and bake
it not too hard, some white wind, sugar, verjuice; butter these, and beat
together, power this in, and so serve it in.

16. A delicate Chewet.
Parboyle a piece of a leg of Veale, and being cold, mince it with Beef suet
and marrow, and an Apple or a couple of warns; when you have minc't it fine,
put to a few par-boyled Currants, six dates minced, marrow cut in little square
pieces, a piece of a preserved Orange-pill minced, season all this with pepper,
salt, nutmeg, and a little sugar, then put it into your Coffins, and so bake
it: Before you close your pie, sprinkle on a little Rose Water, and when they
are baked, shave on a little sugar, and so serve it to the table.

17. To make Pease Cods.
Take marrow and lay it in warm water, then take the yolks in an egg, and a
little grated bread, and mingle them together, and boil the marrow in them,
then take Cinamond, sugar, and Rose Water, and put to it; then take your Paste,
and so make it into Pease-cods.

18. The manner how to put a Gammon of Bacon in Paste.
Cause your Gammon of Bacon to be steeped in water more or less, according
unto its bigness, thickness and dryness.

In case a Gammon of Bacon be very big, well smoked and dried, as your Mayence
Gammons, and Bayonne Gammons usually are, you must let them steep in the water
for at least the space of four and twenty hours or more, and then you may give
a guesle whether or no your gammon be well steeped.

Which that you may the better be able to judge of you, shall take it out of
the said water, and make an opening or hole in the midst of the flesh, drawing
forth a little piece of it; and by tafting it, you may be able to judge whether
the salt and Brine be sufficiently extracted; which having done, and finding it
according to your expectation, you shall thus prepare it for to be put in Paste.

In the first place therefore you must pare the top of your Gammon till you
come to the quick flesh, that so you may take off the superficies or upper part
of the flesh, and all that you judge too dry and salt: after which you must
also take away the skin or upper part, and you must also cut off the knuckle.

Now, having prepared your Gammon in this manner, you must knead as much dough
as you shall judge requisite for your Pasty, and you must make your Crust at
least two inches thick, or thereabouts, and upon the middle of the bottom of
your Pasty, you make a bed or foundation of slices of fat Bocor.

This bed or foundation of fat Bacon must be as broad as the whole Gammon of
Bacon, and upon the said bed of fat Bacon, you must place a good round handful
of Parsley, grossly shreded, after that you shall strew your Gammon with your
sweet spices; and consequenty, you shall place it upon the bed of fat Bacon and
Parsley: which having done, you shall stick some Cloves upon your Gammon, and a
few small pieces of Mace; after which, upon the top of your Gammon, you shall
lay another bed of Persly, and a bed of fat Bacon sliced, and five or six
Laurel leaves upon the fat Bacon, and after that a good half pound of sweet
butter, which you must so spread, as that it may quite cover all the slices of
fat Bacon, which lie upon your Gammon.

Moreover, you shall knead as much paste or dough upon your kneading board, as
will be requisite to make the cover or lid of your Pasly, which dough you must
moysten with your little brush, and immediately cover your Pasty therewith; and
having thus quite completed your said Pasty, you must straightway put it into
the Oven, which must be heated in the same manner, as if you were to bake
household bread,

If your Gammon be a great one as aforesaid, it will require three hours
boiling, but if it be an indifferent one, two hours and a half will serve, or
two hours, according to its bigness; when your Pasty has been in the Oven
about half an hour, you must make three or four holes in the lid for to give
your Pasty vent, for otherwise it would burst, and this you must observe in all
great Pasties: Moreover, in case the Pasty-Crust does suddenly get too high
color and grows black, that is a sign your Oven is over heated, and that it
burns your pasty, wherefore you must take away the embers,

And on the contrary, if your pasty attains no color, that is a sign the Oven
is not hot enough, and which will force you to increase the embers, that so
your pasty may be thoroughly baked.

One day after your pasty has been baked you must stop up the holes, which you
made in the lid with some dough, lest your pasty might be spoiled by the
letting in of Air at those holes, which would be the cause that your pasty
would be subject to grow moldy, and would not keep at all.

19. An excellent way for baking all sorts of Venison and foul.
You must generally observe that no kind of flesh whatsoever may be put in
paste before it be mortified, therefore you must let that flesh which ye do
intend to put in paste be sufficiently mortified, which may be done by hanging
it in the Air, or by burying of it under ground, for the space of twenty and
four hours, after which you must beat the said flesh-meat more or less with a
wooden rowlet or Pestell according to the said fleshes thickness and hardness,
which is a third way to mortify it: so likewise must you observe that beef and
mutton must be more beaten and mortified, than any other flesh whatsoever.

Observe likewise that it is requisite to take out the superfluous and great
bones of such flesh as you intend to put into paste; as for example, out of the
leg or shoulder of mutton, and as for the remaining bones which are in the said
flesh, you must burst and break them; at least in case you intend not to take
them out quite, in the like manner you take out the breast bone of a Turkey
Cock, and of other fowl in like manner.

Observe also that in case your flesh which you intend to pastry up has great
nerves, and hard sinnews or tough skins; you must take all that away: As for
example, from a shoulder or leg of Mutton you must take of the skin in like
manner, if you intend to make a Hare-pye, and that you apprehend it may be an
old and hard one, you must strip off its uttermost skin, before you lard it.

Moreover, you must observe that in case there be hollow places in such flesh
as you intend to pastry up, as there is in a Hare and several Fowl: you must
bruise and break those bones which cause the same hollowness, and so make your
flesh even and smooth. As for example the maw of a Turkey Cock which you must
cut and slash at every four fingers distance, that so you may the better be
able to lard it.

Now in case your Venison, or other gross Viands which you do intend to put in
paste, should be somewhat tainted, or in case they should be warm eaten, cause
water and salt to be boiled together, and let your said Venison or other gross
meats steep therein as in a broth; and having so steeped for a while, draw it
forth again, and hang it up to dry, that so the said liquor may run out.

Now your Viands having bin prepared according to the several foregoing
prescriptions you may lard them very close with great pieces of fat Bacon,
bigger or lesser according to the proportion and quality of your several sorts
of Viands, some slices of Bacon as thick and as long as your little finger, for
Venison, Beef and Mutton; others less according to your own discretion, and it
will be requisite that you steep your larding Bacon some pretty while before
you use it in a little Vinegar seasoned with salt; and before you lard your
Viands with them, Powder them with beaten white pepper or with your sweet
spices which you please.

And in case your Viands be thick and of the length of half a foot or
thereabouts: as for example a brisket of Veal or a Turkey Cock and the like,
either lance them or cut them with trenches at four inches distance, or
thereabouts, in such a wise however, that all the skin or upper part of the
flesh may remain whole, and by the means of these deep trenches you may easily
come to lard all the parts of your said viands which cannot be otherwise done,
besides that your Viands remaining entire and whole, would be the more
difficult to be baked, and the sauce or liquor of your Pasty would not be able
to penetrate or pass through your flesh, but with a great deal of difficulty in
case it were not lanced in the same manner as has bin proposed.

Some there be that do steep their Beef, Mutton, Veal, and other Viands which
they do intend to put in Paste two or three hours in Verjuyce or Vinegar
seasoned with salt or pepper, or with sweet spices: and with some sweet herbs,
and the which must be done as soon as the said Viands shall have bin beaten
with the pestell or rolling pin; and after the said Viands shall have bin
larded, and when you shall have drawn it forth of the said liquour, you must
perfect the putting of it into Paste in the following manner.

Your flesh being ready to be put into paste, you must season it according to
your own discretion with your salt spices in such a manner, as that your said
Viands do well retain the salt or season, to which end you must powder them
thoroughly on all sides; and in case it be a Foul, or any other slesh that is
hollow, you must as then powder it inwards: and before you powder it on the
thighs or back, you must make some Lancements er inlets therein to the end that
your said spices may the better hold or fasten, and may have the better
operation.

Your Viands being thus seasoned, you must place them on the one end of your
dough or paste, either framed of Rye crust or of Wheaten, or white which you
please at discretion as aforesaid, which said paste must be at least an inch in
thickness, and long enough to make up the whole pasty.

Your Viand or Venison, or the like, being placed upon one of the ends of your
paste, you may stick therein some few Cloves, and after that you may fill it up
with some slices of fat Bacon, unto which you may also add some Bay Leaves;
and over and above all these things, you may also apply some fresh butter
spread over the whole Pasty as aforesaid, in the foregoing chapter.

Observe or note that to make a good Hare or Turkey pie, or a pie with four
Ducks, you must have at least a quarter and a half, or much about half a peck
and a quarter, or three quarters of a bushel of meal; moreover, two pounds of
butter, and if so be you will have the crust to be very fine, you may put
therein two pounds and an half, or three pounds of butter: yet however note
this also that the crust being so fat, may be subject to burst in the Oven.

Now in case your pasty be of Venison, or of any other viand that is not fat:
As for example, in case you have a mind to accommodate a Hare excellently well,
you must needs have one half pound or three quarters of a pound of fresh butter
to wrap the Hare in, and at least one pound and a half or two pounds of fat
Bacon, as well to lard your Viand, as to cover it after it is empasted.

But if the meat you intend to put in paste be not over dry nor lean: As for
example, Suppose it be a Turkey Cock well fatned, or a good fat joint of
Mutton; you shall only stand in need of a good quarter of a pound of fresh
butter to enclose the said Viand withal and goad store of fat Bacon to lard it
to boot, wherein you must not fail.

Another observation you may take along with you that some Pastry-men do make
use of sweet Suet in stead of fresh butter to raise their paste withal.

Finally, so soon as your flesh shall be well and thoroughly seasoned with all
the requisite spices and ingredients aforenamed, and that it shall be well
lined with butter below and above, you may as then turn up the end of the paste
which is left over the whole, only moystning the end of the paste which
remains to refresh it, and join well the sides; and when you have thus joined
or added the sides, you may give it what shape you will; after which you may
burnish your pie or pasty and immediately after you may put it to the Oven.

Observe that your Oven must be almost as hot as is prescribed in the precedent
Chapter: and thus these foregoing pasties will be sufficiently baked in two
hours space, provided they be not extraordinary great thick ones: And when
your said pasties shall be thus well and thoroughly baked and cooled again, you
must not forget to stop the holes which you made in their lids, for the reasons
before alleged.

By reason that in case you do not make the said holes in the lid of your said
pasty within a little after it has been in the Oven it will split or burn by
reason of the heat.

20. The Pasty Royal.
Take a leg of Mutton, strip the skin off from it, take out the bones and the
sinnues, after which beat the flesh to mortify it and then cause it to be well
chopped, and as you chop it, you must season it with salt spices.

Now your meat being thus well chopped, you must make up your paste of
Rye-crust, and give it at least two inches in thickness proportionably
according unto the bigness of your pasty, and raise the paste thereof high
enough.

You must line the bottom and sides thereof with fat Bacon in slices, and in
the bottom you must also place a good handful of Ox suet which is small
minced and thereunto add your meat after it shall have been well minced; and in
case Chestnuts be in season, you may add thereunto a reasonable proportion after
they shall have been first half roasted.

When your meat shall be thus in your pastie you must add thereunto one
handful of Beef suet well minced, and about half a pound of Beef marrow cut
into small pieces about the bigness of a walnut: All which compositon you must
cover or overspred with some slices of fat Bacon.

Finally, you shall cover this Pasty with Rye-crust at least a fingers breadth
thick, and you must make a hole in the said lidd.

Such a like Pasty as this must be at least twenty or four and twenty hours in
the oven, which said oven, you must all the while keep shut, to the end that it
may yield a sufficient heat whereby the said Pasty may be thoroughly baked, which
said pasty you must oftentimes take out of the said Oven to supply it with
broth or gravie as often as it shall be wanting.

To which purpose, take the bones and the skin and sinews which ye have cut
away from the said leg of Mutton, bruise them indifferently, and afterward
boil them together with the said skin and sinews for the space of one hour
and a half in water without salt, and when as the said liquour and broth shall
be concocted in such manner as that there shall be but a pint left, you shall
make use of it in the following manner, viz.

After your Royal-Pasty shall have been about the space of four hours in the
Oven, you must draw it, and you must pour thereinto with a funnel about the
quantity of a quarter of a pint of the said liquor or broth being well heated,
after which you shall again put your pasty in the Oven, and within two or three
hours you shall draw it, and you shall see whether or no it does want any
sauce or liquor, in case whereof you shall add more sauce unto it: and in this
manner you shall draw your said pasty at several times till it has continued
in the Oven for the space of fifteen or sixteen hours; when as you shall again
draw it forth of the Oven, and shall take off its lidd, for to imbellish your
pasty with the yolks of eggs hard boiled cut in quarters; you may also add
thereunto Mucerons, the gills and combs of Cocks and other like sweet breads;
you may also thereunto add a small clove of Garlic and a drop or two of
vinegar, for to make the sauce more pleasing and tart: observe also that your
Lamb-stones and sweet-breads must be seasoned with your sweet spices.

After which you must return the said pasty into the Oven again, and you shall
let it remain there till it be thoroughly baked at least three hours
afterward, and you must have a care that the sauce or liquour thereof be
perfectly consumed before you take your pasty out of the Oven for good and all:
So likewise must you have a care to maintain the fire in the said Oven, in such
manner as that the e may be a sufficient heat to bake the said pasty without
the burning it.

When the like pasty is thoroughly baked, you shall take out of it the clove of
Garlic which you did put into it before you do serve it up to the Table, and
after that you shall fasten on the lidd of your pasty again, that so your pasty
may be brought whole to the Table: and if so be that the said pie be not eaten
up at one meal you may cause it to be heated again in the Oven, until such time
as it is quite expended.

To make a mince pie the Italian fashion with leaved or fine Paste.
Prepare your leaved or fine paste, and give it an inch thickness in the
bottom, whereon you shall place a lay of about a handful of minced veale and
suet together, unto which you may add three Partridges or old Pigegeons,
having cut off their feet and legs; the wings and necks, and beaten the breast
flat, which said foul you shall lard in several places in the self-same
manner, as was praseribed in the larding of a Venison pasty, after which you
may season them with your salt-spices and put into them peeled Chestnuts,
Pineapple kernels, and Currants, a little handful of each, three yolks of eggs
half boiled, and cut through the middle, a small quantity of beaten Cynamon,
and a quarter and a half, of a pound of Sugar, a slice or two of preserved
Lemmon peel, and hereunto you may add some Mousecherows and Lamb-stones, and
Sweet-breads, if they are to be had, and if so be you are not minded to put
Partriges or Pigeons into your said pie, you may make the same of any other
meat; as for example, a Coney cut into several pieces, and well larded.

Moreover, to keep a better nourishment or to augment the meat of this your
pasty, you may add unto all these ingredients one handful of minc't-Veale
with marrow or suet, a quarter of a pound of each, and some flices of fat Bacon
on the top of the whole, which said pasty being thus well filled up, you must
cover the same with a lid of leaved or thin paste, not above the thickness of
your little finger, or thereabouts; wash, or varnish your said lid, and make a
hole in the top of your said lid.

Observe that you must of necessity wrap your whole pasty in a buttered paper,
which must be a high as your said pasty, and you must tie it about your said
pie with packthread, to preserve your pasty the better; after which, cause your
pie to be put into the Oven, being placed upon a sheet of white paper and you
must give your Oven an indifferent warm harth as you are used to do unto a
Custard, this Pasty will require at least two hours and a half baking.

When your said pie is almost baked, you must cause it to be drawn forth of
the Oven, and you must pour thereinto with a funnel through the hole, which
you had left in the lid, a sweet sauce made with a quarter of a pound of sugar,
and almost a quarter of a pint of wine, whereinto you must infuse a little
Cynnamon poudred; after which you must put your pie into the Oven again, and
there leave it at least half an hour, to thicken the said sweet sauce.

21. To make minced Pyes of fish, the bones and gristles being taken out.
Take as much fine dough as your own judgment and experience will guide you
to, which said paste you must make as fine as your minced pies or Cockney pies,
and prepare and shape your pasty or pies in the same manner, as your Cardinals
pasties are made; and in case you make them like your minced pies, you must
remember to make your Crust a little thicker in the bottom than elsewhere.

When your pastie is got into a readiness, you must first line it with a
slender lay of butter, after which you shall fill your pie up half way with
minced Carp, or of other fish, which is seasoned in the same manner, as we
shall hereafter prescribe,

After which you must place upon your minced fish some few lenten sweet breads,
and Junkets: as for example; some morsels of hartichoke stools, of parboyled
Sparagus or Carps tongues, boiled in good broth, or Chestnuts half roasted; and
out of lent you may put therein some yolks of eggs hard boiled; so likewise
on Gaudie-dayes, you may add thereunto some morcels of marrow.

When your pie shall be thus replenished with Lamb-stones, and sweet-breads,
you must add another morsel of butter thereunto, and although you should not
chance to put any Lamb-stones and sweet-breads at all in your said pie, yet you
must not fail to place a lay of butter upon the first minced fish.

After which you may proceed to fill up your pie to the very top with your
minced fish upon the top of all, which you must again place a lay of butter,
and if so be your pie may be made in a round form like unto your hot minced
pyes, you must add unto them a lidd of paste like unto a pinnacle, which you
must place upon the top and afterward, you must wash or varnish your said pie
lidd.

Put these pyes into the Oven, and give them an indifferent warm hearth, as you
do in the baking of your small minced pies.

And in case you intend to make these minced fish pies uncovered, after they
shall have been baked, you may add unto them a sweet sauce, and if it be upon
a flesh-day, you may add thereunto the Gravie of a joint of Mutton, or of any
other piece of rost-meat, or else a white sauce made of the yolks of raw Eggs
beaten together with a little verjuice.

After which you must put your pie into the Oven again for a little while, that
so it may partake of the taste of the said sauce, and likewise the said sauce
may have time to thicken, but you must observe not to make these minced pies of
Fish too big; for that, else you will not be able to handle them, nor order
them well. And therefore you had better make them in the manner of tarts, and
brake them in a tart-pan, making them up in a paste, or dough, very thin, and,
as we formerly called it, a leaved paste.

22. The manner to make a tart of marrow of Beef, or marrow bones.
Take a quarter of a pound of Beef marrow, break it into little morsels betwixt
your fingers, and reduce it to the smallness of a hasell nut, add thereunto
the like quantity of powder sugar, and two yolks of Eggs, a small quantity of
salt spices, some Pineapple kernels, some Currants, and the rind of a Lemmon
small shred, add thereunto likewise some Naples Biskets, or Mackaroons, or
peeled and beaten Almonds, or about the bigness of an egg of grated
white-bread; mingle all these together with a fork or spoon, and when you have
prepared all these Ingredients, you must fill up your pastie or tart Coffin
therewith, and put into your tart-pan; after which you may either close your
tart quite up on the top, or else you may cover it with a lid of paste, which
is pricked and transparent in several parts.

Cause your tart to be baked, and after that powder it with some sugar, and put
it into the Oven again for a little while.

23. To make a Lumber Pie.
Take three pound of Mutton, Veale, or Lamb, and three pound of Beef suet, and
shred them small together, and take the tops of Time and Marjerum, and
Winter-Savorie, a handful of each; and mince them very small by themselves,
and take a penny white loaf and grate it, and take ten eggs and break them on
your meat, and two pound of Currants, and for leasoning, take two Nutmegs, and a
race of ginger, and a few cloves, and three of four blades of Mace, and a
little salt, and so mix all these together, and make them into balls so big as
an egg, and when your pie is made, put these balls in, and lay on them a few
raisins, and a few dates sliced, and so lay on the lid, and it will require two
hcures baking, and being baked, make a leer to put in it of Verjuice, and a
little sack, and a little fresh butter, and a little sugar, and set that on the
fire not too hot, and so take the yolks of three eggs, and so beat them with
a little Verjuice, and so brew them together, and power it into the pie, the
lid being cut up, and if you please lay on your lid whole, or cut in pieces,
and set the pieces above the pie, and so serve it hot, and it is a very good
Lumber pie.

24. A Potato Pie.
Boil your Potatoes tender, and then peel them and let them be cold, then
season them with beaten Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Pepper, a little let the pieces of
your Potatoes be cut indifferent, and fill up your pie; then put the marrow of
two or three bones to them, and some dates cut in halfes, a litte mace, some
barbaries, or grapes, or lemmons, and some Cittron sockets, and then put in
half a pound of Butter, and close it, and bake it; liquor it with the liquor
you make for a Chicken pie.

25. Pyes of sheeps tongues.
Wash them with luke warm water, and cleanse them, then put them into paste,
take Mushrooms, small pallats of Beef, cut beatils, a little parsley, and
chibbols, pass all in the pan, pour on it some yolks of eggs, bottomes of
Hartiehokes, beaten lard, or fresh butter, and put them into your Pie, which
you shall bake for the space of two hours, and serve with a sauce of yolks of
eggs, allayed with verjuice.

26. How to make a Paris Pie.
Take good large Chichins and quarter them, or very small chickens whole, with
the giblets; raise your pie round, and prepare to mix with the Chickens a
handful of Cockles, or two ox pallets blanched and sliced, nine or ten yolks
of eggs, some minced in halfes, Pine-kernels blanched, the marrow of two bones
cut into Gobs a little sliced Mushrome, if you have any pickled, season all
these together with salt, Ginger, Nutmeg, Mace, and a very little Pepper, your
pie being made, and filled, put in a good quantity of Butter, and close it; it
will require two hours baking, it being almost baked, put in a little
white wind, or verjuice, or some of the liquor which stewed your Oisters, if
you do stew any, beat it up with a piece of butter, and serve it up hot.

27. How to make a Clery pie.
Take two handfuls of Clary, wash it, and cut it reasonable small, beat it
together with eight whites of eggs, and half yolks, and put it into a frying
pan, with a good piece of butter, sweeten it, stirring it well together as it
fryeth let it not fry too long, and have a care of burning; then take a handful
or two of spinach boiled very tender, press out the water very clean, and
mince it small; then take two or three Potatoes boiled and sliced, and marrow
minced, season all these together, with Nutmeg, Mace, Salt, Sugar, Verjuice,
and Lemmon minced, being pared; your pie being raised, but in these
Ingredients, and lay the marrow of two or three bones on the top as whole as
you can, close it, and bake it in a soft oven an hour and a half, then make a
Caudle with yolks of Eggs, Cinnamon, Verjuice, and a piece of Butter, Sugar,
and a sliced Lemmon if you have it; beat it well together till it boileth, the
Pie baked, put it in a dish, scrape sugar on it, and serve it up.

28. How to make an Olive Pie.
Slice the flesh of a Leg of Veale into thin slices, the breadth of four
fingers, and hack them with the back of a Cleaver, then take six ounces of
Beef Suet minced small, then take Thime, sweet Marjerome, Winter-Savory, and
Capers, mince them small, and season it with Mace, Cloves, Mutmeg, Cinnamon,
Pepper, and Salt; then take a quart of great Oisters, drein them from the
liquor, and roll them in the Ingredients, and take the slices of Veale, and
roll them up with the Ingredients in them, with two Oisters in either of the
Olives, then lay them into the pie with good store of butter over and under;
But before you butter the top, lay in five or six yolks of eggs, some bits of
Bacon and Sausage made up into Balls, with sliced Lemmon: the rest of the
Oisters and Ingredients on the top of the pie; then lid it, and let it bake,
and when the pie is half baked, put in a quarter of a pint of Claret wine, and
let it bake; then make a Leer or Sauce for it with Claret wine, one Oinion or
two, the liquor of Oisters, two Anchoves, letting it boil a little; take out
the Onions, and beat it up with the juice of a Lemmon and Butter, when it is
baked, put in this Leer, shake it well together, and serve it up hot to the
table.

Boiled and roast meats.
29. To boil a leg of Mutton after the French fashion.
Take a leg of Mutton, and take out all the meat at the but end saving the
skin whole, and leaving the bone, then mince the meat small with ox sweet
marrow, and put into it a little grated bread, sweet cream, and yolks of eggs.
A few sweet herbs chopped small, and Currants put in them, two ounces of minced
Dates, a few Raisons of the Sun, and work them in your hand like pudding
stuff, then put it into your leg of Mutton again, and stew it in a pot with a
marrowbone, with stewed broth, and your leg of of Mutton dry: so you make two
boiled meats in one dish.

30. To boil a chine of Mutton or Veal.
Cover your meat with a little fair water, and a little white wind, and whole
mace, one nutmeg grated, one handful of herbs clean picked, and bruised with
the hand; young lettice, spring tops of thime, parsley; when all is boiled well
together, thicken it with a crust of Manchet, a yolk of an egg steeped in some
of the same broth, then season it with Pepper and Verjuice.

31. To make chickens fat in three or four days.
Take a pint of sweet flower, and a pint of French wheat flower, otherwise
called (Buck) and put into it half a pound of course sugar, then make it up in
stiff paste, and roll it up in little rolls, and wet them in warm milk, and so
cramme your chickens, and that will make them fat in three or four days, if
you please, you may sow them up behind the two last days.

32. To boil a Capon in white broth.
Take your Capon and set him on the fire in fair water and when he has boiled
awhile, take some of the broth, and some white wine, and put them into the pot
wherein you mean to make your broth, then take marrow, mace, and dates, and put
them into the broth with sugar; the dates must be cut in halfs, and then set
them on the fire, and let it boil softly: for if it boil much, the marrow
will consume away, then when you are ready to serve your meat, take yolks of
eggs, and strain them with verjuice into your broth, and let your broth boil
after your eggs be in; you must boil your Pruans and Currants by themselves,
and lay them upon your Capon, when you have disht him up, put salt into your
Capon always.

33. To boil a Capon larded, with Lemmons in white broth.
Take a young Capon being scalded and truffed, and put him in fair water by
himself, throw a little dustie Oat meal into the water, for it will make the
flesh boil white; then take two or three ladels full of strong mutton broth,
with a faggot of sweet herbs, a a piece of large mace, or a nutmeg quartered, a
little white pepper, and a little white wind, two or three dates quartered;
thicken your broth with Almonds, season it with sugar verjuice, and a piece of
sweet butter; then take a preserved Lemmon, cut in small pieces, and so lard
your Capon very thick, then dish your Capon up, and pour your broth on him,
take some few par-boiled Currants to garnish his breast, let your Currants be
par-boiled by themselves, because they shall not discolor the broth, scrape
sugar on him, and so serve him up, and garnish your side with sucket, this is
an excellent way for young Pullets, Capons, and Chickens.

34. To boil a Capon in Orange broth.
First take your Capon as you did for white broth, then take Oranges, and take
of the rhind, and cut the rest overthwart, and pick out all the seeds so near
as you can, and lay them in fair water a whole night if you can, then taken
Muskadine, or Hyppocrasse, which is better, and put it in your broth; and into
it put the Oranges, the finest sugar you can get; then put in large mace, and
boiled dates by themselves, and when your broth is almost ready, put in the
dates and the large mace, a good quantity of Rose Water; if you will have this
broth ready by twelve of the clock, you must set it on at eight; for it must
boil very softly.

35. To boil Pigeons with Rice.
Take your Pigeons being scalded and truss't, and put them in a pipkin, with a
ladle-full or two of strong mutton broth, and a little white wind; put into
their bellies a little parsley, savory, and the top of young thime, put in your
broth a little crust of Manchet, a quarter of a nutmeg, and a piece of whole
mace and when your Pigeons be boiled tender, thicken your broth with rice,
being boiled with sweet milk, season it with verjuice, sugar, and a little
pepper; garnish your dish with a sliced orange, and so serve it.

36. To boil Wigeon, Teale, and Mallard.
Take a Wigeon, Teale, or Mallard, being scalded, and trusse them, half roast
them, then take them from the spit, and with your knife lace them down the
breast, stick two or three whole cloves in the breast, then Put them in a pipkin
with two or rhtee ladlefulls of strong mutton broth, and a little whit-wine a
piece of whole mace, thicken it with a tossed steeped in some of the broth,
season it with verjuice, sugar, and a little pepper; garnish your dishes with
clusters of preserved barberies, if you think good you may put one minced onion
into your broth, it is good relish to boil all kind of waterfowl.

37. To boil Larkes or Sparrowes in white broth.
Take Larks and Sparrowes truss't, and put the tops of young parsley in their
bellies, and so put them into a pipkin, with a ladle-full of mutton broth, and
a litte white wind; thicken it with two or three yolks of eggs drawn through
a strainer, with a little of the same broth, season it with a little sugar and
pepper, put into it before you take it up a few par boiled Currants and pieces
of marrow cut into square pieces like dice, and so serve them in upon sippets,
garnish your dish with preserved skirrets or lettice sallets, shave sugar on
the dish side, and so serve it.

38. To boil Gudgeons or Flounders.
Take your Gudgeons and Flounders, and put them into a posnet with a pint of
white wind, and half a pint of fair water, a piece of white mace, and the tops
of young thyme, or a branch of Rosemary, a good piece of sweet butter seasoned
with verjuice, sugar, and a little pepper, and serve them upon sippets.

39. To make broth for a Pike.
Take half a pint of white-whine, and a little water, a little yest, a little
loose parsley, and sweet herbs, rosemary, thyme, and savory, tied together
with some large mace, and butter, and set them altogether, to boil, and when
it is boiled enough, season it with gross pepper, salt, and verjuice, and
boil the Pyke by it self in water, salt, and a little rosemarie, and a little
white wind, (if you will bestow the cost) and so serve it.

40. To make a sauce for fried Gurnet or Rocket.
Take nutmeg, vinegar, sugar and pepper, and let them boil in a chafing dish of
coals before you serve it, and thicken it with the yolk of an hard egg: It is
an excellent sauce for Pigs pettitoes being fried, but you must boil your
pettitoes and let them stand till they be cold, then may you slice the feet,
and cut the liver and lites in pieces; then roll your pigges feet in a little
thin butter being made with sweet cream, yolks of eggs, and fine flower, and
then your petitoes, liver and lites will show very yellow, and the sauce will
make them eat very pleasing.

41. To stew a Carp.
Take a good deal of salt, rub it all upon the Carp, fetch off the skin of it
clean, then put it into a dish, to save the blood; cut of the head and tail;
let it bleed, and as it bleeds trick in softly (as you stir the blood) a little
wine vinegar; take nothing out of it but the worst guts, wipe the belly of it
clean; then put it into the blood with wine stirred well together with a bundle
of sweet herbs, slices of Lemmon, whole Mace, a whole Onion; when it is stewed
tender, take away the Onion and Lemmon, put in a good piece of sweet butter, a
little vinegar and sugar if you will.

42. How to boil a Hanch of Venison.
Let your Venison be powdered then boil it in water; for the sauce, take some
of the strongest broth and put it into a pipkin with vinegar, ginger sliced, a
little pepper, Colly-flower or Cole-wort stalks boiled, and the pith taken out
and put in large mace, Cowes udder boiled and sliced, a little horse raddish
root scraped, and sweet herbs; boil all these a convenient time, then dish the
Venison being boiled, and beat up the sauce with a little butter and lay
Colly-flower on it and what you please. This sauce is very good with a boiled
poudred goose, you may lard your goose with bacon if you please.

43. How to make a grand boiled meat.
Kill and pull or scald what young fowl is in season, as pigeons wild or tame,
partridges, pheasants, teal, plover, widgeons, snipes, larkes or any other
fowl, you may do a young coney wild or tame; truss them and boil them as fair
and as white as you can; and while they are boiling, take strong broth wherein
veal or any other fresh butchers meat has bin boiled to pieces, put to it an
Ox pallet blanched, and cut in dice work pestaches, pine kernels blanched, a
quart of white wine, a good quantity of large mace salt, and five or six
dates cut to pieces; boil these together as long as you think it expedient, and
when it is boiled put to it a large piece of butter and lemmon sliced very
thin, the rind being pared off, and beat it up thick; then dish your meat
orderly with thin toasts in the bottom, pour the sauce on them; garnish with
sheeps tongues boiled, blanched and split, rolled in green batter, and fried,
green sliced lemmon and orange, sippet it and serve it up hot to the table.

43. How to stew a Breame.
Scale your bream and wash it without, but preserve the blood for to stew it
with, as follows; Take clarer, vinegar, salt, ginger sliced two large races,
the pulp of one pound of pruans being boiled, and strained into the broth, one
Anchove, sweet herbs, and horse radish roots stamped and strained; stew these
with no other liquor, than will just cover the fish, when it is stewed beat up
some of the liquor with butter, and pour it on the fish; being dished garnish
it with rasped bread, lemmon, orange, and barberies, serve it up hot to the
table.

45. How to roast a Calves-head with Oysters.
Split your head as to boil, take out the brains washing them very well with
the head, cut out the tongue, boil it a little and blanch it, let the brains be
par-boild as well as the tongue, mince the brains and tongue, a little sage,
Oysters marrow, or beef suet very small mix with it, being minced, three or
four yelks of raw eggs, beaten ginger, pepper, nutmeg, grated bread, salt and a
little sack, if the brains and eggs make it not moist enough; this being done
par boil your Calves head a little in water, then take it up and dry it well
with a cloth filling the holes where the brains and tongue lay with this meat,
and bind it up close together, and spit it and stuff it with Oysters
compounded with the same ingredients as they were with the shoulder of mutton,
stick it as full of them as you can, and roast it througly, setting a dish
under it to catch the gravie, wherein let there be Oysters, sweet herbs minced
a little white wine and a sliced nutmeg; when the head is roasted set the dish
wherein the sauce is on the coals to stew a little, then put in a piece of
butter, the juice of an orange and salt, beating it up thick together, dish
your head and put the sauce to it, and serve it up hot to the table.

46. To make Cream-cabbidge.
Set a gallon of new milk on the fire when it boyls scim it so long as froth
arises, then empty it into ten or twelve bouls as fast as you can without
frothing, and set them where the wind may come: when they are a little cold
gather the Cream that is on the top, with your hand crumpling it together, and
lay it on a plate; when you have laid three or four layings on one another wet
a feather in rose water and musk and stroke over it, and searce a little grated
nutmeg, and fine sugar and lay three or four more lays more on it as before.
This do till you have off all the cream on the bouls, then put all the milk to
boil again, and when it boiles set it as you did before in bouls, and use it in
like manner: it will yield four or five times seething, which you must put on
your plate as before, that it may lie round and high like a Cabbadge: let one
of the first bouls stand, because the cream of them will be thick and most
crumpled; take that up last to lay uttermost, and when you serve it up, searce
or scrape sugar on it: this must be made overnight for dinner, or morning for
supper.

Boiled and roast meats. A rump of Beef, after the best manner.
Take a rump of Beef, or the little end of the brisket, and par-boil it half
an hour, then take it up and put it in a deep dish, then flash it in the side
that the Gravie may come out, then throw a little pepper and salt between every
cut, then fill up the dish with the best claret wine, and put to it three or
four pieces of large mace, and set it on the coals close covered, and boil it
above an hour and a half, but turn it often in the mean time, then with a
spoon take off the fat and fill it with claret wine, and slice six onions, and
a handful of Caphers, or broom-buds, half a dozen of hard Lettice sliced, three
spoon-fuls of wine-vinegar and as much verjuice, and then set it aboyling with
these things in it till it be tender, and serve it up with brown bread, and
sippets fiyed with butter, but be sure there be not too much fat in it when you
serve it.

48. A Bisque of Carps.
Take twelve small Carps, and one great one, all male carps, draw them and take
out all the melts, flea the twelve small Carps, cut off their heads and take
out their tongues and take the fish from the bones of the flead Carps, and
twelve oysters, two or three yelks of hard eggs, mash all together, season it
with cloves, mace and salt, make thereof a stiff searce, add thereto the yelks
of four or five eggs to bind it, fashion that first into balls or loppings as
you please, lay them in a deep dish or earthen pan, and put thereto twenty or
thirty great oysters, two or three Anchoves, the melts and tongues of twelve
Carps, half a pound of fresh butter, the liquor of your oysters the juice of a
Lemmon, or two; a little white wine, some of Corbilion wherein your great Carp
is boiled, and a whole Onyon, so set them a stewing on a soft fire, and make a
hoop therewith, for the great Carp you must scald him, and draw him and lay him
for half an hour with the other Carps heads in a deep pan with so much white
wine vinegar as will cover and serve to boil him, and the other heads in; put
therein pepper, whole mace, a race of ginger, nutmeg, salt, sweet herbs, an
Onion or two sliced, a lemmon; when you boil your carps, pour your liquour
with the spice into the kettle wherein you will boil him; when it is boiled
put in your Carp, let it not boil too fast for breaking: after the Carp has
boiled a while, put in the head, when it is enough take off the kettle, and let
the Carps and the heads keep warm in the liquour till you go to dish them.
When you dress your bisque, take a large silver dish set it on the fire, lay
therein sippets of bread, then put in a ladle full of your Corbilion, then take
up your great Carp and lay him in the midst of the dish, then range the
twelve heads about the Carp, then lay the searce of the Carp, lay that in, then
your Oysters, Melts, and Tongues, then pour in the liquor wherein the searce
was boiled, wring in the juice of a Lemmon, and two Oranges, garnish your dish
with pickled Barberies, Lemmons and Oranges, and serve it very hot to the Table.

To dress a Phillet of Veal after the Italian way.
Take a young tender Phillet of Veal, pick away all the skin in the folds of
the flesh, after you have picked it out clean so that no skins are left, nor
any hard thing, put to it some good white wine that is not too sweet, in a bowl
and wash it and crush it well in the wind, do so twice, then strew upon it a
powder that is called Tamara in Italy, and so much salt as will season it well,
mingle the powder well upon the pasts of your meat, then power to it so much
white wine as will cover it, when it is thrust down into a narraw pan, lay a
trencher on it and a weight to keep it down, let it lie two nights and one day,
put a little pepper to it when you lay it in the sauce, and after it is souced
so long take it out, and put it into a pipkin with some good beef broth, but
you must not take any of the pickle to it, but only beef broth that is sweet
and not salt, cover it close, and set it on the Embers, only put to it with
the broth a few whole Cloves and Mace and let it stew till it be enough; it
will be very tender, and of an excellent taste, it must be served with the same
broth as much as will cover it.

To make the Italian take Coriander seed two ounces, Anniseed one ounce
Fennel-seed one ounce, Cloves two ounces, Cynnamon one ounce; these must be
beaten into a gross powder, putting into it a little powder of Winter Savorie;
if you like it, keep this in a Viol glass close stopped, for your use.

50, To boil Ducks after the French Fashion.
Take and lard them, and put them upon a spit, and half roast them, then draw
them, and put them into a pipkin, and put a quart of claret wine into it, and
chestnuts, and a pint of great oysters, taking the beards from them, and three
onyons minced very small, some mace, and a little beaten ginger, a little thyme
stripped, a crust of a French roll grated put into it to thicken it, and so dish
it upon sops; this may be diversified; if there be strong broth, there need not
be so much wine put in, and if there be no oysters or chestnuts, you may put in
hartichoke bottomes, turnips, and colly-flowers, Bacon in thin slices,
sweet-breads, etc.

51. To make a Pudding of Calves-Chaldrons.
Take your Chaldron after it is half-boiled and cold, mince it as small as you
can, with half a pound of beef suet, or as much marrow, season it with a little
onyons, parsley, thyme, and the outermost rhyne of a piece of Lemmon, all shred
very small, salt, beaten nutmeg, cloves and mace mixed together, with the yolks
of four or five eggs, and a little sweet Cream; then have ready the great guts
of a mutton scraped and washed very clean, let your gut have lain in
white wind and salt half a day before you use it, when your meat is mixed, and
made up somewhat stiff; put it into the sheeps gut, and so boil it: when it
is boiled enough; serve it to the table in the gut.

52. To make the best Sawcidges that ever were eat.
Take a leg of Pork, and cut off all the lean, and shred it very small, but
leave none of the strings or skins amongst it; then take two pound of
beef suet, and shred it very small, then take two handfulls of red sage, a
little pepper, and salt, and nutmeg, and a small piece of an onion, chop them
altogether with the flesh and suet, if it is small enough, put the yolks of two
or three eggs and mix all together, and make it up in a paste if you will use
it, roll out as many pieces as you please, in the form of an ordinary
Sawcidge, and so fry them; this paste will serve a fortnight, upon occasion.

53. How to make a Paste with oil, and the way how to take away the sent of
the oil.
In the first place, you must set your oil over the fire, that is to say, you
must cause it to boil till it bubbles no more, and by this means you will take
away both the sent and the unpleasantnesse of the oil; some others, whilst
the oil is a boiling, put a crust of bread into it.

Having thus prepared your oil, you may put upon your kneading-board; as for
example, one pint of meal flower, whereunto add two or three yolks of eggs,
and as much salt as you can take up betwixt your fingers, and as much oil as
your own discretion will prompt you, to the fourth part of half a pint of
water, or thereabouts, (a little more or less;) mingle all these things very
well together, and work your paste thoroughly with your hands, but leave it
somewhat of the hardest, because the oil has not so firm and solid a body as
the butter: finally, having made your paste or dough in this manner, you may
make use of it according to your pleasure.

44. To make sweet Paste or dough.
For Example,

Take a quarter of a pound of powdered sugar, sifted through a hair, or ranging
sive, then put it into a clear marble mortar, add thereunto the quarter of the
white of an egg, and about half a spoonful of Lemmon juice, stir all these
softly together, until the sugar begins to jelly, and in case it will not
easily jelly, add thereunto some few drops of rose water, and when the sugar
does begin to jelly, you must beat it with a pestel, till it becomes a hard and
firm paste; and when the same is well mingled, you may make pastie crust
thereof.

Note, that at your pleasure you may also make paste, that is but half
sweetened, by mingling an equal part in proportion of sugar, and of meal
together; the which you may mingle together in the selfsame manner, as is
here before described.

55. To make sweet spices, which are used by Pastry-Cooks.
For example, take two parts of vinegar, as two ounces, and one part, viz. one
ounce of beaten pepper, mingle them together, add thereunto beaten cloves, and
nutmegs very small grated, and beaten mace, one ounce or thereabouts, of each,
for one pound of pepper, more or less as you please; and put up all these
several Ingredients thus mingled in a Box.

Note, that it is at your liberty to preserve all the foregoing several sorts
of spices separately in litte leather purses, or in a box, which is divided
into several drawers, or repartitions.

Note also, that diverse persons do only make use of the single pepper instead
of other spices, although it must needs be granted, that the composed spices
all together, must needs be more pleasing and Aromatic, than the pepper alone.

56. The manner how to make a Pastry-Cooks Varnishing stuff; with the which he
gives his Pyes a Color.
Beat together the yolks and whites of eggs, just as if you would make
anomelet, or pan-cake; and in case you would have your Varnish to be strong and
good, it will be sufficient to beat one white of an egg with two or three
yolks; and on the contrary, in case you will have your Varish pale, you should
only need to use the yolks of eggs, and beat them with water.

Now to make use of the aforesaid wash or varnish, take a few feathers, or a
little pensil, or brush, either of silk or hogs brissels, which said brush or
pensil, must be very soft; wet your said pensils or brissels in your wash or
varnish, and so use it at your discretion, to wash or varnish your
Pastrey-works.

Now in case you will not go to the charge of eggs to make your wash or
varnish, you may dissolve a little saffron, or marigold-flowers in milk; so
likewise in Lent you may make use of the eggs of a Pike or Jack for your wash or
varnish, that being most proper for lent, having no relation to flesh.

One thing you must observe, that the Pastrie Cooks put honey in their washing
or varnishing, for to spare eggs.

Creames.
57. Clowted Cream.
Take two gallons of new milk from the cow, strain it into a clean Kettle, set
it upon a trevet over a quick fire of chare-cole, and so soon as it boiles, put
in three pints of sweet Cream, stir it about, and take it off the fire so
presently that it may not boil, after the Cream is in it; have ready
milk-pannes set in straw, put forth the hot milk into them so fast as you can,
and when you have filled your pans, if it be in the winter, after it has stood
awhile, till the reaking be past, cover them up close.

58. Another Cream.
Take sweet Cream and put it into a silver dish, set it upon a chafing dish of
coals, and when it boiles, as the Cream rises, take it off with a spoon, and
lay it into a glass bowl, till your bowl be full; and as you fill it,
sprinkle it with Rose Water, and strain it with fine sugar.

59. Cold Cream.
Take a quart of milk as it comes from the Cow, and put in it yolks of eggs
raw, as many as you shall see fitting, and temper it together, then set them a
chafing dish of coals, always stirring it, for fear of burning, and put sugar
to it, and it will be like Cream of Almonds; and when it is boiled thick
enough, sprinkle it with Rose Water, and cast sugar over it, so let it cool.

60. A Cream with French barley.
Take the third part of a pound of French barley, wash it well in fair water,
and let it lie all night in fair water; in the morning, set two skillets on
with fair water in the fire, and in one of them put your barley, and let it
boil till the water look red, then put your water from it, and put the barley
into the other warm water, then boil it with fresh warm water till it boil
white, then strain the water clean from it, then take a quart of Cream, put
into it a nutmeg or two quarte-red, a little sage, mace, and some sugar, and
when your Cream is ready to boil, put your barley into it, and let them boil
together about a quarter of an hour, and when it has thus boiled, put into it
the yolks of two or three eggs well beaten, with a little Rose Water, then
dish it forth; and eat it cold.

61. Almond Cream.
Take half a pound of Almonds blanched, stamp them very small with some cream,
and then strain it into a skillet, and stir it on a little fire till it
begin to boil, then take it off, and season it with a little Rose Water, made
very sweet with fine sugar, put it in your cream bowl, and eat it cold.

62. Cudgelled Cream.
When your Cowes are new milkt, take two Gallons of that milk presently* while
it is hot, power it into two milk pans, stand up high, that it may run in a
long stream, and so let it stand a day or a night, then scum it off as thick as
you can, without much breaking; put it into what dishes you like, and, if you
will, strew sugar on it.

63. A Butter Cream.
Take two gallons of good milk, and put to it a pottle of cream, set it on a
clear fire and let it boil an hour, then power it into the broad pans, and so
let it stand two days, let it not be stirred, because the skin may be broken,
then take away the top of it off, as thick as you can, and work it together
with a spoon, and ^ay it in a China dish like a dish of butter, and strew a
little sugar upon it.

64. A French Cream.
Take a pottle of new milk hot from the Cow, and put to it a gallon of sweet
cream, put them into a fair earthen pan, and set it on a trivet, over a soft
fire, of a certain heat, all day and all night, the warm embers to lay about
it, lest it cool hastily and so be tough, this cream must never boil at all;
And when you serve it out, cut it in great pieces, and lay them into a glass
bowl, and strew fine sugar upon it, and Rose Water, if you like it.

65. An Almond Custard.
Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds, a quart of sweet cream, boil your cream
with a little large mace, and nutmeg; after it is boiled let it cool again,
blanch your Almonds in cold water, then stamp them exceeding small, with a
little Rose Water, and then strain them with the cream put to it, the yolks of
eight eggs well beaten, eight dates picked, and minced small, one handful of
Currants plumpt in boiling water, a good deal of sugar, and a little salt; put
these into a dish, and bake it upon a pot of boiling water.

66. Sack Cream.
Take two quarts of sweet cream, set it on the fire in a clean skillet, and
when it boiles, put in so much Canary sack, as will turn it like a posset, then
put it forth into a boulter strayner, till all the whey be clean from it, then
rub the Curd through a strayner into a clean dish, season it with Rose Water,
and fine sugar; and if it be thicker than you would have it; then put some of
the whey to it, that ran from it: so serve it up in a cream bowl.

67. Codling Cream.
After your Codlings are thoroughly scalded and peeled, put them into a silver
dish, and fill the dish almost half full of Damask-Rose-water, and put in half
a pound of sugar; boil these together, still turning the Codlings in the
liquor, till it be almost consumed, then fill up your dish with sweet cream,
and when it has boiled a little every where about the dish, then take it from
the fire, strew sugar upon it, and eat it cold.

68. Cream with Apples.
Take a quart of cream, boil it with a little rosemary and thyme and a blade
of mace; Then take some Apples, pare them, and slice them into claret wine,
boil them in the wine with a little Ginger, and a little Lemmon peele with
Musk and Amber-greese, and sugar, when the Apples are boiled well, and cold
again, put them to the cream.

69. Cream with Almonds.
Take three pints of Cream, boil it in a little Rose-mary and Time, and take 2
good handfuls of Almonds blaucht in cold water, then stamp them with a spoonful
of sack, strain them and boil them with the cream, put Ambergris, musk and
sugar to it.

70. Cream with Curds.
Take a quart of cream, boil it with nutmeg, mace, rose, mory, and time; Take
it off the fire, put in a little sack and sugar, a little juice of Lemmons that
it may a little quack it; stir it till it be a little cold, and when it is
quite cold put it into a strainer and hang it up till the next day; then get
pure thick cream, and boil it with some whites of eggs; mingle your whites well
beaten, when your cream has boiled, then set it on again, boil it till it be
pretty thick, as you shall think fit for curds, sweeten it with sugar, Amber
greece and musk.

71. For clouted Cream.
Take some three quarts of new milk, let it boil up, then put in some two
quarts of Cream, as you do for wild curds, let this stand upon Embers all
night, you may put this upon raw or boiled Cream, and then season it with
sugar, if you will have it taste of mace or any other thing boil it in the milk.

72. A Trifle.
Take three pints of pure thick Cream, and boil it with cinnamon, and nutmeg,
and sugar; when it is boiled, keep it stirring till it be but blood-warm, then
put in some rennet, and when you think good serve it.

73. Another clouted Cream.
Take rice, pick it and wash it very fair, and when it is dry, beat it till it
come to fine flower, then take Cream and Rose Water, and Sugar, and put of that
flower into it, and boil it till it be thick.

74. Thick Cream with Rice.
Take dried Rice and beat it fine and strain it with thin cream, and let it
boil in a platter on a chafing dish of coals till it be very thick, then season
it with a little rose water and sugar, and when you think it is thick enough
take it off, and when it is cold, serve it forth with two rows in a dish.

75. A Trifle.
Take boiled Cream and Rose water and sugar, and a little rennet, and stew them
together.

76. Snow.
Take Cream, Rose water and Sugar, and beat them together till they come to a
froth, and then, etc.

77. To make Snow.
Take a quart of cream not too thick, beat it with a birchen rod with whites of
Eggs in it, take off the snow as it rises till you have enough of it for a
dish, boil some cream for the bottom, set a penny loaf in the bottom of it with
a rosemarie sprig set in the midst, strew your snow at the top of it.

78. Clowted Cream.
Take three quarts of new milk and boil it with mace, a little Rosemary and
Thyme, when it has boiled enough take two quarts of cream, strew it all at top
as you do for wild curds; let this cream stand upon Embers till the morning:
boil some sweet cream for the bottom; with sugar and what else you will, when
it is cold lay your slacks of clouted Cream on the top, and strew Sugar upon
it.

79. Apple Cream.
Boil six Pippins pared, (do not cut the cores apieces) in Claret wine, a
little more than will cover them, put in of sugar a good quantity, then boil a
quart of good cream, with a little rosemary and thyme, sweeten it with sugar,
one spoonful of sack, when they be cold put them together, lay your Apples like
Eggs: Remember to boil in your Apples some ginger, lemmon pills very thin sliced.

80. White stuff (of Cream.)
Take a pint of cream, seven whites of eggs, one spoonful of flower, mingle
these well together, set it on the fire, stir it till it grows thick, and
strain it through a thick strainer, with rose water sweeten it: You must stir
this till it be cold.

81. A Tansey (of Cream.)
Take a pint of cream and put to it the yolks of eight Eggs and two whites well
beaten, and half a pint of sack, a good deal of sugar, and nutmeg; mingle all
these well together, and bake it in a frying pan with sweet butter, just as you
do another Tansey, and serve it on a Plate with a little sugar on the top of
it.

82. Goos-berry Cream.
Take a quantity of Goos-beries, scald them and mash them, strain them through
a strayner, then mingle them with your cream and sugar.

83. To make a Cream.
Take a pan of milk as it come from the Cow, and set it over the fire, and
when it begins to rile, pour in some cream; and when it rises again pour in
more; and so do some six times, then take it and let it stand on nettres till
next morning then take it off, and sprinckle rose water and sugar among it, and
so serve it.

84. To make a Sullibub.
Take a quart of cream scalded, and let it be lukewarm, keeping it stirred:
One pint of sack pretty hot, then spout it out as hard as you can, let this
stand all night. In the morning take a froth made of thick cream sweetened with
sugar, a little sack mingled with it, beat it with a spoon as it rises, put it
into a Cullender, when milk is dreaned from it; lay this froth upon your
sullibub as high as you can, froth it in a wooden tray new scalded and cold.

85. To make maggets (of Cream.)
Take a cheese new made, and somewhat stiff; then take cream, and strain it
through a strainer, and cast Sugar upon it.

86. A white pot.
Take a pint of cream and boil it and when it is cold, put to it four yolks of
Eggs, and two whites well beaten, then put in it a little nutmeg, cloves, mace,
and some sugar, and a little salt, then butter your dish, and strew in it the
smallest marrow of a bone, then slyce the crumme of a loaf thin, and lay one
lay of bread, and one of raysins, and marrow, and so til the dish be full then
pour on the cream, and stick the biggest of the marrow all over it, and some
sliced dates, and so bake it.

88 To make Leach.
Take a quart of Cream, and a quartern of Almonds, and blanch them, and grind
them with some of your Cream; then take half an Ounce of whole Cinnamond, and
half a quarter of an Ounce of large Mace, two Ounces of Izing glass; wash the
Izing glass in many waters, and then let it lie and soake a quarter of an hour
then boil it in the Cream, put in six Ounces of Sugar, so boil it till the
Izing-glass be consumed, when you have strained it; put thereto eight
spoonfuls of Rose Water, then never leave stirring it till it be lukewarm,
and when it is cold, cut it out in slices.

Cakes, White-pots, Puddings, and Almond-works, etc.
Almond-workes.
88. To make Almond Butter.
Take a pottle of the best sweet Cream, a pound and a half of Almonds beaten
with rose water to a soft paste; then take three pints of water or more, with
half a spoonful of Coriander seeds well boiled together, when it is cold strain
out your Almonds with this water, getting the substance of the Almonds as much
as you can, then mingle your cream with it, set it altogether upon a clear
fire; when it is ready to boil put in a little salt, and when it boyles up,
seruch in some juice of Lemmons all over it, not too much, but a little to
curdle it: Then take it off the fire, let the Whay run through a thick cloth or
napkin very softly, when it sticks something dry, tie it up round like a
pudding, hang it upon a tack all night, then beat it with fine sugar and a
little rose water; afterward make dishes of it.

89. French stucklings.
Wet your crust with suct and butter, two yolks of Eggs and sugar; cut your
Apples very small, and season it with rose water, sugar, ambergreese and musk,
roll them very thin, and make them square.

90. To make Almond Puddings.
Take a quart of cream, and let it boil on the fire, slice some manchet thin,
pour your cream to your bread, and cover it close, then beat half a pound of
Almonds very small with a spoonful of rose water, mix them with your cream and
bread slice some marrow or beef suet, then take the yolks of eight or ten eggs,
with three of the whites very well beaten, mix these together, then grate one
nutmeg, slice and not beat some Mace, sweeten it with Sugar, then fill your
guts, and boil them.

91. To make Almond Cakes.
Take a pound of Almonds, three quarters of a pound of sugar, keep the other
quarter which makes up the full weight to fry them, when your Almonds and
sugar is beaten, as for march pane, drive out your paste unto Cakes, then lay
them upon papers on a table, or with the lid of a baking-pan, bake them upon
the upper side with embers and coals upon the lid: After which, then turn them
on the other side, and harden that side, then take that other quartern of
sugar, boil it to a candy high, and with a fether Ice them over on the upper
side, and set them under the pan again to harden: which being done, then Ice
the other side, and harden them; and so eat them.

92. To make a Florentine with Almonds.
Take half a pound of rice boiled very tender, some Spinach par-boyled and
beaten, half a dozen yolks of Eggs, mingle to it a little rose water, a little
cinnamon butter, some Almond paste; mingle all these together, and make
puff-paste for the bottom and top of it.

93. Eggs of Almonds.
Take a quart of thick Almond milk, of Izing-glass prepared, as for leech, and
boil them well together, until it will jelly, and stir it well in the
boiling; afterward let it run through a strayner, and season the same with
Sugar, (or Amber-greese and musk if you will) then take three or four Eggs,
and let all the meat be put out at a little hole made in the top of the
Eg-shel, then take the same milk of Almonds and fill the Egg-shels while it is
warm, and so let the same abide there until the morrow, and then take a little
quantity of the said meat when it is warm, and color the same with whole
saffron wrung through a linen cloth, then slice your Eggs when they are cold
the next morning through the midst, shells and all, then cut a round hole
through the midst of the Egg where the yolk should be, and fill up the same
with the colored meat, and so serve them forth.

94. Mackaroones.
Take one pound of Almonds, lay them in cold water over night and blanch them,
then take three quarters of a pound of fine sugar beaten, and put it to your
Almonds; stamp them altogether small, with three spoonfuls of Rose water, to
keep them from oyling, put the whites of four Eggs beaten till they are all in
a froth, then put them to your sugar and Almonds, and so beat them together,
then cast flower very thick upon Plates, and so drop them on as you please,
your Oven being heat with a little more than half a baven set them into it.
Try your Oven with a paper, when the Oven is shut up, if it do not color the
paper.

95. To make a good Marchpane.
Take a pound of long small Almonds, and blanch them in cold water, dry them as
clean as you can, then stamp them as small as you can, then strain them as small
as you can, and put no liquour to them, but as you must needs for oyling, and
that liquour you put must be Rose water, in manner as you wet your pestel
therein; for if you put too much liquour, they will be black, when you have
beaten them fine, take half a pound of the finest Sugar you can get, or more
finely beaten, then put it to your Almonds, and beat it altogether, when they
be well beaten, take your wafers and cut them in compass round the bigness you
will have your March-pane; and then as soon as you can, after you have tempered
your stuff let it be put in your paste, and strike it abroad with a flat stick
as even as you can, and pinch the very stuff as it were an egg set over, and
put a paper under it, and set it upon a fair board and lay a fair Lattine basin
over it, the bottom upwards, and then lay burning Coals upon the bottom of the
basin to see how it baketh; if it happen to burn in any place, fould paper as
broad as the place, and lay it thereon: and thus with attending, you shall bake
it within a little more than a quarter of an hour, and when it is taken, put
on your gold and bisket-sticks in Comfaits, and you shall have a good
March-pane, or ever you bake it you must cast in fine sugar and rose water,
that will make it look mealy.

To make all kind of Conceits of March-Panes, and Pies, Birds, Biskets,
Collaps, and Eggs, and some to Print with moulds.
Take half a pound of March-pane paste being made as before is written; for
your March-pane make some little pies, and fill them with little pieces of
marmate: Cast Biskets and Carrowayes on them, and so gild them, and serve them,
and you may make some of them like Collaps of bacon, so that you color your
paste with a little red roset, and so lay a piece of red and white paste one
upon another, then cut it into slices, and the red being mingled with the
white, will show like interlarded bacon, fat and lean, and some you may print
with moulds.

Puddings.
97, A Quaking-Puding.
Take a pint and a half of thick cream, boil it with a little mace, nutmeg
quartered and ginger; then put to it the yolks of eight eggs, and four whites
beaten well; and a few Almonds stamped and strained with some of the cream,
and a little Rosewater; Put in two spoonfuls of fine flower, and a little
sugar, and a little salt: then take out the whole spice, and put the stuff
into a thick napkin, which must be first wet, and well rubbed with flower,
boil it in the beef pot, or in the mutton broth.

98. A Pudding.
Take a two penny loaf white bread grated small, a pound of Beef Suet shred very
small, half a pound of Almons blanched and beaten, then strain it out with a
quart of cream, season it with a little nutmeg, ginger and sugar; put in the
yolks of six eggs, with two whites, then dip a napkin in melted butter, and
lay it abroad; then take some twenty raisins of the Sun stoned and cut in
halfes, so lay them on your napkin, then lay on your pudding, and tie it up,
and boil it with your Beef.

98. A Plain Pudding.
Take a quart of new milk, boil it with a little whole mace, when it is almost
cold, slice in it a two penny white loaf, the crust being cut off, when the
bread is well soaked, bread it well in it, season it with nutmeg, sugar;
rose water, beef suet shred small, the yolks of six or seven eggs, not above
two whites, a few whole raisins, currants, and dates.

100. Puddings of Neats Tongues.
Take 3 fresh Neats tongues tenderly boilled, and cut them in thick pieces, and
beat them well in a mortar, then take cream, marrow, suet, grated bread,
currants, cloves, mace, nutmegs beaten, dates minced, eggs beaten, rose water,
sugar, salt; mingle these well together, fill your guts, and boil them.

101. Black Puddings.
Take half a peck of great oat-meal, and put to it five quarts of new milk
scalding hot, and so let it stand two nights and a day soaking there; take
thyme, margerome, winter-savory: pennyroyal, parsley, of each two good
handfuls, half a handful of leeks; so season it with a little pepper, salt,
fennel-seeds; to this quantity, you may take the blood of two sheep.

102. To make a Pudding.
Take cream, eggs, and grated bread, and marrow; mingle them all together very
stiff, tie it flat up; when it is boiled, stick it with Almonds, cut them in
long slender pieces.

103. To make a Pudding.
Take twelve pippins, boil them, and take the pap of them; and twelve eggs,
but six whites, and a manchet grated, a nutmeg, and some salt, and sugar;
stir it well, put in some melted butter, and bake it.

104. To make a Rice Pudding.
Take your Rice a pound being tenderly boiled in water, and then in milk, with
some beef suet, being shred small, a good quantity of currants, of white bread,
and three or six eggs, with some cinnamon, and rosewater, nutmeg, salt, and
sugar, if your rice he dry, put to them a little good milk.

EXPERPIMENTS IN SUGAR-WORKS.
Cakes.
105. Cheese-Cakes.
Boil a pottle of milk and a quart of cream together, and when it is cold,
set it to come with Runnet, when it is come, whey it in a butter cloth very
well, then break it small with some good cream, put to it eighteen yolks of
eggs, and two whites, put a good handful of grated bread to it, season it with
nutmeg, mace, and sugar, and rose water, with a little salt; when the paste is
baked fit for it; then put in your stuff, and strew upon it some currants half
boiled, and so bake them, but not too dry, the crust must be somewhat deep.

106. Another way to make Cheese cakes
Take a quantity of the best curds you can make of stroakings and cream, after
you have wheyed them very well, beat them in a mortar, take almost the like
quantity of Almonds blanched, and well beaten withrose water, for fear of
oyling: mingle these together with a quantity of currants, four whites of eggs,
eight yolks well beaten; mingle all these together, with cream, sugar, and a
little nutmeg; lay the meat thick in the Coffins, strew on the top of every of
them, a little Ambergreese bruised with sugar enough: If you half-bake the
Coffins first, it is best. For as soon as the meat begins to look never so
little brown, they are enough.

107. To make dainty Pancakes.
Take an equal quantity of flower and grated bread, and half a dozen of eggs,
tataking out the whites of two only, and beat them very well, and season it as
shall be fit; then mingle all together with a little fair water, and let the
water be something thin, then take the quantity of a spoonful of suet melted,
and moisten the drying pan all over, then put in so much of the stuff as will
cover the bottom of the pan; that done, pour upon it the liquor seething hot,
and hold it a little over the fire, and it will rise quickly, then turn it, and
it will be instantly baked; when one is baked, pour out the liquor; and do as
before, when you bake another, strew them with fine sugar, rose water, and then
serve them up.

109. To make Pancakes that shall be to Crispe, that you may rear them up an
end.
Take a pint of fine flower, the yolks of of six eggs, and the whites of two,
make all this batter with a little warm water, and a little sack, season it with
a little cloves, mace and nutmeg, when you have made it into perfect batter,
then make them in the least frying pan can you get, and bake them not too much
then boil them in lard, as you do your frittars, and when you serve them, they
will be as crispe as wafers, and will stand an end, and will be as yellow as
gold.

110. To make Court-Frittars.
Take a pint of sack, and make a posset with sweet milk from the Cow, take the
curd of that posset, and put it into a basin, with the yolks and whites of six
eggs, seasoned with a little nutmeg, and so beat with a birch rod, until you
have beaten the posset curd and eggs well together, then put fine flovver to
it, and make it a batter for your fritters, and then take clarified beef suet,
and boil them as you do common fritters, and they will eat most delicately,
scrape suon them, and so serve them.

110. Another way.
Take a pint of very fine flower, and two or three eggs, boil them in sweet
butter, as you do a hasty pudding, and when you have boiled your flovver,
butter and eggs in the form of a hasty pudding, then put it into a
stone-morter and put to it the yolks of six eggs, season it with a little
nutmeg and sugar, and when you have beaten these well in a mortar, put it
into a batter-spout that has an Iron on the end like a mullet, or a cross, so
spout it out into your hot lard, and you may throvv it in knots in spouting,
and when they be boiled in lard, serve them with sugar scraped on them, they
will eat most delicately, and they will marvail how you make them, because
they come in knots, a plain batter-spout will make them.

111. To make Sugar-Cakes
To half a pound of sugar, six eggs, six yolks, and one white, a pound of
butter vvashed, and laid all night in rosevvater, and so work in the flovver a
little and a little, till they will roll, and butter the pots, and prick them,
and bake them.

112. Cornish Bunnes.
Take half a peck of flower, a pound of Currants, and four peny-worth of
Saffron, well dried and made small, a quart of scalded cream, and take the
yolks of ten eggs, and the whites of two, and beat them well together with the
cream, with seven or eight spoonfuls of sack, and two or three spoonfuls of
Rose Water, and a pretty deal of new Ale yest, and work all this together with
butter, better then a quarter of a pound, and so much sugar; and when it is
well molded together, make it up in little Bunnes; and if it be too wet, you
must add more to it.

113. Cake Bread.
For half a peck of flower, two pound of Raisins stoned, two pound of Currants,
four grated nutmegs, half a score spoonful of good Ale yest; half a pound of
sugar, as much fresh butter as will wet it; you must not make this Cake thick,
mingle all your things together, keep out your Raisins, and when you have
rolled out your Cake thin, you may make two or three Cakes of this quantity,
then take your Raisins and stick them thick thus do some thrice, and so bake it.

114. Cakes with Lemmon pill.
Grate your finest Lemmon pill, and after you have boiled your double refined
sugar to a Candy, put in a little of your said Lemmon pill, drop them forth in
little Cakes. Add to it Ambergris, musk, etc.

115. Cake Bread.
Take one Gallon of flower, two pound of Currants, and one pound of butter or
better, a quarter of a pound of sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, half
an ounce of nutmeg, and half an ounce of Cinnamon, two eggs, then warm cream,
break the butter into the flower, temper all these with the cream, and put a
quantity of yest amongst it, above a pint to three gallons, wet it very lide,
cover your Cake, with a sheet doubled, when it comes hot out of the Oven; let
it stand one hour and a half in the Oven.

116. To make Biscuit.
Take the yolks of two dozen of eggs, two handful of Anniseeds, a little yest,
one pound of butter, one quart of cream, four pound of fine wheat flower,
work all these together in a paste, and make it up in long rouls being
something flat, then lay them upon papers, and set them into the Oven and bake
them, (but not thoroughly) then let them stand a day or two, then cut them into
slices, and rub them over with small beaten sugar, then lay them upon papers,
and set them into the Oven, until they be hard.

117. To make Diar bread.
Take one pound of good loaf-sugar, and one pound of very fine flower, and one
spoonful of Carraway-seeds, and mingle them together, then take six new laid
eggs, and take out of them one yolk or two according as they are in bigness,
then beat the eggs first by themselves, then put them to the flower and sugar,
and with a pestle beat it wonderfully for two hours, and when you are ready to
set it into the Oven, strew a little fine beaten sugar upon it, to make it
Glase, then butter the Plaits, and put it into your Oven being hot, as it is
for Manchet.

118, To make Jumballs.
Take a pound of fine flower, a pound and a half of sugar beaten and searsed,
six eggs, taking away two eggs, two or three spoonfuls of rose water, two
spoonfuls of cream. Put your eggs, cream, and rose water together, and put
them over the fire, and stir it till it be something hot, then mingle the
flower and sugar, and that together, and make paste of it somewhat stiff, then
put in a pretty quantity of anniseeds being rubbed and fanned clean, and so
make them up in Jumballs.

119. Another way of Jumballs.
To half a pound of sugar, eight eggs, four yolks, as much butter as an egg,
being washed in Rose Water, and fine flower as much as your own discretion
shall see fit to make it a paste, and so work it, and knead it well together
with an ounce of Anniseeds, and Coriander, so roll and make them up in knots,
and butter the plats, and bake them, heat the Oven hot as for Manchet.

120. To make Naples biscuit.
Take Almonds, and Pineapple seeds, and kernels of Musk-millions, fine searced
sugar, as much as all the seeds do weigh, then take a little fine basket
flower, or else rice-flower, and as much of the white of an egg as will
moysten it, and a little quantity of musk, a spoonful of sweet cream; beat all
this well together in a mortar, then lay it upon a pye-plate upon wafers, like
lozinges, so bake it.

121. The first way for Prince Biscuit.
Take a pound of sugar and a pound o flower, and put thereto 8 yolks and 4
white of eggs, and as much sack as will make it ligh and easy to stir, and stir
it with good strengt at least an hour, and after that put into it such a
quantity of Anniseeds and Coleander seeds as shall be best pleasing unto you;
stir it then some little time after the seeds be in for the indifferent well
mixing of them, and so put it into your coffins and bake them with a temperate
fire, so as they may soak thoroughly within and without, and fill not the
coffins too full.

An other way.
Take one pound of sugar fine beaten, a pound a dram of fine flower, then take
twenty yolks of Eggs well beaten, one Ounce, of Anniseeds well bruised, four
spoonfuls of Rose water; you must put in your flower by little and little, and
as you put it in, you must stir it very well or else it will clad, then take
two sheets of clean white paper, and butter them with sweet butte, and pin them
up at the four corners, and so make Coffins of them, put in the butter, and put
under each Coffin a paper: you must try the Oven with a piece of white paper,
if it color the paper much it is hot, and when the stuff begins to come
from the paper, you may take them out and cut them in slices, and lay the cut
side down-ward and when they are dry on that side, you must turn them on the
other, and let them lie in the Oven until the Oven be cold.

123. To make white Biscuit bread.
Take a quarter of a pound of fine-flower, and three quarters of fine sugar,
that is; three times as much sugar as flower, search the sugar fine, and take
six yolks of Eggs, and three whites, and beat them well together, then put the
sugar and the flower in a basin, and make a great hole in the middle, and put
in the Eggs in the hole, and with a ladle or a spoon, beat a little and a
little the flower and the Eggs together, and so continue beating the space of
an hour at the least, then take a half pennyworth of Anniseeds, a pound of
Coleander-seed, and beat them well together, and when you have so done put them
in; then heat your Oven as hot as though you would bake manchet, and let it
bake half an hour or more, and then take it out, and hold it in your hand; if
it be not light, then it is not enough, then slice it with a knife and put it
in the Oven on a gridiron, and a sheet of paper under it to keep it clean.

124. To make Prince Biscuit.
Take a pound of flower, and a pound of fine searsed sugar, and eight Eggs and
three whites and six spoonfuls of sweet Cream put into it, and so beat all
these same in a wooden bowl with a wooden pestle or ladle; and when it is
beaten an hour, put into it an ounce of Anniseeds, being rubbed dried and
dusted, and when you are ready to fill your coffins put in your seeds, and when
you have filled your coffins, bake it in an oven one half hour, if you will
make Craknels to drink wine withal, take your Potters moulds which you do
commonly print your Quindinak withal, and indove them over with a little melted
butter, and so pour your butter into the moulds as thin as you can, and so
bake them in an oven: and when you see that they be baked, then take them out
of the moulds and lay them upon sheets of white paper, and so let them dry in
an oven one half hour, until you see they be as dry as Craknels, and if you
please you may use them, and so you may box them, and keep them all the year.

125. To make French Biscuit.
Take half a peck of fine flower, two or three spoonfuls of Ale-yeast, the yolk
of two or three eggs, a piece of sweet butter, and so make it up for perfect
paste, as thick as for manchet, and all things as stiff, with warm-water as
you do with manchet, then make it up in a long loaf, and bake it in an Oven,
and when it is a day old, pare and slice it in Cakes, then rub it with powder
sugar, and so dry it in the Oven again upon a lattine of wire, or basket-makers
rods, and when it is very dry and hard, then rub it over with white powder
sugar again; then you may box it and keep it all the year.

126. To make Biskatellc.
Take a quarter of a pound of double refined sugar, being beaten and finely
searsed with two grains of Musk one grain of Civet, one grain of Ambergris;
beat all these to a perfect paste, with a little Gum-dragon steeped in rose
water and the white of an eg: all these being beat to a perfect paste, make it
up in little loaves of the fashion of a manchet, so bake them in an oven every
of them in a wafer, and so bake them in an oven, and when you see them rise
your white and hight, then take them out of the oven, and they will be as white
as snow, and as light a puff, and when they be through dry, you may box them
and keep them all the year.

127. To make Wafers.
Take Rose Water or other water, the whites of two eggs and beat them and your
water, then put in flower, and make them thick as you would do butter for
fritters, then season them with salt, and put in so much sugar as will make
them sweet, and so cast them upon your irons being hot, and roll them up upon
a little pin of wood; if they cleave to your irons, put in more sugar to your
butter, for that will make them turn.

128. To make a Carroway Cake.
Take half a peck of fine flower, and kneed it with some warm water, a little
salt and some ale-yest that is not stale as you do your manchet, take the
whites of three eggs, and kneed them in your dowe, and lay it to the fire to
rise, then add a quantity of a pounds of butter, and then kneed it as fast as
you can, with a great care it be not too stiff, put no flower in the kneeding
of your butter and eggs, then take a piece of your dough for a lid, for your
cake, then spread the rest and put in a pound of Carroway comfits, then make it
to a thin cake, fashion it as you please, and put on your lid, that is, a piece
of paste rolled thin, put over your cake, put it in the oven for an hour and a
half: this eats well cold, and very pleasant.

129. To make fine Cakes in the form of rings.
Take a quart of fine flower, an ounce of Colliander-seed, one ounce of
Anniseeds, a good piece of liquorish, half a pound of sugar, two new laid eggs,
new milk to wet it withal, being warmed, and so make boughts in the form of
rings.

130. To make sugar Cakes.
Take a pound of flower, half a pound of butter, and half a pound of sugar, and
as many eggs as will wet it, take so many whites according to the proportion of
the yolks.

All kind of Sugar-works.
131. To make paste-Royall white, formed into Cotes, Bowls, and drinking-cups,
Gloves, Slippers, or any other pretty Conceits, printed with Moulds.
Take half a pound of double refined sugar, beat it fine; and searce it
through a fine lawne Ceatse, then put it into a fine Alabaster Mortar, with a
little Gum-dragon steeped in Rose Water, and a grain of musk, and beat them in
a mortar, until it come to perfect paste, then roll it thin with a rolling
pin, and print it with your moulds, some like Gloves, Slippers, and other
pretty Conceits, as your Moulds are, and some you may roll very thin, and let
them dry in an ashen dish, or otherwise called a court cup, and let it stand
in the dish until it be dry, and it will be like a cup, you must dry them on a
board far from the fire, but you must not put them into an Oven, they will be
dry in three or four hours, and be as white as snow, then you may guild them
and box them, and keep them all the year.

132. To cast all kind of standing conceits in Sugar-works.
Take a pound of double refined sugar, and boil it to a Candie heigh, with as
much Rose-vvater as will melt it, then your double moulds, being watered two
hours, first power the sugar into those moulds, and when it is cold, you may
take them out, and they will be birds, or beasts, according to your moulds,
this standing conceit, you may garnish your March pane with.

133. To cast all kind of fruits hollow into turned works, to put them into
their natural colors, as Oranges e mmons, Cowcumbers, Radishes, Apples, or
Pears.
Take your moulds, being made of Allabastar, every mould being in two pieces,
your moulds being watered, and the sugar being boiled to a Candy heigh, fill
the one half of the mould with the hot sugar, and turn the mould round about in
your hand, and the fruits will be hollow.

134. To make paste of flowers and Color of Marble, that which way soever you
break it, it shall be like Marble, and betwixt the light, it shall look very
clear, and shall in eating taste of he natural flowers.
Take all sorts of pleasant flowers, as violets, Cowslips, Roses,
Gilly-slowors, Mary-golds, or any other pleasant flowers, and beat them in a
mortar every flower by it self, with sugar, until the sugar be turned to the
Color of the slowers, then put a little gum-dragon to the beating thereof and
so beat it out into a parfect paste, and when you have made six pieces of paste
of several colors with them, every flower, will taste of his nature, then roll
your paste thin, and lay every piece of paste one upon another in mingling
sort; then roll your paste into a small roll as big as your finger, then
cut it into little pieces overthwart, as big as small nuts, then roll them
thin, that you may see through them; dry them before the fire, and when they be
dry, you may box them, and keep them all the year.

135. To make paste of Eglantine the Color Amber-Corrall.
Take the Reddish berries that grow upon the briars, before they be too ripe,
and cleave them in the midst, and take the seeds out of them, and scrape them
very clean, and boil them very tender in Clarret wine, and Rose Water, then
strain them, and dry them upon a Chaffing-dish with coals, until they be
reasonable dry, and when it is cold, work it upon the paste with fine sifted
sugar, then roll it thin, then roll upon swans quills, and small reeds, then
dry them before the fire, and when they be somewhat dry, you may box them, and
keep them all the year, and they will look of the color of Currol.

136. To make paste of Elicampane.
Take your Elicampane his smallest young roots, and boil them reasonable
tender, then peel and pith them, then beat them in a mortar, take twice as much
sugar as that pulp does weigh, and boil it to a Candy height, with as much
Rose Water as will melt it, then put your pulp of Elicampane into your sugar,
with the pap of a pippin, and so let it boil together, until you see it
almost for Marmalade, then drop it into drops on a pye-plate, or a sheet of
Glass, and so dry it in the stove, then you may keep it all the year; it is an
excellent paste against the cough of the lungs.

136. To make Canded Cakes of plums.
Put your Plums into a pot, and paste it up close, then set it into a pot of
water, and let it boil a good while, then strain forth the juice from the
plums, and weigh it with sugar ready beaten, let them be of equal weight, then
put a little water into the sugar, and boil it until it comes to be sugar
again; then put in the juice of your plums, and stir it till all your sugar
is melted, then pour it into your glasses, and when it is cold, set them where
they may stand very warm, and when they begin to Candy on the top, make them
loose about the sides of the glass with a knife, and turn them forth upon
glass plates, and so let them dry.

137. To make Paste of Join the true way, as they do beyond the Seas.
Take two pound of yellow Pear-Quinces, and two pound of Peaches, par-boyle
them reasonable tender, and when they be cold, pare them, and scrape all the
pulp from the Coare, then bray it in a stone-morter, with a wooden pestle, then
draw it throughout a piece of thin Cushion Canvise, then take as much sugar as
it weighs, and boil it to a Candy height, with as much Rose water as will
melt your sugar, put off your Quinces and Peaches into your sugar, and so let
them boil a little, then fashion it on a pye-plate, or on a sheet of glass,
and so put them into an Oven after you have baked bread, or into a stove, and
there let them remain a day and a night, the next day turn it, and warm your
Oven a little, and in like sort warm your Oven or Stove until they be through
dry, then you may box them, and keep them all the year.

138. To make paste of Pippins, some like leaves, some like plums, with stalks,
and stones, some white plums, and some red, and green.
Take two pound of Pippins, being pared and cut in pieces, then boil them
tender, and strain them, then take as much sugar as the pulp does weigh, and
boil it to a Candy height, with as much Rose Water, as will melt your sugar,
and when your sugar is boiled to your full Candy height, then put in your pulp
of Pippins, and, and let it boil awhile together, then fashion them on a
pye-plate, some like leaves, and some like half-fruits, and dry them in an
Oven, after you have drawn bread, the next day, turn them all close, your
half-plums together, and put plum stones between them, and stalks in the middle
of them, then put them into your Oven or Stow, until they be full dry; then
you may box them, and keep them all the year, and they will look like natural
green plumes, if you will have your plums look green, you must make your paste
when your Pippins be green, if you will have your Pippins look red, you must
put a little Conserve of Barberries amongst your Pippin-stuff, for that will
color them red, and make them have a pretty sharp taste, and you may make it
all the year, if you keep the stuff in Gally-pots, as thin as starch stuff,
and so that you season it with sugar; you may keep it for tart stuff, whether
you make it of Pippins, Pears, or Plums.

139. To make Paste of Apricocks, or white Pears, or Plums.
Take your Apricocks, or Pear-plumes, pare them, and stone them, then boil them
tender betwixt dishes on a Chaffing-dish of Coals, and when it is cold, lay it
on a white paper, and take as much sugar as it weighes, and boil it to a
Candy height, with as much Rose Water as will melt the sugar, then put your
pulpe of your Apricockes or Peare-plums into your hot Sugar, and let it boil
very leisurably with stirring of it until you see it somewhat stiff, then
sashion it upon a Plate like half Apricocks, the next day close the halfes
together, and put an Apricock stone between them, and when they be dry they
will look as clear as Amber, and eat far better than the Apricock it self;
when the skin is on, and when they be full dry, you may box them and keep them
all the year.

140. To make paste of Goose-berries, printed Ras-berries, or English Currants.
Take any of these tender fruits, boil them tender on a chafing dish with
coals, then strain them with a papp of a roasted Pippen, then take as much
sugar as its weight, and boil it to a Candy height, with as much Rose water as
will melt it, then put in the pulp of your fruits into the hot sugar, and so
let it boil leasurably until you see it somewhat stiff, Almost as stiff as
for Marmalade, then fashion it upon a sheet of glass, and so put it into an
Oven upon a couple of billets, that the glass may not touch the bottom of the
Oven; for if it do, your paste will be tough; therefore raise your glass from
the bottom of the Oven upon billets or round sticks, and so let it dry
leisurably, and when it is through dry, you may box it and keep it all the year.

141. To make Paste of Oranges, and Lemmons.
Take your Oranges and Lemmons, and boil them tender, and shift them in the
boiling, to take away the bitterness of them, you having two vessels of fair
water on the fire, shifting them out of one water into another, then they will
be tender, and their bitterness taken away from them, then cut them in the
midst, and take out their Kernels, then stamp them in an Alabaster mortar,
with the pappe of three or four roasted Pippins, to every pound of Oranges or
Lemmons, take six Ounces of your pap of Pippens, then strain it through a fine
strainer, then take as much sugar as the pulp does weigh, being boiled to a
Candee height, with so much Rose Water as will melt your sugar, then put your
pulp of your Oranges or Lemmons into your hot sugar, and so let it boil
leasurably with stirring it; and when you see it stiff as Marmalade, then
fashion it upon a sheet of glass, or on a Pie plate, and so stewe it in an Oven
as you do all other Paste, and when it is dry, you may box it and keep it all
the year.

142. To make Paste-Royal of Spices.
Take sugar the quantity of four Ounces being beaten very fine and put into an
Ounce of Cynnamond and Ginger, and a grain of Musk, and beat it into Paste,
with a little Gum-dragon steeped in Rose Water, and when you have beaten it
into a Paste in a stone mortar, then roll them and print them with your moulds,
then dry it before the fire, and when it is through dry, you may box it, and
keep it all the year.

143. To make Muskadine Comfits.
Take two Ounces of double refined sugar being beaten and finely searsed, with
a grain of Musk, a grain of Civet, and a grain of Amber-grease, and beat all
these together to a perfect Paste, then roll them thin that you may see your
knife through them, then cut them in small pieces square like Lozanges, then dry
them before the fire two hours, then box them and keep them all the year.

THE BEST WAY OF PRESERVING, etc. Of Preserves.
144. To preserve Apricocks the best way.
TAke your Apricocks dry gathered from the tree before they be ripe, pare them
thin, and take the stones out of them, take a pint of fair water, and a handful
of the parings, let it boil a while, then take to every pound of Apricocks half
a pound of sugar, then take it off the fire, and take out the parings, then let
it stand till it setts, take half a pint or less of the clearest, and put the
sugar to it in a silver pot over the fire to boil, crack the stones, take the
kernels and peel them, when your syrrop has boiled almost to the height of a
syrrop, take it off the fire, put in your Apricocks and the Kernels, so let it
boil softly at the first, and after faster, and scum it often; and when you
must stir it, then take the pan between your hands and shake it, for a spoon
will break them; and when you find they are boiled take them off: then take
them out of the syrrop as dry as you can, so put the Kernel within them, and
lay them in your glasses, those that are most broken, lay them in pots; then
take your syrrop and boil it to a jelly very fast, so put it to them.

145. How to Candy Eringoes, Probatum.
Take your Eringoe Roots that will bend every way, let the biggest of them be
hardly so big as your little finger; wash them very clean and boil them in pure
water not very tender, but as you may feel the pith, then drean the water from
them, and slice one side of every root long ways clean through as smooth as
you can. Then spread it a little and take out the pith. Afterward, scrape the
thine off tenderly of the other side when it is clean from the pyth and rhyne,
as you have done them, put them in fair water, and when they are all done,
wring them hard out of the water, and either bread them or roll them and tie
them with thread at the ends, then weigh to every pound of Eringoes, one pound
and a half or more of pure fine sugar, beat half or more of your sugar, wet the
weight of your roots: As for a Candy of Rose water, boil this on the fire; and
when it is almost sugar again, put a little more Rose water: thus do three or
four times when your sugar is very well boiled, put in the roots, and with a
spoon put the liquor still on the top of them, often turning them, within a
little while after the roots are in, boil them apace, put in at several times
the remainder of your sugar in good big pieces, let that melt in liquor, still
keep your roots turned, when they are enough, they will look clear, then take
them out of the liquor, this liquor you may put to fresh roots, lay those
several upon a wicker, and cover them with a paper, as soon as ever they are
stiff, put them close in a box.

146. How to Candie Oranges, Probat.
Choose the fairest Oranges well colored, cut them in half, and take out the
meat, then put them in fair water three or four days, shifting their waters,
pare them as thin as you can, still putting them in water, as you do them. Then
weigh as much fair water as Oranges, so likewise weigh as much sugar that is
pure fine, make your syrrupe with the water and sugar, when it is boiled and
scummed, put in your Oranges, which must be half boiled before. Cover Oranges
close, let them boil a good while, then take some more sugar, something more
than a-handful, and strew all a top of them, covering them close again, and
when they have boiled, that they look clear, take them out of the syrrop, put
them in a fair dish one by another, then with a spoon fill the halfs with some
of the syrrop, then cover them close till the next day, then take the weight of
them in sugar again, wet that sugar with some of the former syrrop: And set it
over the fire, when it boiles and is thoroughly melted and scummed, put in your
Oranges in this fresh liquour: Let them but simper, when you see it comes up at
top all like a Candy, pour them out in a dish as fast as you can turn all your
Oranges the bottoms upward, the yellow side up, then sift sugar thick upon
them, cover them close to keep in the steem. This do as fast as you can after
half an hour if the Candy be pretty thick, then take them forth, put them one
by one upon a Plate, the yellow side up ward, cover them with a paper, set them
before the fire but not too near till they be dry, then keep them close in a
box.

147. To make Quindiniacks of Ruby color to print with moulds.
Take two pounds of Pippins pared and cut in small pieces, put them into a
pipkin, with as much fair water as will cover them; and when they be boiled
tender, strain all the liquid substance from them; into every pint of that
liquor, put half a pound of sugar; so let it boil leasurably until it come to
the color of Claret being close covered; then uncover it and let it boil as
fast as it can till you see it be as thick as a jelly, you shall know when it
comes to his thickness, by seeing a drop on the back of a spoon like stiff
jelly, and then take it off the fire, and cool it a little, then pour it into
your moulds: If the moulds be made of Wood, you must boil their moulds first,
and if they be made of Tin, you need but wet them, and when your jelly is cold,
take them upon a wet trencher, and so convey them in your boxes, so keep it all
the year.

148 To make Quindiniackes of an Apricocke Color with moulds that you may make
them all the year.
Take Pippins being pared, and cut all to pieces, and boil them tender in fair
water, then wring out all the liquid substance from them, to every pint of that
liquor, put ten Ounces of fine Sugar, and so let it boil as fast as you can,
and when you see it stand upon the back of a spoon like your foresaid jelly
then print it with your moulds, putting in a little more Sugar into every
white, then into your red, and boiling a space uncovered, does procure it to be
white, for the close covering and the lasie boiling does make it red, that is
all the difference in color.

149 To preserve Grapes.
Take the Grapes when they be almost through ripe, and cut the stalks off, and
stone them in the side; and as fast as you can stone them, Strew Sugar on them;
you must take to every pound of Grapes, three quarters of a pound of Sugar:
then take some of the sour Grapes, and wring the juice of them, and put to
every pound of Grapes two spoonefuls of Juice, then set them on the fire, and
still lift up the Pan, and shake it round for fear of burning too; then set
them on again, and when the Sugar is melted, boil them as fast as you can
possibly, and when they look very clear, and the Syrrup somewhat thick, they
are enough.

150 To preserve Pippins, Apricockes, Pears, Plums or Peaches green.
Take your Pippins green, and quoddle them in fair water; but let the water
boil first before you put them in, and you must shift them in two hot waters
before they will be tender; then pull off the skin from them, and so case them
in so much clarified Sugar as will cover them, and so boil them as fast as you
can, keeping them from breaking: then take them up and boil the Syrrup, until
it be as thick as for quiddonie, then pot them, and pour the Syrrop into them
before they be cold, etc.

Take your Apricocks and Pear-plummes, and boil them tender, then take as much
Sugar as they do weigh, and take as much water as will make the Syrrop, take
your green Peaches before they be stoned, and thrust a pin through them; and
then make a strong water of Ashes, and cast them into the hot standing Lie to
take off the Furre from them, then wash them in three or four waters warm: So
then put them into so much Clarified Sugar as will Candie them: So boil them,
and put them up.

151. The best way to preserve Cherries.
Take the best Cherries you can get, and cut the stalks something short, then
for every pound of these Cherries, take two pound of other Cherries, and put
them of their stalks and stones, put to them ten spoonfuls of fair water, and
then set them on the fire to boil very fast, till you fee that the color of
the syrrup be like pale Claret wine, then take it off the fire, and draine them
from the Cherries into a pan to preserve them in, take to every pound of
Cherries, a quarter of sugar, of which take half and dissolve it with the
Cherry-water, drained from the Cherries, and keep them boiling very fast, till
they will gelly in a spoon, and as you fee the syrrup thin, take off the sugar,
that you kept finely beaten, and put it to the Cherries in the boiling; the
faster they boil the better they will be preserved, and let them stand in a
pan till they be almost cold.

152. To preserve Oranges the French way.
Take twelve of the fairest Oranges, and best colored, and if you can get them
with smooth skins they are the better, and lay them in Conduict water six days
and nights, shifting them into fresh water morning and evening, then boil them
very tender, and with a knife pare them very thin, rub them with salt; when you
have so done, Core them with a Coring-Iron, taking out the meat and seeds; then
rub them with a dry cloth till they be clean, and to every pound of Oranges, a
pound and a half of sugar, and to a pound of sugar, a pint of water, then
mingle your sugar and water well together in a large skillet or pan, beat the
whites of three eggs, and put that into it, then set it on the fire, and let
it boil till it rises, and strain it through a Mapkin; then set it on the fire
again, and let it boil till the Syrup be thick, then put in your Oranges and
make them sees as fast as you can, now and then putting in a piece of fine
loaf sugar the bigness of a Walnut, when they have boiled near an hour, put
into them a pint of Apple-water; then boil them apace, and half a pint of
white wind, this should be put in before the Apple water, when your Oranges are
very clear, and your Syrrrup so thick, that it will jelly (which you may know
by setting them to cool in a spoon) when they are ready to be taken off from
the fire; then put in the juice of eight Lemmons warm into them, then put them
into an earthen pan, and so let them stand till they be cold, then put every
Orange in a several glass or pot; if you do but six Oranges at a time, it is
the better.

153. To preserve green Plums.
The greatest wheaten plum is the best, which will be ripe in the midst of
July, gather them about that time, or later, as they grow in bigness but you
must net suffer them to turn yellow, for then they never be of good color;
being gathered, lay them in water for the space of twelve hours, and when you
gather them, wipe them with a clean linen cloth, and cut off a little of the
stalks of every one, then set two skillets of water on the fire and when one
is scalding hot, put in your plums, and take them from the fire, and cover
them, and let them rest for the space of a quarter of an hour, then take them
up, and when your other skillet of water does boil, put them into it, let them
but stay in it a very little while, and so let the other skillet of water
wherein they were first boiled be set to the fire again, and make it to boil,
and put in your plums as before; and then you shall see them rivet over, and
yet your plums very whole, then while they be hot, you must with your knife
scrape away the rivetting, then take to every pound of plums, a pound and two
ounces of sugar finely beaten, th^n set a pan with a little fair water on the
fire, and when it boyles put in your plums, and let them sees half a quarter
of an hour till you see the color wax green, then set them off the fire a
quarter of an hour, and take a handful of sugar, that is weighed, and strovv it
on the bottom of the pan, wherein you will preserve, and so put in your plums
one by one, drawing the liquor from them, and cast the rest of your sugar on
them, set the pan on a moderate fire, letting them boil continually, but very
softly, and in three quarters of an hour they will be ready, as you may
perceive by the greenness of your plumbs, and thickness of your Syrup; which
if they be boiled enough, will jelly when it is cold: then take up your plums,
and put them into a gally pot, but boil your Syrup a little longer; then
strain it into some vessel, and being blood warm, pour it upon your plums, but
stop not the pot before they be cold; note also you must preserve them in such
a pan, as they may lie one by another, and turn of themselves, and when they
have been five or six days in the Syrup, that the Syrrup grow thin, you may
boil it again with little sugar, but put it not to your plums, till they be
cold; they must have three scaldings, and one boiling.

154. To preserve Damsins, or Red Plums, or Black.
Take your Plums newly gathered, and take a little more sugar than they do
weigh, then put to it as much water as will cover them, then boil your
Syrrup a little while, and so let it cool; then put in your Damsins or Plums,
then boil them leisurely in a pot of seething water, till they be tender, then
being almost cold, put them up.

155. To make Marmalet of Oranges, or Orange Cakes.
Take the yellowest and fairest Oranges, and water them three days, shifting
the water twice a day, pare them as thin as possibly you can, boil them into a
water changed five or six times, until the bitterness of the Orange be boiled
out, those that you preserve must be cut in half, but those for Marmalet must
be boiled whole, let them be very tender, and slice them very thin on a
Trencher, taking out the seeds, and long strings, and with a knife make it as
fine as the pap of an Apple, then weigh your pap of Oranges, and to a pound of
it, take a pound and an half of sugar, then you must have Pippins boiled ready
in a skillet of fair water, and take the pap of them made fine on a trencher,
and the strings taken out, but take not half so much Pippins as Oranges; then
take the weight of it in sugar, and mix it both together in a silver or earthen
dish, and set it on the coals to dry the water out of it (as you do with
Quince Marmalet) when your sugar is Candy height, put in your stuff, and boil
it till you think it stiff enough, stirring it continually; if you please, you
may put a little musk to it.

156. Conserve of Pomegranates.
Take a Pomegranate and press it, to take out the juice, then put it on a
silver plate, and dry it on a small fire, or on some warm sinders, sees your
sugar until the plume or skin appear, and more then others; after it, is well
sodde, take it off the fire, and whiten it, then put your juice in it, and take
out your Conserve.

157. How to make Marmalet of Apples.
Take ten or twelve Apples, pare them and cut them, as far as the core, and put
them into clear water, then take the Apples, and the water wherein they do
steep, and half a pound of sugar, or less if you will; power them into a pan,
sees them; as they sees, crush them least they should burn, and when there is
almost no water, strain all through a straining five, take what you have
strained, and put it in the same again, with the grating of half a Lemmon or
Orange, before steeped abovea quarter of an hour in some warm water; and
strained through a linen cloth; for to know, and take out the bitterness of
it; as they seethe, stir always, least your Marmalet do burn, you may know
when it is sod, when it is as in a Gelly, and shows less moystness; and when
it is as it ought to be, take it off the fire, and spread it with a knife the
thickness of two half Crowns.

158. How to make the Marmalet of Orleance.
Take fifteen pounds of Quinces, three pounds of sugar, and two quarts of
water, boil altogether; after it is well sodde, drain it by little and little
through a Napkin, and take out of it what you can, then put your decoction in a
basin with four pounds of sugar; seethe it; for to know when it is enough, try
it on a plate, and if it come off, take it quickly from off the fire, and set
it up in boxes, or somewhat else.

159. To Preserve Raspesses.
Pick clean the fairest Raspesses, and take their bare weight in loaf-sugar,
which must be finely beaten, and strew a layer of sugar in the bottom of the
Skillet, or China dish, and then a layer of Raspes, and so three or four times
double, and crush some juice of other Raspesses, all over them, and set them on
a soft fire, till the sugar be melted, often shaking them; then let them have a
quick fire, and let them boil some five walmes every time they boil up,
shaking of them, and in so many boyles they will be enough.

160. To make Quindiniacke of Quinces.
Take your Quinces, pare them and cut them in quarters and boil them; to every
two pounds of Quinces take three quarts of Spring water to them, and so boil
them very tender, then wring all the liquid substance from them, and to every
pint of that liquor put half a pound of Sugar, and so let it boil leasureably
till it come to his color and thickness, then print it with your moulds, and
so you may box it and keep it all the year.

161. To make Quendiniackes of Gooseberries, Ras-berries, or English Currnas.
Take your Goos-berries, Ras-berries, or English Currants; put them into a stone
pot with a narrow mouth; so put them into a stone pot of seething water,
otherwise called Balneum E N. Let them boil until they be tender, then pour
away the liquid substance from them, and to every pine of liquor, put half a
pound of Sugar, and so let it boil until it come to his color, and thickness,
then print it with your moulds, then box it and you may keep it all the year.
This is the way to make Quindiniacke of all sorts of Plums whatsoever, but you
must draw the quintesence and spirit out of them, for they are of a stronger
body than the other fruits, and therefore they must have water, and that will
make them to run clearer through your strainer before you can put your sugar
unto it.

162 To Preserve Quinces.
Take Quinces and weigh them, core and pare them, then take for every pound of
Quinces a pound of Sugar; then take Quinces and grate them and strain them; for
every pound half a pint af the juice of the Quinces, and half a pint of fair
water; the water, and sugar, and syrrop must be first boiled and clean skimmed,
then put in, your Quinces and turn them still to keep the color of them: then
let them boil so till the Quinces be tender, they must seethe very softly, for
fear of breaking; and ever as the scumme arises, you must take it off with a
feather.

163. To Preserve Quinces red.
Take fair yellow Quinces, pare and core them, and put them into a preserving
pan, with as much clarified Sugar as will cover them; every pound of Sugar must
be clarified with Ale, a pint of fair water; and let them boil close covered
very leisurably, now and then turning them to keep them from spotting, and
taking off the scumm with the back of a spoon; and when you see them very
tender and red, take them up and cover them, and let your syrrop stand
acooling; and when your syrrop is cold, put them in, and they will lie in a
jelly, and so you may keep them all the year.

164. To Preserve Quinces white.
Take fair Pear-Quinces and core them, but not pare them, then par-boyl them
in fair water reasonable tender; then take them and let them stand a cooling,
when they be through cold pare them and throw them in your Sugar, being
clarified as you pare them: so let them boil till they be tender, then take
them up and let your syrrop stand till it be cold; then you may pot your
Quinces, and keep them all the year.

FINIS.
The Contents of the first part; being, Receipts for COOKERY.
1 THe London Pie. Fol. 1. 2 For a Pie ibid. 3 To bake a breast of veal in
Puft-paste. Fol. 2. 4 To make Puft-paste. ib. 5 To bake a Hare. ib. 6 To make a
Pallat-Pye. Fol. 3. 7 To make an Hartichoke Pie. ib. 8 To make a Lamb-stone
Pie. Fol. 4. 9 To bake Red Dear. ib. 10 To make a steak-pye with a French-pud
ding in the Pie, printed. Fol. 5. 11 To bake a Neats tongue. ib. 12 To bake
fallow Dear in the best manner Fol. 6. 13 To bake a wild Boar. ib. 14 To make
Capon Pyes Spanish fashion. Fol. 7 15 To make a Calfs-head Pie. ib. 16 A
delicate Chewet. ib. 17 To make Pease-cods. 8. 18 The manner how to put a
Gammon of Bacon in Paste. ib. 19 An excellent way for bakeing all sorts of
Venison and Foul. Fol. 11. 20 The Pasty Royal. Fol. 17. 21 To make a
Mince-pye. the Italian fashion with leaved or fine Paste, and to make Mince
pyes of fish, the bones, or grisles being taken out. ib. 22 The manner to make
a Tart of Marrow, of Beef, or Marrow-bones. Fol. 25. 33 To make a Lumber Pie.
ibid. 24 A Potato Pie. Fol. 26. 25 Pyes of sheeps tongues. Fol. 27. 26 How to
make a Paris Pie. ibid. 27 How to make a Clary Pie. Fol. 28. 28 How to make an
Olive Pie, Fol. 29.
Boiled and Roste meats.
29 To boil a Leg of Mutton after the French fashion. Fol. 30. 30 To boil a
Loyn of Mutton, or Veal. ibid. 31 To make Chickens fat in 3. or 4. days. Fol.
31. 32 To boil a Capon in white broth. ibid. 33 To boil a Capon larded with
Lemmons, in white broth. Fol. 32 34 To boil a Capo^n in Orange broth. ibid, 35
To boil Pigeons with Rice. Fol. 33. 36 To boil Wigeon, Teal, or Mallard. ibid.
37 To boil Larks or Sparrows in white broth. Fol. 34. 38 To boil Gudgeons or
Flounders. ibid. 39 To make broth for a Pike. Fol. 35. 40 To make a sauce for
fried Gurnet, or Rocket. ibid. 41 To stew a Carp. Fol. 36. 42 How to boil a
Hanch of Venison. ibid. 43 How to make a Grand boiled meat. Fol. 37. 44 How to
stew a Bream, Fol. 38. 45 How to rest a Calves-head with Oysters. ib. 46 To
make Cream Cabbidge. Fol. 39. 47 A rump of Beef after the best manner. Fol. 40.
48 A Bisque of Carps. Fol. 41. 49. To dress a Phillet of Veal after the
Italian way. Fol. 43. 50 To boil Ducks after the French fashion. Fol. 44. 51 To
make a Pudding of Calves Caldrons. ib. 52 To make the best saucidges that ever
were eat. Fol. 45. 53 How to make a Paste with oil, and the way how to take
away the sent of the Oil. Fol. 46. 54 To make sweet paste or dough. ibid. 55 To
make sweet spices, which are used by Pastry-Cooks. Fol. 47. 56 The way how to
make a Pastry-Cooks varnishing stuff, with the which be gives his Pyes a
Color. Fol. 48.
Creames.
57 Clowted cream. Fol. 49. 58 Another Cream. ibid. 59 Cold Cream. Fol. 50.
60 A Cream with French Barley. ibid. 61 Almond cream. Fol. 51. 62 Cudgel'd
cream. ibid. 63 A Butter cream. ibid. 64 A French cream. Fol. 52. 65 An Almond
Custard. ibid. 66 Sack cream. Fol. 53. 67 Codling cream. ibid. 68 Cream with
Apples. ibid. 69 Cream with Almonds. Fol. 54. 70 Cream with curds. ibid. 71 For
clouted cream. ibid. 72 A Triflle. Fol. 55. 73 Another clouted cream. ibid. 74
Thick cream with Rice. ibid. 75 A Trifle. Fol. 56. 76 Snow. ibid. 77 To make
snows. ibid. 78 Clouted cream. ibid. 79 Apple eream. Fol. 57. 80 White stuff
(of cream.) ibid. 81 A Tansey (of cream.) ibid. 82 A Goos-berry cream. Fol. 58.
83 To make a cream. ibid. 84 To make a Sullibub. ibid. 85 To make maggets (of
cream.) Fol. 59. 86 A white-pot. ibid. 87 To make Leach. ibid.
Cakes, White pots, Puddings, and Almond-work.
88 To make Almond Butter. Fol. 60. 89 French Stuckling. Fol. 61. 90 To make
Almond Puddings. ibid. 91 To make Almond cakes. Fol. 62. 92 To make a
Florentine with Almonds. ibid. 93 Eggs of Almonds. Fol. 63. 94 Mackaroones.
ibid. 95 To make a good March pane. Fol. 64. 96 To make all kind of conceits of
Marchpanes and Pyes; Birds, Biskets, Collaps and Eggs, and some to print with
Moulds. Fol. 65.
Puddings.
97 A Quaking-Pudding. Fol. 66. 98 A Pudding. ibid. 99. A plain Pudding. Fol.
67. 100 Puddings of Neats tongues. ibid. 101 Black Puddings. ibid. 102 To make
a Pudding. Fol. 68. 103 To make a Pudding. ibid. 104. To make a Rice Pudding.
ibid.
The Contents of the second part; Being Experiments in SUGAR-WORKS.
105 CHeese-cakes. Fol. 69. 106 Another way to make chees-cakes. Fol. 70. 107
To make dainty Pan-cakes. ibid. 108 To make Pan cakes that shall be to crisp,
that you may rear them up an end. Fol. 71. 109 To make Court-Frittars. ibid.
110 Another way. Fol. 72. 111 To make Sugar-cakes. ibid. 112 Cornish Bunnes.
Fol. 73. 113 Cake-bread. ibid. 114 Cakes with Lemmon Pill. Fol. 74. 115
Cake-bread. ibid. 116 To make Biscuit. ibid. 117 To make Diar-bread. Fol. 75.
118 To make Jumballs. ibid. 119 Another way of Jumballs. Fol. 76. 120 To make
Naples-Bisket. ibid. 121 The first way for Prince Biscuit. Fol. 77. 122 Another
way. ibid. 123 To make white Biscuit bread. Fol. 78, 124 To make Prince Biscuit.
Fol. 79, 125 To make French Biscuit. Fol. 80. 126 To make Biskatello. ibid. 127
To make Wafers. Fol. 81. 128 To make a Carroway cake. ibid. 129 To make fine
cakes in form of rings. Fol. 82. 130 To make Sugar-cakes. ibid. 131 To make
Paste-Royall formed into Cotes, Bowls, and drinking-cups, Gloves, Slippers, or
any other pretty conceits printed with Moulds. Fol. 83. 132 To cast all kind
of standing conceits in Sugar-works. Fol. 84. 133 To cast all kind of fruits
hollow into turned works, to put them into their natural colors: us Oranges,
Lemmons, Cowcumbers, Radishes, Apples or Pears. ib. 134. To make Paste of
Flowers in color of Marble, that which way soever you break it, it shall be
like Marble, and betwixt the light it shall look very clear, and shall in
eating taste of the natural flowers. Fol. 85. 135 To make Paste of Eglantine,
the color Amber-colour. Fol. 86. 136 To make Paste of Elicampane. ib. 137 To
make Canded Cakes of Plums. Fol. 87. To make Paste of Join, the true way as
they do beyond the Seas. ib. 138 To make Paste of Pippins, some like Leaves,
some like Plums with stalks and stones, some white Plums and some red, and
green. Fol. 88. 139 To make Paste of Apricockes or white Pears or Plums. Fol.
89. 140 To make Paste of Goose-berries, printed, Ras-berries, or English
Currants. Fol. 90. 141 To make Paste of Oranges and Lemmons. Fol. 91. 142 To
make Paste-Royal of spices. Fol. 92. 143 To make Muskadine comfits. ib.
The Contents of the third part; showing how to PRESERVE.
144 TO preserve Apricocks the best way. Fol. 94. 145 How to Candie Eringoes,
Probabatum. ibid. 146 How to Candy Eringoes, Probatum. Fol. 98. 147 To make
Quindiniackes of Ruby color to print with moulds. Fol. 99. 148 To make
Quindiniacks of an Apricock color, with moulds, that you may make them all the
year. Fol. 100. 149 To Preserve Grapes. Fol. 101. 150 To Preserve Pippins,
Apricockes, Pears, Plumbs, or Peaches green. Fol. 102. 151 The best way to
Preserve Cherries. Fol. 103. 152 To Preserve Oranges the French way. Fol. 104.
153 To Preserve green Plums. Fol. 105. 154 To Preserve Damsins, or red Plumbes,
or black. Fol. 107. 155 To make Marmalet of Oranges, or Orange Cakes. ib. 156
Conserves of Pomgranats. Fol. 108. 157 How to make Marmalet of Apples. Fol.
109. 158 How to make Marmalet of Orleance. Fol. 110. 159. To Preserve
Raspesses. ib. 160 To make Quindiniack of Quinces. Fol. 111. 161 To make
Quindiniack of Goose-berries, Ras-berries, or English Currants. ib. 162 To
Preserve Quinces. Fol. 112. 163 To Preserve Quinces red. ib. 164 To Preserve
Quinces white. Fol. 103.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by, Gabriel Bedel, and Thomas Collins, 1658. viz.
Books in Folio.
THe Complete Ambassador, containing the Letters and Negotiations of Sir
Francis Walsingham, the Lord Burleigh, and other eminent Persons, being a
perfect Series of the most remarkable Passages of State, both at home and
abroad in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, of blessed memory, collected by Sir
Dudley Diggs.

The History of the Civil wars of France, written in Italian by Henrico
Catterino D' Avilah the whole fifteen Books translated into English by Sir
Charles Cotterel and William Alesbury.

Idem, The Continuation being Ten Books.

A Complete Chronicle of England, begun by John Stowe, and continued by Edmond
Howes Gent, With An Appendix of the Universities of England.

A French English Dictionary, with another in English and French, compiled by
Randal Cotgrave Gentleman. Whereunto are added, The Animadversions and
Supplement of James Howel Esquire

Annals Veteris Testamenti, a prima mundi Origin deducti, una cum rerum
Asiaticarum and AEgyptiacarum Chronico a temporis Historici Principio usque ad
Maccabaicorum initia producto Jacobo Vsserio Armachano digestore.

Idem, Secunda pars. Usque ad imperii Vespasiani initia, atque Extremum Templi
and Reipublicae Judiacae excidium deductum Authore Jacobo Vsserio.

Of Government and Obedience, as they stand directed and determined by
Scripture and Reason, in Four Books, by John Hall of Richmond Gent.

Daltons Country Justice, corrected and enlarged by the Authors own hand
before his death: unto which is annexed. An Appendix or Abridgement of all the
late Acts and Ordinances that relate to the Office of a Justice of Peace, to
the year 1655, by a Barrester learned in the Laws.

I Ragguagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus, two Centuries,
with, The Polyticke Touchstone, written Originally in ward Bulstrede of the
Inner Temple Esquire, Chief Justice to his Highness in North Wales, containing
many choice Cases, learnedly argued by the Judges, ending in the eleventh and
twelfth year of King James, legally licensed and published by Authority.

* The Eleven parts of Reports of Sir Edward Cook, all faithfully translated
into English in one Volume.

BOOKS in Quarto.
Cabala sive Scrinia Sacra, Mysteries of State and Government in several
Ambassies, and Letters, by the great Ministers of State in the Reigns of K.
James, and the late K. Charles, collected by a noble hand in two parts.

The History of Tithes; that is, the practice of payment of them, the positive
Laws made for them, and the Opinions touching the right of them. And A Review
of it, is also annexed, which both confirms it, and directs in the use of it,
by John Seldom Esquire

Miscellanea Spiritualia, or Devout Essays, the first and second part written
by the Honorable Walter Mountague Esquire

The Christian Man, or the Reparation of Nature by Grace, Written in French by
that Elegant and pious Author John Francis Senault, Englished by H.G. sometime
Student of Christ-Church in Oxford.

Potters Interpretation of the Number 666, or the number of the beast.

The History of the Grand Seignor Seraglio; to which is added, The History of
China.

Ross against Copernicus and Gallelaus, a learned and Philosophical piece,
concerning the Earths motion.

An Assize Sermon preached before the reverend Judges at Warwick, 1651. by W.
Durham

* The Regulating of Law Suits, Evidences and Pleadings; An Assize Sermon
preached at Carmarthen, March 16. 1656, by William Thomas Vicar of Laughorne.

Palmerin D'Oliva, both parts complete.

The Recantation of an ill led Life. or, The Discovery of the Highway Law, by
John Clavel Gent. Doctor in Physic.

Observations upon some particular Persons and Passages, In a Book lately made
public, entitled, A complete History of the Lives and Reigns of Mary Queen of
Scotland, and of her Son James the Sixth of Scotland, and first of England,
France and Ireland; Written by a Lover of the Truth.

Powels Search of Records.

Books in Copartnership with W. L.and D. P. quarto

Three Readings of the Lord Dyer, Brograve and Risden, upon the Statute of
Wills, Jointures and Forcible Entries.

The Arguments of the Learned Judges upon Italian, by that famous Roman,
Trojano Bocalini, and now put into English by the right Honorable HENRY Earl
of Monmouth.

The History of Philosophy in eight Parts, containing those on whom the
Attribute of Wise was conferred, with the Pictures of several Philosophers, by
Thomas Stanley Esquire.

Historical Relations of the United Provinces of Flanders, containing the
natural condions of the people, with the Forms of Government; With the Complete
History of the Wars of Flanders, written in Italian by the Learned and Famous
Cardinal Bentivoglio, Englished by the Right Honorable, HENRY, Earl of
Monmouth, the whole Work illustrated with many Figures of Chief Personages
mentioned in this History.

Polytick Discourses; Written in Italian by Prolo Paruta, a noble Venetian
Cavelier, and Procurator of S. Mark: Whereunto is added, A short Soliloquy, in
which the Author briefly examines the whole course of his Life; rendered into
English by the Right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Monmouth.

Eadmeri Monachi Cantuariensis Historiae novorum sive sui Seculi, res Gestas
sub Gulielm I. and II Henric. I. Emisit Joannes Seldenus.

Seldeni Mare Clausum seu de Dominio Maris.

The Hystory of King Henry the VII. written by the Right Honorable, FRANCIS
Lord Verulam, Viscount S. Alban, unto which is annexed a very useful Table.

Orlando Furiso, in English Heroical verse, illustrated with Figures, with an
addition of Epigrams, by Sir John Harrington.

The Marrow of the French Tongue, by John Woodroeph Gent.

Pyrotechnea, Or the Art of Fire Works, with an addition of Logarithmes, by
John Babyngton, Student in the Mathematics.

Devotions upon certain Festivals, piously and learnedly expressed in
meditations, by that accomplished Gentleman William Austine of Lincolns Inn Esquire

* The Phylophy, commonly called The Morals; Written by the learned Philosopher
Plutarch, translated out of Grcek into English, and conferred with the Latin
and French Translation, by Philemon Holland, Doctor of Physic.

The History of the Low Country Wars, written in Latin, by Famianus Strada,
Englished by Sir Robert Stapleton Knight; illustrated with diverse Figures.

Thirdly, Sermons lately preached at the Parish Church of S. Mary Magdelen
Milkestreet, London, unto which is annexed, A Sermon Preached at the funeral of
Sir George Whitemore knight; by Anthony Farindon, B.D.

Books in the Press.
The Roman Hystory of Titus Livius, Englished by Philemon Holland, Doctor of
Physic, purged from many error in the former Impression.

The first and second Volumes of the Annals of the World; written in Latin by
the Reverend James Usher, Bishop of A^magh, and Lord Primate of Ireland; and
now faithfully translated into English, by the approbation of the said Bishop
before his death.

Books in Copartnership with W.L. and D.P. Folio.
A Collection of Acts in the years 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651, very useful,
especially, for Justices of the Peace, and other Officers; with several other
Ordinances of like concernment; by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clerk of the
Parliament, and Clerk of his Highness Council.

A Collection of those Ordinances, Proclamations, Declarations, etc. which have
been Printed and published since the Government was established in his
Highness the Lord Protector, viz. from December 16. 1653. unto September 3.
1654. with their several dates and dependencies; comprised in a lesser volume
than before, for the better use and benefit of the Reader, Printed by his
Highness Printers.

An Epitome of all the common and Statute Laws of this Nation, now in force;
Wherein more than 1500. of the hardest words or terms of the Law are explained,
and all the most useful and profitable Heads or Titles of the Law by way of
common place, are largely, plainly and methodically handled; with an
Alphabetical Table by William Shepherd, Esquire, Sergeant at Law; published by
his Highness special Command.

Lanes Reports in the Exchequer.

Reports of that Reverend and learned Judge, Sir Humphrey Winch knight,
sometimes one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas; containing many
choice Cases, and excellent matters, touching Declarations, Pleadings,
Demurrers, Judgments and Resolutions in points of Law in the four last years
of the Reign of King James.

The Reports of Edward Bulstrode of the Inner Temple Esquire Chief Justice to his
Highness in North. Wales, containing many choice Cases learnedly argued by the
Judges in the seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth years of King James, legally
licensed and published by Authority.

* The Second Volume of the Reports of Edward(...)

Calendarium Pastorale, a Theodoro Bathu^st, in Latin and English.

The Court-Keepers Guide, or a familiar Treatise for keeping of Court Leet, and
Court Baron, by William Shepherd Esquire, now Sergeant at Law.

Nature unbowelled, or Rare experiments in Physic and Chyrurgery, by Alathea,
Countess of Arundel.

An Essay upon the first Book of Titus Lucretius Carus de Rerum Natura;
Interpreted and made English Verse, by John Evelyn Esquire, illustrated with
Historical Annotations.

Phinetti Philoxenes, Some choice Oservations of Sir John Finnet Knight, and
Master of the Ceremonies; to the two last Kings touching the reception and
Precedence, the Treatment and Audience, the Punctilioes and Contests of Foreign
Ambassadors in England.

The Nuptial Lover Two Romances.

Hypolito and Isabella Two Romances.

Brinsleyes Small Copy-Book.

A Synopsis, or Compendium of the Fathers.

The triumphant Lady, or, The Crowned Innocence, a Choice and Authentic Piece
of the Famous De Cereziers, Almoner to the King of France, in English.

Gassendus his Life of Pereskius, rendered into English.

A Golden Chain, or a Miscellany of Divine Sentences of the Sacred Scriptures,
and of other Authors, by Edw. Eulstrode Esquire

Books in Copartnership with W.L. and D P. in Octavo,
Ashes Table to the Lord Cooks Eleven Reports, translated into English.

The New Nature Brevium, by Anth. Fitz-Herbert, translated into English.

The Whole Office of a Country Justice of Peace, in two parts, reprinted with
Additions, by William Shepherd Esquire, now Sergeant at Law.

Idem, His Clerks Cabinet, with Presidents and Forms.

A Learned Treatise in Commendation of the Common Laws of England, by Francis
White of Grayes Inn Esquire

A Treatise collected out of the Statutes of the Commonwealth, and according
to common experience of the Laws, concerning the Office and Authorities of
Coroners and Sheriffs, together with An easier Method for keeping Court Leet,
Court Baron, and Hundred-Courts, by John Wilkinson, to which is added, The
Return of Writs, by John Kitchen; all published in English.

The Clerks Vade Mecum, or a Choice Collection of Modern Presidents, according
to the best Forms extant, and such as have not formerly been printed, useful
for all persons that have relation to the practick part of the Common Law.

Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held before several Judges in that
Circuit, with some Presidents useful for Pleaders at the Assizes.

Reports and Cases in Chancery, Collected by Sir George Carry, one of the
Masters of the Chancery, in Anno 1601. out of the Labors of Mr. William
Lambert, with the Kings Order and Decree in Chancery, exemplified and enrolled
for a perpernall Record 1616.

Synopsis, or An exact Abridgement of the Lord Cooks Commentaries upon
Littleton, being a brief explanation of the Grounds of the Common Law by that
Learned Lawyer Sir Humphrey Davenport Knight, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, with a Table of the most remarkable things.

A perfect Abridgement of the Eleven Books of Reports of the Learned Knight
Sir Edward Cook, Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, Originally in French, hy Sir
Ion Davies, Attorney General in Ireland, done into English.

A Treatise of the Principal Grounds and Maxims of the Laws of this Nation,
very useful and Commodious for all Students, toward the knowledge and
understanding of the Laws; written by that learned Expositor of the Law,
William Noy Esquire.

The reading upon the Statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth chap. 7. touching
Bankrupts; learnedly and amply exemplified, by John Stone of Graies Inn,
Esquire.

* The Office of a Justice of Peace, whereunto is added, The Authors Judgment
upon reading the Statutes, very useful; by the learned William Fleetwood
Esquire, sometime Recorder of London; now continued and fitted to this present
Government.

BOOKS in Twelves.
The Books of Oaths, and the several forms thereof, both Ancient and Modern,
faithfully Collected out of several Authentic Books and Records not heretofore
extant, very useful for all persons whatsoever, especially those that undertake
any office of Magistracy or Public employment in this Commonwealth; In
Co-partnership with W. L. and D P.

Reliquiae Wottonianae, or a Collection of Lives, Letters and Poems, by Sir
Henry Wotton: Provost of Eaton, with the Authors Life.

The Picture of a Christian-Mans conscience, by Alex. Kosse.

Of liberty and servitude, Englished by I. E. Esquire.(...) the Writ of Habeas
Corpus, with the Opinion of the upper Bench Court thereupon; and Sir John
Elliots Case.

The Atturneyes Academy, being the manner of Proceedings in all Courts of
Record at Westminster, and in all other Courts of Law or Equity, with the Fees
of the said Courts, collected by Thomas Powel.

Reports of certain Cases arising in the several Courts of Record at
Westminster in the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charleo, with the
Resolutions of the Judges, reviewed and approved, by Justice Godbolt.

The Touchstone of Common Assurance, by William Shepherd Esquire

The Parsons Guide, or the Law of Tithes, by william Shepherd Esquire

PLAYS in Folio, Quarto, and Octavo.
Bartholomew Fair By Ben. Johnson in folly. The Staple of News By Ben. Johnson
in folly. The Devil an Ass By Ben. Johnson in folly. The Just General; by
Cosmo Manuch, in quarte The Wits Written by Sir' William D' Avenant in quarto.
The Platonic Lovers Written by Sir' William D' Avenant in quarto. The triumphs
of Prince Written by Sir' William D' Avenant in quarto. D'Amour, A Mask.
Written by Sir' William D' Avenant in quarto. The Faithful Shepher dess by
John Fletcher in quarto. The Merry Wives of Windsor, by Shackspear in quarto.
Edward the fourth, the first and second part, in quarto Michaelmas Term, in
quarto. Fine Companion, in quarto. The Phoenix, in quarto. The Combat of Love
and Friendship, by Doctor Mead, in quarto. Polieuctes, or the Martyr, a Trajedy
in quarto. Horatius, a Trajedy, in quarto. The Hectors, or the False Challenge,
in quarto. The Raging Turk, or Bajazet the second. Written by Tho. Goffe:
Master of Arts, and Student of Christs-Church, Oxford, newly reprinted in
Octavo. The courageous Turk or Amurah the First Written by Tho. Goffe: Master
of Arts, and Student of Christs-Church, Oxford, newly reprinted in Octavo. The
Trajedy of Orestes Written by Tho. Goffe: Master of Arts, and Student of
Christs-Church, Oxford, newly reprinted in Octavo.
BOOKS in Octavo.
Selected Odes of Horace, Englished by Richard Fanshaw Esquire

An Apology for Learning, and Learned Men, by Edward Waterhous Esquire

Idem, His two Divine Tracts.

Lamberts Archaion, or a Comment on the High Courts of Justice.

The Parsons Law.(...)

Iacksons Evangelical Temper.

Balzacks Prince, Englished by H. G. Master of Arts, and student of
Christ-Church in Oxford.

The Polytick Christian Favorite, written in Italian by the Marquess Malvezza;
with the Life of Count de Olvarez the King of Spaines great favorite, with
Political Observations and Maxims.

The Life and Reign of King Edward the Sixth, by Sir John Heyward Doctor of the
Civil Law.

Supplementum Lucani, per Thomam May, Anglo-Lugduni Battavorum.

The Actomplisht Woman, written by the honorable Walter Montague Esquire.

Three Sermons Preached by the Reverend and Learned Doctor, Richard Stuart,
Dean of Saint Paul's, afterward Dean of Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet to
the late King Charles; whereunto is added. A fourth Sermon of Universal grace,
by Archbishop Harsnet.

The Ladies Cabinet enlarged and opened, Comprised under three general heads;
viz. Preserving; Conserving, and Candying. 2. Physic and Surgery. 3.
Cookery and Housewifery; to which is added, Choice extractions of Waters, Oils,
etc. Collected and practiced by the Right Honorable and Learned Chimist, the
Lord Reuthuen.

* Excellent and approved Receipts and Experiments in Cookery: with the best
way of preserving; as also, Rare forms of Sugar-works, according to the French
and English manner, Copyed from a Choice Manuscript of Sir Theodore Mayern
Knight, Physician to the late King; never before printed.

Steps of Ascension to God; or, A ladder to heaven; containing Prayers for
every day of the week; and all other occasions, by Edward Gee Doctor in
Divinity, the ninth Impression; in 24.

FINIS.

