THE PRACTICES OF THE EARL of LEYCESTER Against the MINISTER of PENSHERST:

Laid open in a NARRARIVE Sent to his late Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR

August 5. 1658.

JUDGE. 19.30. Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.

LONDON, printed by T. R. for the Author, 1660.

To his Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, etc.
May it please your Highness,
YOur Highnes's Declaration for a Thanksgiving upon Wednesday last, July 21.
has given me occasion as a providential encouragement of God for this humble
address, by the enclosed Narrative, observing what grief of heart it was to
your Highness, that the last Parliament was broken up before they could begin
to think of a settlement for Religion, and the civil Government of this Nation,
as your Highness intimates in the beginning of this Declaration. But I know
your Highness has learned of God to look higher then sublunary Instruments in
all such Events; and that the most high rules in the kingdom of men, and
binds up the hearts and counsels of the Nations; as at the same session he
marvellously bound up your Thames within, that the Channel could not run with
any freeness.

My Lord, I desire to be still one of those Remembrancers that give the Lord no
rest till he has made his Jerusalem a praise in the earth, and to see before I
die, Gods gracious presence re-establisht in our Sion in the beauty of his
holiness, and this poor unworthy Commonwealth reformed into a more righteous
Government then hitherto we have obtained. God has lately showed me to my
grief much iniquity in the very frame, and what God has showed me, I crave the
boldness to give a hint to your Highness of it in this Narrative, that you may
have the glory beyond many Lawgivers of this Nation. Your Predecessors in the
Throne to reform the constitutions of the Courts of Justice into a more
excellent conformity with the wisdom of Gods Word where they are out of
course. And what if God has carried on this afflicted cause (now at length
before your Highness) for this purpose, that it might be an inducement to your
Highness to seek of God (as Moses did in all difficult cases) a better way for
your people, whom I hear in many corners of the land groaning and complaining
under their great oppressions through the Corruptions of Law.

This case between the Earl of Leycester and my self, fell out to be concluded
but a few weeks before the session of the last Parliament, and I feared sadly
for your Highness and the whole Nation, what would follow thereupon, upon, it
being sometimes the course of God to take advantage against a Nation in
bringing a general Judgment upon them for some eminent Act of Cruelty and
Injustice committed against one of his little ones. The Lord who is afflicted
in all our Afflictions, give my Lord Protector a compassionate heart to relieve
the poor, who put their trust in the Lord, against the proud and mighty that
beast themselves against them.

To draw up all in short, that I may not entrench upon the weighty affairs
that are before your Highness, you have here, my Lord, the innocent condemned,
yea a whole family to be cut off as far as the Law can reach them. A most cruel
Verdict abhorred by the consciences of your Judges yet unreverst; The right of
the Gospel Ministry in reproof of sin discountenanced; and the Privilege of
the Peers whilst they were laid aside by Parliament unduly allowed against a
clear Law, against common reason, and against all Presidents in Courts of
Justice until this present case. Whereupon it followed that the preparations
made by your Highness and Parliament before their adjournment in a hopeful way
for some settlement in the civil Government, were notwithstanding at their next
meeting soon unravelled upon the difference of the houses about the very point
of Peers, and those Gentlemen that had a hand in condemning this cause; the one
at the Assize, the other in the upper bench, both, by a signal check of
providence, repulsed in a message to your house of Commons upon this point. Oh,
my Lord, whilst the Controversy was managed in private, I could show your
Highness how terribly God pleaded with our adversary in private, laying it
sorely upon himself and his family, but since he has broke out into the
public, and managed mischief by a Law; Now God has appeared in public
likewise, and yet he knows I grieve to think what an influence it has had upon
your Highnes's Affairs, and may yet have if not prevented.

If therefore the Lord shall show this afflicted cause to your Highness, and
all the iniquity that has moved him to any displeasure thereupon, be pleased
to answer Gods expectation in some way of speedy redress; And let my Lord do
for God and his distressed ones, as much as King Pyrrhus did for Fabricius the
Roman General, who while he was engaged in a War with the Romans, his Physician
sent to Fabricius, telling him, that if he pleased, he would poison his Master,
but Fabricius abhorring such a villainy, sent Pyrrhus word of it, whereupon he
apprehended and crucified his gratitude to Fabricius, dismissed all the Roman
Prisoners without Ransom, acknowledging that he could not make sufficient
compensation for such a favor.

My Lord, God has delivered up those into your hands that lately sought your
life, and has put into your hands that inimicitious Fort of Flanders that has
so often annoyed this land, PLACE="marg" Dunkirck.
and from whence the enemy had prepared now also to annoy you: and what more
answerable return can your Highness make to your good God, that in pity has
saved us, then to restore Gods Captives that are laid up even in your chains,
which is all that is humbly desired at this time by

My Lord Your Highness most humble and faithful servant, JOHN MAUDIT.
Pensherst, July 22. 1658.
A NARRATIVE OF The Sufferings of the Minister of Pensherst under the
Prosecution of the Earl of Leycester.
May it please your Highness.
WHatsoever your Highness own troubles may be in this heavy and burdensome
place, (wherein we cease not to pray for you) yet I hope you have a Christian
ear and heart open to receive the complaints of Gods poor oppressed people from
all places, making it your chief work, as our Lord the chief Shepherd, to mind
the poor of the flock above your self, to carry the Lambs compassionately in
your bosom, and diligently drive those that are with young: this is indeed a
princes trust, comfort and security.

His Comfort, as you may see in Job 16.17, 25. I was a father to the poor, and
the cause which I knew not, I searched out, and I brake the jaws of the wicked,
and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and
I shall multiply my days as the sand.

Thus Job once solaced himself with the thoughts of his care and compassions
over the afflicted, and he assumes this Title in the close of all to himself as
his great glory, That he was one that had comforted the Mourners.

His Security and Establishment, as we see in Phineas, of whom the spirit
testifies, Then stood up Phineas and executed Justice, and so the plague
stayed: that one act of Justice establishing him in an everlasting Priesthood,
and freeing the land from a general Judgment.

The Lord make both good to your Highness, that it may be your comfort and
stability to relieve the afflicted; for it is one of the most experienced
Maxims of State, the Book of Gods Records, and is filled with most Presidents
of, Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it
was well with him, says the Lord to Josiah's son? He judges the cause of the
poor and needy, then it was well with him, was not this to know me, says the
Lord? Jer. 22.15, 16.

My Lord, my case is much one with the poor distressed men of Jabesh Gilead in
King Saul's days, 1 Samuel 11.1. etc. Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped
against Jabesh Gilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash make a
Covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

And Nahash the Ammonite answered them on this condition, Will I make a
Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a
Reproach upon all Israel.

And the Elders of Jabesh said unto him, give us seven days respit that we may
send Messengers unto all the coasts of Israel; and then if there be no man to
save us, we will come out to thee.

Then came the Messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears
of the people, and all the people lift up their voice and wept.

And behold Saul came after the herd out of the field, and Saul said, what
aileth the people that they weep? and they told him the tidings of the men of
Jabesh.

And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his
anger was kindled greatly, and he took a yoke of Oxen, and hewed them in
pieces, and sent them thoroughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of
Messengers, saying, whosoever comes not forth after Saul and after Samuel: so
it shall be done unto his Oxen, and the fear of the Lord fell on the people,
and they came out with one consent.

My Lord, I have been truly besieged many years by the Earl of Leycester,
whiles I have labored in much sincerity in the work of the Gospel here to gain
this little flock to Christ, who has for this seven years cut off the dues of
Tithes which his Lordship should have paid for maintenance of me and my
afflicted family; so that for want of our own, we have been burdensome to our
friends for a livelihood; besides the said Earl has for these six years
devoured our Gleab-land by making a Warren next to our land; so that we have
lost in the judgment of judicious men above half the profit of the land
yearly, whilst my Lord (making it a Warren for profit, not for pleasure) has
enriched himself by multitudes of Rabbets sold to London, which winter and
summer were fed upon our ground. Besides this also, the said Earl has seized
upon our wood, timber and trees at several times, and a parcel of the
Gleab-land which he has railed off from us for these five years together, to
distress us in the accommodations of our Gleab. And after all this and many
more grievous Molestations which have endangered the life of my wife thorough
great frights sometimes, and cast both of us into sickness often. The word of
God in Levit. 26.14, 15, 16. leading ut to reprove those that cast off Gods
Ordinances, I applied the word of God against the Earl of Leycester by name,
for withdrawing from the presence of God for five years together, and greatly
discouraging the Reformation of Religion in this place, as also for much cruel
usage of me and other unwarrantable courses which he persevered in,
notwithstanding many private addresses made to his Lordship by my self to
convince him of the evil of his ways; his rage growing yet higher and higher,
year after year; whereupon the Earl commences a suit against me, declaring,
that I spoke these words against him, viz. That the Earl was a wicked man, a
cruel Oppressor, and an enemy to Reformation, and got 500 li. damages at the
Assize in Kent. Some of the Jury being drawn on as they have since confessed,
with a pretense, that the Earl would not take a farthing of the money, but only
have a Fine for his honor: but having got the Verdict, he prosecuted it
vigorously at the upper bench to have it confirmed. The Judges being through
the hand of God upon their hearts inclined to pity, and having a high sense of
the grievous damages, took the cause into mature deliberation, and arrested the
Judgment for three Terms, hearing the Counsel on both sides. Mean while
Applications were made to the Earl by Major General Kelsey, Sir Michael Leusey
High Sheriff, Lieutenant Col. Compton, Captain Brown, Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr.
Neigh, Mr. Lockier, Mr. Griffith, and Baron Parker, that his Lordship would be
pleased of his own accord to remit the damages that were given him, which would
be more for his honor then thousands in reparation. His Lordships answer to
them was, that the Law should go on till I was at his Mercy, and then he would
do what be should think fitting. At the length God moved the hearts of the
honorable Judges of the upper bench to send two messages to his Lordship, the
one by the Earls Solicitor Mr. Pew; the other by Mr. Broughton, the Clark of
the Crown, ordering Mr. Pew to writ to his Lordship from them, that though his
Lordship had the Judgment, yet he should forbear to take out any execution
against the Defendant for person or goods, or molest me farther to disturb me
in the work of the Ministry, and withal appointed Mr. Broughton to go down in
person to the Earl, and let him know the mind of the Court therein, Mr.
Broughton after he had delivered the Message of the Judges, was bold to press
his Lordship with many arguments of religion and honor, to let fall his
displeasure, and be inclined to a Christian Reconciliation.

But these being not accepted, he offered his Lordship 100 li. toward his
charges in the suit; that being not accepted, he offered his Lordship to have
the Gleab-land, and take out his own satisfaction as he pleased thereupon: all
which being rejected, he offered upon some reasonable time given, the Minister
should quit the place, and be gone. Indeed my Lord we thought it too much after
all our wrongs we had sustained, to give up a place that we had settled upon us
for our life by a gracious act of your Highness in confirming of Sequestrations
upon the Ministers, who aforetime were greatly opposed by turbulent people in
those places for want of a settlement: especially seeing it was not for any
debt that we owed the Earl, or clear damage, but for words which were
wrongfully laid to my charge: but had they been spoken, my Lord chief Justice
Glinn was pleased openly upon the case, to declare they were not so much as
actionable at common Law, and so not worth two pence. But Mr. Broughton
thinking that would content him, we were willing, if the Will of God were so,
(taking the advice of our brethren in the Ministry in the case (with all
convenient speed) to depart, and go where God should call us: But the Earl
granting us no time of deliberation, but having a mind to our goods as well as
our Tithes, and our land, next day after Master Broughton departed, puts the
execution (which he had got by him before Mr. Broughtons Application,
notwithstanding the advertisment sent him from the Judges by his own
solicitour) in force, and sends to the Sheriff for a fieri facias, and so
seizes upon all the goods he could find of ours within doors, and without, our
Kine, our Barns of corn, and wood-barns, Wagons, Hay, and household furniture,
Hangings, Tables, Chairs, Beds and bedding that were under us, and our
Children, and the least inconsiderable Implements that could be found.

Alas! now we found by sad experience, what it was to be given up to the Earl
of Leycesters mercy, which many in City and Country were held in expectation
of, but we had found ever cruel: being used thus with so much rigor and
extremity, Mr. John Seyliard a Gentleman of this Parish, offered his Lordship
these three propositions in our behalf.

1. That my Lord be pleased to give the Minister a full release of the
Judgment his Lordship has against him, upon his resignation of this Rectory.
2. That a competent time be agreed on for removal of his family and goods
coming in this summer, and seeking a settlement in some other place, which
cannot well be less then a years time, or about Michaelmas come 12. months; in
the mean time, that Mr. Samuel Seyliard officiate here in the Ministers absence
by his Lordships permission. 3. That his Lordship and the rest of the parish be
pleased to pay the dues of the place unto the Minister peacably, together with
the Arrears are due, until the time which his Lordship shall agree unto for
the resigning up of this place unto him.
The Earl of Lycester's answer was, that he did not like the Propositions in
regard that the time was too long, and that he would not meddle with the
Arrears of the Parish. Mr. Seyliard replied, that less time would suffice, then
a years space for the Ministers resignation, if his Lordship would not allow
him so much; and for Arrears of the Parish, he and others would take care to be
gathered up and paid, if his Honor would engage for his own Arrears; and if
these Propositions did not like his Honor, that then he would be pleased to
say what would content him.

His Lordship made answer, No, he would not declare himself, but when
Propositions were made that he liked of, he would say something to them.
Whilst these things were in agitation, and friends were preparing yet more
acceptable terms, (as was thought) his Lordship makes have to get what was to
be had, and renewes his writ, and comes upon us suddenly by Bayliffes, who in
an unlawful way climbed up into the stables where our horses were, and brake
in, and unhanged the door, and took out two Mares, which were also sold off,
and the moneys, as the former, returned for his Lordship. After this (by the
importunity of friends being persuaded, who took exceedingly to heart out
sufferings under this Earl from time to time, as did all good Christians)
Captain Pike went in to his Lordship with this our proposition.

That his Lordship be pleased to give the Minister a release of the Judgment
of 512 li. upon his resignation of this Rectory at Michaelmas next.

The Answer that Captain Pike brought from his Lordship, was, That he expected
to have what the Country gave him, and he would be under no Contract with me
for the future; but if I brought my Resignation to him, he would do what he
should think fiting.

This was the Answer, as well nigh as I could take it from the Captain, that
his Lordship at length is come to, expecting, for ought I can understand, that
I should come forthwith with my Resignation, not allowing me half a years time
to remove my family, and place my self other where; whereupon it would follow,
that I must loose the benefits of this year also, which is now ready to come
in; and yet after all this, if I or the Captain that brought this Answer,
understand his Lordship, by refusing to be under any Contract pro future, he
expect; I should deliver up my Resignation to him, and then leave him to his
pleasure, whether he will also take the benefit of the Judgment or no, or give
me any Arrears for Tithes or no; this seems to be like the old strain, that I
should cast my self upon his mercy, which I trust in the Lord I shall never
^^ve need of. See, my Lord, a sad story in a short Map of many years
sufferings, we are straightly besieged with a potent enemy, whose thirst we know
not what will satisfy; he has kept our dues for seven years, and devoured our
Land, seized upon our goods before the Judgment was given him, and much more
since: and how low soever he has us under his feet, it makes him so much the
higher to insult over us. Is it a right eye that would content him? No, my
Lord, but if we may give a guess, our very l^^d would scarce satisfy him, not
being contented with a surrender of this place, but endeavoring farther, as I
have cause to fear, the utter undoing, not only of my self, but also of my poor
afflicted family, if God, prevent it not; O my Lord, I beseech your Highness
consider it well, what is my crime, that I should suffer these things, and that
in your days when God has raised up so Christian a Magistrate for the help of
his oppressed people, and chastisement of those that oppose the Plantation of
Zion, the Reformation of the Church. Shall a Minister of the Gospel be worried
thus in the conscientious discharge of his office against an There being not
one President upon English Records, that such ministerial reproof was accounted
an Act of Sedition
offendour? Shall a Christian reproof in this first President be accounted
sedition, and the innocent be condemned? Shall the Privileges of the old
Peerage be raised upon the ruins of my family only, which since the act of the
Commonwealth have been questioned in so many cases granted in none but this?
Shall it be filed up in the Court of Heaven against the great day of Judgment,
that this was the Justice of England, to make a man such an Offender for a word
which was not actionable, if it had been spoken, yea, to ruin him for it? In
Qu. Mary's days it was but but 100 l. fine to have spoken worse words then
these of the Queen her self: And Statute An. primo and secundo Mariae, c, 3.
shall 500 l. stand upon Record for the Earl of Leycester for saying, He is a
cruel man. If my Lord of Leycester do not say, at length as that Amoniet, yet
will not the Adversaries of Reformation say: And let this be also laid for a
reproach to all their Israel.

Shall not the Lord visit for these things? yea, and has he not already began
to visit, if we could see his hand, for it is not unusual with God for one man's
sin to visit with a general Judgment; witness the famine in David's time, for
Saul's cruelty upon the Gibeonites: the overthrow of the state of Israel for
Elies son lewdness. The Mariners danger of Shipwreck for Jonah his offense:
The Armies defeat at Ai for Achans theft; the famine over all lands for Joseph's
hard usage, the Judgment upon Egypt for Isreal's cruel bondage: surely the Lord
has looked upon our sufferings also, and has and ^^^l with much jealousy
reckon for them; yet the Lord give us patience, for we must not desire the evil
day upon our Persecutors: the Lord in much mercy wipe off our blood from the
Thrones of Justice, and give these men repentance that are guilty of it. But my
gracious Lord, I crave humbly leave to set this day before your Highness, all
that has past, which I am persuaded has been hid from you; how be it the Lord
seems not to accept from Princes that excuse for public miscarriages in the
Commonwealth. Behold we knew it not, Pro. 24.11, 12. If thou, forbear to
deliver them that are drawn Inique oppressos, says Junius.
unto death, and those that are ready to be slain: if thou Ne putes tibi
excusationem fore seg^itiae tuae aut infirmitatis, quafi aut nesciveris pessime
cum illis agi aut rationem juvandi illos, atque liberandi minime tenueris
(crimen in leges transferendo). Nam Deus judex ejusmodi est qui perpendat
intima corda, optime cognoscat, and justifime judicaturus sit.
sa^^^, Behold we knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart, consider
it, and he that keeps A male seu periculo quo devenit proximus tuus, tu autem
ab e^ liberaris, ut oppressis opituleris. Sic Estherae 4.13, 14. Junius.
thy soul, does not he know it, and shall not he render unto every man
according to his works? The Lord therefore give me favor in your highnesse's
sight, in making known to your Highness the distresses of our deeply afflicted
hearts; for we have confidence in your Highness render compassions, and
readiness to relieve all Oppressions. We were unwilling hitherto (though we
bore much) to create trouble to your Highness about our cause, knowing your
burden to be great enough in ordering the public Affairs of the Nation: but
now that our Adversary has acted all this against us upon the public Theater
of the Courts of Justice, and that in the Protectors name, and nothing seems to
content him herein but our ruin (having executed this Judgment to the utmost
of his power for the destroying of me and my family) we dare not hold our
peace, but commending out cause to the Lord for Counsel, are bold to solicit
that power God has put in your Highness hands for our relief, trusting, that
as Mose's ears were open to the daughters of Zelophehad's complaints in their
particular case, as well as to the public Affairs, yea, and made a new Law for
them, when the common Law could not relieve them: So the Lord will also
graciously affect your Highness heart with these our sufferings in particular,
and by his spirit of wisdom direct you to give speedy some check to the Earls
great rage, and fierce proceedings, in a way of Righteousness and equity,
according to the power God has entrusted your Highness with.

Fear not, my Lord, fear not to own this afflicted cause, and search into it,
and the Lord put his spirit upon your Highness, as once he did upon Saul and
Moses, to relieve your Brethren that suffer affliction in your days. If your
Highness find the sentence righteous, punish me double to my offense; but if
innocence be found in me, and conscience convince you that I suffer much wrong,
relieve me, and let not this decree stand in Gods fight upon public Record
much longer.

Behold, O Lord, I am brought low, but yet not below thy help who art the
Almighty, whose method and manner of working is such, as not to step in, till
all creature helps fail, and stand as impotent Idols, and say as that King of
Israel, If the Lord do not help, how can I help?

Isreal's task is increased, and their male Children strangled by Pharaohs
command, before they are brought out of Egypt; Jonah cast over board into the
merciless waters, and buried alive in a more merciless Leviathan, before
deliverance comes: Isaac bound to the wood for a sacrifice before he be
released; Joseph brought to the prison before his advancement: Daniel let down
into the Lions den, before his enemies Accusation was frustrated. The captive
Jews under the Kings royal signet sentenced to be massacred, before they become
favorites in the Persian Court; and the poor men of Jabesh Gilead brought to
disgraceful Articles, before their insulting enemies was overthrown, and put
to flight: This is Gods usual manner with his people, whose faith be puts upon
trial to the utmost; not to save, till none can save: And therefore the Lord
keep up our faith that it may not fail. Here we are, if the Lord say, he has
no delight in us, let him do with us what seems him good; but if he please to
consult his own glory in our deliverance, we will say as Mordecai, Enlargement
and Deliverance shall arise to us, though all should forsake us; but who
knows whether my Lord Protector be come to the Kingdom for such a time as
this, to relieve Christ's oppressed ones, who otherwise had been every here
crushed, which is the expectation and prayer of Gods people, and in special of

Your Highness In all humble Devotion and faithful observance, JHON MAUDIT
Pensherst, July 22, 1658.
FINIS.
THese Papers being left at White Hall, August 5. 1658. for the Secrerary to
communicate to his Highness at Hampton Court: The next morning the Lord
contends in a very terrible thunder, which lasted about six hours, and took
off a fair bough from the chief Cedar of our Lebanus. And delays being made
from time to time by the secretary, the Lord (who is jealous for his oppressed
people, and gives quick returns to prayer) pleads again in a very tempestuous
wind, and shortly thereupon puts a period to the life of the Lord Protector,
which gave occasion of that great mourning that fell out nigh about the time
that this Judgment was given, the year before 1657. as appears by the Record
of the upper-Bench Court in the suit of the Earl of Leycester.

Wednesday in 15. days of St. Martin, 1657.
Unless cause be showed to the contrary upon Friday next after 15. days of St.
Martine, let Judgment be entered for the Plantiffe upon the motion of Mr.
Sergeant Twisden.

By the Court.

Observable also it was in the next Parliament called, January 27. 1658. how
God testified against Peerage in the hot Contests between the Houses about it,
and at length changed the whole Government: and in the Parliament assembled,
May 7.1659 the house declared both against a single Person and house of Peers
in their first Vote. God has many reasons doubtless of his Actions, yet it
were good to make this use upon the whole matter, that it is the great interest
and security of Governors, to do Justice and relieve the oppressed, and not
turn aside the poor in the gate from their right, for the Lord will plead their
cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. Pro. 22.23



