Unity Restored TO THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

By JOHN MAYER, D. D. Minister of the Church of Roydon in the County of
Suffolk, and Author of the Exposition of the Church Chatechism, and the
Comentary on the Old and New Testament, contained in Six Volumes.

Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God. Psalm 122.6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that love her. LONDON, Printed for A. Rice, and are to be sold by
Booksellers. 1661.

Unity Restored TO THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God. Psalm 122.6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that love her. LONDON, Printed for A. Rice, and are to be sold by
Booksellers. 1661.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Grace and Peace in Jesus
Christ.
MOst Gracious and dear Sovereign, so soon as I saw Your Majesty's Declaration
of October 25. I could not but rejoice greatly for Your Care and holy
Solicitude expressed therein, and wisdom like the wisdom of Solomon about
settling unity and uniformity in the Church of England, and devising the means
of effecting it. And whereas some have in writing cast aspersions upon Your
Sacred person, I could not but be greatly grieved at it, and to see how that
notwithstanding this Your Majesty's most serious profession to have informed
your self what you could by consulting with many both grave and learned beyond
Sea, and of your own Land, by what means most probably Unity may be restored to
the Churches under your Majesty's Dominion, yet may remain unsatisfied, who
although they are not reverse from Episcopal Government reformed, yet at
hearing of Suffragens and rural Deans, they are much troubled as at Officers
not formerly heard of either in the time of Queen Elizabeth, King James Your
Grandfather, or of King Charles Your Father. And as for the book of Common
Prayer, although the Prayers therein contained are most pithy and pious, yet
the multitude of them, and often repetitions of some, etc. are offensive, and
above all, the Ceremonies therein prescibed, which they will never abide to see
used, although they be not urged upon them, and so the seeds of dissension will
still continue in our Churches which will in time spring up again, the peace
and unity desired will never be settled: for to settle it must be as but on God,
so but one way under one Vicegerent of God upon earth, and that must be the
best approved of by the word of God, which being so, and Your Majesty's
gracious inclination such, that you have condescended so far as to consult with
some of your own Subjects what way might be best to introduce Unity about
matters Ecclesiastical, which has been so long wanting. My Humble Suit unto
your Majesty is, that You would vouchsafe to cast Your favorable aspect upon
this little book, which I a Subject of yours, as loyally affected to your
Majesty as any other man, have written in concurrence with Your Majesty in the
earnest desire of Unity to be restored to our divided Churches before the
coming out of your Pious and Learned Declaration, having no opportunity
hitherto to present it to your Royal view; being 78 years of age, and full of
grievous Diseases, so as that I cannot Travel.

And in this little Book I hope your Majesty shall see good reason to be
inclined to go the way therein pointed out to prevail for the restoring of
Unity so much desired, and indeed so necessary to promote a settled and lasting
peace, which God grant unto us under Your Majesty Our Supreme Head next unto
Christ Jesus. And to this end, that you may live Usque ad miraculum, gloriously
reigning upon earth, as you have been miraculously brought to this Throne of
Your Fathers, continuing constantly zealous for the propagation of the true
Religion to the end of your days, and finally be Crowned in Heaven with a never
fading Crown of Glory.

Your Majesty's most Humble and Obedient Subject and daily Orator before the
Throne of Grace JOHN MAYER.

How Unity may be restored to the Church of England.
WE having now, by God's singular blessing, Unity restored to this our
Commonwealth under one Head, in whom, for his gracious disposition, and
undoubted right to this Diadem, we all agree: What remains now so much to be
desired, as Unity in our Churches also? for want of which such bloody
dissentions has been so long amongst us, to the great disgrace of our most
true reformed Religion, and to the setting of these three Nations in a most
fearful Combustion.

Upon this consideration therefore, I, though the least able among many of my
Brethren, An. Dom. 60. Jacobus frater Domini fuit Episcopus Hierosolymitanus,
and illo inter fecto Simeon Cleophae filius Hieronimus in Catalogo, cap. 23.
Marcus Praesul Alexandriae an. 67. ibid. post Petrum linus Epist. 2. Romae. an.
70. lib. 3. cap. 3. huic successit annacletus vel Cletus. an. 89. Crescentius
Episcopus Moguntinis an. 72. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4.
shall endeavor to show my good will to restore this desirable Unity amongst
us. The main differences I suppose at this day, are about Ecclesiastical
Government, and the Liturgy, or Book of Common Prayer. For the first, there
will not be, I perceive, any great relucting against Episcopal Government,
because it has so ancient, and such pregnant proof hereof is brought from
holy Scripture, and the practice of the Catholic Church ever since the
Apostles days, and whilst they lived and ordered the Government of the Church
of Christ, if we will give any credit to the most ancient and most credible
History-Writers touching Church Matters.

But about their election to this high and weighty Office: who are to govern
herein; and what power they ought to have above other Bishops or Presbyters
their Brethren; and what Assistants they ought to use in exercising their
power; and whether by any other means they ought to have power to punish
notorious Offenders than by delivering them to Satan, and not by imprisoning,
or any pecuniary punishment; and whether a Bishop may deliver any over to Satan
for any other cause but scandalous living, or blaspheming; and lastly, whether
there ought not to be a Bishop in every City, and great Town, that is for the
more Churches therein as a City, with the Villages about it, and so large
Diocesses to the putting both of Clergy and People to such tedious travel to
have their Causes heard.

First, touching the electing of a Bishop: what better President can there be
to follow, than that of the first Assembly of Apostles and Believers, Acts 1.23.
being 120 to choose one into the room of Judas, who was chosen by praying
first, and propounding two known men amongst them, and casting lots; which was
done by the Apostles and the whole congregation of Believers: For let an
Election be made any other way, and so Gods blessing cannot go with a Bishop so
chosen. Did not the Lord himself at the first ordain twelve, whom he called
Apostles? and are not Bishops set up to govern in the Church generally held to
be the Apostles Successors, to whom singularly the Keys were committed to bind
and loose? and why then should not the choosing of them from time to time be
referred to the Lord? No free People (as all Christians are) be willing to be
governed by any but a Prince of their own electing, whom they know well, and
well approve of to be preferred to this dignity; and how then can it be
expected, that it should go well with that Church which has no hand in the
choice of their Bishop? It was most anciently the Custom of Christians for the
Clergy and People of the Diocese to choose their own Bishop, and then were they
reverend as Fathers: neither did this custom cease till Anno Dom. 1120. Poly.
in Angl. c. 11. de inven. l. 4. c. 10.
when Princes began to take to themselves the right of appointing Bishops in
every place; but before this an. 775. in a Synod held at Rome consisting of 133
Bishops, to the Emperor Charles the Great was granted the Electing both of Pope,
Archbishops and Bishops, Sidebert distinct. 63. Adrianus.
sub poena Anathematis, in the time of Pope Adrian, wherefore it was a
corruption that crept into the Church in time for Kings to appoint Bishops, and
not permit to the Clergy and People a free Election, the Lord being earnestly
sought unto in this so weighty a matter, and in fine the Election referred to
his Divine Majesty, who only knows the hearts of all men; which if it might
be done at this day, the King reserving to himself the power of Confirming a
Bishop thus chosen, His Majesty should free himself from being cause of any
corruption in the election, through the Covetousness of his Courtiers, the
Church of God within his Dominions should most probably be supplied with none
but worthy Bishops, and great unity would every where follow, and all cause of
Divisions in these Churches be cut off; but that it may be orderly proceeded to
such election, the King is to be sought unto to give leave, without whose leave
the Peoples assembling of themselves cannot but be unlawful: as his Writs must
first issue out to choose Knights of the Shire in every County, and that such
leave has anciently been given, the granting of Congedeleers in times of
vacancy to this day do declare, although the man now to be chosen be nominated
by the King, and it is in effect no leave to choose, but to receive hin, for
Bishop whom the King chooses.

Secondly, for the Bishops power above the Presbyters, his brethren; it is, as
Jerome says, only in ordination of Presbyters and Deacons, which cannot be done
without the Bishop; for to him singularly the Apostles committed this power, as
appears by St. Tit. 1. Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.23.
Paul's writing to Timothy and Titus, as he himself and Barnabas had by the
imposition of hands ordained many; whereas the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery is sometime spoken of: nothing else can here be gathered, but that
when the Bishop ordains he ought to do it with the assistance of some of his
Presbyters laying their hands on together with him, and joining in Prayer, the
Bishop having first examined him that is to be ordained, and accepted of him;
but forasmuch as the Apostles had the power of binding and loosing also
singularly committed unto them, and not the Seventy two sent out to preach, and
Bishops elected to govern the Church are their Successors, it is manifest that
the power of Excommunicating and Absolving is peculiar to the Bishop also, and
to such Presbyters to whom he sends out his Process, to publish it in their
particular Churches, as Saint Paul wrote to the Church of Corinth to deliver to
Satan the Incestuous man, declaring the cause, as it is necessary every Bishop
should do to the Rector of every Church.

Again, forasmuch as to Timothy Bishop of Ephesus St. Paul writes, not to
receive an Accusation against any under two or three witnesses: whereby is
implied, that he by virtue of his Apostleship, and power to judge the causes of
his Brethren the Presbyters about Ephesus; it must needs be granted, that the
same power belongs to every Bishop in his Diocese.

Lastly, because Timothy and Titus also had power given them to order things in
the Churches committed to their Government, for praying and preaching, and
stopping the mouths of ignorant and corrupt Teachers, and wicked livers, whose
sins break out after Ordination; it must needs be granted, that Bishops chosen
to rule have the like power. Yet when one is called to the weighty Office of
Ruling in the Church of God, the duty of Preaching diligently still lies upon
him, and rather more than before; for Timothy must not only be instant in
preaching in season and out of season, but also be an example in Doctrine and
Conversation.

Thirdly, touching those whom the Bishop is to use as Assistants in exercising
his power; I cannot find any Chancellor, Archdeacon, or Official once named
in any ancient Writer, but only of Presbyters and Deacons, by whose help they
did both ordain and censure, and being assembled in Counsel together make
Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, for which last we have a President
Acts 15. in the first Council assembling, which consisted of Apostles, Elders,
or Presbyters, and Brethren: and for the first in Paul's laying on of his hands
upon Timothy, and the Presbyters in ordaining him, and for the Presbyters
assistance in excommunicating, see 1 Cor. 5. For although the Church only be
there written to, yet it is not to be conceived, but that the Church consisted
of Presbyters and common Christians, amongst whom what was done cannot be
thought to have been done but by Presbyters as the mouth; and there were some
Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. but without Presbyters it could not be.

Fourthly, touching punishment inflicting upon any: The Bishop ought to have no
power but spiritual; For the weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, says the
Apostle, but spiritual, 2 Cor. 4. it is only such power as Christ committed to
his Apostles, and that was only the power of binding and loosing by
excommunicating and absolving, which is indeed a power beyond the power of the
greatest Monarchs in the world, and more to be feared; for if an earthly Judge
has power to send the body of an Offender to Prison, to be kept there by a
Jailer, and there to be used most hardly, and after that to condemn him to a
bodily death, or to pardon him and set him at liberty again: the power given by
Christ to his Apostles and their Successors, is to adjudge to the Prison of
Hell, the spirit and soul to be kept by Satan, and by him vexed and terrified
with terrors intolerable, and after that to be carried to that Dungeon where
there is utter darkness, there to remain in wailing and gnashing of teeth for
evermore; and upon serious and hearty repenrance to release the sinner again
from this grievous judgment if he be humbled, and professes his penitency
without delay: and if we believe our Lord Jesus, that which is done herein by
the Bishop according to his direction, is done by God; For what ye bind, says
he, upon earth, Math. 18.
shall be bound in heaven, and what ye loose shall be loosed in heaven most
certainly.

As for any punishment corporal, or pecuniary inflicting, it is proper to him
that bears the Sword, Romans 13.
and a Sword-man an Apostle or Bishop must not be, as our Savior showed, when
he gave Peter a check for drawing his Sword and smiting, For he that smites
with the sword shall perish by the sword; that is, he who is sent out to preach
peace.

Fifthly, touching the cause of excommunicating: although this power has been
heretofore used for not appearing at the Bishops Court when he has been
summoned, without any regard to the Calling, or Righteousness of the man, or
for money, or to bring in money, which was an abuse intolerable; yet there is
no warrant by the Word of God to deliver over to Satan for any cause but
scandalous living, or blasphemous Heresy; but for either of these causes there
is, as appears 1 Cor. 5. by the Apostles writing, to have the incestuous
person delivered over to Satan, till he repented; and to have all scandalous
brethren, Adulterers, Railers, Drunkards, etc. put from amongst them; although
Erastus denies this to be a ground for excommunicating, or putting the
scandalous liver from the holy Communion; for although but a Physician, he
would seem to have so much skill in Divinity as to assert, that none, although
most wicked, who hold the true faith, may lawfully be put from it, because none
such were kept from the Passover, but only such as were legally unclean, (...)
which uncleanness is now ceased; therefore says he, none are now to be
accounted unclean who are believers, as though if legal uncleanness which was
much lesser makes one unclean, (...)
but the uncleanness which is by sin does not much more, whenas that
uncleanness which was only outward, of this extending to the very conscience,
witness the Apostles saying, to the unclean all things are unclean, yea, the
very conscience is defiled; and this is not cleansed but by the blood of Christ,
that by the blood of bulls and goats: For not keeping from the Passover the
notoriously wicked by express Precept, there may be this Reason yielded: the
keeping of the Passover was but a legal Ceremony, and was to be eaten by all
that were circumcised, although not circumcised yet in heart, and therefore
neither Children nor Fools were debarred therefrom, nor wicked livers, it
sufficed that they who did eat hereof were not legally unclean; but the Lords
Supper is so holy and separate from profane use, that whosoever eats and
drinks of it unworthily eats and drinks damnation to himself, and this he
does whosoever does not first examine himself, and finding what a grievous
sinner he has been, sorrows not therefore with Godly sorrow, and confesses it
not, neither is converted therefrom. And if it be so, how can they that rule in
the Church, but be accessory to their sin whom they know to be unworthy, but
put them not from participating of this holy Ordinance, till that by
repentance, and promise of Reformation, they be sanctified, that so holy a
thing may not be given but to the holy, at the least so far forth as may be
gathered from their own mouths; although we cannot but admit of some unworthy,
whose wickedness is concealed: but for the commonly known to be profane, or
notoriously wicked, even the Heathen abhorred from having them come to their
sacrifices; for one was at such times set to cry thus, Procul, procul, este
prophani; for excommunicating blasphemous Heretics we have S. Paul for our
example, who says, 1 Timothy 1.2
he delivered Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme, that is, for a chastisement of the blasphemous Heresies which they
held, that they might be made to recant, as is the excommunicating of notorious
Offenders, that being by Satan terrified, who is now let loose upon them, they
may be made to repent, and although they suffer in their bodies this, have
their souls saved at the last day; for some then being excommunicated were
grievously handled in their bodies by Satan, whereby they were made to know how
cruelly they should be tormented in the life to come if they were not made
thereby to repent, as we may gather that the incestuous person at Corinth was,
for that he was so terrified after his excommunication, 2 Cor. 2.
that he was ready to be swallowed up of despair.

6. Touching more or fewer Bishops making in this Kingdom: It is not so
convenient that their Diocesses should be so large as they have been, because
that although in former Ages it might be necessary, when the land was not so
populous, to enlarge the limits of Bishoprics, laying many more Towns
together, and sometime two Counties to make one Bishopric, and able Shepherds,
of whom Bishops might be made, were more rare; yet now, thanks be to God
Christian people having far more increased in Cities, Towns, and Villages; and
Pastors of great ability both to preach and govern, it were much more
convenient that there should be more Bishops made in this Land; not only one
to a City and the Villages circumjacent, but to each City-like Town, most
Diocesses in England, as now they are constituted, being too great a burden to
their Bishops to bear; as Moses sometime complained of the burden of so
numerous a Nation laid upon him alone, and therefore desired the help of more
Rulers, and had by the Lord added unto him 72, whereby he and the people were
more eased, and the better enabled to do the work for which they were raised up.

As Diocesses now are, some belonging to their Charge are so far off, that they
cannot know, or ever hear their Bishop preach, although he continues amongst
them many years; neither can he know all the Clergy, or their worthiness or
unworthiness to encourage or reprove them according to their deserts, and what
a trouble and weariness is it to the people to be forced to travel, some of
them 30 or 40 miles to have their Causes heard, and to be at the charge to
retain Proctors to plead for them, yea, and sometimes Rectores Ecclesiae also:
but if more Diocesses should be made, whence should means be raised to maintain
so many Bishops? Even out of the Bishoprics that now are, and Deanaries, and
Prebendaries, of which what use is there in the Church of Christ, and of which
Antiquity was utterly ignorant?

If it would please God to move the hearts of the Kings Majesty, and the right
Honorable and worthy Members of this present Parliament thus to order this
great business touching Episcopacy, Oh how easily might each Bishop do his work
in his Diocese, by going to preach sometimes in one Church, and sometime in
another all over his Diocese, to the stirring up both of Presbyters and People
to Godliness! and what love and reverence would it procure in all men toward
them, and quell Sects and Factions in the Church, whereas heretofore whilst
Bishops sat idly at home, priding themselves in their Lordly greatness, as if
they were so advanced to live as the Rich man in the Gospel, when his fruits
were increased, in eating and drinking and making merry, being for zeal to the
Truth most cold, but very hot for superstitious ceremonies, coming as near to
the Popish Church as they could, they have been hated as the Pope, and
despised, and been the occasions of great Schisms and divisions in the Church
of Christ, although not so much breaking out as since Episcopacy was put down
in these three Kingdoms, but lying before us as fire covered over with Embers.
And hitherto of Episcopal Govenment.

For touching Archishops, I find no ground at all in the holy Scriptures, and
the Bishop of Rome was the first that ever took upon him the title of
Archbishop, then of Ecumenical Bishop, anno Dom. 119. as Platina says,
inviting all such as suffered wrong in any place to come unto him, and he would
relieve them, and Higinus a successor of his spends a great part of one of his
Epistles in magnifying the Bishops of Rome, as those that are Princes over
other Bishops; and so do most of the Bishops of that Sea: and Marcus Antonius
de Dominis, who was himself Archbishop of Spalato, in his Book entitled, De
Repub. Christiana shows, that Bishops only are of Apostolical institution,
but not Archbishops.

Now to proceed to speak of the book of Common Prayer: That there should be
such a book, The Book of Common Prayer.
and thereby an uniform proceeding in all Churches in this Kingdom, I suppose
it will be granted on all hands, unless by such as are transported by zeal
without knowledge; and Calvin himself is for the Ministers using of one and the
same form of prayer in the public place, and his reasons are very good. First,
because the prayers and thanksgiving there offered are not the Ministers only,
but of the whole Congregation, and therefore ought to be such prayers and
praises as the people by continual hearing are well acquainted withal, and
ready to say a men unto; whereas if the Minister be permitted to offer up
prayers in public, of his own conception, he may happily offer up such
Petitions sometimes as his own fantasy leads him to, that all the people
will not say amen unto, and it may not peradventure be good for them to join
with him therein, lest by so doing they be drawn in some petitions that tend to
Heresy, being for its prevailing; for this being considered of of old by the
Council of Bracca, a Decree was thereby made against any Ministers using a
Prayer in the public place which was not first seen by the Council and allowed.

Secondly, Because every Preacher is not alike guided by the Spirit of God in
praying, but some supposing that the excellency of praying lies in long
praying, will draw out their prayers in public to half an hour or an hour,
or more, at a time, till all or most of their hearers have their spirits tired,
and have their affections made to fag; which if they do, the Ministers praying
is nothing to them, but rather is turned into an occasion of offending God, as
all saying of prayers without lifting up the heart is: and this long praying is
so far from having any ground in Scripture, as that what is written there makes
against it, because when Christ taught his Disciples to pray, Math. 6.
he prescribed a short form, and condemned long praying in many words and
repetitions of the same things as vain babbling, Math. 23.
and hereby upbraided the Pharisees hypocritical praying, that they devoured
Widows houses, and for a color made long prayers; and the Preacher says, God
is in Heaven and thou upon Earth, Eccles. 5.2.
therefore let thy words be few: And both Chrisostom and Augustine are for
compendious praying, and not drawing a Prayer out to a great length by using
many words; for, to this end Chrisostom speaks against those that think to be
heard the rather if they make a Prayer consisting of a thousand lines. And
Augustine advises to make short prayers and often, that they who join in
prayer with thee may be able to keep their hearts lifted up all the time: and
this may serve to beat down the course which now generally takes with the
people in most places, that he has the most excellent gift in prayer that
stands longest in making his prayers. Others there are who prefer humane
eloquence in praying, and therefore fill their prayers with Flowers of
Rhetoric to the pleasing of the ears of the Hearers, which is a way that
neither Christ, the Prophets or Apostles have ever gone in, in praying: lastly,
some Ministers have so poor a faculty in conceiving a Prayer, that they are not
able without an help to do this duty in so good a manner as it ought to be done.

Thus to such as will be moved by Reason it is apparent, that there should be
in our Churches forms of godly Prayers and Thanksgivings to be commonly used by
all Ministers, and sometimes of prayers proper to the present occasion; if
there be plague or pestilence, or other infectious diseases in the land; if
there be danger by the sword of the enemy, or by Civil Wars; if there be famine
or unseasonable weather, too much rain or drought, blasts or mildew, thunder,
lightning or tempests, or murrein amongst Cattle, of many of which Solomon
speaks in his Divine Prayer at the dedication of the Temple which he built.

Touching Prayers commonly to be used every Lords day, they must begin with
confession of sins, and praying for pardon and mortification of sin in us, and
for faith to believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and grace to lead holy and new
lives, and for a blessing upon the Word wherein the Congregation is then to be
excercised in reading and hearing thereof, that all may give diligent attention
unto it, hear it with fear and trembling, and lay it up in their hearts as Mary
did, and live always in obedince to it in all things: and in praying we must
remember all men, the people of all Countries and Nations, such as already hold
the true Faith, who are the Church of Christ, that they may be preserved from
all their enemies, and established as upon a Rock, against which the gates of
Hell may not prevail, but fall as Dagon did before the Ark, and such as know
not Christ, that they may speedily be converted, and that to this end the true
light may rise up unto them, and the Christians who are Idolaters may be
undeceived, and turn from deifying of the Bishop of Rome, unto us, whom they,
for our being against him, count Heretics; and that the ancient People of God
the Jews may have the vail taken away from their eyes, that they may see into
the end of the Law, Christ Jesus, and believe, 2 Cor. 3.
and be saved, as the Apostle Paul says that they shall: then we ought to pray
for Kings and Magistrates under whom we live, and for the Ministry of the Word;
for all such as are afflicted, whether within our Land or without, that be our
brethren, being sorry for their sufferings as for our own. Thus for public
Prayers.

For Thansgivings, they are also to be made commonly; 1 Timothy 2.
first for gracious and godly Kings, when such are set over us, and like
Magistrates under them; for the light of the Gospel shining amongst us by the
Preachers thereof, beseeching the Lord of the Harvest from time to time to send
forth Laborers into his Harvest. We ought also to have Thanksgivings for Rain,
and fruitful Seasons, for deliverance from Plague, Pestilence, or Famine, for
Victory over our Enemies, and Cessation of War, which has been in our Land,
and particularly for Women preserved from the great danger of Childbirth, when
God has made themable to come again to his house to give him thanks, as we
ought to pray for them that are laboring with child, and for such as we have
in their dangerous sicknesses prayed for, when they are restored to health
again, and if we look into our Book of Common prayer enjoined every Minister to
use in his Church under a great penalty, by statute Law made, 10. The book of
Common Prayer.
of Elizabeth we shall find therein formed a Common Prayer prescribed in
confessing of our sins, and in all the particulars beforegoing so pious and
effectual as any that can be conceived; that only which can by any that are
conscientious be excepted against, is so great a multitude of prayers to the
tiring of the spirits, both of the Minister and people, although for the most
part they be but short, yet being so many, and some often repeated, the saying
of them all cannot but be a weariness to most men whose devotion is but weak,
and therefore it were to be wished, that his Majesty and his great Council
would refer the amending of this fault to some Godly and judicious Divines, in
whom there is no prejudice against a reformation herein, as there is in some
who are so addicted to our Liturgy as it is, that they say it cannot by all the
Divines in England be amended, which I grant is true, for the matter and form
of these Prayers, but for the multiplicity and repetitions, it must needs be
yielded for the reasons aforegoing, that the Book may be amended to the better
liking of the whole Nation; for when the reading of all these Prayers was
enjoined, there were but few able Preachers in England, but abundance of
Churches and Parishes, to meet there to offer up their Prayers to Almighty God,
and to hear his holy word read and taught, insomuch as that in most Churches
Sermons were seldom preached, but only Divine Service said, and some homily
read in the forenoon, and in the afternoon only Divine Service said; wherefore
that a competent time might be spent both times, the Liturgy used of old,
before the Reformation of Religion, when in most Churches they came only to
hear Mass was translated into our mother tongue, that which was Idolatrous
being left out, and so appointed to be used in all Churches, with the prayers
therein contained, being so good and effectual, could not but be a commendable
way for that time, but now thanks be to God, the number of learned and able
preachers being greatly increased, who labor almost in every Church, in
preaching forenoon and afternoon, it were too great a burden to enjoyne them,
the reading of so many prayers, an Epistle and Gospel beside Psalm and Chapters
every forenoon; and it would be too great tediousness to the people, and
wearying of their affections, to the making of them to worship God with their
bodies, but not with their spirits, which is vain, for what difference between
their praying, Esaias. 9.
that are so long and full of repetitions condemned in Scripture as
Pharisaical, and such a multitude of prayers, and some again repeated, being
altogether as long as their own prayer, yea, does it not come near to the
superstitious devotion of the Papists, who pray upon beads saying a great
number of prayers at once? thinking for the great multitude of them to be the
more accepted before the Lord, we have no hint given us in Holy Scriptures of
multiplying many prayers when we come together in the public place, but of
praying there together, and then spending the greatest part of the time in
reading and preaching, the whole time, for the most part, in preaching and
expounding the Scriptures. For when at any time Christ came into a Synagogue on
the Sabbath day, we read of a lecture of the Law, and the Prophets then Read,
and then of his Preaching, but of Praying we read nothing at that time, Luke 4.
although there was certainly praying also; for my house, says the Lord shall
be called the house of Prayer: and as he did, so he gave Commission to all his
Disciples to do, saying, Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. But of
saying any prayers before preaching he said nothing, although the Apostles
after his Ascension, and other believers assembled together to pray, Act. 1.14.
and they again after the converting of 3000 continued together in teaching,
breaking Bread, and prayer, and many other passages there be, which show that
there was Praying in the House of God, as well as preaching. But most time by
far was spent in Preaching and Reading, as appears by Nehemiah 8. where first
it is said, That Ezra read in the Book of the Law before the people, assembled
together, from Morning till Midday. ver. 3. Then he prayed, all the people
saying Amen. ver. 6. After which by other Ministers of the Lord the people were
further instructed in it. ve. 8 All which considered, who can stand yet for
saying so many Prayers at every assembling together, to the house of God, And
not acknowledge that the Book of Common Prayer has need to be corrected, by
putting out the repetition of the Lords Prayer, after the rehearsing of the
Creed of the Apostles, and then after the Letany, which is a most excellent and
general Prayer for all things and all persons that we should pray for,
concluding Morning-prayer with two Prayers only following, and the three
prayers for Good Friday, which is for the conversion of Jews, Turks, and other
Infidels, the versicles and repeating of the Lords Prayer there being left out,
Against Letay exceptions
and the Prayer of the Kings Royal Progeny and Bishops, Curates and People, as
being prayed for before in the Letany, and here because some petitions in the
Letany are by some excepted against, I will say somewhat in the justification
thereof; some except against this, Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the
offenses of our fore Fathers. As if in so saying, we pray for the Dead, but
they are too captious that make this exception, for the Lord threatens to
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, to the third and fourth
Generation, And to the same effect our Lord Jesus threateneth the Jews, Matt.
23.
to bring all the Righteous Blood that had been shed by their Forefathers upon
them; Wherefore we pray only against vengeance, taking upon us for our own
sins, or the sins of our Forefathers, against which who but a cavellar can
speak.

Secondly, They except against this, from Fornication and all other deadly sin,
Good Lord deliver us. As if hereby the Popish Doctrine, that some sins are
venial, and some only deadly, Romans 6.23.
were employed, when as the wages of any sin is death, unless repented of, and
pardoned: But although it be so, yet there are some sins greater then others,
of which it is particularly said, that they who do such things shall die, Exek.
18. Gal. 5.19.
and never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, of which Fornication is one,
wherefore every lesser sin indangereth him that commits it, in respect of the
second death; yet there are some greater sins, whereby the Soul is more
endangered, because few of them that live in such great sins, have the grace
given them to Repent; we pray therefore to be kept from all sin, but more
especially against the greatest, as David. Psalm. 19.12, 13. Cleanse me from
secret faults, and keep me from presumptuous sins, so shall I be innocent from
the great offense, which is most deadly.

Thirdly, They except against praying against sudden death, for we ought all to
be always prepared for Death, and to such as are prepared, it can never be
sudden. But seeing no man lives and sins not, who can be always so well
prepared as he should be? and who then has not need to pray this Prayer? And
sudden dying is more uncomfortable to friends surviving, and may prevent the
setting of our houses in order, which was granted in favor to Hezekiah, and
the parents blessing of his children before he die, as Isaac and Jacob did, and
their giving instructions to those about them, which commonly are most
memorable to the edifying of the hearers at that time, and their own commending
of their Souls to God by prayer, and the death of the wicked is sometimes
spoken of, as a sudden going down into the pit, as we have heard, that some of
them have done, in the very acting of some great sin.

Fourthly, They except against that petition, That God would preserve all
Traveling by land or by Water; Whenas by land there are some Thieves
traveling, and by water some Pirates and murderers; But by saying all, we
mean only all that be traveling about their lawful occasions only.

Fifthly, They except against that, wherein we pray, That God would have mercy
upon all men; for which there is a plain place. 1. Tim. 2. Let Prayers and
supplications be made for all men, and a reason added, that God would that all
should be saved, neither does it make against our praying thus, that few shall
be saved, it is enough for us, that God would not have any perish, but turn
from sin and live, and therefore this we must pray for, as we would not be
found defective in doing our duty herein by God commanded, and helping what we
can, all men toward Salvation, leaving the success to God; Some other
exceptions also be made against our Book of Common Prayer, Except taken.
as against the Collect of the second Sunday after Trinity Sunday, wherein it
is said, Give unto us that which our prayers dares not perfume to ask. As if
there were any thing, that we durst not pray for in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when as he has bidden us ask and ye shall have; and said, whatsoever
ye ask in faith shall be done for you: but the meaning is not, that we dare
not for our unworthiness, if we had not been warranted thereunto by his
promise: But thereupon we are made bold to ask the greatest boones in all the
World, the pardon of all our sins, and Justification by faith, and Salvation.
As for the exception taken to the words of the Prophet Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
in the beginning of our Divine Service not rightly rendered, but so as may make
a wicked man bold to go on in his sins till his last sickness: At what time
soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I
will blot out all his wickedness out of my remembrance says the Lord; Whereas
the words of the Prophet are, If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
has committed, and keep all my Satutes, and do that which is Lawful and
right, he shall hereby live, he shall not die, all his transgressions that he
has committed, shall not be mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he
has done he shall live: Betwixt which, and the Book of Common Prayer, there is
this great difference, there forgiveness of sin is promised only upon
repentance, from the bottom of his heart, which may be understood of hearty
sorrow, and no more, when he sees the Ax ready to be laid to the Root of the
tree to cut it down, which Ahab did when he saw judgments ready to come down
upon him, and Judas also repented and was exceedingly sorry; in the Prophet
there is turning from all his sins, and keeping all the Statutes of the Lord,
and doing that which is lawful and right required in him that would not die,
but live; of wicked, he must turn righteous, which one being deadly sick, and
dying, has no time now to do, although he be penitent and grieved at his heart
for his sins, for if it be in truth, he has yet but two parts of Repentance in
him, which Reprobates may have, as in the two examples beforegoing, confession
of the mouth, and contrition of the heart; But for want of the third, keeping
the statutes of the Lord, and doing contrary to that which he did before, he
cannot expect the fulfilling of the promise of Life made to them that do thus;
wherefore instead of this beginning it is necessary to set down the very words
of the Prophet, that there may be no occasion given to the wicked to think,
when they have in the public place confessed and sorrowed for their sins a
while, they are forgiven, and shall be saved, although they turn not from them
all, no nor from any, but return as the Dog to his vomit.

And hitherto of that, which I have thought necessary to be considered, and
amended, or not, in our common Prayers, and that not without showing good and
solid reason, which ought to bear sway with all that are endued with reason,
more than the custom that has heretofore been when our case was not like to
that which now is. As for the Ornaments, as they are called, wherein the
Minster is enjoined to read and to use them in all his ministration. Surplice
and Cope.
viz. The Cope and Surplice and Hood, because I hear that they shall no more be
enjoined, because of the scandal that has been by them in most parts of the
land, I will say no more but this, they are truly relics of Popery; although
the Surplice has been used very anciently, yet not in the first century, but
altogether without ground in holy Scripture, which commands to do only in the
public worship of God what he prescribes, without adding, or detracting
ought, which holds as well under the N. T. as the old, wherein vestments were
indeed commanded to be used, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
by the Priests in their ministration about the Altar, but now under the new,
that kind of service being at an end, and a new, which is spiritual, being set
up, without peculiar vestments, for which the Minister is left free, as well as
other men, what was it but a reducing again of a ceremony antiquated long
before into the Evangelical Church, which was proper to the legal, contrary to
the Rule given by our Savior; The true worshippers of God, John 4.20.
shall worship him in spirit and in truth: which is not yet so to be
understood, as if no regard was to be had to externals, for we must worship God
outwardly in the body also, according to that, O come let us worship and fall
down, and kneel before the Lord our maker, and a man praying or Prophesying
with his head covered, that is having his hat on his head, as when he is only
amongst his fellows, for not doing this outward reverence to Christ his head,
who is in a special manner present in the congregation, thus reverencing him
less than the head of the Kingdom where he lives, dishonors his head:
Cor. 11.
and for garments to be worn by the Minister in his ministration, that which is
most decent may be enjoined, for all things must be done decently and in order,
and if by our governors in the Church, a black Gown, which has been proper to
a Minister, be judged most decent, and a peculiar kind of Cloak, whereby he may
in all places be known from other men, and reverenced accordingly, what are any
that are inferiors to take exceptions thereto; and likewise if they inhibet
the Clergy from wearing long hair, which the Apostle says is a shame for any
man to wear, and require, that they show no levity, and in their own apparel,
by wearing light colors but dark, which shows gravety; not in following vain
fashions of the time, Zeph. 1.8.
which shows exceeding great levity, which ought to be reproved by the
Minister and threatened, Reading of the Scriptures.
as by Zephany even in the Kings Children.

For Reading of the holy Scriptures in the Church before preaching, there is
something which is justly excepted against. viz. both the appointing of
Chapters to be read out of Apocry phal Books, as Esdras, the book of Wisdom and
of Tobit, etc. and those not a few, but 60 at the least in the year, wherein
they say that the Service book, which now we have, is altered from the first
appointed in the year of Edward 6. in which were none but canonical Scriptures
appointed to be read, and that in all Churches the Ministers are required to
read Chapters, both in the Old and New Testament, appointed by the days of the
month, which though it may be well in Churches or Chapels where service is
said every day, yet if the Minister in every parochial Church keeps himself
to this order, he shall not in many years, by reading the Chapters appointed
for the Lords days, read most of the Chapters of the Bible, but pass them
over continually. And forasmuch as now there is preaching in every Church of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, sometimes upon Gospels, and sometimes upon Epistles,
this is but an adding of an unnecessary labor, to the wearying of the
preacher, before he comes to his greatest labor. Wherefore His Majesty and
the Council of the Land, in whose power only it is, are to be desired to see
these things amended also.

And lastly, because it is an offense to some, Reading of prayers.
and indeed, not so commendable in a Minister to read prayers, and there was
not any such thing done in Israel of old, for nothing was read in the
congregation but Scripture, and as for praying and praising of God it was don
memoriter, by the Minister, Nehe. 8.
the saying of the prayers set forth in the Book of Common Prayer without book
by the Minister would be enjoined, that coming from his spirit immediately, as
if they were his own, both he himself and the whole Congregation may be the
better affected therewith, and such as know not how to pray, by hearing them
often so said, may be stirred up to learn them by heart also, and make use of
them, or some of them, in private, which how shall they be put on to do, if the
Minister himself cannot say them, but by the book: to read a prayer made by
others cannot be praying by the spirit, as all praying in the Congregation
ought to be; but then may one be said to pray by the spirit, when he has laid
up the prayer to be uttered in his heart, and from thence immediately brings it
forth, being affected with it, as if it were of his own conceiving. If it shall
be counted sufficient for a Minister to read prayers in the Congregation, when
his sight grows dim, or he cannot see, or the Sky be overcast with darkness,
how shall he be able to go on in praying? if it be said every one has not so
good a memory: I answer, He that gives himself to praying, upon pains taking
shall attain to a memory snfficient for this, and so all Ministers after the
example of the Apostles ought to do, Act. 6.
or else they are not worthy of the Ministry, as for the praying in the Pulpit,
if so much time has been spent in praying before, it will not be requisite
now, for the Preacher to spend much time in praying again, but after a short
prayer made for the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, and for a blessing, to fall
immediately to the work of preaching, Matt. 5. Luke 4.
For when Christ preached in the Mount, and in Nazareth, we read of spending
time in preaching, but not in praying, and likewise of the Apostle Peter's
saying much when the people were assembled together to hear him, Act. 2. Act.
10.
by way of preaching only, and of Paul: neither do I find that any of the
Ancient Doctors of the Church, when they stood up to preach, did otherwise. As
for the ten commandments rehersing every Lords day, in the house of God, to
make all the people perfect in them, I hold it most necessary, for if a man
must in his own house daily speak of the Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.
how much more ought the Minister of God in his house? and add together with
the people the precatiuncle set forth in the end. For the Ministers giving
warning to keep diverse holy days, which have not most anciently been kept in
the Church of God, that is the Saints days, Of Saints days.
there is great need to put down the keeping of all these, both because we do
not read of any such days keeping before anno 501. which was a time of great
Superstition. Anastasius being then Bishop of Rome, who was a Nestorian
Heretic, and caused Macedonius Bishop of Constantinople to keep the Feasts of
Peter and Paul, which had never been done in the East before, as I have showed
in my History of the Church, where I have also proved by good reason, that it
was a corrupt Superstition crept into the Church to injoin the keeping of them.
First, because working was prohibited poor men upon those days, who can hardly
live upon their labor all the six days, when as the Lord allows all to work
upon all the six days, and prohibiteth work only upon the seventh. Secondly,
such as are idly disposed, both poor men and Servants, had by this means a
Cloak for their Idleness, to the great detriment of the Commonwealth, and
because Idleness gives advantage to to fleshly lusts which fight against the
Soul, the keeping of those days was a letting loose of the reins to wicked men's
inordinate affections, that they might run to all excess of riot, as former
experience has often proved, especially at the Festival time of Christmas,
when so many days together were spent in idleness and vanity, and if there
were nothing else amiss in keeping these days but idleness, when all should
work, it were enough to press to the putting of them down; for that idleness
is so much condemned in holy Scripture. Thirdly, because they are commanded to
be kept holy, by resorting to Church to read and hear the word of God, and to
pray, and yet no days are spent so profanely, there being no care had but to
keep laboring men and Tradesmen from the necessary work of their Callings,
and if they do their work to punish them, and so the holy day is made but a
stale to bring money into the Commissaries Court. Fourthly, It is too great an
honor to be given to any but God to call a day after his name, and to keep it
in way of honoring them; for this comes near to the worshipping of the
Saints departed, and Mine honor (says the Lord) will I not give to another.
If it had pleased God that such honor should be given to his Saints, surely
something would have been said of it, and days should have been instituted
under the old Testament by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Joseph and Moses, Samuel
and David, etc. and under the new by the Apostles, before that so long a time
as five hundred years had passed. Lastly, in other reformed Churches this
burden of keeping any holy days besides the Lords days, and some to the honor
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the day of his Nativity without the tale of so
many days more added, of his Resurrection, Ascension, and of his sending down
of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, and the day of his Passion has been long ago
cast off, but not the keeping of the day of the Lords Nativity, as lately has
been done in England, when our Divines Assembled at Westminster could not find
that any days ought to be kept holy but the Lords days, whenas by ancient
History it appears that the day of the Lords Nativity was kept in the very
first Century of years after Christ's death; for there it is recorded, that in
the year 130 Nativitatis Domini, Telesphorus being Bishop of Rome, he amongst
other Decrees made this for one, that three Masses should be said, that is,
there should be three Communions as upon a most high day, upon the day of the
Lords Nativity, one in the Evening when he was born, another in the night, when
by Angels from heaven his birth was declared, a third at day light, because the
first day of Salvation then began to shine, whereby it is intimated, that our
Lords Birth day had been kept before in his Church, no man being to tell how
long, whence it may be gathered, that the custom began immediately after his
Ascension to Heaven, and now the Solemnity thereof began to be more increased
among Christans, but the increasing thereof by keeping 12 days, was not brought
in til 400 years after, wherefore upon the reasons before going they may be cut
off, and it will be best pleasing to our Lord to keep his day alone by doing
duties of Devotion, in Feasting and other expressions of joy, and exercising
liberality to the poor, partly upon other days also when that day approaches.
And thus much touching Holy days.

Now to say something touching the Holy Communion, and the Service appointed
about it, the Exhortations to be made to the Communicants before receiving are
all very good and Godly if they were not too much tyring to the Minister, after
his Spirits spent so much before in praying, reading and preaching: and
therefore it were to be wished, that all the Service going before might be
omitted, as being in effect said before amongst all the people, and one of the
Exhortations to prepare to the worthy receiving, and so proceed immediately to
that short one, beginning thus, Ye that do truly and earnestly repent ye of
your sins. etc. to the end, a Psalm being finally sung, as Christ has given us
example, and then The peace of God which passes all understanding, etc. some
places of Scripture tending to stir up Charity to the poor, Of kneeling.
being in conclusion recited, and the Alms gathered. For the gesture of
kneeling appointed in receiving, it is a gesture showing the greatest humility
that can be, as is in all reason expected by the Lord when at his hands we
receive so great a Blessing: and the Minister at the same instant is praying
that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ should preserve us bodies and souls to
eternal life. Whereas it is excepted against by some, because at the
Institution the Apostles did not kneel but sit, and as it was done then so
ought we to do. I answer, this I deny, but what they were commanded to do we
ought to do, that is, to take bread, Give thanks, break, and eat it as his
body, in remembrance of him, etc. for the gesture since there is nothing said,
we are left to our own liberty therein, and the Governors of the Church have
power to appoint in what Gesture it shall be done, so that it be according to
the general rule most decent, and such is kneeling for a subject before his
Sovereign, confering some honor upon him, as he does that has the honor of
Knight hood conferred upon him, and so he that has the honor of a Doctor
conferred upon him by the Vice Chancellor of the University kneeleth before him
to be admitted to it, and a Son before his Father at receiving his Blessing,
and why then may not a Christian before Christ his Sovereign Lord offering
himself unto him to be received by the hand of his Minister, his
Representative. If the practice of the Apostles at the Institution were
obligatory to all Christians, Cor. 11.
St. Paul in commemorating the Institution would certainly have made mention of
it, as well as of other circumstances, but because he does not, it is apparent
that we are not bound to hold us to the same gesture, and indeed that the
Gesture is not material appears; for that although at the Institution of the
Passover, instead whereof the Lords Supper was ordained, standing was
appointed, yet Christ with his Disciples did not eat it standing but sitting.
If it be objected against kneeling, that is an appearance of evil, that is, of
Artolatria, the worshipping of the bread of Christ's body held in the hands of
the Priest, believed by many to be no bread now, but the Lords body, who is to
be worshipped. Ans. in such as believe so, it is indeed Artolatria, that is
Idolatry, but for so much as we do not believe it for substance to be any other
than bread till sanctified to an holy use, and Christ's body only to such as
believe it to be so to them when they have received it, nourishing them to
eternal life. In our kneeling only for reverence to the Lord when we receive,
it cannot carry a show of Idolatry, although, if when it is carried about, as
in the Church of Rome, They that fall down upon their knees to it cannot but be
guilty of this foul sin, whether they believe it to be Christ or not. Kneeling
therefore in recieving by those that are of the same Faith with us cannot be
justly accepted against, yet because some weak ones will be scandalized hereby,
it may be received standing, as it is in some Reformed Churches, but sitting at
the Lords Table is most undecent and unmannerly.

After the Communion follows that Service which is to be used in Baptising,
Of baptism.
in which nothing has been by the most scrupulous excepted against, but
against the requiring Godfathers and Godmothers to answer for them, and in
such words as they are biden to do, and against signing with the sign of the
Cross; for the first, that there should be Sureties for Infants that cannot
yet speak for themselves, if they be wise and Godly, and make conscience to do
their endeavor when the Children are grown to Understanding, that they may be
taught and stirred up to profess and promise for themselves what has bin
promised in their behalf, it cannot but be acknow ledged to be good Christian
care of the Church whereby it is thus provided: But the questions asked of them
would be a little altered thus. First, Do ye believe in God the Father
Almighty? etc. and not do thou, as if the question were directed to the
Child, for this is by many counted ridiculous. Secondly, Do ye desire to have
this Child Baptized in this Faith? Thirdly, Do ye come to undertake, as much as
in you shall lie, that this Child shall forsake the Devil? etc. The answer to
this last being, we do thus undertake all these things; for if the Children of
believing Parents ought to be Baptized (as all the Orthodox have ever held)
truly there is great need that some faithful persons should undertake for
them, as has been said, and help what they can toward the Childrens doing so,
as is promised, till they by learning the Catechism come to answer for
themselves. Neither was the name of Anabaptists heard of for the space of 1500
years and upward, where John Leyden an ambitious Tailor in the City of Munster
in Germany, aspired by such means after making himself a King, as he did, and
by other abominable opinions which he then broached. And for the baptizing of
Infants we have this convincing reason grounded upon the word of God, that if
Infants under the N. T. who come of Gods people that profess the true faith
ought not to be baptized, there is no Sanctifying Ordinance for them, and they
are in worse case than the Infants of the Jews, because they had Circumcision,
whereby they were sanctified and delivered from the danger of death, to which
they were by nature subject, but being circumcised, they were saved if they
died in their Infancy: but the Children of Christians should be altogether
without any sanctifying Ordinance, and so continue Children of wrath, as all
are by nature, and if they die before they be baptized in danger of being cut
off, John 3.5.
for unless one be born again of water and the Holy Ghost he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Peter. 3.19.
and St. Peter says that baptism is as Noah's Ark that saves, and how absurd
is it to say that none can be saved till they they be grown up and attain to
actual Faith? for to say they ought not to be baptized til then is in effect to
say so. Now that Children born under the N. T. are not in a worse but a better
case than they under the Old, appears by this, that we have now a better
Mediator, and a better High Priest, and a more glorious Ministry; for then
Moses was the Mediator, Aaron the High Priest, and Moses had his face covered
when he spoke to the people: but now the Son of God is Mediator and High
Priest, and lays Heaven open more plainly by his Ministry, and the way for
Parents and Children to attain unto it, viz. by baptism, after that the Parent
believes administered both to him and them. If this were not so, what comfort
could believing Parents have although they themselves were baptized, but their
children not, for fear of their dying unbaptized and unsanctified? for their
children are as dear to them as their own souls. If any shall think that they
are sanctified by the faith of their Parent, because it is said to believers at
Corinth In case but that one Parent were a Believer, otherwise your Children
were unclean, but now they are holy. It is to be understood that the Apostle
said so, because that immediately after the Parent was baptized, the children
were baptized also, and this is more than probable, because Origin who lived
about an. 200 says, that it was held to be a Tradition of the Apostles that
Infants ought to be baptized. Secondly, The Cross.
touching the Cross in baptism, although it has been very anciently used, and
God has sometimes wrought miraculously thereby for the confirmation of the
Faith, as Chrysostom says, yet for so much as it has been in time of Popery
turned into an Idol by being adored and trusted in, Godly zeal cannot endure it
any longer, but as Hezekiah, that good King, when the people committed Idolatry
with the brazen Serpent, which had been by Moses set up, and miraculous cures
had been thereby wrought upon such as were stung by the fiery flying Serpents,
brake it down, so ought every good Christian King to do by the Cross, that
such an occasion of Superstition being taken away, Laying on of hands.
the like sin may be no more committed. As for Confirmation by the Bishops
laying on of his hands in due time upon children that have been baptized, there
seems to be a ground for it, Heb. 6. where Imposition of hands is spoken of as
one of the principles of the Christian Religion, and that next to the Doctrine
of baptism, and therefore it is hereby intimated, that Children which had been
baptized were to come when they had attained to the knowledge of that which
they were in their Baptism bound unto, to have hands laid upon them by such as
had power committed unto them, to bless them, as the Apostles had, that they
might receive the Spirit of Grace and Sanctification, as actual believers, as
being baptized, and having the Apostles hands laid upon them, received the Holy
Ghost, and spoke with tongues, as is to be seen specially Acts 8. where the
Samaritans, who believed being baptized by Philip, when Peter was come, and
laid his hands upon them, received the Holy Ghost, but Philip had not
commission thus to do, and as was said before, Bishops are the Apostles
successors, and therefore to them only it seems that this power was given, and
that they ought to go about in their limits to do this office, and herein the
Apostles had Christ for their example, to whom little children were brought,
and he blessed them, and required, that it should so be done, saying, suffer
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, etc. as being of avail
toward the attayning of the kingdom of Heaven, and therefore this is to be
believed touching Christ's blessing of little children, although they were not
then intelligent enough to believe actually, but the Bishops blessing is to be
after some knowledge attained unto, as the Apostles laying on of hands was not
but upon them that had knowledge, and did prosess the true faith, wherefore the
Ordinance of conformation is not to be disallowed, but not to be extolled, as
it is in the Church of Rome, as a Sacrament, and that not inferior to Baptism,
and as necessary to Salvation, it must needs be granted to be very necessary,
because a necessity is hereby put upon parents to teach their children betimes
the ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, etc. and to cause them
to come to Church to be examined by the Minister, as is appointed, that the
Catechism which is so short being learned by them, they may be blessed, and the
work begun about them in their baptism perfected; whereas if this Ordinance of
conformation by imposition of hands and Praying be neglected, neither will
parents who are ignorant themselves, or were not thus brought up, have any care
of teaching or getting their Children taught these things, as by long
experience has proved too true, and so many by Baptism received in their
infancy to be Christians, are for ignorance of the Christian Principles like
Heathens, differing only from them in this, that they have been baptized, which
when they are grown up will avail them no more to Salvation, then circumcision
in the flesh did the Jew, that was without the circumcision of the spirit,
wherefore let this most ancient custom of the Church be again revived, and
Ministers of the Gospel in all Churches straightly enjoined to Catechize as
well as to Preach, at the least till the children of their Parishes are made
perfect in that so short a Catechism set forth by Authority, and if any
ministers mind moves him to add more questions thereunto, he may find above 100
more interlaced in my Catechism put out near 40 years ago and allowed, and
along time by many of my brethren in the Ministry used, till that unhappy
confusion came into our Church, and under a pretense of more Reformation, much
more deformity came to the face of our fair Mother the Church of England, and
because Parents are generally most negligent in causing their Children to come
to be Catechized, and much more in teaching them at home, it is as necessary to
lay some pecuniary mulct upon them if they cause them not, as is upon them, if
themselves be absent from the Church; if our higher powers would take this into
their serious consideration, and strictly enjoin all Ministers to do their
parts in Catechizing, and Parents in teaching and causing their Children to
come to becatechized, instead of a most ignorant, we should have a most knowing
generation, and where there is any Grace, a more conscionable, to live and do,
as with their own mouths every one shall acknowledge to be his bounden duty,
but Bishops diocesses being so large, that they cannot in person go about, to
lay their hands upon all, that are instructed, will it not be necessary to make
deputies in more remote places, to do it in their stead?

Of Matrimony.
Touching the proceedings and service in Matrimony by the Book of Common Prayer
appointed, these words which the Husband is bidden to say, with my body I thee
worship, sound so ill, as that most men take exceptions to them, because they
may be taken as implying the husbands making a God of his wife, seeing, as
Christ says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve; To take away this exception therefore, if instead of those words, these
might be used, And I will honor thee as the weaker vessel, it would not be
without ground in the Holy Scripture, and of the going of the Priest
immediately to the Lords Table -- the persons Married following, and kneeling
there to pray, and to take the Communion, what reason can be yielded, yea, is
there not reason against it, it is a show of worshipping and praying to the
host, as it is called, as to Christ, made of the Bread standing there.
Secondly, there is danger of their unworthy receiving, for want of examining
themselves before, to which they are then most probably indisposed, as having
their hearts then taken up with other pleasures; Wherefore this also would be
considered, and no more enjoined, they that are to be married being rather
required at some other time before, when there is a Communion, reverently to
receive it, being duly prepared.

Now remains nothing more to be spoken to in the Book of Common Prayer, The
Visitatio^ of the Sick.
but the Visitation of the Sick, the Burial of the Dead, and Thanksgiving for
women coming to Church after Childbearing, in all which none other but the
good spirit seems to have been the guide of such as thus ordered it; and it is
pity that the order for the visitation of the sick is not generally followed,
being so Godly and comfortable. And for the burial of the Dead, Burial of the
Dead.
what can be excepted against, unless it be in that prayer, that we, with this
our brother, and all other departed in the true faith, may have our perfect
consummation and bliss in thine everlasting Kingdom; but they are too quick
of apprehension, who say, that this is with the Papists a praying for the dead
whenas indeed it is not a praying that they may be saved, but for the hastening
of the time of perfecting our Salvation both in Soul and Body; that is, that
the coming of our Lord Jesus may be hastened, when this shall be done, and the
person deceased being a Christian, who in the judgment of charity supposing
him to be gone to Heaven in his Soul, pray thus for him together with our
selves and other believers.

The thanksgiving for women, Thanks giving for Women.
and their bringing of an offering after childbearing, in way of real
thankfulness, is grounded upon Levit. 12. For although it were a Ceremonial
Law, and Ceremonial rites are now done away, yet there was a moral in the same
enjoined, which binds always, that is to show thankfulness in the house of
God for so great a deliverance, Isa. 28.22.
as Hezekiah being delivered from his deadly sickness, went up to the house of
the Lord, and praised God.

And thus by the help of God I have finished the task undertaken, to show how
unity may be restored to the Church of England, in respect of Episcopal
Government, and the book of Common Prayer, now the God of peace and unity work
so in the hearts of his Majesty and Parliament, that it may be so done, and the
doubts and Scruples about the Book of Common Prayer, being taken away, as has
been said, the same good God work so in the hearts of all his Ministers, that
all contention being laid aside, they may with one heart and one mind, agree to
serve God in the public place in such uniformity, that the Pristine splendour
of this our Mother Church through uniformity may be restored, and the foul
blemish of differences may be done quite away, to the great comfort of all true
hearted Christians, and the glory of God Almighty. And because unity in opinion
is no less necessary, than uniformity indivine worship, and there be many
Sects in the Church of England at this day, although it be not possible for the
higher powers on Earth by their authority, or for the learned in divine
knowledge, to make by their most convincing arguments, all to be of one mind
with the Chatholick Church reformed: yet there may be some course taken to keep
their erroneous opinions from spreading further, and their liberty may be so
suppressed, as that there may in appearance and ex professo, be little or no
discord; and this may be by injoyning all under a penalty to be taken off, such
as shall afterward offend, to come duly to their own parish Church, as is by
Law required. 2. By not permitting under a greater penalty, private meetings in
houses. 3. By stoping the mouths of their ringleaders and teachers, the
punishment of imprisonment, or banishment being laid upon them that will not
forbear; for so godly Emperors have dealt with such disturbers of the peace of
the Church in times past, and good reason, for as Elijah said, if the Lord be
God follow him, if Baal be he, go after him, it is intolerable that there
should be more religions in one Kingdom, than one generally professed therein
under one head, because as Religion has the name a religando binding men's
hearts together, so permit diverse religions, and although in some politic
respects, they may live together in external peace, yet their hearts not being
knit together, but separated from one another, this peace cannot always
continue, but as there is an opportunity offered break out into bloody
dissension, as was proved by woeful experience in the Romish Chatholicks in
Ireland, and Anabaptists in Germany, and when in time of peace so great a
Massacre was made in France, Anno 1573.

To conclude, whereas in this Tract I have made some mention of my History of
the World, from the creation to the end of Nehemiah his principality, 2. From
thence to the destruction of Jerusalem. 3. From thence to the Year of our Lord
1648. His Majesty may be pleased to take notice, and all others that delight in
the best Histories, that I have by Gods assistance finished this great work
diverse years ago, and have it ready to be published, if it might be accepted
of, as being next unto the sacred history, most necessary for all Christians
who are studious to read, for the better understanding of the most notable
things done in the world, both before the Flood and since in the 4 Monarchies,
and other Kingdoms of the world, and of the state of the Church of God in
those 500 years, of which the Holy Scripture says nothing, and lastly of the
government that has been by Emperors, and Bishops of Rome, and Councels, of
Heresies, corruptions in Religion, famous Doctors in the Church, and most
memorable occurrances in Kingdoms, and miracles wrought to confirm faith, or
superstition, true or false.

FINIS.

