TRIA SUNT OMNIA: OR A necessary Narration, and distinct Discussion OF FAITH,
HOPE and LOVE; Legible in the Idea of the Book.

By R. Mayhew; M. of the G. Author of that Tract, which has this Title, The
Death of Christ, the Death of Death.

1 Cor. 13.13. And now abides Faith, Hope, Love; these three; but the greatest
of these is Love.

Litera scripta manet, non ita verba diu:
Litera sculpta manet, non ita^ scripta diu.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snowden, for the Author, An. 1680.

TO THE SERIOUS and SPIRITUAL READER.
READER.
SOlomon (the Sage of Israel) has transmitted this Sentiment of his unto
posterity; Eccl. 12.12.
Of making many Books there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the
flesh. But, though there may be a weariness (in) well-doing, yet there should
not be a weariness (of) well-doing; for as it is inconsistent with the truth of
grace to be weary (of) welldoing, so it is incumbent upon the truly gracious not
to be weary (in) well-doing. Gal. 6.9.
Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not. There is a possibility; a probability; yea, a certainty of
persevering. Job 17.9.
The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands, shall add
strength to strength. Those that have an imputed, and imparted, or implanted
righteousness, shall certainly persevere in their spirituals, and morals; in
their inward, and outward way; in the way of their Heart, and in the way of
their Hand. The ways of the Lord are right, Hos. 14.9.
and the just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

Reader; may not the Lip, and the Pen offend two ways; Negatively; by not
speaking, or writing; as well as positively, by speaking, or writing? But this
may be objected, that I bring Straw into Egypt, a Country abounding with Corn;
Ne plus ultra.
that I draw a picture after Apelles; that I write an Iliad after Homer; that I
do that which has long since been done by protestant Heroes; Nil dictum, quod
non prius dictum.
and that there is nothing spoken, which was not before spoken. My reply (with
all humility) follows: It Is true, I may (much more than others) apologize for
my self, being the ( Benjamin of my Fathers house) and say, what am I so
little, to appear in an Essay so great? What is a Muscle-shell to empty an
Ocean? Can my Line sound these Depths? Here is Faith, which has the person of
Christ for Object; here is Hope, which has Heaven for Object; here is Love,
which has the personal excellency of Christ for Object. But though my Line
cannot sound this Bottom, may I not let it down? If I cannot appear as a Cedar
in Lebanon, may I not appear as a Shrub in the Valley? May I not cast a Mite
into the Lords Treasury, if I have no more to cast? May I not bring a little
Goats hair that may contribute toward the erection of the Temple, if I have
nothing better to bring? A Book may speak, when the Author (does) not; when the
Author (dares) not; when the Author (may) not; when the Author (is) not. It was
the saying of an Emperor, say little to others, Conrade. Pauca cum aliis; tecum
multa.
but more to thy self. It was also the saying of a Monarch, Qui nescit tacere,
nescit loqui. Hen. 6.
He that knows not how to be silent, knows not how to speak. But silence
(when Truth is wounded is a (loud) Sin. God sent the book of Nature, before he
sent the book of Scripture. God has two books; the book of his Works, and the
book of his Word; the book of the Creatures, and the book of the Scriptures:
The former, is a very large Volume; or rather contains many Volumes; a whole
Library: The latter, divides it self into the old, and new Testament. This, is
Man's book; but there is Gods book; the sacred Scripture, which is the Book of
Books. I would not be guilty of that vanity in out-bidding my self, and (if I
be not) then I do assert with the greatest confidence, and innocence, that I
would not appear with wisdom of Words, and yet I would not appear without words
of wisdom; that I had much rather (with Luther) my book should not be read,
than that Gods book should be left unread; yea, than that should not be first
and last, most and best read.

Reader; I begin to be weary of reading those books, wherein I find not the
NAME OF CHRIST. In (this) Book, thou shall find (this) name, which is a name
above every name, Phi. 2.9, 10.
that at this name every knee may bow; things in Heaven (Angels, and the
spirits of just men made perfect;) things on earth (Saints and Sinners;) things
under the earth (infernal Spirits.) The Proconsul in Asia (in the time of
Justin Martyr) did forbid the Christians to read any books that spoke of a
Christ. Is this a wonder? Peter and John were commanded not to speak at all,
Act. 4 18.
nor teach in the name of Jesus. It is said of one that he had a rare felicity
in reading of books; Perkins.
he did (as it were) but turn them over, yet would give an account of all that
was considerable in them; he perused books so speedily, that one would have
thought he had read nothing: and yet so accurately, that one would have thought
he had read all. Erasmus says, that he learned more from one short page of
Luthers writing, than from all the great Books of Thomas Aquinas. Though more
may be learned in reading one line of Gods book, than in reading all the leaves
of Man's book; and (if thou be spiritual) thou will find a vast difference in
reading the one, and the other; yet (if Christ be with thee) thou may learn
something in reading the book of man. I like (thorough grace) books under a
divine Design; that are sent into the world for Truth, rather than Triumph; and
for Verity, rather than Victory. A pretension to satisfy every Reader, would
be as ridiculous as his Essay, who studied to make a Vestment for the Moon,
that might suit her under every interchange: And, as improbable for Success, as
his Enterprise, who (with a dish of one Radish) would satisfy every palate.

Reader, if thou be curious, and critical unto an Excess, I despair of
pleasing thee, because thou will be finding fault, besides the faults that are
to be found: As (therefore) I have not been writing in haste, so be not thou
reading in haste; Eternitati pingo. Xeuxis.
but as one painted for an eternity, so do thou read for an eternity. It has
been said, THREE THINGS, Tria sunt omnia.
ARE ALL THINGS: The Father purposing; the Son purchasing; the Spirit
perfecting; here are three things; they are great things; they are (as it were)
all things. As the hypostatical union, or Union of natures in Christ, is the
Wonder of Wonders, so a Trinity in Unity, 1 Timothy 3.16.
and an Unity in Trinity, is the Mystery of Mysteries. That he who was God,
should be Man; that had Eternity for his Mansion, and his Measure should be an
Infant of a day old, Luke 2.11.
is the wonder of wonders. Thus, a Trinity in Unity, and an Unity in Trinity,
is the Mystery of Mysteries. Many of Gods incommunicable properties, and works,
have (though most wickedly) been attributed to false Gods; as Eternity;
Omnipotency; Creation of the world; divine providence etc. But did it ever come
into the mind of any Idolater to imagine his God to be Three in One? Deitas in
Moise; Dualitas in Prophetis; Trinitas in Evangelis, manifestatur.
A Deity in Moses: a Duality in the Prophets; a Trinity in the Evangelists, is
manifested. The purpose of the Father; the purchase of the Son; the perfection
of the Spirit: The election of the Father; the Redemption of the Son; the
manifestation of the Spirit; here are three things, and they are (as it were)
all things.

Christian-Reader; the name Christian, has been so odious, that it was crime
enough to be a Christian; yea, Christianus sum.
to say I am a Christian, was the way to (cruel) yet (glorious) Martyrdom.
Fiunt non nascuntur Christiani.
It was said of old, they are made, not born Christians. Non Generatio, sed
Regeneratio.
A Christian does not beget a Christian, because it is not Generation, but
Regeneration, that makes a Christian. Now (as a Christian of Christ's making) I
commend thee to God, and the Word of his grace; Acts 20.32.
who is able to do above all superabundantly; Ephesians. 3.20.
that thou may meet with the Jewel in the Cabinet, and with the Pearl in the
Field; but pray for me also, that the bottom of my days, may be the best of my
days, and my last works, may be more than my first: That I may go in the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ: That my Trumpet may not give
an uncertain sound, and that I may live Sermons, as well as preach them: That I
may be a wooer, and winner of Souls for Christ, for he that wins souls is
wise: Animarum Procus, and Victor. Prove. 11.30.
That I may have least of the Sin of which I have most, and most of that Grace
of which I have least: That I may live, and dye, praying or preaching; live and
dye in the Closet, or in the Pulpit; this will be additional unto him, who
would (without a flourish) subscribe himself,

Reader, Thy Friend, and Servant for Jesus sake, Richard Mayhew.

THE IDEA OF THE BOOK.
Section 1. Of Faith.
Chap. 1. Whether there be such a thing as a Gospel-Faith. Page. 1, 2, 3. Chap.
2. What this Gospel-Faith is. Page. 4, to the 24. Chap. 3. Of a great and a
strong Faith. That a Gospel-Faith is a great Faith, is evident. 1. Because it
sees things invisible. Page. 24, 25. 2. Because it hops things incredible.
3. Because it does things impossible.
Qu. 1 But how shall I know that I am in the Faith? Page. 27. Sol. 1. Where
there is Faith, there is Love. 1. To Christ. 2. To those that are Christ's. 3.
To those that are not Christ's. Page. 28, 29, 30. 4. To the Ordinances of Christ.
Sol. 2. Where there is Faith, there is also a Train of good Works. Page. 31.
Qu. 2. But what are the Symbols of a great Faith? Sol. 1. It trusts Christ
without a Pawn. Page. 32, to the 40. 2. It Is a wonder-working Faith. 3. It Is
steady and steadfast. 4. It swims against VVind, and Tide. 5. It bears great
Delays. 6. It takes no Denial.
Six things call for a great Faith. 1. Great Services. Page. 41 etc. 2. Great
Sufferings. 3. Great Promises. 4. Great Providence. 5. Great Temptations. 6.
Great Corruptions.

Chap. 4. Of a little and a weak Faith. Qu. But how shall I know a true Faith?
Sol. 1. It goes not alone. Page. 51 etc. 2. It has a true Object. 3. It Is not
easily come by. 4. It has two Hands. 5. It dreads not Trial. 6. It lives in a
Storm.
Use 1. To the Soul (out) of Christ. Page. 56. 2. To the Soul (in) Christ.
The Compendium versified. Page. 58, 59.

Sect. 2. Of Hope.
Chap. 1. Whether there be a Gospel-Hope, and what this Gospel-Hope is. Page.
60. The various Acceptions of Hope. Page. 61. The Description of a Gospel-Hope.
Page. 62. A distinct Discussion of it, in its 1. Nature. Page. 63. 2. Quality.
3. Object. 4. Cause.

Chap. 2. Inferences, and Motives, as to Gospel-Hope. 1. Inferences, concerning
a Gospel-Hope. Inf. 1. It Is the Duty, and the Mercy, of the Israel of God, to
make the God of Israel the Object of their Hope. Page. 74. Inf. 2. As a true,
so a vain Hope. Page. 75. Inf. 3. All that are hopeless, are also Christless.
Page. 77. Inf. 4. There must be living upon the Object of Hope. Page. 79. Inf.
5. Those ( who have Hope) should have a life in Print. Page. 80. Inf. 6. Those
(actually) Christ's, are to hope to the end. Page. 82. Inf. 7. The hoping man,
is the happy man. Page. 83. Ob. 1. Ah but this is an evil day, and like to be
worse! Sol. Be not forbiddenly concerned, for Christ is the Object of thy Hope.
Page. 84. Ob. 2. Ah but mine eyes fail in waiting for God! Page. 85. S.
Enjoyment, will compensate all thy Hope. Ob. 3 Ah but I may say as the Church
did! S. Dest say as the Church did? then do as the Church did. 1. She seeks
God. 2. She senseth her heart. 1. With her own misery. 2. With Gods Mercy. 3.
She seals this with her own experience.
Ob. 4. Ah but I question whether my hope, be a true hope! S. A true hope, may
be known from a false hope, these ways. Page. 87. 1. A false hope, has a
false Object. 2. A false hope goes alone. 3. A false hope is short-lifed. 2.
Motives, concerning a Gospel-Hope. Page. 89, etc.
Mot. 1. Would ye have the God of Gods to take pleasure in you? 2. Would ye not
be Stumbling Blocks? 3. Would ye be secured when the Winds are prodigious, and
the Waves are impetuous? 4. Would ye be under a distinguishing, and a
dignifying Character? 5. Would ye sweeten all your Bitters? 6. Would ye have a
formal Plea at the Throne of Grace? 1. Against Enemies without? 2. Against
Enemies within? Live then and dye, in the Act, and exercise of Hope.

The Epitome of the Prose in Verse. Page. 97, 98.

Sect. 3. Of Love.
Chap. 1. Whether there be a Gospel-Love, and what this Gospel-love is? Page.
99. Love, is referrible to God, and Man. 1. To God. Thus it signifies his, 1
Divine Essence. 2. Divine Purpose. 2. To Man. Thus, reducible to three heads.
1. Carnal. Thus, there is a love; Page. 100, etc. 1. To Sin. 2. To Self. Now
there is 1. A sinful. 2. A natural. 3. A religious. 4. A moral. 5. A relative.
6. A lawful.
Self. Page. 105. Page. 106. 3. A love to the World. Page. 107. 2 Moral.
Reduced to four heads. Page. 113. 1. Magisterial. 2. Parental. 3. Conjugal. 4.
Spiritual. Page. 116. Qu. But what is this Gospel-Love? Page. 118. Sol. A
Description of it in its 1. Nature. 2. Original. 3. Soil. Page. 119, etc. 4
Object.


Chap. 2. How this personal Excellency of Christ appears, that is the proper
Object of this Gospel-Love. Page. 126. Christ is excellent in Page. 129, etc.
1. Name. 2. Nature. 3. Love. 4. Light. 5. Wisdom. 6. Wealth. 7. Counsel. 8.
Comfort. 9. Conduct. 10. Power. Page. 134, etc.

Chap. 3. Inferences from a Gospel-Love. Inf 1. The Lover of Christ, has much
in Reversion. Page. 138. Qu. 1. But what is this Crown under promise, for the
Lovers of Christ? Page. 140. Sol, This Crown is called 1. An Inheritance. 2.
The joy of the Lord. 3. The Kingdom. 4. The Crown of Life. 5. The Crown of
Righteousness. Page. 143. Thus, under a two fold notion. 1. Ex part Dei. 3. Ex
part Rei.

6. A Crown of Glory.
Qu. 2. But why shall those have a Crown (with) a Christ hereafter, that have a
Cross (for) a Christ here? Page. 144. In a four fold respect. 1. The Father. 2.
The Son. Because he has 1. Prepared this. 2. Prayed for this. Page. 145, etc.
3. Promised this. 3. In respect of the Saint. Page. 148. Ob. 1 Ah but my
Temptations are many! Sol. More loved by Christ, than hated by Satan. Page.
149, etc. Ob. 2. Ah but my Tribulations are many! Sol. 1. All things shall work
together for thy good. 2. Suffer but a while, thou have but a while to suffer.
3. The last Dish will be the best.
Ob. 3. Ah but my Corruptions are many! Sol. Sorrow not as one without hope.
Ob. 4. Ah but I question whether Christ loves me! Sol. Do thou love Christ?
then Christ loves Thee. Page. 151. Ob. 5. Ah but I question whether I love
Christ! The Symbols of a Love that is right, and real. It Is Page. 152, etc. 1.
Jealous. 2. Cordial. 3. Uncessant. 4. Loyal. 5. Expansive. 6. Expensive. 7.
Expressive. 8. Sociable. 9. Submissive. 10. Superlative.
Inf. 2. Thy Vote must be given for Christ, and his Church. Page. 161. Inf. 3.
Christ, must be loved, or the Soul must be damned. Page. 164. There are three
things indispensably necessary in order to a living well; doing well; dying
well. Page. 165, etc. 1. Repentance. 2. Faith. 3. Love. Page. 172, 173. The
Marrow of the Prose in Poem,

The Author to the Reader.
AH little Tract! what will become of thee?
From City thou may unto Country flee?
But if for Sea thou set sail, this craves
That Heaven saves thee from the Winds and Waves.
Alexius (the man was such an Ass)
More than a Monster does a Looking-Glass
A Book did hate: On Caesar therefore look,
Who lost a Robe, that he might save a Book.
For Money solely Aristippus looks,
But solely Plato looked after Books.
Books, Blessings are, and blessed are the Books,
To blessed Man, that for a Blessing looks.
The Bible is the Book of Books; it is true;
Consisting of old Testament, and new;
This firstly read, and mostly; also look
In order (sometimes) in this little Book.
Well may I say when under Heavens Gale,
What Parity between a Shrimp and Whale!
No Parity between a single Sand,
And all the rest that are upon the Land.
What is a Spark unto the Furnace? yea,
What is a Drop to a tremendous Sea?
But obvi'us it is unto a seeing Eye
That there is a far greater Disparity,
Between a sinless God, and sinful Man,
Who is a Wink of Life; his Days a Span:
Man finite is, but infinite is God,
Who into Solace turns a smarting Rod:
Who Comforts Crosses make; but also can
Make Crosses Comforts unto saved Man.
Faith, Hope and Love, the Subjects are; too high,
For him that has a Film upon his eye:
Ah what is a Muscle-shell! can lapsed Man,
With this exhaust the bounded Ocean?
His Line's too short this Bottom for to sound;
He lets it down but cannot find the ground:
Come Reader now, and prospect take of mine;
Then take thine own, for longer may be thine.
Faith, Hope and Love, grand Graces are all three,
But longest-lifed is the last I see.
Faith, Hope and Love, are lovely Graces, which
A Moment-Man so rarely do enrich.
A Beggar, yea, a Bankrupt is a Man;
Worth nothing; worse than nothing if he can
Be without Faith, Hope, Love; grand Graces all;
Whose Objects have been ever since the Fall,
Christ; Heaven; Saints; these of all Sizes; and
Of Sexes also all, at Sea, at Land.
Ah little Babe! it may be thou will find
Some Friends, though many Foes that are unkind:
My prayer is, Friends care of thee will take,
Both for thine own, and for thy Fathers sake.
Now Reader come; take; taste, and also eat;
Here is much Broth, but here is a little meat.
Go little Book, and with thee also go
The greatest God, and Good, to Friend, and Foe.
Halelu-jah.
(...) THE Grace of Faith.
Section I. Of Faith.
CHAP. I. Whether there be such a thing as a Gospel-Faith?
IT IS said, if a man has lost his Religion, he may seek it in Poland, and be
sure to find it, or conclude that it is banished, yea vanished out of the
world. The Father of Lights, has made England the Region of Religion; the Land
of Goshen; the Valley of Vision; yet, if we go to many places, and converse
many persons, we shall not find a Gospel-Faith, as if it had taken the wing,
and sought another Climate. Ens Entium. Deus, est colendus.


Some Philosophers could hit upon a ( Being of Beings) somewhat like the
(first) Commandment: Upon a (God) to be worshipped, somewhat like the (second)
Commandment: They accounted ( Vows and Oaths sacred) somewhat like the (third)
Commandment: They had some (superstitious Feasts) in resemblance of the
(fourth) Commandment: And as for the second Table, Honor Parents, Steal not;
Whore not; Kill not; Lie not; Covet not; they could (with open mouth) declaim
against these; though the spiritual part of these, was too sublime for them:
Now, Faith is the grand Commandment of the Gospel: 1 John 3.23.
This is his Commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus
Christ: But, they were so far from finding out this, that they (contemptuously)
called the Christians, Credentes.
Believing Ones; as if their Faith had been their Absurdity; whereas God
calls all such absurd, that have not Faith. That we may be delivered from
unreasonable (absurd, (...)
so the Greek) and wicked men, for all men have not Faith.

I would now assert (beyond all modest contradiction) that there is such a
thing as the Faith of the Gospel. Mark 1.15.
Repent and believe the Gospel. Faith and Repentance, they are Twins of Grace;
they lay in the same womb of Free Grace; And as they lay in the womb together,
so they come into the world together: But, as Esau got the start of Jacob, and
came (first) into the world, so Faith (as it appears to me) seems to get the
start of Repentance, and is (first) in the Soul: Faith is (first) in Act, but
Repentance is (first) in Sight. God has joined Faith and Repentance together;
woe to those who put them asunder. They who either believe without repenting,
or repent without believing, do neither believe, nor repent. That there is the
Faith of the Gospel, is evident: May Peter speak? he was the great Doctor of
the Circumcision, and a good Orator, That the Gentiles (by my mouth) might hear
the word of the Gospel, and believe. It Is true, if we look (with both eyes)
upon most men, and their Manners, we may (easily) conclude, that they are
strangers to this Faith; yet there is such a thing as the Faith of the Gospel.
Phil. 1.27.
May Paul (also) speak? He was the great Doctor of the Uncircumcision, who
spoke with Tongues more than they all, and had a great command of Rhetoric:
Striving together for the Faith of the Gospel. The words are metaphorical,
taken from Wrestlers, who strive for the Mastery, or, for the Crown; they did
put themselves in hazard for the defense of the Gospel.

CHAP. II. What this Gospel-Faith is.
IT IS connatural unto man, Qui been distinguit, been docet.
to out-bid himself: I would know nothing by my self but my sin; yet he that
distinguishes well, teaches well. I would not take the wall of those pious
and prudent, laborious and learned Divines ( Cedars of Lebanon) that have gone
before me upon this Subject, Prove. 31.31.
whose works praise them in the Gates; that died in the Lord; have rested from
their labors; Rev. 14.13.
and whose works have followed them in a way of mercy, though not in a way of
merit: Nor, would I be ambitious (were they living) to go by their side; yet,
suffer me to cast in my mite; for, great has been the Controversy between
Protestants and Papists; yea, between Protestants themselves, wherein the
Essence of a Gospel-Faith lies. As there is an hypocritical or temporal Faith,
so there is a dogmatical or historical Faith, Luke 8.13. Acts 24.14.
as Divines call it. There is Faith, and there is the Assurance of Faith; there
is the Faith of Affiance, and there is the Faith of Assurance; there is the
(direct) and there is the (reflect) Act of Faith: I shall (therefore) engage
(as I am (more) or (less) indulged, the Gales and Gusts of the Spirit) the
(direct) Act of Faith; the Faith of Affiance: the Seed of Grace (which is
incorruptible, and durable) may (for a time) lie under clods and clots: There
may be Grace, where there is no Peace; and Faith, where there is no Assurance:
Yea, the Tenure of Grace and Peace, is not (always) the same; but, as to
Peace, God can (and that in a moment) if we sin against him, turn our Heaven
upon Earth, into a Hell upon Earth.

But, Act of Faith? what (then) is this Faith of Affiance? what (then) is this
Gospel-Faith?

Gospel-Faith is the Gift of God, Sol.
and Fruit of the Spirit of God, whereby there is (upon Gospel-terms) a
Reception of Christ Jesus the Lord, and a Recumbency upon him (solely) for
salvation.

This Definition of the Faith of Affiance, Def.
suggesteth a reflection of six things, as considerable Remarks and Ingredients
indispensably necessary, in order to its Constitution; its Pedigree, its
Object, its Essence, its Act, its Rule, and its End.

Its Pedigree. is the Gift of God, and Fruit of the Spirit of God.

Gospel-Faith is the Gift of God. is not a Native, but a Donative. By grace ye
are saved through Faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Here is the mercy, and
that is Salvation; here is the motive, and that is Grace; here is the medium,
and that is Faith: By grace ye are saved through Faith; but this Faith is not
of your selves, it is the gift of God. Though Faith be (in) us, yet it is not
(of) us; it is the gift of God. Lapsed Man has lost his Freedom of Will to
Good. This Man has no Freedom of Will (to that which is truly good) but what
is wrought by Free Grace. The two Poles will as soon meet, as Free Grace, and
Free Will, in the Justification of a Sinner before God. I could readily Seal
the saying of One, who laying his hand upon his breast, Dr. Hill Firmin's Real
Christian. p. 26. Non Gratia est ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita omni modo.
said, Every true Convert has something (here) that will draw an Argument
against an Arminian. As the Habit of Faith, so the Act of Faith, is the gift of
God. Faith is an (Outlandish) Plant, and of a (divine) Extract. Faith is not a
slip growing in our own Garden, but a (heaven-born) Grace. What is freer than
gift? Now the Act, as well as the Habit of Faith, is given. It is given; yea,
(according to the Greek) freely, (...)
or graciously given) unto you in the behalf of Christ, not (only) to believe,
Phil. 1.29.
but (also) to suffer for his sake: That is, it is given with all freeness
imaginable; yea, with an uninimaginable freeness; for, it is Grace (no) way,
unless it be free (every) way.

2. Gospel-Faith is the Fruit of the Spirit of God. Faith, that is the Fruit;
Gal. 5.22.
the Spirit, that is the Tree. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith. Here is variety; this, that, and
the other Grace: Here is (also) rarity: Here is Faith and Love, the top-fruit
of the Tree. Vices end in themselves, but Virtues abound with fruit: It Is
called the Fruit of the Spirit, because (originally) from the Spirit, as the
Fruit is from the Tree. As all Light meets in the Sun; as all the Creatures met
in the Ark; as the Members meet in the Body; as all the Branches meet in the
Tree; and, as all the Lines meet in the Center, so all Power meets in the
Spirit, and concenters there. It Is (therefore) called the work of faith with
power. 2 These. 1.11.
Power is as inseparable an Adjunct of the Spirit, as the Light of the Sun, and
the Heat of the Fire; it can no more be severed from it, than the Soul from the
Body, whilst a living Organ. It Is a Faith of the operation of God. Col. 2.12.
It Is the operation of God, because wrought by the Spirit of God. Yea, there is
a power exerted in the working of this Faith, aequivalent (unto) and
aequipollent (with) that power, which gave a Resurrection unto Christ Jesus. To
this the Apostle speaks, (...). Ephesians. 1.19, 20. (...).
as one acquainted with the work of Faith, in his own Soul. And what is the
supereminent, or sublime magnitude (so the Greek) of his power to usward who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, in
the upper heavenlies. Certainly they are under a prodigious Deception and
Delusion, who say they have believed, ever since they could remember. The
Apostle expresses this power put forth upon those that believe, by a six-fold
gradation.

It Is (his) Power. cannot be wrought (in) the Soul, nor wrought out (for) the
Soul, by any power short of (this) power, which is the power of God, and of the
Spirit of God. It is (his) power.

It Is the magnitude of (his) power. great, but (also) Greatness of power.

It Is the supereminent, sublime magnitude of (his) power.

It Is the working of (his) power.

It Is the working of (his) mighty power.

It Is the same power, Resurrection, and Ascension to Christ. This is the
Gradation, and it is an evident one; it is an eminent one; it is an excellent one.
When they called upon Spira to believe, he replied, it was as impossible as to
drink up the Sea at one draught: It is (says he) as possible to keep the Moral
Law, as to believe; for it is natural to work for Life, but supernatural to
believe for Life.

Its Object. Object of this Faith, is the Person of Christ. The Person of
Christ is the Object of this Gospel-Faith. That he might be just, Romans 3.26.
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. But, the Greek thus; That he
might be just, and justifying him, who is of the Faith of Jesus: That is, who
is of the number of those that renounce all confidence by their own works, and
believe (only) in the Person of Christ, for Salvation. It Is not the Light
within, that is the Object of Faith, as some say. It Is not the Church that is
the Object of Faith, as others assert with great confidence. It Is one thing to
believe (the) Church, and another thing to believe (in) the Church. The Church
may be believed, but Christ must be believed in. Neither is the Pope (who looks
like the Reuben of the God of this world) the Object of Faith; Clark's Martyr.
147.
(though in the Maryan-days) the Sheriff told one Carver at the Stake, Except
thou believe in the Pope, thou art damned both Body and Soul. Mrs. Lewis. 191.
A Bishop (also) told one (in the same days) If thou believe no more than is
in the Scripture, thou art in a damnable condition. God is the proper Object of
Repentance; Christ is the proper Object of Faith. Acts 20.21.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is the
(mediate) Object of Faith; God is the (ultimate) Object of Faith. 1 Pet. 1.21.
Who by him do believe in God, that raised him from the dead, and gave him
glory, that your faith and hope might be in God. This (also) is the Doctrine of
Christ: Joh. ^4.1.
Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. Ye
believe in God, as a Father, believe (also) in me as a Savior, as a Sacrifice,
as a Satisfier, as a Surety.

Its Essence. Reception of Christ. The very Essence of Gospel-Faith (if I
mistake not) lies in receiving this Person of Christ, in all his Offices. A
Gift is received by the Hand. Faith is the Soul's Hand. Joh. 1.12.
To as many as received him, to them gave he privilege to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name. Christ is received by Faith; and
not (only) received into the Head, but (also) received into the Heart. Ephesians.
3.17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Thus Christ dwells by his
(Spiritual) presence, and by his (gracious) Influence. Col. 2.6.
As ye therefore have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Here
is a Reception of Christ in all his Offices; received Christ Jesus the Lord.
These three, Christ, Jesus, Lord, are often put together. We preach not our
selves, 2 Cor. 4, 5.
but Christ Jesus the Lord. Thus Paul (in his Benedictions) uses at least
seventeen times these words, 1 Cor. 1.3. chapter 15.23. 2 Cor. 1.1. chapter ult. ult.
Gal. 1.1. chapter ult. ult. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. chapter ult. ult. Col. 1.1. 1 These.
1.1. chapter ult. ult. 2 These. 1.2. chapter ult. ult. 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4.
This Reception makes the Union; herein lies the very Essence of the Faith of
the Gospel. Christ is received in all his Offices; Prophetical, Sacerdotal and
Regal; as the Churches Prophet, Priest and Prince. Of these suffer a distinct
discussion.

Christ is the Churches Prophet. Church has had many Prophets, but Christ (by
way of Emphasis, Eminency and Excellency) was (the) Prophet. Moses (in
Old Testament times) was the Cheiftain of the Prophets, leading the (first)
Ranks. John the Baptist (in New Testament times) was (also) the Chieftain of
the Prophets, leading the (last) Ranks. Moses leads the Van, and John brings up
the Rear of the Prophets; but, both these gave the wall to Christ, as the
Prince of Prophets. Thus Moses did. Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A
Prophet shall the Lord God raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto me,
him shall ye hear in all things, Acts 3.22, 23.
whatsoever he shall say unto you: And it shall come to pass, that every soul
(every person, whether upon the Throne, or upon the Threshold; in his Robes, or
in his Rags) that will not hear (that self-same Prophet) shall be destroyed
from among the people. (...)
But, as Moses, so John, gave the wall to Christ. Joh. 1.29, 30.
John seeing Jesus coming unto him, says, Behold (the) Lamb of God, which
takes away (the) sin of the world. Every word has its Emphasis, and is
Emphatical. Behold (the) Lamb of God: Christ was a Lamb in passion, but a Lion
in Resurrection; a Lamb suffering death, but a Lion in rising from death; The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Behold (the) Lamb of God, which takes away (the)
sin; the Root, original; and the Branch, actual sin: which takes away (the)
sin of (the) world. But, where does John give the wall to Jesus? that
follows; This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man, which is preferred
before me, for he was before me. Though he appears (now) without worldly
grandeur and glory, yet he is incomparably more excellent than I am. Job 36.22.
Well did Elihu say, Who teaches like him? The words are a divine Challenge,
Who teaches like him? Bring forth the Man; yea, bring forth the Angel (if ye
can) but ye cannot, that teaches like unto God, or Christ.

Christ is the Churches Priest. Priest over the House of God. Heb. 10.21.
Of his Priestly Office there are two parts; his Oblation and Intercession.

His Oblation. Lamb in Effigy, Heb. 9.14.
provided for a burnt-offering; so He (through the eternal Spirit) offered
himself without spot to God.

His Intercession. Heb. 7.25.
all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. Christ is Intercessor, who has the Judges ear.

Christ is the Churches Prince. is King of Sion, King of Saints, and to be King
of Nations, though the Kings of the Nations can (hardly) bear this: Pardon this
innocent Digression; 1 John 5.3.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. He is lovely in all the administrations of his
Regal Office. His Commandments are not grievous. Nihil difficile amanti.
Nothing is difficult to him that loves. Christ's Laws are Lines drawn in
Love; yea, Lines drawn in Blood. His yoke is easy, and his burden is light.
Christ has on his Vesture, and on his Thigh, Rev. 19.15.
a name written, KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS.

Its Act. Reception of Christ, so there is a Recumbancy upon Christ. As Christ
is received, so he is rolled, and rested upon. It is not Christ, or some
others; not Christ, and some others; but, Christ, and no other. Faith in the
(vital) Act of it, is a resting upon another. Faith (in the most proper and
essential Act of it) is a rolling upon Christ. Commit thy way unto the Lord.
Psa. 37.5.
Golgnal-Jehovah darkecha; Roll upon Jehovah thy way; so the Hebrew. Cast thy
Soul, and all thy Concerns, whether for temporals, or for eternals, upon
Jehovah. It is with a Soul (in this Act of rolling and resting upon Christ) as
it was with the four Lepers, 2 Kings 7.3, 4.
who said one to another, Why sit we here until we die? If we enter into the
City, the Famine is there, and we shall die there; and, if we sit still, we die
also; now therefore come, and let us fall into the Host of the Syrians; if they
save us alive, we shall live, and if they kill us we shall but die. Thus, says
the Soul, when duly and truly awakened; I see an indispensable necessity of
Faith; Mark 16.16.
for, He (or She) that believes not, shall be damned; but no Man (or Woman)
can from (himself) or (her self) believe: Ex puris naturalibus.
If I go to Moses, he is dead; as Aaron died upon Mount Hor, so Mose. died upon
Mount Nebo. God (now) speaks, not by a Servant, but by a Son whom he has
appointed heir of all things and by whom he has made the world If I go to
Moses, Heb. 1.2.
I die; and if I sit still I die; if I remain in my blood, I am like to bleed
to eternal death: If ye believ^ not that I am he, Joh. 8.24.
ye shall die in your sins. Well (says the Soul) I have but one way left, but
this is Christ, who is (the) Way, Joh. 14.6.
and (the) Truth, and (the) Life, the Way, without Error; the Truth, without
Falsehood; the Life, without Death: I will cast my self into the hands of (this)
Christ; I will cast my self at the Feet of (this) Christ; if he will save me, I
shall not be damned; if he will not save me, I can but be damned, though I know
not how to bear the thoughts of damnation; I will adventure here; I will live
or dye here: I will (in this case) do, as the Queen did in another; Esth. 4.16.
I will go, and if I perish, I perish. This is a going unto Christ; this going
(unto) Christ, is a believing (in) Christ; this is the direct, though not the
reflect Act of Faith; this is a Faith of Affiance, though not a Faith of
Assurance. Now, the Man, or the Woman, that has (this) Faith, though He, or
She, has not Assurance, shall not perish; for the promise is made unto this.
Joh. 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and he that comes unto me,
I will in no wise cast out. Herein ye have a twofold Assertion; the one refers
to the Father; and (therein) a twofold Act of Giving, and of Drawing; All that
the Father gives me shall come unto me. Gives me, chooses in me. Thou have
given him power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2.
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him: shall come
unto me; shall believe in me; going, or coming (unto) Christ, is believing (in)
Christ. He that comes unto me shall never hunger, Joh. 6.^5.
and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. The other Act belongs to the
Son. And he that comes unto me, that is, believes in me, I will in no wise
cast out. Wherein ye have three things worthy a most spiritual and serious
reflection; the person promising; the person promised; and the subject matter
of the promise.

The person promising. Christ, who has Bowels of Mercy, as well as Beams of
Glory. This is Christ, who is the Being of Beings, as God; the Beauty of
Beauties, as Man; the Blessing of Blessings, Joh. 6.36.
as God-Man. But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not.
The Promiser is Christ, Matthew. 1.23, 25. Jer. 23.6.
who is as able to perform, as to promise: One, who cannot out-bid himself;
and, whose names are Emanuel, Jesus, Jehovah.

The person promised. comes unto me, believes in me. Him, or Her; the Man, or
the Woman, without exception, or exemption as to Nation, whether Jew, or
Gentile; as to Age, whether a Methuselah, or a Josiah; as to Degree, Acts 10.34.
a Craesus, or a Codrus. God is no respecter of persons.

The subject matter of the Promise. There are two Negatives in the Greek, (...)
which strengthen the Affirmative; I will not, not, cast out of doors. As if
Christ had said; though there be not grace (desired) if there be grace
(desiring) I will not, not, 1 Pet. 2.2.
cast this person out of doors: Though there be not the Faith of Assurance, if
there be the Faith of Affiance, I will not, not, cast this person out of doors;
Though there be not the reflect act of Faith, if there be the direct act of
Faith, I will not, not, cast this person out of doors; I will be so far from
shutting the door upon this person, when He, or She, comes, that I will not
cast this person out of doors, after He, or She, is come. Oh infinite mercy!
As, this is an (endeared) so an (endearing) Text, and thousands of Souls may
have (happily) closed with a Christ in it.

It Is Rule. Gospel-Faith has it is Rule, infallible one. Christ, is to be
received, and rested upon, according to Gospel Tenders, and Terms. Now, the
Terms of the Gospel are free; freely-free. Christ must be received, and rested
upon, not upon the account of the merit of his own, but upon the account of his
(own) merit. The Sinner, must come (as) a Sinner, Mat. 9.12, 13.
unto (this) Savior. The whole need not a Physician: They see no need of a
Physician: But those that are sick: They, who are sensible of Sin, and Sick of
Sin, see a need of a Physician. Christ, came not to call the righteous (the
conceitedly righteous) but sinners unto repentance. Christ, is (freely)
offered, and (thus) he must be received. Joh. 4.10. (...).
He is (the) Gift of the Father. If thou knew (the) gift of God. He, is not
only (a) Gift, but also (the) Gift; yea, the Gift of Gifts, by way of Emphasis;
Eminency; Excellency. He, is the Gift of Gifts, from the God of Gods. Here, is
the Giver, and that is the Father; is there such another Giver? Here, is also
the Gift, and is there such another Gift? All gifts, from the Cell of nature,
to the Chair in Glory, meet in this Christ, as in their proper Center. If thou
knew the gift of God. But, Tit. 2.14.
as Christ is the Fathers gift, so he is his own gift, who gave himself for us.
That is, to Death; Even the death of the Cross. Oh Unparallelled Love!

It Is End. Salvation. There is a Reception of Christ, and Recumbency upon
Christ, for Salvation; yea, upon him (solely) for Salvation: now, Salvation is
a great thing: He, thought so, Aug.
who said, Lord, here beat me; here banish me; here bleed me; here burn me, so
thou will but hereafter save me. Ask a convinced Soul, that has been sailing
by the Gates of Hell; that has been reflecting Sin, as the way to Hell; and
that looks upon every thing less than Hell, to be less than Sin, and he will
tell you that Salvation is a great thing. Ask a deserted person, that has been
days, and nights in the Deep; that has been crying out of the Depths; that
has been without Sun-light; without Moonlight; withhout Starlight; whose
Soul has been like a troubled Sea, and he will tell you that Salvation is a
great thing. There is a generation (in this last of the latter days, O Tempora!
O Mores!
and day of greatest Debauchery) guilty of Imprecation; wishing Damnation to
themselves. I have read of one, who reflecting those words of Moses, If thou will not forgive their sin, Exo. 32.32.
then blot me out of thy book which thou have written; which (probably at
least) may be nothing else but a rasing his Name out of the Records of Israel:
Romans 9.3.
Reflecting (also) those words of Paul, I could wish my self accursed from
Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen, Corn. a Lapide. Firmin's real Christian;
p. 20
according to the flesh; which (probably also) may be nothing more than wishing
himself cast out of the Church, that they might be brought to Christ; draws
(unhappily) this Inference; That it is lawful for a man (in order to the
Salvation of many) to wish his own Damnation. I am not of his Opinion, but must
take leave to dissent from him: I cannot believe, that he who has a sense of
Hell, though he has not a Sight of Heaven is to wish his own Damnation. I
would not be put off without Salvation, though I went thorough a Rack, or by a
Stake, for it; and, if there were but ten men in a Kingdom to be saved, I would
(if I could) put in to be one of those ten saved Ones. Salvation is a great
thing; for it is not only a Step (unto) but also a State (of) Felicity, and that
for an Eternity, which has its Commencement here, and its Completion
hereafter. Now, this Salvation, is by Christ. Luke 2.11.
That Christ is (a) Savior, is evident. Unto you is born this day in the City
of David (a) Savior, which is Christ the Lord. The Greek word for (Savior) is
a word that cannot be fully expressed in one Latin word, (...)
for it signifies as much as a most absolute Deliverer, from all Danger, and
Evil; such a person as does not (only) once deliver, but is (also) the Author
of (perpetual) Salvation. Now, this Salvation, is worth the Hearing; worth the
Heeding; worth the Having; worth the Holding. That Christ is (the) Savior,
John 4.42.
is as evident. Now we believe; now, but not until now: Now, we believe, not
because of thy saying: Thy voice, could not reach our Hearts, though it reached
our Ears; it was Christ's own voice that reached our hearts: Now we believe, not
because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know, that this is
indeed (the) Christ (the) Savior of the world. But as the believing Soul
receives Christ upon Gospel-terms, and rests upon him for salvation, so
(solely) upon him for salvation. There is salvation in no other. Acts. 4.12.


Thus have I according to my Stature, being, (at most) but a Dwarf to others)
got thorough the Definition; at least the Description of a Gospel-Faith, which
is the Gift of God, and Fruit of the Spirit of God, whereby (upon Gospel-terms)
there is a Reception of Christ Jesus the Lord, and a Recumbency upon him
(solely) for salvation.

CHAP. III. Of a great, and strong Faith.
THat there is a Gospel-Faith, has been already evinced, beyond all modest
contradiction. That a Gospel-Faith, is a great Faith, Mat. 8.10.
is evident. I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. Christ (as God)
knew his Faith before he spoke, for he was the Donor of it; but (as Man) he
marvels at it, not finding the like among the Jews. And as a Gospel-Faith is a
(great) Faith, so it is a (strong) Faith. Romans 4.20.
It Is said of Abraham, that he staggered not at the promise thorough unbelief,
but was strong in Faith giving glory to God. Here is a strong Faith, but it was
a strong God, in a strong promise, that gave strength to his Faith, and made it
strong. A Gospel-Faith, appears a strong, and a great Faith, upon a divine
reflection of three reasons.

Because it sees things invisible. Faith is the Souls Hand, so it is the Souls
Eye. This is the will of him that sent me, that he which sees the Son, and
believes on him, John. 6.40.
may have everlasting life, and I will raise it up at the last day. Faith,
makes things absent, present. Faith, makes a God visible, Heb. 11.27.
who is invisible. The Apostle records this concerning Moses, as seeing him who
is invisible. Heb. 11.1.
He gives (also) this Definition of Faith, to be the substance of things hoped
for, (...)
and the convincing demonstration of things not seen. It signifies a
demonstration that convinces a Soul thoroughly, of the Certainty, and Verity,
of such things, as by reason, and natural parts, are not seen.

Because it hops things incredible. Abraham, Romans 4.18.
that he believed in hope, against hope. He believed besides, and above all
Causes, Arguments and Appearances of natural hope. Every thing, stood in the
way of Abraham's hope that he should have a Son, and yet he believed this. Faith
goes before; Hope, follows after; It Is as possible for a man to hope for that
which he believes not, as it is for a Painter to draw a Picture in the Fire. Did
any one (in that day) believe at the rate that Mordecai did? If thou (at this
time) in holding thy peace, Esth. 4.14.
hold thy peace, then shall respiration, and deliverance arise to the Jews
from another place.

Because it does things impossible. impossible to other things, is possible to
Faith. Mark. 9.23.
All things are possible to him that believes. Now to see things invisible; to
hope things incredible, to do things impossible, these were Luthers wonders,
and are mine; and may be thine. But, lest any should make a God of Faith, I
shall Subjoin this: I do not take the Act, without the Object; not the Act of
believing, Heb. 12.2.
without Christ, the Object of Faith; for, as he is the Author of it, so he is
the Actor of it; and as he is the Communicator of it, so he is the Consummator
of it.

Now, if this be true, that there is such a thing as a Gospel-Faith, and (this)
Faith be a (great) Faith, then wonder not at that divine imposition, of that
divine duty, of self examination, universally incumbent upon true believers.
Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Here, is a Duty, and a Direction.

A Duty, Act, and the Object.

The Act. (...) from (...)
and the word which is the first root, signifies to pierce thorough: Now, the
word here to examine, coming of it, signifies to make, or to take Trial;
because by piercing thorough a thing, it is tried, what it is within, whether
sound, or no. Examine me, oh Lord, Psalm. 26.2.
and prove me; try my reins, and my heart.

The Object. Your selves. That is, Souls. Only take heed to thy self, Deuteronomy. 4.9.
and keep thy Soul diligently. Here, Self, and Soul, are the same in sense,
though not in Sound.

The Direction. Whether ye be in the Faith; or, whether the Faith be in you.
Whether your Gold be not Dross; Isa. 5.24.
whether your Silver be not Tin; whether your Root be not Rottenness. Come
(now) to the Test; to the Trial; to the Touchstone; examine thy Soul whether
thou be in the Faith.

But how shall I know whether I be in the Faith? Qu. 1.
how shall I know that I have Faith? how shall I know that my Faith will go
into vision, when my time goes into eternity?

Where there is Faith, there is Love. Sol. 1.
Faith, and Love, do grow upon the same Tree, which is the Spirit. Faith, and
Love (like Rebecca's Twins) go hand in hand. Gal. 5.6.
But Faith which works by Love. Bellarmine
Faith, is not wrought by Charity, as one perverteth this Text; for then it
will follow, that Love (by which Faith is wrought) must needs be before Faith;
but Faith works by Love. Though Faith be not Loves parent, yet Love is Faiths
partner. The Soul, that has a Faith of the right Stamp, has (also) a Love of
the same Stamp; now, this is a love to Christ; a love to those that are
Christ's; a love to those that are not Christ's; and a love to the Ordinances of
Christ.

Faith) have a Love to Christ. Where there is Faith in the Person of Christ,
John 21.17.
there is Love to the personal excellency of Christ. Lord, thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee. Christ, having asked Peter love thou
me more than these? v. 15.
Love thou me more than thy nets? more than thy Fishes? more than thy Friends
that are about thee? Love thou me more than these? more than thou love
these? or, more than these love me? Peter, being asked of the measure of his
Love, answered only as to the Truth of it; and being asked of the Quantity of
it, answered only as to the Quality of it, that it was of the right, Stamp, and
had his own Superscription upon it. Peter will not be his own Judge, but refers
it to his Lord, and Master to sit in Judgment upon it; Lord, thou know all
things, Can. 3.3.
thou know that I love thee. This is a Soul-Love. Saw ye him whom my Soul
loves?

Those (in the Faith) have a Love to those that are Christ's. He, that loves
the Father, loves (also) the Child, 1 Jo. 5.1.
for the Fathers sake. He that loves Jonathan, loves (also) Mephibosheth for
Jonathans sake. He, that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him. And, not only (this) Child, or (that) Child, but also (every)
Child, Col. 1.4.
must be loved for the Fathers sake. Since we heard of your faith in the Lord
Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the Saints.

Faith) have a Love to those that are not Christ's. The cry of these (under
their retirements) is, Lord, that not only this Husband; or this Wife; or this
Child; or this Servant, but also this Neighbor, who is an Enemy to Christ, and
the Call of Christ; an Enemy to Christ, and the Cause of Christ; an Enemy to
Christ, and the Crown of Christ, Mat. 5.44.46.
were in Christ; had Faith in the person of Christ. Love your enemies. If ye
love them, which love you, what reward have ye?

Faith) have a Love to the Ordinances of Christ. There Is a Love to the Church,
for Christ's sake; a Love to the Pool, for the Angels sake; a Love to the
Cabinet, for the Jewels sake; a Love to the Stream, for the Fountains sake; a
Love to the Gallery, for the Kings sake; a Love to the Field, for the Pearls
sake. Those, that have met with God, and Christ under Ordinances, can as well
tell how to be without Bread, Job. 23.12.
as to be without Ordinances. I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than
my necessary food. That man is defective in his prudentials, that thinks to
keep up the Fire, by withdrawing the Fuel. He is under a great Temptation, at
least not without great Corruption, that thinks to grow in Grace, under the
neglect of means. Is Abstinence from meat, the way to get Strength? A man would
think that none but Bedlamites should assert this. It Is the tree planted by the
rivers of water, Psa. 1.3.
that brings forth fruit in his season. It Is the Soul that wades in
Sanctuarywaters, that is a Cedar in Lebanon, and a green Olive in the house of
God. Psa. 42.1, 2.
May the sweet singer of Israel speak? As the Heart pants after the water
brooks, so pants my soul after thee, Oh God! My Soul thirsts for God, for
the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? He that (to day)
turns his back upon the Ordinances of God, may (to morrow) turn his back upon
the God of Ordinances.

Where there is Faith, train of good works. A Believer, is not to be a
Loyterer, but a Labourer. Remembering without ceasing, your work of Faith, and
labor of love, and patience of hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ. They, who
believe, must study to maintain good works. Though works morally, and
spiritually good, be not essential unto Faith, yet they are evidential unto
Faith; though they be not the essence of a lively Faith, yet they are the
evidence that Faith lives; for, Jam. 2.26.
as the body without the soul is dead, so Faith without works is dead.

But what are the Symbols of a great, Qu. 2.
and a strong Faith?

A great, and a strong Faith, Sol. 1.
can trust God without a pawn. Then Faith acts in a most Kingly way, Job 13.15.
when it hangs upon a killing God. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
Though God makes a Thrust at me, and that Thrust should be mortal, yet he shall
be the Object of my Trust. An unbeliever, yea, a weak believer, must have
something to feed his Senses, or he gives up the Ghost: when an unbeliever is
at his wealths end, he is at his wits end; but now a great, and a strong Faith
questions not but that God will make provision, though he sees not in which way
the provision should come. Creed qued non vides, and videbis quod non credis.
Believe what thou see not, and thou shall see what thou believe not. It is
Faith, to believe what thou see not, whose reward is to see what thou
believe. Heaven, and Hell, have all in sight, Faith will have no work in
either. Faith fears no Famine. Nothing grows weak, where Faith grows strong.
Lactant.
Judge (as one says) of Persons by Faith, not of Faith by persons. The Prophet
strains lovelily, and yet loftily; wherein there is a supposed condition and a
proposed conclusion.

A supposed Condition. Hab. 3.17, 18.
and the Vine fail; though the Olive, and the Fields fail; though the Flock,
and Herd fail. Suppose nothing but impending judgments; suppose a death upon
all, and a failure of all things: Here is the Condition supposed.

A proposed Conclusion. Here is the Conclusion proposed. Though desolation, and
devastation come; though poverty and prison come; though fire, and famine come;
though sword, and pestilence come; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy
in the God of my Salvation. Here, Faith, has nothing in hand, and Christ shall
be trusted without a pawn. Christ, is a Feast in Famine; and All, in the want
of all, unto a person that has a great, and a strong Faith. Faith, has a
chemical art; Chemists (they say) will entract Gold out of Stones, and Iron. He
that can extract evil out of the Apostolic, and evangelick Faith, must needs
be an excellent Chemist, and may safely undertake to draw water out of a Pumice.

A great, and a strong Faith, wonder-working Faith. Faith, is a prophetic
grace, and answers it self. Psa. 37.34.
Though he falls, yet shall he not be utterly cast down, for God upholdeth
him with his hand. Faith, works thorough Eclipses, and is this short of a
wonder? This, is the true Logic of Faith, to draw conclusions of Peace, in
War; of Safety, in Danger; of Light, in Darkness; of Life, in Death. This is
the victory that overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4.
even our Faith. Take not the Act, without the Object. Faith, may be said to
overcome two ways.

discerns a Vacuity in all terrene Objects. Eccl. 1.2.
Vanity of Vanities (says the preacher) all is Vanity.

As it uniteth to Christ. makes the Subject (in which it is) a member of
Christ, and so a Conqueror thorough Christ. John 16.33.
I have overcome the world. He that has a great, and a strong Faith, is above
the worlds frowning, and the worlds fawning.

A great, Faith, is steady, and steadfast. A weak Faith, is shaken (in) the
Soul, though not shaken (out) of the Soul; but a strong Faith, is like an Oak,
which spreads its root deep, and is not easily blown down. Hence, that
imposition; 1 Cor. 15.58.
wherefore, my Brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable. A metaphor, taken from
a Foundation, on which a thing stands firm; or, a Seat, Luke 22.32.
wherein a man sits firm. I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.
Satan's first Seige, was laid against the Faith of Threatenings; here it is laid
against the Faith of Promises; but (says Christ) I have prayed for thee (and
for all that are mine) as well as thee, that thy Faith fail not; that it fall
not short of what it (has) been; or, of what it (should) be.

A great and a strong Faith, swim against Wind, and Tide. Corrupt reason,
speaks like Peter, Master, save thy self; but a great Faith says, Luke 9.24.
He that will save his life shall lose it, but he that will lose his life for
my sake, the same shall save it. Corrupt reason says, who would profess
against the streams of the times? But a great Faith says, it is better to dye,
than to deny; better to suffer than to sin. Corrupt reason consulteth safety,
but a great Faith consulteth duty, and will hazard safety to preserve Sanctity.
An Abraham (thorough grace) can sail to Heaven, though the tide of reason, and
wind of temptation, be against him. Genesis 22.
Take uow thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, (the only Son left in his Family,
for Ishmael was gone; or his only legitimate Son, in opposition to a Bastard)
whom thou love, (with an especial dearness, as being the Son of thine old
age, and of thy Wives miraculous conception, above the course, and force of
nature) and get thee into the land of Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3.1.
(upon which the Temple was built) and offer him there for a burnt offering.
Was not this command enough not only to puzzle fleshly wisdom, but even Faith
it self? One command seems to enterfeir with another; that in obeying one, he
must disobey another: One command says, Thou shall not kill; but here, Go take
thy Son, and offer him up for a burnt offering. That God who gives life may
call for it when he pleases. In this command, all that was in Abraham was put
to trial. Take a taste.

As a Man. inhumane to slay an innocent one, though a Servant; yea, a Stranger;
but this was a Son. Or

As a Father. unnatural to kill his own Child, though he had many Children; he
had but One. Or

As a Husband. Consort say, that he should be killed, against whom she could
not endure a Scorn, or a Flout? Or

As a Believer. Infidels blaspheme his God, and Religion, for such a Fact?
This, is the tenth time (as some reckon) that Abraham was tried; but, was there
any trial like unto this? What Course does he now steer? He does not call
Relations, and Reason, Genesis 22.3, 4, 5, 6.
to the Councilboard; but, early in the morning, he rises up; takes his Son;
goes to the place, and goes about his work.

A great, and a strong Faith, Delays. Though God does not answer in Kind, and
give a present answer to prayer, yet a great Faith says, I shall have it in
due time. A weak Faith, is soon out of Breath, but a strong Faith makes not
haste. Isa. 28.16.
He that believes makes not haste. He shall not be (as a man at his wits end)
running backward, and forward, but expect a timely, and a thorough Issue. A
great Faith will stay Gods leisure: Oh, says Faith, if I may not have the
mercy now, I will stay longer! Then said I, I am cast out of thy sight, Jon.
2.4.
yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple.

A great, and a strong Faith, Denial. This, ye may run, and read, in the trial
of the Woman of Canaan; which (by the Evangelist) is introduced with a
demonstrative Adverb, behold: Behold, Mat. 15.22.
a woman of Canaan. Is it wonderful that there should be a Woman in Canaan,
when that was a Land, and had many Women in it? No; it is not wonderful that
there was (a) Woman in Canaan, but this looked like (the) Woman in Canaan; this
looked like a Woman of Women. But what of this Woman? She comes, and cries unto
Christ; Have mercy upon me, Ver. 23.
O Lord thou Son of David. She comes to him as God and Man, acknowledging his
Divine, and humane nature. My Daughter (not a servant) is vexed (not troubled)
grievously (not a little) with the Devil (not with a common enemy.) But what
entertainment does She find? She finds repulse upon repulse. Though She comes,
and comes right to Christ, yet, Christ answers her not a word. Christ is a
mute; will not the Savior speak to the Sinner? As the Father knows not how to
bear the Child's not asking, so the Child knows not how to bear the Fathers not
answering. The Sinner speaks, but the Savior is silent; he answered her not a
word. Here Christ seems to neglect her. His Disciples say unto him, send her
away, for she cries after us. Christ answered, I am not sent but to the lost
Sheep of the house of Israel. Christ, Ver. 24.
was sent to be a Savior of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews: I will give
thee for a light to the Gentiles, Isa. 49.6.
that thou may be my salvation to the end of the Earth. He was (first) sent
to Israel, Jerome.
says one. Junius.
He was (while in the form of a servant) sent (only) to Israel, says another.
Here, Christ seems to deny her. Ver. 25.
She comes now, and worshipeth him, saying, Lord help me. The words are few,
but forcible. He answers, Ver. 26.
It is not meet to take the Childrens bread, and to cast it to Dogs. Here,
Christ seems to disgrace her; but all is for the exercise of her Faith, and
patience. A man would have thought, that one repulse from Christ (whose Looks
are Loves) had been enough; but this poor Woman is repulsed three times; as if
she had resolved, here I will live; here I will lie; and here I will die, but I
will have an answer of peace. She, was a Gentile, and Christ speaks after the
manner of the Jews, who call the Gentiles, Dogs: Is it meet to take the
Childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs? The Woman seems to answer by an ingenious
inversion, retorting the words of a blessed Jesus upon himself: Truth, Lord,
yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters tables. As if She
had said; it is true, I am a Dog, but Dogs are indulged Crumbs: If I may not have
a Feast, let me have a Fragment: If I may not have a Cordial, let me have a
Crum; for Crumbs belong to Dogs. If I be a Dog, I am (thy) Dog, and let me be
indulged the Fare of a Dog. The Woman will take no denial, and this is called
by him (that best understood it) a great Faith. Now Christ cries out as one
conquered; as if she had made a conquest upon him by her Faith. Jesus answered,
and said unto her, Ver. 28.
Oh Woman, great is thy Faith! be it unto thee even as thou will; and her
Daughter was made whole from that very hour. I have (though not a Cedar in
Lebanon, but a Shrub in the Valley, and the most unworthy) been weakly
discussing the Signs of a great, and a strong Faith. Vlpian.
Did one complain that there were few Philosophers? I may complain there are
few true Believers; at least that have a great and a strong Faith. Is it not
unbecomming, to have a (great) God, and a (little) Faith? It dishonours God as
much, and more, when we believe little, as when we do little. Though Man is not
worthy to be beloved, yet God is worthy to be believed: Suffer me therefore to
encourage a great Faith, by a reflection of six particulars, which call for a
great Faith.

Great Services call for a great Faith. doing calls for great believing.
Believers they are to do what Christ commands; where Christ commands; when
Christ commands; as Christ commands, and this calls for a great Faith.
When Christ (in a way of mercy) has laid Seige to the Souls of persons, their
cries have been, what shall we do? Men, and Brethren, what shall we do? Sirs,
what shall I do to be saved? Lord what will thou have me to do? Believers, may
have great work yet to do, before they go off the Stage, and be gathered unto
their Fathers, which, calls for a great Faith. Believers, may have great work
yet to do, before they go to the grave of silence; to the house appointed for
all living, and this calls for a great Faith. There is a Testimony to be born
to the Headship of Christ (which is the generation-truth) as (the) Head, of
(the) Body (the) Church, and this calls for a great Faith. Who knows but the
question may be, is there any King but Caesar? Is there any Head of the Church
but the Prince, or the Pope? Rev. 11.2
Christ, will have his witnesses, though they be but Two: A few comparatively;
Chap. 12.17.
the remnant of the woman's seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Great Sufferings call for a great Faith. Action, so great Passion calls for a
great Faith. There may be dying, as well as doing work for Believers, and great
Passion calls for great Faith. The Cross, is the way to the Crown; Passion,
is the way to Paradise; the Wilderness, is the way to Canaan. This way the Head
went: Luke. 24.26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his Glory?
This way the Body must go: Act. 14.22.
Thorough much tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of God. The Cross, is
the Churches Arms; yea, she glories in bearing it for a Crest. Though God had
one Son without Sin, yet he never had a Son without Suffering. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Luther
says, that he learned more by Christ's Cross, Qui non est Crucianus, non est
Christianus.
than by all the letters in the book. He says also) that he is not a
Christian, that has not a Cross. They, who are without chastisement, are
Bastards, and not Sons: Now, no Bastard can inherit by the Law of God; by the
Law of Nature; by the Law of Nations. This has ever been the poesy of the
Church of the first born, TO DO GOOD, ANDTO SUFFER EVIL. Suffering work, is
noble work; the noblest work, that Dust and Ashes can be concerned in. Saints,
are inferior to Angels, as to doing, but Saints are Superior to Angels, as to
Suffering; for they are Spirits, and so impassible. Whom God affects most, he
(many times) afflicts most; and, there is (many times) the choicest Affection,
under the chiefest Affliction.

Great Promises call for a great Faith. Stock, and a Believers Patrimony. The
Promises of God are great things, so great things, that what would not a
convinced, or a deserted Soul give for a Promise? The Promises of God, they are
greater than the Fears, or the Faith, of the People of God: The Promises of
God, they are greater than the wants, or the weaknesses, of the People of God:
The Promises of God, they are greater than the Sorrows, or the Sins, of the
People of God: The Promises of God, they are greater than the Threatenings of
God, and as great as the Commands of God. When the World was shaken by Adam's
sin, Genesis 3.15.
God secured it by the Promise of his Son. All the (after) Promises, were but
as so many Commentaries upon this (first) Promise the SEED OF THE WOMAN. God,
has many times repealed Punishments, but God has not at any time repealed
Promises. The Promise is a Ground for Faith, as the Precept is a Rule for
Obedience. The congregating and calling of the Jews, together with the drying
up of the great river Euphrates in order thereunto, are not these great things
to believe? and do not these call for a great Faith? The blasting of Babylon,
and the blessing of Sion; the breaking of Babylon, and the Building of Sion;
the Ruin of Babylon, and the Resurrection of Sion, are not these great things
to believe? and do not these great things call for a great Faith? A numerical
resurrection of the Body; Act. 1.10.11.
the binding of Satan; the personal return of Christ from Heaven, (...)
and the reign of (His) with (Him) according to the Greek (the) thousand years,
Rev. 20.4.
are not these great things to believe? and do not these great things call for
a great Faith?

Providence call for a great Faith. The works of God, are distinguished into
two sorts, of Creation, and Providence. It Is bad to outrun Providence, and
it is not good to loyter, and lag behind it. It Is not good to go before God, and
it is as bad to stay long behind him. Creatures, have a teaching voice; they
read us Divinity-Lectures of divine Providence. There is the general Providence
of God, Acts. 17.28.
which extends it self to the whole world: From him we live, and move, and have
our being: There Is also the special Providence of God, which he shows toward
his Church. Isa. 43.2.
When thou passest thorough the Waters, I will be with thee, and prevent thy
drowning; when thou walk thorough the fire, I will be with thee, and prevent
thy burning. Is not every year, a year of Wonder? Annus Mirabilis.
what detections, disappointments, and defeats, have there lately been, upon a
beastly, and bloody, brutish and barbarous, merciless and murderous generation,
by a timely interposition of divine providence? The Poison, and the Antidote,
come into the Nation together; such is the divine Providence, of the divine
Majesty. God, now speaks, not (only) from the Earth, but (also) from Heaven,
by the great and wonderful works of his Providence, Eusebius.
which one calls the Sermons of God. Now, do not these Providence, call for
a great Faith?

Temptations call for a great Faith. Where is the Christian (of Christ's making)
that is without Temptation? Our whole life (says one) is but a Temptation. Aug.
There was a Tempter in the terrestial Paradise, but there shall be no Tempter
in the Celestial Paradise. That, indeed, a man is, that he is under Temptation.
To be without Temptation (says one) is the greatest Temptation. Tillinghast
When God puts any of his Servants into Satan's hand's, then he keeps Satan in
his own hands. There is no place in the world that can secure from Temptation,
or be a Sanctuary from Satanical Assaults. It is the folly of Popish Votaries,
that think to immure themselves within Walls from the Temptations of Satan.
Cloisters, are as open as the open field to Satan; but he is confined (as to
his Temptation) to the aereal part, and therefore called the Prince of the
power of the air: Ephesians. 2.2.
When once (therefore) we are beyond the Earth, we are beyond the reach of all
Temptations. I am (says Luther) set upon (without) by all the world, and
(within) by the Devil, and his Angels. Satan, in Tempting, hides the Hook, and
shows only the Bait. Christ, was made like unto Man, that he might be
Tempted, and Man is Tempted, that he may be made like unto Christ. When Satan
does his worst in Tempting, a Christian should do his best in praying. Beza.
One (when Tempted) made this answer, Whatsoever I was, Satan, I am now in
Christ, a new creature, and it is that which troubles thee. Luther, gives one
compendious way to withstand all temptation whatsoever; If moved any way by
Sin; Satan; or the World; answer all with this only, I am a Christian;
Christianus Sum.
I may not yield to any sin, for I am a Christian. Suspend thy judgment as to
those under temptation; Christ himself was Tempted in the highest measure that
could be. That, which is written of Spira, that he was a Reprobate, and a
Castaway, because he concluded this of himself, was penned very
inconsiderately; for, what did befall him, which may not befall a Child of God?
Christ's intercession, must be the Souls Anchor, in time of temptation. He, that
can say under temptation, Ego, non sum Ego.
as that young Convert did, I am not what I was, nor where I was, is happy
indeed. Oh (says Satan) there is at hand a blasting time! a breaking time! a
binding time! a bleeding time! a burning time! curse God, and die; curse thy
King, and thy God, and look upward. Do not great temptations call for great
Faith? Satan rages most at last: He is always going as a subtle Serpent to
delude, or, as a roaring Lion to devour. Satan, is the greatest Peripatetick.

Corruptions call for a great Faith. As there are great Services; great
Sufferings; great Promises; great Providence; great Temptations, and all these
call for a great Faith; so, more than all; most of all; worst of all, there are
great Corruptions, which also call for a great Faith. Corruption, is the Sting;
this is the evil of evils; the plague of plagues; the poison of poisons. There
are Achans within to be stoned to death: Saul's within, to fall upon the point
of the Sword of the Spirit: There are Agag's within, to be cut in pieces: There
are Goliahs within to be destroyed; the Sons of Zerviah within that are to be
subdued, and these call for a great Faith: Pro. 20.9.
Was that Question ever answered? Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am
pure from my Sin? Ah Soul! look within, and see new worlds of Sin; now, do not
these call for a great Faith? May it not be said of Sin, Malum complexum.
what is said of War, to be a Complex, and a complicated Evil? As there is the
nature of Sin, so there is the sin of the Nature; And does not this call for a
great Faith? As there is no Sin in Grace, so there is no Grace in Sin. Sin is
evil; all evil: Sin is so bad, that we cannot call it worse than it is. Its
name is Evil. Romans 7.21.
When I would do good, evil is present with me. As there is the evil of
Suffering, so there is the evil of Sin, and this is the worst Evil. But, as the
name of Sin is evil, so the nature of Sin is evil. Romans 7.13. (...).
That Sin by the Commandment might become exceeding sinful. Or, that Sin by the
Commandment might appear hyperbolically sinful: Or, (according to the Greek)
that Sin by the Commandment might appear a Sinner unto an Hyperbole. Now, does
not this call for a great Faith? Sin, is a darkning of the Glory of God; a
defacing of the Image of God; a crucifying of the Son of God; a grieving of the
Spirit of God; a wounding of the Soul of Man; And does not this call for a
great Faith? Is there a Day without Clouds? A Moon without Spots? A Garden
without Weeds? A House without Rubbish? A Soul without Sin? A Heart without
Leaven? Now, does not this call for a great Faith? They, look like perfect
Strangers to their own Hearts, who pretend unto a personal Perfection. Paul,
was cried up for an earthly Angel, Rom 7.17.
yet not without Sin. It Is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me.
There is but one thing in all the World, that is the object of God's
abhorrence; that makes Man truly miserable; that caused the Maker of Man, to
repent of Man's making; that necessitates Mercy; that called for Christ's
Sufferings, and caused Tears to stand in his Eyes; that God looks upon with a
vindictive Eye; that Christ came to destroy; that made Angels, Devils; that
makes a Hell within, and that is Sin; Now, does not this call for a great Faith?

CHAP. IV. Of a little, and a weak Faith.
AS there is a great, and a strong Faith, so there is a little, and a weak
Faith. Why are ye fearful, Mat. 8.26.
oh ye of little faith? I would not discourage an Infant-Faith: That God, who
bids us receive him that is weak in the Faith, will not himself reject him; but
God bids us receive him that is weak in the Faith: Romans 14.1. Fides, periculis
secura; securitate periclitatur. Aug.
Him that is weak in the Faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations.
By one that is weak in the Faith, the Apostle may mean a young Convert; a Babe
in Christ; or a Person not sufficiently instructed concerning the Use of things
indifferent. Though thy Faith be not grown to a Cedar, if it be a Shrub, or a
bruised Reed, it is too good to be broken. A weak Faith, may lay hold upon a
strong Christ. A Palsical hand may tie the knot in Marriage. It Is con-natural
unto Man to desire Salvation, rather under the notion of Doing, than of
Believing. Dream not of the same Favor with Saints, unless thou have the same
Faith with Saints; but it is Faith of the same Stamp, not of the same Stature;
the same as to Quality, though not as to Quantity; the same as to Truth, though
not as to Degree. A spark of Fire, is true Fire, the Furnace is no more: A Drop
of Water, is true Water, the Ocean is no more. Now, as a little Fire, may be
true Fire, and a little Water, true Water; so a little Faith may be true Faith.

But how shall I know that I have true Faith? Qu.
I fear my Silver is Tin; my Gold is Dross; my Faith is Fancy: Ah! I fear, that
my Faith is not a true, but a false Faith: How shall I know a true Faith, from
a false Faith? That Is the Question.

A true Faith goes not alone. Sol. 1.
As it is said, it is not good that Man should be alone; so, it may be said,
that Faith is not good, that is alone. The Leper (under the Law) was to dwell
alone, but true Faith goes not alone. It Is written, Woe to him that is alone;
so, Woe to that Person whose Faith is alone. Unless a corn of Wheat falls into
the Ground, and dies, it abides alone; thus Faith, if it has not Works is
dead, Jam. 2.17.
being alone; or, by it self; so the Greek. A false Faith goes alone; an
Hypocrite speaks of his Faith, when his Works are speechless, or speak nothing
but Unbelief. An Hypocrite is all Creed, but no Commandment; he says he
believes, but continues in Sin. It Is a false, not a true Faith, that goes
alone: A true Faith has a train of good Works. Jam. 2.18.
Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works.

A true Faith has a true Object. false Faith, has a false Object; an
Hypocrite believes the lying Vision of his own Heart; but a true Faith, has a
true Object; this has the Person of Christ for Object; a Christ in all his
Offices, as the Churches Prophet, Priest, Acts 16.31.
and Prince. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.

A true Faith is not easily come by. false Faith is easily had; this Faith,
Mark 4 5.
is like the Seed in the Parable, which sprung up suddenly; it is without
Convictions, and Heart-woundings. Though there may be many Convictions without
out Conversion, yet is there any Conversion without Convictions? It may be said
to a Person that has a false Faith, concerning his faith, as Isaac did to his
Son concerning his Venison; Son, how came thou by thy Venison so soon? So,
Soul, how came thou by thy Faith so soon? Have not been wading in the Waters
of Marah, and of Meribah, and yet have faith? Have not been sailing by the
Gates of Hell, and yet have faith? Have there been no Pains, nor Pangs, and yet
have faith? This faith may have the stamp of a Caesar, but it has not the
stamp of a Christ upon it. A true Faith is hardly come by; it cost many
Prayers, and many Tears; this spiritual Infant is not born without Pains and
Pangs. When Peter had told the House of Israel, that God had made that same
Jesus whom they Crucified, Acts 2.36, 37. (...). Leigh.
both Lord, and Christ, the Text says, They were pricked in their Heart: The
word signifies to Rent, Vex, and Wound punctually, even the least part, and
point of the Heart; as if the sharpest points of many empoysoned Daggers, in
the severest manner, had been fastened in their Hearts. Now, Soul, has thy
faith a Train of good Works? Has it Christ for Object? Did it cost thee dear?
Then it is a true Faith, though a little Faith.

A true Faith has two Hands. false Faith has but one Hand: An Hypocrite would
take Christ, but not give up himself to Christ. An Hypocrite, would take Christ
by way of Surety, but not give up himself to Christ, by way of Surrender; but
now a true Faith (though it be but a little Faith) takes Christ as a Savior,
and submits unto Christ as a Sovereign. True faith can say to Christ, Rule thou
in the midst of thine Enemies. Psalm. 110.2.
Not only in the midst of thine Enemies without, but also in the midst of thine
Enemies within. Now, Soul, art as willing to be sanctified by Christ, as to be
saved by Christ? As willing to be crucified with Christ, as to be crowned with
Christ? Then thy faith (though a little Faith) is a true Faith.

A true Faith dreads not Trial. honest Man, is not afraid of the Bar. A false
Faith dreads a coming to the Test; to the Trial; to the Touchstone: An
Hypocrite, is like a Man that has stolen Goods in his House, the Man is
unwilling that his House should be searched; the Hypocrite is unwilling that
his Heart should be searched; but true Faith will come to the Trial. Psalm. 26.2.
Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my Reins, and my Heart.

A true Faith will live in a Storm. false Faith will die in a Storm; an
Hypocrite, is like those Hearers, that had no Root; Luke 8.13.
which for a time believed, but in time of Temptation fell away: When a Storm,
or Shower of Blood came, their Faith died; but true Faith will live in a Storm;
Col. 2.6, 7.
for, as it has Christ for Object, so it has Christ for Root. Now, Soul, does
not thy Faith dread the Test, and will it live in a Storm? Then (though a
little) it is a true Faith. But, to conclude this (first) Section, suffer the
words of Exhortation.

Art not in Christ? Christ. Art not in Christ? Come (then) to Christ, Joh. 8.24.
or go to Hell. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. If
ye die (in) your Sins, ye will be Damned (for) your Sins. Art out of Christ?
It Is a wonder to me, and may be to Thee, that thou art out of Hell.

Art in Christ?

Multiply Cries (through Christ) unto Christ, for more Faith. Luk, 17.5.
The Apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith.

Drink of the Brook by the way, He that believes, Acts 13.39.
is justified from all things, from which he could not be justified by the Law
of Moses.

The Compendium Versified.
PRose into Poem comes, to welcome Those
In Poem, that no welcome found in Prose.
Faith, subject is; this leads the Van of Grace;
This goes first within the Churches Race.
Faith, subject is; But what is a Gospel-faith?
It Is Heaven's Gift, as one most truly says:
The Spirit's Fruit; the Essence of it lies
In taking Christ (as sacred Truth complies)
On Gospel-terms; which Terms are freely free,
In all his Offices; now these are three;
Christ; Jesus; Lord; who first, and ever since,
Has been the Churches Prophet, Priest, and Prince.
Thus taking there must be; there (also) must
Be resting (solely) by this mortal Dust,
On Jesus Christ the Lord for Grace and Glory;
This sweetly does comport with Sacred Story.
If Faith, then Love (tho not about Romances)
To Christ, and Christ's; the Christless; Ordinances.
A Gospel-faith, it is great; it is strong, I see;
Its Symptoms also may appear to Thee.
No Famine fears this Faith, but Christ does take
Without a l'awn, and Earnings of him make.
In Famine Christ to great Faith is a Feast;
A Fragment is (with Christ) a Dish at least.
Its Logic (also) does Conclusions make
Of Light in Darkness; Life in Death; awake.
It Is steady; steadfast too; let none control;
Not shaken (out) though shaken (in) the Soul.
This swims against Wind and Tide; it progress makes;
Bears great Delays, and no Denial takes.
Great Act'on; Pass'on; Promises; and all
Great Providence; Tempting; Sinning; call
For Gospel-faith, timely to take the Wall;
Which cannot stoop unto a final Fall.
Lend both Ears now, and hear, for Jesus says,
Oh Woman! great is thy Prophetic Faith.
THough Faith be little, may it not be true?
A Spark, and Drop, the Fire, and Water show.
He teaches well, that does distinguish well;
Now real Faith from false, may Mortals tell.
True Faith, of good Works has a lovely Train;
Its Object's true; it costeth dear; again,
It has two Hands; it dreadeth not a Test;
It lives in a Storm; that is better; best.
Art not in Christ? Go then to him; or go
To Tophet dying; unto endless Woe.
But art in Christ? beg down more of this Grace,
Be joyous (also) running of thy Race:
From all things has a Surety freed Thee,
That Moses Law could not a Sinner free.
As there is a great, so there is a little Faith,
In sacred Scripture this Jehovah says.
SECTION II. Of HOPE.
CHAP. I. Whether there be a Gospel-Hope? and what this Gospel-Hope is?
AS there is a Gospel-Faith, so there is a Gospel-Hope. Faith is the Christians
Logic; Hope, is the Christians Rhetoric. Faith, is compared to a Doctor in
the Schools; Hope, is compared to a Captain in the Wars. Though there may be a
difference between Faith and Hope, in respect of Subject; in respect of Object;
in respect of Office, and in respect of Order; yet, as there is a Gospel-Faith,
so there is a Gospel-Hope. Now, as a Gospel-Faith, so a Gospel-Hope, has a
various acception, and acceptance in the sacred Scripture.

By Hope, sometimes understand Faith. Be ready always to give an answer to
every Man that asks you a reason of the Hope that is in you, with meekness, 1
Pet. 3.15.
and fear. By Hope here understand Faith; Faith, as to the Doctrine, and
Discipline of the Gospel. If the Glory of God, and the good of those that ask a
reason of Faith, as to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Gospel, be concerned;
otherwise, we are not to cast Pearl before Swine. Mat. 7.6.
Apply not Evangelical Promises unto swinish Men, who regard them no more than
Swine do Pearls, of whose use they can have no sense. Have thou faith? Romans
14.22.
Have it to thy self before God. If thou be persuaded in thy self, that a
thing is indifferent, use this liberty to thy self; have Faith with thy self,
but boast not of it to the offense of another.

By Hope, hoped for. Looking for the blessed Hope. That is, Tit. 2.13.
for the blessing hoped for. Here Hope is Metonymically put for the blessing
hoped for.

By Hope, Christ Jesus himself, the Object of Hope. Acts 28.20.
For the Hope of Israel, I am bound with this Chain. Christ, is called the Hope
of Israel, in respect of the Fathers, who looked for his coming, according to
promise.

By Hope, Prince, Isa. 20.5.
or People. They shall be afraid and ashamed of Aethropia their expectation,
and of Egypt their glory.

By Hope, persuasion. 2 Cor. 2.7.
Our hope of God is steadfast, knowing, that as you are partakers of the
Sufferings, ye shall be also of the Consolation.

By Hope, Grace, Ps. 131.3.
or Act of Hope. Hope thou Israel in Jehovah, from now, as yet, unto Eternity;
So the Hebrew Text. Now, it is the Grace, or Act of Hope, that is the Subject to
be discussed, as I am more or less indulged the Gales, and Gusts of the Spirit.

But what is this Grace, Qu.
or Act of Hope?

Gospel-hope, Sol.
is a Grace, and Fruit of the Spirit; consisting in an assured, and abiding
Expectation; Descr.
having God, and all promised Good, future, and possible, for its Object;
grounded upon the Mercies of the Father, and the Merits of the Son.

Now, in this Description, there are four things that call for Discussion,
being indispensably necessary in order to its Constitution: The Nature of it;
the Quality of it; the Object of it; the Cause of it.

1. The Nature of it. Gospel-hope, is a Grace, and Fruit of the Spirit. The
Apostle speaks of some of the Spirit's Fruits, against which there is no Law;
Gal. 5.22, 23.
no Law of Condemnation. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace,
Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Hope, is not
expressed, but it is implied; the reason is obvious, for Hope is a Grace; now,
all Grace grows upon this Tree, and is the Fruit of this Tree, the Spirit.
That Hope is a Grace, is as evident, for it is ranked with Faith, and Love. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
Remembering (without ceasing) your work of Faith, and labor of Love, and
patience of Hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ. Here is the work of Faith; it is not
a dead, but a living Faith; it is a work, but it is a Work of God; a work of
Grace, and it works by Love. Here is the labor of Love; Love, is laborious;
it labors much; labors most, though it thinks it labors least. And, here is
the patience of Hope; here is a bearing of the Cross, in hope of the Crown; a
passing through the Wilderness, in hope of the Land of Promise, a Suffering
(for) Christ, in hope of Reigning (with) Christ.

The Quality of it. Hope, is an assured, and abiding expectation.

It Is an assured expectation. Hope is acted by the Spirit. Gal. 5.5.
We (through the Spirit) wait for the hope of Righteousness by Faith. Here is a
waiting, or expectation, and this is through the Spirit, which must needs be
certain, and sure: Yea, that it is an assured expectation, the Apostle
endeavors to insinuate. Romans 5.2.
We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. Where there is Joy, there is
Assurance. There will come a time, when Time shall go into Eternity, and the
Soul shall go into Glory, and we rejoice in hope of this Time. There will come
a time when we shall go Home; when we shall go to our Father's House, wherein
are many Mansions, and we rejoice in hope of this Time. There will come a time,
when we shall be arrived at our Haven; our Heaven; our Palace; our Paradise,
and we rejoice in hope of this Time.

It Is an abiding expectation. Hope is no remover, but an abiding grace. Hope,
is not a fading quality; though it does not always act (at least in that degree
act) yet it always is, where it ever was. Though it be not always a lively
hope, yet it is always a living hope. Dum spiro, spero; dum expiro spero.
While I live, I hope, says the Heathen; while I dye, I hope, says the
Christian. It Is written, that the wicked is driven away in his wickedness,
Prove. 14.32.
but the righteous has hope in his death. There is a hoping (to) death, and a
hoping (in) death. Hope, is to last, so long as this life lasts; and to run
parallel with the longest minute, and moment of Time. A Christian (of Christ's
making) never loses his hope, until he has found that which he hoped for.
That Hope (which is the Concomitant (...) of Faith) is an assured, and abiding
ex pectation, Heb. 6.11.
may be read by him that runs: We desire, that every one of you do show the
same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end. Here, is not (only)
hope, and assured hope, but (also) the assurance of hope; yea, the full
assurance of hope. (...)
A Metaphor taken from Ships that have all their Sails up; yea, and all these
Sails filled with Wind. As Faith has an eye to the truth of the promise, so
Hope has an eye to the good of the promise; but, the assurance of this hope,
is, that we shall receive that Good. Though Hope (in vulgar-Dialect, and in the
things of the World) signifies of things to come a probability; yet (in
Scripture-Dialect, and in the things of Salvation) it signifies an undoubted
certainty.

The Object of it. Object of Hope is God, and all promised Good, future, and
possible.

The Object of Hope, God. That God is the Object of Hope, is evident, for he is
called the God of Hope. Romans 15.13.
Now the God of hope fill you with all Joy, and peace, in believing, Objective
and effective.
that ye may abound in hope, thorough the power of the holy Spirit. He is
called the God of hope objectively; because the proper, and primary object of
it; and effectively, because the worker of it by his Spirit: Both these are
legible in this proof: The God of Hope; there he is the Author, and the Object
of it: That ye may abound in hope; there he is the Actor, and the Worker of it.
This Hope is in God formally, as in the Subject of it; and in God causally, as
in the Fountain of it; He is the Author of it, and the Donor of it; the God of
it, and the Giver of it.

As God, so Good; all promised good, Object of Hope. Though God, or Christ be
the immediate Object of hope, yet there are subordinate Objects of hope; as the
Word of God, and the good things of God; yea, all the good things of God,
relating to this life, and that which is to come. But, this Good, which is the
Object of Hope, must be promised good; all promised good. In hope of eternal
life which God that cannot lie promised before the world began. Or, rather,
Tit. 1.2
from the beginning of ages, Genesis 3.15.
in that famous promise of the blessed seed. Non ab aeterno, sed ante multa
saecula. Grotius.
Not from eternity (says one) but before all ages. As there is a Hope (by
which) we lay hold, which is the Grace, or Act of Hope; so there is a Hope
(upon which) we lay hold, which is the Good for which we hope; the Object of
hope, God himself; and all the good things which he has promised. This hope
may be considered two ways; for the grace acting in us, or for some promised
good, upon which the grace acts. If, therefore, we take promised good to be the
object of hope, then it falls under a two fold Notion.

Hope looks at that which is good. hope for that which is evil of it self, or
to him, if it appears so to be; though many have hoped for that which is indeed
so, and has proved so to them in the event, and issue.

Hope, Object, some good future, and possible.

Future. springs from the apprehension of some good that is to come. The
Object of Hope, is some future good, but the Act of Hope, is a present good,
and that is present pay, to bear our charges in waiting. It Is a future good,
that is Hopes Object, not something had, but something to have; not something
in Hand, but something in Heaven; yea, especially Heaven it self; for, as
Christ is the Object of Faith, and Christians the Objects of Love, so Heaven is
the Object of Hope. For the hope which is laid up for you in Heaven. The Object
of Hope, is a future good; for that which a man has already in his possession,
or does already enjoy, he cannot be said to hope for. Enjoyment, swallows up
hope, or rather perfects it. Thus, the Apostle argues; Romans 8.24.25. Not saved
To, but Spe.
we are saved by hope: Not by the Grace, or Act of Hope; but we look for
salvation promised, and for salvation to be performed: What follows? but hope
that is seen, is not hope; for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? but
if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.

Possible. As future, so possible good, Object of Hope. It Is some possible
good, or, such a good, as we have good grounds to attain; for impossibilities,
are rather the Object of Despair, than of Hope. Now, that is a possible good,
which is a promised good; for the Apostle having asserted a hope laid up in
Heaven, connecteth, and connexeth this; Col. 1.5.
whereof ye have heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel.
Whatsoever God has laid under promise, is possible and attainable; now what
good is it, that is for the good of those actually his, that is not laid, and
left under promise? That Heaven, into which all will run, as all the rivers run
into the Ocean, is under promise. Fear not little-little flock (so the Greek)
for it is your fathers good pleasure to give the Kingdom. Luke 12.32.
True faith is rooted in the promise, and fruited with peace. A believer, has
something in hope, though little in hand; much in the promise, though little in
his purse.

The Cause of it. mercy of the Father, and the merit of the Son. Free Grace is
the moving cause; the Action and Passion of Christ, the meritorious cause.

Free Grace is the moving cause of this Gospel-Hope. is the wheel that sets all
a going in the Heart; Primum mobile.
yea, the wheel that sets all a going in Heaven. All good, is from God, and is
an Act of his Free Grace. May the Apostle speak? Every good gift (the temporal,
and smaller) and every perfect gift (spiritual and greater) is from above, and
comes down from the father of lights, Jam. 1.7
with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

The active, obedience of Christ, is the meritorious cause of this Gospel-hope.
As all this promised good is grounded upon the mercy of the Father, so upon the
merit of the Son. The Socinians say, that Christ dyed only as an Example; that
he did not satisfy divine Justice by his active and passive obedience. Are not
many, not (only breathing the Veins, but (also) letting out the Vitals, and
bleeding to death, this blessed and sacred truth, that Christ by his active,
and passive obedience, has given satisfaction (to) the Father, for all given
unto him (by) the Father? If God be reconciled, certainly then he is satisfied;
but God is reconciled. Reconciled to God; but how? Romans 5.10.
thorough the death of his Son. There was a concurrence of Christ's active and
passive obedience, in order to Satisfaction and Salvation.

There must be the Action of Christ. Christ must do. Man, would be doing,
though it was to his undoing, for he sinned against a negative precept, and did
that which was prohibited: The Woman gave unto me, and I did eat: Now, as Man
would do, so Christ must do; as Man did that which was prohibited, so Christ
must do that which is imposed. I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do. John 17.4.
Christ (for His) has exactly answered what the Law perfectly required. Christ
has fulfilled the righteousness of the Law (for) his, and Christ is fulfilling
the righteousness of the Gospel (in) his. It is written, that when Christ had
(upon the Cross) received the Vinegar, John 19.30.
he said, It is finished. Now the Prophesies of him were finished, says one.
Aug.
Now his pilgrimage, and the wrath of God were finished, says another.
Chrysist.
Now the Jewish Law, and Sacrifice, was at an end, says a third. Jansenius.
Here is the Action of a Christ.

There must be the passion of Christ. Christ must dye. As there must be his
active, so there must be his passive obedience. As Christ did, so Christ dyed,
and so satisfied. Is not Redemption a Good? a great Good? a Soul Good? This is
by Christ. Ephesians. 1.7.
In whom we have redemption thorough his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. Man, had sinned; God, was offended, and
would be satisfied the same way that he was offended; that is, by the Sinner,
or by the Surety; by the Person, or by the Proxy; by the Creature, or by
Christ; Now, 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ has suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God. That he might bring God down to his, which is a heaven here, and carry
his up to God, which is a heaven hereafter. Here is suffering, and here is
satisfying, for here is bringing unto God; into reconciliation, and communion
with God. A sinless one suffered, and satisfied for sinful ones. Christ, was
Man, that he might suffer, and God, that he might satisfy: Heb. 9.12.
He has (by his own blood) once entered into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. As the High Priest entered with blood into the holy
of holiest; so Christ (by his own blood) has entered into the holy place (which
is Heaven) of which the holy of holiest was a tipe, and has obtained eternal
redemption for us. Now, if Christ (by his Action, and Passion) has obtained
eternal redemption, certainly then he has given by these (unto divine Justice)
a plenary, and perfect satisfaction, for all given unto him, and unto whom he
is given.

CHAP. II. Inferences and Motives, concerning a Gospel-Hope.
I. Inferences, concerning a Gospel-Hope.
It Is the Duty, Infer. 1.
and Mercy, of the Israel of God, to make the God of Israel, the Object of
their Hope. To these distinctly.

It Is their Duty. Psalmist found amazing, and amusing strivings, and struglings
(within) his heart, he reflected this incumbent duty (upon) his heart: Why art
thou bowed down O my Soul? Psalm. 42.5.
and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God. Did he so? do thou
so. It Is undoubtedly thy duty to keep Hope acting upon it is Object. Oh write
after this Copy, and walk after this path, in this matter!

It Is their mercy. hope, when there is nothing in hand! Both the Duty, and the
mercy, of the Israel of God, are legible together, in making the God of Israel,
the Object of their Hope. Let Israel hope in Jehovah; there is the duty: For
with Jehovah there is mercy, Psalm. 130.7.
and with him is plenteous redemption; there is the mercy. The Psalmist, and the
Prophet, are not Two, but One, as to their Opinion herein, and Imposition
hereof: Trust ye in Jehovah until eternity; Isa. 26.4.
there is the duty: For Jah Jehovah is a rock unto Eternity; there is the mercy.

As there is a true, Infer. 2.
so there is a vain hope. It Is said by Bildad, (old love, Spes vera, and vana.
or without love) as the word signifies, That the hope of the hypocrite shall
be cut of, Job. 8.14.
and his trust shall be as a spiders web; or house; margent. The hypocrite
clings about the object of his hope, as a man that is ready to drown, takes
hold of any thing within his reach, though a twig, or a broken stick; but this
shall be cut off, and his trust shall be a spider's house. The web, is the
house of the spider. There is some curiosity in the web of a spider, but there
is no stability in the web of a spider. The spider fetches her web out of her
own bowels, having no extrinsecal materials to build her house with. The web
(also) of the Spider does perish: when the house comes to be cleansed, down
goes the web of the spider. Thus, the works of an Hypocrite are unstable; they
are fetched out of himself; but when a shower of blood comes, his hope goes to
wrack: Is not this (now) a vain hope? The Prophet, has a Dialect in Consort:
Jer. 3.23.
Truly in vain is salvation looked for from the hills, and from the multitude
of mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. Whether by
hills, and mountains, we understand formidable Forts, and humane Help, as some
interpret; or Idols, as others interpret, in vain is salvation looked for from
these. Well may it be said (in this critical hour) with the greatest
confidence, and innocence, truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of
England, and of his Israel in England: All the Salvation of the Israel of God,
has been from the God of Israel, and written as with a Beam of the Sun;
witness those detections, disappointments, and defeats, of a beastly and
bloody; merciless and murderous generation of Men: Did I say men? I may say
miscreants, and monsters; armed Furies, and incarnate Devils; within our
Bowels, and upon our Borders. I shall therefore Seal, what the Psalmist has
written to my hand; He that is our God, Psalm. 68.20.
is the God of salvation, and unto God the Lord, belong the issues from death.

Those, that are Hopeless, are Christless, Infer. 3.
and Godless. Art without a Gospel-Hope? read then thy misery in capital, and
text letters, for thou art Christless, and Godless too. Ah soul! what pensil is
able to delineate thy misery? Thou art Hopeless, and so consequentially
Christless, and Godless. Ah! what hopeless person should (with dry eyes) read
that text, and truth? At that time ye were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.
being aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world: Here are
five withouts, and they are all sad ones indeed.

Without Christ. Is this nothing? He is All, and in All: All things, and in all
things; so the greek.

Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. Commonwealth before or since?

They were strangers from the Covenants of promise. propriety in the promise of
Life for they had no propriety in the Prince of Life.

They were without Hope. hope of these.

Without God. World without God, and yet these were without God in the World.
Ah Soul! may not thou read thy misery in red letters? in letters of blood? To
be without Christ, the Ground of Hope; to be out of the Church, the place of
Hope; to be without the Covenant, the reason of Hope; and to be without God (as
to Reconciliation, and Communion) the end of Hope, is not this sad? and (at the
hearing of it) may not thine ears tingle? Who is able to say what it is to be
without any of these? but what is it then to be without all these? The great
Doctor of the Gentiles (speaking of Christians of Christ's making) says, If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we are of all men the most miserable. If Faith, and Hope, should not stretch
themselves beyond (this) life, then there would be no life, like a Christians
life.; such are the Crosses, and Losses here; such are the Pains, and the Pangs
here; such are the Trials, and the Travels here; but, we have in (this) life
hope for (another) life; for a (better) life; for a life incapable of these
things. They, had hope, but thou art without it, Jam. 2.19. Luke 8.30, 31.
and is not this sad? Hope (in some sense) excels believing, trembling, and
praying; the Devils believe, and tremble; yea, they besought Christ; but they
cannot hope: This, they want, and can never have: This, is the life of
Christians, and the want hereof makes Devils.

There must be living (thorough hope) upon the Object of Hope. Infer. 4.
The life of Faith, is a noble life, and so is the life of Hope; these two live
together, and will dye together. Lam. 3.24.
Jehovah is my portion (says my soul) therefore will I hope in him. It Is a
mercy to have a portion (in) the World, but it is a misery to have the World
(for) a Portion. Though thou have no Bags, and Barns; not an Affluence, and
Confluence, of these lesser, and lower things; though thou have not a Palace,
but a Cottage, and live not at Court, but upon a Common; though thou farest
not deliciously, but have short Commons, and have not Bread (for) to morrow
(until) to morrow; though thou have not Variety, and Rarity, but a morsel, nor
the finest (or fat of the Wheat) but pulse; though thou have not Superfluity,
but a handful of Meal in the Barrel, and a little Oil in the Cruse; yet (if
actually Christ's) thou have Jehovah for thy Portion, therefore hope.

Those (who have the Grace of Hope) should have a Life in Print. Infer. 5.
What manner of persons ought they to be in Cogitation, and Communication, and
Conversation, who have God, or Christ, or Heaven, for the Object of their Hope?
Have a Gospel-hope? look then to thy Steps, and make strait steps to thy Feet.
A well led life, is the best Monument. It Is highly commendable, when the life
of a Christian, is a Commentary upon the life of a Christ. A
Congregational-life, should be a Christian-life; an Evangelical-life, should be
an Angelical life. A Life in Print, is a silencing evidence. Good works, are
more evidential unto interest in Christ, than good words. The Life, rather than
the Lip, is evidential, for what Country, thou art bound; what thy Desires, and
Delights, and Designs are. The End of the Conversation, is (notoriously)
evidential (for) or (against) a Man. The Life will speak, when the Lip is
silent. It Is not the witty Head, but the holy heart, that shall go to Heaven,
1. Jo. 3.3.
Every one that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
Every one (actually in Christ) as to Nation, whether Jew, or Gentile; as to
Sex, whether Man, or Woman; as to Age, whether a Methuselah, or a Josiah; as to
State, whether a Crassus, or a Codrus; as to Degree, whether a person in his
Robes, or a person in his Rags, desires, and endeavors (thorough Christ) to
be pure, as Christ is pure. This (as) is an as of quality, not of equality. A
Christian, should be like the floor of the Temple, and the Ark of Noah,
over-laid with pure Gold within, and without. Jewel.
It Is said of one, Diu vixits licet non diu fuit.
that he lived long in the short scantling of his life. It Is said of Daniel,
that nothing was found against him, unless it was concerning the Law of his
God. Though perfection be not in the power of a Christian, yet it should be in
the endeavor of a Christian. Those, who shall wear Kings Robes in Heaven, must
wear Saints Robes on Earth. Godliness (says one) always enricheth the
possessor. It Is pity but the life of a Christian should be such, as envy it
self might not know where to fasten. As the Image in the Glass, does resemble
the Face, or Figure; the Feature, and Favvur; so does a Christian (after his
proportion) that has a Gospel-Hope resemble Christ.

Those (actually Christ's) are to hope to the end. Infer. 6.
As there must be a believing to the end, 1 Pet. 1.9.
if at the end of our days, we would receive the end of our Faith, the
Salvation of our Souls; so, there must be a hoping to the end, if at the end of
our days, we would receive the end of our hope, and be graciously arrived at
that City (which is the Object of it) the builder and maker whereof is God.
Heb. 11.10.
Hope, is a sweet, and firm companion of man; it is the last thing that leaves
him. The Apostle presses a hoping to the end. Gird up the loins of your mind,
1 Pet. 1.13.
be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you,
at the revelation of Jesus Christ. Gird up the loins of your mind: The Jews,
and eastern people, tuck up their long garments, that they may be more
expedite, and free, to a journey, or business; thus, Christians (having a
Gospel-Hope) must take short their minds from terrene objects, and delights in
their progress thorough the wilderness, unto the Holy Land: Be sober; in
principle; in practice: And hope to the end; and hope perfectly, (...)
so the greek: But, for what? For the grace that is to be brought unto you at
the revelation of Jesus Christ; for more grace here, and for glory hereafter.

That a hoping person, Infer. 7.
is a happy person. Have a Gospel-Hope? drink (then) of the brook by the way,
and lift up thy head, for the hoping soul, is the happy soul. Thou may say,
as Luther did, let him be miserable that can be miserable, for my part I cannot
be miserable, for I have a Gospel-Hope. Psalm. 146.5.
Happy is the man that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God. Can thou be miserable, so long as God is merciful? Can thou
be unhappy, when the God of Gods, is the Object of thy Hope? Have a
Gospel-Hope? Then that God who has eternity for his mansion, and eternity for
his measure, speaks unto thee from the mercy-seat; from Gerizim (the mount of
blessings) not from Ebal (the mount of curses) for the hoping person, Deu.
11.29.
is the happy person. The Heathens had this Divinity among them, that only good
men should be happy hereafter. When Craesus asked Solon (that
Athenian-Lawgiver) who was more happy than Craesus; Solon answered, Tellius;
who, though he was a poor man, yet he was a good man. If there be a person
unhappy on this side Hell, it is a person without a Gospel-Hope; and, if there
be a person happy on this side Heaven, O terque quaterque beati!
it is a person that has a Gospel-Hope. This may be said of Christ, and of
those who are Christ's (having him for the Object of their Hope) that they are
three times; Toties quoties.
four times; many times; very many times blessed.

Ah but this is an evil day, worse! The People of God have not (only) the sense
of death, but also the sentence of death in themselves now: There is a Storm
impending; a Shower impending; it may rain (and that blood) before night; before
I be gathered unto my Fathers; before I go to the grave of silence, and have a
pillow of dust for my head.

Be not over concerned, Sol.
for Christ is the Object of thy Hope. Do not rack thy thoughts, and Anticipate
Providence, for, Mat. 6.34.
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Do not live like a person in the
Tombs; dig not thine own grave, and bury (as it were) thy self alive, for God
is the Object of thy Hope, and will be so in a day of evil. Jer. 17.17.
Be not a terror unto me, thou art my hope in the day of evil.

Ah but mine eyes fail in waiting for God! in waiting for Good!

Enjoyment, Sol.
will compensate all thy Hope, and fruition will be a Compensation unto all thy
expectation. Hope deferred, Prove. 13.12.
makes the heart sick, but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life.

Ah but I may say as the Church did! Lam. 3.18.
My strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord. I am clean out of Hope.

Do say as the Church did? Sol.
then do as the Church did. But what did the Church?

1. She seeks the God of Gods. (remember, that is a better reading;) Remember
my affliction, v. 19.
and my misery, the wormwood, and the gall. As if she would give unto that God
a memento, that needs no memento's: It Is true, God needs no memento's, and
memorandums, but yet to do these things, he will be enquired of by the house of
Israel.

She senseth her Heart, own misery, so with Gods mercy.

With her own misery. v. 20.
and is humbled in me; or bowed in me. This I recall to mind (reduce, v. 21.
or make to return to my heart; Margent;) therefore have I Hope.

With Gods mercy. v. 22, 23.
They are new every morning; great is thy faithfulness. As if she had said,
it is a wonder of mercy that things are no worse, seeing we are no better, but
are so bad.

She seals this with her own experience. v. 25, 26.
The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks him: It
is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the
Lord. The experience of the Church, is here produced. We are not to make
experience the Rule of Scripture, but to make Scripture the Rule of experience.
It Is said of Luther, Experientia docet, optimaque Magistra est.
that he felt what he spoke, and had experience of what he wrote; therefore
greatly qualified to express to the life, both the Sore, and the Salve; the
malady, and the medicine; the Assault, and the Assistance; the Order of the
Battle, and the means of the Conquest.

Ah but I question whether my hope be a true hope! fear is that my hope has
the Stamp of a Caesar, but not the Stamp of a Christ upon it!

A true Hope, Sol.
may be known from a false Hope.

A false Hope, has a false Object. pleasure their Hope; some make profit their
Hope; and some make the World their Hope. Job, declaimeth against this: Job.
31.24.
If I have made gold my hope, or have said unto the fine gold thou art my
confidence. Thus, false Hope, has a false Object, but true Hope, has a true
Object. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.1.
an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God, our Savior, and Lord
Jesus Christ, which is our Hope.

A false Hope goes alone. counterfeit Hope, is without a Train; this has no
Graces going along with it; but, true Hope, has a Train of Graces. We glory in
tribulation also, Romans 5.3, 4.
knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience, experience, and
experiencee, Hope. The Apostle (in the context) having asserted, Romans 5.2.
we glory in Hope of the glory of God; the Glory of God, was the Object of
their Hope, and they gloried, therein (for so the greek is, (...)
we glory in hope of the glory of God) subjoineth this; And not only so, but we
glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works patience, and
patience, experience, and experience, Hope. Graces, have (as it were) a
generation one from another, though all Graces have but one generation from
Christ at once. We have (here) the Genealogy of Hope in three Descents:
Experience, is the next, or immediate Parent of Hope; and experience, hope.

A false Hope is short-lifed. Job. 8.13.
As all the Hope of hypocrites perish when they dye, so (while they live) their
hopes are dying: They have no hope when they dye, yet all their hope is to dye,
and that is a miserable hope. The Hopes of hypocrites, they are as the Life's of
many Popes have been, very short. Job. 20.5.
The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite is but for
moment. Did the Psalmist say, remember how short my time is? I may say to the
hypocrite, remember how short thy Hope is. And, as the Apostle says, Brethren,
the time is short; so, the hypocrite may say, my Hope is short. Thus, a false
Hope, is a transient Hope, but a true Hope, is a permanent Hope; a false Hope,
is a fleeting Hope, 1 Cor. 13.13.
but a true Hope, is an abiding Hope. Now abides faith, hope, and love.

Motives concerning a Gospel-Hope.
Would ye have God to take pleasure in you? Live (then) and dye in the Act,
Mot. 1.
and exercise of Hope. There are vessels in whom God takes no pleasure; but,
what infinite, Condescension is it, that he which does all things according to
his pleasure and who (only) has right to say, my will, is my Law; my will, Sic
volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
is my rule, should take pleasure in Dust, and Ashes? in undeserving? yea, in
ill deserving creatures? We may resolve the reason of Gods actions, into Gods
will; He is the Lord. The first Cause, needs not to show second Causes; God,
has the reason of all things in himself, and therefore we are not to call upon
him to give a reason: God, is the only Line, and Rule to Himself; and to all
besides himself. We must do the will of God, because it is the Will of God; his
will, must not be (only) the Rule of what we do, but (also) the very reason why
we do it. Was there ever any Cain, or Esau? Any Achitophel or Jezebel? any
Judas, or Julian, but did the will of God, though they went to Hell for their
pains? Luth. Fiat voluntas mea; mea, Domine quia tua. Psalm. 147.^^.
Luther praying for an useful Friend, cried out, my will be done, oh Lord! but
he comes off with this, mine, oh Lord! because Thine. Jehovah, takes pleasure
in those that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. God has the People of
his Pleasure; a peculiar people, a peculiar treasure; a People very near unto
himself.

Would ye not be Stumbling Blocks in the way of others? Live (then) and dye in
the Act, 1 These. 4.13.
and exercise of Hope. What the Apostle says concerning the resurrection (I
would not have you sorrow even as others which have no hope) is also true
concerning other things. Do not carry it in the world, and before the world, as
those who have no hope. Do not dishonor your master by pangs of pannick, and
forbidden fear. Should it not have been below a David, a man after Gods own
heart, a person of that worth, and weight, to say, I shall one day fall by the
hands of this Saul? Did not David fear many Philistines, and does he now fear
one Saul? Did God say that David should outlive Saul, and does David say that
he shall dye before Saul? I have so mewhere read of a Salutation, and a
Replication, between a Ruffian, and a poor man: The Ruffian, meeting him
weeping as he was going, saluted him thus; what, weeping still? but what if
there be no Heaven to compensate this weeping? The poor man replied; Ah Sir!
but what if there be a Hell for those that weep not? The Salutation was bad,
but the Replication was good. I beg pardon, if I make this Use; it is connatural
unto man, to run into extremes, and excesses; but this I preach, and press,
that there may be Tunes of Joy, with Tones of Sorrow, in those that have Christ
for the Object of their Hope; that they would be taking a prospect of the
bright side, and not be altogether poring on the dark side of the Cloud. As
sorrowful, 2 Cor. 6.10.
yet always rejoicing. He brings in the sorrow of the godly with an ( AS) says
Anselm; not that it is sorrow indeed, Quasi.
but (as) sorrowful; as if it were a painted Sorrow, not true Sorrow; but, when
he speaks of Joy, there is no (as) but true Joy. The Design is this; while ye
(who have Christ for the Object of your Hope) are looking downward, be also
looking upward; and while ye are in the reflection of what ye are in your
Selves, be also in the reflection of what ye are in your Surety (for he is the
Object of your Hope) that ye may not be Stumbling Blocks in the way of others.

Would ye be secured when the Winds are prodigious, impetuous? Live (then) and
dye, in the Act, and exercise of hope. When the winds rise, and the Waves roar,
the Anchor is cast to secure the Ship. The Apostle discoursing, and discussing
two immutable things (the promise of God, and the Oath of God) in which it was
impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.17, 18, 19.
that we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the hope set before us; connecteth and connexeth this; which hope we have
as an anchor of the Soul. A material Anchor, is cast downward, but a mystical
Anchor is cast upward, and fastened in Heaven. Our Hope must enter into Heaven,
and fix there. The best of the Earth is not ground good enough, nor sure
enough, for our Anchorhold. Whatsoever we make our Hope, we make our God, and
is there any thing on Earth good enough to be our God? Creatures (from the
Instinct of Nature) will seek a Refuge upon the approach of a Storm. Do the
Heavens gather? will it rain before night? Is there a shower of blood impending?
Ark then (in) a Christ, and Anchor (upon) a Christ. Act (thorough Christ) hope
upon a Christ, who is the Object of a Gospel-Hope.

Would ye be under a distinguishing, Character? Live (then) and die in the Act,
and exercise of Hope. As some have been under a debasing Character; thus, Ahaz
was; This is that wicked Ahaz: Thus, Ahab was; Ahab, sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of God, whom Jezebel his Wife stirred up: Thus,
Jeroboam was; He did evil above all that were before him: Thus Abijam was; He
walked in all the sins of his Father: Persons, and places, might be multiplied,
in order to the evincement of this, that some have been under a debasing
Character; but, others, have been under a dignifying Character: Thus, Moses
was, for God himself preaches his funeral Sermon; Moses, my servant is dead:
Thus, David was; I have found David, the Son of Jesse, a man after my own
heart, who shall fulfill all my wills: Thus, Jacob was; He went (unto) a Duty a
Jacob, and prayer; he went (from) that Duty an Israel, and prevailer: Thus, Job
was; his passion, is buried under his Patience, and his Infirmity, under his
Grace: Ye have heard of the patience of Job: Thus, Abraham was; He is cried up
as the Father of the Faithful, who, against hope, Romans 4.18.
believed in hope. He believed against hope of Sense, and Reason; he believed
in hope of Gods Word, and Power, as appears by the Antithesis. He believed
above the hope of man, and under the hope of God, who calls things that are
not, as though they were.

Would ye sweeten all your Bitters? (then) and die in the Act, and exercise of
hope. It Is very connatural unto professors, and possessors of Christ, to rack
their Thoughts; to dig their own Graves; to imbitter their Sweets; to live like
persons in the Tombs; to take their Turns in Bochim; and to pitch their Tents
in the Valley of Baca, by an Anticipation of providence. Number. 24.23.
Who shall live when God does this? says Balaam. Thus Manoah said to his Wife,
Jud. 13.22.
we shall surely die; Why? Because we have seen God. Thus, persons, are apt to
take wrong measures and to misconstrue the providence of God. Are not many
ready to say, how insignificant are all the Detections, and Disapointments, and
Defeats, that the God of Gods has brought upon the People of his Curse? We are
all like to be concerned in a common calamity: But now interposeth a
Gospel-Hope with another Dialect, and says, meliora spero; I hope better
things; had God determined Destruction, he would not have given us these
Pledges for future Deliverance by indulging a Nation such Detections and
Disappointments, and Defeats. Will not God distinguish between Goshen, and
Egypt? between Sion, and Sodom? between Beth-el, and Beth-aven? between
Isralites and Ishmalites? between the inward and the outward Court? I hope
better things. Hope (in the worst of times) looks for better times. Job 13.15.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Though God should make a Thrust at
me, and this Thrust should be mortal, yet He shall be the Object of my Hope.

Plea at the Throne of Grace, against enemies without, and within too? Live
(then) and dye in the Act, and exercise of Hope. To these distinctly and
concisely.

Plea at the Throne of Grace, against enemies without? Live (then) and dye in
the Act, and exercise of Hope. Those (who have a Gospel-Hope) have enemies
without, open, and close. It was the common saying of an Emperor, Leo Isaurus.
Inimici occulti, pessimi.
that a close Enemy is far worse than an open. The Psalmist, had his Enemies
without and against them he prays upon the account of his hope. Deliver me,
Psalm. 71.4, 5.
oh my God, out of the hand of the wicked; of the unrighteous, and cruel man;
for thou art my hope, oh Lord God; thou art my trust from my youth.

Plea against enemies within, at the Throne of Grace? Live (then) and dye in
the Act, and exercise of Hope. As those (who have a Gospel-Hope) have enemies
without, so within, and these are the worst. Ah Soul! they are the Saul's
within; the Achans within; the Goliah's within; the Sons of Zerviah within,
that are the greatest, and the worst enemies. Against these (also) does the
Psalmist pray, upon the account of making God the Object of his Hope. And now
Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee: Deliver me from all my
transgressions, Psalm. 39.7, 8.
make me not the reproach of the foolish.

AS Gospel-Faith, so Gospel-Hope appears
In sacred Writ; now greatly this endears
That Holy-Place (should Death arrest to morrow)
Where Tunes of Joy admit no Tones of Sorrow.
A Gospel-Faith goes first, but follows then
A Gospel-Hope, which decketh lapsed Men.
Though Gospel-Hope has various Acceptations
In Gospel-Lines; all worthy Contemplations;
In silence pass I them: This little Tract,
Of Gospel-Hope, suggests the Grace, or Act.
A Gospel-Faith is Logic unto Man;
And Gospel-Hope his Rhetoric; but can
Man Hoping be, and not believing? then
May Pictures in the Fire be drawn by Men.
Faith's cried up as Doctor in the Schools;
Yet cried down by many graceless Fools.
Hope's cried up as Captain in the Wars;
In Consort yet are these, detesting Jars.
This Gospel-Hope appears a lovely Grace;
The Spirits Fruit, in running of our Race;
It Is an assured Hope with Approbation;
It Is (also) an abiding Expectation;
For Object, this has God; all Promise-Good
Both Possible, and future understood;
It Is on the Mercy of the Father founded;
And on the Merit of the Son it is grounded.
DEscribed thus, the Seeing may espy
Its Nature; Object; Cause and Quality.
The Duty, and the Mercy of a Soul,
Are herein found, and that without Control.
As there is a true, so there is a Hope that is vain.
All Hopeless ones, are Christless ones. Again;
We (thorough Hope) must on its Object live,
If to the Object we would Glory give.
Hope, calls for a Life in Print (I Will hasten)
That Envy (now) may not know where to fasten.
All hoping ones, are happy ones; and it is
From mount Gerizim Jesus speaks to His.
False Hope, false Objects has, but Hope that is true
Christ Jesus has for Object, truth does show.
False Hope, does go alone; a blessed Train
Of Graces has true Hope, and these remain.
False Hope short-lifed is, and transient:
True Hope is living, lasting; permanent.
Would ye that God in you should take a pleasure?
Not stumbling others, taking a right measure?
Would ye from others differ under Crosses?
And would ye sweeten all your bitter Losses?
Would ye have formal Pleas? this is the Scope;
Live (then) and dye in Acts of Gospel-Hope.
But drawing to a Close, I cannot grave it,
A Heaven it is to hope it, what to have it?
SECT. III.
CHAP. I. Whether there be a Gospel-Love, and what this Gospel-Love is?
AS there is a Gospel-Faith, and a Gospel-Hope, so there is a Gospel-Love.
These three divine graces ( Faith, Hope, and Love) are (as it were) a created
Trinity, and have (as it were) some glimering Parility of a Trinity uncreate.
Both Moralists and Divines say, that Love is the Weight of the Soul; it
inclines us to this or that thing; which way soeever the Affection goes, the
Mind also goes, and the Action follows. This was the Definition of Plato
concerning Love; That it is an Ardor, a Flame of a Soul dead in his own Body,
and living in another. As there is a Love of Compassion, with which an Enemy is
to be loved; Love your enemies; So, Mat. 5.44
there is a Love of Complacency, by which a Friend is to be loved: The Spouse
loved to lean, as well as leaned where she loved; Who is this that comes up
from the wilderness leaning upon her beloved? Cant. 8.5.
Love, is referrible to God, and Man.

To God.

His divine Essence. infinitely delights himself in his Son, who is his wisdom;
in his Spirit, which is his power; in his Creatures, 1 Jo 4.16.
and in his Children. God is Love: He is Love in the Abstract; he is (as it
were) a Compound of Love.

His divine purpose. Romans 9.13.
This is the foreknowledg of God, and the good pleasure of his will.

To Man. Love is referrible to God, so to Man, and thus it is reducible to three
heads; carnal; moral; spiritual.

Carnal. carnal Love, which falls under a three fold notion, and is reducible
to three heads; Sin; Self; World.

Sin. love to Sin, and that is the worst Love. Though Sin be an evil; yet there
is a love to Sin. Though it may be said of Sin, as it is said of War, Malum
Complexum.
to be a complex evil, yet there is a love to Sin. Though the Name, and the
Nature of Sin be Evil, yet there is a love to Sin. Though Sin be a burdening,
and a breaking of God, yet there is a love to Sin. Jer. 5.31
The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the people bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so; but what will ye do in the end thereof? Though Sin
be a darkning of the Glory of God, and a defacing of the Image of God, yet
there is a love to Sin. Though Sin be a crucifying of the Son of God; a
grieving of the Spirit of God; and the greatest injury to the Soul of Man; yet
there is a love to Sin. Though Sin makes Angels, Devils, Din vixi; diu
peccavi. Aug. Beza.
and irritates a God to cast them out of Heaven, into Hell, yet there is a love
to Sin. Though Sin (the plague of plagues) did provoke that God, who is
infinite in Attribute, as well as in Essence, to turn Adam (the Emperor of the
Universe) and his captivating Consort (the Emperess of the Universe) out of
Eden into the wide World, yet there is a love to Sin. Though Sin be a cursed
Inmate, and a cursed Makebate between God, and Man; between Man, and Man;
between Man, and Himself, yet there is a love to Sin. Though Sin has been the
unhappy Womb of all the penal, and prodigious Judgments that have been in the
World, yet there is a Love to Sin Though Sin has been daring of an angry Deity
to rain (as it were) Hell out of Heaven upon Sodom, and Gomorrah' yet there is
a love to Sin. Though Sin has made that work in Countries; in Cities; in
Churches; in Families; in Souls, yet there is a love to Sin. Though Sin had not
a Being (from) God; cannot have a Being (with) God; and strikes at the Being
(of) God, 2 Timothy 3.4.
yet there is a love to Sin. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. The
Greek is elegant; Paronomasia.
it is an Agnomination, or Allusion to words, when the most differing
signification is taken away. There is no Sin in the nature of Angels, there is
nothing but Sin in the nature of Men. Man (naturally) is a Vessel of Sin, and a
Vassal unto Satan, and yet there is a love to Sin. Though God be a hater of
Sin, Man is a lover of Sin.

Self. love to Sin, so there is a love to Self. Self-love, is a great Sin, for
a man is to deny himself, not to love himself. Mat. 16.24.
If any one will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. Self-love, makes a Man lovely in his own, but loathsome in Gods
eyes. Those that deny not themselves, and their own ends for Christ, will deny
Christ for their own ends, and will be denied by Christ in the end. A Man may
dye (for) Christ, and yet not dye (in) Christ. Man (though the epitomy of the
creation) is but a piece, and patch of the Earth, who should rather be (out) of
love, than (in) love with himself. The civil rule is so defaced, that the most
of men are compounds of self; let their Neighbor sink, or swim, it is all one
with them; Non nobis solum nas cimur.
that it is become proverbial, Every man for himself: But, if (only) for
himself, it is a maxim drawn in Hell, and ushered into the world by the Prince
of Darkness; for, we are not only born for our selves. Blessed Bradford, had
low thoughts of himself; he would often subscribe himself John the Hypocrite
and a very painted Sepulcher. Terra incognita.
Let not any Region of thy self, be an unknown land to thy self. Many, are
proud of their knowledge, yet pride is the Daughter of Ignorance. I hate (says
one) that which I am, Aug.
and desire that which I am not. Though a proud man is said to know himself too
much, yet he does not know himself enough; yea, not at all, as he ought to know
himself. Oh beg! beg! beg! beg of the God of Gods, to alienate thee from thy
self, and annihilate in thee whatsoever opposes himself. Let Antony, or
Augustus win, it is all one to some; by contrary winds they can sail to their
own ends. A Holy heart loves good thoughts, but it loves not thoughts of its
own goodness. When Titus had taken the City of Jerusalem, the Army saluted him
Emperor; presenting him with Crowns and Garlands; which he modestly refused,
saying, I have only lent my Hands, and my Help, to God, and his People. Many
do, as Hind the Robber did, who returned some part of the Money he took from
others, to be the better thought off, and the less pursued. Abraham (though the
Father of the faithful, and (as it were) one of Gods Privy Council) had low
thoughts of himself, and writes himself Dust and Ashes. Genesis 18.27.
Jacob (though sent from the Angel (which was Christ) with the name of Israel
(a princely power with God) according to the import of the word) had low
thoughts of himself, and writes himself less then the least of Gods mercies.
Gen 32.10.
Agur (though one of the holiest, and wisest men in his day) had low thoughts
of himself, and writes himself more brutish than any man, Prove. 30.2.
and not having the understanding of a man. Paul (though cried up for an
earthly Angel) had low thoughts of himself, Ephesians. 3.8.
and writes himself less than the least of all Saints. Nothing, can be less
than the least; but, he thought himself so much less than others, as that he
writes down himself less than indeed he was. There is a manifold Self, of which
take a Taste.

There is a sinful self. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? Rom
6.1, 2.
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?

There is a natural-self. Lusts, so this takes in a man's Arts, and Parts;
Gifts, and Reason. 1 Cor. 12.31, (...).
But covet earnestly the best gifts. Be zealous after the best things, so the
greek; studiously affect them.

There is a religious-self. Duties, and Services, whether ordinary, or
extraordinary. Phi. 3.9.
Not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is
thorough the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

There is a moral-self. freedom from gross, heinous, and enormous wickedness. 1
Pet. 4.15.
But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer,
or as Bishops in another Diocese; as priers into other men's matters; greek.

There is a relative-self. Relations in the flesh. 1 Cor. 7.29.
That they who have wives, be as though they had none.

There is a lawful-self. indifferent. All things are lawful unto me, but all
things are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, 1 Cor. 6.12.
but I will not be brought under the power of any. Though the words be general,
yet they make nothing for Libertines; for that rule of the Logicians here
holds, Verba sunt restringenda ad subjectam materiam.
That words how general soever they seem, are to be restrained to the matter
treated of. Now the matter was concerning the use of things indifferent, as
meats, and drinks, etc. There is a love to self, but a Man should rather hate
than love himself. If any one comes unto me, Luke 14.26.
and hates not his Father, and Mother, Wife and Children; Brethren, and
Sisters; yea, and his own life, he cannot be my disciple. Here are not (only)
Relations (though the nearest, and the dearest) but (also) Life, the Top of
all: If Relations; yea, if Life, stands in competition with Christ, these must
be hated, rather than he should not be loved; or, these must be loved less than
he; they must be loved in subordination (to) him, not in coordination (with)
him.

The World. As there is a love to Sin, Self, so to the World. Christ, is the
best Indies. It is no sin to be rich, but when riches are gotten by sin. The
Earth is Gods Footstool, yet many make that their Throne; Heaven is Gods
Throne, yet many make that their Footstool; they tread, and trample upon the
things of Heaven, while they set their hearts upon the things of the Earth. 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas has forsaken me, having embraced this present World. The World was more
to him than the Gospel, and Christ the Sum of it; the World was more to him
than the Church, and Communion with it. Is it not pity that no more are
clothed with the Sun? Rev. 12.1.
and pity that no more have the Moon under their feet? many live as if God had
sent them a voyage into the world to trade for Cockles, and Pebbles, when God
sent them into the world to trade for Paradise, and for Pearls. Who but the
Alexanders and Caesar's of the world? the Nero's and Nimrods of the world? the
Pharaohs, and Pilates of the world, have (ordinarily) been the Lords of the
world? Esth. 1.1.
Ahasuerus (a prince, or Head, as the word imports) reigned from India to
Aethiopia, over 127 provinces, which might well have served 127 Persons, and
yet may it not be rather feared that he is gone to Hell, then hoped that he is
gone to Heaven? The World, is a fools Paradise, Hoc aliquid, nihil.
and yet there is a love to the world. This is the motto of the World, This
something, is nothing, and yet there is a love to the world. The world is a
Cheat; a Mountebank; a Bitter-sweet; a Pageant; like Sodom Apples, more in
show, than in Substance, and yet there is a love to the world. Epicurus.
It was a good moral Instruction that fell from the shame of Philosophy, the
course to make a man rich, is to increase his wealth, but to restrain his
covetous desires. That Cardinal was an Atheist, Bourbon.
as well as a Papist, who preferred a part in Paris, to a part in paradise.
Dulce venenum. Ber.
Riches are but a sweet poison, as one says. Praise the world, and worldly
things, no farther than Naaman was; He was Captain of the Host of the King of
Syria; he was a great Man with his Master, 2 Reg. 5.1.
and honorable; he was also a mighty man in valor, but he was a Leper. There
is a (But) which mars all: There is a Blot in the Scutcheon; a Blur in the end
of the Encomium; a Blank in the Catastrophe; a Prickle under the Rose; but he
was a Leper. Though the World, and the Soul must part, or Christ and the Soul
will not meet, yet there is a love to the world. As Oil increases the flame of
the Fire, so the more a man has of the world, the more his Heart is inflamed
with it, and yet there is a love to the World. There is nothing in the Creature
that is of any long Continuance, much less of any long Contentment, and yet
there is a love to the World. Mat. 19.22.
The two poles shall sooner meet than the love of Christ, and the love of the
world, and yet there is a love to the world. 1 Reg. 21.5, 6.
Ahab is sick for the vineyard of Naboth, though he has a whole Kingdom to
walk in.

To be delivered from an inordinate love of our natural life, and all the
concerns thereof, is a greater mercy then to be gratified with a confluence of
all worldly desirables, and yet there is a love to the world. The Duke of
Venice, Hoc solum miht superest sepulcrum.
did truly write upon his Tomb, there remains nothing to me but this
Sepulcher, and yet there is a love to the world. The whole Turkish Empire
(says Luther) is but a Crust, Vbi Amor, ibi Oculus; vbi Animus, ibi Digitus.
which the Master of the Family may cast to a Dog, and yet there is a love to
the world. He that loves the world much, can love Christ but a little, if at
all. Covetousness, looks like a sin inconsistent with the truth of grace, and
yet there is a love to the world. 1 John 2.15.
If any man loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. It Is one
thing to be wisely-worldly, and another thing to be worldly-wise. They will buy
the world at too dear a rate that pay one sin for it, and yet there is a love
to the world. Prosperity, puffs up the heart with pride, that Man looks upon
himself as God; thus Alexander, Antiochus, Domitian, Herod, Nebucadnezzar, and
Senacherib did. He is richest, not that possesses most, but that desires
least, and yet there is a love to the world. The people of God, have never so
much of the Word about them, as when they have least of the World about them,
and yet there is a love to the World. Though God prefers one Soul above all
the world, yet there is a love to the world. Bion.
Though one calls Covetousness the Metropolis of Vice; and another calls it the
element of evils, Timon.
yet there is a love to the world. Though Covetousness be called the Root of
all evils, yet there is a love to the world. 1 Timothy 6.10.
For the love of money is the root of all evil. In which words we have the
Subject, and the Comment.

The Subject. The love of Money. (...)
signifying the Desire, or Love, or Study of Money. It is a preposterous, and
inordinate love.

The Comment. Root; the root of evil; yea, of all evils; so the Greek. (...)
The Apostle says not that it is the Cause, principle, or Original, but the
Root; and that not of a few, but of many, evils; yea, not (only) of very many,
but (also) of all evils: As if a covetous man, who is (as it were) a Compound
of Self, and of the World, were ready to commit any sin.

There are some things that were (from) everlasting, Decrees of God had no
beginning, but have an end, in their determinate time. This is true concerning
the mission of Christ into the world. Gal. 4.4.
In the fullness of time, God sent his Son, made of a woman (a woman shall
compass a man) made under the law (not only under the ceremonial law as a Jew,
but also under the moral law as a Man) to redeem those that were under the law.

There are some things which were not (from) everlasting, Angels; yea, the
Souls of men, and women, which had a Beginning, but shall not have an end. The
Soul, is a Blossom of Eternity; has a stamp of Immortality, and comes not
under the Arrests of Death. Mat. 10.28.
But are rot able to kill the Soul.

There are some things neither (from) everlasting, worldly things; for they had
a Beginning, and shall have an End. God, will give them their End, as he is
Omega, who gave them their Beginning, as he was Alpha. Prove. 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they fly away as the Eagle toward Heaven.

There only is the God of Gods (who is the Being of Beings) that is (from)
everlasting, Psalm. 90.2.
and (to) everlasting. From everlasting, to everlasting, thou art God. Or, thou
art; Septuagint. But the Hebrew is thus: Ume gnolam gnad gnolam attah El: And
from Eternity, unto Eternity, thou art God. Now, the things of the world perish
from their using; yea, perish from their use, and yet there is a love to the
world.

Moral. As there is a carnal, moral love, which I shall reduce unto three
heads; Magisterial; Parental, and Conjugal.

Magisterial. great love, especially for a good Servant. The Centurion's love
was great to his Servant; it is expressly said, Luke 7.2, 3.
that he had a servant which was dear unto him, but he was sick, and ready to
dye; now, hearing of Jesus, he sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseeching
him that he would come, and heal his Servant. A Servant dear unto him: The word
imports a Servant of great price; or, a precious, and honorable Servant. Good
and faithful Servants are rare, and therefore precious. May not that be said of
Servants, which is said of all other Relations among men? for a few good, there
are many bad; and (like Jeremiah's Figs) the good (usually) very good, but the
bad (usually) very bad. There was not one Servant that went into the Ark with
Noah, nor out of Sodom with Lot, which (undeniably) demonstrate that few
Servants were good.

Parental. Magisterial, so there is a Parental love. David's love to Absalom was
great, if not too great: That I had dyed for thee, 2 Samuel 18.33.
oh Absalom my Son! my Son! Was Absalom dead Spiritually? Is Absalom dead
naturally? or rather violently? yea, is Absalom dead everlastingly? Is he
damned, as well as dead? It may be this was the reflection that was like a Dart
to the Heart of David: Oh that I had dyed, that he might have lived! Oh that I
had gone to the grave of silence, that he might not have gone to Hell! The love
of Jacob to Benjamin was great; so great, that the life of the Father seems
to be bound up in the life of the Son. Genesis 44.30.
Kill the Son, and you kill the Father; one grave will serve for both. But, as
there is a love from the Father to the Child, so there is a love from the
Mother, to the Child. The love of the Mother is a great love, if not the
greatest love. Isa 49.15.
Can a woman forget her sucking Child, from having compassion on the Child of
her womb? Is there such a Woman among Women? Can a Woman lay aside her nature?
Is not that Woman very unworthy to be ranked among Women, that can desert the
Babe of her Breast, and expese it to have its Brains dashed out? or, its Bowels
trodden out? Is there such a Woman? It Is pity there should be such a Woman.

Conjugal. As there is a Magisterial, Parental, so there is a conjugal love.
This is a love from the Husband to the Wife, and from the Wife to the Husband.
Husbands love your Wives, Col. 3.19.
and be not bitter against them. A Metaphor taken from such things as are
bitter in the Taste; Gall, mingled with sweet things, makes them distastful:
So, if the Husband be bitter, the Wife will not digest it. Among the Heathen,
the Gall of the Sacrifice (that was slain, and offered at Nuptials) was cast
out of doors; to signify, that persons (in a conjugal-state) should be as
Doves without a Gall. A man loves his Child as something of himself, but he
loves his Wife as Himself. The Athenian-Lawgiver, Tanquam aliquid sui; tanquam
Se. Solon.
commanded, that Men, and Women, should marry together for Issue, Pleasure, and
Love, but not for Money. Did they so then? it is to be feared that few do so
now. It Is said of Wallaeus, Clark's 1. Part. Eccl. Hist p. 982.
and his Consort, that their mutual care was so to please each other, as by
Deeds to prevent each others Desires. Conjugal-Love is (at least ought to be)
great love. The love of Abraham to Sarah was great; of Isaac, to Rebecca was
great; Livia nostri conjugii memor esto; vive, and vale.
of Jacob, to Rachel was great; of Elkanah, to Hanna was great; of Augustus, to
Livia was great; who dyed in the embracement of her with these words; Remember
that we were one; live, and farewell. As there was love in life, so there was
love in death. Ephesians. 5.25.
Husbands, love your Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it. This (as) is an (as) of quality, not of equality; for Christ so loved the
Church, as to give himself to death for it, even the death of the cross; but,
thus, Man does not for his Wife; if he did, it would be insignificant, for he
could not save her; nor sanctify her; nor satisfy her.

Spiritual. carnal, and a moral, so there is a Spiritual love. Thus there is a
love in God to Man. Romans 5.8.
But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ dyed for us. There is (also) a love in Man to God. I love the Lord,
Psalm. 116.1.
because he has heard my voice, and my supplications. There is a love in
Christians to Christians; to all Christians; and as Christians. Since we heard
of your Faith in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.4.
and of the love which ye have to all the Saints. And, John 13.1.
as there is a love in Christ to Christians; Having loved his own which were in
the world, he loved them unto the end; so, Can. 1.4.
there is a love in Christians to Christ. The upright love thee. By a
Christian, I understand not a Babe of Nature, but of Grace; not a Christian of
Man's, but of Christ's making. It is a person that has a life (from) Christ, and
a life (for) Christ.

Life (from) Christ. I am crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20.
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. He had a life whereby
he did live (says one) but he had not this life (from) himself, nor (in)
himself, Aug.
to give to others, as Christ did. I live, yet not I. I live (says another) a
Spiritual life, Perkins.
but not I as a natural man.

Life (for) Christ. Where there is a life (from) him, there is a life (for)
him; and, where there is a life (for) him, there must be a life (from) him.
Phi. 1.21
To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. Or, Christ, is to me life, and
death, is gain; so the Greek. The meaning is this, Christ, is my life here by
Grace, and hereafter by Glory; he is both the Author, and the end of my life; I
live (for) him; I live (to) him; I live (in) him; I live (by) him; and (if I be
put to death) it will not endammage me, but advantage me, for I shall exchange
Earth for Heaven; a Cottage for a Palace; a Prison for a Paradise. This is a
Christian indeed, and the love of this Christian to a Christ, is a Gospel-Love,
which now falls under discussion.

But what is this Gospel Love? Qu.


G^spel-Love, Sol.
is a supernatural Grace, and expansion of the Soul, toward the personal
excellency of Christ, Deser^tio.
as its proper object.

There are four things indispensably necessary, in order to the constituting of
a Gospel-Love; the Nature of it; the Original of it; the Soil of it; the Object
of it: To these distinctly.

The Nature of it. Gospel-Love, Grace. As Faith, and Hope, so Love is a Grace,
a chief one; a choice one. That Love is a Grace, (if not the chiefest, and the
choicest one) is evident, for it is in conjunction with Faith, and Hope, bearing
the Garland from them both. When those three Goddesses (say the Poets) strove
for the Golden Ball, Paris adjudged it to the Queen of Love. There are (if I
may so write) three celestial Graces; three theological Virtues, in an holy
emulation, striving for the Chiefdom, and the great Doctor of the Gentiles
gives it to Love. There abides Faith, Hope, 1 Cor. 13.13.
and Love; these three; but the greatest of these is love. That Love is greater
than Faith, or Hope, will appear (beyond all modest contradiction) by an
induction, and reflection of these following particulars.

Love is greatest as to Title. Titles of Love, and so it appears greatest.

Love, For, 1. 1 Jo. 2.8, 9, 10.
that is called the new Commandment. A new commandment write I unto you. Where
is Faith or Hope, so called? It Is called a new commandment.

excellent commandment.

imposed upon such as are renewed.

renewed by the Lord after it had been (as it were) antiquated, and almost
extinguished.

Love, bond of perfection. Above all things put on charity (Love, (...)
so the Greek-Text) which is the bond of perfectness. Above all things put on
love, for this is as a garment put upon all others; (...)
and this is the bond: Not such a bond as ties one thing to another, but
properly such a bond as does couple, and conjoyn; bind, and unite many things
together; which is the bond of perfection; Col. 3.14.
or integrity. Now, where has Faith, or Hope, such a Title?

Love, fulfilling of the Law. Gal. 5.14.
All the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Where is Faith, or Hope, so called? This seems to be
opposed to the doctrine of the false Apostles, which urged Ceremonies alone.
Some, restrain the law to the second table; others, take it absolutely for the
whole law; because none can love his Neighbor as himself, but he must needs
love God; now, the love of God and our Neighbor, contains in it the whole Law.

Love is greatest as to Dignity. Love, noble than Faith, or Hope; the reason is
obvious, because it is more blessed to give, than to receive. Acts 20.35.
Faith, and Hope, are on the taking hand, but Love gives. The property of
Faith, and Hope, is to receive into themselves, but the property of Love is to
lay out it self for others.

Love is greatest as to manifestation. and Hope, are unseen, Rev. 2.19.
and may be dissembled, but Love appears visibly upon the Stage. I know thy
works, and thy charity; that is, thy love.

Love is greatest as to Similitude. and Hope, do not make a man like unto God,
but Love does. God, can never be said to believe, or to Hope, but we know that
he loves; yea, we know that he is Love. God, is love, 1 John 4.16.
and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Love is greatest as to Latitude. Faith, Hope, are under restriction, but Love
is not. Faith, and Hope, are restrained within the Limits of our particular
persons; The just shall live by his Faith; Hab. 2.4.
Rejoicing in Hope; Romans 12.12.
but Love is like the Firmamental Sun, which shines upon all, good, and bad;
and throws his beams upon all, not forbearing to warm the Earth, which bears
weeds.

Love is greatest as to Longitude. and Hope, are shorter lifed than Love. Love,
outlives Faith, and Hope. Love, is the longest lifed Grace. Beatus qui amat te;
and amicos in te; and inimicos propter te.
Our Love, shall not end with our Life, but our Faith, and our Hope shall. As
Love transcends Faith and Hope under the notion of Latitude, for Faith and Hope
are within the bounds of a man's person, but Love is to God himself; and from
him to our Friends; yea, our enemies; so love transcends Faith and Hope under
the notion of Longitude; Mat. 5.8.
for Faith shall go into Vision, Heb. 12.23.
and Hope shall go into Fruition, when Time goes into Eternity; but Love shall
go with the Soul, and be with the Soul in an Eternity. There is no need of
Faith in Heaven, for that is a place of Vision; nor of Hope, for that is a
place of Fruition. If ever I be graciously arrived at this Harbor; at this
Haven, at this Heaven; if ever I be graciously passed thorough the gates into
this city, which has foundations, the builder, and maker whereof is God, I
shall not find Faith there, for that is gone into Vision; nor Hope there, for
that is gone into possession; but I shall find Love there; yea, (there) I shall
find nothing but Love.

The Original of it. Gospel-Love is a (supernatural) Grace. As Faith, and Hope,
so Love, is an outlandish Plant, and of a divine extract. As Faith, and Hope,
so Love is not a Slip growing in our own garden; it is born above; it comes
down from Heaven into the Soul. The Affection of Love is natural, Gal. 5.22.
but the Grace of Love is supernatural. It is the Fruit of the Spirit. But the
fruit of the Spirit is love.

The Soil of it. The Soil, Seed is the Soul. Can. 1.7.
Tell me (oh thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest; where thou make
thy flocks to rest at noon. This grace of Love is a Seed cast into the Soul; it
is an expansion, or going out of the Heart. Saw ye him whom my Soul loves?
Can. 3.3.


The Object of it. excellency of Christ. That is counterfeit, but not current
love; false, but not true love, to follow Christ for loaves. Love, that is
true, is rather taken with the Fountain, than with the Stream; with the Hand,
than with the Token; with the Jewel, than with the Cabinet. I will love thee,
Psalm. 18.1.
Jehovah, my strength. Love, that is true, is rather taken with the Giver, than
with the Gift; with what Christ (is) rather than with what Christ (gives;) with
the God of Mercy, than with the mercy of God. The personal excellency of
Christ; the Beauty of Christ; the purity of Christ; the perfection of Christ,
etc. they are the Objects of this Gospel-love. Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire
besides thee. As if the Psalmist had said, Lord Jesus, not thine but Thee; not
thine, without Thee; not thine in compare with Thee; not the Token, without the
Hand; not the Stream, without the Fountain; not the Gift, without the Giver:
Lord Jesus, not the Field without the Pearl; not the Cabinet, without the
Jewel; not the Shadow, without the Substance: Lord Jesus, not the Pool, without
the Angel; not the Gallery, without the King; not the mercy of God, without the
God of the mercy. I have been prolix, but pardon the prolixity (for some may be
as long in going (one) mile, as others may be in going (two) miles) and resent
the Sentiment, that, Gospel-Love is a supernatural Grace, and expansion of the
Soul, toward the personal Excellency of Christ, as its proper Object.

CHAP. II. How this personal Excellency of Christ appears, that is the proper
Object of this Gospel-Love.
THat Christ is an excellent person, an excelling person, is evinced to my
hand, and none will deny, that acknowledge his Deity. Did any understand Christ
better than the Church? so well as the Church? Now, she writes him white and
red: These, are the best Temperature of Man; they are the (natural) and the
(native) Badges of Beauty: Can. 5.10.
But what follows? The Armor-bearer among ten thousand. Did Luke write most
excellent Theophilus? Luke 1.3.
certainly then I may write most excellent Jesus. Was Felix written (by the
chief Captain) most excellent Governor? then Christ may be written the most
excellent person. Acts 23.26.
The great Doctor of the Gentiles was so graciously taken with a Christ, that
he accounted all things but loss, Phi. 3.8.
for the excellency of the knowledge of this most excellent person. Was it said
of Joseph (and that by Pharaoh) is there such a man as this is, Genesis 41.38.
in whom the Spirit of God is? What may then be said of a Jesus? Job 1.8.
Was it said of a Job (and that by a God) that there was none like him in the
earth? What then may be said of a Jesus? Was it said of David, Mar. 2 Samuel 18.3.
thou art worth, or (as) ten thousand of us? what then may be said of a Jesus,
whose personal Excellency is the proper Object of Gospel-Love? certainly he is
of more worth than ten thousand Joseph's; Jobs; David's.

But wherein does the personal Excellency of Christ appear? Qu.


Christ is excellent in Name. Some, Sol. 1.
have a great name, but not a good name; thus Sennacherib had; Isa. 36.13.
hear ye the words of the great King, the King of Assyria. Others, have a good
name, but not a great name; Jam. 2.5.
God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in Faith, and heyrs of the
kingdom. Christ, has both a great, and a good name. God (in paradise) lapt up
the name of Christ in the seed of the woman: Jacob, in Shiloh; Daniel, in a
certain one, etc. That the name of Christ is great, is evident: His name shall
be called wonderful; Isa. 9.6.
Counselor; the mighty God; the Father of eternity; the prince of peace. The
name of Christ is great: Thou shall call his name Emmanuel; Mat. 1.23.
God with us. And, as the name of Christ is great, so the name of Christ is
good. Jer. 23.6.
In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is
the name whereby he shall be called, Jehovah tsidkenu.
Jehovah our Righteousness; so the Hebrew. Christ, has a good as well as a
great name: Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.
A great name (with the Earth) is better than a good name, but a good name (with
Heaven) is better than a great name. One name in Heaven, is worth ten thousand
names on earth. Christ, excels in name; the name of Christ, it is Honey in the
Mouth; it is music to the ear; it is a Jubilee to the Heart. Had it not been for
(this) name, we should not have had a name; at least a name not worth the
having. That must needs be an excellent name, when there is no other name under
Heaven given amongst men whereby they can be saved. Acts 4.12.
It Is still evident: Being made so much better than the Angels; Heb. 1.4, 5, 6.
as he has obtained a more excellent name than they; Heb. 1.4, 5, 6.
for unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son this day
have I begotten thee: And again; I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son: And again; when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he
says, And let all the Angels of God, worship him. Angels, are not to be
worshipped, for Angels are to worship.

Christ is excellent in Nature. god never had a son, without suffering, so god
never had but one son without sin; now, this son was christ, who was made the
son of man, that men might be made the sons of god. he was made sin for us, who
knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. It Is not for want of
ignorance of their own hearts, that there is in some a pretension unto personal
perfection. Who can say I have made my heart clean, Prove. 20.9.
I am pure from my sin? When was there a Soul without sin? Did not Adam (the
Emperor of the Universe) disobey? The woman gave unto me, and I did eat. Genesis
3.12.
Did not Abraham (the Father of the faithful, and the Friend of God) dissemble?
Say, I pray thee, thou art my Sister. Genesis 12.3
Did not Jacob (a prayer, and prevailer with Christ) supplant his Brother? Genesis
27.22.
The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. Had not Moses
(though a Minister of Righteousness, and mediator of the old Covenant) his
passion? Number. 20.10.
Hear now ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock? Had not David
(though a man after Gods own heart) a pang of forbidden fear? I shall one day
perish, 1 Samuel 27.1.
or be (consumed) by the hand of Saul. Had not Jonah (though his name
signifies a Dove, and Doves (they say) are without a Gall) his pettish humor?
Jon. 4.3.
Lord, take my life from me, for it is better for me to dye, than to live. Had
not Peter (though of a Fisherman, made a Fisher of Men) a plague sore? Then
began he to curse, Mat. 27.74.
and to swear, saying, I know not the man. I might multiply instances; I shall
add but one more: Had not Paul (though a tall, if not the tallest Cedar in
Lebanon) sin running in his veins? Romans 7.23.
I have a law in my members, warring against the law of my mind. These; all
these, had weeds in their Garden, but Christ had none; had Dross in their Gold,
but Christ had none; had Seams in their Coats, but Christ had none; had Rubbish
in their Houses, but Christ had none; had Leaven in their Hearts, but Christ
had none; had Sin in their Souls, but Christ had none; Heb. 4.15.
He was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

Christ is excellent in Love. Love of Christ, that is a sweet Monosyllable
indeed. As Sin is the worst, so Grace is the best Monosyllable: As Lust is the
worst, so Love is the best Monosyllable. The Love of Christ, that is a sweet
Dish indeed! Do I write a Dish indeed? I may write a Feast indeed: It is no
wonder that the Jews said, John 12.35.
Behold how he loved him. Did ever any one live, as Christ lived? for he lived
and sinned not. Rev. 1.5.
Did ever any one love, as Christ loved? for he loved, and washed from sin in
the blood of himself. Christ's feet, were washed with Mary's tears, such was
her love to him; but Mary's heart, was washed with Christ's blood, such was his
love to her. Shall I suggest the love of David to Absalom? of Jacob to
Benjamin? of Jonathan to David? as a spark to the Furnace, and as a Drop to the
Ocean, so is the love of a Christian, to the love of a Christ* Christ's looks,
are loves; his life, was a life of love, and his love, was love to the life:
Did he not come into this world rather to love than to live? rather to dye than
to stay?

Christ is excellent in Light. dark state, is a dismal state; a dungeon state,
is a dreadful state. Man (naturally) is a Bartimeus; he is blind; born blind.
May it not be said of any one, as they said of their Son? That this is our Son
we know, and that he was born blind we know. If Christ Jesus shines not in our
Horizon, we are in the dark; yea, we are darkness it self in the very Abstract.
Ephesians. 5.8.
And ye who were sometimes darkness, are now made light in the Lord. Now
Abstracts (in Scripture, and common Dialect) are emphatically significant, and
carry more than an ordinary sense in them. As the Sun (in the Firmament) is the
worlds bright eye, so Christ (the Sun of righteousness) is the Churches bright
eye. As the eye is the light of the body, so Christ is the light of the soul.
Christ, styles himself the light of life. John 8.12
He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. Did a Job say, I was eyes to the blind? What may a Jesus then say? who is
the life of light, as well as the light of life.

Christ is excellent in wisdom. Satan, subtle, and so are his Servants: The
children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of
light; but they are wise unto damnation, not unto Salvation; they are wise to
do evil, to do good they have no knowledge. Christ, is wiser than all; wisest of
all; he can turn their wisdom into folly, and out-shoot them in their own Bow.
This barbarous and brutish; this beastly and bloody; this murderous, and
merciless generation upon our Borders, and in our Bowels, shall one day know,
that there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is any divination against
Israel; according to this time it shall be said concerning Jacob, Number. 23.23.
and Israel, what has God wrought? The wisdom that man has, is a poor
pittance; a poor moity, Col. 3.3.
but in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge. That man's
wisdom is but conceit, who is wise in his own conceit. Solomon, was wiser than
all men, but Christ is wiser than all Angels. Christ is the wisdom of men; the
wisdom of Angels; the wisdom of God; the God of wisdom. I am understanding.
Pro. 8.14.
Is not this a lofty Dialect, evincing the truth of his Deity?

Christ is excellent in Wealth. Christ is most wise, so he is most wealthy.
There are mines of Gold, but Christ is a mine of Grace. He is full of grace,
and truth. Christ, is an Ore indeed; he is able to enrich a Beggar, that is
worth nothing; yea, a Bank-rupt, that is worse than nothing. John 1.14.16.
Of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. As the paper (from
the press) receives letter for letter; as the Wax (from the Seal) receives
print for print; as the Glass (from the Image) receives face for face; so the
Christian (from Christ) receives grace for grace. Luther, would not be put off
with Gold, without Grace, and Glory. Christ, must needs be rich; Mat. 13.45.46.
must needs be richest, for he is the pearl of great price. Christ, is a pearl
of that value, that he can pay all thy debts, and bear all thy charges.

Christ is excellent in Counsel. is mine, and sound wisdom. Achitophel, was the
Counselor of David, but Christ is the Counselor of Sion; the Counselor of
his Jedediah's. Isa. 9.6.
His name shall be called wonderful; Counselor. Apollo, was the Oracle of the
Heathen, but Christ is the Oracle of the Christian. Is not that a Dialect
becoming a Deity? My counsel shall stand, Isa. 46.10.
and I will do all my pleasure. As Christ commands, so he counsels. Rev. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me: But what? Gold; the most excellent, and the most
estimated of all Metals: Yea, Gold tried in the fire, not counterfeit, but
current coin; the graces of the Spirit: And raiment; the righteousness of
Christ: Yea, white raiment; white, being a natural color, and beyond all
artificial color.

Christ is excellent in Comfort. Christ be the Preacher, and the Text too, I,
even I, Isa. 51.12.
am he that comfort thee. Not I, or another, but I and none other. It Is
(purely) the voice of Christ, that stilleth the voice of desperation. Christ,
says to a person, (whose soul is like a troubled Sea) as Jethro did to Moses,
go in peace; as Eli did to Hannah, go in peace; as Jonathan did to David, go in
peace; as David did to Absalom, go in peace; as Elisha did to Naaman; go in
peace: Thus Christ said to the Woman that had the plague, Go in peace, Mar.
5.34.
and be whole of thy plague: Luke 7.50.
Thus Christ said to Mary Magdalen (that City-sinner) Thy faith has saved
thee, go in peace: And thus Christ; said unto the woman that touched him, Be of
good comfort, Luke 8.48.
thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace.

Christ is excellent in Conduct. is the Shepherd, and he leads the Sheep.
That Christ is the Leader of the Church, is evident. Prove. 8.20.
I lead in the way of righteousness; in the midst of the paths of judgment. He
leads in Summer, and in Winter too; in fair weather, and in foul weather too;
in the streets of Sion, and of Sodom too. Rev. 7.17
The Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them to living fountains of water. Those (actually) Christ's, are under the
Conduct of Christ, from the Wilderness to Canaan; from Earth to Heaven; from
Grace to Glory. Christ leads out of a state of Sin, into a slate of Grace,
and thorough a state of Grace, into a state of Glory. Thou shall guide me with
thy counsel, Psa. 73.24.
and afterward receive me to glory.

Christ is excellent in power. Heaven is devolved upon Christ. He is the Object
of the Angels adoration. He has the Angels at his command, and can send them
forth as an heavenly Host, to assist his people. Peter, Mat. 26.53.
(says Christ) think thou not that I can now pray to the Father, and he
shall give me more than 12 legions of Angels? And, as he has power over
Heaven, so over the Earth; as he is the Object of the Angels adoration, so of
the Saints admiration, 2 These. 1.10.
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that
bleieve. And, as Christ has power over Heaven, and over Earth, so over Hell:
As he is the Object of the Angels adoration, and of the Saints admiration, so
of the Devils consternation. Phi. 2.10.
That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow; things in Heaven; Angels, and
the spirits of just men made perfect: Things on Earth; Saints and Sinners:
Things under the Earth; infernal Spirits.

CHAP. III. Inferences from a Gospel Love.
THe Lover of Christ, Infer. 1.
has much in Reversion. Though the lover of Christ has much in possession,
yet more in reversion. The Apostle has a lovely, 1 Cor. 2.9.
and a lofty strain: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man, the things that God has prepared: But for whom? for
them that love him. Vespatian, the Emperor.
I have read of one that commanded a liberal sum of money should be given to
one that fell in love with him: The Steward asked under what Item he should put
it: The Emperor answered, Vespatiano adamaco.
Item, to the Woman that loved Vespatian. But now, Soul, when Christ gives he
does not put it under an Item of Money, but of Mercy: not under an Item of
Gold, but of Glory: Item, Heaven, with the Sinlessness thereof; Heaven, with
the Sorrowlessness thereof; Heaven, with the Temptationlessness thereof; Heaven
with the Timelessness thereof, to the Soul that loves me. Item, the things
which are invisible; and inaudible; and inconceivable, to he Man that loves me;
to the Woman that loves me. Art a lover of Christ? Drink then of the brook by
the way, and lift up thy head, for man sees not; hears not; conceives not, the
things that Christ has prepared for them that love him. Art a lover of Christ?
then though thou did come (unto) this work mourning like a Dove, and have
been (at) this work groaning like a Turtle, yet go away (from) this work
singing like a Lark, for man has not seen, nor heard, nor conceived, the
things that Christ has prepared for them that love him. It Is true; every lover
of Christ, may (as one did) mourn over his want of love to Christ; A Minister,
weeping at the Table as he sat at meat, was asked wherefore he wept; who
answered, I weep, because I can love Christ no more. Do ye see the tears of
repentance stand in mine eyes? It Is because I can love Christ no more. Do ye
see Tears run down my Cheeks? it is because I can love Christ no more. Do ye see
my Tears fall upon my Plate? It Is because I can love Christ no more. But, Soul,
though to love Christ no more be a ground of Sorrow, yet the promise (to the
lover of Christ) is a ground of Joy. The promise is made to the lover of
Christ. Jam. 1.12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

But what is this Crown under promise for the lovers of Christ? Qu. 1.


This word (Crown) passes thorough various expressions in the sacred Scripture
but all amount (unto) and meet (in) one, Sol.
and the same thing.

It Is called an Inheritance. Naboth, had an inheritance, and he valued it.
Shall I give away the inheritance of my fathers unto thee? This was but a
vineyard, and he might have had a better for it, or the worth of it in money;
but what manner of inheritance is this inheritance? To an inheritance
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4.
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you. It is
incorruptible, not perishing with the things of the world: It Is undefiled, not
defiled with abuse: It fades not away with Antiquity: And, it is reserved in
Heaven: It Is safe; it is sure; it is secure; and will be thy security, that art a
lover of Christ.

It Is called the Joy of the Lord. Mat. 25.21.
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. For the joy of the Lord to enter into us,
is for Heaven to enter into us; for us to enter into the joy of the Lord, is
for us to enter into Heaven. On Earth, there are Tones of Sorrow, with Tunes of
Joy, but in Heaven, there are Tunes of Joy, without Tones of Sorrow. Heaven, is
not a Baca, a valley of tears; not a Bochim, a house of mourning; but a
Shushan, a City of joyfulness.

It Is called the Kingdom. Mat. 25.34.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Are not Kingdoms great things, with
great Men? This was the flagitious position, of a flagitious Machiavel, That
breach of faith for Kingdoms is no sin. Will not men swim (as it were) through
a Sea of blood to a Kingdom? Here is a Kingdom, and it is the Kingdom of Heaven;
the third Heaven; the Heaven of Heavens.

It Is called the Crown of Life. What none? No: Rev. 2.10.
What not binding, and banishing? No: What not Poverty, and Prison? No: What
not Fire and Massacre? No: What not Rack, and Stake? No: Behold the Devil (in
his Seconds, and Servants) shall take some of you (not all of you) and cast
into prison (not into Hell) and ye shall have tribulation ten days (not for
ever:) Be thou faithful unto death; there is the precept; and I will give thee a
crown of life; there is the promise. A Crown represents unto us Dignity, plenty,
and perpetuity. A Crown is round, as if it had neither beginging nor ending.

It Is called a Crown of Righteousness. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have finished my course; I have kept the faith: Here are three Metaphors;
the first is taken from wrestling; I have fought a good fight: The second is
taken from running I have finished my course: The third; is taken from
standing, or keeping in the Field; I have kept the faith: But what follows?
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness. Though this Crown, be a
Crown of Mercy, and a gift of Grace, yet it may be also called a Crown of
Righteousness, and that in a twofold respect.

Upon the account of God. Crown is promised to the overcomer. Ex part Dei.
Rev. 2.11.
He that overcomes shall not, not (so the Greek) be hurt of the second death.
This Man, shall not be blasted, but blessed; shall not be damned, but saved;
shall not go to Hell, but to Heaven.

Upon the account of it self. Ex part Rei.
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to those that
trouble you: 2. These. 1.7, 8.
And you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jefus shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels. As it is a righteous thing with God to send
the Sinner to Hell, so it is a righteous thing with God to send the Saint to
Heaven. As it is a righteous thing with God to avenge himself upon the
persecuting in this world, so it is a righteous thing with God to right the
persecuted in (another) world, that can meet with no right in (this) world.

It Is called a Crown of Glory. Crown is the most excellent Badge of royal
Majesty. But we see Jesus, Heb. 2.9.
who was made a little lower than the Angels; for the suffering of death: That
is, that he might be fitted to suffer death, which he had not been, if he had
not been made a little lower than the Angels, by taking upon him our humane
nature; for, Christ was made lower than the Angels that he might suffer death,
as well as in suffering of death: But what follows? Crowned with glory, and
honor, All Crowns are glorious, and Glory is a Crown. A Crown, and Glory, are
of such near alliance, that they differ more in Sound than in Substance, and
are often put together as one thing. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee;
Prove. 4.8, 9.
a Crown of glory shall she deliver thee. He has stripped me of my glory, and
taken the Crown from my head. Job. 19.9.


But why shall those have a Crown (with) a Christ hereafter, Qu. 2.
that have a Cross (for) a Christ here?

In a four fold respect; Sol.
the Father; the Son; the Spirit; the Saint.

In respect of the Father. Crown is in a way of Mercy. There is no reason to be
given of Mercy, but Mercy. I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy. As
mercy is the element of the Father, so the motive of the Father, and the Father
has no motive but his mercy. Luke 12.32.
Let there be no fear little little flock; there is a negative precept: For it
pleases your Father to give you the kingdom; there is a positive promise. The
Crown, is the Fathers gift; and for the Father to please to give, is for the
Father freely to give; to give with all imaginable freeness; yea, with a
freeness uninimaginable. The Crown is given upon the account of God's Mercy,
not upon the account of Man's Merit.

In respect of the Son. Crown is in a way of merit. Though the Mercy of the
Father be the moving cause, yet the merit of the Son is the meritorious cause
of this Crown. This will appear by an induction, and reflection of three
reasons.

Because Christ has prepared this. Crown is prepared by Christ. In my Fathers
house; in heaven; for as God has his lower house, which is the Heart, so he
has his upper house, which is Heaven; as he inhabits Eternity, Joh. 14.1.2.
so he dwells with him that is of a poor, and of a contrite spirit: But what of
this house? There are in it many mansions; (...)
the word mansion signifies a Remaining; denoting the perpetuity, and eternity
of the State; but my Line is too short to sound this Bottom; heaven is best
known by the inhabitants therein, and thereof: If it were not so, I would have
told you; would not my Father hide from Abraham the thing that he would do, and
shall I hide from you the thing that I go about? I go to prepare a place for
you. I go to make Heaven ready for you, and I will also make you ready for
Heaven. Though I be your Husband, yet I am also your Harbinger, and I go before
to take up Lodgings for you. Christ is the Churches Harbinger; the Churches
forerunner; he is ascended to Heaven that he may prepare mansions for his. Heb.
6.20.
Whether the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus. Christ, as Head, is gone
before, to take possession of Heaven for the Church his Body.

Because Christ has prayed for this. Christ has prayed for the Crown. As
Christ has prepared this, so, he has prayed for this. Father, I will; it is a
Dialect becoming a Deity, and does evince the Deity of Christ: Father, I will:
But what does Christ will? That those which thou have given me, John 17.24.
be with me where I am. That is, when I am with thee; invested with that Glory
whereof I am now divested. Here is Christ's prayer, that His might be with him;
with him in Heaven; and was not Christ heard in all that he prayed for?

Because Christ has promised this. Christ has prepared this Crown; and prayed
for this Crown; so, he has promised this Crown. And I, John 12.32.
if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me. There is a twofold lifting up of
Christ, ignominious, and glorious; a lifting up on the Cross, and a lifting up
in the Gospel. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
me. As Christ draws out of a state of Sin, into a state of Grace, so he draws
out of a state of Grace, into a state of Glory.

In respect of the Spirit. Cross (for) a Christ here, shall have a Crown (with)
a Christ hereafter, in respect of the Father, and of the Son, so in respect of
the Spirit. In whom, after ye believed, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. The words
are very emphatical, ye were sealed: Now, that nature of a Seal, is to make all
things sure. But what follows? Which is the earnest of our Inheritance; (...)
This word, is not Greek, but Syriac originally; which signifies more than
earnest, for it signifies (as some say) a Pawn, or Hostage, as well as an
earnest: But, take it as an earnest, this is only used in contracts of buying
and selling; it is a part of the whole, and engages the whole.

In respect of the Saint. Saints life, would be a sad life, should there only
be a Cross; but as there is a Cross here, so there shall be a Crown hereafter.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we are of all men the most miserable: But the Saint shall have a compensation
hereafter for all his crosses, and calamities here; for all his dangers, and
deaths here; for all his sorrows, and sufferings here; for all his trials, and
travels here. The righteous perishes: Isa. 57.1.
The righteous; that is, the righteous man, or woman; the righteous person:
But, what of him? or her? He, or She perishes; that is, dies, and the body
perishes: Is, here all? Marg.
No: And merciful men (men of kindness, or of godliness) are taken away; none
considering that they are taken away from the evil to come. From the evil of
sin, and from the evil of suffering.

Ah but my Temptations are many! Ob. 1.


Art actually Christ's? Sol.
thou art more loved by Christ than hated by Satan. The mercy of a Christ, is
more than the Malignity of a Satan; and Christ loves his, more than Satan can
hate his. Christ (by his own blood) has once entered into the holy place, Heb.
9.12.
having obtained eternal into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. Thou art redeemed for ever, but thou shale not be tempted
for ever.

Ah but my Tribulations are many! Oh. 2.


Art a lover of Christ? Sol. 1.
then all things shall work together for thy good. There is (unto the lovers of
Christ) under every providential Occurrence, an universal Concurrence of things
for good. All things shall work together for good to to them that love God. All
things; Romans 8.28.
as national, and congregational, so personal. As it was said, it is Good that
Nero persecuteth; so, it may be said, it was (for) good that Nero persecuted.

Art a lover of Christ? while, thou have but a while to suffer. The longest
night will have an end. After ye have suffered a while. It Is but a while; yea,
a little while; yea, a very little while, that thou have to bear the cross, For
yet a very little while, Isa. 10.25.
and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction. The
Cross is transient, the Crown is permanent.

Art a lover of Christ? dish will be the best. Have a cross (for) Christ? thou
shall have a Crown (with) Christ. Have a Hell here? thou shall have a Heaven
hereafter. Have thy worst here? thou shall have thy best hereafter. Have thy
bitter here? thou shall have thy sweet hereafter. Have thy Wilderness here?
thou shall have thy Canaan hereafter. Christ, has reserved the best wine until
the last; he will make the last Act, the best part of the Comedy. Mark the
perfect man, Psa. 37.37.
and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

Ah! Ob. 3.
but my Corruptions are many!

This is sad; Sol.
this is saddest. Flee from sin as from a most pestilential plague; as the Pest
of Pests; yet sorrow not as one without hope. 1 John 2.1.
Little children I write unto you that ye sin not: Ye had better be sick than
sinning, be sighing than sinning; be suffering than sinning; be doing than
sinning; be dying than sinning; Yet if any one sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Ah but I question whether Christ loves me! Ob. 4.
Oh that I did but know that Christ loves me! I could leap over a wall, and run
thorough a troop, if I did but know that Christ loves me. Oh! how shall I know
that Christ loves me?

Do thou love Christ? Sol.
certainly then Christ loves thee. Pro. 8.17.
I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me. Christ,
is first in love; the love of a Christ is primary, the love of a Christian is
secondary; the love of a Christ is the cause, the love of a Christian is but
the effect. We love him: Why? 1 John 4.19.
because he first loved us. There is the Sun, and then the Light; the Tree, and
then the Fruit; love (from) Christ, and then love (to) Christ.

Ah but I question whether I love Christ! Though Christ may love me, Ob. 5.
yet I question whether I love him. As a word filty spoken, so a word fitly
written, is like an apple of gold, in a picture of Silver: But how shall I know
whether my love to Christ be of the right Stamp?

Is it jealous? then it is real. Sol.
Art more jealous of thine own heart, than of the hearts of others? thy love
then to Christ is real. Eleven, of the twelve Apostles, seemed to have a holy
jealcusie upon themselves, for every one of them began to say, Mat. 26.22.
Lord, is it I? It Is true, at last Judas spoke, but he spoke last, v. 25.
Master is it I? He says unto him, thou have said. Judas, was plotting his
Apprehension, and Crucifiction, and yet he says, master is it I? The rest
might be in earnest, and truly jealous though he was not. God, was jealous for
Sion, with great jealousy: And the Apostle was jealous of the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 11.2.
with a godly jealousy; or (according to the Greek) with the zeal of God. (...)
Thus, a lover of Christ, keeps up a holy jealousy upon himself; he dreads a
disobliging of Christ; a disquieting of Christ; a disturbing of Christ; a
disgusting of Christ. Can. 3.5.
I charge you ye daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
love, until he pleases.

Is it cordial? real. Is thy love not only in word, but also in truth? not
complemental, but cordial? then it is right, 1 John 3.18.
and real. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tengue, but
indeed, and in truth. We are to love in word, and in tongue, but not in word,
and tongue only; our Deeds must speak the Truth of our Loves. The love of an
Hypoerite to Christ, is like the shining of a Glowworm, it shines but it
heateth not.

Is it uncessant? Stamp. True love knows no playing days; it ever has a rest
of contentation, but it never has a rest of cessation. As he was never a
Friend, that is not ever a Friend, so he was never a Lover, that is not ever a
Lover. As Christ once loving his, ever loves his, so a Christian (of his
making) once loving him, ever loves him. Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted, and
grounded in love. As Christ dwells in the hearts of his lovers, by his special,
and spiritual presence, and influence; so these are rooted, and grounded in
love; their love is firm, and strong: But what follows? v. 18.
That we may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and height, and depth. The Apostle here sets out the love of Christ,
with Depth, and Height; with Length and Breadth, the four Dimensions of the
Cross; to indicate, intimate, and insinuate unto us, that upon the extent of
the Tree, was the most exact love that ever was, with all the dimensions in
this Kind represented.

Is it loyal? real. True love, is not so much set upon what Christ has, as
upon what Christ is; not so much set upon his, as it is set upon him. Christ,
is sweet without any thing, but nothing is sweet without Christ. Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? or on earth that I desire besides thee? True
love desires no wages; it is wages enough to it self; it pays it self in seeing
and serving the beloved. In keeping of them there is great reward. Psalm. 19.11.
Grace, shows us wages in the work. God (says one) will reward his people
according to their work. Secundum laborem. Bern.
The Nurse does much for the Child, so does the Mother; the Nurse does it for
the love of wages, but the Mother does it for the wages of love. A wise man may
look for his Advantage in the end of his work, though he be not to make
Advantage the end of his work. Though Christians are not mercenary, to work as
Hirelings for pay, yet (in the Issue) they shall have better than pay for all
their works. Though Christ will not be served (for) wages, yet Christ will not
be served (without) wages; yea, such wages, as will weigh down all our works,
and all our woes. We can never want pay, or reward for that work, which is a
reward, and can pay it self.

Is it expansive? Stamp. If love be true it is extensive; it extends it self to
all the Saints. Since we heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, Col. 1.4.
and of the love which ye have to all the Saints. Is this text antiquated?
Opinion, must not bias our Affection. If love has the Stamp of a Christ upon
it, then Mephibosheth is loved for the sake of Jonathan; then the Child is
loved for the sake of the Father; then the Christian is loved for the sake of
Christ. Are there not some men that cannot love others, because they are not
altogether so broad, and long as themselves? Whosoever is right, or wrong, in
point of Opinion, I dare write he is wrong, that is not right in point of
Affection. It Is reported of the Primitive Christians, Behold how the Christians
love! Ecce quam diligunt Christiani!
Love, is called an old commandment, and a new commandment, but we are now
making it no commandment. Does not a difference in Opinion, beget a difference
in Affection? Many men have a good Opinion of their own Opinions, though their
Opinions be not good. It Is said of Bucer, Aliquid Christi.
and Calvin, that they loved all in whom they could epsy any thing of Christ.
It is not indispensably necessary concerning men's going to Heaven, and entering
thorough the gates into the city, that they are of this judgment, or of that
persuasion (holding the head, holding the foundation) but their living in love
is necessary. Divide, impera.
Divide, and rule; divide and rage; divide, and ruin, is the sophistry of the
prince of darkness. Division is an unhappy weed, and it grows apace. It Is pity
that Abraham, and Lot, should fall out by the way. It Is pity that Man should
make Two, whom God has made One. It Is pity that one Christian should now say
to another, Dic aliquid, ut duo simus.
as one Man formerly spoke to another, Speak something that we may be Two.
Division of Tongues, hindered the building of Babel; division of Hands, Heads
and Hearts, hinders the building of Beth-el.

Is it expensive? then it is real. lover of Christ, is willing to be at cost for
Christ. Verbal love, is like painted fire, and a golden loaf, but real love
(with David) will not have that which cost it nothing. The woman, thought not
her ointment, (though precious) too good for Christ. Mat. 26.6, 7.
When Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the Leper, there came unto
him a woman having an Alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on
his head, as he sat at meat.

Is it expressive? image of a Christ upon it. A lover of Christ, is not a mute,
but has a mouth for Christ. Lovers, will speak one (of) another, and (for)
another, when they cannot speak one (with) another. The Husband is at Sea, or
beyond Sea, but the Wife speaks (of) him, and speaks (for) him. As he is a
lover of Christ, that delights in seeking a Christ; in serving a Christ; in
suffering for a Christ, as well as in seeing a Christ; so he is a lover of
Christ, that delights in speaking of a Christ; in speaking for a Christ; in
speaking to a Christ, as well as in speaking with a Christ. A lover of Christ,
is big with expression; must give vent to its Soul; it cannot but speak the
things which it has seen, and heard. A lover of Christ, will give his Vote for
Christ, whatever the danger be; and the difficulty be; and the death be. Thus
Peter did: Ye denied the holy one, Act. 3.14, 15.
and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; and killed the
prince of life, whom God raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.

Is it sociable? right, and real. My God, Dr. Sibbs.
and I (says one) are good company. Man, is a sociable creature, and he loves
Company, but it is the Company that he loves. Is acquaintance with Christ thy
ambition? is enjoyment of Christ thy Center? is converse with Christ thy
Element? then thou art a lover of Christ. It is said of Ignatius, that being
opened, Ainor meus crucifixus est.
there was found in his heart (written in letters of Gold) My Love is
crucified. One also (in a tract of his) speaks of a woman, Dell.
who meditating the torments of Hell, together with the hatred of the damned
there, prayed, that though she were damned, yet she might love God. Was not
enjoyment of God, and Christ, the ambition of the Psalmist? My soul thirsts,
Psa. 63.1, 2.
my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and weary land without water, to see thy
power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary.

Is it submissive? then it is real. Christ? art graciously willing to bleed or
burn, for a Christ? art graciously willing to bear the indignation of the Lord
because thou have sinned against him? art graciously willing to dye a Sacrifice
(for) Christ, if thou may no longer live a Servant (of) Christ? art
graciously willing to suffer the loss of all things for Christ? then thy love
is real. It Is recorded of the Hebrews, and transmitted to posterity, that they
took joyfully spoiling, Heb. 10.34.
knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring
substance. They were glad they had any thing to lose (for) a Christ, knowing
they should lose nothing (by) a Christ. They were glad of an opportunity to put
off their worldly goods at so great a rate, as a proof of the sincerity of
their graces. Our goods never go off at so high a price, nor come to so good a
market, as when they are spoiled in a good cause. These, were not concerned for
their Goods, as Micah was for his Gods, for they knew they were gracious here,
and that they should be glorious hereafter. True love, flies not (like Chaff)
in the face of him that fans it. Though I cannot dispute for a Christ, yet I
can dye for a Christ, said the Martyr.

Is it superlative? real. Has Christ no Competitor? no Corrival? then thy love
is of the right Stamp. As Christ bestows himself wholly upon a Christian, so
a Christian bestows himself wholly upon Christ. True love, keeps back nothing
from Christ, Illi non Christum amant qui aliquid plus amant.
for whom all is too little. He loves not Christ sincerely, that loves not
Christ singularly, that loves not Christ superlatively. Love thou me more
than these? John 21.15, 17.
was the question of Christ to Peter. Love thou me more than thy Nets? more
than thy Fish? more than thy Friends that are about thee? Or love thou me
more than these love me? Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee; was the answer of Peter unto Christ. Peter was asked of the Degree of his
Love, but he answered as to the Truth of it; he was asked as to the measure of
it, but he answered as to the manner of it; he was asked as to the quantity of
it, but he answered as to the quality of it. Can thou say without a Check, as
one did? Lord Jesus, Ambrose. plus quam mea; meos; me: Substance; Seed; Self.
I love thee more than my possessions; more than my Relations; more than my
self; then thy love is right, and real. None (to) Christ, says the Psalmist;
none (but) Christ, said the Martyr; all (in) Christ, says the Apostle. A lover
of Christ, must love nothing much, but that Christ, whom he can never love too
much. Ambrose (on the Funeral of Theodosius) observes, that he died with these
words in his mouth; I have loved; Dilexi; dilexi.
I have loved: which he conceived to be the Answer of the Emperor to the
Angels, asking him how he had behaved himself in the Empire; I have loved; I
have loved: That was enough to him, and this will be enough to thee (in a dying
hour) that the personal excellency of Christ has been the Object of thy Love.

Thy Vote must be given for Christ, Inf. 2.
and his Church. Art thou a lover of Christ? give then thy suffrage for this
Truth, that the personal excellency of Christ, is the object of the Churches
love. Be not afraid, nor ashamed to own this, though thou dwell where Satan's
seat is. Amnon was Lust-sick; the man keeps his Chamber, until he has
defloured his Sister Tamar Micah was Idol-sick; if ye take away his Gods, and
the Priest (though not worth the keeping) he looks upon himself as a Beggar, if
not as a Bankrupt. Ahab was Vineyardsick; he must have the Vineyard of Naboth,
though he has a kingdom to walk in; he will set his foot there, though he goes
thorough the Blood of the Owner. Judas, was World-sick; this Caitiff will
betray a Christ, though he has but thirty seven shillings, and six pence, for
this damnable act; he undertook it for thirty pieces of silver, each piece
being one shilling, and three pence. But the Spouse is Lovesick: Can. 2.5.
Stay me with flagons; comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. I charge
you, Chap. 5.8.
ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye see my beloved, that ye tell him I am sick of
love. As if the Church had said, ah my head-ake; my heart-ake; yea my
heart strings are ready to break for a sight of Christ; for a smile from
Christ: Ah! whatever ye forget to tell him, remember to tell him this, that I
am sick of love for him; that I know not how to live another Day, another Duty,
without a Sight (of) him without a Smile (from) him, for his personal
excellency is the Object of my love. Had not Mary Magdalen a great love for
Christ? Much was forgiven her, Luke 7.47.
for she loved much. Not that her much loving, was the cause of her much
forgiving, but her much forgiving, was the cause of her much loving, and her
much loving the consequent of her much forgiving. (...). Particula, non
causativa, sed allativa, vel rationalis. Not, Causa praecedens, but, Signum
subsequens.
This word (for) does not signify here a cause, as if her Love was the cause
of the forgiveness of her sins, but a reason drawn from the Sign; many sins are
forgiven her, and hereby you shall know it, because, or in that she loved much.
The particle (for) in our common Dialect, is used as a note of the effect; or
Sign; there is Fire, for I see smoke; this Tree, lives, for it sprouteth. Much
was forgiven her, therefore she has loved much. The whole scope of the Parable
is to show, that he loves most, unto whom most is forgiven, and not
(contrarily) that most is forgiven unto him that loves most. The Antithesis,
in the same verse, necessitates this Comment: Those words, but to whom little
is forgiven, the same loves little, supposes this Thesis, because much was
forgiven her, she loved much,

Christ must be loved, Inf. 3.
or the Soul must be damned. There are many things without which we may be, and
yet live well; and do well; and dye well; but if we be without love to the
personal excellency of Christ, we cannot live well; nor do well; nor dye well.
Love (to the personal excellency of Christ,) is indispensably necessary unto
Salvation. That God who has appointed the end has also appointed the Means,
that shall lead unto that end. We may be without possessions, and without
Relations; we may be without an Affluence, and a Confluence of these lesser,
and lower things, and yet live well; and do well; and dye well; yea, we may be
without such Degrees, and pitches of Grace, and yet live well; and do well; and
dye well; but there are other things without which if we be, we cannot live
well; nor do well; nor dye well; now, they are these.

Repentance. Repentance toward God. If persons live and dye, without
Repentance, they cannot live well; nor do well; nor dye well. As there is
sorrow which works wrath, so there is a sorrowing according to God.
Repentance must be speedy, without procrastination; it must be cordial without
dissimulation; it must be general, without exception; it must be continual
without interruption. Repentance is so necessary, yea, of such necessity, that
a preaching it was imposed among all nations, Luke 24.47.
beginning at Jerusalem. Though Sin (for) a Believer be perfectly covered yet
Sin (in) a Believer is not perfectly cured; there are the Remainders of Sin,
Reliquiae peccati.
and these must be mourned over. While there is an Issue of Sin kept open,
there must be an Issue of Sorrow kept open; while the Ship springs a Leak, the
Pump must be kept at work. There are Turns as well as Tears, in a
Gospel-Repentance. It was the saying of one, Tertullian.
if thou be backward in thoughts of Repentance, be forward in thoughts of
Hell. It Is best not to sin, but (having sinned) the next best is to repent. As
God has a Bag for sins, so he has a Book for Prayers, and a Bottle for Tears.
Tears are the truest Rhetoric of a troubled Soul; they are a prevailing Suada,
beyond the loudest and quaintest Oratory, both with God and Man. Dr. Done.
I repent (says one) all my life, but that time I spent in Communion with God,
and in doing good. There is a repentance unto salvation, never to be repented
of, and this is the gift of God; now, without this repentance, there will be no
living well; nor doing well; nor dying well. Luke 13.3.5.
Except ye repent (and this except is without exception) ye shall all likewise
perish. That (says one) which Christ here threatens to the impenitent, was
fulfilled after 40 years; for then Titus (the Emperor of the Romans) on the
feast of the Passover besieged the City and (having taken it) slew many
impenitent Jews, as they were sacrificing.

Faith. Person of Christ. If persons live, and dye, without Faith in the Person
of Christ, they cannot live well; nor do well; nor dye well. If any live, and
dye, without Faith they cannot live well, for, Hab. 2.4.
the just shall live by his Faith: If any live, and dye without Faith, they
cannot do well, Romans 14.23.
for, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin: If any live and dye without Faith,
they cannot dye well, for, if ye believe not that I am he, John. 8.24.
ye shall dye in your sins. Now, if there be dying (in) Sin, there will be
damning (for) Sin.

Love. Faith in the Person of Christ, so there must be Love to the personal
Excellency of Christ. If persons be without love to the personal excellency of
Christ, they cannot live well; nor do well; nor dye well. If any man loves not
the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22.
let him be Anathema Maran-atha. Some Texts are short; thus, these are; Pray
without ceasing: Rejoice evermore. Some Texts are sweet; thus, these are; In me
ye shall have peace: Go in peace. Some Texts are long, and short; thus, these;
Depart from me all ye that work iniquity, I know you not: Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devils and his Angels. It Is thus
here; here is a long and a sharp Text; If any man loves not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha. Is it not enough to amaze, and amuse,
(if the Spirit goes with the Word) the greatest Atheist, and Papist? the
greatest Egyptian, and Ethiopian? the greatest Saracen, and Socinian? the
greatest Man, and Woman? In this text there is something supposed, and
something proposed. Here is,

A Supposition. Act; the Subject; the Object.

The Act. medium between loving, Luke 11.23.
and hating? He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not
with me, scatters.

The Subject. If any man. If any one; (...)
so the Greek. If any Soul; if any person without exception, or exemption, as
to Nation, whither Jew or Gentile; Is he the God of the Jews only? Romans 3.29
is he not the God of the Gentiles also? As to Sex, whether Man, or Woman: As
to Relation, Whether an Isaac, or a Rebecca; a Jacob or a Benjamin: As to Age,
whether a Methuselah, or a Josiah: As to Estate, whether a Croesus, or a
Codrus: As to Place whether a man in his Robes, or a man in his Rags. If any
one loves not.

The Object. emphatically presented in his triple Office, as the Prophet, and
Priest, 2 Cor. 4.4.
and Prince of the Church. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord.
David was a King, and a Prophet; Jeremiah, was a Priest, and a Prophet;
Melchizedech, was a King, and a Priest, but these three Offices together
(Prophetical, sacerdotal, regal) never met in any one, but this only one,
Christ Jesus the Lord, the Phaenix of the world: If any one loves not the Lord
Jesus Christ.

A Proposition. Subject, and the Sentence.

The Subject. Him. That is, Him, Her; the Man, or the Woman; the Husband, or
the Wife; the Father, or the Child; the Master, or the Servant; of what Nation
soever; of what Age soever; of what Estate soever, of what Place soever.

The Sentence. Judgment, and the Duration of that Judgment.

The Judgment. Anathema. Execration, or a Curse. Now, this is a sad one, if not
the saddest one, for it is a Gospel one, and Gospel curses, are the saddest
curses. Gal. 1.8.
Th^ugh we or an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you any other Gospel, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: let him be a Curse, (...)
according to the greek. It is thus here; and it is not said, let this person be
anathematized, but an Anathema; accursed, but a Curse.

The Duration of the Judgment. This consists of two Syriac words; Maran, our
Lord; atha comes. Let this person be a Curse, until Christ comes to judge
both the quick and the dead, John 5.22.27.
for all judgment is committed to the Son, because he is the Son of man. Let
this person be Anathema Maran-atha. Reduplication (in the sacred Scripture)
signifies two things.

Vehemence of spirit in him that speaks.

The Certainty of the thing spoken. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear, Romans 8.15.
but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. It Is
a repetition in several languages, Syriac, and Greek; whereby we cry Abba,
Father. The Spirit of God, is a Spirit of Supplication, in Jew, and Gentile.
And, as there is a crying in two languages (Abba Father) so here is a cursing
in two languages (Anathema maran-atha;) to show, that both Jews and Gentiles,
whether men, or women; whether old or young; whether high, or low; whether
rich, or poor, if they live and dye, without love to the personal Excellency of
Christ, are not only anathematized, but also an Anathema; are not only
accursed, but also a Curse, to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to Judgment,
and (from that Judgment) for an eternity. Of those three degrees of curses
(says one) which the Jews used in their threefold excommunication, Perkins.
this of Anathema Maranatha was the highest; including as much as this; Let the
Lord come and strike this person with eternal perdition. If any person loves
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let that person be Anathema Maran-atha.

As Gospel-Faith, and Gospel-Hope appear,
So Gospel-Love, which brings up the Rear.
As there is a carnal, and a moral Love,
There also is a Gospel-one above.
Now Gospel-Love appears a Gospel Grace;
The Spirits fruit, within a Gospel-Race:
It also is the noble souls expansion,
To Jesus Christ, within the highest mansion;
And for its proper Object also makes
His Excellency, where are no mistakes:
Of Gospel-Love (take from a Dwarf in Stature)
Its Object; Soil; Original, and Nature.
Christ, JESUS is; most excellent in Name;
In Nature too, for sinless is the same:
Excelling is a Christ in Love; in Light;
In Council; Comfort; Conduct; also Might:
Most excellent in Wisdom, and in Wealth,
Christ Jesus is, who is the Churches health.
Man, Mortal is, and posting to the Grave,
But Lovers of a Christ a Crown shall have.
Inheritance it is, and Heavens Joy;
A Kingdom it is, that cannot be a Troy:
A Crown of Life, so it is in sacred Story;
Of Right'ousness; yea it is a Crown of Glory.
Some Reasons also may be given why
The Lovers of a Christ (when they shall dye)
With Jesus Christ a lasting Crown shall have,
Who had a Cross on this side of the Grave.
THe moving Cause, the Fathers mercy is;
The merit of the Son does follow this;
The Earnest of the Spirit comes next,
Which Ushers in (according to the text)
The loving Saint, that he may have his Sweet,
Who Bitter had, before a winding sheet.
Art tempted? yet a Jesus loves more,
Than Satan hates, though he does greatly roar.
Art troubled? suffer but a while, and know,
To suffer but a while thou have below.
Art sinful? Ah! this calls for Lamentation,
Yet advocates a Christ for Consolation.
Christ, loving is, and easy it is to try him;
Do love a Christ? then thou art loved by him.
Take Symbols also of a Gospel-Love;
It jealous is unto a Christ above:
It Is cordial; uncessant it is, and loyal,
In persons who appear (divinely) royal:
Expansive it is; expensive also it is;
Expressive too, both unto Him, and His:
This Gospel-Love, it is love that is sociable;
Submissive it is; superlative, and stable.
Thy suffrage give (unto a g^^ less Dove)
That Christ is Object of the Churches love.
Christ, loved must be by a Man I see,
Or damned must the Man for ever be.
Thus, to divert, I did attempt to scatter,
In Poem here the marrow of the matter.
FINIS.

