Epaphras. A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT AVSTELL IN CORNWALL: IN COMMEMORATION of a
Benefactor, the second of February, 1639.

By Joseph May, Master of Arts, and Pastor of that Parish.

HEB. 13.16. To do good, and to distribute forget not; for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Humphrey Robinson, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND, AND FRIENDLY Benefactor, Mr. Richard Delamaine, servant
to his Majesty in the practice of the Mathematickes.
SIR,
THis newborn Babe seeks admittance into your bosom, and that justly,
because it is one of your own begetting: your Purse and my Pen have joined for
the production of this Issue; which now (as you see) has taken footing to step
abroad into the world. I for my part have designed it for the Sanctuary, there
to hold a candle, that some dim-sighted-passengers might by its light find out
a way to the poor man's Box; and that by the same light I and my fellow servants
may behold what manner of man Epaphras was, for our pattern and imitation. I
have sent it unto you without Bag or Scrip, very naked, yet in such garments as
Truth uses to put on. You that love your Country so well, cannot choose but
make much of your own child, borne in your own Parish, and one that does so
well resemble you. I have only taught him his prayers, or rather I have
learned from him how to pray; especially for you, that you may stand perfect
and complete in all the will of God: Which duty shall always be really
performed by

Yours truly obliged, JOSEPH MAY.

To his beloved Parishioners of Saint AUSTEL.
BEloved Friends and Parishioners, it was for your sakes that I preached this
Sermon, and you know by whose procurement: They are salutations which I
presented unto you from a friend of yours, wherein you may perceive his love
and zealous affection toward this place, the place of his birth and first
breeding. It is my desire that among the many Sermons which I have delivered,
some one may be more powerful then the rest, to work in you an imitation of
our Benefactors good works (the glory of God being his chief aim) and that
it be not raked in oblivion, or as a Candle put under a Bushel, when it was
intended to give light to the whole house. I have here published what I
formerly preached; you have the light both of the word of God, and the good
works of men, walk in the light of the one, by the light of the other, that
ye may be the children of light, and so at length placed in glory (like
stars in the firmament) with him who only has immortality, and dwells in
that light which no man can approach unto: whereunto tends the labor and
service of

Your friend and Minister, JOSEPH MAY.

Col. 4.12, 13. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ saluteth you,
always laboring fervently for you in prayers; that ye may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God; For I bear him record that he has a great
zeal for you, and them that are at Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.


THe Saints and faithful brethren which were at Colosse a city of Greece,
converted to the faith of Jesus Christ, by the faithful ministry of Epaphras,
give occasion to our Apostle to rejoice, be holding their order and
stedfastnesle of faith in Christ upon the hearsay and report that came to
him, Col. 2.5.
and therefore made them a choice part of his Apostolical charge, whereby to
animate, Col. 2.1.
and confirm them in the faith received: And however he had not seen them in
the flesh yet his spirit and heart went with them; and this Epistle is sent
unto them by Tychicus a faithful Minister, Col. 4.7, 8, 9.
and Onesimus a beloved brother; to the end that the state of the Apostle might
be made known unto them, and likewise their state made known unto him:
Thereby to comfort their hearts, and to establish them in the truth; herein
compendiously setting before them a platform both for life and doctrine; that
so every Saint and faithful brother might know what belonged to his several
vocation. And toward the end of his Epistle by way of consolation remembers
the salutation of others of the holy brotherhood and fellowship as well as of
himself; as namely of Marcus, Aristarcus, Justus, Epaphras, etc. So that
Epaphras here mentioned is one of the beloved brethren, and fellow servants,
whose salutations to the Church that was at Colosse, to the Saints and brethren
there, the Apostle remembers in this Epistle; as in the text, Epaphras who is
one of, etc.

In my judgment the Apostle is more zealous and affectionate in the
salutations remembered from Epaphras, then from any other of the brethren:
Because in the remembrance of the salutations of Epaphras, he so highly
commends Epaphras for his love, especially toward the Colossians. This is
observed by the several commendations of others here mentioned compared with
the commendations which are given of Epaphras, Aristarcus, Marcus, Jesus, which
was called Justus, they were his fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God; Luke
a beloved Physician, these are commended in briese; but Epaphras has a large
commendation; two whole verses are spent to this purpose (enough to make a
short epistle;) in the commendation of Epaphras, which the observations here
following shall more plainly demonstrate, to the end that the worth of
Epaphras for imitation may be had in ever lasting remembrance. Wherefore
observe (I beseech you) first, who is here commended; Epaphras: and in him the
matter of his commendation; that is why, and wherefore he is commended.
Secondly, by whom he is commended, and in him the manner of his commendation:
I bear him record.

The person commended is called Epaphras, Nomen quasi not amen. etym.
I suppose it to be his name taken in baptism at his conversion from Paganism
to Christianity, Colosse a town of Phrygia. Alst. (...) 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 3.1. 1
Pet. 1.12, 13 Col. 1.7.
which might be done at Jerusalem (where Peter baptized Phrygians and others)
not without significancy, especially in that he was after his conversion
deputed to a ministerial calling: which calling requires that men be put in
mind and remembrance of their duties by the ministry which was the practice of
the Apostle toward Timothy and Titus. And of Saint Peter to the dispersed
Brethren. And Epaphras, properly signifies an admonitor, or one that puts
in remembrance, and in this point he was for them a faithful Minister of
Christ, well brooking his name by his office: a fit name for a servant of Jesus
Christ; so that it was comfortable to the Colossians to hear of Epaphras, and
to have his name mentioned in the Epistle, whereby they received a testimony of
his love toward them, requiting that testimony of their love in the Spirit,
which was declared by Epaphras unto the Apostle. Epaphras in those days was
glorious among the Saints on earth, Col. 1.8.
but now is he glorious among the Saints in Heaven. And so in remembrance of
the man we come to the matter of his commendation; which is grounded on three
several foundations, as they lie in order of the Text. First, upon his love to
his country, who is one of you, and for you. Secondly, upon his calling and
office, a servant of Christ: Thirdly, upon his labor and exercise of prayer,
not without respect to his calling, and love to his country; always laboring
for your fervently in prayers, etc.

In which holy exercise of his there offer themselves to be considered the
subject matter of his prayer, and the several circumstances thereof: The
subject matter of his prayer is, that they may stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God: The several circumstances are these: First, the
painfulness of his exercise in prayer, expressed by labor and striving; yea;
and that fervently: It was not faint and easy, cold and perfunctory, but hot
and fervent with labor and strivings, for surely to labor fervently in prayer
is a painful and hot exercise; this is amplifyed by his zeal, for he had a
great zeal for them. Secondly, the continuance of his exercise in prayer:
Always, that is, constantly and continually, not intending every minute of
every day, but exercise of prayer every day: As it was called a continual
burnt-offering which was offered but morning and evening every day, Numb. 28.4.
compared with verse 6. So they may be said to pray always and continually,
which morning and evening do offer the spiritual sacrifice of prayer.
Thirdly, the extense of his laborious prayers, which are made not only for the
Colossians, but also for them of Daodicea and Hierapolis, other congregations
where Epaphras had bestowed his labors to plant the grace of God in truth.
Thus much concerning the grounds of his commendation in general. Now with your
leave (and liking as I hope) I shall a little more discourse upon those grounds
of the Apostles commendation of Epaphras in their order; whereof the first is
the ground of his just commendation taken from his love to his country, who is
one of you, laboring for you and has a zeal for you, says the Apostle.

Epaphras was a Colossian, their own countryman and townseman, their
countryman either by birth, or by education, or by habitation, in which
several senses one may be said to be a countryman or townsman, Natus in
Bethlehem, educatus in Nazareth, incola in Capernaum. Theophilact.
as Christ was a Bethlemite, a Nazarite, and a Capernaite: Lyra says perhaps
he was a Gentile by Nation, and made Paul's Disciple; Without perhaps Dionisius
Carthusianus says, he was natione Colossensis, Forte crat Gent. lis natione
and de partibus Colossensium. Lyrain locum. Dionysius Cart. in lbcum.
a countreyman of that place; this agrees with the text, for he was one of
them, Marcus, Aristarcus; and Jesus called Justus, they were Jews, of the
circumcision, verse. 11. but Epaphras was their own countryman, and by that tie
had a nearer relation unto them, which causes him more fully to express his
love and affection toward them. It was their glory that such a flower grew in
their garden, as Theophilact notes upon the place, much more for their
consolation and comfort that they had such a faithful Minister, and such a
beloved brother.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
He is unnatural that has no better affection to his native soil then to a
foreign country; Psalm. 137.
By the rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept when we remembered thee O Sion:
Jerusalem could not be forgotten, rather the right hand should forget her
cunning, and the tongue cleave to the roof of the mouth; whom nature has
joined together, they cannot easily be put asunder. This made Mordecai and
Hester to intercede for their Countrymen at Ahasuerus Court. Hester 4.
As it was said of the courageous soldiers in Hectors army, Enreliqui cives
vestra virtute teguntur: So it may be said of good men well affected to their
Country, that the endeavor and care of one man does many times deliver a whole
city from disolation. Were the armed Spartans by Agesilaus accounted Moenia
urbis, walls of the city? Certainly good men are Propugnacula acclesiae, the
defense of the Church; like the Towen of David builded for an armory, whereon
hang a thousand Bucklers, all shields of mighty men. Can. 4.4.
Sodom had been delivered had there been but a few righteous men in that
place to have interceded for the rest, for good men borne and abiding in a
town or country, are termed Auxiliatores ab ipsa natura suppeditati, Plutarch.
helps ordained by nature for that purpose; Therefore what some one may prize
too much (as Lots Wife did her delightful Sodom) one cannot choose but look
back upon, to wit, his own country; the sympathy of native affection is not
easily wiped off, as it appears by Moses, into whose heart it came to visit
his brethren the Children of Israel, As 7.23.
after 40. years spent in Pharaohs Court. O patriae natalis amor! Sic allicis
omnes.
O quantum dulcoris habes!
Such was the love of Epaphras to the Colossians the first ground of his
commendation.

The second ground of his worthy commendations is, that he was a servant of
Christ, and so generally is every believing Christian, bought and redeemed from
the bondage of sin and Satan to serve and obey God in righteousness and true
holiness; Romans 6.18.
For such as are made free from sin do become the servants of God, and
therefore being delivered from our enemies we must serve him without fear in
righteousness and holiness all the days of our life, and hereby such as love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity, are called and accounted (as our Savior Christ
was) his righteous servants, Esaias 53.11.
or rather by this service they have obtained a greater honor then to be
called servants, Rem 12.1.
for we are no more his servants but his sons, Gal. 4.7. Because we do and
perform that reasonable service which belongs rather unto sons, then
servants. Such servants were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; Job, Noah and Daniel,
and such are all those that desire to glorify God by doing his will with
fervency of spirit serving the Lord. Romans 12.11.
These are they which are numbered of the Tribes of Isreal, Revel. 7.
one hundred forty and four thousands, and of all nations and kindreds and
people and tongues, a great multitude, which no man could number, and are
called the servants of our God, who are said to be sealed in their foreheads,
in that they do openly profess Christ, and embrace the truth, and make
profession thereof with courage and constancy; making an open show of their
faith, Revel. 14.1.
because the Name of the Lamb of God is written in their foreheads in this
number. Epaphras was a servant of Christ in the general acception, and we
which truly believe and profess Christ with him, are fellow servants. Now
there is also a servant of God or of Christ, specially taken for one, that is a
servant by an especial calling or function, wherein he is to do God and
Christ an especial service: such are they that serve faithfully in their
ministry, being thereunto called, Acts 13.2.
as Barnabas and Saul, and that is chiefly to show unto men the way of
salvation; so testifiyed by the Damsel, Acts 16.17. Such servants were Paul
and Timothy, and James, and Peter, and Jude: so styling themselves in the
proemes of their several Epistles. And the office of these servants was
principally (like Peter and John) with boldness to speak the Word of God;
Acts 4.13.
God may justly challenge service from all his creatures, because he has formed
them, from all good Christians, because he has redeemed them, but from his
Ministers principally, because he has called them to be the chiefest of
servants in their holy function; he said to Jacob, Esai. 44.21. 1 Cor. 6. ult.
thou art my servant, for I have formed thee; to the Israel of God, thou art my
servant, for I have redeemed thee; to the faithful Minister, thou art my
servant, for I have called thee, or appointed thee to be a chosen vessel to
bear my Name before Gentiles and Kings, Act. 19.15.
and the Children of Israel. Mat. 20.1.
These are shadowed by the hired servants which labor in his Vineyard. In all
these respects was Epaphras a servant of Christ, but especially in his
ministry; his labors for the Colossians do manifest his faithfullservice,
Col. 1.7.
for he was a faithful Minister of Christ for them. First, in that they had
learned of him to know the grace of God in truth, having done his office
faithfully in preaching the Gospel; 1 Cor. 14.3.
a right Evangelicall Prophet, speaking unto them to edifying, to exhortation
and comfort, and laboring for them by earnest and fervent prays, In Text.
which are the maine duties of a faithful Pastor in relation to his flock.
When Epaphras was at Colosse, he was chiefly busied about Gods errand,
delivering his mandates to the people. Now that, he is at Rome he is busied
about the Colossians errand, to deliver petitions for them unto God. And this
he does with such earnestness, that (like Jacob) he is wrestling with the
Angel, Genesis 32.26.
he will not be answered until he receive a blessing. Orandi art capi Deus se
patitur, Maldon. in Jo.
God is pleased so to be overcome, and no way else; for by this sacred force
the violent take the Kingdom of God, and if importunity prevail with the
unrighteous, Luke 18.5.
much more the righteous Judge.

The third ground of his deserved commendation is taken from the work he
undertook and performed on the behalf of his Countrymen the Colossians, his
holy exercise of prayer; wherein to commend the work I observed several
circumstances, and the subject matter of the same: the circumstances are
already handled, though briefly, and therein I refer you to that which has
been formerly delivered. The subject matter is now the thing which I intend to
treat of, wherein is comprehended all necessaries to make perfect and complete
Christians. He prays for them that they may stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God; that is, (as I do understand it) that they may be perfect
and complete in obedience to all the will of God. Obedience makes the soul of
man Gods faithful servant; nay it makes the soul the wife of its Savior. It
is divinely spoken of a moral man, Eschyl.
that said, Obedientia est foelicitatis matter, and servator is Iovis uxor: That
is, obedience is them other of happiness, and the wife of the saving God. Genesis
22.28.
Abraham had the promise, Quia obedisti voci mea, because thou have obeyed my
voice; and for this grace he had the honor to be called the Father of the
Righteous: but our Savior Christ did more by obedience for man, because by his
obedience we are made righteous; Romans 5.19.
and of him it is said that he was factus obediens, as ordained of the Father
for that purpose, and for this purpose also, that we in him, and by him should
learn obedience to all the will of God; and this was the Summum bonum, the
desired happiness which Epaphras prays for to betide the Colossians, that
they might stand perfect and complete in obedience to all the will of God. He
will have them to be perfect and complete; that is, to lack nothing, to be
absolute and entire to be all full, without the least defect, to have all
excellency, even in the superlative degree, so that there should be no want
nor possibility of adding any thing; he prays for their Christian perfection,
that they might be perfect, Mat. 5. ult.
as our Father which is in heaven is perfect: whereunto Christ exhorts, and
whereunto Christ propounded a pattern to all believers to be obedient to the
will of God in all things; Mat. 26.39.
God is most absolutely perfect in his Essence, in his Attributes, in his
Works. Of this perfection in God, Christian perfection comes short, it is
not so much as a point to that line, or as a drop to that Ocean; nevertheless
it is accepted of God, and accounted a perfection: First, by comparing it to
the conditions of the men in this world; and next, by their imitation and
resemblance which they have of God and his Son Christ in the works of
holiness; for such as labor for Christian perfection, they bewail their own
imperfections, and strive by holy desires and endeavors for a heavenly
perfection, they exercise themselves in holy duties, are conversant with God in
the inward man, and are heavenly minded, they are patient in adversity,
forgiving injuries, praying for persecutors, and are ready upon occasion to
help their greatest adversaries: they practice the rules of charity toward all
men, exercising good works, and carefully walking in their several callings.
After this manner, and in this measure a Christian perfection may be had, 2
Cor. 12.9.
by the help and assistance of that grace which is sufficient for us. We have
it in this life but in part, but when that which is perfect (indeed) is come, 1
Cor. 13.10.
then that which is in part shall be done away. And we must have patience to
awaite until we arrive to that harbor, where the spirits of just men are made
perfect, Heb. 12.
to be perfect indeed. Wherefore it becomes every good Christian to labor
for such a perfection as may be had in this life, thereby to fit himself for
real and absolute perfection in the life to come. Est aliquid prodire tenus.
It is availeable to do our endeavors: one may be as Neah was, Genesis 6.9.
a perfect man in his generation; and the mandate to Abraham is to all the
children of Abraham, Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me and be thou perfect: for not only the man of God in his
holyfunction, but also the servant of God in his holy conversation must be
perfect to every good work. 2 Timothy 3.16.
And for that the chiefest grace and virtue of this life consists in love;
the Apostle calls love vinculum perfectionis, the bond of perfection. Colos.
3.14. And wise Solomon in the Canticles speaking mystically of the graces
proper to the Church of Christ, says, vna est columba mea, Cant. 6.8.
perfecta mea, Which our translation renders, my Dove, mine undefiled is one,
uniting love and perfection in every good Christian.

This perfection is first in the heart, there rooted, and thence spreads unto
the tongue and the hands. It is first in the mind and the affection, and
thence proceeds into words and works by a sanctified operation, for such a
perfection is required. First, we must serve God with a perfect heart, as the
good King Ezechiah did, 2 King. 20.3.
and as David commanded his son Solomon to do. 1 Chion. 28 9.
And then with our tongues, it any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man. And for our hands, James 3 2.
they are to be made perfect unto every good work. Phil. 3.14, 15.
By this means pressing hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, and would be
really perfect, be thus minded. For this perfection and fullness labored
Epaphras on the behalf of his Countrymen the Colossions, in his prayers, and
farther limits this perfection and fullness with the will of God. For his
labor for them in prayers is, that they may stand perfect and complete in all
the will of God: where his will is to be understood, not for his Essential
Attribute, which is the council of his will, Voluntas. Volitio. Volitum.
Ephesians. 1.11. for that is hidden from us; nor for his will bringing to pass
what he has decreed, for so his judgments are unsearchable, and his ways
past finding out, Romans 11.33. And who has refisted his will: Romans 9.19.
but for the object of his will, which is revealed and made manifest by the
word taught and preached. This is the will of God required to be done of us, in
which will we must show our obedience. Psalm. 40.7, 8.
In the volume of the book (says David) it is written that I delight to do
thy will, O my God! which is Prophetically spoken of Christ, Allegorically of
every good Christian, whose duty it is to be a follower of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor.
11.1.
For it is just and requisite for such as know the will of God, should approve
the things that are more excellent, as instructed out of the volume of his
book. Romans 2.18. Luke 6.46. Mat. 7.21.
Why should we call him Lord and Master, if we do not the things that he
says: It is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven,
says our Savior Christ. It is required that we be transformed by the renewing
of our minds, that we may prove, and by our obedience approve, Romans 12.2.
what is that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God. It must must be
unto us as it was unto Christ, meat to do the will of God, and to finish his
work, Ioh. 4.34.

Men's thoughts ought especially to pitch on three things concerning the will of
God: First, what he will do with us. Secondly, what he will do for us: And
thirdly, what he will have us to do. If we do what he will have us to do,
then will he make us vessels of mercy: this will he do with us, and he will
bless us here and hereafter, this he will do for us. The sum of our
obedience to the will of God in doing what he will have us to do, is, First,
Acts 17.10. John 3.16. 1 Thessalonians 4.3.
to repent seriously: Secondly, to believe in Christ constantly: Thirdly, to
lead a holy life continually. It is the will of God that we recover our selves
out of the snares of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and turn from sin unto God, and so make our selves new creatures, that we
may believe in Jesus Christ, by faith appprehending him to be our Priest to
offer sacrifice for us; our Prophet to teach, and our King to rule and govern
us; and that we become holy, as he is holy, eschewing evil and doing good, 1
Pet. 1.16.
separating our selves from wickedness, and wicked company, dedicating our
selves and labors to God and godliness, walking circumspectly, ever learning
and practicing piety, devotion, and heavenly mindedness, cleansing our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and perfecting holiness in the
fear of God; 2 Cor. 7.1.
forsaking our own weak and corrupt wills, and applying our selves wholly to
the will of God, which calls us to repentance, and newness of life. For if
God be our Father, what Christ applied to the Scribes and Pharisees to another
purpose, is most true of us, The works of your Father ye will do. To do his
works, and obey his will, John ^.44.
confirms the spiritual kindred (far more noble and excellent then the
carnal) betwixt Christ and us: for whosoever shall do the will of his father
which is in heaven, Mat. 12, ^0.
he is his brother, and fister, and mother: Luke ^.21.
and his mother and brethren are those which hear the word of God, and do it.
Where the word of God, and the will of God are one, and of one signification,
that no man might be to seek where to learn, or how to know the will of God.
Wilson.
There need no rules of Philosophy, no decrees of Popes, no traditions of the
Church, for the salvation of men's souls, or the ordering of men's lives; 2 Timothy
3.16.17.
the Scripture alone (which is a most absolute witness of Gods will) is
sufficient to make the man of God perfect. There is the rule and Canon of
obedience to the will of God; because all doctrines necessary thereunto, are in
the Scriptures fully declared and expressed. For when Moses had told the people
the words of the Lord, and had taken the Book of the Covenant, and read it in
the audience of the people, they said: All that the Lord has said, we will
do, and be obedient, Exodus 24.7. And our Apostle thanketh God for the Romans,
that they had obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered
them, Romans 6.17. For to obey is better then sacrifice; 1 Samuel 15.22.
because he that sacrifices, does but slay a beast, but he that obeys, does
slay himself in his own corrupt will and naturally depraved affections. Now
then Epaphras in the subject matter of his prayers for the Colossians, does
include the sum of all perfection necessary to Christians in this life, in that
he prays, that they may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
And here the Apostle does not only pray, that they may be perfect and
complear, etc. but also that they may stand perfect, etc. where the Metaphor in
the phrase of standing, is not to be omitted; because to stand in a matter, is
to be constantly settled in the same, signifying to abide and continue in it,
and not to be drawn away from that station and posture by any assault or
temptation: as the Romans are said to stand in grace, Romans 5.2. And as the
Galatians were advised to stand fast in their Christian liberty, Gal. 5.1. And
the Ephesians are exhorted to take unto them the whole armor of God, that they
may be able to withstand in the evil day; and having done all, to stand,
Ephesians. 6.13. For as the counsel of the Lord is said to be sure and immutable;
Heb. 6.17.
so the Prophet David says, It stands for ever. Psalm. 33.11.
Epaphras prays not only for an habendum, but a tenendum to, that so the
grace of obedience to all the will of God, may be theirs to have and to hold.
And no marvel that Epaphras had such a zeal for them; because there was a
possibility that they might be spoiled through Philosophy and vain deceit, Col.
2.8.
after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ, which might be feared; and therefore out of the earnestness of his
zeal for them, he labors instantly with our Apostle to write this Epistle,
and send faithful messengers with the same, as Tichious and Onesimus, that as
they had received Christ by the ministry of Epaphras, so they might walk in
him by the counsel and consolation of the Apostle. Anxie sollicitus. Pel. in
loc.
To this purpose his zeal is shown for the Colossians, in that he was very
earnest and careful for them, that they might continue in the doctrine by him
taught and preached; whereby the foundations of Christianity laid, might not be
thrown down or overturned. As there is a zeal of God for men expressed by the
zeal of the Lord of Hoasts for the remnant of Judah, and those that remain of
Jerusalem, 2 King. 19.30.31. So there is a zeal of men for God, which was the
zeal of Elias, being zealous for the Lord of Hoasts; because the children of
Israel had forsaken his covenant, broken down his Altars, and killed the
Prophets, 1 King. 19.10. And there is again a zeal of men for men: this was
the zeal of Epaphras for the Colossians. The zeal of God for men is the
abundant and earnest, love of God for the good of his Church and his people.
The zeal of men for God is the fervent and zealous love of men toward God for
the advancement of his glory. The zeal of men for men is the hot and earnest
affection that the Church and people of God have to do good one to another.
Zeal being still taken in the better part for true warrantable and religious
zeal: for this zeal of men to men sets forth the fruits of it self in
mercy and compassion, Gal. 6.10.
in the desires of doing good to all men, especially to them of the household of
faith; in the hatred of profaneness, and the furthering of Gods true worship
and service, in wrestling against the corruptions of the world, ever hotly
pursuing that grace of God which teaches us to live godly, Tit, 2.12.
and righteously, and soberly in this present world. The zeal of men for men,
is positive; of men for God, is comparative: but that of God for men, is
superlative. This we may admire, the other two we must practice. To be zealous
as Epaphras was; and withal, that our zeal be extensive, not unto one person,
or one place only, but unto many persons, and many places, even unto all the
world, and all persons in the world. For look how far the commission from
God extends to go and teach; Mat. 28.19. 1 Timothy 2.4.
so far it commands to extend the rays of our love and affection; even to
such as are of Colosse, Laodicea and Hierapolis, the Cities and places which
had no long existence. For in Nero's time, Strab. lib. 10.
(as Historians write) they all perished with an earthquake. From such
desolation the Lord deliver us. Nevertheless, the love of Epaphras toward them
is here highly commended; and wherever this Epistle shall be read, what this
Epaphras has done for the Colossians, shall be told for a memorial of him.
And so much for the person in my text commended, and the grounds of his
commendation: It remains that I say somewhat of the person that commended him.

The person that commended him (as I have said before) was the Apostle Saint
Paul, and the manner was by bearing record or giving testimony, of both which
bri^fly and together. For the person commending, as he was not a Citizen of a
mean City, Acts 21.39.
so he was not a man of a mean quality, for he was a chosen vessel unto the
Lord, Acts 9 15.
to bear his name before Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel; and
by the Apostles, Peter, James, and John, he was appointed (I may say
consecrated) the Apostle or Bishop of the Gentiles; he makes no question but
his testimony would be accepted of the Churches as it was at Rome, Romans 10.2.
where he witnessed by his Epistle the zeal of Israel, 2 Cor. 8.3.
at Corinth, where he witnessed the contribution and liberality of the
Macedonians, at Galatia, Gal 4.15.
where he witnessed the abundance of their love toward him; and here at
Colosse where he witnesses the zeal of Epaphras toward the Colossians. It was
the happiness of Epaphras to be limned by such a Painter. Tul. de or at.
Tully the Orator esteemed it sufficient that wise Cato approved him, though
others condemned him. And Paul's testimony of Epaphras was as much (if not more)
as if all the other Apostles had borne record of his just commendations; 1 Cor.
7.40.
for the Apostles judgment as in other matters, so also in this, was guided by
the Spirit of God. Undoubtedly Epaphras had never obtained these commendations
from Saint Paul unless he had duly deserved them, and the causall particle
does enforce it, for I bear him record. Wherefore to be commended by him, was
the greatest honor the times could afford, and that was justly due unto
Epaphras. Prosp. de sym.
Paul was another Simmachus mirabili eloquio and sapientia praeditus, wise and
learned, vir totus exsapientia and virtutibus factus, Boethius de eod.
full of grace and goodness, which Symmachus said of himself, mei moris est
been cognitis approbatisque, far suffragium, nec personas hominumsed vitae
merita cogitare. My manner is to approve such as are well known, and well
deserving, not respect men's persons, but to weigh and consider the merit of
their causes. There were but few to give such testimony of Epaphras, and
therefore for the future glory of Epaphras, the Apostle does bear record, to
make an everlasting record of Epaphras his well deserving. What was requisite
to a sure testimony is found in the person of Saint Paul. First, eminency in
authority. Secondly, approbation of fidelity. Thirdly, exemplary integrity. All
these were in him, for he was conspicuous and eminent in place and authority;
one of an approved fidelity, and his life and conversation full of exemplary
integrity; 2 Cor. 12.11.
for authority he was not one whit behind the chiefest Apostles; 1 Timothy 1.12.
for fidelity, he was accounted faithful, and so put into the ministry: For
integrity, his conversion altered his conversation, his life made good his
doctrine, Gal. 2, 20.
for Christ lived in him. The integrity of his conversation was approved by the
viper that fell from his hand, from the courteous entertainment that he
received from Julius, Acts 27. and 28.
whose defense and patronage saved him when the mu inous Soldiers would have
killed him, and from Publius and the Barbarians that thought him to be a God.
But above all, how did the Disciples at Caesarea witness and approve the
integrity of his life, when they not only wept, Acts 21.13.
but did even break their hearts to forgo him; so that it might be truly
said of this Apostle (in whom Christ lived) as it was said of Christ himself
by the Centurion, certainly this was a righteous man. Lake 23.42.
This was the applause and commendation which good men and wise men did ever
strive for. Laudari a laudato, Cice. 4. Tusc. qu.
to be well spoken of by them that were well spoken of: the approbation of one
Paul was better then the praises of ten thousand parasites. This approbation
had Epaphras from Paul; the Minister of the Colossians from the Bishop of the
Gentiles; and it were to be wished, that every Pastor set over the
Congregations in the Church of England, had the like approbation from his
Diocesan.

In the application of the Text give me leave to commend unto you an Epaphras
now living, whom we of this place have round zealous for us, and of whom I now
bear record; Let us examine how and in what measure he may be paralleld to
the Epaphras of St. Paul.

As Epaphras had a relation unto the Colossians, so this man to us. Epaphras
saluteth them by Paul's Epistle; this man by his several Epistles unto me for
you, saluteth you. Epaphras was their Countryman, so this is ours. Epaphras
was a servant of Christ, so is ours too; First, in the common and general
service of Christianity: Secondly, in the service of the Ministry in
particular, though not by a special service and calling, to teach and preach
the Gospel of Christ in his own person; yet alique mode; for that he procures
Sermons to be preached at his cost and expense; and this way does exercise a
ministerial function, though not formally, yet efficiently, for the glory of
God, and the good of this congregation. Epaphras prayed for them; this man is
not behind in the like holy exercise for us. Wherefore I desire your patience
to hear some passages, word for word as they are delivered in his salutations
by several Epistles; In one Epistle it is thus: I aim at those of my country
by nearest relation, and them of the Parish and Town wherein, I was born. And
again, I cannot do less then remember the place of my birth, and the poor
that be in that town; and I desire that my gift (viz. his benevolence and
contribution) may stir up some to the like actions whilst they live, and not
defer it till their death. And again, I most humbly pray you (writing to me
your Minister) to give unto your Parishioners four Sermons in this year, and
I pray God heartily, that they may work upon the hearers effectually, as they
are by me intended for their good. And again, I cease not to pray to God for
the increase of your talent, and that your ministry may distill upon the
hearts of your hearers, to gain some, and to direct, establish and comfort
others to Gods glory, and your everlasting peace and happiness. And again, my
prayer to God for you and yours, is, that he will abundantly according to the
riches of his grace, make your labors most profitable and glorious in your
charge, and the high calling that God has called you unto. And again, I pray
heartily unto God that I may be what I am instructed in from men of your rank
and calling, who are the lights of the people, and the guides of souls, for
whom my prayers to the God of Spirits (which is the quickening instrument) shall
never cease to be poured forth, that every one of you may be as Moses and Aaron
to go in and out before your people, and to speak a word in due season to those
that hear you for their and your own salvation: So to Gods gracious protection
I commit you and them. And unto these his several prayers for me your minister,
and you my Parishioners, his alms so liberally extended toward the poor of
this place, and then tell me wherein he comes short of Epaphras. There is not a
Sabbath in the year, wherein his hand is not extended to our poor, On the
Feast of S. Luke, the Purification of the Virgin Mary, Ascension day, and S.
James, on each day allowing 10.5. to the poor, and 10.5. for a Sermon.
and at four festivals in the year plentitifully enlarged, not only in Alms,
but Sermons also, that so the whole congregation may be fed, some spiritually,
and some corporally by his pious bounty. S. Paul did testify that Epaphras had
a great zeal for the Colossians his contrymen, and it was so; and I (though
inferior to the Apostle, yet witness the truth) do testify of our friend,
benefactor and countreyman, that he has a great zeal for you, and certainly it
is so. Wherefore let us then in some thankful way acknowledge the benefit of
his love toward us, Gal. 1. ult.
and make requital as the Churches of Judea did for S. Paul, even by the
glorifying of God in him, and let us all in general pray for him as our
Apostle did for the household of Onesiphorus; 2 Timothy 1.16.
The Lord give mercy unto his house, for he has often refreshed us.

However, if you for your part be negligent and backward, yet I for my part
will say, and heartily pray, Peace be to him, and love, and faith from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 6.23.24.
And grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Johaunes Hansley.

May 29. 1641.


