A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE SVCCESSE OF Former Parliaments.



Imprinted at LONDON: MDCXLII.

A DISCOVRSE Concerning Former Parliaments.
SIR:
I Have, according to my small ability, and the shortness of time, fulfilled
your command, in sending to you this brief and plain Discourse concerning the
ancient opinions and esteem of English Parliaments (for that was all which you
desired) without any reflection upon the proceedings of this present
Parliament: accept it only as a plain piece of common talk, which I would have
delivered, had I been present with you: Such discourses need no dress of
Rhetorique.

THe constitution of our English Monarchy is by wise men esteemed one of the
best in Europe, as well for the strength and honor of the Prince, as the
security and freedom of the people; and the Basis, on which both are founded,
is the conveniencie of that great Council, the High Court of Parliament.

Without which neither can the Prince enjoy that honor and felicity, which
Philip de Commines, a forrainer, so much admires, where he delivers what
advantages the Kings of England have by that Representative Body of their
people, by whose assistance in any action they can neither want means, or lose
reputation. Nor on the other side, can the people have any possibility of
pleading their own rights and liberties. For in the Interim between
Parliaments, the People are too scattered and confused a body, to appear in
vindication of their proper interests; and by too long absence of such
Assemblies they would lose all. For (as Iunius observes) Populus (...)
heritatem sua^ tac^te non ut endo amitti^; sic plerumque accidit ut quod omnes
curare tenentur curet nemo, quodomnibus commissum est, nemo sibi commendatum
putet:

The People insensibly lose their power for want of using it: for so it
happens, that what all should look after, no man does; what is committed to
all, no man thinks his own charge.

And in that Interim it happens, that those Optimates Regni (as he speaks) who
under the Prince are entrusted with government, meaning Councillors, Judges,
and other great Magistrates, either through fear, flattery, or private
corruption, do often betray the peoples rights to the Prince.

The state of government standing thus; If distempered times happen to be (as
our Chronicles have showed some) where by dissension between Prince and
People, the Kingdoms ruin has been endangered, it does not so much prove
that the English government is not the best, as that the best government may be
abused. For in every Monarchy, how limited soever, the Prince his person is
invested with so much Majesty, that it would seem a mockery in State, if
there were no considerable power entrusted into his hands; yea, so much as
that, if he be bad or weak, he may endanger the ruin of the Kingdom; so
necessary is it for all humane ordinances, how wise so ever, to leave somewhat
to Chance, and to have always need of recourse to God, for his assisting or
curing Providence.

And though the Kingdom of England, by virtue of the government thereof, will
be as hardly brought into a confusion, as any in Europe; yet there is no
warrant against the possibility of it.

For it was ever heretofore seen, that our Parliaments were rather a strength
and advantage to an honorable wise Prince, than a remedy against a bad or weak
one; or, if we change the expression, they were rather an excellent diet to
preserve a good reign in strength, than Physic to cure a bad one; and
therefore have been as much loved by sound and healthy Princes, as loathed by
them that were out of temper; the later having thought them a depression of
their dignity: as the former have esteemed them an advantage to their
strength. So that in such times only the true convenience of that great
Council has been perceived by England, and admired by foreign Authors: in
the other times it was, that those witty complaints have been in fashion (as
Sir Robert Cotton speaks of a bad time) that Princes in Parliaments are less
than they should be, and Subjects greater. But on the contrary, that they have
been an advantage to Kings, the constant Series of our history will show. 1.
By those great achievements which they have enabled our wise Kings to make,
who were most constant in calling them, and consenting to them. 2. That no one
Prince was ever yet happy without the use of them.

It may therefore seem a Paradox, that any Prince should disaffect that which
is so high an advantage to him, and a great wonder, that some Kings of England,
not vicious in their dispositions, nor very shallow in their understandings,
have so much kicked against Parliaments. And that such have been (before we
show what reasons may be of it) see the characters of some Princes, whose
success and fortunes are known to all that read the histories, as they are
delivered by Polydore Virgil, who in his sixteenth book speaks thus of Henry
the third: Fuit ingenio miti, animo magis nobili quam magno, cultor religionis,
adversus inopes liberalis. He was of a gentle nature, a mind rather noble than
great, a lover of religion, and liberal to the poor.

In his eighteenth Book thus of Edward the second; Fuit illi natura bona,
ingenium mite, quem primo juvenili errore actum in leviora vitia incidentem,
tandem in graviora malorum consuetudines and consilia traxerunt. Non deerant
illi animi vires, si repudiatis malis suasoribus illas just exercuisset. He
was of a good nature and mild disposition, who first by the errors and
rashness of youth falling into small faults, was afterward drawn into
greater, by the society and counsels of wicked men. There was not wanting in
him a strength of mind, if avoiding evil counsel, he could have made a just
use of it.

And in his twentieth Book, thus of Richard the second; Fuit in illo spiritus
non vilis, quem consociorum improbitas, and insulsitas extinxit. He was of a
spirit not low or base, but such as was quite destroyed by the wickedness and
folly of unhappy Consociates.

A reason of this accident may be, that their souls, though not vicious, have
not been so large* nor their affections so public, as their great calling has
required; but being too much mancipat d to private fancies and unhappie
Favorites, and long flattered in those affections under the specious name of
firmness in friendship, (not being told that the adaequate object of a Prince
his love should be the whole people, and that they who receive public honor,
should return a general love and care) they have too much neglected the
Kingdom, and grow at last afraid to look their faces in so true a glass as a
Patliament, and flying the remedy, increase the disease, till it come to that
unhappie height, that rather than acknowledge any unjust action, they strive
for an unjust power to give it countenance, and so by a long consequence become
hardly reconcilable to a Parliamentarie way.

Such Princes (though it may seem strange) have been a greater affliction to
this Kingdom, than those who have been most wicked, and more incurable for
these reasons. 1. They have not been so conscious to themselves of great
crimes; and therefore not so apt to be sensible of what they have been
accidentally made to do against their people by evil counsel, whose poison
themselves did not perfectly understand. And therefore they are more prone to
suspect the people, as unkind to them, than themselves as faulty, and so the
more hardly drawn to repent their actions, or meet heartily with a Parliament.
2. The second reason is from the People, who naturally look with honor upon
the Prince, and when they find none, or few personal vices in him (not
considering that the true virtues of Princes have a larger extent than those of
private men) will more hardly be brought to think, though themselves feel, and
suffer for it, that he is faulty; and therefore sometimes (which would hardly
be believed, if experience had not showed it) the People have been so rash as
that to maintain for the King an unjust Prerogative, which themselves
understand not, they have to their own ruin, and the Kings too (as it has
after proved) deserted that great Council whom themselves have chosen, and by
whom only they could be preserved in their just rights; until too late, for
the Kings happiness and their own, they have seen and repented their great
folly.

Such a desertion was too sadly feene at the end of that Parliament of Edward
the second, where the two Spencers were banished, and the tragical effects
that followed, when the King found so great a party both of Clergy and
Laity, as enabled him to call home again his banished Favorites, and proved
fatal to so many Parliamentarie Lords, as the like execution of Nobility had
never before been seen in England: over whose graves the People afterward
wept when it was too late, and proceeded further in their revenge, than became
the duty and allegiance of Subjects.

It is therefore a great misfortune to England, and almost a certain
calamity, when the distempers of government have been let grow so long, as
that for their cure they must need a long Parliament. For there are no ways,
how just, how moderate soever they be, which that great Council can take (if
they go far enough to make the cure) but will provoke, either by the means, or
the length of them, the Prince his impatience, or the peoples inconstancy.

For the first; the Delinquents must needs be many and great* and those
employed, and perchance highly favored by him, besides the reflection which is
made upon his judgment by their sufferings, and that will be one reason of his
impatience.

Another is, that many prerogatives which were not indeed inherent in the
Crown, but so thought by the Prince, and by him and his bad Council long
abused, to the prejudice of the People, with some seeming advantage to him*
(though well weighed they brought none) are then after a long sufferance called
in question.

For the People are used to entrust kind Princes with many of their own rights
and privileges, and never call for them again till they have been extremely
abused. But at such a time to make all clear after so long a reckoning (and
those long reckonings in State being commonly fatal; for Parliaments have
seldom been discontinued, but by such Princes whose governments in the
Interim have been very illegal) they usually question so much, as that the
Prince thinks himself hardly dealt withal, such a Prince as we spoke of, who
not bad in himself, but long misled by wicked counsel, was not enough
sensible of the injuries he had done.

The second obstacle that such Parliaments may find is the Peoples
inconstancy; and what age is not full of such examples which before we name,
let us consider whether there be any reason for it? This perchance may be one,
that the People naturally are lovers of noveltie, affecting with greediness
every change, and again loathing it when it ceases to be a noveltie.
Long-discontinued and reforming Parliaments seems to carry the face of a
change of government, and those things may then happen which do in the shift
of Princes, that some people may for a while flatter themselves with new and
strange hopes, that prove frustrate; or else with quicker redresses of
inconvenience, than the great concurrence of so many weighty businesses can
possibly admit, how industrious soever that great Council be, distracted with
so great a variety; and the people after some time spent, grow weary again
of what before they so long had wished to see. Besides, the people are more and
more poisoned daily by the discourses of the friends, kindred, and retainers to
so many great Delinquents, as must needs be at such a Parliament: who, though
they be no considerable party in respect of the whole Commonwealth, yet ply
their particular interests with more eagerness than most do the public. They
subtly persuade the people, that whatsoever the Parliament does against those
great Delinquents is aimed against the Kings honor, and that he is wounded
through their sides. And this opinion is somewhat furthered, when the People fee
how many prerogatives of the Prince (as we said before) are after long
enjoying called in question. So that by this means their inconstancy seems
to be grounded upon loyalty to the King, and they (perchance with honest, but
deceived hearts) grow weary of the great Council of the Land.

Another reason may be, that the Prince himself averse from such a Parliament,
for the reasons aforesaid, can find power enough to retard their proceedings,
and keep off the cure of State so long, till the People tired with expectation
of it, have by degrees forgot the sharpness of those diseases, which before
required it.

By this means at last, accidentally a miracle has been wrought after a long
Parliament, which is, that the People have taken part with the great
Delinquents against the Parliament, for no other reason, than because those
Delinquents had done them more wrong than the Parliament could suddenly
redress. And so the multitude of those great Delinquents crimes has turned to
their own advantage.

But in such reforming Parliaments, upon whom so much business lies, not only
the inconstancy of the people has been seen in history, but the
unstedfastnesse of the Representative Body it self: and the distractions of
that Assembly, whilst they forsake each other under so great a burden, have let
that burden fall dishonourably to the ground. The most unhappie instance in
this case, was that Parliament of Richard the second begun at Westminster, and
adjourned to Shrewsbury in the nineteenth year of his reign; a Parliament
that discharged their trust the worst of any that I read of; where there was as
much need of constancy and magnanimity as ever was, to redress those great
distempers which were then grown upon the State; and as much mischief ensued
by their default, both upon Prince and People, which might have been well
prevented, and his happiness wrought together with their own (in the
judgment of best Wtiters) if they had timely and constantly joined together in
maintaining the true rights of Parliament, and resisting the illegal desires
of their seduced King. But being fatally distracted, the major part of Lords
and Bishops wrought upon by the King, and the House of Commons too far
prevailed with by Bushy the Speaker, and his Instruments, they utterly deserted
the Commonwealth, and looking only upon the Kings present desire, assented to
such things as made the Prerogative a thing boundless; that he himself (as
the Story reports) was heard glorying to say, That there was no free and
absolute Monarch in Europe but himself. Upon which, the same bad counsel
which had before brought him out of love with Parliaments, brought him to as
great an abuse of that power which he had now gotten over a Parliament. And
then followed the blank Charters, and other horrid extortions, besides the
suffering of some Lords, whom the people most loved; and shortly after, by a
sad consequence, his own ruin. Nor do we read that any of those Lords, who
under color of loyalty and love (as they called it) to his person, had
trodden down the power and privilege of a Parliament under his feet, had
afterward so much loyalty to him, as to defend his Crown and Person against
the force of an Usurper, who without any resistance or contradiction unjustly
ascended the Royal Throne: the sad occasion of that miserable and cruel
civil war, which in the following ages so long afflicted the Kingdom of
England. This was the worst example of any Parliament; but in other times,
though bad too, they have proved better Physic than any other earthly ways or
means could be; yet their greatest virtue and excellency is seen, when they
have been used as a diet by honorable and just Princes, such as this Nation
has been often blessed with; and such who have thought it no disparagement or
depression of their dignity, to be ruled by the sway of that great Council,
than a wise guider of a ship would think it to follow his Compass, or any
Mathematician to be directed by his necessary rules and instruments.

FINIS.

