PARTHENOPOEIA, OR THE HISTORY OF THE Most Noble and Renowned Kingdom OF
NAPLES, With the DOMINIONS thereunto annexed, and the LIVES of all their KINGS.

The first Part By that Famous Antiquary SCIPIO MAZZELLA, MADE ENGLISH By Mr.
SAMSON LENNARD, HERALD of ARMS.

The Second Part Compiled By JAMES HOWELL Esquire

Who, besides some Supplements to the First part, draws on the Thread of the
Story to these present Times, 1654.

ILLUSTRATED WITH THE FIGURES OF the Kings, and the Arms of all the Provinces.

-- Vidi sub Rupe micantem
Parthenopem Egregiam --
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

(...) And as we read of one of her Princes, Alphonso Duke of Calabria, came
and obtaind of Henry the Eight (your Progenitor) to be made Knight of the
English Order of Saint George, that thereby he might have protection from him,
being Sovereign of the Order, against Charles the 8th. of France (as the Laws of
the Garter tied Henry unto) so She comes to install herself in your Lordships
Favor, to be protected and sheltred against any blasts of Obloquy that may
chance blow upon Her in this more bleak and colder Clime.

Lastly, She coms with commission to inform the World, how much (for such
frequent noble Favors) I am

London Calendis Maij 1654. MY MOST HIGHLY HONORED LORD, Your obedient and
truly devoted Servitor, Iam: Howell.

TO THE READER.
WHEN Rome shrunk into a Pigmies Skin from that Gigantic stature she was once
of, (in those days when the Tyber did out-swell the Ocean) Naples may be said
to have stuck closest to Her of any, and continues so still; for to this day
she ownes Her for her Mistress, and Lady Paramount, In recognition whereof the
Spanish King pays Her a Heriot, with a Rent of seven thousand Ducats every
Saint Peter's Eve, till which be done he lies under the Curse of the Church
which is quickly on and off.

Now the Kingdom of Naples being so delicat a piece of the Europaean Continent,
and having had such vicissitudes, and various turns of Fortune, may well
deserve for those two respects, to have a Chronicle of it self in one entire
piece, which was not done yet under this Meridian.

Touching first, all do acknowledge that for delicacy of all things, either for
common use, pleasure, or wonderment, Naples may be called Natures Darling, who
seems to study how to make her self admired in diverse places; Ceres and the God
of Wine strive there for Mastery; She abounds with Silks, Oils, Fruits,
Flowers, Roots, Fowl, Fish, and Flesh, with an incomparable Race of Horses, as
also with such a choice of fragrant Wines, that She may be called Bacchus his
Inner Cellar: It is also the Country where Manna is gathered, and She has the
best Medicinal Baths that the Earth affords.

Now this rare fertility may be impted, not so much to the heat of the Air, as
to the Sulphurous quality and heat of her Soil also, which though it be
over-violent in some places, causing Incendiums and Earthquakes, (the one if the
irruption of the fire be deep, the other if it be near the Superficies) yet
this fire dilating it self up and down through her bowels, it makes the Womb of
the Earth more prolificall. Touching the Territories annexed to her Dominions,
some of them as Apul^a may contend with Her for fecundity, but others not*
specially Calabria which compard to Naples may be said to be a course List at
the side of a piece of fine Scarlet.

Now, for the Inhabitants (whereon the second reason depends) they may be said
to have much of Virtue and no less of Vice, and were they cast into a Balance
one could hardly discern which Scale would be traboccant and over-poising; They
are magnificent both in Houses and Habit, they are free and full of Complement,
yet though the Hall be commonly open, the Closet is shut, though the face be
unclouded (Viso sciolto) and free, yet the Heart is close and reservd: The same
may be said of the Mouth and the Hand, when the first open's widest the other
is closest shut; They are in their Method of Devotion, pious and charitable,
their stately Temples, and Monasteries demonstrat the one, and their
Lazarettos, or Houses for the Poor do verify the other, specially that of Monte
de pieta, an Hospital of 60000. Ducats of yearly Revenue, whose Officers upon
some Festivals go in Gowns of white Satin. Now, for the mass of ordinary
peeple, as there is a common Saying of England, Inghilterra buona Terra, mala
Gente, England is a good Country, but the people are bad; so there is a worse
Saying of the Napolitan, that it is Un Paradiso piantato da diavoli, It is a
Paradis peepled by Devils; Indeed the Napolitan according to the quality of the
Soil is of a fiery boiling Nature, which makes the Spaniard ride him with a
Bitt and a Martingall, he has as many Whirlwinds in his Brain and quicksands
in his Breast, as the French or any other Nation; Witness else their sundry
Innovations, for Naples had in two years no less then five Kings of several
Countries, Insomuch that I have not read of any Political Instrument so often
out of tune, having had forty popular Revolutions in less then four hundred
years, yet none that brought a Ruin with it.

Touching this last Revolution in the year 1647. it was the violent'st of all,
it was like a Candle burning at both ends, the common peeple were all as mad as
if they had bin bit by a worse thing then the (...): In which Revolution there
were so many prodigious things happend, that were they not recent, and don as
it were but the other day they would be held for mere Romances; For it requires a
strong faith to believe that in so well a policed Christian City, so
replenishd with Nobility, Gentry, and Gown-men of all Professions as Naples is
known to be, there should be such horrid Barbarismes committed; That this Tumult
from a small spark should com to be so huge a fire, from a little source should
com to be such a rapid Torrent, that from a weak blast it should so suddenly com
to such an impetuous Whirlwind, that it should begin with a score of Boys,
pursued and ended with so many thousands of Men; That a young barefooted
Tatterdemalian Retaylor of Fish, shaking off his blew Wascot and red greasy
Bonnet, should so suddenly com to have such an ascendent upon the spirits of the
peeple, as within three or four days to govern Naples in chief, and being clad
in Cloth of silver to ride so triumphantly with naked Sword in hand (and his
brother as despicable a thing as he in Cloth of gold) attended with an Army of
fifty thousand men, and so march up to the Castle where the Viceroy kept his
Court, where he forced him to grant whatsoever he proposed; That in so short a
tract of time he should mount to such a despoticall, or rather Imperial power
for nine days together, as to give the Law to Nobility, Gentry, and
Comminalty, that his single Warrant should have Authority enough to chop off any
man's head, to plunder and burn any Palace, whereof there were above sixty that
became Sacrifices to Vulcan by the fury of the Peeple, which was more raging
then the flames of the Fire; Insomuch that it may well be said the Napolitan
Courser never foamed so much at the mouth before: It Is true he was galld with
Gabels, which found way from the roots under ground to the tops of Trees upon
all sorts of Fruits; Masanello got all those Gabels and Taxes to be utterly
damned, with all other that were imposed upon the City of Naples, and other
places above a hundred years before; which being done the fickleness as well of
Fortune as of the common peeple, was never more confirmed then in the handling
of this man, for having Lorded it and Signoriz'd in Naples more then ever the
great Turk did in Constantinople for nine days (for he proved but a nine days
Wonder) the tenth day he was slain by the same peeple that raised him, his body
was dragged up and down the streets and hurled into a Ditch, his head chopped
off and put upon a Pole, which yet the same peeple took out the next day, and
washing it clean, they sowed the head to it again, and perfuming both, they
carried him in a solemn procession up and down the City, with thousands of
Torches and so buried him in the honorablest way that could be in the great
Cathedral Church.

Now in this prodigious Revolution there were many things of extraordinary remark
that are considerable; First, it was prophesied by the fiery Mountain Vesuvius
hard by, and by Rutilio Bennicasa an Astrologer; Vesuvius gave warning of it
some years before, for the great Vorago or fiery Gulf, of about a mile and a
half circuit which rages in the head of that Mountain, did belch forth greater
flakes of fire then ordinary, the ashes whereof fell thick on the streets of
Naples, and besides caused such an Earthquake, that the Viceroy thought it
safer to ly some nights in the fields at the sign of the Moon, then in his
Castle: Now these unusual motions and expectorations of fire in Vesuvius or
Mount Summa, has bin always held a presage of some popular Insurrection;
Besides, as these prophetical effects surpass any humane brain, so did the
natural causes of those horrid Vesuvian fires transcend the capacity of Pliny,
who in searching the causes thereof was stifled by the smoke, as Aristotle,
another of Natures Secretaries, was swallowed by the Sea as he was diving into
the causes of the ebbs and tides thereof. Touching Bennicasa's prediction, his
book is extant wherein he punctually fore-tels that there should be a horrible
popular Sollevation in the year 1647. now, this number seven had much to do
with this tumult, for it happend in the seventh month of the year, on the
seventh day of the month, on the seventh hour of the day, in the seventeenth
month of the Duke of Arco's Government, Masanello had seven Secretaries, and as
before, it happend in the year sixteen hundred forty seven. Moreover it is
remarkable how when this Convulsion happend in Naples, it diffused it self by a
miraculous suddenness to the remotest parts of that long Kingdom, as if it had
bin done by intercourse of Spirits, and the news thereof transported by a
supernatural way; insomuch that this Commotion may be said to be like a great
Pond frozen over, where if the Ice break in one place it will commonl^ crack
all over.

Another thing of remark is, that Doctor M^iello the Kings Protophysitian in
Naples should make such an operative Figg for the Fisherman that should so
infatuat him, and by a strange kind of Intoxication make him act Orlando
Furioso.

Moreover it is remarkable, how before this, Masanello having done the work for
the peeple, was so modest that he threw away and toar his Cloth of silver Suit,
and taking his Fisher-mans Habit again, said, that That Profession was less
troublesome unto him, as we read of the Metemphycosist Pythagoras, who said,
That he did lead a merrier life when he was a Frog, then when he was a
Philosopher: This of Masanello's may be said to be such a Metemphychosis, and
as there is a trick by subtilty of art to blow up a small Pill of Past to the
bigness of a Canon bullet, so by the puff of popular Air, Masanello may be said
to have swelled to that hugeness. Furthermore it is remarkable, that a shower
of Musket bullets should be shot by the Banditi at Masanello, and none should
have power to penetrat his body.

Lastly, it is to be admired that in so few months after (for the Convulsion
did not cease with Masanello) there should be so perfect and bloody a civil War
twixt Naples and her own Castles, wherein there happened above an hundred
Skirmiges, above 80000. bullets were shot off from Sea and Castles, and above
2000. from the City. It is also worthy of admiration what Reverence the peeple
in the rough of their fury did always bear to the Archbishop of Naples the
Common Father of the City, for had it not bin for him, the whole Town in all
probability had bin turned to a heap of ashes, which (as a world of examples
more might be produced) may serve for a pregnant instance to prove, how
avaylable to a state the Reverence of the chief Governors of the Church is, for
suppressing of Uprores; Now, this Reverence is to be supported by a stately
Gravity and large Revenues accordingly, to oblige the peeple, and draw an aw
from them by works of Charity; And where this Revenue with other kind of
Gartuitie* fayls; farewell all Reverence to the Church.

In the ensuing Story the Reader shall find all these passages related, as also
an accurat view of the whole Country; He also shall be acquainted with their
Kings, amongst whom he shall meet with two more memorable then others; which
were Charles the Fifth, and Philip the Second; The first among various Exploits
he achieved, both in Europe, America, and Afric, at last he invaded and
conquered himself, in Resigning by a free Spontaneous Act all his earthly
Power, Possessions, and so many Crowns to gain One the more easily in the other
world, by making himself of a mighty Monarch an obscure Monk, that thereby he
might not only with more convenience study the Theory of Mortification, but put
it in practice. The second is memorable for his close and abstruse method of
Government, for by his own hand-writings, and out of his private Closet in
Madrid (where he always moved as in his Orb) he communicated the beams of his
power and commands to the old and new World, as far as the Antipodes, like the
Sun, who though he never stir from the Ecliptic, yet out of his luminous Sphere
does use to disperse his Rays through the whole Universe.

To conclude this late Motu^ Trepidationis in Naples, as also that of Sicily,
with the utter Revolt of Portugal and commotions in Catalonia, as also the loss
of so many Towns about Flanders which were given in ransom for Francis the
French King, as likewise the rending away of the county of Rossillon, has
given so shrewd a ^heck to the Spanish Monarchy, that she is still a branling
ever since, having made her so thin of men at home, and money abroad, and
plunged her in such a bottomless Gulf of debt, that the whole Revenue of
Naples which is above three millions per ann: is scarce able to pay the
Genoways, and other banks, their yearly interest; And the Spanish Monarchy is
like to continue still in this shaking aguish posture while this fiery Cardinal
sits at the French Helm moving upon the principles of his Predecessor, who may
be said to be two fatal ^ngins raisd up to unhi^ge the World.

I. H. Sen s^o, non Segnesco.

The chief Ingredients that go to the Composition of this Historical Survey.
I^ THe Situation of the City of Naples. II. The names of the several
Provinces, and the quality of the Country. III. The Customs of the Peeple, and
the famous men Naples has producd. IV. An account of the Revenues, Imposts,
Donatives, and other Perquisits of the Crown. V. A History of the Kings of
Naples with their Titles and Style. VI. The names of the Barons with their
Arms as also of the spiritual power VII. A discourse of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, and how it is appropriated to the Kingdom of Naples, etc. VIII. An
exact relation of the procedures of the Spanish Match with England, etc. IX.
The Revolt of Catalonia. X. The Revolt of Portugal. XI. The several
pretentions of Right and Title to the Crown of Portugal. XII. The Tumults of
Sicily. XIII. The three late horrid Revolutions of Naples. XIV. Of the Duke of
Ossuna Viceroy of Naples, of his Extravagancies and the strange Articles
exhibited against Him. XV. The Catastrophe of Olivares the great Spanish
Favorit, and the causes of his downfall. XVI. A true Relation of the
suspectfull death of Don Carlos Prince of Spain never yet so much discovered to
the World.
Upon the CITY OF NAPLES, FIRST CALLED PARTHENOPE, OR THE VIRGIN-CITTY.
Salve Parthenope, Decora salve.
PArthenope, a City bright as Gold,
Or if the Earth could bear a richer Mold,
Is com to greet Great Britain Queen of Isles,
And to exchange some Silks for Wool, she smiles
To find that Cloth should wear and feel so fine
As do her Grograns, she does half repine,
That Lemsters Ore, and spires of fallow'd Grass
The leafs of Mulberries should so surpass
Which so abound in Her, with every thing,
Which Pleasure, Wealth, or VVonderment can bring
That Nature seems to strive whom she should please
Herself, or Us, with rare Varieties.
There, her own Bawd to be, she may be said,
As if the VVanton with Herself she played.
Let England then strew Rushes all the way
To welcome in the fair Parthenopey;
For I dare say She never yet came over
In such a Garb to visit any Shore.
I. H.

A Table of the most notable things that are contained in the first part of the
HISTORY of NAPLES.
ACerra, a City, and why so called 16 Acidola, a spring of an admirable nature
8 Adria, a City in Apruzzo, now called Atri 74 Alphonso the first of Aragon 17
King of Naples 160 Alphonso the second, 19 King of Naples 162 Amalfia, a City
23. by whom it was built 26 Annibal the Carthaginian falls in love in Apulia or
Pugl^a 89 Apruzzo citra, the ninth Province of the Kingdom 69 Apruzzo ultra,
the tenth Province of the Kingdom 73 Aquila, Metropolitan City in Apruzzo, 76.
how many Churches are in it, ib. Nature and custom of the Aquilans, ib. how
many armed men it can set forth upon occasion ib. Adriatic Sea, why so called,
and where it ends 89 Arms of Terra di Lavoro 21 Arechi, Dukes of Benevento 22
Arms which the Province of Principato citra carries in its colors 36 Arms of
Principality ultra 43 Arms of Basilicata 47 Arms of Calabria citra 52 Arms of
Calabria ultra 60 Arms of the Land of Otranto 65 Arms of the Land of Bari 68
Arms of Apruzzo citra 72 Arms of Apruzzo ultra 81 Arms of the County of Molise
84 Arms of Capitanata 93 Ascoli in Apruzzo, restored to the Church by Queen
Giovanna 80 Asturno, a Hill where the Royal hunting is in the Land of Lavoro 9
Aversa, a City, by whom built, and famous men of it 15
B
BAsilicata, fourth Province of the Kingdom 44 Barletta, a famous Town 67
Benevento, a City, by whom it was built 38 how it came into the Churches hands
40 Basignano, and other Towns and Cities in the Province of Calabria 51
Bitonto, a City in the Land of Bari 68 Boiavo, a City in Capitanata 83
Borrello, and other Towns in Calabria ult. 54 Brutii, whence called, 53.
Brindisi, and by whom it was built, 63. Body of St. Nicholas in Bari, 67.
Bodies of Saints found in the Province of Bari, ib. Body of S. Thomas Aquinas,
71. Bounds of the Land of Apruzzo, 70.
C
CAlabria citra, the 5 Province of the Kingdom, 47. Calabria ultra, the 6
Province in the Kingdom, 52. Capitanata, the 12 Province, 85. why so called,
ib. Charles the 1 of Anjou, 9 King of Naples, 152. Charles the 2. 10 King of
Naples, 153. Charles the 3 of Durazzo, 13 King of Naples, 155. Charles the 4. 20
King of Naples, 162. Charles the 5 Emperor, and 26 King of Naples, 168.
Catanzaro, chief city of Calabria, 59. Campania the happy, why so called, 4.
Castle of Vovo, 10. Casasana, a most delicious place, built by Charles the
second, 11. Capua a city, 13. sacked and rebuilt, 14. Casetta, a city, by whom
it was built, 17. Capre of Partivento, 56. Castle at Mare Volturno, 8. Campo
Basso, a chief town in the county of Molise, 83. Cava, a City, and its
beginning, 24. Caliph King of Egypt, friend to the Amalphitans, 26. Charles the
great disguised to see the Princess Arrechi, 39. Capa of Palinuro and Molpa,
45. Calabria citra, a Province, why so called, 49. Calabria ultra, a Province,
52. its fertility, ib. Cardinal Pascasius his soul, 10. Cape of the Pillars,
60. Crickets and their properties, 56 City of Chie^i Metropolitan of Apruzzo,
70 Counts and Dukes of Puglia and Calauria, 136. Coronation of the Kings of
Naples, 174. Coast of Amalfi, 25. Cosenza, chief city of Calabria, 50. Cotrone,
a city in Calabria, 60. County of Molise, 11 Province, 82. its bounds, and
things whereof there is plenty, ibid. Conradus the fourth Emperor, and seventh
King of Naples, 150. Cuma, a city, 9. Custom of the sheep of Puglia, and the
Revenues of it, 91. Country House of Scipio and Lelius, 7 Cicero his
country house, where the Emperor Adrian was buried, 9* Charles 2 King of Naples
drives out the Saracins 92
D.
DIscourse of the Kings of Jerusalem 176 Donatives given by the kingdom of
Naples to their Kings Court 106 Dukes of Benevento, 38. Dukedom of Benevento
usurped by the Greeks, ibid. Death of Alexander King of the Molossians, 50.
E.
EFfigies and lives of the Kings of Naples, 139 Euoli a famous town in the
Principality Citra, 34. The noble Families of the said town, 35.
F.
FRederick the second Emperor, and sixth King of Naples, 148. Ferrante the
first of Arragon, eighteenth king of Naples, 161. Ferrante the second, the one
and twentieth king of Naples, 161. Frederick 22 king of Naples, 164. Ferdinand
the Catholic 24 king of Naples, 166. Flora and its riches, 20. Fertility of
the Province of the Prinpality Citra, 23. Fairs and noble Families of Salerno,
33. Female become male, 34. Fountains, Rivers and Lakes in the kingdom of
Naples, 111. Fondi a City in the land of Lavoro, 6. Fens and Marshes of the
kingdom, 127. Fishes bred in the sea belonging to the land of Lavoro, 5.
G.
GAeta a city and its gulf, 17. Giovanna the first, twelfth Queen of Naples,
154. Gelasius the second, the fifth Pope. 6. Giovanna the second, 15 Queen of
Naples, 157* Giovanna the third, 25 Queen of Naples, 166 Giacomo Sanazaro, 10.
G^avina a city, why so called, 67. Gulfs and Capes of the sea in the kingdom.
45. Gulf of Salerno, 28. Gulf Adriatic where it begins, 63. Gulf of the famous
city of Venice, ibid. Great Constable, 184. Great Admiral, ibid. Great
Justice, 185. Great Chamberlain, 186. Great Protonotary, ibid. Great
Chancellor, ibid. Great Steward, 187.
H.
HEnry, the sixth King of Naples, 147 Hunting of Swordfishes, 55. Hills in the
kingdom of Naples, 1^5. How long the Samnites warred against the Romans, 69.
I.
ISland of Capri, 12. Ischia, ibid. Islands of Eolia, 54. Ionick sea where it
begins, 60. John of Procida caused the Sicilian vespers, 12.
L.
LAdislaus fourteenth king of Naples, 156. Lakes of the said kingdom, 128.
Lewis the 12 king of France, and 13 King of Naples, 16^* Lake of Celano, 60.
Lake of Averno, 9: Lanciano a City in Apuzzo, 71. Land of Lavoro its praises,
6. Lewis king of Italy, 30. Land of Otronto seventh Province of the kingdom*
61. Land of Lavoro why so called, 4. Land of Bari, eight Province, 66. Lives
and portraitures of the Kings of Naples, 139.
M.
MAnfredi eighth king of Naples, 151. Massa a city, 11. Marigliano, 16. Manna
what it is, and how it is engendered, 57. Matera, a city in the land of
Otronto., 64. Mines which are in the kingdom, 132. Misenus, Aeneas his
Trumpeter, ^0. Miracle of Saint Pantaleon his blood in Ravello, 28. Martian
water brought to Rome, 80. Mines in Calabria, 48. Mine of Bolearmonick in the
said city, 64. Mines and Bathes in the land of Lavoro, 5. Manner of writing
used by the Kings of Naples to diverse Kings and Princes, 181. Mount St. Angelo
and its description, 87. Mount of Somma* 11. Mount Casino, 19. destroyed by the
Saracens, 39. Mount Virgin a famous Monastery, 42. Mount of salt in the said
Province, 50. Mount Leone a place in Calabria, 53.
N.
NAture of the territory of the land of Lavoro, 4. Nature and qualities of the
inhabitants, 6. Naples faithful to the Romans, and its praises and Arms, 10,
11. Nisita an Island why so called, 13. Names of the Viceroys of Naples from
the year 1505. 183. Nola a noble city and its Citizens, 21. Of the cattle
which had custom paid for them in the kingdom of Naples in the year 1592. 91.
Nucera, 24.
O.
Origin and difference of the crowns of the Noblemen of the Kingdom of Naples,
188. Otho the sixth Emperor seeks to take away the body of St. Bartholomew
of Benevento, 40. Otranto a city of the Kingdom, 61. How far it is distant
from Greece, ibid.
P.
PAtria a Lake, 8., Piacenza a city, why destroyed by the Romans, 34.
Principality Citra, second Province, 22. Principality Vltra, third Province,
and why so called, 37. Procida, why so called, 12. Philip the second, 27 king
of Naples, 170. Philip the third, 28 King of Naples, 171. Physicians famous in
Salerno, 32.
Q.
QValities of the inhabitants of Basilica^a, 46. Qualities of the Inhabitants
of Calabria, 60. Qualities of the inhabitants of the land of Otronto, 65.
Qualities of the inhabitants of the land of Bari, 68.
R.
REnato of Anjou, 16 king of Naples, 159. Reggio a city of Calabria, 55.
Revenues the crown of Spain has in the kingdom of Naples, 97. Rivers in the
kingdom of Naples, 111. Rock of Mondragone, 8. Rhodes how it came into the
hands of the knights of St. John's order, 26. Ruggiero first king of Naples,
139. Robert the 11. king of Naples, Robert Guiseard Duke of Puglia, 76.
S.
SAracens gain a great number of places in Capitanata, 87. St. Thomas Aquinas,
18. St. German why so called, 19. St. Paulino inventes of Bells, 20.
Sanseverino, 24. Salerno why so called, 29. Saracins come over into Calabria,
30. Sarno, a River, 33. St. Antony, Abbot, of whence he was, 34. Saint Vito and
his body within the demains and Territory of Evoli, 35. S. Bartholomew Apostle
in Benevento, 39. Situation of Calabria in ancient times, 49. Saint Thomas
Apostle, and his body, where they are, 71. St. Erasmus which appears to
Seafaring men, ibid. Sessa a city, and why so called, 8 Siccardo Duke of
Benevento, 29. Sea-compass, whose Invention, 27.
T.
TAncred fourth King of Naples, 145. Taranto a chief city, 62. Temple
Floriano, 20. Temple of Juno in Basilicata, 45. Titles of dignity used by the
Kings of this kingdom, 181. Tower of the Grecian and of the Annunciata, 11.
Totila King of the Goths, 19. Troy of Puglia, by whom built, 92. Tremiti,
anciently called the Diomedean Islands, 93. Traietto, 7. Tranie, a city. 67
V
Vlesti a destroyed city, 89. Volturnus a River, 8. University of Salerno by
whom founded, 32
W.
WInes and Oils made in the land of Lavoro, 5. Woods which are in the Kingdom.
A Collection of the prime Materials that go to the structure of the second
part of the History of the Kingdom of Naples, with the additions to the first.
A
ALphonso Duke of Calabria, made Knight of the English Garter in policy In
Epist. ded. A strange Prediction of Benincasa before the last tumults in
Naples, In proem. A rare observation in the number seven ib. The Advantage
which a due reverence to the Church carries with it to a State, In proem. An
Abridgment of the expeditions and exploits of Charles the fifth fol. 2 Of Don
Antonio of Portugal 8 Of Antonio Perez. ib. A cross Alliance betwixt France and
Spain, 25 A relation of the marriage betwixt them at the confines ib. A Letter
from the last King of France to his new Queen, with her answer 26 A Treaty of a
match betwixt Prince Charles and the Infanta of Spain The Arrival of the said
Prince in Spain, and the circumstances ib. A high Speech of Olivares at the
Princes coming ib. Another Speech of Gondamars 27 An Appearance of the Infanta
two days after in public, with a blew ribond about her arm that the Prince
might distinguish her ib. A censure of the English that came with the Prince
ib. A notable saying of Archy ib. A high passion showed by the Prince to the
Infanta ib. A civil answer by the Prince to the Popes complement 28 A discreet
answer to another Speech of the King of Spain's 28 The Amorous parting of the
King of Spain and the Prince ib. An Inscription thereupon 29 A Rupture of the
Spanish match 31 A Libel against Spain 34 A pithy, but punctual Relation of the
late prodigious Revolutions in Naples, and how it was suppressed 44 Arettus
Jest, of the Neapolitan 62
B
BAcchus has his Inner-Cellar in Naples In proem. The Battle of S. Quinten on
S. Laurence's day 7 The Battering Canons heard from Calais to Antwerp 6
Boccolini had his bones crushed by baggs of sand, whereof he died 24 Buckingham
the breakneck of the Spanish match 29 Buckingham, Olivares, and Bristol clash
one with another ib. Buckingham makes use of the Parliament to break the match
37 Buckingham not beloved in Spain 30 By what reasons one may conclude the
Spaniard did really intend a match with England ib. Bristol and Ashton like to
clash about a Letter sent from the Prince ib. The Bold spirit of young don
Carlos, Philip the second's son exemplified 17 Buckinghams parting speech to
Olivares 29 Olivares his Answer ib. Olivares forced to part covertly from the
Court of Spain betwixt two Jesuits 59
C
THe Cause of the Dedication of this work to the Marquis of Hartford, in Epist.
Ceres and Bacchus strive for mastery in Naples in proem. Comparisons of the
last tumults in Naples, in proem. A Comparison of Philip the second, in proem.
A Character of Charles the fifth 1 Charles the fifth, first of the Austrians, who
mounted the Neapolitan courser ib. Some Critical censures upon Charles the
fifths resignations 4 The Conquest of Portugal, the last great exploit of
Philip the second 12 The Close illegible countenance of Philip the second 18 A
Comparison betwixt them of Milan and Naples 24 A Contract betwixt Rome and
Naples at Delphos ib. A Character of the Count of Olivares the great favorit 60
The sad Catastrophe of him ib. His witty Speech touching the Queen of Spain ib.
A Character of the Neapolitans 61 Conde de Castrillo, present Viceroy of
Naples, helped to put down Olivares 60
D
THe Duchy of Calabria compared to Naples in point of fertility in proem. The
Duke of Alva, though in disgrace, yet employed for the conquest of Portugal by
Philip the second 7 Don Alonzo de Vargas reduces Saragoza 9 The Duke of
Parma's protestation at his entrance into France ib. A witty Dialogue betwixt
Almansor, King of Granada and Naples 22 Of the nature of the Neapolitan horse
122 The difference betwixt Rome and Naples 24 Don Gaspar de Gusman, first
favorit of this King of Spain Don Philip the second thought to be accessory to
Escovedos death 18 An Apology for the extraordinary actions of Kings ib. Don
Lewis de Haro, the present favorit of Spain, Olivares nephew 60 Donna Maria the
Infanta caused Mass to be sung for the Prince his good voyage to England 30 Don
Balthazar the young Prince, helped to put down Olivares 59 Donna Anna de
Guevara her wise speech with another of the Queens 58, 59
E
EArthquakes and incendiums in Naples, and their cause in proem. The
Expeditions of Charles the Emperor 2 The Exploits of Charles the Emperor ib.
Examples produced of the admirable temper of Philip the second 1^ Examples of
his piety 16 Examples of his charity 1^ Of Escovedo, Secretary to don John 18
The Expulsion of the Moors from Spain 20 The motives which induced Philip the
third to banish them ib. The English Ambassador gave the first advice of an
intended insurrection of the Moors ib. An Epitaph put on Masanello 53 Eraso, a
great wise man, Secretary to Charles the fifth 3 An Elogium of Charles the fifth
4 The Extraordinary policy of Philip the second, to suppress the dangerous
insurrection of Saragoza 8
F
FRench compared with the Neapolitan in proem* Five Kings of several Nations in
Naples in 5 years in proem. Forty several Revolutions in Naples in a short time
in proem. Fortune being a woman, loves youth best 3 France the greatest one
knot of strength aagainst Spain 9 The Fleet 88. 11 The Four Acts for which
Philip the second was censured 18 The Fare betwixt Naples and Sicily 44
Filomarin^, the Archbishop of Naples, from utter destruction 49 First Foundress
of Naples was a young Grecian Lady 60 The Formidable insurrections of Naples
suppressed principally by young Don John of Austria 56
G
GReat works of charity in Naples, in proem. The greatest conquest Charles the
Emperor made, was of himself in proem. Of the Gout 2 The Guysards take Calais
on Christmas day from the English 6 Genovino, an old Priest and cunning fellow,
made Masanello's chief privy Counceller 47 The Duke of Guise comes from Rome to
Naples, the people entertain him for their General, and is treated with
highness 55 Young Don John of Austria takes him prisoner, and sends him to
Spain 57 The Duke of Guise breaks out of prison in Madrid, and is taken again
at Victoria, but released by the mediation of Conde 55 The Lord Goring does
notable service in Catalonia 57 Grandees of Spain curbed by Olivares ib.
Gennaro the next great Rebel to Masenello executed ib.
H
THe Heriot and Rent which Naples paies yearly to the Pope in proem. The
History of Naples never brought to England till now in proem. How Francis the
first was taken prison in Italy 3 The Hearts of Kings, as their ways should be
sometimes inscrutable 18 Henry the sixth of England compared with Philip the
third of Spain 21 Henry the fourth of France compared to a barber ib. How he
shaved Philip the second while Q. Eliz. held the basen ib. How Philip the
second rid the Neapolitan Courser off his legs ib. The Hazardous night-plo^ of
Don John, and how it took wonderful success for reducing of Naples 56 Henry
the eight, Protector of the Duke of Calabria, in Epist. ded. Henry de Gusman,
Olivares bastard, his legend 59
I
INhabitants of Naples have the face open, the heart shut in proem. The
Inconstancy of the vulgar in proem. The Insurrection of Aragon 8 The
Insurrection of Sicily under the Marquess de los Velez 44 The hideous
Insurrection of Naples a little after ib. D. John of Austria arives at Naples,
where he does notable exploits, and reduces the City 54 Don John composeth the
tumults of Sicily 57 He takes Barcelona with the help of the Lord Goring 57 An
Inhuman piece of vilany discovered in Naples ib. Julian Valcasar, Olivares
Bastard 59 Inducements to believe that the Spaniards did really intend a match
with England 30 An Italian libel englished 36 Julian Valcasar, base son to
Olivares, changes his name to Don Henry de Gusman 59
K
THe Killing of Masanello in proem. King of Spains vast expenses in the
Belgians wars 7 Kings of Spain might have filled their Palaces with gold, had it
not been for those wars 7 King Philip the second's wise speech in his sickness
12 Another to his son when he left him the bloody whip ib. Another when he took
the extreme unction 13 Another when he was expiring ib. King Philips Epistles
called el prudente, by the Conclave ib. King Philip the third was the first
Prince of all Spain 15 Of Ratscini de Medice 60 The King of Spain
excommunicated every year by the Pope 62 The King himself clears Olivares of
any fault 59 The Kings Phisician, Mayello, gives Masanello a figg at a banquet
50 King Philip a great reverencer of the Church 16 King of Spain and Prince of
Wales take mutual oaths for performance of Articles 28
L
THe Lazaretto in Naples that has 60000 crowns in annual Rent, in proem. The
Legend of Philip the second's life 6 The League of France, a Hydra of many
heads 9 The Legend of Philip the third of Spain 19 A clash betwixt him and
Critoval de Mora, when his father was a dying 13 A notable Libel against the
Spanish government in Italy 23 The Lamentation of Naples for the tyranny of the
Spaniards 34 The Letter which the King of Spain writ to the Duke of Braganza,
upon the revolt of Portugal 42 The Letter which the Duke of Braganza writ in
answer ib Of the Duke of Le^ma 90 Lemsters Ore compared with Naples Silk in
proem. In Luniginiana three Marquisses were found upon one tree eating figgs to
preserve them from starving 62 D. Lewis de Haro Olivares his Nephew, now
favorit of Spain 59
M
MAnna, and excellent medicinal baths in Nap^^s in proem. Masanello as po^ent
in Naples as the Turk in Constantinople in proem. Masanello a nine days wonder
in proem. Masanello shakes off his cloth of silver suit, and takes again his
fishermans habit in proem. Masanello compared to puff-past in proem The
Meditation of heaven the best Philosophy 3 The Marriage betwixt Mary of
England, and Philip of Spain 6 Mary of England thought to be pregnant, being
sick of a Tympany ib. Mary a dozen years older then Philip ib. The wise motives
induced Q. Eliz. to refuse part of France 9 The main policy of the Spaniards in
Italy, is to join Naples and Milan 23 The mighty losses the Spaniard has
received by the revolt of Portugal 43 Masanello first followed by the boys 45
Then by men ibid. He shakes off his fishers slop, and goes clad in cloth of
silver, his wife, brother, and children in cloth of gold 48 He prognosticates
his death 52 More Nobles in Naples then any where else 62
N
NAples the darling of Nature in proem. Of the Neapo^itan horse in proem. A
notable saying of Severus the Emperor at York 2 A Notable saying of Henry the
fourth of France ib. A Notable saying of Charles the Emperor, when he took
Francis prisoner 3 The Notable speech of Charles the Emperor at his resignation
ib. Another Notable saying of Charles about his Secretary Eraso ib. A Notable
saying of Ferdinand the Emperor ib. Naples the first Kingdom passed over to
Philip from his father 5 A Notorious saying of Philip the second ib. A Notable
saying of an old Captain to Charles the Emperor ib. A Notable saying of Philip
the second 7 A Notable Letter of King Philip to Aragon 8 The Notable speech
made upon the news of King Philip the seconds death 14 Notable Speeches of
Massanello to the people and Viceroy 45 Naples a bawd to her self in proem.
Naples called first in Octavians time 60 A Notable Story of a Neapolitan
Courser sent Henry the fourth 61 Naples fendetary to Rome 62 The Neapolitan
full of noble friendship 61
O
THe Ocean outsweld once by the Tyber in proem. The strange operation of an
Italian fig upon Masanello in proem. Of the two French Cardinals in proem. Oran
reduced by Mendoza 9 Ossuna, a little man, but of a mighty spirit, Viceroy of
Naples 31 The Odd Articles exhibited against him 32 How he used the Courtesans
of Naples ib. How he made a frivolous expencefull war against the Venesians 31
How he used a Barber shaving his wife the Duchess 33 How he kept a Morisco
Courtesan, and got a bastard of her 34 How he was outwitted by Cardinal Borgia,
who succeeded him 31 How he was sent prisoner to Spain, his wifes high
language, and his own to the King 33 The C. of Ognate, Viceroy of Naples 54 He
comports himself with extraordinary prudence and success ib. Of Olivares his
bastard 59 Of a horrid Tragedy in the City of Nocera 61 Olivares never gave
audience to women 60 Free from corruption, and indefatigable in the Kings
service ib.
P
St. Peter's eve the King of Spain a Heriot, and an annual rent to the Pope in
proem. A Proverb of Naples in proem. A Proverb of England in proem. A
Philosophical digression 2 Our Passions our greatest foes ib. Penion de Velez
conquered by Mendoza 10 A Punctual relation of the education of the Prince Don
Carlos 16 Another of his sickness 17 Another of his death 17 The Pope
prejudiced by the nearness of so potent a neighbor as the Spaniard 23 The
Prince of Sanza beheaded at Naples 40 The subtle way how he was surprised in
Rome at Mass ib. Puzzolo the great Bandito is rewarded for the Act ib. A
Portentous accident happened in and about the Tercer^s, how a new Island popp'd
up out of the Sea 43 Perrone, the notorious Bandito hanged by Masanello 51
P^rthenope, the first name of Naples 60 The Parliament of England cried up by
the people in the streets of Naples 53 A Parallel betwixt Rome and Naples 24
Q
A Question whether virtue or vice reigns most in Naples in proem. Queen Eliz.
offered a part of France in the time of the League 9 Queries made into the life
of Olivares the grand favorit of Spain 41 The cross winds which blew upon Spain
all the time of his Government, with a recapitulation of all her losses 40 His
way to endear the Duke of Braganza unto the King ib. The too much confidence he
had of Portugal, and the high answer he sent the Duchess of Savoy, then
Vice-Queen there 41 A Question made by Braganza, whether he should accept of
the Crown of Portugal, but excited thereunto by his wife ib. Her notable Speech
ib. The Quarrel betwixt the Spaniard and Portugal, stated in point of right of
succession 43 The Queen the greatest cause of Olivares downfall 58 A clash
betwixt the Queen and the said Olivares ib. Queries how the Spaniard got first
footing in Italy 23
R
ROme shrunk into a Pigmie's skin from what she was in the proem. Rome still
Lady Paramount of Naples in the proem. The Resignation which Charles the Emperor
made to his son 2 Of the Retiredness of Philip the second of Spain 4 The Reward
which Spain gave a Politician 24 The Restitution of those Jewels the Prince
left in Spain for the Infanta, notwithstanding the breach of the Treaty 31 The
Reign of this King of Spain less succesfull then of his Predicessors 58 The
first Race of the Neapolitans 60 A Remarkable story of the Marquess Oliverio 61
A Remarkable story of the Neapolitan revenge ib. The Revenues of Naples above
three millions yearly in proem. Not able to pay the King of Spains interest to
Genoa ibid. A Relation of the revolt of Portugal 41 Rome has more men, and
Naples more people; Rome has more Comendams, and Naples more Cavaliers 24
S
THe Sulphurious quality of the Soil, cause of the fertility of Naples in
proem. A Saying of Pythagoras in proem. The Shaking condition of the Monarchy
of Spain in proem. Self-conquest the greatest victory 2 The Strange carriage of
a Spanish Captain toward King Philip the second 15 A Strange opinion the
Spaniards had of the English since they dserted Rome 20 The Spanish Ambassadors
plot against Buckingham in England 37 The Subtle information which they gave
King James against him 37 The Solemn complaint which Sir Walter Ashton made in
Spain against the said Ambassador 38 The whole plot detected in the said
complaint 39 The Spanish Ambassadors instead of punishment, are rewarded ib.
Spain and England break out into a short war ib. Seven Secretaries attended
Masanello 50 A Strange Tale of a Neapolitan horse toward his rider 61 A
strange Story of Olivares his bastard 59 A Saying of Olivares at his fall 60
T
THe Tumults of Masanello like a candle burning at both ends in proem. The
Conquest of the Philippine Islands by Philip the second 10 The successes of
this world compared ib. The disasters of Philip the second ib. The ill
successes of Mestogan ib. The ill success at los Gelues ib. The ill success at
Granada 11 The ill success at Goletta d' Tumi ib. The notable temper of Philip
the second ib. The grounds that Philip the second pretended for invading of
England ib. The ill offices which Q. Eliz. did Philip of Spain ib. The disaster
of the invincible Spanish Armada 88 12 The taking of Cales by the Earl of Essex
ib. The tragical end of Masanello 52 Two pound of brains found in Olivares skul
when he was opened 60 A huge Tempest role when he was going to be buried ib.
V
MOre Vicissitudes in Naples then in any other Country in proem. Ve^^vius fires
prophetical in proem. De Valdes gets Florida from the French 10 The Vow made by
Philip the second to build the Escurial 7 The Vastness of that building being
called the eight wonder of the world 14 A Very great clash in Naples betwixt
the Duke of Matalone, and the Prince of Sanza 40 Vasconcellos the Portugal
Secretary murdered Viceroy Ognate did notable service in Naples 60 Viceroy of
Naples, the Duke of Arco's reproached by young Don John of Austria 55 An
Universal sadness in Spain for the breach of the match with England 31
W
THe Wonderful progress of Masanello in a few days in proem. The Witchcraft
of the Mahumetan 10 Wise sayings of Philip the second upon sundry occasions 14
His Wise comportment toward an insolent Captain 15 His Wonderful temper ib.
Of the four Wives of Philip the second 16 His Wise comportment and sayings
upon the death of his eldest son 17 A Wise Speech of Charles the Emperor,
concerning Kings 16 Another touching Spain and England 20 A Wise Speech of this
King of Spains Nurse ^8 Ways extraordinary that Olivares had to enrich himself
57 Ways extraordinary to raise the King money ib. Sir Walter Ashtons memorial
to the King of Spain for the miscarriage of his Ambassadors in England 37 Wise
ways which Philip the second had to decide controversies 16
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES.
THe Kingdom of Naples, otherwise called the Great Sicilia which from Faro
lies as it were almost an Island enclosed with three Seas, the Tirren, Ionian,
and Adriatic, has in circuit a thousand four hundred and twenty miles, Vfent
is a River near the City of Ansure, now called Terracina for the roughness
thereof: It was builded by Ansurus the son of Jupiter.
being accounted only by land from the mouth of the River Vsent to that of
Tronto, a hundred and fifty miles. These two Rivers, the one runs into the
Tirren, the other into the Adriatic Seas, where are contained, besides a
little part which there remains of Latium, many Regions which the people of
the Country call for their greatness, Provinces, the which (according to the
division made by the Emperor Frederick the second, by King Charles the first, by
King Alfonsus the first, by the Catholic King, and by Don Ferdinando the
Catholic King) are these, The Land of Lavoro, the Principality on this side,
The Provinces of the Kingdom of Naples.
the Principality on the other side, Basilicata, Calauria on this side,
Calauria on the other side, the Land of Otronto, the Land of Bary, Abruzzo on
this side, Abruzzo on the other side, the County of Molise, and Capi^anata:
There are also adjacent unto the said Kingdom, under every Province, certain
Islands very near lying round about, as in the Tirren Sea, directly against
Terracina, and at Gaeta are Ponza, and Pandaria, now called Palmarola, by Pliny
called Pandatena, and by Strabo, Pandria and Pandaria, and directly against
Mola Palmosa is Parthenope, so called by Ptol^my, now commonly called
Bentetiene, and against Pozzuolo is Ischia, which anciently had three names,
Inarime, Pitacuse, and Enaria. There are near Ischia, Prochita, and the Isle
Nessi, See Virgil in the end of the fifth Book of Aeneid^s, where he says,
Iamque adeo scopulos syrenum, etc.
the one now called Procita, and the other Nisita. There is against the Cape of
Minerva, the Isle Capri, and Sirenusse directly against Passitano, which are
two little Isles, the one called Gale, the other St. Peter. Opposite to
Tropeia, and to Ricadi, are the Isles Eolie, which were only inhabited by the
Lipari, which compasses sixteen miles, all the rest are solitary and desert,
and retain also the ancient names of Stromboli, and Vulcan, from whence
continually arises fire and smoke* In the Adriatic Coast are Rasato, and
Gargano, directly against Varrano, and the four Isles of Diomedes, The Isles of
Diomedes, called by Cornelius Tacitus in his 4 book Trimerus.
which now by one name are called Tremite, which are but little; but of the two
greater, the first is called St. Mary of Tremite, the other St. Doimo, and the
two lesser, the one Gatizzo, and the other Capara. These are the Isles of any
name, except the Rocks which are comprehended in the Confines of the Kingdom of
Naples. This fortunate and great Realm exceeds all other Kingdoms, The praise
of the Kingdom.
not only by reason of the situation, lying in the midst of the fifth Climate,
which is held the most temperate part of the world, but also for the great
abundance of all good things, being not any thing to be desired, which is not
there to be found, of so great perfection, and in so great plenty. It is
Inhabited by people so warlike and generous, that herein it gives place not to
any other Country, I will not say only of Italy, but of all the world besides;
being a thing well known to all men, that the most valiant Nations, the
Piligni, the Samniti, the Marsi, the Frentani, being so well known in the Wars
of Archidamus, and of Cleonimus the Spartan, of Agatocles the Sicilian, of
Alexander the Epirote, of Pyrrhus of Molossus, and Hanniball of Carthage, and
in the civil Wars of Julius Caesar and Pompey, and other Romans, these People
have valiantly demeaned themselves, and in latter times have also declared
their prowess, and manifested every one their noble acts in the Wars which
they had against Alericus and Totila, ancient enemies of these noble Provinces.
This happy Kingdom has also produced excellent wits in all Learning and
wisdom, Men and women endued with diverse Sciences.
as in Philosophy, Aistossenes, Architas, and Euritus of Tarentum, Filolous,
Aremeones, Tela^ges, Aristeus, and Rodippus, born at Cotron, Androdamus of
Reggio, Parmenides, Zenon, and Leucippo of Scalea, Hippasus of Metapont,
Pythagoras, Timeo, Xenon, Filodamus, and Euetus of Locris, a Country worn out
with antiquity; St. Thomas Aquinus, see lib. of Metheora.
Ocelus of Lucania, Stratonicus of Cuma, St. Thomas of Aquin: Nearest to this
our age, the light of all Learning was born at Naples; and of a more later time
Augustine, Nifus of Sessa, and Simon Portius a Neopolitan* neither will I
conceal the glory of the Poets and Orators which have honored this Kingdom.
Ennius, an ancient Poet was of the Country of Puglia Rudia, Lucillus of Arunca,
near to Benevento, Pacuvius a Tragical Poet of Brindese, Venosa may boast for
bringing forth Horace, as also Sulmona Ovid, Regio of Theagenes, Ibicus,
Cle^mines, Turia is a Country of Calauria, anciently called Meta^tos. Marinus
flourished in the time of the Emperor Hadrian, and writ many questions of
Philosophy, as Suida notes.
and of Lodwick Parisetus a youth, Croton of Orpheus, Turia of Stesicorus, a
Lirical Poet, Nola of St. Paulinus Bishop, Napes of Achias the Master of
Cicero, of Pub. Statius, of Marinus, and excellent Orator and Philosopher,
Disciple of Proelus, of Porcellus, of John Pontanus, and Iacobus Sannazaco,
Amiternus of Salust, Capoa of Vittor Bishop, an eloquent Orator, and learned
Astrologian, Aquin of Iuvenal, and of Marcus Tullius Cicero the very lightning
of eloquence. This said Noble Kingdom has brought forth not only men, but also
learned women, which have been very excellent in Philosophy, as Themistoclea
the sister of Pithagoras, of whom she learned many notable things, and Damea
the daughter of the same Pithagoras, who sufficiently expressed her learning in
expounding the difficult opinions of her Father; no less Myan and Arignote her
said daughters, have been excellent in the same profession. Artea the daughter
of Aristippus, after the death of her Father, maintained while she lived, most
gloriously the School, and held the Chair of Philosophy. In the Art of Poetry
have been very excellent, Perilla the wife of Ovid, See Stasius in the end of
his 3 Book to Claudia.
Claudia wife of P. Statius Papinius Neapolitan, Violentilla, wife of Aruntius
Stella Neapolitan Consul, and a famous Poet; Luscina the daughter of
Stesicorus, a Poet of Metaurus in Calabria. And those that were not born in
this Kingdom, have esteemed it a place worthy of their life, of their leisure,
and of their studies, as Plato, Vergil, Livy, and Plotin, which had their
habitations in Villages in diverse places of the Kingdom, and there composed
their Works holding famous Schools; for which cause it may truly be accounted a
happy Kingdom. But since these few things are touched in general, but as it
were passing by for the knowledge thereof, I will now endeavor to handle them
in particular, and with a very distinct order, whereby every one shall clearly
understand how many good and beautiful things that whole world contains in
it; and that through the excellency thereof, have repaired thither so many and
so strange Nations, as never the like have past into any other Kingdom or
Province, as well to inhabit, as to sack and ransack the same. And to speak of
the most ancient, thither have come the Coni, the Sicli, the Morgeti, the
Enotri, the Pelasgi, the Ausoni, the Etoli, the Arunci, the Etrusci, the Osci,
the Opici, the Cimerii, the Lapigi the Liburni, the Illirii, and other people
which are of later memory, even continuing to this our time, as the Greeks,
Goths, Lombards, Saracins, Normans, Germans, Frenchmen, Spaniards, and also the
Turks have attempted to overcome it. But leaving to discourse any more in
general, I will proceed with a particular narration of every Province in this
Kingdom.

The Land of LAVORO, The First Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
THe Fortunate and happy Province of the Land of Lavoro, called of the Latins,
Terra Laboris, has on the East the River Silare, on the West Garigliano, now
called Liris, on the North the Apennin Mountains, and on the South the Tirrene
Sea: the length thereof wants little of a hundred miles, The length and
breadth of the Land of Lavoro.
and the breadth thirty: It has been inhahited by the Osci, the Arunci, the
Volosci, the Ausoni, the Cimerii, the Samniti, the Cumani, and the Picentini.
It has four principal Rivers, Garigliano, Vulturno, Sarno and Sele, which as
they are between them, little wanting of an equal distance, so always in most
places they cannot be waded. This Country was also called of the Latins,
Campania felix, it was called happy for the fertillity and fatness of the
earth, Campania Felix, why it was so called.
which is so much, and in such sort, that here Ceres and Bacchus strive
together for the greatest Sovereignty: It attained the name, of the largeness
of the fields, it was also called the old Campania, as a difference from the
new, that is, Campania of Rome, and now from the Leborine Fields, which are
near Capoa, it is called the Land of Lavoro. The Fields of this Province, The
nature of the Land of Lavoro.
lie under moist and mistie hills, and are all, as it were, in a plain, and the
benefit of this Land (briefly to declare the nature of the Earth) is, that the
superficial or uppermost part thereof is very dry and dustie; but within, so
spongeous and moist, like to a pomice that sucks in the water, whereby no small
profit arises also from those Hills, for that the showers descending from
them, are dispersed over all the Valley, and so not over-watering the earth,
nor making it too soft, but apt and easy for tillage; the same ground sends
not out that received moisture in any Springs or Fountains, but temperateth it,
and concocting within it, holds it as nourishment unto it. Corn is sowed once
in a year, and Oats and Flax twice every year. Dionysius of Alicarnassus says,
That in his time was successively gathered in one year, three sorts of Fruits,
that is, one in the Spring, another in Summer, and the third in Autumn. In this
most plentiful Region the Trees flourish twice in a year, Trees flourish twice
a year in this Province.
and there is found all delights for the pleasure of men. In this Noble
Province, are large and fertile Fields, pleasant and fruitful Hills, thick and
delightful Woods, fresh and clear Springs, and pleasant Lakes: Moreover there
are places in the manner of spacious Amphitheaters wrought amongst the Hills, by
that great Workmaster Nature, to yield delight in the hunting of wild. Beasts
that are enclosed therein; and to declare the great abundance that is there, I
will begin with flying fowls, whereof there are great plenty, that is to say,
Pheasants, Partridges, Goodwittes, Woodcocks, Snites, Quails, and diverse
others. In like sort there are of four-footed Beasts, The great plenty both of
fowls and wild beasts in the Land of Lavoro.
as wild Boars, Hearts, Goats, Hares, Conies and Foxes; of ravenous creatures
there are Wolves, and of those that are fatted it is very plentiful. There are
also in places near the Mediterranean shore, great Vaults and Caves, with the
Foundations of sumptuous Buildings, which yields no small wonder to every one
that beholds them, with other strange works wrought, as well by the wonder of
Nature, as also by curious Art and the emulation thereof, which procures no
small admiration to all that knows not the powerfulness of Art and Nature. The
Sea of this most happy Province abounds with diverse sorts of excellent
Fishes, as Sturgions, Mullets, Tonnies, The fishes which the Sea of this
Province brings forth.
and sundry other fishes. Neither is there less abundance in the kinds of
Shel-Fishes, as of Oysters, Muscles, Cockles, Periwincles, and infinite others.
Of Minerals it is very rich in Gold, Silver, Alume, Brimstone. Besides this, it
is endued with so many medicinable and wholesome Bathes, which in the Spring,
and other times of the year, Mines and Baths.
heals infinite people of many strange and incurable diseases. So that that
great Grandmother Nature, has bestowed so great abundance of her benefits,
that it seems she is delighted therein. The which the writer Polybius
considering, which was the Master of Scipio Africanus, wrote these words near
Sipontino, Est enim Campanus ager copia rerum, and fertilitate regionis, ac
amaenitate and pulchritudine loci excellentissimus, nam in littore maris
positus est, and ex eo universo terrarum orb venientes in Italia innumerae
gentes consunt. And Hannibal, that great Carthaginian Captain, beholding the
delightfulness of this happy Region, and the beauty thereof, purposing to
assemble his Army, which he caused to winter therein, returned from thence
nice, dainty, and full of the delicacie of Campania, said, as it is written in
Strabo, in the end of the fifth Book, Victor ipse periclitor, ne host is praeda
siam: quippe qui milites viros dederim faeminas recipiam. The Campanians (says
Cicero against Rullus of the Law Agraria) Superbi bonitate agrorum, magnitudine
fructuum, salubritate aeris, and pulchritudine regionis This Province does
likewise deserve great praise for the diversity of Wines which it brings
forth, Of the Wine. Oil, and living creatures which are in this Province.
so much esteemed both in ancient and later times, as the most delicate of
Sorrento, which Tiberius Caesar, and Physicians so much commended; the Wine
Massico, now called Massaquano, brought from the Mount Massico, which is near
Carinola, in the Territory of the people Equani, among which is Massa and Vico:
the most excellent Falerni so much pleasing to the Roman Emperors, of whom
Julius Caesar, as Pliny writes, honored his Feasts and most sumptuous
Banquets which he made in Rome and principally that wherewith in two and twenty
thousand Chambers he feasted all the Romans. See Plutarch.
There are the tears and Greek Wines so much celebrated by Pliny; the most
odoriferous Wine Nolano, and that of Vico no less wholesome then pleasant in
taste, with others very excellent and delicate Wines, which are preferred
before all others in the plentiful Tables of the greatest Lords. The Oils are
in no less esteem, which are there made, and chiefly those of Massa, of
Sorrento, of Vico, of Gaeta, and of the Isle of Capre. And no less fruitful is
this fortunate Country of the best Cattle, as Oxen, Cowes, fat Weathers,
Hogs, and Calves, whereof the most excellent are those of Sorrento. There is
also made the finest silks, which Merchants buy more then any others, for the
goodness thereof. It is very plentiful in Herds and Droves of Cattle, and
serviceable Horses for War. And to conclude, this Province worthily deserves
all praise for the excellent things that are therein, wherefore it is no marvel
if ancient Writers call this the most beautiful and excellent Region of the
world, The praise of this Province.
having a most temperate and delicate air, and so fruitful a Country, that in
all times of the year there are heard diverse and sundry birds to sing. Here in
the Spring time, and even in the Corn, where are not sowed, do grow Lillies,
Violets, and Roses of excellent and delicate savor, so that the earth never
cease to bring forth; for which cause it is commonly said that Campania
yields most Ointment, others say most Oil, being also made in Naples the
best and most excellent Conserve that may be found, The excellent Conserve of
Naples.

The nature and condition of the people of this Province.


through the great goodness of the Roses. This Country brings forth people of
an indifferent stature, and of a fair complexion, valorous minded, and very
wise both in Council, and the managing of worldly affairs, ingenious and apt
for learning, and more then measurably warlike both on foot and horse, from
whence generally appears a certain mind to command.

Having now declared the sundry benefits and celestial favors of this most
noble Region, I will now handle in particular, where I left at the City of
Ansure, now Terracina, in a part of Latium, was founded the City of Fondi,
standing placed in the way Appia, Fondi.
twenty miles distant from Terracina, of Strabo, Pomponius, Mela, Silus an
Italian, and of Ptolomy called Fondi; but of Antonius Fond, the Territory
whereof brings forth excellent Wines, which are much commended of Pliny, and
of Strabo, and Martial writes, that by any means the Wines of Fondi must not
be suffered to wax old. Pliny lib. 14. cap: 6.


Haec fundana tulit felix autumnus opimi
Expressit mulsum Consul, and ipse bibet.
Soterus, Bishop of Rome, was born in this City, who governed the Church of God
7 years 11 months, and 18 days. This City suffered much loss by Ariadeno,
Barbarossa the Turk, Captain General of the Navy of Soliman Emperor of Turks in
the year 1534. at which time all the Citizens that were found therein were made
slaves. Passing along toward Formie, on the left side, is Villa Castello, from
whence descended the Roman Emperor Galba, on the right side appears the Lake
Fundano, The Lake Fondano.
called by Pliny, Fundano, although it be written Fandano by some corrupt
writers: This said Lake is full of Fishes, and very great Eeles. Five miles
from thence remains the foundations of the City Mamurri, Mamurry.
of whom Horace says, In Mamurranum lassi deinde urbe manemus. Passing hence
by the rough and stony way Appia, near the most high steep Mountains is the
Land of Atrio, now called Itro, the Country of the Lamury Citizens of Rome,
five miles almost, but somewhat out of the way Appia, on the right hand is
Gaeta, Gaeta.
upon the shore so called (as Strabo and Virgil affirm) of the Nurse of Aeneas,
which died and was there buried; and although the Gulf of Gaeta, and the strong
Rock thereof be sufficiently known, and much renowned, especially in ancient
time, yet was it not a City until the Saracins destroyed Formie, which was in
the year of Christ 856. and then was the relics of the worthy St. Erasmus
transferred from Formie to Gaeta, and it was by Pope Gregory the 4th made a
Bishops Sea. This City was very faithful to King Ladislaus, from whom for this
cause it attained many privileges, and so strong was the Castle thereof, that
it was held one of the Keys of the Land, and therefore was there always held a
strong Garrison of Soldiers, Gaeta has always the best Haven: which as
Spartianus writes, was repaired with great cost by Antonius Pius. This City
had great honor by Galasius second, Galasius second, Bishop of Rome
Bishop of Rome, by that famous Thomas of Viao, of the Order of Preachers
General, and after Cardinal of the Church R. this excellent man past to a
better life at Rome the 9 of August in the year 1534. And moreover about our
time John Tharcagnota has been very famous, whose History is generally known
to all. Following on the said way, there are seen even to Mola (which are five
miles) delightful Gardens near the crooked shore of the Sea under Gaeta, full
of green flourishing Oringes, Lymons, and other pleasant fruits, environed with
delightful Christaline streams, yielding much content to the beholders
thereof. Proceeding somewhat forward, in following the aforesaid pleasant way
on the seaside, is seen the beautiful City Mola, Mola.
built by the ruins of the ancient City Formia, now called Ormia, which a
little distance are seen the Foundations of Formia, Formia.
built by the Laconi (according to Pliny) and was so called by the convenience
of the Haven (as Strabo writes) this ancient City was the habitation of
Antiphate King of the Lestrigoni, most cruel Tyrants. Mola has very fair and
fruitful Territories, some think that Mola was so named of the Wharfs, or
rather of the Mills which are therein turning by the continual course of water
which plentifully rises from the bottom of the Hills. In this Country was the
fair and delightful Village Formiana of Scipio and Lelius the true and
faithful friends; which afterward was purchased by Cicero, and throughout all
this Country, The Village of Scipio and Lelius.
which is from Mola to the River Garigliano, are seen the ruins of great
buildings, whereby it may be thought that those places in ancient time were
much inhabited, being the most delightful, pleasant, and fruitful that the
Roman Empire had. After Mola, three miles upon a little Hill, See Martial, lib.
x. epig^a. The Castle Honoratus.
is the Castle Honorato, in the way Hercolantea, builded by Honoratus of Gaeta,
County of Fondy: Not far off is the Hill Cecubo, which stretches to the Gulf
of Gaeta; this Hill is much renowned for the excellency of the Wines thereof,
which are much commended by Horace, by Martial and Strabo, following that way
toward the mouth of the River Garigliano, where it runs into the Sea before
Clanino, Horace, lib. pr.
is Liris, The River Garigliano.

The overthrow given to the Saracins by Pope John the 10. Consalvus Ferrandus,
grand Captain of Cordova. Tratetto. Minturne.


so much celebrated for the overthrow which the Saracins had by Pope John the
10th, and for the Victory obtained by Consalvo Ferrando, of Cordova against the
French, to whose only valor was attributed the Victory of them, and the flight
of the Turks, whereby he gained the glorious surname of Great Captain, a favor
vouchsafed from heaven, whereof the world has so few. This said River rises
from the Appennine Mountains, and passes by the Territory of Vestino, near to
the Country of Fregelle, now a famous City, and goes by Luco, or rather the
Sacred Wood, sometimes honored of the Minturnesi, which was near the said
City. On the left side of the said River is seen upon a little Hill the City of
Traietto, builded near to the place where was the City of Minturne, the ruins
whereof are now to be seen, and almost the whole Theater, and the ancient
aquiducts; Minturne was builded by the Ausoni, and was afterward a Roman
Colony, and was divided by the River, near the mouth thereof. It was in the
time of Pope Marcellinus, honored with a general Council, and it was one of
the Cities* which for the grievance of the air, was privileged by the Romans
both from the Wars and other burdens and Impositions. Cai. Marius flying
hither secretly, hid himself in a moorish or fenny place, and beholding an Ass
to go very pleasantly to the water to drink, took it for a good presage, or a
token of good fortune, reinforced his Army, and putting to Sea, entered Rome
victoriously.

From thence leaving the Confines of this Region of Latium, we enter on the
right hand into the Land of Lavoro, and the Hill which is in the entrance of
the Land of Lavoro, very near to the mouth of Garigliano, has many famous
names, The Land of Lavoro. Garigliano.
for in some place it is called Gauro, in other Massico, and in some other
Gallicano; that part thereof that is nearest to Garigliano, is called Gauro,
from whence the River has been called Gaureliano. Pliny says that this Gauro,
as also the Hill Vessuvio, near Naples, yields Sulphur or Brimstone, which
the hot-waters sufficiently declare, which at this present are seen to issue
and boil, where now is the Tower of the Bathes, and the Bathes themselves.
After Minturn the first Land that is nearest in the Land of Lavoro on this
side, was Trifano, Trifano.
situated by Livy between Minturn and Sinuessa, the next following was
Sinuessa, five miles (as Strabo says) from Minturn; but it is ten miles, as it
now appears; Livy says that there were two Colonies brought about the
Territory Vestino and Falerno, one at the mouth of Garigliano, which was
Minturn (as is said) and the other in Vestino, which confineth with the
Territory of Falerno, where first there was a Greek City called Sinope, Sinope,
called Sinuessa. Turpillus the Comical Poet.
which was builded by the Sinopesi, and was by the Roman Colony called
Sinuessa, because it joined near to the City Sessa: Here died old Turpillus
that comical Poet; many ruins of this City are to be seen on the land, but
more in the Sea, and the Haven thereof had a large Key or Wharlf made by men's
labor, at the top of the Hill called Dragone, says Livy, that Fabius Maximus
led his Army by the top of the Mount Massico, forbidding passage to Hannibal,
and that the Soldiers of Hannibal sacked the Country even to the water
Sinuessano, The Hill Massico.
from whence it seems that the Mount Massico, whereon Fabius Maximus held his
Army, is a part of the same Hill which reaches from Sessa to Carinola. In the
place of Sinuessa two miles from thence upon the Hill, is the Fort of
Mondragone honored with the dignity of a Dukedom, The Fort of Mondragone.
the Town whereof stands in the Plain less then a mile from the Sea; where
Sinuessa was, is nothing seen but the Baths, which as Strabo says, do cure
many diseases, and especially help women that ate baren. After the Fort of
Mondragone upon the Hill Massico which is full of Villages, The Villages of
Sessa.
from the part toward the Sea there is no land or Castle; but from that part
which is toward Garigliano, between the Sea, Garigliano, the way Appia, and
the Mount Massico, is no more plain then eight miles every way, and is manured
and inhabited with much people, and is now called the Villages of Sessa, which
Plain in the happy time of the Romans, was very fruitful, three full Meadows
abounding with much Grass, as Martial affirms: Near Cascano one of the said
Villages, is a Vein of Gold, which King Alfonsus the first made use thereof,
but now it is fallen to decay, because they say it yields not sufficient profit
into the Kings Exchequer; yet the Reverend Majesty of the Roman Commonwealth
did not so, for that they respected no other end then the common utilly, caused
the Mines to be dug, for the relief of those poor people that labored
therein.

Now turning us into the way Appia, as it passes by the foot of the Hill
Massico, is the ancient City Sessa, called of the Latins Suessa, anciently
named Pometia, and sometimes Arunca, The City Sessa.
builded, as some say, by Hercules, it has been inhabited by sundry people,
the first was said by the Arunci, and the Ausoni, and the Seclecini, and after
by the Volosci, and last of all the Vestini, as it appears in sundry places of
Livy, the Territory whereof is very fertile of all sorts of Fruits, but
particularly Corn, Wine, and Oil, which for great abundance, the Citizens
thereof say proceeds from the excellency of the air, and that Sessa was so
called, as it were Suavis Sessio being so well and so excellently situated, Why
it was called Sessa.
and therefore the Emperor Claudius growing sickly and weak, went thither to
recover his health. Sessa was a privileged City of the Romans, that worthy
Philosopher and Phisician Augustine Nifo has in these our days much honored
this City. Augustine Nifo.
The Arms of this City is a Lion Rampant gules in a field or, it has the
dignity of a Dukedom, the Lord whereof is Don Antonio of Cordova, Duke of
Somma, Nephew to that Noble Lord Consalvo Ferrando of Cordova. Going from Sessa
by the way Appia, on the right hand of Massico eight miles is Carinola,
sometime called Cal^no, an ancient City, joined on the one side to the
Territory of Falerno, Carinola. The Fields Falerni, what they were, and how far
they stretched. The Fields Stellato. Calvi. Cajazza. Tiano. Caianello. Vulturno.
and on the other to the Hill Massico, the Fields Falerni stretch from Carinola
to Cassilino, which was afterward called Casteluccio, and was here joined with
the Field Stellato, more pleasant then any other part of Italy, as Livy writes.

The Hill Massico stretches beyond the City of Tiano, and of Calvi, called
long since Cales, even to Cajazza, which the Ancients have called Calatia, this
Hill is extended with a back on the left hand from Calvi to Venafro, and from
thence directly to Volturno, another part boweth on the right hand, full of
Woods and Caves, and goes to Caianello, sometime called Calicula: And to
Vulturno on the right hand of the mouth of Vulturno was sometime a City called
also Vulturno, as Livy witnesses, and was where we now see the Land called
Castello, to the Sea of Vulturno; not far from the Sea is to be seen Patria,
Patria.
builded upon the ruins of Linterno, which was the Town of Scipio Africanus,
where he made choice to live when he betook himself to a voluntary exile, and
where he spent the latter part of his life: It is said that he caused to be
written on his Sepulcher, Ingrata patria non possidebis ossa mea. Of the
Fountain Acidula, and the property thereof.
There is near Linterno, among the ruins thereof, the Fountain of water
Acidula, which water is said to make a man drunken as wine; and the Shepherds
report* that whosoever drinks of this water, is delivered from all pain of
the head; and we having a desire to make trial thereof, found it to savor well
as all other, and although a certain fume ascends up the nose in smelling it,
as Wine uses to do; yet drinking but a little we could not perceive the
effects thereof, which it procures in drinking. Five miles from Linterno is
Cuma, between which two places where the shore is crooked between the Pool and
the Sea, The City Cuma.
was the Town of Servilio Vacia, of whom Seneca speaks. Cuma was builded by
the Galcidesi, and the Cumei; the leaders of the Colonie which came thither to
inhabit, were Hippocle Cumeo, and Megastene Calcidese, which agreed between
them, The Town of Servilio Vacia.
that from the one it should take the inhabitants, and from the other the name;
although some say it was named Cuma from the waves (for Cuma is as much as to
say Onda) for being near the stony shore it is full of mighty Rocks,
continually beaten with the waves of the Sea. Near Cuma is the Promontory
Miseno, where was buried Misceno the Trumpeter of Aeneas, and between these two
is the Lake Acherusia, which is a Moor or Marsh of the Sea very muddy, leaving
Miseno, Miseno* Trumpeter of Aeneas
near under the Promontory is the Lake: From thence the shore fetches a
compass making a gulf where is the Castle Baia, and the Baths of warm water, no
less profitable for health, then delight. Baia was so called by Baio the
Companion of Ulysses, which was there buried. Near Baia is the Lake Locrino (in
the time of the Romans) within it was the renowned Lake Averno. Bana, the Lake
Averno, and Pizzolo, why they were so named.
The Lake Lucrino was so called by the profit of the Fishes and Oysters that
were taken there. Following the shore is the City of Pozzuolo, which in former
time was the Harbor of the Ships of Cumani, builded upon the Hill. In the time
afterward of the Wars of Hannibal, the Romans replenished it with people; and
of the Ditches named it Pozzuolo. Others affirm that it was so named by the ill
savor of the water; which from Bale even to Gumeo is generally felt. Following
then that shore from Pozzuolo, are seen many Springs of wholesome and
medicinable water on the shore near the Ruins; departing from Pozzuolo, and
going by the way which leads to Naples, are great ruins of buildings on
every side for the space of a mile. At the end of these ruins is the Court of
Vulcan, now commonly called Solfatara, which is a Plain enclosed round about
with smokie Hills, Soffatara.
in the manner of fiery Fornaces, from whence out of diverse places arise very
stinking exhalations, and the Plain is all full of Sulphur, and sometime it
boileth out more then eight hand breadths in height, and being mixed with the
earth it seems black, and in in such sort that it may rather be called dark
clay, then water. Here amongst those natural things that is worthy
consideration, it seems that the watery humor preserves the Sulphur in such
manner, that during all the time it continually burns it consumes not, and
the fire abides in the same holes, the water issuing by the same passage. This
place was also called of ancient writers Campo Flagro, as it were a burning
field from whence the Poets feign, that there was the battle of the Giants with
Hercules, and that the flashing of their wounds, and the Conquest of the
Giants, do cause such and so great ebolitions of fire and water. Bending
afterward to the North a little from thence is the Hill Asturno very high, in
the midst whereof is a Plain very low, reduced into a circle, The Hill Asturno.
being two miles in circuit, where is a little Pool with Sulphur water, which
issues out on every side very beneficial to those which are diseased. This
Plain is compassed with a Hill which every carries an equal height; in one
side whereof is a very thick Wood, planted in such sort that all Italy yields
not a place more beautiful and more pleasant for hunting. This Wood has great
plenty of Acorns and other Fruit and Food for Cattle, and is full of wild
Hoggs, Goats, Hearts, and other kinds of wild Beasts which entering in of
themselves, or forced by others, can come no more out again. The top of this
Hill is very large, for it reaches more then the space of five miles; this
place is commonly called Listroni, Listroni.
a place reserved for the Kings hunting.

Returning to the way which goes from Pozzuolo to Naples, is seen the place
where was the Village of Cicero, so named at this present, where was buried the
Emperor Adrian, The Village of Cicero, where the Emperor Adrian was buried.
which died at Baia (as Spartiano writes) where the temple was afterward
consecrated by Antonio his successor in the place of the Sepulcher. Following
yet the said way is seen great ruins of the Village of Lucullus, which he had
near Naples (according to Plutarch) where likewise he caused to open the stony
Hill with the Iron, which carried the water of the Sea into the Lake Agnano,
which was included in those Hills. On every side of this open Country appears
high Rocks, near which are the ruins of stately Buildings. Passing by the said
way to the Lake are the Baths of the Lake Agnano, which are certain little
close^ vaulted Rooms, from whence there rises certain hot vapors, in such
sort, that a man entering in naked presently falls into a sweat* and therefore
they are called Sudatorii. They dissove the raw and crude humors in man, they
lighten the body, comfort the weak, Hot-Houses.
heal the intrails, dries the Fistula and the ulcer in the body, and eases
the pain of the Gout; Here St. Germano Bishop of Capoa, is said to find the
soul of Pascasio Cardinal, The soul of Pascasio Cardinal.

See also John ^^ki^ in his 2 book of Purgatory.


as St. Gregory relates in the fourth Book of his Dialogues. A little farther
on the right hand, at the foot of the high Rock (which compasses in the Lake)
very near to the same is a hole not very deep in the Rock, nor very large nor
high, where any living creature being cast in, dies sudden^y, which afterward
being presently taken out and cast into the water of the said lake, reviveth
again. Pliny makes mention of this hole in his second Book, where he says,
Alii spiracula vocant, alii Charoneas scrobes mortiferum spi^atum exalentes.
The said Lake brings forth no other thing but Frogs; and in the Spring are
often seen many heaps of Serpents, which are there drowned and stifled in the
water by the providence of God, which suffers them not to increase, being so
hurtful and venomous to the nature of man.

Pausilipo, a most delightful place which according to Dion, was possessed by
Vedio Pollione, a Roman, a man famous for no other cause then his wealth and
cruelty, because in that place he had certain Fishponds, wherein he used often
times to cast in men, as food for his fishes; and dying, le^t Augustus his heir
of Pausilipo. Virgil his Sepulcher. Chiaia Giacomo Sanazaro.
Afterward we come to Pausilipo, which had that name for the pleasantness of the
air, which so well agrees with the situation, helping much the infirmity of
weak minds for the expelling of melancholy: Here Caesar had a Fish Pond, wherein
a Fish lived sixty years. And the bottom of this pleasant Hill was all full of
Gardens, and Fruits and delightful Villages; and that part toward the Sea,
was not far from the City of Naples, near the shore whereof were an infinite
number of Habitations which time has utterly ruinated. After follows the
Cave of Cocceio, which some attribute to Lucullo, and others to Basso, made
after the fashion of that of Cuma, whose entrance is open, and with so great
largeness, that three Carts may there pass in rang, and by little and little
the light enters at the windows in the top, which in many places are cut out
in the upper part of the hill, and in the right side from the passage of the
Cave in the way toward Naples is the Sepulcher of Virgil, and by that which
does appear, this was a Chapel compassed and vaulted with Arches, and smoothly
walled about with Marble, and within were places for Images to stand in,
without, opposite to the Chapel is an Epitaph in white Marble, with these
modern Verses, Qui cineres tumuli haec vestigia? conditur olim
Ille hoc qui cecinit pascua, rura, duces.


Going then toward Naples appears the little Hill Olimpia, now Piaggia,
called of the Neopolitans Chiaia where are so many goodly Buildings, among the
which there is one made by M. Giacomo Sanazaro, so great a friend to the Muses,
as any in these our days, called Merguglino, and in Latin, Mergeline,
celebrated by him in his Book De partu Virginis. A little farther near unto the
City is the little Isle of Megary, now called the Castle of Vovo, where
remains a good Garrison of Soldiers. The Castle of Vovo.


Last of all is the fair and Royal City of Naples, at the first called Sirena,
where Parthenope arrived carried by the fortune of the Waves, who changed the
name, being newly re-inhabited, according to the Oracle of the Cumani, which
before they had destroyed; it flourished and increased again by the union and
amity of the Palepoli, being always faithful to the people of Rome, under
whose Empire it continued with great glory and renown, Naples always faithful
to the people of Rome.

The praise of the City of Naples.


until it sell together with the rest of Italy into the hands of the Goths,
and other Barbarians, who expelled by the Normans, was governed by them, and
made the Head of the Kingdom, from whose Dominion succeeded the House of
Suevia, by means of the Queen Constance the only Heir; from whence it came to
pass, Charles having killed Tancred, and subdued Coradine under the French, and
after succeeded by means of Queen Ione of Arragon, now it remains in peace
and tranquillity under the protection of the Catholic King Philip, and so
populous, that it is not inferior to any other City whatsoever, excelling in
Nobility and riches, all other in the world; there continually repaireth sundry
Nations from all parts of Europe, there are assembled the most part of the
Noble Families, and there also florisheth the study of the Laws, and all good
Learning. It stands at the bottom of little Hills, which compass it in the
manner of a Bow or Arch. The Gulf Cratera is directly opposite unto it, The
Gulf Cratera.
so called in ancient time, for that Miseno, and the Promontory of Minerva, now
called Campanella, with the Isle of Capri, compasses it in the fashion of a
Cup. A Cup which may be truly called a Cup or Goblet of Silver, since the
purity and calmness of the water resembles in outward show, quicksilver.
Naples has on the East side, Fields, which in length join to the Plains
Acerram, and in breadth pass to the foot of Vesevo, now called Somma. Strabo
says, that in his time did spring at Naples, hot waters very commodious to
make Baths, little inferior to those of Baia; The Arms of the City of Naples.
but that they were of less quantity. The Arms of this City was a Field per
fesse or. and gu. which Arms were given by great Constantine the Emperor.

Near Naples is the Greek Tower, first called Herculea of Hercules, The Tower
of Greece, and of Nuntiata.
which came thither with many Ships, after he left Nontiata near the ancient
Stabie. At this place stands aloft that famous Hill of Somma, called Vesevo,
and Vesuvio, about which are situated many pleasant Villages, except in the top
where the Poets feign remain the shoulders of the Giant Porfirius. In the time
of the Emperor Titus, with a general fear to all those in the fields, and
destruction of them which were nearest, it cast out from the top thereof great
flames of fire, The Hill Somma casts out fire.

The death of Pliny.


and Balls of Sulphur Mine, and burning stones, where Pliny died, the great
preserver of the Latin tongue, whilst he desired to see the great exhalations
of that Hill, which cast the ashes even into Africa.

Going a little farther is the City of Castle, by the Sea of Stabia, so named
by the City Stabbia, which was not far off, which had been destroyed by L.
Silla* this Castle is situated in a corner of the Mount Gauro, where it
begins to stretch toward the West, which makes the Promontory of Minerva.
Here, about the distance of a mile, through the delight of the place, King
Charles the second builded a Royal Palace, calling it for the sweetness of the
air, the Wholesome House; which afterward King Rubert enlarged, giving it
greater beauty and ornament; which place is now possessed by the Noble Family
Nocera, The Wholesome House, a most delightsome place builded by King Charles the
second.
King Ferrant the first having bestowed it on Pietro Nocera, his chiefest
favorite, which for his great valor, was afterward by King Ferrant the second
made General of the Galleys. This Country abounds with great plenty of clear
water, and great store of the best Fruits; and for the facility and easy
access of the place, has much Traffic: According to the division of Strabo,
of Ptolomy, and of Sempronio, this City should be placed in the Country of the
Picentini, which is now called the Province of Principato; but we have thought
best to confine it in the Land of Lavoro, because it is situated in the Gulf of
Cratero. Within a little is the beautiful City Vico, builded by the people
Equani, then follows the City Sorrento very ancient and Noble, situated on
the top of the Hill, whose prospect is the Sea: Although it be not of that
greatness as formerly it has been; it has a very fertile and delightful
Territory, garnished with Vines and Oringes, and other fruitful Trees. This
City was builded by the Greeks, and was called Petra Syrenum. In this City
lived Antonio the Abbot, a most holy man, and famous for his miracles, whose
body remains even now as a testimony of his divine Miracles (as they say)
toward those which are oppressed with Spirits. Then from Sorrento a mile* is
the City of Massa, newly named, The City Massa.

The Temple of Minerva. The Isle of Sirenuse, see Virgil in the end of his 5
Book of Ene^dos; now these Islands are called under one name Gallo* where is
the Isle of Capri.


to the which Paolo Portarello, that excellent Poet, and great Humanist has
now, and always gives everlasting glory. From hence then is seen the solitary
Hill Atheneo, the which because it joyneth not with any other Hill, passes
along toward the West, and is otherwise called the Hill Massa, it was also
called Prenusso, Sirreo, Minervio, and the Hill Equano; in the top of the
Promontory is to be seen a great part of the Temple of Minerva builded by
Ulysses. Under the side of the said Promontory are certain desert and stony
Islands, called the Sirenes; in one whereof, from that part which lies toward
Surrento, in ancient time, was a rich Temple, where were certain very ancient
gifts, long since presented by the Inhabitants of the Country for the worship
and reverance of that holy place, the Relics whereof are now to be seen.

Here ends the Gulf called Cratera, included within two Promontories, Miceno
and Ateneo, which lie toward the South; which Gulf is almost wholly planted
with Houses, and goodly Gardens, opposite to the which rises out of the Sea,
the Isle of Capri, the first delightful place of Tiberius Caesar, but now
ordained for Exiles and banished people: Here twice in a year are Quails taken.
Directly against Miseno is the Isle of Prochita, Procita, why it was so called.
now called Procita, the which (according to Strabo) is a part of Pitecuse,
Procita was so called (as Pliny says) by the depth thereof; for by miracle the
said Isle rise of it self out of the bottom of the Sea. But as Dionisius of
Alicarnaseo affirms, Dyonisius of Alicarnaseo, in the first of the Histories
of Rome.
that it was named by a beautiful young man, a Trojau, called Procita, which
came thither to inhabit. Whereof Servio upon these Verses of Virgil says, in
his 9 Book, Tum sonitu Prochyta alta tremit, etc. Says that it had that name
from Protheus, which signifies spread or dispersed, to the which opinion
agrees the Greeks, and almost all the Latins. Silio the Italian in his 12
Book, speaking of Procida, says thus, Apparet Prochyta saevum sortita Numanta,
Apparet procul Inarime, quae turbine nigro
Fumantem premit Iapetum: flammasque rebelli
Ore rejectantem, John of Procicla, Author of the Sicilian Evening.
and si quando evadere detur
Bella Iovi rursus, superisque iterare volentem.
Within this Isle is a fair Country well replenished with people, which has
the same name, and is very famous for the abundance of Corn that is gathered
within it, and for the taking of Partridges and Pheasants, Ieronimo Zurita in
the History of Arragon.
whereof there is great plenty. The Lord of this Isle in former time was John
of Procida a Physician, a man very famous, who fearing not the power of King
Charles of Angio, to revenge a great injury, took Sicilia, with that famous
slaughter of the French, commonly called the Sicilian evening; The Family of
Procita in Catalogna.
and he had done greater matters if he had been permitted. This John was in
great esteem with James King of Arragon, after whose death King Peter his son
knowing the valor of John: Le dio (dice il Zurita) en el Reino de Valencia
para el, y sus successores las Villas, y Castillos de Luxer, Benyzano, y Palma,
con sus alquerias. He gave him (as says Zurita) in the Kingdom of Valentia to
him and his successors, the Towns and Castles of Luxer Benyzano and Palma, with
their bordering Villages. The Isle Ischia. Of the Giant Tipheo the Poets speak
diversely: for Virgil in the 9 of Aeneidos says, that here he was stricken with
lightning by Jupiter, in the which opinion agrees Lucan, but Ovid says it was
in Sicilia. Alfonsus King of Arragon and Naple, was of the House of Medina, so
says Laonico. Calcondile Athenian in the History of the Turks, in his fifth
Book.
From this man descended the Family called Procita, which are now very great in
the Kingdom of Catalogna, and enjoys the County of Almenare. In the said
Isle in a fair Church, with great reverence is preserved the body of St.
Margarite the Virgin and Martyr, which was carried thither from Antiochia.
Salvo Selano the Phisician honors much this Isle, now living in Naples with
great renown, who has written upon the Aphorisms of Hyppocrates. The said
Isle is distant from Naples twelve miles, and in composs seven. A little from
Procita lies the Isle Ischia, formerly called Inarime, Pithecusa and Enaria,
very famous not only for the Fable which the Greeks feign of the Giant Tipheo,
stricken with Jupiters Thunderbolt, but also for a Fortress there, being so
great that it is held the second Key of the Kingdom. The said Castle was
builded by Alfonsus of Medina, King of Arragon, first of this name, King of
Naples, who because it was so well fortified, caused it to be called Ischia,
which has given the name to the whole Island, especially because all the other
ancient names were forgotten. This Castle is very strong by the natural
situation thereof, and is built upon a very high Hill, and the passage thereto
very steep, and the way for the most part is cut out of the Rock with men's
labor, and the entrance is so difficult and straight, that two Soldiers may
easily guard it. Hither Ferdinando the son of Alfonsus the second of Arragon,
King of Naples retired himself for his security, when Charles the eight King of
France had victoriously entered Naples. In the year 1301. the said Island
sustained great hurt, for being therein certain veins of Sulphur (whereof the
Island is very full) the fire kindled, and running through it, burnt a great
part, even to the City of Ischia, now called Gironda, and the fire continued
one month and a half, burning many men and other living creatures, Gironda, an
ancient City of the Isle.
whereby the Inhabitants were enforced to abandon the place, flying out of the
Isle, some to Procida, some to Capri, some to Pozzuolo, and some to Naples. And
of this fire the marks yet appear, where neither grass nor any other thing does
grow, and that for the space of more then two miles, which place the Citizens
call the Cremata. This Isle is in compass 18 miles, where is a fair City, to
the which are subject eight Hamlets, or small Villages. This said Isle is very
fertile, and brings forth all so^ts of Corn and there is made excellent Wine,
and has Mines of Gold, which were together found with the Sulphur, in the
year 1465. by Bartholmew Perdice Genoway. It is every where full of Villages,
very thick and close adjoining, there is one very high Hill, which is very
difficult for a man to climb, in the top whereof rises a Spring, Bartholmew
Perdice Genoway.
called the Fountain Aboceto, all the rest of the Isle has great scarcity of
water. The Shores of this Isle are rather crooked then straight, the air there
is very healthful and pleasant, and in it are many and sundry Baths, with
those so marvelous sands, all things fit to heal diverse sorts of infirmities,
and many incureable, of the which we have sufficiently written in the Book of
the Antiquities of Pozzu^la, The Book of the Antiquities of Pozzuolo, written
by the Author of this Work. The body of St. Restituta Virgin.
by me not long since published, to which I refe^ the Reader. This Isle was
first inhabited by the Licii, which after the death of Oroute their King, were
driven out by Eneas. Afterward came thither the people Arimni, and within a
while the Calcidii. There lies with great reverence in two honorable Churches
of this Isle, the bodies of St. Restituta, Virgin and Martyr, and of St.
Olivata her sister (which, as is said) do infinite miracles. Of this Isle was
Fabius, Seleucus, Oronre, that excellent Cosmographer and singular Poet.

Sailing from hence more forward toward Naples, near the Mount Pausilippo, The
Isle Nisita, why it was so called.
is the Isle of Nisita, of the Latins called Nosium, and Nesis, which had a
fair and goodly Fortress made by the Dutchmen of Amalsi, with a most secure
Haven called Agliono, very commodious. Nisita was so called (as the Poets
feign) by a Nymph of the Sea, the daughter of Nereus and Doride, Gods of the
Sea* for the truth is, that Nesis in Greek, is an Island, it was in ancient
time the Town of Brutus, that worthy Roman; and in our days there was found in
a Sepulcher a dead body of wonderful greatness, imbalmed, which had about the
neck a Chain, with a Jewel of Gold, with this Inscription, M. A. Acilius, C. F.
I.I.I. R.

Leaving this Isle is another much less, which is rather a Rock, I may say it
was and is commonly called Gaiola; but in my opinion it should be called Gaia,
Gaiola, why ^t was so called.
if yet that particle ola, were not adjoined thereto for a diminutive,
signifying the smallness and beauty thereof at an instant, for being very
delightful and pleasant, and made in the fashion of a Theater, where also
appears the marks of an enclosed Park for the keeping of wild Beasts, and the
Temple of Neptune which was there in old time, so that to every one that comes
thither, it seems a place of great delight. These then are the Cities upon the
Sea of happy Campania, and the Isles that are thereabout.

But in the Land of Naples the principal City is Capoa, The City Capoa.
situated on the side of Vulturno, upon the way Appia, twelve miles distant
from the Sea* it was in former time as great as any in Italy, except Rome, the
first and chiefest, the Senate of Rome once purposed to go to inhabit there. The
opinions of the building of this City are diverse, and first Cato and Sempronius
says, that it was builded by the Osci; others, as Virgil, Lucan, Silius,
Dionisius of Alicarnassus, and Suetonius say that it was builded by Capi, the
companion of Aeneas, and that by him it was afterward so named. Others say that
Remus, the son of Aeneas builded it, and called it Capoa, from Capi the Father
of his Grandsire. Strabo is of another opinion, saying it had this name from
the large Fields wherein it stands, whose first Inhabitors were the Opici,
and Ausoni, and the Osci, which were driven out by the Cumani, and afterward
these by the Toscans, by whom Capoa was made the Head of twelve Cities builded
by them in these places, and of this opinion seems to be Eustaccius, Livy,
Pliny, and Annius Diodorus and others say that it was so called for the great
capacity and largeness which it has to produce and bring forth necessary
things for the sustenance of living creatures; and in truth the Territory
thereof is most excellent above all other Countries of the world. This City, as
Livy declares particularly in many places, was of great Wealth and Authority,
and in the time of the great prosperity and delights thereof, was the seat and
habitation, and as it were a second natural Country to Hannibal, and in the
time of the siege of Casilino, wintred there with his Army, which became
corrupt, effeminate, and lazy through the many delights and pleasures thereof:
But coming afterward into the power of the Romans, it was as it appears to
some, that Capoa was by them utterly ruinated, Capoa destroyed.
for being strong, a near neighbor, and always their enemy: But the utility
and most fertile Territory was the safety thereof, that it was not ruinated,
because the multitude of Colonies might have a place and a dwelling in this
Country and Territory, and the houses themselves were builded of the common
Treasury of Rome: Yet nevertheless there was not left any sign, or any body of
a City or Council, or any Authority, the which Marcus Tullius declares more
largely in one of his Orations, calling the Capoans proud and arrogant, through
the bounty of the earth, and the abundance of all things which they had. But
there was since (contrary to the opinion of Tully, by Julius Caesar in his
first Consulship) carried to Capoa one Colony of Romans, and those new
Inhabitants undoing and pulling down certain ancient Sepulchers to build little
houses in their Villages, purposing to employ those stones, and using therein
much labor and diligence, passing up and down discovered certain Vessels of
antic work, found in a little Table of Brass, wherein was written, Capi, The
Sepulcher of Capi, the builder of Capoa.
the builder of Capoa to be here buried, with Letters in Greek words to this
effect, That whenever the bones of Capi shall be discovered, at the same
instant one of the kindred of Iulo must be slain with a sword by the hands of
his own friends and kindred, and after be revenged with grievous afflictions
and the ruin of Italy. Capoa destroyed by Genserico King of the Vandals.

Capoa newly builed.

The Lombards destroy Capoa. Capoa re-edified.

Conradus King of Naples cast the Walls of Capoa to the gr^und.

Capoa sacked by the French.




This same Capoa was by Gensericus King of the Vandals razed and destroyed,
with sword and fire six hundred years after it had been subject to the Romans;
but since the Goths and Ostrogoths being chased away by Narsete Eunuco Captain
to the Emperor Justinian, was newly inhabited again. And about a hundred years
after was destroyed and ruinated anew by the Lombards; but with the relics
builded of the Inhabiters again, two miles distant from the ancient place.
Since by Conradus King of Naples, son of the Emperor Frederick the second, the
Walls thereof were thrown to the ground, because the Capoans were known to be
contrary to the Manfredi, with the Neopolitans; wherefore he ransackt and sacked
it, and did therein harm enough. It sustained great calamity in the time of
Pope Alexander the sixth, being sacked and robbed by the French sent by Lewis
the twefth King of France, to the Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples, against
King Frederick of Arragon; now it remains well fortified by the providence of
Philip of Austria, the most puissant Catholic King, under whose protection it
rests most secure. Pliny in the description of Italy, speaking of Capoa,
says that there is the Field Leborino, much more pleasant and delightful then
any part of all Italy; and he in another place calls Leborino the excellent
Territory of Capoa; and to declare what it is, the Territory thereof is all
plain, which stretches from Tifata (which is the Hill above Capoa) even to
Naples and Pozzuolo; and from Capoa to the mouth of Vulturno, where it enters
into the Sea. Capoa being so hated and defaced by the Romans, and twice
ruinated, the people near adjoining disdained to be any longer called Campani,
desiring to avoid this infamy, The Land of Lavoro, why it was so called.
and this danger to be hated and undone for this name, changed the name, being
called by their ancient name, Leborini, and so much their constant perseverance
prevailed, that that which before was wont to be called Campania, was called
the Land of Lebore: But since the word being corrupted by people, was called
the Land of Labor; from whence grew the opinion, that this should be because,
as it were all pains (for so the word Labor signifies) should there be well
bestowed; and some others have said, that it should be so called from the great
and difficult pains that is required in the subduing of it. F. L. Sosipatro
Charisso.
F. L. Sosipatro Charisio, a most ancient Gramarian was a Citizen of Capoa,
whose works have been found by Iano Parasio. Victore, Vittore Bishop.
called the Capoan, Bishop, and a famous Astrologian, and an excellent Orator*
has given great honor to this City, who lived in the year of Christ 480.
Likewise Pietro of Vineis, was also a Citizen, Peter of Vineis
a learned Lawyer, which was in great favor with the Emperor Frederick the
second, King of Naples: but the Emperor had afterward a certain suspicion of
him for a conspiracy that was de^ised, banished him, where through grief he
died, having first composed a Book of Consolation: Of this Pietro, Dante makes
mention in the first part of the 13 Cant. saying, I am he which holds both
the Keys. John Antonio Campano.
John Antonio Campano has also given no small reputation to this noble City,
of whom Raffaello Voluterano writes, that he know him, being a child, attended
the keeping of sheep, and being apt and urged by nature, endeavored by all
means to attain learning, wherein he so much profited, that he was esteemed
worthy to read in the Schools of Paris, being entertained by the Paragians with
a large stipend, and so much he increased in fa^^ and learning, that Pius the
second afterward made him Bishop of Apruntino. This learned man left behind him
many Works, of the which was the book of the Acts and famous deeds of Braccio
of Montone. He writ the life of the worthy Prince Frederick Duke of Vrbin, and
the life of Pope Pius the second. Moreover in these our days Camille
Pellegrino* and Beneditto of Vva, excellent Poets, whose Works are well known,
have, and always give everlasting honor to this noble City. And with these
has also been very famous John Battista, an eloquent Orator.

Afterward from Capoa, eight miles distant is Aversa* a noble and a rich City,
builded upon the ruins of the ancient Attella, often remembered by Livy and
Marcus Tullius. Atella was the wellspring of lascivious Verses, The City
Atella.
and wanton and effeminate behaviors; whereupon the compositions, and
lascivious Comodies and dishonest, were called Atelliane. Boys and girls were
taught certain lascivious Verses, and to that purpose did come with a certain
composed measure, and wanton carriage of the body, and roling the eyes to
pronounce them with so great immodesty and lascivious behaviors, at the Tables
of dishonest persons, and on the Stages, that there wanted nothing but the
dishonest and carnal conjunction together.

But of better discipline was the beginning of Aversa, the which by Averso the
Norman, a famous Captain, was first built, The City Aversa, by whom it was
built.
and afterward was beautified by Robert Guiscardo, a worthy and a valiant man.
This City was ruinated and defaced even to the foundation by Charles the first
of Angio King of Naples, for the Rebellion of the House Rebursa: But it was
afterward newly re-edified and beautified by Charles the second, King, his son.
This City is great, Aversa destroyed by Charles of Angio, King of Naples.
and much inhabited, and is one of the principal in the Land of Lavoro, as well
for the vicinity and neighborhood of the City of Naples, from the which it is
not distant more then seven miles, as also for the fertilty of the pleasant and
beautiful fields thereof, the which being enclosed in six miles, spread
between Naples and Capoa: And a little more toward Linterne, compassing a
great part of the Leborine fields, sometime very famous, and now called Gaudo.
Moreover this City is very honorable for the Bishopric, which yields eight
thousand Crowns yearly, and is now under the Authority of the worthy and
reverend Lord Don Pietro Orsino, a Prelate (as it is commonly said) of great
clemency and wisdom, Don Pietro Orsino.

The famous men of Aversa.


whereby he is loved and honored of all. This City had many famous men very
expert in the Law; as Cavello Barnado President of the Kings Chamber, Felice
Barnada, Tomaso Grammatico, a famous Councellor for the deciding of
controversies, Scipio Cutinar^o, Regent of the Council of Italy in Spain, Marc.
of Mauro, President of the Summaria. In Philosophy have been many learned, as
Bartholmew of Donato, which writ a discourse de Corporeitatis Luca Prassitio,
which subtly and wittily writ ten Disputations against Augustine: Nifo of
Sessa, very learned are these Treatises, De immortalitate animae: and de
prestantia literarum supra arma, wherein he expressed great learning, and in
these days together with these the reverend Father Alfonso of Marco, of the
reformed Order of Preachers, who for his good and examplary life, shines as
the Sun in darkness, he has learnedly writ upon Logic, natural Philosophy,
the soul, Metaphysick, and de ente rationis, and he is now commenting the same
of St. Thomas, and if God permit him life, we may expect other learned Works to
proceed from him. In the aforesaid City are these Noble Families, Altimaro,
Cutinario, Gargano, Grimaldo, Landulfo, Pacifio, Scaglione, Silvestro,
Simonello, Tufo, Ricardo, Della Valle, and others.

Not far from Aversa is Marigliano in a good Soil, and is wholly walled about,
and by the Ancients called Merlianum Marigliano.
and Marianum, the Citizens whereof say, that it was so called by C. Marius the
Founder thereof, and it is now endued with the dignity of a Marquess, under the
jurisdiction of the House of Montenegro* Innocentius the third, Bishop of Rome,
has much honored this Land, being born there; and at this present R. D.
Iacobo Marotta a learned Philosopher, who has written upon the predicables and
predicaments of the Logic of Scotus, and de triplici intellectu, Humane,
Angelical, and Divine, and read in the common Schools of Naples, the
Metaphisicks with a wonderful concourse of Students.

Afterward appears the City Acerra, called by Strabo, Acerrae, which was
burnt by Hannibal the Carthaginian: The City Acerra, why it was built.
But was again newly re-edified by the Romans, whereof Livy often makes
mention, and Virgil calls the Territory thereof very good and fertile. Near
to which City runs the River Glanio, very hurtful to the Country through
the continual inundations, and therefore is almost disinhabited. Acerra was
builded by the people Nasamoni, who in honor of Jupiter Feretrio made a high
Altar after the fashion of a little Ship, Acerrr, why it was so called.
whereupon they burnt great abundance of sweet Odours, wherefore it was called
Acerra by the Nasamoni, which opinion Alexander of Alexandro Neopolitan
confirms in the 7 Chapter of his third Book, speaking of their Gemali: Acerra
erat ara constituta ubi odores incenderet, The Temple of Jupiter Feretrio.
quae acerra dicta erat a Nasamonibus populis. Some are of opinion that an
Altar so called, was only devised by the Nasamoni, but that Numa Pompilius
erected the Temple of Jupiter Feretrio. Festo believes that Feretrio was so
called by bringing of peace, although Plutarch says that he should be so named
by the wounding of enemies: whereupon Propertio writes a learned Elegy of
Jupiter Feretrio thus, Propertio in 4.
Nunc Iovis incipiam causas aperire Feretrii,
Armaque de ducibus trima recepta tribus.
To which Temple the Ancients when they obtained victory of their enemies,
consecrated all their best and richest spoils.

Departing from Acerra, is the River Glanio; which springs from the Hill
above Sessua, The river Glanio and the original thereof.
by ancient Writers named Clanius, whereof Virgil makes mention in two of his
Georgicks thus, Talem dives arat Capua vicina Vesevo.
Ora jugo and vacuis Clanius non aequus Acerris.
Probus writes that the River Clanio took that name from the Giant Clanio.
Afterward is seen Sessula, Sessula
distant from Acerra four miles, called by Strabo, Suessula, and by Livy in
many places, and in his seventh Book shows that in this City was a great
battle between the Romans and the Samnites, where the Samnites were put to
flight by M. Valor. This City is almost now ruinated. Afterward appears from
the North part, the Hills of Capoa, called by Livy, Tifata, these Hills are above
Capoa, and above all this Country, the which pass along even to the Territory
of Nola. The river Isclero.
Afterward is the River Isclero, and the River Sorritello; and not far off upon
a fair Hill is the Aierola, an excellent Country, honored with the dignity of
a Dukedom under the Family Caracciola. Aierola.
From Aierola five miles is in a fair Plain, Arienzo, a Country full of worthy
and honorable people, called of the Latins, Argentum, the Territory whereof
is very fertile and full of Fruit, and especially of Percope, where they grow
more common in this Country then any other, verily these fruits are to be
preferred before all others for their delicacy and great goodness these said
Trees live not above five years, and it is necessary that the seeds or carnels
thereof be sowed toward the East, in a place where the cold cannot hurt them,
for cold is a great enemy to these Trees; the Fruit thereof is of the color of
Gold with red spots, and a slender rine, and weighs a pound and more according
to the place where they be planted. Not far off upon a steep and pleasant
little Hill is the City of Caserta, replenished with worthy and honorable
people, the original whereof is uncertain, The City Caserta, by whom it was
built
the Citizens of it affirm by ancient tradition, that it was builded by the
Sessulani and Galatini, others believe from the relics of the second Capoa in
the Hill Trifisco, and last of all others say that it should be builded by the
Longobards, and was made a Cathedral Church by Alexander the fourth, Bishop of
Rome. The Lords of Aquino ruled this City a long time; afterward it came under
the Counts of Tilesia, of the Noble Family Siginulfa, and lastly Giulio Antonio
Acquaniva, a noble Lord, possessed it with the Title of a Prince. The noble
Family of Santori has much honored this City, of which that excellent Doctor
of Law, Lonardo, Lonardo Santoro.
has been much renowned who left to the world a worthy and honorable issue,
from whom descended the famous and reverend Giulio Antonio Santoro, Cardinal of
the Church of Rome, and Francesco Antonio, Archbishop of Severin^ his brother,
men no less famous for Learning, then for sincerity of life. Going a little
farther is Mataloni, Mataloni.
of some called Magdaloni, and of others Metalionis, which has the dignity of
a Dukedom, subject to the noble Family of Carrafi. Near which upon a Hill is
the fair City of Venafro, named by Strabo, Venafrum, Venafro.
the Plain whereof Pliny calls fertile and full of Olives: whereupon Martial
praising the Oil, says, Hoc tibi Campani sudavit bacca Venafri
Vnguentum quoties sumis, and istud oles.
This City in the time of our Ancestors had the Title of a County under the
Pandoni Gentlemen of Naples, after the which it came under the Dominion of the
worthy Lords of Lanoia, Princes of Sulmona, but now it is in the Kings hands.
Going a little farther is the noble and ancient City of Sora, so called both
now, and in old time, The City Sora.
which in the time of the Romans was the principal City of all Sannio* Pliny
places it in the first Region, and Ptolomy in Latium, and Strabo describes it
in happy Campania. We following the division of the Kings Court, place it in
this Province of the Land of Lavoro, or happy Campania.

Livy says that the said City was made at one and the same time a Colony of
the Romans, with Alba, which was of the Territory Vestino; but possessed by the
Samnites. This which Livy says, that Sora should be of the Territory Vestino,
is true, for this reason, that the City Vestina being near Garigliano, in the
Plain of Sessa, that which was from the mouth of the River even to Sora, by the
River Garigliano, all under one only name of Vestini became so called, and
Garigliano and Sessa were comprehended under the self-same of Vestini. Livy
says that the Sorani becoming rebels and joining with the Samniti, went
against them with all their force, and says that in this rebellion the Sorani
cut in pieces the Roman Colonies that were there; which stirred so great desire
of revenge, The Sorani cut in pieces the Roman Colonies.
that at length the City was taken by Treason, one of Sora bringing in ten
Romans secretly into the Castle, whereupon the Citizens broke up the Gates in
the night and fled away, and the Roman Army freely entered in, and there were
taken 325 of the Sorani, Authors of the Rebellion, and the death of the Roman
Colonies, The Romans take Sora.
and were carried bound to Rome, and cruelly beaten in the Marketplace, and
afterward put to death to the great contentment of the people, The Romans send
another Colony to Sora.

Sora destroyed by the Emperor Frederick the second.

The River Fibreno, and the beginning thereof.


which desired as their proper interest, that in their Colonies their Citizens
might be secure. But within awhile following the Romans sent another Colony to
Sora under the Consulship of L. Genutio, and of Servio Cornelio, the which for
a long time remained there peaceable: But in the time afterward of Gregory the
ninth, was destroyed by the Emperor Frederick the second; and for all this, was
by the same Citizens repaired, and in process of time increased in much honor
and riches, and is now reputed one of the best Cities in all that Province, and
is adorned with the Title of a Dukedom. The said City on the one side is
compassed with a stately and strong Wall, and the other is defended with the
River Fibreno, which has its beginning under the Mountains of Capistrello,
which is a Country in the Apennin, eight miles above Sora, The River Liris, now
called Garigliano.
which River enters into Garigliano (called in old time Liris) near the
Monastery of St. Dominico of Cisterniensi. This River abounds with water, and
seems to be that which according to Pliny comes from the Lake Fucino, which
in the beginning is divided into two branches, whereof that on the left hand,
by means of the high and steep Mountains is very swift, but that on the right
hand running by a Rock, and falling not from that hight as the other, passes
with a pleasant current very calm and beautiful. These two branches being
joined again together under Sora, make an Island very delightful, and of much
traffic, An Island, a most beautiful Country, called by the Ancients
Interamnia.
which the Ancients have called Interamina. Following the course of these
Rivers, are these Countries following Torre, Campolato, Isoletta, and
Colledrago. Now above the Isle before named, which with those two Arms makes
Garigliano, there are very high Hills, and almost wholly disinhabited; and on
the right hand there is a Country above those rough and cragge Hills, very
pleasant, called Comino, which is environed with very high Hills, and has seven
Countries well inhabited that is, Comino, a pleasant Country was ^o called by an
ancient City of the same name.
Vicalvo, Alvito, Santo Donato, Settefrati, Piacinisco, Gallinaro, and
Casalviero. This Country was in old time called Comino, of a City which was
there so called, whereof Livy speaks in many places, and chiefly in the tenth
Book, where he says, that it was taken by Spurio Carvillo Consul, being entered
within it, and his Soldiers retired, which had the Guard of the Marketplace,
there was given to Papirio the Consul eleven thousand and thirty men, the first
being killed by four thousand three hundred and eighty. In this same Country on
the right hand under the Hills is Atina, an ancient City, which was one of those
five which made Arms for the aid of Turnus, The City Atina.
against Aeneas, according to Virgil in the seventh of Eneidos, Quinque adeo
magnae positis incudibus urbos
Tola novant, Atina potens, etc.
At the side of the said City runs the River Melfa, which rises in the
Apennin Hills, The River Melfa.
and enters into Garigliano, near Pontecorvo, a City whereof Virgil and Livy
make mention. Coming down into the bottom of this Country on the side of the
said River, under the Castle of Casalviero on the left hand, is a little
Country which they call Schiavi; and yet lower upon a very rough and craggie
Hill is Arpino, a famous City, whose stately Walls yet standing declare the
greatness thereof; The City Arpino.
and although it has been the natural Country as well of Caio. Marius as of
Marcus Tullius, the one the mirror of Chivalry, the other of Eloquence, yet
that preferring Learning before Martial Affairs, used for the Arms M. T. C.
Under Arpino on the left hand near the River Melfa is Fontana, a little
Country; and hard by is Arce, The Arms of Arpino.
a worthy City, the Territory whereof abounds with great store of excellent
Fruits, and has a goodly Fortress, and is beautified with the Title of a
Dukedom. The City Arce
Not far off follows the City Aquino, called in old time Aquinum, which is
almost ruinated, whose Relics manifestly declare what great estimation it had
in former times, The City Aquino.
where apparently are seen the ruins of stately Buildings, with goodly Statues
of Marble. Both now and ever Aquino has received much honor by Giovenale a
Satirical Poet, and Victorino an excellent Geometrician, Giovenal, a Satirical
Poet.
who flourished in the time of Leo the first (according to the opinion of some)
he found the computation of Easter, according to the course of the Moon,
Victorino, a Geometrician.
at the persuasion of Pope Hillary. Moreover Pescenio Negro Emperor of Rome,
has honored this Country, as Herodian declares in his second Book of his
Cesars. Pescenio Negro, Emperor.
And although the said City be almost ruinated, nevertheless it has the
dignity of a County. Here Robert Guiscardo the Norman was created with great
solemnity Duke of Apuglia and Calauria, St. Thomas of Aquin.

Gio Menardo, in the 6 book of epistles, in the 5 epistle.

Adinolfo, Count of Aquino, and Duke of Gaeta.


by Gregory the seventh, Bishop of Rome, in the year 1073. as Biondo writes in
his Histories, and Platina in the life of the said Gregory. But above all, that
Angelical Doctor St. Thomas, has most honored Aquino, the which though born
in Naples, is surnamed of Aquino, because his Ancestors possessed that Country,
with other Cities and Lands. John Menardo says, that the said Angelical Doctor
was of the House of Frangipane; others say that he was of the Noble Family of
Sammacula, and that afterward from that Seignory (as we have said) which they
had of Aquino, they were surnamed of Aquino, the which Family was much advanced
by Adinolfo, County of Aquino, for as much as by the common consent of the
Gaetani, he was created Duke of their City; among the ancient Poets, Rinaldo of
Aquino has been very excellent, of whom Monsignor Pietro Bembo makes mention
in his Epistles.

Now coming again into our former order, leaving the ancient City of Aquino,
there is on the left hand Roccasecca, and on the right hand upon a high Hill is
the famous and worthy Monastery of Monte Casino, Monte Casino.
builded upon the ruins of the noble City of Casino, an ancient Colony of the
Romans, and a worthy City of the Lat^nes, which (as Livy writes) had a Colony
brought together with Minturn, the which in the time of the Romans was very
famous, for that noble and stately Temple of Apollo, which had a hundred and
fifty high and mighty Pillars. The said Monastery was builded by St. Benedict
Norsino, for his Monks, in the year of Christ 5^0 where Totila King of the
Goths going to visit him, understanding he had a spirit of Prophecy, and
purposing to make trial, Totila, King of Goths*
if that which had been reported were true, put on Lackies apparel, causing
another to go before him, clothed in Kingly Ornaments, which feigned himself
to be Totila; but the Saint knowing of God the deceit sent unto him with a
cheerful countenance to stay with the rest of his company, and pointing to the
King which was basely appareled, requesting him to come into the Monastery. But
neither this, nor other the like signs of sanctity, which St. Benedict
declared to the Lombards, were sufficient to restrain the unbridled fury of
these Barbarians, that they might not destroy this Monastery, the which was
foretold to the Monks by their Father St. Benedict. It was afterward repaired
again upon the first foundations, and also enlarged 112 years after by Petronio
Petronasso Bresciano, through the persuasion of Pope Gregory the second, as
Paulo Diacono writes, and Elia Capriolo, in his third Book of the Brescian
Histories. The Revenue of these Monks yearly, Paulo Diacono in his 6 book of
histories*
was more then fifty thousand Crowns. There lies with great devotion in the
said Monastery, the bodies of many Saints and blessed people, especially that
of S. Benedict Norsino, the Founder and Head thereof, and of St. Scolastica his
sister, whose holy bodies were there found in the year 1443. whereby it seems
that that cannot be true, which Paulo Diacono writes of them, saying, that in
the year 694, in the time of Gisulfo, Prince of Benevento* the said holy bodies
were carried by certain Frenchmen into France, where to the honor both of the
one and the other, were builded two Royal Monasteries. The which opinion is so
much the less true, as that Pope Zachary affirms to have seen the bodies of
these two Saints with his own eyes in the Mount Casino many years after;
wherefore we will give more credit to the report of a chief Bishop, and to the
bodies which were found and seen in the year 1443. then to the opinion of Paulo
Diacono. Pliny declares in the fourth Chapter of his seventh Book, that in the
said City of Casino in the time of the Consulship of Licinio Crasso, and of
Caio Cassio longo, a girl in a certain house b^^^me a boy, which by commandment
and advice of their Southsayers was carried (...) left in an Island abandoned.
At the foot of the Mount Casino is Saint Germano, a new City, so called by the
name of a holy Abbot which built it. Going farther is Theano, called by Pliny
and Strabo, Theanum Sidicinum, a City whether Augustus sent a Colony; and not
far off is Calvi, The City Theano.
an ancient City which was builded by Calai, the son of Borea, which came into
these places after the return of the Aragonanti, as Silio declares in his
eight book, The City Calvi.
although Livy and Festo affirm that the first Inhabiters were the Ausoni.
Afterward we come to Piedemonte of Alife, a good and a plentiful Country, and
full of worthy people, where through the commodity which they have of the
water, is made good Cloth of Wool; out of this Country has risen many
excellent men, endued with much Learning, among the which these are of the
greatest note, Philippo Francisco of Piedemonte, which commented the Poetry of
Horace, Lodovico Paterno, an excellent vulgar Poet; but in these our days the
said Country is much renowned, by means of certain Gentlemen which being
contented with their retired estate, live virtuously, employing the time in the
exercise of Divine Learning, and some of them in giving council to others in
the profession of the Laws. Of the same Country was Nuntio Tatiaglia, which
composed the practice of the Civil and Criminal Lieutenantship. The City Lauro,
by whom it was built.
Following the same way is Lauro, situate in a pleasant and delightful place.
This City was builded by Ruberto Orsino, Count of Nola, as Cantalitio the Poet
writes in his fourth Book, where he says that the said Count built it,
because that great Captain Consalvo Ferrando of Cordova received in the said
place the Crown of Laurel, after he had the victory of the French. This Country
has the title of a Marquis, the Lord whereof is Don Scipio Pignatello, a most
worthy man, and of very honorable and virtuous qualities. A little farther is
Palma, which belongs to the said Marquess, the which Castle was also builded
by the said Count of Nola, Palma The Plain of Palma.
and to this intent I will not omit to speak of the Plain of Palma, so much
commended for the hunting there, where that great Alfonsus the first of
Arragon, King of Naples, built to this purpose a sumptuous Palace, which
afterward was destroyed by Charles the eight, King of France, although the
relics are yet to be seen. Hard by is the ancient and noble City of Nola, The
City Nola.
so called by Strabo in his fifth book. This City was builded (as Trogo
affirms) by the Giapigii; but according to Solmo by the Tirii. It was very
great in old time, this City, as Ambrogio Leoni declares in his first book of
Nola, that the Walls thereof (as he says) were in compass 2017 paces, having
twelve parts, and was built round. Nola may boast, that the Emperor Octavius
Augustus the Monarch of the world died therein, The death of the Emperor
Octavius Augustus.
in honor of whom, Tiberius his successor in the Empire, builded in the said
City a stately Temple, the relics whereof are yet to be seen: There are also
to be seen in this place, many relics of ancient and stately buildings; now
it is not so great; though it be very populous. The amorous Flora was of this
City, who dying, left her only heir of all her Jewels and Riches the people of
Rome, and so much money was there found in her house, with the Jewels which
they sold, Flora and her Riches.
as were sufficient to build the Walls of Rome, and also to redeem the
Commonwealth: Wherefore the Romans, because she had her beginning at Rome, and
also had left all her goods to the Commonwealth, built a most sumptuous and
stately Temple in memory of her, from whose name they called it Floriano, The
Temple of Flora.
wherein every year, on that day which she died, they celebrated the Feast of
the Goddess Flora. Suetonio Tranquillo says, that the first Feast which the
Emperor Galba celebrated in Rome, was the Feast of amorous Flora, in the which
all the Romans, both men and women might lawfully commit any lascivious
dishonesty, which then was accounted the most holy, that which that day was
most dishonest. St. Felix Bishop.
St. Felix Bishop has given great honor to this City, whose body lies in it,
and as they say, there rises continually Manna out of his holy bones, whose
life was written by St. Paulino Bishop of this City. St. Paulino was the
inventor of the use of Bells, St. Paulino the Inventer of Bells.
an Instrument utterly unknown to the Ancients, which is now so necessary in
the Church of God: He gave it the name of Campane, because he invented it in
Campania, where is the aforesaid City of Nola, of the which he was Bishop; and
that the Citizens ever since glorying therein (as rightly they may) have
always used to give a Bell for the Arms of the City. The Arms of Nola.


And to say something of the famous Counts of Nola; Monsignieur Guido da
Monforte was the first thereof, The first Counts of Nola.
a most noble and valiant Gentleman of France, which came with Charles the first
of Angio to the Conquest of the Kingdom, with whom he was in great estimation,
and having one only daughter, called Anastasia, married to Romano Orsino, chief
Justice of the Kingdom, who by the death of his Father in Law, Romano Orsino
was the first of that Family that had Lordship in the Kingdom.
succeeded in the County, which was the first of the Family of Orsina, which
had Seigniory in the Kingdom. The posterity of this man have proved all worthy
men and very valiant; but the matchless Paragon of all was Ramondo, which
flourished in the time of Charles the second, for being chased away and forsaken
by his Father, went into Soria, after he had in a journey into the Holy Land,
done many valiant exploits against the Moors, and overcome in a private
combat, Wherefore the Rose was adjoined to Arms of the House of Orsina.
a most fierce and mighty Saracin, who carried a Rose upon the top of his
wreathed Turbant, returned home into the Kingdom with great honor, and for a
token of that Victory, joined it with much glory to his Arms, whereupon through
his great magnanimity and valor, was made Prince of Taranto. That Principality
has been continued even to this present, one of the most important Members of
the Kingdom, for it contained very much land, and Cities of greatest
importance, which for brevity I omit to name; so that Ramondo being a very
mighty and great Lord, the House of Orsina was very famous through all Italy.
R^mondo married the Lady Mary of Eugenio* of an honorable proginy in France,
who after the death of her husband; having the tuition of her children, became
Queen of Naples, at such time as King Ladislao besieged her in Taranto, who
being not able to subdue her, resolved to take her for his wife, and so by that
means to possess the Inheritance of the children of Ramondo, of whom the first
was John Antonio, who redeemed the Principality of Taranto with money from
James, husband of Queen Ione. This John Antonio increased much his Patrimony
with Lands of great importance, and was highly favored by Alfonsus of Arragon,
John Antonio Orsino, Prince of Tarento.
King of Naples, who made him great Constable, which is the chiefest of the
seven Offices in the Kingdom, with a hundred thousand Ducats yearly for a
Pension.

And to return to the Counts of Nola, they were great L^rds, for they possessed
Sarno, Tripalda, Palma, Avella, Lauro, Forino, Ascoli, and other Lands. Counts
of Nola.
But afterward Felice Orsino, Prince of Salerno succeeded in the County, who
having little experience in worldly affairs, through the d^^^ension and
division of the Kingdom, lost his State in (...) time after the death of his
Father. And King Ferrant the first gave Salerno to Robert (...), and Nola,
Tripalda, Ascoli, Lauro, and Forino, to Orso Orsino, (...) great Chancellor of
the Kingdom, and partner with him in the Wars against John Antonio Orsino;
whereupon the line of Romano Orsino, which had ruled Nola almost two hundred
years, was extinguished, and the Principality of Salerno, rose of the House of
Orsino 24 years after he had it. But this line afterward of the Count Orso,
continued but a small time, for the Lady Santola, a Citizen of Nola, by whom he
had two sons, the one Duke of Ascoli, and the other a Knight, lost all their
Inheritance through the wicked means of their mother, who lewdly justified of
her own accord, that they were not begotten by the Count Orso, were deprived of
all their right by King Ferdinando, who gave the County of Nola, with Cimitino,
Avella, Monforte, Lauro, Palma, and Ottoiano, to the Count Nicola Orsino of
Pitigliano, whose successors possessed it until the year 1528. the which Don
Arrigo, in serving the French, lost his life and his state also; and so ended
the line of the Counts of Nola, which were so famous in this Kingdom.

Now returning to our former order, I say, that from the City of Nola are also
sprung many other famous men, as well adorned with Learning, as with Military
Discipli^e, which would be too teadious to repeat, and therefore I re^er the
reader to Ambrogio Lione, who very exactly names and describes them all. But
for us it shall be only sufficient to name the Noble Families, which the said
Leone writes of, which are in the said City, and are these following,
Albertino, Alfano, Barone, Capos^rosa, Candido, Cesarini, Coriale, Carmignano,
Campobascio, The names of the Noble Families of Nola.
de Ferrariis, de Elia, Freccia, Fellecchia, Fontana, Rosa, Del Iodice, Joseph,
Infant, de Gennaro, Maffei, Marifeulo, Morra, Mastril^o, Mazzeo, Notariis, De
Palma, Perarii, Perrigioanni, Rehi, Risi, Santori, Sassolani, etc. and at this
present the Bishop of this City, Fabritio Gallo Neopolitan, a Prelate (besides
his learning) a man of sincere and pure life, who with much diligence composed
a Sinodal Book of his Diocese. There are many other places, the which I think
not fit to recite all, but the greatest and most important I have not omitted
any, but the small and little, as those which are thought to be of little or no
account, I have neglected, assuring you, that to the integrity and soundness of
the Work, it shall not fail in any momentary matter.

The Arms of this Noble Country is in a Field Asur^^ Cornucope in salter through
the middle of a Crown the first of ^eres, the other Bacchus or; The Arms of
this Province of Lavoro.
the which Arms signify the great fertility and abundance of the Country,
which as it were Queen of every other Province, exceeds them in all the
benefits of Nature. Whereupon in confirmation of what I have said, I will
concluded with L. Floro, who speaking thereof, thus writes, Omnium non modo
Italia, sed toto orb terrarum pulcherrima Campaniae plaga est: Nihil mollius
coelo; nihil uberrius solo, nihil hospitalius mari. Denique bis floribus
vernat, ideo Liberi, Cererisque certamen dicitur. Hic illi nobiles portus
Caieta, Misenus, and tepentes fontibus Baiae, Lucrinus, and Avernus, qu^dam
maris otia. Hic amicti vitibus montes ^aurus, Falernus, Massicus, Pulcherim^s
omnium Vessuvius, Aetaeni ignis imitator. Vrbes ad mare, Formiae, Cumae,
Neapolis, Herculanium, Pompei, and ipsa caput urbium Capua, quodam inter tres
maximas, Romam, Carthaginemque numerata, etc.

The PRINCIPALITY On this side the second Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
THe ancient Inhabiters of this Province were called the Picentini: But Arechi
the second, 14th Duke of Benevento, in the year 755. Arechi, Duke of Benevento,
in the year 755.
much enlarged his Dukedom, for as much as he not only subdued by force of Arms
the Picentine people, but also the Irpini, whereupon growing proud, usurped the
Title of Prince, and was the first in Italy that attributed to himself that
Title, and so commanded that his State should be no more called a Dukedom, but
a Principality. And from hence perhaps it so came to pass, that within a while
after from that new Title of Prince, The Confines of the Picentini*
all that part of the Picentini, and of the people Irpini, by one only name
were called Principato. The Confines of the Picentini, according to Strabo,
Ptolomy, and Sempronius, has on the West the happy Campania, on the North the
Irpini, on the East the River Silaro, and Basilicata* and on the South the
Tirren Sea. This said Country was within the said limits in breadth 16 miles,
and in length, beginning from Sirenuse even unto the mouth of the River Silaro
260 furlongs, which is 33 miles. But according to Pliny only 30. Where the
Picentini dwelt.

Why the Picentini were driven away by the Romans.

The City Picentia.


the circuit of which Country contained a part of old Campania. The Romans
brought these people from Adria to inhabit here about the borders of Pestano.
But afterward being Confederate with Hannibal the Carthaginian, the Romans for
this cause became afterward their enemies, who in disdain drove them out of
the Country, and were forced to dwell elsewhere, as some report, their
principal City was Picentia, as Pliny testifies, the which are also so named
by Pomponius and Silius in his eight book, from the which these people derive
the name Picentia, of the Picentini, as some say. Others affirm that the
Sabines having chosen of a new people, ce^ain Colonies, sent them under the
Conduct of Pico, which brought them into the borders of Pestano, and there
built the City of Picentia, Sundry opinions of the Picentini.
from whence they were afterward called Picentini. Others say that they were so
called of Piceno, from whom their forefathers draw their first original, and
that from their City the people were so called. And last of all others say from
Pico, their Captain, they had that name, which led the first Colony of Sabines
into a part of Pestano. The Territories of this Province are very fruitful in
many places of all sorts of Corn, and have sufficient store of Cattle; The
fertility of the Province.
and where there is not that abundance of these things yet that great Mother
Nature yields other things very plentiful, which in time of Harvest
sufficiently appears, that even among themselves there seems a certain
emulation. Besides this, the Sea, which every where with great abundance of
diverse sorts of Fishes, both shel-fish and others, furnish it, as it were
glorying it self comes nothing behind the other. To conclude, the greatest part
of this Region brings forth Corn, Wine, Oil, Rice, and all other sorts of
pulse. And those places which are any thing scarce of these things, besides
diverse excellent Fruits, yield Honey, Silk, Bombace, and Saffron: whereupon many
say this Region is seasoned and tempered with all the graces. It is also
adorned with pleasant Woods, and thick and shady Groves, and has high and
stately Mountains, and delightful Hills, with great plenty of Springs and sweet
waters. On the Seaside it has many secure and safe Havens, and goodly Shores,
and the places much inhabited; it has besides all sorts of fruitful Trees,
and particularly those which were transported by Hercules unto us out of Media,
as Citrons, Limons, and Oringes, which the beautiful Nymph Amalfi planted in
the pleasant Valleys of this Country, a place which seems to the beholders
thereof, a most beautiful Embrodery or Arras work, where the nearer a man
comes, the more pleasure increases both to the eyes and the nose, besides the
Myrtle Trees, the Bays, the Gelsomine, the Roses, the Rosemary, and Flowers of
sundry kinds, and other the like Plants, from whence proceeds such a fragrant
smell, which mingled with diverse odours, yields an admirable sweetness. Who can
be able to declare the ornament and furniture of the Vines, from whence are had
such sweet and delicate Wines? Verily the places of this Region are so
delightful and pleasant, that they are worthy to be numbered among the most
beautiful and most delicate of all Italy. And here the air is temperate and
wholesome, and through all the year excellent hunting* both for fowls and
beasts. In truth the Territory of this beautiful Region is such, that all
Italy has not almost the like, wherefore it may be called a perfect work of
Nature. In praise whereof that learned Julius Cesare Scaligero composed these
Verses, Quae Borcae g^lidas furias contemnit ovantis:
Torva procellosi despicit arma Noti
Medorum, and silvis foecundas provocat auras,
Fundit, and a biseris Indica dona jugis.
Protinus Autumnus veris cum tempore certat,
Et ver cum Autumni tempore certat item
Huc accessit hyemes venerantibus uda capillis,
Et peperit mirans, and sibi poma legit.
Tuta mari fruitur: terrae dominatur amarae,
Et coeli mutat jura. quid ergo? Dea.


But having now made a description of this Country, which begins at the
mouth of the River Sarno, leaving the Castle of Stabie, going by the
Mediterrane, four miles distant from the said River, is the City Noceria,
whereof M. Tullius and Livy makes often mention; Noceria.
now called of the Pagans Nueera, because the Saracins held it a certain time,
their Army being overthrown at Garigliano by Pope John the tenth. This said
City is endued with the dignity of a Dukedom under the Family of Carrafa. And
in this City among others, are these Noble Families, Pagano, Rinaldo, and
Vngro. On the right hand of Nucera are certain Hills, in the midst whereof lies
the Land of Tramonti, so called because it is situated between the Hills. At the
side of these Hills on the left hand, near to a very pleasant Valley, is
Sanseverino, Sanseverino.
a good and an excellent Country, from whence (as some affirm) the noble Family
of Sanseverino derive their original, whereof have descended more excellent
Warriers then were in the Trojan horse, of whose noble deeds Histories make
sufficient mention, and whereof we have also discoursed in the noble Families
of Naples, whereto I refer the Reader.

But returning to the said Country (although it be of a later time)
nevertheless is very famous for the excellent Wines that are had out of the
fertile Valleys thereof, which the Latins call Amineum vinum, whereof Virgil
says, Sunt and Animeae vitis firmissima vina. Some had opinion that from the
ruins of the ancient City of Aminio, Sanseverino should be builded, in which
noble Country are many worthy Families, as the Curiale, Capacini, Caiano,
Folliero, dell' Abbadessa, Pandone, Pescara of Sarno, Sambarbato.

The water of Mela.
Somewhat lower into the said Valley is a Country called the water of Mela, of
the Latins named Aqua Malorum, where died Queen Margarite of Durazzo, wife to
Charles the third, King of Naples. Near to the said Country is a certain River
which passes a few miles, but dives under the earth, running through certain
holes and Channels in the ground unseen, the space of a hundred paces, and then
rises out again so great and clear as at the first. On the right hand of the
Valley, and of the River, upon a hill, is the City of Cava, so named by the
situation where it stands. For that Adalferio Pappacarbone, a noble
Salernitan in the year 910. Cava and the beginning thereof in the year 910.

Adalferio Pappacarbone.


drawn with holy zeal to do penance for his sins, retired himself into this
place, abiding in a certain Cave. The fame of his virtuous and holy life,
encouraged many to do the li^e, whereupon in process of time it came to pass
that place was much frequented for the worship and reverence of the sacred
Hermitages and Churches that were there; for the which Guaimaro the sixth,
Prince of Salerno in the year 940. Guaimaro, Prince of Salerno, the 6. an. 940
built for the benefit of the Monks of the Order of S. Benedict, a sumptuous
and stately Monastery, and endued it with great Revenues. In process of time
following, the said Monastery was given in commendum to certain Prelates, but
came afterward into the possession of the Cardinal Olivero Carrafa, who
understanding the good life of the said Monks restored it to them again, Pope
Leo the tenth agreeing thereto; at which time the Cavaioli desired of the said
Pope a Bishops Sea, which they obtained, and moreover was ordained that for
maintenance of that Pastoral Charge, the Monastery aforesaid should give yearly
to the Bishop a thousand and eight hundred Ducats of Revenue; and so it
appears that the Cavaioli had made a great beginning to their Cathedral
Church. Thus much concerning the original of this City, where are these Noble
Families, Anna de Curtis, Gagliardo, Longo, Ponza, Rocca, and Tosone. The
Cavaioli are ingenious men, and of great Traffic; but above all, full of
spirit and courage, wherein generally appears in them a ready inclination to
fight, and are very obstinate in their opinions, and therefore very litigious,
and full of contention with every one. Returning to the shore of the Sea, from
Nuceria eight miles, leaving the Castle Amare, and on the left hand also
passing by a great and mighty high Hill, where from the side that lies toward
the North is Gragnano and Littere, small Countries, Gargano. Lettere.
in the Plain going by the side of high and spacious Mountains, which pass
along to the Terrene Sea, makes the Cape of Minerva or Ateneo, called also
Pren^sso, Sirreo, The Cape of Minerv^.
and the Hill Equano, which is now so called by the Amalfi, in which arm of
Land are these Cities, Vico, Sorrento, and Massa, which we have described in
the Province of the Land of Lavoro, being so divided by the Kings Court. In the
aforesaid arm of Land ends the Haven of Crattera, or rather the Gulf of
Surrento, made of two Promontories, that is by Miseno and Ateneo, which lies
toward the South. Now all the circuit which is in that bending, which is of
this Promontory toward the East even to the nearest places of the Territory of
Salerno, now belonging to old Campania (as Strabo affirms) is called (as ^ath
been said) the Coast of Amalfi, from the City of Amalfi, The Caost of Amalfi.
where lies a pleas^nt and an excellent Country to the South, which is in
length little less then twenty miles* Here between the stony and craggie Rocks
and steep Hills, lies Pasetano, Praiano, Trani, Pasetano. Praiano. Trani.
Amalfi. The body of St. Andrew the Apostle: Pietro Capoan* Cardinal, in the
year 1208. The Church of the Capucines.
and the noble and pleasant City Amalfi, in the which in a most sumptuous and
stately Church, is preserved with great reverence the body of St. Andrew the
Apostle, where continually attends a Priest which has charge thereof, which
(they say) accustometh to bestow on every one that comes thither, certain Viols
full of clear and sacred liquor, by the Citizens called Manna which (as they
say) continually issues from that holy body, the which was brought thither by
Pietro Capoano of Amalfi, and Cardinal of St. Marcel, which was in the year
1208. The head of the said glorious Saint in the time of Pope Pius the second,
was transported to the worthy City of Rome in the year 14^4. where now it is
most religiously kept. There is also the Church of the Capuocini, called the
Canonica, the way whereof is very rough and difficult, where is a Reliquary
made by the said Cardinal, wherein is preserved a great number of the Relics
of Saints. When I was there, I repuested the Keeper of the place to give me a
Note of them, the which because he could not instantly do it, he sent it me
afterward to Naples, written by that good religious man in Verse, which
follows; the which pleased me so well, as to impart unto posterity those
reverend and holy Relics, Religio, vel casus si huc te duxerit hospes,
Condita Sanctorum cernere cord kara
Clauditur, o, tectis, A Note of the holy relics which are in Canonica.
quantus thesaurus inistis
Accedens sacris, collige, sisquo memor
Lumine nam tremulo spectabis brachia Cosmae
Carne, cruore, cute, and cum unguibus illa simul.
Sanguis inest Christi: quo dura ex morte redemptus
Es mortalis homo? respice, plange, geme.
Emicat hic ligni pars sancta ex cruce recisi:
Et tumuli sacri, spinaque morte Dei.
Nam caput hic Dioniedis adest venerabile cruce:
Ictu, Iacobe, alto est saucia calva tua.
Basilii caput est: Romani signa colenda:
Accedunt mentes Eustachii ^ssa pias,
Hic Stephani, hic Zacheriae fulgentis, and ossa,
Insontis turbae frustula mult^ jacent
Pangratii cerebrum est: Catharinae, ac optima mala:
Vrsula jamque suo sanguine cord movet.
Ossa hic Marci adsunt. Grisostomi, and ossa Ph^lippi;
Qui moveant nostras, excipiani que preces,
Plurima sanctorum monumenta hic deinque fragrant:
Quae carvere suo, haud, nomine, nota mihil
Haec ut scuta potes miserae tutamina vitae
Voce vocare diu, quaerere mente pi^i
Haec tibi succurrent posituro morte dolores
Namque sodalis eris, dum soci usque comes
Namque dies aderit supremi transitus orbis;
Qua potes istorum scandere laetus open.
Nunc calamum sumpsi, nunc haec tibi scripta notavi
Vive praecor felix, and memor ipse mei.
Of what great Power and Authority the said City has been, the stately
Buildings that were therein sufficiently testify, where at this present a
great part of the sumptuous Arsenal or Storehouse is yet standing, By whom
Amalfe was builded, and why it was so called.

Amalfo a Roman, Captain of the Emperor Constantine.

Amalfa the d^ughter of M. Marcello Ruffo, Roman. The Calife of Egypt, a great
friend to the Amalfi, anno 1020.

Churches builded by the Amalfi in Jerusalem.

The Hospital of St. John Baptist in Jerusalem. Pope Honorius 2 in the y^ar
1127.

Ramondo of Poggio, first great Master of the Knights of the Hospital.

How Rodes came into the possession of the Knights of St. ^ohn The Amalfitani
the founders of the Religion of the Knights of St. John See the History of
Henry Pantaleon de rebus memor^bilibus ordinis Johanitarum, Rhodiorum, ant
Melitentium equi^um terra malique fortiter gestis. lib. 1. f. 3


wherein the Amalfitani kept their Arms and Weapons. In what time, or by whom
the said City should be builded, there is no certainty; for some believe that
in the year 520. certain worthy Romans which departed from the City of Melfi,
and here residing, should build the said City, calling it Amalfe. Others
attributing a more ancient original, say that it was builded by Amalfo a Roman,
and Captain of the Emperor Constantine in the year 335. And finally others say,
that a certain worthy Roman Lady called Amalfe, the daughter of Marco Marcello
Ruffo, builded it, and that by her name it was named Amalfe. It increased in
process of time with much people, and was governed many years as a Commonwealth
under Dukes, and oftentimes made War with the Salernitani, and others which
sought to trouble them, and often had the better, and especially of strangers,
it became very famous for the Traffic of the Citizens thereof, the which for
the great number of ships which they had sailing every where, had great
Merchandise, whereupon through the Traffic which they made in the year 1020.
obtained the favor of Calife King of Egypt, whereby they got safe conduct
freely to Traffic into all his Territories, through the which favor, with
large and bountiful gifts which the Merchants of Amalfi bestowed upon him,
bound him in such manner, that they obtained what they would, and in particular
had license to build in Jerusalem a Church, with a house near to the holy
Sepulcher of Christ, to receive the Latin Passengers which came to visit those
holy places, the which Church was consecrated to St. Mary, commonly called the
Latin, for a difference of the other places which they had near about the
Greeks and Sorians; whereupon in a while after they built another house under
the title of St. Mary Magdalene, where they received with all true charity and
courtesy, all women that came to visit that Sepulcher. But so great a number
of people repairing thither, and the place being little and narrow, they made
an Hospital under the name of St. John Baptist, and with the alms which was
gathered of other devout people, maintained the Hospital, in which place they
constituted a Head, which they called a Governor or Rector, whereupon after a
certain time, a Governor of the said place named Gera^do in the year 1099.
having a long time governed the aforesaid Hospital, began to bear together with
his associates, a white Cross in the midst of the breast, on a black garment,
and instituted and established a rule of life after the Order of St. Augustine.
The same did Agnesa, which was Prioress of the Monastery of women. The said
Religion was afterward approved by Pope Honorius the second, in the year 1127.
The rule which was confirmed, went so well forward, that through the liberality
of Princes they got great riches, and Ramondo of Poggio was created great
Master thereof. Jerusalem being afterward taken in the year 1187. by Salandine
Emperor of the Turks, the said Knights in the year 1189. had for their
habitation the Isle of Rodes of Isancio Angelo the second, Emperor of
Constantinople, whereupon by means of their habitation they were called Knights
of the Rodes.

All this we thought good to say, for to declare that this Noble and Sacred
Religion of the Knights, sometime of St. John of Jerusalem, afterward of the
Rodes, and now of Malta, have had their beginning from the said Amalfitani.
Arrigo Pantaleon speaking hereof, in his History thus writes,

Anno 1020. Interea Amalfitani celebris, ac pia gens Italiae varias merces,
easque in solitas, and turcis gratissimas in Orientem navibus devexerunt, est
autem Amalphia civitas exterioris Italiae, inter mare and montes eminentissimos
sita, ab Orient habet Salernum, ab occidente Surrentum, and Neapolim, ab
Austro Siciliam Tyrrheno mari sejunctam. Ob has ergo novas merces Caliphae
Aegiptio, caeterisque praefectis ac incolis Syriae erant acceptissimi, ita ut
magistratuum licentia omnes regiones, and urbes circumire, atque merces
distrahere omni metu se posito libere poterant. Illi autem Christianae
religionis, and paternarum traditionum memores quoties occasio dabatur loca
sancta visitabant. Quia vero Hierosolymis nullum haberent domicilium, ut in
aliis maritimis civitatibus, amicis collectis, Calipham Aegiptium adeunt, ac
per ejus proceres oblato scripto impetrant ut praesidi Hierosolymorum
nunciaretur; quo Turcarum amicis in ea part qua Christiani habitant locus
amplissimus ad aedes oportunas construendas designetur. Hac occasion oblata,
pecuniam passim a mercatoribus colligunt, and ad lapidis jactum ante januam
Ecclesiae Dominicae resurrectionis, in honorem Dei, and Virginis Mariae
monasterium erigunt; quinetiam alias aedes adjungunt, quae ad usus monachorum,
atquae suae gentis hospitium satisfacerent. Hoc fundamento jacto, ex Amalphia
monachos, and Abbatem ^o transferunt, and locum ritu Romanae Ecclesiae Deo, and
matri virgini consecrant: unde locus ille monasterium de Latina semper dictus
fuit. Cum autem eodem tempore etiam sanctae viduae omnibus laboribus and
periculis contemptis ea loca invisirent, nec inter se, mulieribus oratorium,
and propriam domum extruxerunt, ubi postea monasterium Mariae Magdalenae
peccatricis fuit constitutumut certus monialium numerus ibidem peregrenantibus
foeminis inservirent. Paulo post etiam debet Caliphae filius cum Romano
Argiropilo ^mperatore Constantinopolitano foedus iniit, atque Christianis
facultatem concessit templi Dominicae resurrectionis recuperandi, itaque
Ecclesia illa circa annum salutis millesimum quadragesimum octavum restaurata
fuit, Constantino Monaco sumptus suggerente, etc. In Amalfi the year 1300. was
found to the glory of the Amalfitani by Flavio di Gioia the Mariners Compass by
the virtue of the Adamant stone, Flavio di Gioia, the inventer of the Sea-card
in the year 1300.
with the Sea-card so necessary for Pilots, and Seamen, the which invention
was wholly unknown in former time, having no other help then the shadow of the
Sun, and the North Star, as it appeared in that Voyage of Lucano, when Pompey
after his discomfiture in Thessalia, going to Lisbone to fetch his wife
Cornelia, making a journey afterward by Sea toward Egypt, demanded of the
Master of the Ship, How they sailed in old time.
and the Mariners, in what manner they guided their Bark in a direct course to
perform their Voyages, where they knew no other way then what we have said. In
old time Pilots and Sailers were accustomed every year to offer in the chiefest
Church thereof, bountiful and rich gifts, Pilots and Sailers came every year
to Amalfi.
in a grateful remembrance of so great a benefit; since the beginning of this
excellent invention, they found out not only the longitude of the distance of
every place, and the direct way from one place to another, but also to avoid
contrary winds, the traversing of the waters, the fear of shipwreck, the danger
of Rocks, and the encounter of Rovers and Pirates, whereupon John Pontano
calls the said City Magnetida, and Antonio Panormitano in praise thereof made
this Verse following, Prima dedit nantis usum magnetis Amalphis.

The said City is very pleasant for the beautiful Gardens that are there, and
for the great plenty of water, which yields great commodity in the making of
woollen Cloth, and Iron, and Paper, which are there wrought. There are in this
City these Noble Families, Alamagni, Amallano, Afflitto Austericcio, Bembo,
Brancia, Bonito, Capoano, Cometurso, Comite Castello, Corsari, alias Don Musco,
Cappa Santa, D' Arco Dentice, del Iodice, de Domio Marino, De Fusolis, De
Platamono, Favaro, Molignana, Marramaldo, Petrarca, Pisanello del Barone
Guglielmo. The Arms of this City have been a field per fesse gu. and Ar. plain
crosses counter-changed, the which signify no other then a unity and consort
of things, which we have declared of the said City.

Not far from Amalfi is the beautiful and rich Country of Mairue, Mairue.
full of honorable people, called by the Letterati, Maiorium, which was
builded by Sichinolfo Longobard, Prince of Salerno in the year 842. although
some affirm that it had its beginning of Sicardo Duke of Benevento, brother of
the said Prince. The Citizens thereof were almost all Merchants, and very
ingenious; it has had at sundry times men of great worth, as Vinciguerra
Lanario, which was Lieutenant of the Kings Chamber, John Antonio Lanario,
Councellor, and afterward Regent of the Council of Italy in Spain with King
Philip, by whom through his worthy merits he was created Count of Sacco. And
moreover in those days, that worthy and learned man Farrante imperato has
much honored that Country, an excellent and most diligent searcher, and
conserver of all the riches of Nature, and is very learned in the experience of
simples, whereupon to his great charge has collected so many diverse things,
and procured them from sundry parts of the world, which yield no small wonder
to every one that sees them, for the which cause many learned men come from far
Countries, allured through the same of this man, to see in Naples his admirable
and rare study. He has composed two learned Works, the one a History of
natural things, and the other of Treacle, the which Works are sufficiently
known to the world. He maintains how in Naples his most honorable house, with
great courtesy and kind entertainment, of the which the City of Scala may well
boak, that the said Family descended from it, which flourished with Military men.

Going a little higher, appears Minori, a little City which is very
delightful for the pleasant Gardens thereof full of Oringes, Citrons and
Limons, and other Fruits. The City Ravello.
Afterward in the top of a Hill is the City Ravello, full of goodly buildings,
and the seat of Nobility, where in the principal Church thereof is preserved
within a grate, The miracle of the blood of St. Pant^^eon.
the miraculous blood of St. Pantaleone, which being black, and hard as a
stone, the day before and after its Feast (as they say) is liquid and moist, as
it was at the time when it was first spilt. The Noble Families of the said City
are these following, Acconciaioco, Alfano, Bove, Campanile, Confalone,
Citarella, The noble Families of Ravello.
Castaldo, Curtis, de Vito, de Insola, Fenice, de Foggia, Frezza, Fusco,
Grifone, Iusti, Longo, Muscetola, Marra, Peroto, Rogadei, Rufula, Rustico,
Sasso, Sconciaioco, and others. In these days Paolo Fosco Bishop of Sarno,
has much honored this City, Paolo Fosco.
who writ two learned Books, one of Visitation and Church-Regiment, the other
de Singularibus in jure Pontificio. Going a little farther is Scala, re-edified
by the Longobards, The City Scala.
in which City were these Noble Families, Afflitti, Alfani, Marini, Atrara,
Bondello, Bonito, Cavaliero, Frisaro, Grisone, Mansella, Pando, The noble
Families of Scala.
Rufola, Samnella, Sasso del Cardinale, Staivano, Sebastiani, and others. The
said City was burnt at the same time with Amalfi, by the Emperor Lotharius the
third, because they had been very favorable to Ruggiero the Norman, King of
Naples, which was in the year 1125. but was afterward by the same Citizens
newly repaired.

Descending after toward the shore of the Sea, going from Amalfi, and sailing
toward the East, The cape of Orso.
is a little Promontory called the Cape of Orso, very memorable for the Victory
Count Philip, Lieutenant to Andrea Doria had there, then Admiral of the King of
France, against the Empereal Army, where were taken prisoners, the Marquess of
Vasto, and Ascanio Colonna, with the death of Don Vgo de Moncada Viceroy of
Naples, and of Don Pietro di Cardona, and others; which thing was the cause
that Andrea Doria left the service of the French King, and joined with the
Emperor Charles the fifth. The occasions that moved Doria to leave the French
party, we have discoursed at full in the lives of the Kings of Naples, and
besides in the Annals of the said Kingdom. Going along by the Continent of the
Land, you come to Vieteri, called of the Latins, Vicus Veterum, and Vetus
Vrbs, where are many delightful and pleasant Villages, and going a little
farther a mile distant from the Sea, appears the most ancient and famous City
of Salerno, the Head both of this Region, and also of Basilicata, builded near
the River of Silare, The River Silare, and Drumento.
which rises from the Apennine, where also springs Drumento, which runs
down into the Adriatic Sea, the said City is situated at the foot of an arm of
the Apennine, it has in the front or forepart, fertile and spacious fields,
behind and on the left side high Mountains, on the right side the T^rrene Sea,
The Gulf of Salerno, by Strabo called Sinus Pestanus.
which is so near, that the walls are watered therewith; and from which a Gulf
very perilous is so named, which Mariners now call the Gulf of Salerno: which
by the Latins is named Sinus Pestanus, from the ancient City of Peste, which
is now wholly ruinated, as is to be seen in the midst of the shore. Through all
the Territory of Salerno, are seen pleasant Garden^ full of Oringes, Limons and
Citrons, and other excellent Fruits, and all the year there are Flowers, which
seem as a perpetual Spring, through the happy influence of the heavens,
wherefore Horace says, Quod sit hiems veliae, quod coelum valla Salerni. and
therefore all the fruits that grow there are of singular perfection, Horace in
his Epistles.
and especially Pomgranates, and the Appian Apple, whereof is written, Omnia
mala, mala, preter Appia Salernitana. The Grain Rice, which is there in great
abundance, is very excellent and worthy praise; there are also precious Wines,
and most pleasant in taste. Salerno was so named by the River Silare, whereof
Lucan speaks in his second Book, Radensque Salerne tecta Siler. But who
should be the Founder thereof, no Writer has made any mention. Yet the
Citizens say, that Sem, the son of Noe built it, and for authority thereof,
Salerno, why it was so called, and by whom it was built.
alleadg an ancient Hymn which their Clergy were wont to sing the 15 of May, in
celebrating the Feast of the Translation of St Fortunato, Caio, and Anthe, the
which Hymn thus begins, O Salernum civitas nobilis
Quam edificavit Sem Noe filius
Non tuis sed sanctorum meritis collaudaris.
It is true that it was an ancient Colony of the Romans, who fortified it, and
put therein a strong Garrison of Soldiers, for the doubt and distrust they had
of the Picentini, Lucani, and Brutii, which were assembled together with
Hannibal, Salerno, a Colony of the Romans.
whereof Strabo in the end of his fifth Book thus vvriteth. Picentum vero
Metropolis erat quondam Picentia, nunc vero per vicos vitam agunt, ab Romany
expulsi propter initam cum Annibale societatem. Quo quidem in tempore, pro
militari officio, Strabo, lib. 5.
and viatoris publici aut tabellaris operam explerent assignati sunt, quem
adm^dum, Lucani, and Brutii easdem ob causas. Paulum autem supra mare Romani
Salernum custodiae gratia in eos munierunt, etc. Afterward under the Triumvirat
of Ti. Sempronio Longo Consul, and of M. Servilio, and of C. Minucio, Thermo;
Salerno a Colony of the Romans.
was made a Colony at the same time with Pozzuolo, Vulturno, Linturno, and
Buxento, and from that time following was that City confederate with the
Romans, and governed as their Commonwealth, nor ever was it unfaithful unto
the reverend Majesty of the Roman Empire, by which means it increased in
honor, and grew very populous; but always defended it against the fury of
Barbarians. But Italy being afterward overrun by the Longobards, Salerno under
the dominion of the Longobards.

Sicardo, Duke of Benevento slain.


Salerno came also under their Dominion, and so in the year of Christ 839.
Sicardo the 18. Duke of Benevento, and fifth Prince, being slain by Naningone
Radelchi the Treasurer took the Principality of Benevento, all things being
then in hurly-burly: The Salernitans grudging at that Election, and to be
always subject to the Beneventani, with secret practices attempted to wring
the Seigniory from the hand of Radelchi, and to give the same to Sichinolfo,
the brother of the late slain Sicardo, who was then in prison at Taranto; but
they perceiving so great an enterprise could not be well undertak^n without the
help of the Amalfitani, made league with them, and so by common advice sent a
Bark well armed, under show to buy certain earthen Vessels, which with great
secricy they sent to Taranto, where the Bark arived, and they landed those to
whom the charge of so great affairs were committed, so ordered the matter that
they came thither by night, and not knowing where to remain, were received by
the Jailer, under whose custody that miserable Sichinolfo continued, whom they
corrupted with money, and made so drunk with wine, became therewith so drowsy,
that easily they brake up the prison, and released Sichinolfo, wherewith they
merrily entered their Bark and came to Salerno, where the name of Sichinolfo
being advanced by his partakers and favorites, they drove away and killed the
Officers and adherents of Radelchi, Sichinolfo, Prince of Salerno, An. (...).
and proclaimed him Prince and Lord in the year 840. there joined with
Sichinolfo, Landolfo, Count of Capoa, and likewise in favor of him came Orso,
and Radolmondo, the one Lord of Cou^a; and the other of Agerenza. Radelchi
seeing so dangerous a conspiracy at hand, and fearing though he delayed no
time, they would notwithstanding gather greater force, with an incredible
courage caused his people to be assembled, and got together a goodly Army,
wherewith he came against Salerno, whom Sichinolfo deferred no time to
encounter; having all these people united together, Salernitani, Capoani,
Argentini, and Conzani, and coming with him to hard strokes, remained
conqueror, having put the Beneventani to slight, and many of them cut in
pieces, won their Quarters, and took from them many Ensigns. Whereupon with
plenty of spoil and glory, entered Salerno with great triumph; and having got so
great strength, which was not only sufficient to defend, but also to assail the
enemy in his own quarter, with a mighty Army came against Benevento. But the
Beneventani being not able to endure, that to the ill-fortune of the first
overthrow should be annexed new ignominy, became so desperate to be thus
disparaged, charged the back of Sichinolfo with the uttermost of their fury,
forcing them to retire, and turn their back, having put to the edg of the sword
not a few of those which were not speedy for their own safety. The Saracins of
Sicilia understanding these stirs, The Saracins of Sicilia enter Calauria.
unwilling to omit so good an occasion, incontinently entered Calauria, and
overcame Taranto, going against Puglia, a City of the same Province, put it to
sword and fire.

In the mean time Lodovico King of Italy being invited by Londone, Count of of
Capoa, son of Landolfo, to yield some redress to the afflicted state of the
Longobards, Lodovico King of Italy makes a division of the State.
having cut the Saracins in pieces, made division of the Principality between
Sichinolfo and Radelchi, who remaining Prince of Benevento, with the bounds of
that State, and Sichinolfo possessing the rest, with title of Prince of
Salerno, which was in the year 847. and so was made the division of the
Principality of Benevento between these Lords; and now began the title of the
Principality of Salerno. Anno 847.
The Arms of these Princes now laid aside* Sichinolfo no long time after
enjoyed the fruits of his great labors, being assailed with a grievous
sickness, departed this life, The death of Sichinolfo. Sicone.
having by Itta his wife left one only son, by the name of his grandsire called
Sicone; who being also a child, left him to the tuition of Pietro his Gossip.
Sichinolfo reigned little more then ten years with fame and the reputation of a
liberal and a valiant man, to whom Radelchi was not much inferior, who having
reigned twelve years lacking one month, died the year 8^0. leaving heir of his
estate his son Radelgario.

Lodovico King of Italy being gone, the Saracens that held the City of Bari,
began by little and little to spread over Puglia, and to prey and spoil the
Country, Lodovico, King of Italy recalled by the Longobards. Adamario 2 Prince.
Danserio 3 Prince. Guaiferio 4 Prince. Guaimaro 5 Prince. Gisulfo 6 Prince. The
body of St. Matthew the Apostle brought to Salerno. Landolf 7 Prince. Guaimaro
the 8 Prince. The Emperor Currado enters Italy.
the which thing proceeding happily, partly encouraged them to spread even to
the Tirrene Sea, forraging and miserably spoiling Calauria, and partly to run
through all the Principality of Benevento, whereupon the Longobards being unable
to resist so many evils, recalled Lodovico again into Italy, who delayed no
time to come, and having with many battles brought the Saracins to extreme
misery, conceiving indignation against Sicone, banished him from Salerno, and
constituted Prince thereof Ademario son of Pietro. To Ademario succeeded
Danferio, and to him Guaiferio, and next after Guaimaro, who died the year 950.
by whose death his son Gisulfo succeeded in the Principality, in whose time
things were in some quiet.

In the year 954 the body of St. Matthew the Evangelist was brought to Salerno,
which had been first in Ethiopia, where he suffered martyrdom; and after in
Britain, was found by revelation of the same Saint, the Authors of that age
write, that three years after were seen two Suns, and that in the Month of
July, two days together, all the Sea which is between Naples and Cuma, became
sweet. Gisulfo was a merciful and valorous Prince, and began in the honor of
the said Saint, a magnificent and stately Church, beautified with high and
mighty Pillars of Marble, and under the Alter bestowed the sacred body of the
said Saint, (where they say) is seen much Manna, which always issuing from his
reverend bones, are often the occasion of admirable effects. Gisulfo dead, the
Principality fell to Landolfo, who being possessed with zealous and holy
devotion, continued Monk, and in the year 998 resigned his State to Guaimaro,
the son of the other Guaimaro. In the year after 1038. the Emperor Corrado
entering Italy for the displeasure he conceived against the Archbishop of
Millan, and understanding the injuries and tortures which the Prince of Capoa
had do^e to the Monks of Casino, being very dishonest and wicked, the Emperor
came with his Army to the Mount Casino, and again understanding the
lamentations and complaints of the Fathers, incontinently went to Capoa. The
Prince fearing him, retired into the Fort of St. Agata* the which he one day
doubting his ill dealings, had caused to be very strongly fortified; whereupon
the Emperor being not able to lay hold of him* deprived him of the
Principality, and gave the same to Guaimaro, Prince of Salerno. Guaimaro being
now become a mighty Prince, through the uniting together of so many great
possessions, received Ambassadors from Mainace, Lieutenant of the Emperor of
Greece, desiring him to give him aid of his Normans, he being with a mighty
Army of Grecians, and many Calaurians, and Puglians, in expedition to expel
the Saracins out of Sicilia. To whom the Prince sent Guglielmo, Dragone, and
Vnfrido, the sons of Tancred with 300 other Normans, a small number, but
valiant people, with the which they recovered a great part of Sicilia.

Now the Prince Guaimaro growing proud with so great felicity ill entreated the
Salernitani, whereby becoming odious to all, they took one day occasion, that
as he went to recreate himself upon the shore of Salerno, to assault him, and
gave him 36 deadly wounds; and afterward in contempt of him, Guaimaro slain by
the Salernitans.
they dragged him a long time about the Walls of the Fortress and the City. But
Guido Lord of Surrento inviting the Normans to aid him, neglected not the
revenge of his brothers death, having recovered the City, and put Gisulfo his
son into his Fathers Seigniory, executed 40. for the death of the Prince.

But within a few years following, Gisulfo grew into controversy with Ruberto
Normando, Duke of Puglia his Cousin, Ruberto Normando Count* of Puglia, and
Prince of Salerne.

King Charles 1 made Prince of Salerne.


the Duke with a strong siege begirt Salerno, where finding the Prince
grievously sick, died not long after, and so came the Principality of Salerno
under the Normans, who after with the title of King, governed the whole
Kingdom, from whose dominion in the year 1195. it fell into the House of
Suevia, by the right of Queen Constance, the only heir thereof, from whence it
came to pass in the year 1265. that Charles of Angio having slain Manfred, and
overcome Currandine under the French, created his first begotten son, called
Charles the lame, Prince of Salerno, who succeeding in the Kingdom, was the
second of that name. Afterward the Kingdom came under the Durazze, which Queen
Ione the second having a desire to recompense in some measure the services
which Antonio Colonna had done for her, created him Prince of the said City,
which Seigniory retained certain years, until Alfonsus of Arragon the better
to settle his foot in the Kingdom, having with large promises drawn unto him
Raimondo Orsino, Count of Nola, a puisant Lord, to bind him the more unto him,
Ramondo Orsino Count of Nola.
made him Prince thereof, which dignity remained no long time in that house,
for that it fell into the Kings Exchequer by rebellion of Daniel Orsino, the
which Principality King Farnando in the year 1463. gave to Ruberto Sanseverino
Count of Marsico, his great Admiral. Ruberto Sanseverino, Prince of Salerno,
1463. Salerno a R^gal City.
Notwithstanding that Seigniory continued not long with them, for that Ferrant
the third, Prince, made rebellion against the Majesty of Caesar, whereby all his
estate was confiscate; and so from thenceforth the said City was made a part of
the Kings demesnes; now it remains peaceable under the protection of the most
potent Catholic, King Philip.

All this I thought good to declare, the better to satisfy the Reader, how
this famous City came under Princes, and last of all their Kings.

But now returning to speak of other things, which give no small ornament to
this City; one thing is the public and famous School, which for a long time
has always flourished in every faculty, and especially in Philosophy and
Physic, for which it was called the City Hippocratica; Francisco Petrarea
speaking thereof in his Commentary, thus writes, Fuisse hic Medicinae fontem
testator antiquitas, And although it be a most ancient famous Uniuersity;
nevertheless it is said, that in the year of Christ 802. Charles the great
instituted it, at which time two others were founded by him, the one in Paris,
and the other in Bologna. This City is very plentiful of all necessary things
for the sustenance of living creatures, and in it is the Kings Audit, and the
Treasury of the Province. The Citizens thereof are very ingenious and nice, The
University of Salerno founded by Charles the great, an 8^2.
and very much inclined to the exercise of weapons, and learning, and to all
virtuous endeavors, they are also very courteous and modest, and generally in
all appears a certain natural civility: the Nobility is divided from the
people in three Quarters or Courts, which they call Seggi, and are these,
Portanova, Portaretese, elo Campo, in the which Seggi are these Noble Families
following. The disposition of the Salernitans.
In Portanova are Aversani, Capograssi, Comiti, dello Iodice, Grillo Longo,
Mazza, Morra, Pagano, Pinto, Santo Mango, Salernitano, de Stafano del Barone d'
Accadia, Scattaretichi, Serluchi, and Vicarii. In Portaretese are these,
Aiello, Coppola, Capoano, Curiale, del Pezzo, Guarna, Pagliari, Pantoliano,
Prignano, Manganaro, Porta, Rascichi, Rugiero, and Vivaldo. In the Segge of
Campo, Castellomati, Cavaselice, David del Regente, del Pezzo, Granito,
Guardato, Grillo, Ruggio, Sciabichi, Solimeni, and Trentacapilli. There are
also many other ancient and Noble Families, the which for that they are not
comprehended in any of the said Seggs, I think it not amiss at this time to
make no mention of them.

The (...) of Salerno
And therefore you are to understand, that although of the Family of Pezzo there
is mention made in two of these Seggs, yet for all that are they not two
different Families, but one and the same, being a thing very manifest, that
their original came from Collen, a famous City of Germany, where at this
present is a branch of the ancient stock, and descended from John del Pezzo, a
valiant and famous Captain, which wandering along time, served in the Wars both
here and there, whereupon by means of the Wars which were in Italy, came
hither, following the faction of the Arragonese, and as he was very expert in
military discipline, showing much maturity of wit, and invincible courage of an
excellent mind, and incomparable wisdom to resolve the difficulty of the
affairs of War. He was in great estimation with Alfonsus the first King of
Arragon, from whom he obtained many bountiful and rich gifts. Of the valor
and magnanimity of the said John, a certain large privilege makes sufficient
mention, which I have seen, made by the same King, under the date of
Castiglione of Peschiera, in the year 1448. and 23 of January, in the which
privilege was decreed that one Pietro de Biscolis should not presume to bear
for his Arms, a Lion se^ant or. with the tail through his legs, and turning up
toward the head above a fesse ar. in a field gu. declaring that these Arms
were the ancient Ensigns and Coat Armor of the said Family. Besides, the said
Family prospers in many other Corporations, in diverse places, as Pietro de
Pezzo descending of John, went to Amalfi to the Government of that State, was
comprehended in the number of the Nobility of that City, and Luke his brother
serving the Duke of Amalfi, Marquess of Guasto, in the Wars of Lombardy, being
a Captain of much renown, in his return, passing by Rome, was by the Decree of
the Senate made with his successors of the race and line of the Roman Senators,
the which line is now to be seen, in the Segge of the Nobility of Campo, in
Salerno. And Francesco del Pezzo the son of Pirro, being by the favor of King
Philip created Auditor of the same Province, was reckoned among the Nobility of
the Segge of Portaretese. This Family has always had excellent men, both in
Learning and Military affairs. And among others, Don Ieronimo del Pezzo, a
noble man, well qualified, which for his excellent parts was by the favor of
King Philip, honored with the Order of the Knights of St. James. And among the
rest John Andrea, Knight of St. John of Malta, which valiantly fighting in the
enterprise of Zara died there; and now lives with much honor, Silvio, Knight
of the same Malta, and of sincere life and singular learning besides the Lord
Cesare del Pezzo Bishop of Sulmo. What they were in old time their royal issue
sufficiently declares; the men of this Family have been Lords of many Castles
and great revenues. But in these days they possess the Barony of St. Mango in
Cilento, and the Barony of Prato* St. Pro in the County of Aquila^ the one is
Baron Tiberio del Pezzo descending of Luke, a Lord of most pleasing behavior,
and a great lover of virtue (which is one of the rarest Noble men of these
days) the other possesses Hortenzio del Pezzo Doctor of Law, and descended
from Pirro before said.

Now returning to Salerno, in whose reverend Churches the bodies of many Saints
are in rest, whereof Marc. Antonio Marsilio Colonna, Archbishop of the same
City, very largely discourses. Marc. Antonio Marsilio Colonna, Archbishop of
Salerno. Famous men in Physic. Matteo Silvatio Trotula. Abella. Mercurial.
Rebecca Guarna. Boccuccio Grillo. John de Proeida* Author of the Sicilian
Evening. Paolo Grisignano Francesco de Alfano. Antonello di Rugiero. Pietro
Bailardo.
Many ingenious and learned persons have given great ornament to the said City,
as in Physic Matteo Silvatio, who at the instance of King Rubert writ
Aphorisms, of Physic: Trota, or Trotula de Ruggiero, a woman of great
learning, which composed a book De morbis mulierum, and eorum cura, and another
de compositione medicamentorum. Abella which very learnedly writ two books in
Verses, the one de Atrabile, the other de natura seminis humani. Mercurial
composed four books, the first de Crisi, the second de febre pestilentiale, the
third de cura ulcerum exteriorum, and the last de unguentis. Rebecca Guarna
writ de febribus de urinis, and de Embrione. Boccuccio Grillo writ de
differentiis pulsuum, and de febrium causis. John of Proeida, although he were
Lord of the Isle of Procida, notwithstanding he was an excellent Phisician, and
composed a learned Work of Physic, and was the Author of the Sicilian Evening
against the French. In the same profession there have been in these latter
days very excellent men, as Paolo, Grisignano, Francesco d' Alfano, Antonello,
and John Cola di Rugiero. In the faculty of the Law were very famous Pietro
Bailardo, of whom the Gloss makes mention in L. quinquepidum, C. finium
regendorum. John Cola de Vicario, an expert* Doctor, which is much commended by
John Vincenza, in the deciding and defining of freedoms and privileges, Charles
de Ruggiero for his learning was a Counceller of great estimation, of whom
Afflitto testifies in his definitions. Tomaso de Simeone, whose Works not long
since were committed to the Press by Sebastian Maffa. John Angelo Papia, a most
worthy and famous Doctor now lives, and has read 26 years continually in the
public Schools of Bologna. Pirro Alfano, a man of excellent fame, whose
writings are a sufficient testimony. No less famous have been Iulio Pomponio
Lieto, Masuccio Guardato, John Andrea Longo, and Andrea Guarna, John Cola di
Vicario. Carlo di Ruggiero. John Angelo Papia. Pirro Alfano. Pomponio Lieto
Andrea Guarna Benedetto Ruggio.
which composed that excellent and learned discourse, entitled, Bellum
Grammaticale* Benedetto Ruggio being a very famous Rhetorician, was sent by
King Alfonsus, Ambassador to the State of Venice, where he died, whose funeral
Marc. Antonio Sabellico performed in the behalf of the said State, extolling
his singular virtues. Moreover this City has no little fame for the two mighty
Fairs, which are there every year, the one the third of May, and the other the
21 of September, the first continues eight days, and the other ten, where
Merchants come almost from all parts of Italy, Sicilia, Schianonia, Graecia,
and Asia, and other Nations to sell their Wares. This City contended with Capoa
for the precedence, and in the general Assembly of the States in the public
Parliament at Naples, which could not be finished for the obstinacy and
wilfulness of the Factions, The Fairs of Salerno.
the claim and contention, the Catholic King Ferdinando, moderated so the
matter* that he appointed Capoa to speak, saying, that it should speak before
Salerno. The Arms of this City is in a field Azur under the Evangelist S.
Matthew the protector thereof, fix bars Ar. and gu. the which Ensigns are the
Arms of Hungaria, Which Charles the second of Angio King of Naples gave to the
said City, because his wife Mary the only daughter of King Stephen, succeeded
in the aforesaid Kingdom of Hungary, the said King Charles being before (as has
been declared) created Prince of Salerno.

Leaving Salerno and Sanseverino, twelves miles off, upon the side of a Hill is
Sarno, the Town lies beneath in the Plain, and the Castle is seated higher
upon the Hill, which overlooketh both the Town and the Country. Sarno.
From hence walking toward Naples, about a mile and half, we encounter the
head of the River Sarno, over the which is an entrance or passage guarded with
a Tower, naturally fortified by the River and the Hill; The River Sarno.
the which place by the Inhabitants of the country is named the mouth of Sarno:
The said country is adorned with the dignity of a Count, subject to the Family
Tuttavilla. There are in it these Noble houses, Abbignente, Alteda, Balzerani,
Lupo, Pandone, Mont^oro, Romandia, de Specchio, and others. Six miles after we
come to Montoro, and not far off is the worthy Country of Montecorvino,
Montoro. Montecorvino.
built in a beautiful valley at the foot of a Hill, near the which, in a place
which they now call Pattipaglia, are seen the ruins of the stately and ancient
City of Picentia, called by Strabo, Picentum, which was destroyed by the
Romans, because it was confederate with Hannibal the Carthaginian. Picentia, a
famous City, why it was destroyed by the Romans. Acerno. The City Campagna.
Eight miles off, near Acerno is seen among the Hills, Campana, a City so called
because it is situated in the borders of the Province of happy Campania, and
the said City is environed by two little Rivers, the one called Atro, and the
other Tempsa, the which are full of fish; and the Territory thereof is part
plain, and part hilly, where are thick Woods of Oak, and therefore very good
hunting both for Fowls and Beasts, the plain thereof is almost all full of
Olive Trees, and Vines, and in the desert Hills are often taken goodly airs of
strange Falcons. Of this City was the holy man St. Antonio a Monk of the Order
of St. Benedict, St. Antony the Abbat, an. 625.
who in the year 625, being created by his Monks, Abbot in the Monastery of the
City Sorrento, went thither, where living godly, there died afterward,
whereupon in token of his good life, God showed after his death many miracles,
and in particulars toward those which are visited with evil spirits, whose
holy body the Sorentini with great reverence keep within their City, neither
stick they to say that he was their Citizen. There are in the said City, these
noble Families, Bernalla, Campanino, Ciminello, Greco, Guerrieri, de Nigris,
Viviano, Tercasia, and others. Now lives with much honor to this City*
Augustino, and Detio Bernalli, both Doctors of the Law, and very learned, and
great lovers of virtue. The said City was in the time of the ancient Kings
endued with the dignity of a Count; but in the year 1530. the Emperor Charles
the fifth advanced it to the Title of a Marquess, in the person of Honorato
Grimaldo Genoway, Lord of Monaco, under the enstalement (to speak like a
Lawyer) to hold it as a feuditory liegman, and not with the succession of
inheritance, whereby he that is Lord of the Castle of Monaco, and shall defend
it at the pleasure of the King of Naples, does succeed to the said Marquiship.
Conturso.
Eight miles distant is the Country of Conturso, the which is compassed with
the Rivers Sele and Negro, it has a most pure Climat, and a plentiful
Territory; of the said Country was that excellent and learned man Antonio Pepi,
called by his surname Peperone, which was judge of the great Court of the
Vicaria in Naples, and writ a book de omni vero officio. John Cola Pepi was
very inward with the King Farnando, which for his great skill and experience in
the Laws, was by the said King made his Counceller, and to James his brother he
gave the Bishopric of Capaccio. No less learned in these days is Sertorio
Pepi, a man singularly qualified and very faithful. This Noble Family has for
a long time ruled the said Country, with other Castles.

Going then four miles is Quaglietta, a little Castle; and no more then 12
miles distant, Quaglietta. Evoli.
but from Salerno 18. we come to the fair and ancient Country of Evolo, by
Ptolomy called Ebulum, which was builded by the people Eborini, so naming it by
the first son of Jupiter King of Athens, the said City stands not far from the
River Sele, and the River Tusciano, the current or stream passes along by the
Walls thereof, named by the Country people, Toliero, which Virgil calls
Tanagro, Virgil in the 3 of his Georg.
when he says, Sicci ripa Tanagri. The River Sele called by Strabo, Siler,
rises in the Apennine, where the River Aufido has his beginning, which
runs by Apulia, and falls into the Ionian Sea, near Barletta three miles;
but Sele runs toward the South, and leaving Campania by Basilicata, in the
end falls into the Tirrene Sea. The said River (according to Strabo, Pliny,
and Sillio Italico) has the property to change into a stone whatsoever is put
therein keeping the color, and the first form thereof. It is reported by grave
and credible Authors, that in the time of Ione of Angio, the first of that
name, Queen of Naples, took the Scepter of the Kingdom, A woman changed to a
man. Anno 1460.
a woman of Ev^li, having brought forth a son, became her self a man. It is
also verified that in the year 1460* in the same City, a woman called Emilia,
married to one Antonio Sponsa, after she had lived 12 years with her said
husband, was changed to a man, and Pontano which knew her, testifies that
afterward she exercised the office of a man, and besides took a wife, and that
allowing her a dowry, by commandment of King Ferdinando, the Judge enforcing
the said Antonio to yield it her. The same John Pontano, John Pontano, Li. 10.
(...)
a man rather divine then mortal, witnesses in his tenth book of Celestial
things, which Antonio Panormita recites, that a woman of Gaera, after 14 years
she had been used by her husband, her natural member suddenly altered, and she
became a man, wherefore to avoid the scorns that were made thereof both by men
and women, became a Friar, and so lived all the remainder of her life, where
the said Pontano affirms to have known her, and that she was buried in Rome
in the Temple of Minerva: Therefore that seems not so wonderful which Pliny
writes in the fourth Chapter of the seventh Book of his natural History, which
things, Pliny, lib. (...) a woman may turn to be a man.
with all that appertain, seem rather impossible then miraculous; nevertheless
for my self I cannot deny the authority of such persons, and especially that
which Philosophy cannot only not deny, but also approve, for that according to
Philosophers and Phisicians, the man differs not, nor is known from the woman
by any member, but by being either too hot or too cold, because the nature of
man without all doubt is more hot then that of women, and by the power of this
heat it so falls out, that nature drives out that member in men, which in
women by reason of their coldness, remains inward, whereupon it may be, that
after some certain time, or by some meat, or the air, or by some other occasion
that coldness may be so inflamed and heated, that it may now do that, which in
the birth it could not.

But returning to Evoli, the said City has very fertile Territories, and
spacious fields, abounding with all good things beneficial for the use of
living creatures, whereof the said City glorying, bears for Arms, the four
Elements. The bones of St. Berniero lie with great reverence in it, in a
glorious Church, dedicated to St. Peter the Apostle, at whose Sepulcher (as
they say) God shows wonderful miracles toward those which are possessed with
evil spirits. The body of St. Bernier^. The body of St. Vito.
From the said Country eight miles, near to the River Silare is the reverend
Church of St. Vito, where rests his said holy body, together with Modesto and
Crescentia the Nurse; whereupon all those which are bitten with mad-dogs repair
hither, and by the intercessions of the said St. Vito (as they say) are
presently healed.

There are in the said Country these noble Families, Caravita, Clario,
Corcione, Christophero, Crispo, Fulgione, Fiorenza, Gentilcore, Granato,
Giuliano, The noble Families of Ev^ly.
Ligoro de Loisio, Malacarne; Marcancione, Mirto, Monaco, Millone de Novellis,
Orso, Della Porta, Perretta, Ragoni, Raghi, Russo, Saceo, Troiano, and others.

Going from Evoli no more then twelve miles, is Aquaro, a good Country, The
Country Aquario. Matthia Iuono.
so called for the abundance of water which invironeth it round about. That R.
Padre Matthia Iuono, surnamed Aquario, of the Order of Preachers, has given
great honor to this Country, of the learning of this man, many Works written
by him are sufficient testimony, that is to say, certain learned discourses
upon all the principles of Logic, natural Philosophy, Metaphisick, and the
Soul, upon the four Books of Sentences, and another book in particular of the
exquisite learning of the controversies between St. Thomas and all the other
Doctors and Philosophers, with a brief discourse de memoria artificiali, The
Country of Olivito.

The Country of Agropoli.

The air of Agropoli, and the effect thereof.

The Castle of Abbate.

The Cape of Licosa.

The Castle of Bruca.

The River Elect.

The Isles of Enotrie, Isacia and Pontia.

The Country of (...).


and de significationibus terminorum juxta doctrinam Sancti Thomae. The said
learned man died in the year 1591. Walking a little forward is the Country of
Olivito, the natural Country of Camillo Borrello, an excellent Lawyer. Olivito
was so named because the Territory thereof is full of Olives.

But leaving these Mediterranean places, and walking the ruinous way by the
shore, we come to Agropolo, where is reported, that through the delicacy of the
air, women at twelve years of age are capable of husbands, like to the
Cipriots, which at that time lose their virginity. After we come to the Castle
of Abbate, is the Cape of Licosa, first called the Promontory of Possidoniate;
hard by is the Castle of Bruca a relic of old Velia, with the River Elect,
which takes the name from the City of Elea, and hither the Romans sent to
celebrate their accustomed sacrifice to Ceres their Goddess. Before the Country
of Elia are the two little Isles of Enotrie, which have two little artificial
Havens, the one called Isacia, and the other Pontia. Afterward appears upon a
high hill* Cammerota, in a small circuit of ground, builded (as some affirm) by
the relics of the ancient City of Molpa, The City Molpa destroyed. The Haven
of Saprico, now called the gulf of Pulicastro.
which stands but a little distant. Going afterward some few miles is a
goodly Fortress* Near Policastro, with the Gulf which the Ancients call the
Haven Saprico, is the City of Sapri, now named Bonati. Within the Land is
Capaccio, Novi, and the Valley of Diano, a little from whence upon a hill is a
Country called Atane, on the other side is Polla, Tito, and Sala, so called
because the hills are full of Sage, whereupon because in this Valley rises a
great Spring of water which the City of Diano takes the name from, Atane of
Atteone, Tito of Titan, which is the Sun, Apolla of Apollo, it seems from the
resemblance and near affinity of these names, and from the pleasantness of the
Country the Fable might here have had its beginning of Atteone, the son of
Aristeo, with Diana. After follows the Fenn with the rich Monastery of St.
Laurence, possessed by the Carthusian Monks, Saponara. Marsico. The disposition
of the people of this Province.
and not far distant is Laurino, Saponara, and Marsico, with many other places.

But to conclude, touching this Province it remains that I now declare the
disposition and nature of these people, which are of a strong constitution, and
naturally merry, ready in arms, desirous of learning, wary in their affairs,
and given both to pleasure and profit, they are also painful and industrious,
and inclined to Traffic; the Gentlemen are comely and neatly attired, nothing
differing from the manner of the Neopolitans; but the common people respect not
so much civility, for as much as they cloth themselves with cloth made of
course wool, and base attires on the head. All the men in general are very
jealous, both of their honor and their wives, whereupon proceeds the old
Proverb, Picentinorum Zelotypia. In bargaining and contracting their affairs,
it behooves a stranger to be very wary, A Proverb.
for what with deceitful and flattering speeches and many oaths, The Arms of
this Province.
they easily deceive those that buy any thing of them. The Arms of this Country
is per fesse ar. and Sa* unto a Sea-compass, four wings extended and fixed in
Salter, with the North-star in chief sinister or. The which said arms declare
unto us that in this Province was found (as has been said) the Mariners
Compass, with the virtue of the Adamant stone and the Sea-card, by Flavio di
Gioia, whereupon the two fields, the one signifies the day, the other the
night; the four wings which are joined to the Sea-Compass, declare the four
Cardinal Winds, and chiefest in the world, that is to say, the East, the West,
the North, and the South; the shining Star signifies the North Star, wherewith
through that excellent invention, Pilots and Mariners might sail both day and
night with any wind.

The PRINCIPALITY On the other side the third Province in the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
THe people of the Principality on the other side, are part of the ancient
Irpini, and derive this name from Lupo, which conducted them into this Province
to inhabit, Strabo in his 5 book.
for so much as the Sabines call Lupo, Irpo, the which Strabo declares in the
end of his first Book, saying, Ordine de hinc sunt Hirpini, and ipsi Samniticae
gentis. Qui quidem ex Lupo nomen adepti fuerunt, The ancient limits of this
Principality.
qui eis in deducenda Colonia Dux oblatus est Samnites enim Lupum vocant
Hirpum. The limits of these people were on the East Lucania, at this present
called Basilicata, on the South a part of the said Basilicata, with the
Picentini, The Vale of Beneventana, the principal part of Sannio.
and the happy Campania, on the West the Sabines and the Vestini, on the North
the Apennine Hills, and the Plain Apuglia, now called Capitanato, with the
Saracins and the Peligni. There is also contained in this Province a Country,
now called the dale of Beneventana, the principal part of all Sannio, The
length of the Valley of Beneventana.
where have been done greater exploits, and more in number then in any other
part of Italy. This Country has higher hills then the Apennine, from whence
proceed in certain places little brooks, and from almost immeasurable Cliffs
and Rocks, The Rivers Sabato and Vulturno.
which is the cause of many Rivers, Streams, Lakes and Springs, it stretches
in length (going along by the Apennine) 80 miles from the head of Vulturno, to
the beginning of the River Silare in Basilicata, Matese, a Promontory of the
Apennine.
and of so many Rivers which water this Valley (except some few) all first fall
into the River Sabato, and afterward into Vulturno, so that from the lower
part, Sabato seems a snag, or a branch of a Tree, among all the other boughs
thereof. In Matese, which is a Promontory of the Apennine, did inhabit the most
valiant people of all Sannio. Of these people which remained upon these hills,
The City Benevento, by whom it was built.
Livy says that they were alwailes faithful to the Sannites, neither could
the Roman Army go much before them. The principal City of this Region is
Benevento, edified (as Servio affirms) by Diomedes the Greek* and Livy says
that it was first called Malvento, and that it was made a Colony of the Romans
at the same time with Arimino, under the Consulship of P. Sempronio, and Ap.
Claudio. The said City was maintained many years in great peace under the
Government of the Romans, until the coming of Tottila, King of the Goths into
Italy, who destroyed it with great slaughter, and so remaining ruinated for
certain years, was afterward repaired and possessed by the Longobards more then
two hundred years, Benevento possessed by the Longobards more then 200 years.
at which time they became Lords of Italy, and established their siege or ^ea^
in the said City, and named it the Dukedom of Benevento* the which Dukedom
contained all happy Campania, which we now call the Country of Lavoro, except
Pozzuolo and Naples, the greater part of the Sannity, of Benevento, Isernia*
and Guasto, even to the River Pescara, which of the Ancients was called Aterno;
and all that which was contained under the name of Feligni, of Marsi, and of
Marrucini, now commonly called Abruzzi. The Dukedom of Benevento, how much it
contained.


The first Duke of Benevento which began to reign in the year 573: was Zotone,
which reigned twenty years, to whom succeeded in the Dukedom, Arechi, sent
thither by Agisulfo, King of the Longobards, who ruling 50 years, died, left
his successor Aione his son, which died in the year 645. Aione dead, Rodoaldo
five years quietly possessed the Dukedom, The names of all the Dukes of Benevento.
who died in the year 649. and left Grimoaldo his brother to succeed him, a
worthy Warrier, who became King of the Longobards, the year 666. whereupon
Romoaldo his natural son remained Duke of Benevento, which reigned 16 years,
and died in the year 681. whom Grimoaldo the second, Arechi the second of this
name, Duke of Benevento* Who first undertook the dignity of a Prince in Italy.
his son, succeeded, which reigning three years, and died the year 694. and
left the Seigniory to Gisulfo his brother, who having reigned, as Erechemperto
says, 24 years, died the year 707. and left Romoaldo the second, his son,
successor and heir of the Dukedom, which held that Seigniory 26 years, and died
in the year 733. By the death of Romoaldo, Gisulfo the second, his son
succeeded in the State, and died in the year 750. After Gisulfo, Luitprando
took that Dukedom, which reigned 5 years, died the year 755. and Arechi the
second succeeded him, which was a valiant and a worthy Prince, and as we have
elsewhere said, was the first of all the Dukes of Benevento, which caused
himself to be entitled Prince, and perhaps Lord of all others, which until
that age had but the particular title of Lordship. He would also wear a Crown
upon his head, and caused himself to be anointed by Bishops, and in the end of
his privileges and Letters Papents, and other writings, caused this to be
added, Scriptum in nostro sacratissimo Palatio; the which dignity, in what
manner he obtained it, is not known* except it were granted by King Desiderio,
whose son in-law he was. Great were the Wars of this King which he made with
the Romans, Pope Adrian.
and the Bishops that lived in those days in Rome; so that Adrian which at
that time ruled the Apostolic Sea* was enforced for his refuge to sly to King
Charles for aid of the French, Charles the great.
in such manner that Stephen the second his predecessor, through the to^l and
travel which King Astolfo urged him unto, was constrained to submit himself
unto the power of King Pepin the second, father of the said Charles, who for his
great enterprises was afterward surnamed the great.

Then came King Charles in the aid of Adrian, and overcame King Desiderio, and
took him prisoner in the year 774. in the month of May, The end of the Kingdom
of the Longobards in Italy.
and absolutely took the Kingdom of Italy from the hands of the Longobards, the
which for the space of 2^6 years possessed the same; but he thought himself no
absolute Conqueror unless he subdued the Prince Arechi, especialy for that by
the right of his wife he pretended a title to the Kingdom of Italy, he made War
against him. But the Prince knowing his power unable to resist the puissance of
so mighty a King, which was now come to beleaguer the City of Benevento, was
constrained to accept such Conditions as were offered unto him, acknowledging
himself from thence forward to be under the Crown of France.

Many notable things are written by the Longobards of this Arechi; Charles the
great was disguised as an Ambassador to see the Prince Arechi.
for because that when Charles sent unto him Ambassadors from Salerno to perform
the Covenants agreed between them, disguised himself through the fame of his
great renown into the habit of a Royal Ambassador, to see himself the Prince
Arechi, and having seen the Magnificence and splendour of his Court, the number
of Knights that attended him, his great abundance of Plate, his Stables full of
excellent Horse, and the majesty with the which he gave audience, and the
wisdom wherewith he answered, returned to his people with great admiration,
often times saying, that the Prince Arechi and his Court was far more excellent
then the fame thereof. He bestowed much labor and great cost to repair, and
newly to fortify Salerno, that he might have one secure Fortress upon the
Tirrene Sea. The City of Salerno fortified by Arechi* Arechi died the year 78^*
There repaired unto his Court, Paolo Diacono when he fled to St. Mary of
Trimiti, whether he was confined by Charles the great, and was by him and his
wife well entertained. Finally, Arechi being of the age of 53 years, died the
26 of August, in the year of our Lord 787. having reigned Prince 29 years and 5
months. Arechi dead, Grimoaldo the third, his son, succeeded in the State,
which with King Charles and Pepin, made great Wars, and died the year 807.
having reigned 19 years and 6 months.

By the death of Grimoaldo, was created Grimoaldo the fourth, son of Delrico
which was Treasuror of Prince Grimoaldo; but making himself odious to some, was
slain in the year of our Lord 820. having reigned 12 years lacking 5 months.
Great contention suddenly arose among the Beneventani about the Principality:
but in the end Sicone, a noble Lord, was created, which died in the year 832.
and reigned 12 years and 6 months. Sicone dead, his son Sicardo succeeded in
the State, which made great wars with the Saracins that molested the Kingdom:
But perceiving afterward they had set foot in Sicilia, and therefore doubting
left in time they would overrun all the Islands of that Sea, sent through all
those places to search out the bodies of Saints, which were there found, and
caused them to be brought to Benevento with great reverence. Among which the
most excellent and worthiest work he did, was, that he caused the body of St.
Bartholmew the Apostle, to be brought from Lipare. The Saracins in Sicilia. S^.
Bartholmew the Apostle.
Sicardo was slain the year 839. having reigned 7 years wanting 2 months. After
the death of Sicardo, Radelchi his Treasuror got the Principality of Benevento,
which reigned 12 years, and died the year 850. in whose Principality succeeded
Radelgano his son, which died the year 853. and left his successor Radelchi his
brother, though by some Writers he is called Adelgisio, which fled into Corsica
the year (as Regione says) 873. Monte Casino destroyed by the Saracins in the
year 884.
Afterward Gauderi the son of Radelgario got the Principality of Benevento, who
held it but two years and half, and to him succeeded the year 876. Radelchi his
Cousin, son of the Prince Radelchi, and held the Principality 3 years lacking 9
months. The Principality of Benevento came into the possession of Aione, Leone
Emperor of Cons^antinople.
the year 879. under whose Regiment, and the ensuing Lords, the Saracins being
almost the space of 40 years settled in a place called Garigliano, committed
infinite evils through the Country of Lavoro. Among other mischiefs which were
done in the year 884. they burnt the Monastery of Monte Casino. Not long after
departed Basilio, The Dukedom of Benevento possessed by the Emperor of Greece.
Castaldo was a certain dignity which the Empero^s of Greece were accustomed to
bestow on their favorites; which some say signifies a Lieutenant* o^ President.
Emperor of Constantinople, the year 886. to whom succeeded Leone his first
begotten son, in which time the Prince Aione taking occasion by the death of
the Emperor, the greatest part of his State revolted; whereupon Leone having
endured this injury certain years, at length in the year 891 he sent against
him a strong Army, under the command of Simbatizio Patrizio, who being three
months encamped about Benevento, happily subdued it 318 years after it had been
possessed by the Lombards, beginning from Zotone the first, Duke of Benevento
until to this time. Simbatizio Patrizio having possessed the Dukedom of
Benevento, used the Authority of a Prince; after whom came Giorgio Patrizio, by
whom the said State was Governed 3 years and 9 months. Coming afterward in the
year 895 Guido, Marquess of Toscana drove away the Greeks, and held the
Seigniory about 2 years, to whom presently followed Radelebi, the which held it
two others, until it was possessed by At^nolfo Castaldo of Capoa, in whose house
the Principality of Capoa was joined with that of Benevento, who maintained it
a long time in great prosperity. Atenolfo being now made Castaldo of Capoa, was
afterward in the year 899. entitled Prince of Capoa and Benevento, in the
which house for the space of 163 years that Seigniory remained. Atenolfo died
the year 914. and Atenolfo and Landolfo his sons succeeded him in the
Principality. Atenolfo died about the year 946. and the Principality only
remained to Landolfo, which by that most valiant Prince Luitprando, received
many overthrows, and died the year 951. and left that Principality to his son
Pandolfo, which was surnamed Iron-head. The Prince Pandolfo departed this life
the year 966. and left eight sons, Anno 996.

The Emperor Otho the 3 goes about to take away from Benevento the body of St.
Bartholmew the Apostle.


whereof Landolfo his first begotten had the Principality, and died the year
982. and Landenolfo took the Government of the State, which was slain the year
991. The Prince Landenolfo dead, his brother Laidolfo succeeded in the
Seigniory, which continued not long in the Principality, in whose place was in
the year 996. created Prince Pandolfo of St. Agata his son, in which year the
Emperor Otho the third was Crowned in Rome, under whose Principality Historians
recite, that the Emperor going about to take away from Benevento the body of
St. Bartholmew, the Apostle, there was given him instead thereof the body of
St. Paolino, Bishop of Nola; of which deceit being informed, made War with the
Beneventani, but growing grievously sick, raised his siege, and as he much
desired, returned into Germany, little regarding the heat of Summer; being come
into his natural Country, departed this life the year of our Lord 1001. and so
the Beneventany were delivered of so grievous a War.

Henry the 2 Emperor, by many named the first*
Henry the second succeeded in the Empire by the election of the Princes of
Germany, who in the year 1022. levying a mighty Army came into Italy to the
prejudice of the Greeks, and understanding the ill demeanor and most wicked
proceeding of the Prince Pandolfo, took the Prince prisoner, and carried him
along with him into Germany, and the Principality of Capoa he bestowed upon
Pandolfo Count of Tiano. Henry the Emperor having builded in Bamberg, a City of
Germany, Benedict the 7 by some called the 8.
a noble Church in the honor of St. George, and desiring that the same might
be consecrated as a Cathedral Church, Benedict the 7 consenting thereto
obtained with condition, that the said Church should give by way of tribute
yearly to the Bishop of Rome, a mark of silver with a white horse well
furnished; but within a while the Bishop receiving in gift from the Emperor
Benevento, How Benevento came under the dominion of the Church. Ruberto
Guiscard created Duke of Puglia and Calauria.
the tribute from the Church of Bamberg was discharged, by this means then
Benevento came under the dominion of the Church, which we have declared in our
History of the lives of the Kings of Naples, and after we have declared how
Ruberto Guiscard having possessed Benevento, being desirous to expel the
Saracins out of Italy, came to the Parliament in the City of Aquila in the year
1060* with Pope Nicolas the second, which was much labored by the Roman
Barons, and Guiscard having with great humility adored the Pope made peace with
him, and he restored the City of Benevento, and all other places which he held
belonging to the Church, whereupon the Pope did not only receive him into grace
and favor, but created him Duke of Puglia and Caulauria, and so Ruberto was
now made a vassal of the Church. Ruggiero the Norman, King of Naples, possessed
Benevento.
Benevento being afterward possessed by Ruggiero the Norman, King of Naples,
William his son who succeeded in the Kingdom, restored it to Pope Adrian the
fourth, as a thing properly belonging to the Church, whereupon he was by him
confirmed in the Kingdom, the Emperor Frederick the second, and King of Naples,
having been excommunicated by Gregory the ninth, disdaining the same, ruinated
and made spoil of the said City, and threw the Walls even to the ground; being
afterward repaired by the Citizens thereof, was by Charles of Angio, the first
of this name, sacked, because they were known to be favorable to King Manfred;
and although this City sustained so many spoils, yet the Citizens thereof
always repaired it. St. Gianuario Martyr, was Bishop of Benevento, whose body
lies with great reverence in the principal Church of Naples, Bishops of Rome.

Orbilio Grammatico*

Rofredo, and Odo^redo, famous Lawyers.


where (as they say) are seen many miracles of his holy blood. There was born
in Benevento, Felix the fourth, called the third; Victor the third, and Gregory
the eight, Bishops of the holy Church of Rome, which were of exemplary life,
and endued with learning. Orbillio Grammatico was very famous in the time of
Cicero, which for his austerity and severe speech, was by Horace called the
wonder. Rofredo and Odofredo, Lawyers of great fame were thereof, Angelo Catone
Marino Bilotta. Mercurio of Vipera.
from whence afterward descended the house of the Odofredi in Bologna, Alberto
Morra Cardinal, and Dionisio which was also a Cardinal, Angelo Catone, a
learned Philosopher was Count and Archbishop of Vienna. Marino Bilotta was
President of the Chamber under King Ferrant the first. Mercurio of Vipera was
dearly beloved of the Roman Bishops, and employed in diverse affairs, and
afterward made Auditor of Rota* Pietro of the worthy Family Candida, was
Councellor of State, and Captain of the principal Fortress of the Kingdom under
King Ferrant the first. Bartholmew Camerario, a famous Lawyer, Pietro Candido*
Bartholmew Camerario.
having been from the beginning in most honorable employments in the service
of the Emperor Charles the fifth, was made Lieutenant of the Kings Chamber, with
Title of Keeper of the Patrimony. He was in great account with Pope Paul the
fourth, by whom he was created in Rome Purveyor of the Store, and General of
the Army; he was afterward entertained by King Francis in France, and made his
Councellor. Leonardo Grifo.
Leonardo Grifo most expert in the affairs of the Church of Rome, whereupon he
was created Archbishop of this Country. Thomaso Controviero, a man of Princely
behavior, was in great account with Paul the sixth, by whom he was created
Bishop of the City of Penna, Gabriel de Blasio. John Camillo. Bilotta. S^ipio
(...).
and Vice-Legat of Bologna, and had been advanced to greater honor if the
death of the Pope had not hindered it. Gabriel de Blasio, being a man of great
virtue, was made Judge of the Vicaria, and of the Kings Council. Two men of the
Family Bilotta have carried great honor in their Country, which flourished in
the time of our forefathers, the one called John Camillo, the other S^ipio, of
whom the first being a man much learned in many Sciences, was by the King
employed in diverse honorable affairs, and was created the first
Exchequer-Advocate of the Vicaria, and afterward of the Sommaria. And the
second was a most virtuous and a good man, and was general Commissary of the
Kingdom against Malefactors, which through his good Government brought them
into peace and tranquillity, and in reward had the Office of Exchequer-Advocate
of the Vicaria, which his brother held, and had enjoyed, if untimely death had
not prevented it. Hec^ore Savariano. Andrea Candido.

The noble Families of Benevento.


This famous City has also brought forth many excellent men in Arms, of whom
omitting to speak, I refer the Reader to the Histories which largely discourse
thereof, among whom two have been very famous in the time of our forefathers,
as Hectore Savariano a valiant Soldier of his age, of whom Giovio in the life
of Leo the tenth makes honorable mention. And Andrea Candido, Prior of
Barletta, Knight of the Rodes.

There are in the said City these Noble Families, Aquino, Avolos, Bilotti,
Bottini, Candidi, Capassi, Calendi, Capobianchi, Caraccioli del Leone,
Contestabili, Controvieri, Del' Aquila, Di Blasio, Di Enea, Del Sindico, della
Vipera, Egittii, Filingieri, Grisi, Laurentii, Leoni, Mascambroni, Mazzei,
Mazzilli, Monforti, Morri, Pesci, Sallaroli, Savariani, Tu^i, Vico,
Vintimiglia, Vitro, the Archbishop of this City has 24 Bishops his
Suffraganes, which number no other place of Christendom has equalled. This
City is situate in a plain place, near a Plain full of little brooks of water,
with many hills round about very plentiful, and distant from Naples 30 miles.
Writers affirm that in the division that was made of the Roman Empire between
Charles the great, and F.L. Nicesero the Greek, Charles the great, and F.L.
Nicesero divided the Empire the year of our Lord 800.

The quality of the Province*


the Dukedom of Benevento, and the City of Venice were appointed as the limits
and confines between the one and the other*

Now because we have sufficiently discoursed of Benevento, we will declare the
quality of this Country, the which although it be full of hills, is nevertheless
very pleasant through the variety of the situation, high, low, plain, and very
commodious for tillage, because the Country is wholly inhabited, and abounds
with all good things. The Hills are covered with Vines and fruitful Trees, the
Dales and Plains with Corn, and Gardens, there are also thick Woods, and
watered with many Rivers, and store of Cattle, of Corn, Wine, Oil, Flax,
Apples, Chestnuts, both great and small Nuts, Pears, and other fruits of great
goodness and perfection; whereby in time of Harvest it does appear that it
contends in equal comparison with other plentiful Provinces, and above all
there is excellent hunting both for fowls and beasts. The Air is subtle and
wholesome although cold; There are moreover in this Country in the Territory of
Prata, Mines of Gold and Silver, which for that they yield no great profit, are
not much regarded. Distant from Benevento little less then ten miles, is the
Valley of Caudina, where was the ancient City of Caudio, The Valley of Caudina.

The City Caudio.

Hirpio, now called Arpaia. The Gallows of Caudine. St. Martino. St. Angelo on
Scala. Attavilla. Montefredano. Avellino.


the relics whereof yet appear; and not far from thence is the ancient
Harpino, now called Arpata, which is very near to the Gallows of Caudine, very
famous for the overthrow which the Romans had there, where the Consul and the
Roman Army by deceit enclosed, were constrained by the Sannites to pass
shamefully under the yoke, the which place the Country People now call the
streit of Arpaia, which stands but a little distant from the City, the which is
endued with the dignity of a Marquess, subject to the house of Guevara. On the
other side of the Valley Caudina, are these Countries, St. Martino, St. Angelo
a Scala, afterward comes the same River, which joyneth with the River Sabato,
which rises from Montevirgine, a high and spacious place, in the Valley
whereof, the first Country which is there is Altavilla, afterward is the Castle
of Montefredano, and near the Valley is the ancient City of Avellino, which is
now written in the Exchequer Roll Avellinensis, but in the Books of the Roman
Court, Avellinus Episcopus; and the Territory thereof abounds with great
store of small Nuts, and therefore by the Latins they were called Avellanae
nuces. The said City is dignified with the Title of a Prince, which the family
Caracciola the Red possesses. Then follows Mercuriale, now called
Mercugliano, the Country of the holy Hospital of the Annunciation of Naples;
Mercogliano. Montevirgine.
and above that Hill is the noble Church and Monastery of Montevirgine of white
Monks, of the Order of St. Benedict, which was builded in old time in honor of
Cibele, mother of the Gods; but changed by the Christians into the honor of
the glorious mother of God our Savior, the Virgin Mary, a place of so much
beauty and sanctity, which not only excels in fame through all this Kingdom,
but through all Italy, and beyond; whereupon at two several times of the year,
that is to say at Whitsontide and our Lady day in September, there concurs and
flocks together from far and near places, innumerable people bringing all sorts
of Presents. This Monastery is the head of the said Congregation of
Montevirgine, and therein are continually resident 200 Monks. In the Church
there is a Reliquary, which the Monks of the same place say, that a greater is
not in all Christendom, for so many bodies of Saints, and other relics that
are therein, among which there are to be seen (as they say) the entire bodies
of the three children which were put into the flaming furnace. There are other
notable things, as the Sepulchers of Kings, and other Princes. The Founder of
this holy place was William of Vercelli, of whose life, manners, and miracles,
and of the things abovesaid, who desires to have a full and true satisfaction
thereof, he may read the History of the Original of the notable things of
Montevirgine.

Six miles from Benevento upon a very high Hill, is seen the Country of
Montesuscolo, Montesuscolo.
where resideth the Kings Audit of the Province, and every Sunday is held a
Market with great concourse of people. And a little distant is the Castle, and
Montemileto, which has the Title of a County.

Afterward we come to the Hills of the Apennine, which are called Monti Tremoli,
Monte Tremoli. The River Sabato.
where arises the River Sabato, which passing by low places, in the end is
joined with the River Vulturno. Antonio in his book of remembrance, calls
this River Sabbatum; but the people of the Country name it the River of
Benevento, because it runs near the said City. Afterward we come to these
Countries, Montefalcione. Candida. Serpito. Vulturara.
Montefalcione, Candida and Serpito; but above the high and difficult
mountains, called Monti Tremoli, above named, appears the City Vulturara.
Above Benevento little more then the third part of a mile, runs the River
Calore into the River Sabato; on the right hand whereof, which bends toward
the Hills and Mountains, which we have said to be above Benevento, are these
Castles and Countries, Pia, Chiusano, the old Castle, and a little above
Montella, an excellent and goodly Country, Pia. Chiusano. Castello vetere.
Montella. Apice.
endued with the Title of a Count. Over the River Calore two miles from Sabato,
the Emperor Valentine made a great and magnificent Bridge, joining with the way
Appia, which was therefore called Valentino, which is now all ruinated. On the
left side of the said River are these Countries, Apice, where was another
goodly Bridge, which was joined with the said way Appia, and then Mirabella,
Tauraso, Cursano, Bagnulo, Cassano, Nusco. Mirabella. Tauraso. Cursano.
Bagnulo. Cassano. Nusco.

The River Calore.

The River (...).

The River Tripalto.

Bonito. Grottamenarda. Flumari. Vico. Melito. Amando. Zuncoli.

The Hill Crepacore.

The River M^^scano. Corsano. Montecalvo. Ariano. Montemale. Casulalbor^.

The Freemens Castle. Padula. S. Iorio. Molinara. Reino. S. Maria del Colle.
Cercello. Cassano. St. Croce.


And afterward begins the Apennine to rise, where springs the River
Calore, and on the other side of the Hill in like sort rises the River Ausido,
which the Country people call Lofanto, which passes through Apuglia, and
runs into the Adriatic Sea. Then comes on the right hand of Calore the
River Tripalto, which is near the populous Country of Tripalta, which has the
honor of a Dukedom, in the principal Church whereof lies with great reverence
the body of St. Ipolistro Martyr and Priest. On the right side of the said
River is a long and spacious Wood, called by the same name Tripalta, near the
which on the side of this River are situated these Countries, Bonito,
Grottamenarda, Flumari, and Vico. On the left side of the said River is Melito,
Amando, Zuncoli, and then up toward the Apennine is a great back of the Hill
called Gr^m^, which through the great difficulty to climb up, is called
Crepacore, upon the which Hill springs the River Moscano, which runs into
Calore, in the same place where enters the River Tripalto. On the right hand
of Moscano is Corsano, and Montecalvo, and in the distance which is between the
said rivers upon a pleasant hill is the City of Ariano, called in old time Ara
Iani, of a famous Temple which was there, and dedicated to Ianus. On the right
side of Moscano are these Countries and Castles, Montemale, Buon, Albergo,
Casalalbore, and the Freemens Castle. Afterward is to be seen the mouth of the
River Tamaro, which runs into Calore, and has as great plenty of water as
any other above named; and between the said two Rivers; as it were in the
midst, is Paluda, a populous and principal Country, and somewhat higher on the
right side of Tamaro are these Countries and Castles, Sain^^ Iorio, Molinara,
Reino, Santa Maria del Colle, where died Iacobo Caldora a famous and a valiant
Captain, Cercello, Cassano, and Santa Croce.

Here begins a mighty great Wood which incloseth on both sides the Apennine
Hills, so that one part stretches even to Fortore, a River of Puglia, the other
to Tamaro, the which Wood is four miles in breadth, and twenty in length. On
the left hand of Tamaro are these Countries, Pietrapulcina, Pavoni, Pestolo,
Fragnito, Campolottara, the Monastery of Giulietto, Morcone, and in the
Apennine, Supino, an ancient Country, whereof Livy makes mention. Then
follows Altavilla before named, which has the dignity of a Count, subject to
the noble house of Capoa, above the which, in a hill of the Apennine is to be
seen Castellovecchio, near which rises the River Tamaro.

Having now described this Region* The quality and nature of the people of this
Province.
it remains that we now discourse something of the Inhabitants therein, the
which are very sturdy and strong, and of healthful complexion, and all are
exercised and expert in arms, and in learning they grow excellent which apply
themselves unto it. But in Merchandise they are little employed, which so
falls out because every man is contented with his own goods. Those in general
which dwell in the Country are attired after the fashion of the Neopolitans,
but not the women, the which go diversely apparelled, and very few use to wear a
mantle upon their gown, they dress their heads with base attires, only covering
them with a broad linen cloth, neither do they wear pantosles, but shoes and
chopineos. The natural color of the people inclines more to white then a swart
color, in reasoning and discoursing they are very stately and disdainful, and
great braggadochios, but very obedient to their superiors. The arms which this
Region have used is a field per fesse gu. and argent, a Crown in chief or* the
which Arms I think signify no other then that new title of Prince, which the
valorous Arechi the second, The Arms of this Province*
the fourteenth Duke of Benevento gave in the time that he subdued the
Picentine people to his dominion, whereupon by the field gu. and ar. would
manifest the virtue and courage of this Country, which was in the said Arechi,
and for the Crown of Gold, which little or nothing differs from a regal
Crown, I think signifies the new Lordship, as has been declared.

BASILICATA, The Fourth Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
A Part of Montagna, sometimes named Lucania, and another of Puglia, were in
ancient time called by one only name Basilicata, but from whence the said name
should proceed is not certainly known: But some think, although they have it
not from any great authority, that this Province was by an Emperor of
Constantinople, given in dowry with one of his daughters. Others affirm, and
more probably, that it was so called by Basilio, a man very valiant in Arms,
which in those days possessed all these places, and from this Province, and from
the Country of Otranto, with his industry and valor drove away the Greeks and
Carthaginians that were established therein. The River Silare divides this
Province from Vestini, The limits of the Province of Basilicata.
and from happy Campania. It has on the South the Tirrene Sea, on the East the
River Lavo, with the Brutii, and part of Magna Gretia, and on the North the
Pugliesi, the Pecutii, with a part of the Irpini.

These people Lucani had their original, according to Pliny, from the Sanniti,
which are now called Abruzzesi; The Lucani and their original.

Elephants brought into Italy, see Pliny lib. 8. chap. 6. The fertility of the
Province.


but first the Possidoniati inhabited there, a people of Magna Grecia,
afterward the Morgeti, Seculi, Italiani, Enotri and Pelasgi, and at length the
said Sanniti were afterward called Lucani, the which were a long time popularly
governed by themselves, and were so called by Lucano a Captain, which with a
Colony of Sanniti came into this place to inhabit. The first Elephants that
were ever seen in Italy, were brought hither in the Wars of King Pyrrhus, and
were called Lucan Bulls, in respect of Lucania, which was in the year after the
building of Rome 47^. This Province is for the most part mountainous and hilly,
but yet very fertile in all sorts of grain, and yields excellent Wines, for
the Vines grow to a wonderful greatness, which proceeds through the perfect
temperature of the air, and the ground where they are planted, and for the most
part were joined to the Oppi, and embracing and taking hold of them, stretch
out their boughs on every side, and in time of Vintage is often seen one only
Vine to be able to make a But or Hogshead of Wine. Moreover this excellent
Country yields in abundance Corn, Oil, Honey, Wax, Annis, Corianders, Saffron
and Bombace, of which things the Country of Tursi, called in old time Tarsia,
does most exceed. In this excellent Province through the delicacy of the air
the Trees and Roses flourish twice in a year, where in every place is seen great
abundance of diverse sweet and pleasant fruits; there are also most beautiful
Gardens, the which for so much as they are watered with pleasant Rivers, bring
forth excellent Citrons, Oringes, and Limons. On that part which stretches
toward the Sea, the pleasant fields yield no small delight to the beholders
thereof, and all the year there is excellent hunting both for fowls and beasts.
And it is no less plentiful in herds of Cattle and Hoggs* wherewith the
people of the Country make great store of Sausages, and Sopressate, very
excellent and good, which the Lucan Latinists so call because they were
invented by the Lucani, whereupon Martial thus says, Filia Picenae venio
Lucanica porcae, Martial lib. 1*

Plutibus hinc niveis grata corona datur.
The Sea thereof abounds with excellent Fish, and yields shel-fish of a
delicate and pleasant taste, which have within them an excellent Pearl.

But in describing the Country of this Province, I will begin from the mouth of
the River Sele, where it runs into the Sea, that is to say, here from it I
will follow along the shore of the Sea, even to the River Lavo, where it
runs into the Sea, afterward I will describe the places of the Medeterrane.

Departing then from the mouth of Sile, and walking along the shore of the
Tirrene Sea we come to a place where was the Temple of Juno the Argive built
(as Strabo affirms) by Jason; and going from thence seven miles, The Temple
of Juno the Argive. Possidonia.
is the place where was Possidonia, by Strabo called Pesto, which was built
near the Sea by the Doresi, and afterward magnificently enlarged by the
Sibariti. Servio reciting the authority of Virgil in the fourth book of his
Georgicks, says thus, Biferique rosaria Peste. He places the said City in
Calauria, wherein he was deceived, it standing in Basilicata. Also Ovid makes
mention of this City in his first book de art Amandi, saying, Caltaque
Pestanas vincat odore rosas. The Ancients call the Gulf of the Sea which lies
hereby, Sinus Pestanus* but now Mariners call it the Gulf of Agropoli, and
others of Salerno, The Gulf of Agr^poli.
the which Gulf begins at the shore of the Picentini, and so compasses even
to the Promontory of Possidoniato. Peste was called by the Greeks Possidonia,
the which City the Ancient ruinated buildings are now to be seen half in the
Sea: little more then eight miles farther on the shore is to be seen Agropoli,
and Castello del Abbate, where is made the best Malmsie: directly against it is
a little Isle called Leucosia, by the name of a Sirene which did there inhabit;
and going no more then nine miles appears Castello amare of Bruca, with the
large and spacious Wood, where was the ancient Hyela, by Virgil called Velia.
Opposite to the place where Velia stood, Velia.
are in the Sea to be seen two little Islands, called Enotrie, the one is named
Pontia, the other Isacia. And for as much as I have written of these six places
in the Province of the Principality on this side, I will speak no farther
thereof, and especially having counted them among the places of the said
Region, though perhaps they rather belong to Basilicata.

A little farther is to be seen Pisciotta, by Strabo called Pyxuntum oppidum.
Pis^iotta.
And from thence two miles appears the Cape of Palinuro, named by the
Ancients, Promontorium Palinuri, which was so called by Palinuro the Pilot of
Aeneas ship, of whom Virgil writes in his sixth book. The Cape of Palinuro.
Molpa.
Having past the Cape of Palinuro, there is to be seen upon a Promontory the
ruins of Molpa, which was by Bellisario Captain of the Emperor Justinian
destroyed. The Imperial Rock. Francavilla. Noia. St. Arcangelo. Roccanova.
Castellonova. Episcopia. Claramont. Senisi. Tursi. St. Mauro. Ferrandina.
Pesticcie. The River Vaisento. Metaponte.
Entering now into the Land from the Sea a mile on the side of the hill is to be
seen the Emperial Fortress, and among the hills stands Francavilla, where is a
sumptuous Monastery of Cathusians. Afterward at the foot of the Mountain is
Noia; and farther within the hills is St. Arcangelo, Roccanova, Castelonova, and
Episcopia, a Country very fertile, whereof the ancient Lord is Francesco
Antonio of Porta, a Gentleman of Salerno, whose worthy Family was much ennobled
by the Kings of this Kingdom. Then follows Claramont, Senisi, and the City
Tursi, distant from the Sea fifteen miles, and from the River Acri two; and the
said City has the dignity of a Duke, which lately King Philip gave to Don
Carlo d' Oria, the son of John Andrea Prince of Melfi, Admiral of the Sea. A
little farther among the hills is St. Mauro and Ferrandina, in a populous
Country made by Ferrandino the son of Alfonsus the second, King of Naples,
being Duke of Calauria. Walking yet among the hills, appears Pesticcie; and
returning by the shore of the Sea is the mouth of the River Vaisento, where it
falls into the Sea; going a little farther we discover a large and a goodly
Plain, and half a mile from the Sea is to be seen the ruins of the noble City
of Metaponte, built by the Pilii, which came hither from Troy with Nestor.
Metaponte was destroyed by the Sannites. In the said City dwelt Pithagoras a
long time, where he died, which after his death the Metapontini made of his
house a Temple, and there adored him as one of the Gods. To the which City
Ippaso, a most excellent Philosopher, Disciple to Pithagoras, has given much
honor. Now upon the said ruinated City is Corn sowed, and in the end of the
Territory thereof (as Strabo declares) ended the limits of Grecia Magna.

Leaving the place where stood Metaponte four miles, and from the Sea but one,
upon a place somewhat elevated, is to be seen twenty high and mighty Pillars of
Marble placed in two ranks, which the Country people say that there was the
School of Archita the Tarantine, and passing within the Country is the River
Vasente, Pomarico. Miglionico. Grott^la. Montescagioso. The River Bradano.
Tricarico. Montepeloso. Venosa.
and two miles from the said River, at the foot of the hill is Pomarico a good
Country, and the hill Miglionico, and six miles distant stands Grottola,
adorned with the dignity of a Marquisat, the Lord thereof is Alfonso Sances
Decano, one of the Council of State; and going not far is Grassano, and
Montescagioso. Within a mile of Bradano. Descending toward the Sea at the foot
of the Hills appears Tricarico, a very honorable and beautiful City; and
ascending up the Hills is the City of Montepeloso.

And ten miles from hence following the right side of the River Bradano, is the
City of Venosa, called by Pliny, Venusia; Patercolo writes, that it was a
Colony of the Romans, Can^sa.
the which Livy confirms, which was in the year 552. under the Consulship of
P. Galba, and C. Cotta, Horace that eloquent Lirical Poet has given much
honor to this City, it is adorned with the dignity of a Prince, subject to the
Family Gesvalda. From it fifteen miles appears Canoso, whether Terentio
Varonne the Roman Consul did retire with fifty of the remainder of the
Cavaliery at that famous overthrow which Hannibal gave to the Romans at Canna,
Lavello.
where L: Paulo Emilio the other Consul was slain. Potenza.


Six miles after appears Lavella, which has the Title of a Marquisat,
subject to the Family of Tufo; then comes Potenza, a populous and rich City
upon the Apennine, to the which Sebastian Barnaba a Neopolitan Gentleman the
Bishop thereof, now gives no small ornament, a Prelat of sincere life, and
endued with great learning. The said City has been a long time possessed with
the Title of a Count by the House of Gevara, Melfi.
which through defect of issue male, is now conveyed to the Family of Noia
Prince of Sulmona. Going on the left side is seen the noble and rich City of
Melfi, Stigliano.
from whence John Andrea d'Oria Admiral of the Sea by the grace and favor of
King Philip has the Title of Prince, a Noble man, well experienced in Sea
affairs, and very honorable. And following the same way is Spinazzola, and not
far off is Stigliano, which has the Title of a Prince, The condition of the
Inhabiters of this Province.
which Lewis Carrafa Duke of Mondragone enjoys, a very rich Lord, and much
affected to Poetry.

Coming now to a conclusion of this Province, the which produces tall and
strong men, with black hairs, azured eyes, and of a white complexion, and
generally all are accustomed to cut their beards very short, and also the hair
on their heads, their manners and conditions are diverse, and in their Apparel
somewhat base and rude, except those which inhabit in the City, which go very
civil, and have good behavior and conversation, but the common people are very
rustical and barbarous, they employ themselves to nothing but tillage and
hunting, and wrestling, and all practice Arms, in so much as there is not a
child that knows not how to discharge a Pistol and Caliver. They little apply
themselves to learning. The women are not fair, and basely attired without any
ornament or handsomness, but very painful, and carry great burdens upon their
heads. The Arms of this Province is or, a fesse, counterindented asure voided
of the field, The Arms of this Province.
in chief an Eagles head arrached proper and crowned of the first, which arms
signify the victory which the Lucani had, having expelled and driven away all
the Greeks out of their Country, whereupon the Lieutenant of the Emperor of
Constantinople flying with other Captains, were drowned in the River Bradano.

CALAURIA, On this side the Fifth Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
Toward the South in the utmost Confines of the Kingdom, lies the ancient
Province of Calauria, in the South part of Italy, included within the Terrene,
Sicilian, and Ionian Seas, like the figure of a beast with six heads, and is in
circuit 544 miles. In this excellent and fruitful Province grows almost all
things, not only necessary for the sustenance of living creatures, The
fertility of Calauria.
but also for the delights and pleasures thereof. It is all full of pleasant
and fruitful Hills, Mountains and Valleys: the fields are like those of
Campania felix, they are watered with Springs and Christaline Fountains. Here is
had all sorts of Corn, sundry Wines, The diverse Mines in Calauria.
and in great abundance, all kinds of Fruits, Oil, Sugar, Honey, Wax, Saffron,
Bombace, Annis and Coriander seeds. There grows Gum, Pitch, Turpentine, and
liquid Storax. In former time it was never without Metals, but at this present
it does much abound, having in most places diverse sorts of Mines, as Gold,
Silver, Iron, Marble, Alabaster, Cristal, Marchesite, three sorts of white
Chaulk, Virmilion, Alume, Brimstone, and the Adamant stone, which being in the
fifth degree, draws not Iron, and is in color black. There grows hemp and
slax of two sorts, the one called the male, the other the female: There falls
Manna from heaven, truly a thing very rare; and although there is not gathered
such abundance of Silk, yet I dare say there is not had so much in all Italy
besides. There are also Bathes, both hot, lukewarm, and cold, to cure many
diseases. Near the Seaside, and likewise on the Mediterrane are goodly Gardens
full of Oringes, Citrons, and Limons of diverse sorts, it is watered with many
Rivers. There are on the hills of the Apennine, thick Woods of high Firrs,
Holms, Platanes, Oaks, where grows the white odoriferous Mushrome which shines
in the night. Here is bred the soft stone Frigia, which every month yields a
delicate and wholesome Gum, and the stone Aetites, by us called the stone
Aquilina. In this Province there is excellent hunting of diverse creatures, as
wild Hoggs, Staggs, Goats, Hares, Foxes, Porcupines, Marmosets. There are also
ravenous beasts, as Wolves, Bears, The excellent hunting in Calauria.
Lyzards, which are quick-sighted, and have the hinder parts spotted with
diverse colors. This kind of Beast was brought from France to Rome in the
sports of Pompey the great, and Hunters affirm this Beast to be of so frail a
memory, that although he eats with hunger, if he chance to look back,
remembers no more his meat, and departing searches for other. The Sea then
which lies upon this happy Country, abounds with great store of excellent
fish, and in many places grows both white and red Coral, and near the shore is
found the Touchstone which tries Gold and Silver from all other Metals. This
Province is of greater antiquity then any other in all Italy, because it was
begun to be inhabited before the flood by Aschenaza the son of Gomero, the
Nephews of Noe, into which place being come where now is Regio, through the
amenity and temperature of the air very delightful, made there his
habitation, and founded a City which by his own name he called Aschenaza, and
the inhabiters thereof were called Aschenazei; which that it may seem true,
Josephus which lived in the time of the Emperor Titus, in his first book of
Jewish antiquities testifies saying, Aschenaz inslituit Aschenazeos, qui nunc
Rhegini vocantur a Graecis. The same also St. Jerome confirms in his Hebrew
questions upon Genesis saying, Aschenas Graeci Rheginos vocant. The like name
of a City was not heard of among any other people except that in Calauria, the
which City was afterward by the overthrow called of the Greeks Rhegium; Sicilia
being in the same place divided from Italy through the violence of an
Earthquake.

Calauria was called by sundry names, at the first it was called Ausonia by the
valiant Ausonii, The sundry names of Calauria.
the inhabiters thereof, or as some affirm by Ausono the son of Ulysses, it was
afterward by the Oriental Greeks called Hesperia, because it is situate in the
West. Five hundred sixty seven years before the destruction of Troy it was
called Enotria by Enotro of Arcadia, which with a Colony came to inhabit in the
middle of Ausonia, The City Pandesia.

King Italo:


where he builded many Cities, the principal whereof was Pandosia: This name of
Ausonia continued many and many years, until Italo was by the Enotri created
King, from whom they named the said Region Italia. This Italo being a man very
ingenious, taught the Enotri the manner to till and ear the ground, and to
shear their sheep, and lived but nineteen years, and left Morgete his son heir
of the Kingdom, the which ordained that by his name Italy should be called
Morgetia. King Morgete.
Morgete dead, and the people not contented to continue his name, in as much as
he was odious unto them, the name of Italy was renewed again, Why it was called
Magna Grecia.
and they called the Country Italia, the which name continued a long time
until the Greeks came to inhabit there; and then they called it Magna Gretia,
for the frequency of the great number of learned Scholars which came thither to
hear the Philosopher Pithagoras; but as the Poet Archilao says, t^was so
called through the great multitude of Greeks which inhabited there, being drawn
through the fertility and pleasures of this Country; whereupon Ovid in his
fourth book de factis thus says, Itala nam tellus Graecia major erat.

It was afterward by the latter Greeks, which came thither to inhabit called
Calauria, which in our tongue signifies abundance of all good things, Why it
was c^lled Calauria.
and truly so is it, because there is no place, I will say not only in all
Italy, but in all Europe, that may contend with this, there being not any thing
necessary for the life of man, or which may yield delight, that is not in great
abundance, and with all perfection: so that corresponding in every part, the
effects agree with the name thereof, as plainly appears, that nature it self
cannot be more delighted in it self, yielding so many benefits as any Country
whatsoever. All this Country was divided by the Apennine into two parts, The
ancient situation of Calauria.
and that part which was toward the Ionian Sea was called Magna Grecia, the
which also contained a part of Lucania (now called Basilicata) and did stretch
from Regio even to Taranto. The other part was by the Greeks called Bretia,
from Bretio the son of Hercules, and of the Latins Brutia, Bretia. The river
Laus
and stretched from Regio to the River Laus, now called Laino. It has lately
been divided by the Kings Court into two Provinces* whereof the one is called
Calauria on this side, the other Calauria on the other side; that on this side
contains a great part of Magna Grecia, and of the Brutii, and ends with
Basilicata; and from the one side where is the head of the River Acri, and of
the other where runs the River Lavo, stretches from one sea to the other,
except that part which lies in the East, and is joined with Calauria on the
other side. As touching those people which dwell upon the Tirrene Sea, where
the Brutii in old time inhabited, are both in nature and manners more temperate
and staid then those near the Ionian Sea, who are more fierce and crafty, as
also their color bewraieth, for the other are white and red, these dark and
brown. And for so much by the Kings Court it is divided into two parts (as has
been said) in the superior and inferior, in the one is the Cape Cosenza, in the
other Catanzaro; the one has 30 Cities, the other 16. and in all three hundred
sixty seven with Countries and Castles.

But entering into the particular description of Calauria on this side, having
past the River Turbolo, the ancient bounds of the people Lucani, there
appears Turture, in the Territory whereof grow many Sugar Canes; almost
opposite stands the Isle of Dimi, Scalea, and the River Lavo, The River
Turbolo.

The Isle of Dim. Scalea. Lanio.


even where the ancient Lucani did arrive: Then follows Cerella, Belvedere,
Bonifati and Citracro, where are often made many Vessels through the great
commodity of Timber, and Pitch, whereof that Country does much abound; within
upon the banks of Lavo, is the City of Lanio, built upon the ruins of the
ancient Lau, and the said City is honored with the dignity of a Marquess,
subject to the Family of Cardin^s: Not far off is Campotenese, which had this
word from the ancient Temesini; having been their Territory. On the right hand
is the Hill Apillonio, where is such plenty of excellent Pasture, that the best
Cheese is there made in all those parts; The Hill Apollonio.
on the left side is Morano, a populous and a rich Country, which Antonio Pio,
in his Commentaries calls Summuranum, where is made excellent Cloth, Morano.
and every year there is a Fair with great concourse of people there about; the
Territory thereof is very fruitful and fertile, and there is made very fine
Silk, and Manna gathered, and on the Hill there are infinite store of excellent
simples.

Not far distant from the said Country springs the River Sybari, where was
the ancient Syphei, the ruies are to be seen, whereof Livy makes mention. The
River Sibari.
Going thence four miles is Saracena, in a good Country, called by Stefano,
Sestium, which was built by the Enotri, in whose Territory is made singular
Wine, Saracena.
and excellent Oil; it has besides Mines of Gold, and of Lead, of Alabaster
and Cristal. Near hand about five miles distant is to be seen the ancient
Country of Altemonth, called Balbia, which is not certainly known, whether it
was built by the Ausoni, or Enotri. Altomonte.
The Wines which are there made have a very delicate taste, whereof Pliny in
his 14 book much commends, and prefers before all the Wines of Calauria, from
whence in their most costly and sumptuous banquets was always the Wine of
Balbano. And Atheneo making mention thereof in his first book, thus writes,
Vinum Balbinum generosum, and admodum austerum, and semper seipso melius
nascitur. In the principal Church of this Country lies with much reverence the
body of St. Paolo of Malta, brother of St. Dominico. There are in the said
Territory natural Hills of white salt, Hills of Salt.
and they are no otherwise cut then if they were stones, and there is
Alabaster, and two rich Mines of Gold, of Silver, and Iron, and the Azured
Lazul stone. And at the foot of the Apennine in the Territory thereof grows
Cristal, and white Chalk; and the River Grondo passes through the said
Territory, being very full of Eeles and Trouts. This Country was given with the
Title of a Count in the year 1462. by King Ferrant of Arragonia to Luca
Sanseverino Prince of Basignano, which now in the said house is maintained.
Next after follows the City of St. Mark, called by the Latins Argentanum;
St. Mark.
and a little distant is the ancient City Meluito, so called for the plenty of
Vines which grow there; but in old time it was called Temesa, in which place by
the providence of God haunted an evil spirit a long time for the death of
Hippolitus the companion of Ulysses, which was there slain against all
humanity; A Proverb.
whereupon rose the Proverb among the Ancients, Aderit genius Temeseus. Noting
hereby that Gods vengeance never fails to reward such wickedness, if by
humane means it be not punished. The said City was built by the Ausoni, which
Strabo affirms in his sixth book, saying, Alao prima urbs Brettiae Tempsa,
quam Auxonii condiderunt, nostrae autem aetatis homines Tempsam etiam vocitant.
Temesa was a Bishops Sea, as appears in the Councels, when Hillary the Bishop
thereof came to the fourth Roman Sinod under the Popedom of Agathon. And the
Territory thereof is very fat and fertile, and yields excellent Wine, Oil,
Honey, fine Silk, Grain, and other Corn, and all kinds of Fruits, and from
heaven descends Manna, Foscaldo*
and there is made great store of Bird-lime and Glue. Hard by is Foscaldo,
where is great abundance of Sugar, Honey, Wine, Corn, and other Fruits. The said
Country is honored with the dignity of a Marquess. A little higher is the
Country of Lattarico, which by Livy is called Hetriculum; Lattarico. Torano.
Regina.
hard by stands Torano, and Regina, called in old time Herinium, built by the
Enotri, in whose Territory is made great abundance of Oil, there is also Mines
of Brimstone, Saltpeter, and Alabaster; and a little farther is situate the
City Montalto, by Barrio called Vffugium, it had sometimes a Bishops Sea,
Montalto.
which dignity was joined to Cosenza. It has a good Territory, which yields
Grain, Oil, and other Fruits, and there is made great abundance of Silk, there
is also Alabaster, and Brimstone, and every year there is a very great Fair. It
has the dignity of a Dukedom, the Lady whereof is the Lady Mary of Arragon, in
whom ends the line of old Alfonsus of Arragon, King of Naples, the which
State by marriage fell into the Family of Moncada.

Going now toward the Sea we may behold Paula, a name corrupted, derived from
ancient Patycos, Paula.
very famoms for being the natural Country of St. Francis, the Author of the
Order of the Minimi; hard by is St. Nocito, very famous for the excellent sweet
Wine; St. Nocito.
then comes Castellofranco, with the River Campagnano, Castellofranco.
called in old time Acheronte, where was slain (even as he was foretold by the
Oracle) Alexander, King of Molossi, mean while he not understanding the
cautions of the devil, The death of Alexander King of Molossi foretold by the
Oracle.
rested secure, having avoided another River of the same name in Epiro. The
words of the Oracle were these, Aeacida cave accedas ad aquam Acherusiam,
Et Pandasiam, quod ibi tibi laetum decretum est.
Near hand is seen Cerisano, called in old time Citerium; and upon the side of
the River Crati, and of Basenta is the famous City Consenza, full of people,
rich, and very ancient; Cerisano. Cosenza.
it was a Colony of the Lucani, in old time it was the chief City of the
Brutii, but now the head of this Province. The said City is situate between
hills and dales, it has before it a great Plain which stretches very near
forty miles, and is called the Villey of Crati, it is compassed with 85 Hamlets
or Villages, which for the most part are very great. It abounds in all things
which may be desired either for profit or humane pleasure; it has brought
forth many excellent men, and among others, the Abbot Giacchino, endued (as
Dant says) with a prophetical spirit, who was of one of the Villages of
Cosenza, called Celico. St. Thelesphoro, Iano Parassio, Antonio Telesio, John
Baptista d'Amico, Coriolano Marticano, and Berardino Martirano, which was also
Secretary of the Kingdom, Pi^tropaolo Parisio, a famous Doctor of Law, which
was made Cardinal by Pope Paul the third, Borardino Telesio, which writ against
the Philosophy of Aristotle, John Maria Barnauda, Sertario Quattromani,
Giovanpaolo d' Aquino, Prospero Parisio, and Iacobo of Gaeta. In this City are
these noble families, Abenante, Aquino, Andriotto, Aloe, Amico, Arnoni,
Alimena, Arduino, Barono, Bernando, Beccuto, Bombino, Bonconto, Britto, Bovi,
Bonaccursi, Cavalcante, Ciacci, Caputo, Casella, Cozzi, Cicala, Caroleo,
Curatore, Celso, Clavelli, Dattil^, Donato, Domanico, F^rrao, Farrao d'
Epaminonda, Farrao d' Antonello, Fera, Favoro, Figlino, Franza, Gaeta, Gaeta d'
Marc. Antonio, Garofalo, Giannochiri, Gaeli, Gioanni, Giaccino, Gadi, Longo,
Longobuccho, Migliar^se, Marano, Monaco, Martorano, Maurello, Minardo, Moyi,
Materi, Massaro, Mirabello, Mangoni, Nero, Poglisi, Peloso, Pellegrino,
Pascale, Passalacqua, Poerio, Parisi di Ruggiero, Parisi di Mario, Pantuso,
Quottromani, Roccho Ruggiero, Rangi, Russo, Scaglione, Spatasora, Ser^alo,
della Motta, Sersale di Guido, Sambiase, Spirito, Sirisanto, Spina, Sanf^lice,
Stocca, Tilesio, Testo, Toscano, Tarsii, Tirello, Velle, and others. The Arms
of this City is seven Hills vert, in a field or. From hence on the right hand
lies the Wood Brutiana, which the people of the Country call for the
excellency thereof Sila, not so hideous and terrible in Winter through
continual snow and ice, as it is pleasant and delightful in Summer, The Wood
Sila.
where the fresh and cheerful air, with many Rivers full of excellent fish,
and the diverse sports of fowling, and hunting of wild beasts, and the infinite
herds of Cattle which there seed upon the plentiful fruits thereof, represent
in effect that which the Poets feign of their Arcadia. Not far distant lies
Carolei, called by the Latins Ixias, built by the Enotri. And walking a little
farther appears Bisignano, Bisignano.
a good and plentiful City, much inhabited, which has the Title of a
Principality subject to the Family Sanseverina. Stifano calls this City
Besidia, which according to Barrio was built by the Ansoni; and very near lies
Tarsia, called Capresis.

Returning toward the Sea we come into these Countries, Fiumefreddo,
Bellomonte, Tarsia. Fiumefreddo. Bellomonte. Amontea.
and the City Amontea, which was an Episcopal Seat, but now united with the
Church of Trop^ia. A little farther is Aiello, called by Bario, Tylesium, which
has a strong Castle, and a fruitful Territory, with a Wood where is great
sport in the hunting of diverse living creatures. This Country holds the Title
of a Marquess, and the Lord thereof is Alberico Cybo, Prince of Massa, Aiello.
no less worthy of honor for his Learning then his Chivaldri. Near to Aiello
is the Hill Cocuzzo, where it seems that the Apennine exceeds it self in
height. Then follows Martirano corrupted from the ancient name of Mamerto,
whose Citizens showed themselves no less faithful to the people of Rome, then
valiant in Arms, Marti^an^.
they only fighting with Pyrrhus, one of the best Soldiers of the world, the
which they performed so courageously, that Pyrrhus being mindful of the valor
of the Brutii, and of the death of his Alexandro, durst not any farther hazard
his fortune. From thence afterward lies on the side of the Sea, Nocera, Nocera.
the relics of the ancient Terinia, which was destroyed by Hannibal, they
being not able to defend it: and here runs (according as the Ancients
affirm) Ligia, one of the Sirenes upon the mouth of the River Saccuto. Then
follows Castiglione, Castiglione.
the Cape of Subero, where Pyrrhus disbarked himself coming from Sicilia; after
comes St. Eusemia, which Stephano says is called Lametia, where is a Gulf so
named, very full of Coral, and the best Tunny; and a little distant lies
Nicastro, and here the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa made for delight and
pleasure, St. Eusemia. Nicastro.
convenient Baths, and excellent hunting both for wild beasts and fowls, the
first which began in Italy to be delighted in hauking with Falcons, which in
former time was unknown, although some write that Anasilao was the first. Not
very far is Tiriolo, the relics of old Tirio, Tiriolo.
where the Apennine is drawn into so narrow a point, that the rainwater which
descends from the ridg of some one house, falls on the left side into the
Terrene Sea, and on the right into the Adriatic.

And coming now to an end of this Province, which has for the Arms thereof, a
Cross bastonesa, in a field Ar. the which Ensigns and Arms had its original in
the time that Boemundo the Norman, The Arms of this Province.
Duke of Calauria came with twelve thousand choice soldiers in aid of the holy
Land, whereby through his prowess and valor was afterward made Prince of
Antioche, and for so much as the enterprise was very famous and honorable,
therefore I believe the said Province gave these Arms, representing thereby the
great Voyage which the said Duke made.

CALAURIA, On the other side the Sixth Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
CALAVRIA on the other side, is a Province which contains a good part of
Magna Grecia, and of the Brutii, and passes from the one and the other side of
the Apennine, to the Ionian and Terrene Seas, and is divided from Calauria on
this side by the Mediterrane above Cosenza, going by a direct line to the one
and the other Sea, into the Ionian near Stromboli, and into the Terrene at the
Gulf Ipponiate, which is the Gulf of St. Eufemia, and these are only the
Confines of the said Province where the Brutii sometimes inhabited: From that
part which lies toward the North, except a little, is wholly compassed with
the Sea; on the East is the Ionian, on the South Sicilia, and on the West the
Terrene, which is the utmost limits of the Kingdom. It is partly plain, The
fertility of this Province.
and partly mountainous; it has fair and fruitful Hills, Woods, Rivers, and
Fountains, great plenty of Corn, Vine, Olives, and every other thing necessary
for the sustenance of living creatures: There are horses and herds of cattle
very plentiful, and great abundance of woll, and of the best and finest silk.
In this Province are pits of gold, of silver, and great plenty almost of all
metals; it has many hot baths which cure diverse infirmities, and to conclude,
it is a Country endued with all good things, for the which it may be called a
most happy Region. The men of this Country* as also of all Calauria, after
other ancient names which they had, were called Bretii, Brutii, why they were
so called.
and they were so called from Brettio the son of Hercoles, as Stephano writes
in his book of the City, and Ermolao upon Stephano; and as it appears by many
Greek Monuments, which are declared with great Learning by Pierio Valeriano,
and by many Antiquaries. Iustine and Trogo say that they were called Brutii, of
Brutia a maid. John Annio affirms that they were so called by Bruto Ombrone a
most valiant Captain. The error of some writers about the name Brutii:
Calepino and Nicholas Perotto say they are called Brutii, A Brutis moribus;
but this is a vain thing, and an idle conjecture of them. Guarino not well
understanding Strabo, adds to his translation many things of his own conceit,
Strabo saying that Brutii fuerunt rebels Lucanorum, he adds here that they
were fugitives, a name which was given to servants; but we finding in
Histories, and principally in Iustine, that these were children, and not
servants of the Lucani, for so much as the Lucani were accusto^ed to bring up and
foster their children in the field after the manner of the S^ar^ans; but their
children misliking that manner of education, opposed themselves against their
fathers, that is to say the Lucani, and went to inhabit in Calauria. These
people in process of time became so mighty, that they feared not any, whereby
(for as much as their Country was not well able to contain them) they made
spoil of the places near unto them, and expelled the natural inhabitants, the
which they often attempted, being allured through the sweetness of the booty.

The ancient limits of the Brutii were the River Lavo, or Lao, now called the
River Laino (measuring along the shore of the Sea) and the straight of Sicilia,
the space between these bounds is according to Strabo 1350 furlongs, The bounds
of the Brutii.
which contains 169 miles; but according to the description of Ptolomy, these
were the limits, on the West the River Lavo with the Lucani, on the South the
Terrene Sea with Faro of Messina, on the East part of the Ionian Sea, on the
North Magna Grecia, with the River Chrati.

And to make a description of this Province, I will begin from the Cape of
Subero, where Pyrrhus King of the Epirots coming from Sicilia, disbarkt
himself. Not far off is Triolo, the relics of old Tiro, where the Apennine
Hills are very narrow; and then is Malda built by the Saracins, Triolo. Malda.
which has a very fruitful Country. From hence on the Sea at the mouth of
Amato, is Angitola, where Dionisius often desired to unite the said Haven with
that of Squillia. Afterward appears Pizzo in a very spacious and pleasant
place, with the little Islands Itacensi, which perhaps had this name because
Ulysses arrived there. Pizzo.


Then comes Bevona planted with goodly Gardens of Citrons and Oringes, the
ancient Harbor of Hipponio, which the Country people now call Monteleone,
which lies in a pleasant prospect with many fields round about; the said City
was founded by the Greeks, and they called it Hipponium, Bevoua. Montel^one.
because it was builded according to the likeness pnd similitude of a horse,
for that (...) in the Greek tongue signifies a horse, the which City (as the
Histories thereof recite) was in compass eight miles, wholly built with bricks,
the ruins whereof are at this present to be seen; this noble City had very
pleasant and delightful fields which compast it round about. Poets have
feigned that when Ceres traveled in search of her daughter Proserpina that was
stolen away, remained here that Winter to gather Roses and other pleasant
Flowers, where also continues the three Festival days which the Tyrant
Agatocles so long since ordained. Pestino a famous Writer was of this City,
which is celebrated by Macrobio in his sixth book de Saturnali, in this word
Transmicto, Dominico Pizzimetti a learned Philosopher was also of the same
City, which translated out of Greek into Latin the predicaments of Archita
Tarentino. The ancient Vibo was destroyed by the Agareni in the time of blessed
Nilo, and the like ruin sustained Terino, Tauriano and Trischene. And this
noble Territory is very fertile, for it brings forth Grain, Barley, Beans,
Fitches, and other Corn; there are also planted great store of Sugar Canes, a
thing very rare in Italy. This Country is adorned with the dignity of a Duke.

After follows Soriano, whch has the Title of a Count. Then comes Arena,
Soriano. Arena.
and ascending up the Apennine is the goodly Monastery of St. Stephen del
Bosco, built by Rugiero the Norman, where is kept (as we have said) with many
other relics the body of St. Bruno. From hence on the right hand appears
Borrello, and Melito an honorable and an ancient City which was builded by the
Milesii, B^rrello. Melito.
a people of Asia; for as Herodotus writes in his sixth book, Mileto a City of
Asia being conquered and overcome by Darius, the inhabiters which departed from
the ruin thereof, being deprived of their natural Country, came with their
wives and children together with the Sanni into Regio, where they were received
by Anasilao Lord of the Country, to whom he gave so much Territory as they
built therein a City to inhabit, the which they called (as we have said)
Melito; these in process of time, the Country being too little, many of them
went into Messina, but being expelled by the inhabiters of the Country, went to
the Isle of Malta. There is to be seen in the said City of Melito, a stately
and magnificent Church under the name of the Trinity, which is beautified with
stately Pillars of Marble, which the Duke Ruggiero the Norman caused to be
transported from the ancient Hipponio; the said Church was by the mediation of
the said Duke consecrated by Pope Calisto the second, in the year of our Lord
1122. where at this present is to be seen the fair and costly Tomb of Marble of
the Duke Ruggiero. That holy Paolo of the Order of Preachers was of the said
City.

B^iatico. Tr^pea.
Walking toward the shore of the Sea is Briatico, which has the Title of a
Marquisat, and Tropea has this name from the Greek word (...), for that
ariving there, the Current of Faro is turned back, very dangerous to Sailers,
near which Hercoles arived coming from Spain, whereupon that place was
afterward named the Harbor of Hercoles. Here butteth out into the Sea the Cape
of Vaticano, and near at hand is Ioppolo, and Nicotera, augmentned by the
ancient ruins of Medama, Nicotera.
and Rosarno; there is the River Metramo, in whose waves, according as the
Ancients were accustomed, feeling themselves oppressed with any sin, were freed
by their washing themselves therein, as Orestes who thought hereby to be purged
from the murder of his mother; a little farther was the ancient Metauro, which
boasted much of Stesicoro, though with little right the Sicilians challeng him
to themselves; Metauro. Tauriano. Gioia. Seminara.
and after is discovered Tauriano: and from hence on the Sea is Gioia. A little
distant remains Seminara, a Country well inhabited, in whose Territory the
Frenchmen were overcome by Consalvo Fernandes of Aghilare in the time of Lewis
the 12 King of France. And near the Mediterrane under a great descent of the
Apennine, called by the country people Aspromonte, rises as it were a rock
between two Rivers: the Country of Sinopoli is adorned with the ancient dignity
of a Count, Sinopoli.
the jurisdiction whereof is from the house of Ruffa. There was born in this
Country that holy man Paolo of Sinopoli, Friar of the Order of Saint Francis,
called the Minori of Osservanza, whose relics are reverendly preserved in the
City of Nicotera. Going a little farther is Oppido, which has the Title of a
Count, and Terranovo, Oppido. Terranova. Polistena. The Isles Eoli. Lipare.
a populous City, which is adorned with the dignity of a Dukedom. Not very far
is Polistena; against the Castle whereof lie the Isles Eolie, the which have
this name from Eolo, which the Poets feign to be the God of the winds, knowing
by the nature of the place their change and alteration; of these Isles Lipare
was only inhabited, whose circuit is 16 miles, sometimes a Colony of the
Gnidii, which were very strong at Sea, and made long resistance to the
improvident assaults of the Toscans, and of their first fruits they oftentimes
consecrated to the Temple of Apollo at Delphus. The said Isle is distant from
Sicilia 20 miles; Strabo and Pliny call this Isle Meligone, which is very
famous as well for the fruitfulness of the ground, as also for the delicacy and
sweetness of the fruits, and the great plenty of Alume which it yields; the
said Isle was at the first ^nhabited by Lipareo the son of Ausonio King of
Italy, who being at discord with his brothers, came hither with diverse
soeldiers to remain, and here built a City, which by his own name was called
Lipari, the which City was always faithful to the Kings of Naples, from whom
in recompense it obtained many privileges and freedoms; but finally in the
month of July 1544 it was destroyed with sword and fire by Ariadeno Barbarossa,
Captain of the Turkish Army; but it was suddenly repaired again by the Emperor
Charles the fifth. The other Isles are not manured nor inhabited, whereby their
ancient names yet continue, that is to say Stromboli, and Vulcano, from whence
continually rises smoke, and sometimes flames of fire with horrible noise and
thundering. Here we may see Bagnara, where the women for their beauty and
comeliness appear like Nymphs; Bagnara.
and here is the general fishing for the Sword-fish, called by Pliny Xiphia,
the which is done (as Strabo declares in his first book of Geography) in this
manner following, which manner is also recited by Polybius. First of all one is
appointed as a spy to stand in a high place, The taking of the sword fish, how
it is done, and by whom it was invented.
being as a common guard or defense for all the fishers, the which are
dispersed into many little boats of two oars, remaining in every one two of
them, one which guides the boat with two oars, the other to wound the fish
with an armed Sphere, which he standing on the fore-deck, or head of the boat,
holds in his hand; so soon as the spy makes a sign that the fish is
discovered rising with the third part of his body above the water, he with the
oars roweth near the boat, and the other preparing his blow wounds him with a
wonderful agility, then snatching out the sphere, the iron remans behind, which
being broad-headed, and so well accommodated, that easily a man may wound with
it, and as easily leave it in the wound; to the iron is tied a long little
cord, which goes so far with the wounded fish, that beating himself and
laboring to escape, becomes weary: Then they draw the fish to the shore, or
get him into one of their little boats, if he be not overgreat; and if it so
fall out the sphere be cast into the Sea, it cannot therefore be lost, because
that being made part of Oak, and part of Firr so well joined together, the
weight of the oak drawing one end under the water, the lightness of the firr
causes the other end to rise up, so that it may easily be taken. Moreover it
falls out sometimes, that he which roweth is wounded in the boat, so great is
the sword of the fish and his fierceness, that this labor is no less dangerous
then the chasing of the wild Boar. Some say that this fishing was learned in
the time of Ulysses, which came into these places. Sciglio.


Afterward appears upon a great Rock, Sciglio, by Pliny called Scylleum
Oppidum, which also holds the name of Scilla the daughter of Forco, which
while the Ancients say should be turned into a Rock, according to the Fable,
was a horrible and hideous Monster which devoured ships, noting that great
danger of Pharaoh, where the roaring and terror of the waves, and the fearful
aspect of the sands, represent very often to passengers which there sail, the
great horror and dreadful fear, oftentimes bringing death it self. This place
was fortified by Anasilao against the Tuscans, where Spartaco was overcome by
Marco Crasso, he in vain purposing to escape in the dead time of the night: And
the said City is adorned with the dignity of a Prince.

Continuing the beautiful Coast of this Country, we may behold the ancient
Cemi, now called Coda della Volpe, and Catona, with Fiumara di Muro, and Regio,
Coda della Volpe. Fiumara di Muro. Regio.
called of the Latins Regium Iulium, which is one of the most ancient Cities
of all Italy, builded (as has been said) by Eschenes the Nephews son of Noe,
to whom the Greeks gave this name because from that place Sicilia was separated
from Italy through the violence of an Earthquake, the which Virgil confirms
in his third book of Eneidos, saying, Haec loca vi quandam vasta convulsa ruina*
Tantum aevi longiqua valet mutare vetustas.
Dissiluisse ferunt, cum protinus utraque tellus
Vna foret, venit medio vi pontis, and undis
Hesperium Siculo latus abscidit, arvaque and urb^^
Lictore deductas angusto interluit aesto.
This City maintained the Commonwealth thereof a long time, and was destroyed
by Dionisius of Siracusa, but being afterward repaired and beautified by Julius
Caesar, suffered many ruins, and last of all by Ariadeno Barbarossa that famous
Captain of the Turkish Navy. In the Territory of this City on the right side,
Grasshoppers and their natures.
the Grasshoppers make a wonderful noise, and on the left they are still, the
which by Poets is attributed to the cursings of Hercoles, being therewith
disquieted in his sleep; but more truly it so happens by the dew which falls
there in the night, because those creatures receive not so much heat to make a
noise, although some affirm they have another kind of voice then the other,
where also they declare the Fable which chanced to Ariston and Eunamo, the
Musician of the Grasshopper, supplying to the one the sound of the string which
he brake in his Citaren, the which the Ancients kept in remembrance a long
time. In Regio is made the best silk, and excellent Wine, whereof Atheneo in
his first book thus says, Vinum Rhegium cum Surrentino pinguius sit, usque ad
annum quintumdecimum est utile. The earthen Vessels that are there made are
much commended, and in old time also were made excellent dishes and vessels, as
Pliny reports in his 35. book, saying, Rhegium inquit siglina, and plastice
nobilitatur. And in another place says, nobilitatur Rhegium patinis. This City
had in old time many excellent Philosophers, and learned men, as Aristides,
Aristocrates, Demostenes, Athosione, Calais, The worthy men of Regio.
Eurchyde, Eliacone, Hipporco, Mnesibolo, Obsimo, Phytio, Selinusio, and
Theocle, of the which Eliacone Hipparco and Phytio, were excellent
Philosophers; to Hipparco Plato entitled a book de studio lucrandi. Androdamo
and Theetheo were also of Regio, two Philosophers and Lawyers.

Now going a little further we come to the Promontory of Leucopetra, so called
by the shining stones that are there, which Mariners now call the Cape dell
arm. Afterward appears the Promontory of Hercules, The Cape of Partivento.
which the Countrey-people at this present call the Cape of Partivento: A
little further is Mendalaia, afterward Brancaleone, Bruzzano; this Cape in old
time was called Zeffiro, where the Moors arived in the year 1126. which
afterward destroyed a good part of the Kingdom. Strabo speaking of this Cape
thus says, Zephirum Promontorium agri Locri a quo Locrenses Zephiri dicti
sunt: Pliny says that in this Promontory is included the first Harbor of
Europe, from the which the Seas have their name. Then follows Bianco, from
whose Country is had great store of Wine; going a little further is discovered
Potamia, which abounds with great store of the best honey; and a little below
is Motta Bovalina, whose Territory is very fertile, yielding good Wines, and
there is gathered no small quantity of Manna, and in the pleasant fields do
naturally grow great plenty of medicinable herbs; here through the amenity of
the air is seen as it were a perpetual Spring, and in every place is excellent
fowling for Partridges, Potamia. Motua Bovalina
Quails, and other Fowls. Gismondo Loffredo possesses this Country, which by
the grace and favor of King Philip, has besides it, newly obtained the Title
of a Marquess. Not far off is to be seen Condoianni, called in old time Vria,
the which Country has the dignity of a Count. And a little distant from hence
is the ancient and noble City of Geraci, called in old time Locri. By whom the
said City should be built, Writers hold diverse opinions, for Dionisius Aphro in
his book de situ orbis writes that Locri was builded by the Queen of the
Locresi, and thus says, Hinc ab boream Zephiri, quae summa vocatur,
Sub qua sunt Locri celeres, qui tempore prisco.
Illuc Reginam propriam venere secuti
Ausoniamque tenent, qua currit slumen Halecus.
Others hold opinion that it was built by Aiace Oileo, or by the Naricii his
companions, confirming it with the words of Virgil in his third book of
Eneidos, saying, Hic, and Nariiti posuere moenia Locri,

This first City used of all others, the written Laws of the Greeks, and were a
long time governed by that commonwealth, and grew very famous for the
Government of Zeleuco their Lawgiver, who was so severe against Adulterers, Of
Zeleuco the Law giver, and his ^everity
that he refused to pardon his own son taken in adultery, he would to the end
the rigor of his Laws should be observed, which commanded that the proof of
this crime should be deprivation of both the eyes (he reputing these two as it
were one thing) was himself first deprived of one eye, and his son of another:
This City also was very famous through Timeo the Philosopher, and Eunomo the
Musician, Timeo the Philosopher. Eunomo the Musician. Eutimo atleta. The Temple
of Proserpina.
and Eutimo Atleta, who was so strong that he did bear upon his shoulders a
stone which two Oxen were scant able to draw. Likewise this City has been very
glorious for the sumptuous and admirable Temple of Proserpina, whereof Livy
makes such honorable mention in his 29, and 31 book. The said Temple was
spoiled for the riches therein by Pyrrhus, and by Dionisius the Tyrant; and
last of all it was robbed by P. Plemnio the Roman Legate. Nevertheless they all
sustained the punishment of Divine vengeance, the one whilst he went up and
down the shore, through fear restored the sacriledg, was afterward slain by
Argus; the punishment of the other was imposed upon his son, being therefore
deprived his Kingdom by God, which often punishes the sins of fathers in their
children, and the other by authority of the Senate died miserably in prison.
There are in the Territory of the said City excellent Baths of brinish and
sulphur water, which help and cure many diseases, and are very good for barren
women. Here are made very fair earthen dishes, and great abundance of the best
and finest silk, excellent oil, capers, corianders, and most delicate manna.
But to the end the Reader may be well satisfied, I will say somewhat of the
said manna which is so much commended by Phisicians. Manna then (as that
learned Mattiolo says) is a certain dew, or sweet liquor which falls in the
night from the air upon the leaves, What Manna is and how i^ comes.
and the boughs of trees, and upon the grass and herbs, and upon the stones,
and likewise upon the earth, the which afterward growing very thick within a
certain space of time, becomes grainy like gum, and this is properly called
manna on the leaves, and is a small grain transparent and heavy, like to a
little grain of white mastick, and of a sweet and pleasant taste. After this,
that on the boughs holds the second place, and the third is that on the stones,
and on the earth, the which has a bigger grain, and nothing so pure a color,
and this is gathered in the morning before the heat of the Sun, forasmuch
afterward as the Sun dissolving it, it is easily converted into air, and
therefore some of them use, which gather it when any great plenty falls, to cut
off the boughs of the trees in the morning betimes, and to carry them into the
fields in the cold air, where through the hardness they gather it wi^h the
greater ease. Averroe was of opinion, and many other besides him, that the
Ancients, and especially Galen, knew not this manna. Manna falls in the
nights in the Summer season when the air is coldest, and the day before very
hot and dry, for the learned interpreters of nature say this proceeds of the
light vapors from the earth and the water. Forasmuch as being first purified
and concocted by the Sun; it is to be thought that by the cold of the night
following it becomes thick. And besides it is to be understood, that that Manna
which falls upon fig leaves, and the Ash is whitest and most gummie; but that
which falls upon the leaves of peaches, of almonds, or oaks, is liquid, and
in taste and color like honey. Therefore we may easily believe, that not by
its own nature, or of it self, Manna becomes gummy, and is made thick like
unto mastick; but these accidents cause these effects upon the leaves and trees
where it chances to fall. Neither is that to be believed which many report
thereof, that manna before the canicular days, sweateth in Calauria, without
falling from the air, even from boughs, and likewise from the bark of the
bodies of the ash and plum-trees, and to be engendered naturally of it self in
these trees, and to sweat out of them, in like manner as gum sweateth from
diverse other trees, wherein they are much deceived; forasmuch as that which
sweateth from these trees in the canicular days, is no other then the
celestial manna descending there in the next succeeding months of May and June,
sucked up by the bark, and drawn out again in such manner as a man draws a
drop of oil out of a piece of woollen cloth that is fallen upon it, and so it
afterward comes to pass, being incorporated with the rine of the tree, issues
out again, drawn by the violent heat of the canicular starr, and is there
thickened, and becomes grainy in the manner of gum. It is evidently seen, that
that which falls from the air is better preserved by the ash and the
plum-trees, then any other kind of Tree or Plant whatsoever; and therefore it
is not to be admired if the most sottile and thin part enters and penetrateth
through the pores thereof, The temperature of Manna.
being there preserved, does not corrupt in a long time. Manna is (according as
Avicenne and Mesue relates) of an equal temperature, more inclining to heat
then otherwise. But according to Averroe, it is hot and moist, it loosneth the
body, although but weakly by it self alone, and therefore it is given to women
with child, and to little children without any hurt or fear; being mingled and
wrought with medicines, it increases their virtue. It gently and easily
purges choler, takes away thirst, opens and mollifieth the parts of the
breast, and of the throat; but it cannot be preserved in the true perfection
thereof above one year. Leaving the said City two miles, we come to the River
Buthroto, whereof Livy makes mention; Livy, lib 9. Siderono. Grotteria.
and not far off is the little Castle of Siderono, with the River Locano which
is full of fish; and a little above is Grotteria, which is six miles from the
Sea, and from Ieraco ten. Barrio is of opinion that the said City was builded
by Idomeneo, King of Candia, called by the Ancients Castrum Minervae. The
Territory thereof is very fruitful and fertile, because that besides the great
abundance of fruit, of oil, of almonds, of silk, and of the best honey; it has
very delectable and pleasant Gardens full of Oringes, Citrons, Limons, and
Pomgranates, and in it are Mines of Gold and Lead. The said Country is adorned
with the dignity of a Marquess subject to the house of Aragona d' Ayerbe.
Departing from Grotteria we come to Mottagioiosa, called by Pliny and by Mela,
Ministra, where is made good Wine, Oil, and Silk, and there is also Mines of
Salt. Mottagioiosa, Roccella.
Near the Sea is Roccella, called in old time Amphissia, whereof Ovid in the 15
book of Met. makes mention, saying, Levibusque Amphissia remis saxa sugit.
This Country has lately been honored with the dignity of a Prince, by the
favor of King Philip. Following the same way, we come to the mouth of Alaro,
which the Ancients called Sacra; Mottapaganica. The Promontory of Cocinto, now
^ called the Cape of Stilo.

The Ionian Sea, where it begins to be so called* Stilo.


after we encounter Mottapaganica, we come to Monesteria, very famous for the
excellent Cheeses, and Flax that are made there; a little higher appears the
ancient Promontory of Cocinto, which is now called the Cape of Stilo, which
according to the opinion of some, is the longest in all Italy, there are dug
round about it many Mines of Gold, of Silver, and Iron, and of Steel. From the
point of the abovesaid Cape begins the Ionian Sea; and afterward is Stilo, a
good and populous Country, whose Territory is very rich of Mines of Gold and
Silver, and other Metals. And there is also made very excellent Flax, Capers
Saffron, Bombace, and it stands from the Sea five miles. Tomaso Campanella of
the Order of Preachers, was born in this Country, and Telesiano the
Philosopher, the which has learnedly writ eight books of disputations against
the Peripateticks in favor of Berardino Telesio, and is now at this present
writing De sensu rerum, where he shows he understands all things. A little
distant is Santa Caterina, and Badolato, a Country very delightful, where is
made excellent Wines, Oil, Honey, and very fine Silk, and also is gathered great
store of Manna, to the which Country Giulio Berlingiero, and Giovandomenico
Greco, excellent Lawyers, at this present yield much honor. After follows
Satriano, called of the Ancients Caecinnum, Badolato. Satriano.
from whom the River takes the name, which runs but a little from thence,
of the which Thucidides in his third book makes mention, saying, Laches, and
Atheniensis egressi e navibus nonnulla loca locridis juxta caecinnum amnem
Locrenses ad arcendam vim occurrentes cum Proxeno Capatonis silio circiter
trecentos caeperunt, detractisque armis abierunt. Afterward is to be seen
Petrito, Petrito. Soverato.
a little Castle situate in a pleasant seat, where is made excellent good Wine;
not very far is Claravalle, which for the goodness of the Flax, contends with
Alexandria for the precedence. Then follows Soverato, whose Territory is
garnished with beautiful Gardens of Citrons, Limons, and Oringes, where near
to the Fountain Meliteo, is to be seen an Oak whose leaves never falls. And
afterward is Squillaci, a noble and an ancient City, built, as some affirm, by
the Ausoni, or by the Enotri. Of this City thus writes Strabo, Squillaci.
Scyllaceum Atheniensium Colonia, qui Menestei comites fuere: From the name of
this City, the Gulf of Squillaci takes its name, so perilous to Sailers,
whereof grows the Proverb, Naufrag^^ Scyllaceus. Squillace was a Colony of the
Romans, as C. Velleio Patercole writes in his first book; to the which City
Cassiodoro, A Proverb.
Munk of the Order of St. Benedict has given great ornament, which writ many
books upon diverse matters; and among others, composed the Tripartite History in
12 books, and a book de ratione animae, and another upon the Canticles; he writ
another book of Etimologies, with a Catalogue of all the Roman Consuls. He
lived in the time of Iustine the old Emperor, and died in the year of our Lord
575. The said City is honored with the title of a Prince, subject to the house
of Borgia, wherein with much reverence is preserved the body of St. Agatio.
Here leaving the River Crotalo, and Roccella, upon a high Hill is Catanzaro, a
noble and populous City, the which was builded by Fagitio, Lieutenant in Italy
for the Emperor Nicephero. And Catanzaro was so called of the Greek word
Catizo, which in Latin signifies sedeo, to which the excellent situation and
the workmanship of Silk, Catanzaro.
and Cloth brings great profit, it is one of the fairest and principal
Cities of Calauria; and at this present it is the head of this Province, and in
it resideth the Kings Audit.

In the chiefest Church thereof lie with great reverence, the bodies of St.
Vitaliano, and Theodoro, Martyrs, whose holy lives are written by the reverend
Paolo Regio, Bishop of Vico.

Hard by is to be seen the City of Taverna, which stands near the Wood Sila.
This City had its original from the ancient Treschinesi, Taverna Treschinesi.
the which being in the year 1068. ruinated by the Saracins, was afterward
reedified within the land in a most strong and inpregnable place; but
sustaining afterward diverse calamities, was again newly built by the Citizens
thereof two miles distant, under a most delicate temperature of air. In the
Territory of this City grows the odoriferous Turpentine which Macedonia,
Damasco, and Syria so much esteemed the having thereof. This City has received
much honor by John Lorenzo Anania, an excellent Divine and Cosmographer, which
has writ the Universal Fabric of the world, and a learned discourse of the
nature of devils. Simari.


Toward the Seaside is to be seen Simari; and a little distant is the City
Trichenesi, which had very stately buildings in the old time; Trischenesi.
but at this present the relics are scant to be seen.

Then follows the City Belcastro, which some say was the ancient Chona. This
City boasts much of St. Thomas of Aquin, Belcastro. The Calaur^si say that S.
Thomas of Aquin was born in Belcastro Mesuraga.
affirming that he was there born, where they say he did the miracle of the
Roses, for which they cease not to contend with the Neopolitans, saying he was
of their City; this worthy Saint died in the Monastery of Fossanova, in the
Territory of Terracina, in the year of our Lord 1274. Near unto it is Mesuraga,
called in old time Reatinum, builded by the Enotrii, of the which Country was
the worthy Matteo Vidio, of the Order of the Minori, whose body with honor
lies in the City of Taverna. Not far distant stands Policastro, called by
the Ancients Petilia, which was builded by Philotete, the son of Piante,
companion of Hercoles: Of this City Virgil in the 3. book of Aeneid, says
thus, Policastro
Hic illa.
Dulcis Melibaei parva Philoctetae subnexa
Petilia muro.


This City was a Colony of the Romans, the which was many times defended with
much valor against the assaults of Hannibal, by whom being at length taken,
was destroyed.

Then follows Siberna, an ancient and an honorable City, now called Santa
Severina, S. Severina, Cutro.

The Cape of Pillars.

Castra Hannibalis.


which is situate on a high Hill in the mids between two famous Rivers, very
strong by nature; and after is the Rock where are dug great hills of Salt.
From hence leaving the River Tacina, appears Cutro, which abounds with
excellent Flax; and a little above is the Castle, which some say should be the
place named by the Latins, Castra Hannibalis. Then appears the Isle and the
Cape of Pillars, before called the Promontory Lacinio, and was so called of
Lacinio a famous Pirat which went robbing up and down, and was afterward slain
by Hercules, who built there a sumptuous Temple to Juno, which Eneas honored
with a Cup of Gold; this place was very famous for the School of Pithagoras,
and for the ashes of Filotete, which laid upon the Altar, was not dispersed
with the wind. This Cape of Pillars in these latter times was so called by the
many and great Pillars which are there standing of the said ruinated Temple.

Leaving this Cape, where begins the second gulf of the Mediterrane, is the
famous City of Cotrone, in old time one of the greatest and chiefest Cities of
Maegna Grecia. Cotrone.
The opinions of Writers are diverse, by whom the said City should be builded,
for some affirm that it was built by Lacinio Corcireo. Ovid, and Strabo say it
should be Misilo; Pithagoras more ancient then these, writes that Hercules
built it. This City was very famous because the Philosopher Pithagoras was a
Citizen thereof, See Plutarch in Communio, and St. Thomas in the 1 book of the
Methe^ra: of Aristotle.
from whose School proceeded more Philosophers then were Captains in the Trojan
horse, and also for Orpheus the Poet, and Democides the Phisician, so much
esteemed of the King of Persia; besides the beauty of the women have been much
commended, for Zeuxses portraying Images in the Temple of Juno, took them for
his pattern, and for the sports and exercises of Atleta, where was Milo, so
strong that he used to carry a Bull; and Egone which in running overtook the
young Heifers, cutting from them their hoofs, and making afterward a present
thereof to his Amarillis.

Walking along we come to the City Cariati which has the dignity of a Prince;
and not far off lies Calopizzato, Crusia, and the noble and ancient City
Rossano, built by the Enotri; Rossano.
John the 7. Bishop of Rome, which was born there, honors much this City.

A little farther within the Land, is Longobucco, where are sound certian Mines
of Silver; Longobucco.
from thence descending toward the Sea, we may see Corigliano; and not far off
is Cassano, in so fair and temperate a Country, as it is not inferior to the
best part of all the Land of Lavoro; and here within the circuit of this
pleasant Country was the ancient City of Turio, Turio.
which at this present the people of the Country call Terranova: Trogo writes
in his 20 book, that the said City was builded by Filottete, the which was much
ennobled by Herodotus, having writ therein his Histories, in which City he also
died, as Pliny says; from the same City Octavius Augustus had his beginning.
And this City has also been the natural Soil of many Roman Bishops. Then
appears toward the seaside, Trebisazze, Albidona, Amendolara, and the River
Semio, called in old time Siri, by the City of Siro, which stood very near,
which was afterward named Heraclea, to whom the Statue of Minerva bred great
wonder, in turning and rouling the eyes against the Ionii, which sacking and
spoiling the City, respected it not. The men of this Province are of a white
complexion, The quality and disposition of the men of this Province.
of indifferent stature, and strong, crafty, firm and resolute in their
opinions, hardy and stout, much inclined to Learning and Arms; they use Daggs,
Swords, and Pikes. The Gentlemen attire themselves after the Neopolitan
fashion, and likewise the women; but those which live in Villages are very rude
and barbarous. The Arms of this Province are per salter or.4. pates gules; and
on the second partition or so many crosses bastone Sa. The which two Crosses
signify the two Calaurias; and the other partitions are the Arms of Aragon.
These Arms were invented by Don Ferdinando of Aragon, Duke of Calauria, the son
of Alfonsus the first, King of Naples, for that he would not otherwise express
them, that although the Region of Calauria was divided by his Father into two
Provinces, nevertheless he was Lord of them both.

The Country of OTRANTO, The seventh Province of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
THe fair and rich Province of the Country of Otranto, called in old time
Iapigia, as Solon says, of Iapige the son of Dedalus, which came thither with
many people to inhabit. These people had their original from Latii, and as
others say, from the Cretians, which with the Illerians came into this utmost
bound of Italy. This Province was also called Salentina, from the Promontory
Salentino, at this present named the Cape of Santa Maria; but as Festus says,
of Salo, which is to say the Sea which compasses it almost round about, except
a little part which joyneth with the firm land; others affirm that it was
called Salentina of the people Salentini, which came with the Cretians hither
to inhabit. It was afterward called Messapia, of the Captain Messapo, which
came from Peloponesus with a Colony into this Region. And not long after it was
named by the Creeks, Calauria. And finally from the City of Otranto, all this
Region is called the Country of Otranto. The figure and form of this Province
is an out cape of land, which is one of the three angles or corners of Italy,
wherein ends one of the two principal capes, wherein is a part of the
Apennine, The form and figure of this Province.

The circuit of this Province. The quality of the earth.


and here as is commonly thought, ends the Adriatic Sea, and is united with
the Ionian. Verily this Province seems as another Chersonesus, lying under a
pleasant air. The circuit thereof is little more then 200 miles, whose Istmus
is between Taranto and Monopoli, not exceeding the space of 40 miles; in the
which Peninsula, although the superficial part of the earth for the most part
be rough and stony, nevertheless being ploughed up, discovers excellent
mould, and although there be little store of water, it yields good pasture for
Cattle, and brings forth Wheat, Wine, Barley, Oats, Olives, Citrons,
excellent Musk-millions, Figgs, Apples, Pears, The great plenty of fruit in
this Province.
Limons, Oringes, Oxen, Asses, Mules of the best breed, and such abundance of
Saffron, that it seems to be rather the proper fruit of this Country, then of
Carthage. The great plenty of O^l which is there made, seems a thing
incredible to those which have not seen it, whereby all the Kingdom does not
only abound therewith, but also the greatest part of Italy; and every where is
excellent fowling, and hunting both for Conies and hares. And although the air
be very wholesome, yet the leprosy is very common, by the means, as I think, of
eating Pork, and dry Figgs, the ordinary food of the common people. The
springs of water are partly sweet, and partly gross and brackish. In this
Country is bred the Tarantola, Why the disease of the leprosy reigns in this
country.
whose venom is driven away with sound and singing, the which Galen also
affirms, with the authority of Theofrastus, of certain other creatures. There
are also bred the Chersidri, and there is no part of Italy more troubled with
Grasshoppers, which devour all things where they come, and in one night consume
the ripest fields. But nature has provided a remedy by the means of certain
Fowls, Chirsidri.
which they call Ganie, which destroy this vermin. The Hail also much hurts
this Province, which almost every year does some spoil. The Thunder is there
felt, as in the Country of Lavoro, both in Summer and Winter. But coming to the
description of this Province, beginning at the River Bradano, is Taranto, a
worthy and an ancient City, which some say had that name from the River Tara,
and others from Tara the son of Neptune, and others impute the original to
Hercoles. This City so increased by the means of Falanto the Spartan, who
governing under the Democratical Regiment, contended sometimes with the Lucani,
The description of the country. Taranto.
and sometimes with the Senate, being always aided by strange Captains, having
sometines the help of Alexander, and sometines of Pyrrhus, became so rich, that
there was no City except Siracusa, that brought greater riches to the people of
Rome; it glories much in her Archita, that admirable Mathematician, which
caused a Dove of Copper to fly round about the City, and of Aristosseno the
Musician. Taranto lies between two Seas, whereof the one is called the great,
Archita the Mathematician.
the other the little; in the lesser which is in compass 18 miles, there
runs in many springs, and the River Galeso, by means whereof, and the
calmness of the water, there are many fishes, and no less then in the Sea of
Constantinople. The river Galesio.

The situation of the city of Taranto.


The City stands in an Island like unto a ship, having bridges to pass over
into the Continent; here the ebbing and flowing of the Sea is very violent; on
the other side with a ditch made by men's labors, is joined the little sea with
the great, the which ditch is able to receive a gally, where at this present is
the City, esteemed one of the strongest Forts of the Kingdom, where was the
first Fortress which Fardinando of Aragon King of Naples repaired. Cesaria.
Gallipoli.
Of this Country there is no more to be said, then that which Horace says,
Ille terrarum mihi praeter omnes, angulus ridet. Coasting from hence is
Cesaria, a place ruinated by those of Gallipoli, with the lower sea, full of
great skuls of fishes; not very far is Gallipoli, a City very fair and
populous, which Pliny calls Anza, but Pomponius Mela names it Gallipolis,
the said City was built by the Greeks, which being afterward droven out by the
Gauls, called it Gallipoli. The said City is situate in a narrow piece of Land,
running into the Sea in the fashion of a Drying Pan, in whose utmost part is
that most impregnable City, both for the situation, the Wall, and the Castle,
because the steep and craggy Rocks rampire it; where in the Wars between the
Aragonesi and the French, defended it self in the behalf of Aragon, with great
commendation. That excellent Philosopher John Baptista Crispo, has much
ennobled this City, who has writ 23 books De Ethnicis philosophis caute
legendis, and three others de Animarum statu ex hac vita migrantium. Departing
from thence is Vgento, Vgento.
and the Cape of Luca, called in old time the Promonto y of Iapigio; and in
this place was the famous Temple of Minerva, where was kept the Arms and the
Chain of Diomedes; this cape is now called the cape of Santa Maria, in the end
of the country, so named at this present by the sumptuous church here builded
in honor of the glorious mother of our Lord, called of the Ancients
Promontorium Iapigium, and of Pliny, Ara Iapigia. This cape rises out as a
front or brow of Lacinio, compassing on both sides the gulf of Taranto. Then
follows Castro, a place to be noted for the ruins it sustained by the Turks,
in the time that Soloman attempted the enterprise of Italy. Castro.
Not far from thence is the cape and the famous City of Otranto; Otranto.
here Acomat Bascia first mustered his soldiers in Italy, having destroyed
this City according to the manner of Mahomet 2. his Prince, he made new
fortifications in the city, whereupon were afterward made by our ancestors so
many fortresses through all Europe, that they seemed invincible. And this city
is so near to Greece, that it is scant distant 50 miles, The distance between
Otranto and Greece.
and therefore in this place I think first Pirrhus, and after M. Varro purposed
to join Italy with Greece by a bridge of ships. Here also begins the Adriatic
Gulf, which is divided from the Ionian sea, as it were by a line or path, Where
the Adriatic Gulf begins.
although many say it has its beginning from the Mount St. Angelo; or rather
according to some, from Ancona. This great gulf had its name from the city of
Adria, the which lying crooked as it were a horn, more then any other gulf of
the Mediterrane, even to Tieste, separating Italy from Sclavonia, being on the
right side full of Havens, and having very few on the left, and oftentimes so
tempestuous, whereupon grew this Proverb amond the Ancients, Adria furiosior;
it is now called the gulf of Venice, that famous City giving the name by a Ring
of Gold, which the Duke casts in on the Ascension day, the Popes Legate being
present. Why it was called the Gulf of Venice. The Lake of Liminiti. Brindesi.
And continuing this course are to he seen near the Lake of Liminiti certain
ruins, which declare the greatness of the Emperor Adrian. After comes the Haven
of St. Cataldo, and Brindesi, which was sometimes one of the chiefest cities in
Italy; for all the shipping from the East arived here; and now through discord
and dissension it is half desert. And therefore the air is very unwholesome, a
thing which happens to all great cities, why the air is no better, is the want
of inhabitants (because they dry up the moist and moorish places with their
tillage, and cut down the woods that are too thick, and with fire purge the ill
air, and with high buildings have that which is good) so contrarily there is
nothing worse then the solitude of great cities, because not only they are
deprived of the abovesaid helps, but of the houses themselves, and their ruin
is the receptacle of corruption, which appeared in Aquileia, Rome, Ravenna,
Alexandria in Egypt, and also Bagdel. For the which cause the Greeks did not
too excessively enlarge their cities. Plato and Aristotle, how great they would
have a City to be. The Haven of Brundesi.
Plato would not that his should exceed five thousand Families; Aristotle, that
all his people at one instant might hear the voice of the Crier. The Haven of
Brindesi is like to the head of a heart, whose horns compass the city within it,
because it is divided in two, it is barred up with a chain, the outward part is
guarded by two rocks, and an Island, the mouth of it is very deep, but in the
Wars between K. Alfonsus and the Venetians, a ship sunk to the bottom, which
choked it in such manner, that hardly a Gally can pass. Here we encounter two
Valleys dug by hand, which brings in the sea on the right hand, and the left
side of the city lies in such sort, that it makes almost an Island. It has
two fortresses, one within the two horns, built by the Emperor Frederick the
second of square stone, very beautifully built; the other in the ^sle of St.
Andrea. At the mouth of the outward haven, built by King Alfonsus of Aragon.
Strabo calls this city Brundusium, By whom Brindesi was built.
and others write that it was builded by the Etoli, and afterward inhabited by
the Cretesi, which came with Theseus and Gnoso, and at last it was a colony of
the Romans, and in old time was of so great power, that L. Floro says it was
the head of the Salentini. M Pacuvio, the Tragical Poet, the nephew of Ennius
on whose Tomb says A. Gellio, was engraven this Epitaph. Adolescens, temetsi
properas, hoc te saxum rogat,
Vt se aspicias; deinde quod scriptum est, legas.
Hic sunt poetae Pacuvii Marsi sita
Ossa; hoc volebam, nescius ne esses: vale.
There lies with great reverence in the principal church thereof, the bodies
of St. Theodoro and Pelino, Martyrs, and there is to be seen all the whole
tongue of St. Jerome. The noble Families that are in this city, are these
following, Balzo, Bove, Caracciolo, Catignano, Cuggio, d' Eredia, Fornaro,
Pando, Pascale, Pizzica, Ramondo, Scomafora, Sasso, Tomasino, Villanova,
Vacchedani, and others. Between Brindesi and Otranto, every place is full of
Olives; but from Brindesi to Ostuni (for the space of 24 miles) there is
nothing but bushes and woods. Brindesi is distant from Rome 360 miles, Matera.
and from Durazzo 220. On the Mediterrane lies in a corner of the River
Bradano, Matera, the which some say should be Acheronitia, Matera is distant
from Gravina twelve miles, and is very famous for the strangeness of the
situation thereof, and for the multitude of people, and in it is a Mine of
Boalarmonack, The Mine of Boalearmonack.

The Poet Eustachio.


which is of excellent nature to heal a wound, and the bloody flux, and the
biting of venomous creatures; and moreover there is a Mine of Saltpeter.
Eustachio, said to be of Materea, was a citizen thereof, a Phisician which in
verse writ of the virtue of the Baths of Pozzuolo, and also M. Vito of Matera,
a very learned man of the Order of St^ Dominick, was a citizen thereof, as the
Chronicle of the Order of Preachers makes mention, saying, Nec defuit Italia
dare nobis fratrem vitum de Matera sydus, atque alterum long clarius.
Following that way, Motola. Misagne^ Otra.
we come to Motola, Misagne, and Otra, which has the title of a Marquess: and
a little farther appears the ruins of Baleso, but without that famous
fountain, being either lost, or otherwise having changed its course. Afterward
is to be seen Leccie, Leccie.
where resides the Council of State and the Nobility of the Province, which
has such a residence, such buildings, and the precinct of such a country, and
so great civility, that it seems as a little Naples. Carlo Sigonio calls this
city Aletium, and others Licium, which as some write was built by Idomeneo a
Greek, Captain of the Cretian soldiers, and called it Litio, of his own
country. Others say that it was not Idomeneo, but Malennio King of the
Salentini that built it; but howsoever it is not to be doubted but it is
ancient. Afterward it increased in people by the ruin of Lupia, The Epitaph on
the Tomb of the Poet Ennius.
and of Rudia the natural place of the Poet Ennius, which as Cicero writes,
upon his Tomb were engraven these verses, Aspicite O cives senis Ennii imaginis
urnam,
Hic vestrum panxit maxima facta patrum.
Nemo me Lacrimis decoret, nec funera fletu
Faxit? cur? volito viva per ora virum.


This City has an excellent fruitful Territory with pleasant Gardens, and
about it is a Grove of Olive trees of forty miles, which yields a very fair
prospect. Within the said city besides many goodly churches, there are also 13
convents of Friars, 8 of Munks, and two honorable and worthy Hospitals. The
citizens thereof are generally given to Arms and Learning, and all apparel
themselves very costly. This city has brought forth among others, excellent
men of War, as Leonardo Prato Knight of Jerusalem, Bailief of Venosa, which as
Bembo writes, was one of the best Captains of his time, Bembo in the ^. book
of the History of Venice.
and in the enterprise of the Rodes killed in a single combat a Turkish Giant,
which very often had overcome valiant Christian Captains, he being very expert
in the Wars, served the Commonwealth of Venice with such general applause, that
after his death the said Commonwealth erected a Statue of Marble, which at this
present is to be seen in the Church of St. John and Paul, with this
subscription,

Leornardum Pratum militem fortissimum, and ex provocatione semper victorem.
Praefectum Ferdinandi junioris, and Frederici Regum Neap. ob virtutem
terrestribus, navalibusque preliis foelicissimum magnis, This Leonardo Prato
Guicciardino, and others say, was of Naples, but it is not true.
clarissimisque rebus pro veneta Republica gestis, pugnantem ab host cesum.

Leonardus Loredanus Princeps, and amplissimus ordo Senatorius prudentiae, a^
sortitudinis ergo, statua haec aequestri donandum censuit.

Scipio Ammirato, an excellent Historian, lives at this present with much
honor to this city, which for his rare qualities is much esteemed by the Duke
of Tuscan. Going a little forward through this pleasant and delightful
country, is situate upon a hill the City Ogento, by Ptolomeo called Vxentum,
which has the title of a Count subject to the house of Orsina; and walking
certain miles appears the fair country of St. Pietro in Galatina, Ogento. St.
Pietro in Galatina.
the natural country of Marc. Antonio Zimara, and of Theophilus his son, an
excellent Philosopher. Departing from thence, and walking a mile appears
Soleto, called by Pliny Soletum, of which place was Matteo, called of Soleto,
the famous Nigromant. Hard by is the worthy country of Galatena, to the which
Antonio (called the Galatean) has given great honor, a Philosopher, Orator,
Poet, and an excellent Cosmographer, Galatena.
whose Works are well known, he was dearly esteemed of King Fardinando of
Aragon, and of King Frederick, from whom he obtained many bountiful gifts; he
departed this life with much honor in the year of our Lord 1509. in the city
of Lecce, on whose Tomb remains this Epitaph: Qui novit medicas arts, and
sydera coeli
Hac Galateus humo conditus ille jacet
Qui coelum, terramque animo concepit Olympum
Cernite mortales quam brevis urna tegit.
The fields of this country are fruitful, and yield all sorts of corn, wine,
and oil* the Marquess thereof is Cosmo Pinelli, the son of Galeazzo, Duke of
Acerenza, a Lord warthily qualified, very virtuous and kind, and as he has an
honorable presence, and a Princely port, loves not only Arms, but Learning
also, Cosmo Pinelli, Marquess of Galatena.
wherein is added further perfection in the full felicity of a flowing wit,
graciously to express his noble and high magnanimity, whereby he does not a jot
degenerate from his worthy progenitors. Walking along we may discover certain
small Villages and Castles here, and there near these places, which being of no
great importance, I think best to omit. Going from Galatena six miles,
appears Paravita, Paravita: Nardo.
and Nardo, a city very fair and ancient, which Ptolomy calls Neritum, where
is often seen in the air, the southwind blowing, as it were in a glass, the
likeness of those things which are round about, the common people that knows
not the reason or cause thereof, imputes it to a diabolical illusion, whereas
the reason is the disposition of the place, and the quality of the air, which
is made thick through the superfluous and excessive humidity opposite unto it:
hard by are to be seen the ruins of Vest, where not long since were
discovered certain Epitaphs of the ancient Letters of Messapie. Afterward we
come to Casalnuovo, edified by the ruins of the ancient Mandurio, which has a
very fruitful Territory.

But coming now to an end of this Province, Casalnovo Mandurio. The nature and
quality of the inhabitants of this Province.
it remains that we declare something of the Inhabitants, the which generally
are very strong, and of a comely constitution, simple in behavior, and more
neat then those that dwell near unto them, their proper language seems to be
diverse, for some speak with the pallat, others with the pallat and the breast,
and in all appears a strong and ingenious wit, and in their apparel very decent
and comely. They apply themselves much to Arms, and those that are exercised in
Learning prove very excellent. Whereupon I do believe that which a wiseman
feigned, that here Mars and Minerva should encounter, only for that it seems
that the most part of men therein are employed in Learning and Arms. The Arms
of this Province is or. four pales gu. a Dolphin proper, in his mouth a
Cressent argent. The arms of the region of Otranto.
The original of the which Arms was in the year 1481. At the time that Alfonsus
of Aragon Duke of Calauria, the son of Ferdinando the first King of Naples,
drove away the Turks from the city of Otronto, and other places; whereupon the
men of this Province willing to show that great service which the King had done
for them, in delivering them from the hands of the wicked Tyrant Mahumet the
second, Emperor of the Turks, for this cause devised the said Arms, declaring
by the four pales gu. in the field or. the Arms of the King Fardinando of
Aragon. The Dolphin was no new invention, but very ancient, for so much as the
monuments declare, that the Dolphin with Neptune were the proper ensigns of
the country of the Salentini; but only they added the half moon in the mouth of
the Dolphin, noting thereby that the new Seigniory which the Tyrant Mahumet
endeavored to hold in this worthy Province, was by the care and diligence of
the valiant Alfonsus, and the virtue of the Inhabitants thereof taken from him:

The Country of BARY, The eighth Province of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
THe fertile and fruitful Province of the Country of Bary, was in old time
called Apulia Pucetia, of Pucetio the brother of Enotrio, and son of Licaone,
which with many followers departed from Greece 375 years before the Wars of
Troy, and settled themselves in this place, the which people were sometimes
called Pucetii, and sometimes Pedicoli, and were the first men sent out of
Greece to dwell elsewhere. Also the said people which inhabited between the
Territory of Taranto, Brindesi, and the River Aufido, were named Etoli, of
Etolia of Greece, the people whereof came into these places to inhabit, as
certain Writers affirm, the Pediculi being droven from thence, remained
therein. What these Pediculi were, Strabo declares in his sixth book, and Pliny
in the third; and say that they were nine youths, and as many wenches which
departed from Illiria, and here inhabited, from whom descended 13 people, and
to the end they might dwell the more securely, built many Castles, and were
called Pediculi, that is to say, boys or children. At this present it is called
the Land of Bary, from the city of Bary, anciently called Iapigia, and Baretum,
the head of this Province, in the which city in a stately church wherein with
great reverence is preserved the body of St. Nicholas, sometimes Bishop of
Licia, from whom continually issues (as is said) a certain liquor, called by
the Citizens Manna, which is an admirable thing, and the Priests which have the
keeping thereof use to bestow on those that come thither, little viols of glass
full of the said Manna. The said Church is served by a hundred beneficed
Priests. The bounds of this Province was according to Strabo and Pliny, from
the Territory of Taranto, and of the Brindesi, along unto the River Fortoro,
from thence by the Mount Gargano, The limits and fertility of this country of
Bari.
and toward the Adriatic Sea, or rather Ionian (according to Ptolomy) even to
the Lucani, and the Irpini, and the Sanniti, and so the said bounds have on the
South the Salentini, Lucani, and Irpini, on the North the coast of Ionian, and
Adriatic, on the West the River Fortoro, the limit of the Caraceni, and
Ferrentani, now called Abruzzo. The goodness and fertility of this Province is
very great, for it yields Grain, Wine, Oil, Barley, Beans, Fitches, Annis,
Comin, Coriander, Saffron, and Bombace. There are great Woods of Almons and
Olives, so bigg-bodied and so high, that it seems that nature has brought them
forth as a wonder unto men. And to be brief, so great is the difference of
these Trees, from those which grow elsewhere, as is between the wild Olives and
those which are planted, and also of the greatness of the bodies, and their
admirable height, with the fashion of their boughs, whereupon the Ancients have
said that they were dedicated to Minerva, The fable of the nymph Fillida.
and have also feigned that in these places was hanged Filida the Nymph; and is
no less plentiful of Oringes, Limons, and other the like fruitful Trees, as
well for the benefit of living creatures, as for pleasure; besides there is
excellent hunting, both for fowls, and also wild beasts. The Sea thereof has
great store of good fishes, the air is very cheerful and temperate, but the
waters are otherwise, for they are gross and brackish. Barletta.
There are on the side of the Sea these Cities and Countries following,
Barletta, of later Latinists called Barolum, a worthy City, rich and full of
people, built by the inhabiters of Canusio, but enlarged by the Emperor
Frederick the second. In the midst of the Marketplace of this noble City is a
great Statue of Metal of ten yards high of the Emperor Frederick, although the
Barletani affirm that it is the Image of the Emp. Heraclio, nevertheless the
first opinion is truest. There is also a very strong castle, which is accounted
one of the four that are so famous in Italy. Presently follows the fair, The
city Trani Don Ferrant Gonzaga, Prince of Molfetta. Nicola di Giovenezzo
companion of St. Dominick.
city of Trany, named by Pliny, Trinium* built by Terreno the son of Diomides
and repaired by the Emperor Trajan. Hard by is Molfetta, a city full of
civility, which with the title of a Prince is possessed by the Lord Don Ferrant
Gonzaga, chief Justicer in the Kingdom. Nicolo, surnamed of Giovenazzo,
companion of St. Dominick, gave the name to this City, to whom was revealed the
manner of conveying his bones, as is to be read in the book of the famous men
of the Order of Preachers. Walking along we come to Mola, Saint Vito,
Polignano, St. Stefano, and Villanova. Farther within the land are these
cities, Monopoli, Monopoli.
built by the ruins of Egnatia, to which City has grown great honor by
Bartholomeo Sibilla of the Order of Preachers, an excellent Philosopher and
Divine, and C^millo Querno, a singular Poet who lived in the time of Pope Leo,
Ostuno, Ceglie, Conversano, Gioia, Rotigliano, Altamura, Acquaviva, Cassano,
Monorvino, Modugno, Terlizzi, Rutigliano, Quarato, Pulignano, and Biseglia,
called in old time Vigile, a noble city and full of Traffic, wherein was found
the bodies of St. Mauro Bishop of Sergio, and Pantaleone, martyred for the
Christian faith, being revealed to Francesco del Balzo d' Andri, Lord of this
city, who caused them to be put with great reverence in an honorable
Sepulcher, The city Gravina, why it was so called.
from which rises (as they say) continually a precious liquor called Manna.
After follows Bitetto, Ruvo, and Gravina a great city, very fair and civil, the
which with the title of a Duke is anciently possessed by the worthy Family
Orsina, Don Antonio Ors^no is the present Duke thereof, a young man, which is
very likely to imitate the honorable steps of Duke Ferrant his father of
worthy memory. And the said Gravina was the Garner and Storehouse of Puglia,
for the inestimable quantity of corn which was gathered in the Territory
thereof; and there is one notable thing which is there done every summer by the
Stork, whereby the country receives no small benefit by the destruction of
Serpents which breed there too plentifully* which the Storks feed upon;
whereupon I will not conceal the manner observed by this bird in killing that
venomous creature, The batel which the stork makes with the serpent.
as the people of the country report, and is at all times to be seen. The Stork
has a very long beak, bigg and sharp pointed, and making one of his wings to
serve as a buckler, which is very great among the bigg quils thereof, thrusts
his beak in and out, being accompanied with a very long neck, so fiercely
pricketh and gripeth his enemy, until he kill him, and afterward taking him in
his mouth carries him to his nest, oftentimes flying within the view of the
city. And it is to be noted that in this combat was never seen any stork killed
by the serpent; whereupon the Dukes have always observed by a penal Act to
punish whomsoever kills any stork, and therefore they live familiarly with
them. The Arms of Gravina are certain ears of Corn, and bunches of Grapes, to
declare how much the Territory thereof abounds with these two sorts of
fruits, that is to say Corn and Wine, whereupon some think from thence it
takes its name. In this Province is Bitonto, so called as it were bonum totum,
it is a rich and a populous city; Bitonto.
the Territory thereof is very fertile, for so much as it yields besides Wine,
Oil, and Corn, Almons, and Oringes, and Limons in great abundance. Julius
Acquaviva Duke of Atri was Marquess of Bitonto. This country is famous by the
means of Antonio the Divine, an excellent Preacher, and Mariano likewise a
Divine of great name in his time. Cornelio Musso Bishop of Bitonto. Adri.
Canosa.
Cornelio Musso the Bishop does also increase the honor of this city, an
admirable and incomparable Preacher, whose Works are generally known. There is
Andri the renowned and beautiful City, and likewise Canosa, near ancient
Canna, where Maherbal Captain of the horse said unto Hannibal, Vincere scis
Annibal, sed victoria uti nescis, because he obtaining the victory of Canna,
went not presently to Rome, as he was advised. In this Province are bred a
great multitude of venomous serpents, called the Tarantole, which Latinists
call Phalangi, The tarantole and their nature, see Alexander of Alexandria in
the 2 lib. of these. Geniale. cap. 17 The quality and condition of the men of
this Province.
which are certain living creatures little differing from the likeness of a
frog, which with often biting, so envenometh that the infection cannot be
cured, but with music, dansing, singing, and colors, and without these means
they cannot live. The men of this Province are generally of great courage, and
very forward in military affairs, but very frail, and unable to encounter
adversity, whereof grew this proverb, That in the beginning of the battle they
are more then men, but in the end less then women. They are for the most part
of a swart complexion, and of a tall stature, in conversation courteous, and
painful in their affairs, they abstain marvelously from stealing, in taking
parts, and in bargaing they are very honest, and seldom is any contention among
them, the women are beautiful, loving, and complete. Some have thought,
because there is no Iron in this country, they had in old time little use of
swords, but only a long staff pointed with a little iron, which served them to
fight and defend themselves; but having the enemy in a straight, or a little
distant, the footmen cast darts and other weapons, going to skirmish, they wore
only one coat, they had their Targets painted with diverse colors, and very few
used any mail; but at this present it is otherwise; for there is not a boy that
knows not how with good aim to discharge a piece, The arms of this Province,
and the signification thereof.
and almost every one is trained up in the practice of military affairs. The
Arms of this Province is per salter azur and argent, a crosier or Bishops staff
or. These Arms as I think, signify by the corners, the bounds thereof, which
divide it from the other Provinces, and by the Bishops staff, should seem to
declare the devotion of St. Nicholas, and so much the more we may believe it,
in so much as the body of the said Saint lies in the principal City of this
City.

ABRUZZO On this side the ninth Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
ABRVZZO is the coldest part of all the Kingdom, but the Province is very
famous, for the puissance and glory of the ancient Sanniti, which are the
Pentri, Amiternini, Precutini, The Sanniti and their inhabiters.
Marci, Caraceni, Vestini, Marracini, and Irpini; although Pliny also adds
the Frentani, and Peligni. All these people descend of the Sannity, from the
City of Sannio, called in old time Samnum, where the Sabines remained, being
arived in these places, from whom the said Sannity derive their original. Of
what power and authority these people have been, would be a thing no less
difficult then tedious to recite, insomuch as their Empire became so great,
that they overan, sacking and spoiling even to Ardea of the Latins, and also
to Campania felix, How long the war continued between the Sannites and the
Romans.
whereby they held War in these countries the space of 80 years, oftentimes
incountring the Romans with victory, and after diverse fortunes both on the one
and the other side, in the end they became so subject by the means of the Fabii
and the Papirii, both the fathers and their sons, that they could never any
more strive against them. The History is well known of the famous exploit at
the gallows of Caudine, when under the Consulship of Vetturio and Posthumio,
the Romans being there intrapped, The valley of Caudine.
were afterward enforced by Pontio Captain of the Sanniti, to pass
dishonorable under the yoke, the which being endured by the Romans with a
silent disdain, within awhile after was revenged with a notable overthrow given
unto them under the most valiant Cursor L. Papirio, the which is discoursed at
large by Titus Livius. At this present (as is elsewhere declared) where is
named the Gallows Caudine, is called the straight of Arpaia, and where the
Romans past under the yoke, is the yoke of St. Mary, and the Valley Caudine is
eight miles distant from Benevento. Strabo speaking of the Sannity, thus says,
Sannites postremo a Sylla deleti sunt, quos cum caeteris Italis bello fractis,
solos arma retinentes, ac Romam oppugnantes, vide^et, alios in fuga cecidit,
alios abjectis armis se dedentes ad quatuor millia in villa publica, quae in
Campo Martio est trucidavit, fractisque proscriptionibus, non ante destitit,
quam universum Sannitium nomen deleverit, aut Italia fugarit. The Region of
Sannio was more in length then in breadth, for it had on the North the
Ferentani and Pugliesi, on the South the Campani and Lucany, on the West the
Ausoni with Piligni, and on the East the same Lucani and Pugliesi. The confines
of the country of the Sannites.

Who were the worthiest people of the Sannites.

Why it was called Abruzzo The limits of Abruzzo

Where Abruz^^ has its beginning.


The worthiest people of all the Sanniti were the Pentri, Caraceni and Hirpini;
from whom this country of Abruzzo derived its name, there are sundry opinions,
for some say, they were called by the Latins Aprutium, because it is
mountenous and full of wild hoggs. Others affirm that a part of Abruzzo being
sometimee inhabited by the Precutini, time having corrupted the word* instead
of Precutio, was called Aprutio. I name this Province Abruzzo, as it is by the
Kings Court, and as at this present it is commonly called, changing the letter
P. into B.. The bounds of Abruzzo had on the East the River Fortore, Tronto on
the West, on the North the Adriatic Sea, and on the South the Apennine Hills,
and moreover also it had on the East the Plain Puglia, with the River Fortore,
on the West part of the Sabines, Picentini, and Campani, with Latium, the
Equicoli along the Apennine, as much on the one side of the said Hill, as is on
the other. It now takes its beginning from the mouth of the River Pescara, and
goes along the shore of the Adriatic sea, even to the mouth of Fortore, where
it ends with Capitanato, leaving by that Province the City of Teramo, and
between the Land with Abruzzo on the other side, and that branch of the River
Pescara, which rising from the straight of Valata, passes by the foot of the
Apennine against the Land of Popoli, and near it enters into the Valley called
Itramonti; leaving all the country which has the River on the right side; and
a little higder above the Marsi are the Apennine Hills, where the River Sangro
springs, which rises from that obscure Valley of Barrea, which they call the
Kings Valley, in the Plain near the castle of Sangro, which divides this
Province from the county of Molise. This Province is partly plain, and partly
mountainous, and has great plenty of Rivers, and great and thick Woods, and
the Territory thereof is very fertile, for it brings forth Wine, Grain, Oil,
Rice, Barley, and other Corn, and everywhere is gathered great abundance of
excellent Saffron* And although the air be somewhat cold, nevertheless the
amenity of the country is sweetened thereby with so good a temper, and such
plenty of fruits, and herds of cattle, and abundance of wild beasts, besides
ravenous creatures, as wolves and bears. Some think that the Frentani were the
most valiant people of all Italy, but (as I think) they were much deceived,
having not first well considered the words of Pliny, who describing the Region
of the Frentani, says it makes the fourth, which from the River Tiferno
begins the fourth Region of the Frentani, so that by these valiant people he
means the Frentani themselves, and the Marrucini, which came afterward, and
the Peligni, and the Precutini; and who reads the Roman Histories, may know
that the squadrons of the Peligni were preferred before all the Latin Nations.
The principal city of this Region is called at this Present Civita di Chieti,
Peligni the most valiant people of all Italy.

Civita di Chieti* the chief city of this Province. Pepin the s^n of Charles the
great, for what cause he destr^yed Civita di (...).


named by Ptolomy Teatea, and of Pliny Theate, and also of Strabo, Theate, and
was so called by Theata the mother of Achilles. Both these said Authors write,
that this city was the chief and principal head of the Marucini, as likewise
Silio affirms the same, saying, Marhucina simul Frentanis aemula pubes,
Corfini populos, magnumque Theate trabebat.


This city is situate upon a very high hill, distant from the Adriatic Sea no
more then seven miles, it was destroyed by Pepin the son of Charles the great,
for taking part with the Longobards; but it was about two hundred years
following repaired again, and became so pleasing to the Normans for the most
pleasant situation thereof, that Gotfredo the brother of Ruberto Guiscardo, in
the time of Pope Nicholas the second possessing this Province, made the said
City the head of all the Country of Abruzzo, the Territory thereof is very
excellent, and brings forth all necessary things, as well for profit as
pleasure. beyond the River Sangro among the Peligni is the ancient City of
Orton upon the Sea, being by Strabo called Ortonium, and of Cato, Ortonum; but
Ptolomy names it Orton. Gotfredo the the Norman made Civita di Chieti the
principal city of Abruzzo. Orton.

The body of St. Thomas the Apostle.

The light of St. Heramo, which appears to sailers when they are in great
danger.

The city Ferentana, now called Francauilla. Lanciano.


And Strabo writes that it was in old time called Petra Piratorum, because the
Rovers and Pirates retired hither when they had robbed at the sea; in the which
City is to be seen in a very stately Church, where with great reverence is
preserved the body of St. Thomas the Apostle, with his ancient Tomb, in which
Church appears always upon the Steeple when any ship is in danger at sea,
the miraculous light of St. Heramo, which the Ancients attributed to Castor and
Pollux, although Philosophers affirm that it naturally proceeds from the
repercussion of the air through the winds and water, which seems very
unlikely, because there is not so much as the leaf of a tree that moves
without the providence of God; how should this light casually chance, the sea
presently becoming calm, and the sailers in safety, which in that perilous
state called faithfully upon the name of God? Neither can it be by the means of
any evil spirits, for never is showed any deed of piety but by some celestial
and divine means, and especially toward the faithful. Not far distant from
Ortona, is to be seen Ferentana, at this present corruptly called Francavilla,
because it was often possessed by the French; this City was (according to Razano)
the head of the Frentani. From the River Sangro, or Sanguine, called in old
time Saro, four miles distant; and as far from the sea is Lanciano, a noble
City, called by Pliny, Anxium, and of Ptolomy, Anxanum: Here at two several
times in the year, that is to say in the month of May and August, do Merchants
assemble almost from all parts of Europe, Asia, and from other parts, where is
a principal Mart or Fair very famous through all the world: on the right hand
of Lanciano, at the foot of the Hill is Maiella and Palumbaro; and on the right
hand of the River Sangro, near the Sea, is the Monastery of St. John, where
sometimes was the famous Temple of Venus; and above are these Countries,
Fossaceca, and the Fort of St. John; and a little higher on the side of Sangro
are seen the great ruins of the City of Bica, which the country people call
Seca; on the right hand comes the River Aventino, and joyneth with Sangro, and
near the foot of Maiella are these Countries, Civitella and Lama, and on the
right hand of the River Aventino is Palena, the word being corrupted in place
of Peligno, near the which appears the ruins of the ancient City sometimes the
chief and head of the Piligni, called Superequani. This Country is ennobled
with the dignity of a Count, the Lord whereof is Matteo of Capoa, Prince of
Couca, a very rich Lord, and a great lover of Learning.

But returning behind Lanciano, going along the shore of the sea, we come to
the mouth of the River Foro, which rises from the Mount Maiella, The river
Foro. Tollo. Miglionico Fara Rapino Penna

The river Lento Villamaina Petrono The sort of Montepiano Castle Menale
Bucchianicho The city Sulmona, the natural place of the Poet Ovid.


where it enters into the Sea, near the which is the Castle Tollo, and on the
left side thereof near unto it is Miglionico; and a little higher is Fara, and
before it is Rapino, and near to Maiella is Penna. After the mouth of the River
Foro, is to be seen on the sea the mouth of the River Lento, which also rises
from Maiella. On whose right side (but yet very near) distant from the Sea but
five miles, appears Villamania, above the which (nevertheless under Maiella) is
the Castle Petrono, near to the which is the Fort of Montipiano, and above the
fountain from whence the River Lento springs, is Castle Menale. And somewhat
lower upon the Mediterrane is Bucchianico, a civil Country, honored with the
dignity of a Marquisat, the Territory whereof is very fertile, and has great
plenty of Olives; going a little farther we come to the noble and fair City of
Solmona, by Strabo called Sulmo, and likewise Ptolomy and Cato so name it; the
said City was built by Solemo of Frigia the companion of Aeneas. That eloquent
Poet Ovid Nasone, was here born, as he witnesses in the 4 book of de
Tristibus, in his tenth Elegy, Sulmo mihi patria est gelidis uberimus undis,
Millia qui novies distat ab urbe december.
And the Poet Martial in the first book of his Epigrams declares the same,
saying, Mantua Virgilia gaudet, verona Catullo,
Pelignae gentis gloria dicar ego.
This City has the dignity of a Principality, the Lord thereof is Don Horatio
of Noia, a most generous Knight. Departing from Sulmona we come to the River
Aterno, The River Aterno, now called Pescara.
now called Pescara, from the City of Pescara, which is very near, built by the
ancient City of Aterno, from whence the River has its name. The said City is
ennobled with the dignity of a Marquisat, possessed by the Family Davolo. Going a
little farther toward the Mediterrane, is the little Castle of Cantalupo,
situated at the foot of a Hill, under the which most miraculously does flow a
liquor called the stony oil, The stony oil which rises in the territory of
Cantalupo Caramanico. Cusano.

The mines of pitch which are in Manupelli.

The nature and condition of the people of this Province. The arms of this
Province, and what they signify.


the which is very carefully gathered for the virtue and medicinable operation.
Afterward appears Caramanico, a noble Country, the Territory whereof is very
fertile; and a little beneath is to be seen Cusano, in whose higher parts the
River Librata ends in Pescara, in old time called Albula, into the which
runs two little Rivers, which also descend from Maiella, in the midst
whereof is the Country of Lietto Manupello, in whose Territory is a Mine of
Pitch, which was found the year 1577. And it is in the manner of Tarr.

Being now come to an end of this Province, it remains that I declare somewhat
of the Inhabitants. The people of this Country are very tall and strong, and in
countenance not much unlike the French Nation; in bargaining with strangers
they are simple and courteous, full of courage, and much affected to the
profession of Arms, wherein they grow to great perfection; they are not very
costly in their apparel, but much given to hunting, they are also well inclined
to Learning, and apply themselves much to the study of the Law, and Physic.
The Arms belonging to this Province, is or. a wild Boars head couped in pale on
bas, a yoke in chief gu. noting as I think thereby, the great abundance of wild
Hoggs that are therein, and with this, that memorable exploit that chanced
between these people and the Romans, as it is before recited; moreover it may
be said, that these two charges should signify the same service, placing the
head of the Boar as a fierce and cruel beast, for the arrogance of the Romans
put under the yoke. But I refer my self to better judgment.

ABRUZZO On the other side the tenth Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
THe worthy and renowned Alfonsus of Aragon, the first of this name, King of
Naples, willing to take away the continual strife which fell out among the
Collecters of the Impost and Custom of Abruzzo, divided the said Province into
two parts, and so that which is included in Aterno, and the Hills of Marsi, is
called Abruzzo ulteriore, The limits of Abruzzo on the other side.
which I am now to handle. This part contained the Marrucini, Piligni, and
Ferentani, and part of the Sanniti: Abruzzo is now divided from Campania of
Rome between the Region of the Equicoli, and a little River of obscure name,
having on the one side certain Vaults and Caves, and on the other a high Hill.
It is divided from the Province of Abruzzo on this side by a branch of the
River Pes^ara, running from the foot of the Apennine above Raiano, and directly
against Popoli ends its course: and a little higher by the Apennine Hills,
near the head of the River Sangro, between Pesco and Sarli, and Gioia, and
above the Lake Fucino, in the utmost parts of the Marsi. By the same Hills which
lie toward the South it is also divided from the Country of Lavoro, by the
River Garigliano, even at the spring which rises by the Valley of Orvito under
the Fountain, near to Balzorano, comes Abruzzo on this side to join with the
Territory of Sora. And these places end not only with the Marsi, the Marrucini,
the Peligni, the Ferentani, the Vestini, the Sanniti, and the Preguntini of
Abruzzo, but also with the Territory of Naples.

This Country is both in men and situation very strong, The fertility of this
Province.
it has great plenty of Corn, herds of Cattle and Wine, it has many Rivers,
and an excellent air, there is great variety both for hunting and fowling,
there are also Bears, and great store of Wolves.

But now coming to describe in particular the Rivers, and the Cities which are
in this Province, I will begin from the shore where is a Castle called
Montepagano; and going along twelve miles upon the Seaside, is to be seen the
River Viciola, which springs from the Apennine near the Mount Corvo,
Montepagano. The river Viciola.

The river Tordino. Teramo. Campio. Bisigno. Rugnano. Murro. Locaristo. Guardia
di Vomano. Cast Vecchio. Transmondo. Cautiano. Forcella. Miano. Rapino.
Montorio. Compotosto. Poggio. (...) Monteverde. Montegualco.

The river Piomba. Porta d'Adria. Silva. Hadria, now called Atri, where the
Emperor Adrian was born. From whence the Adriatic Sea had its name. Celino.
Schiarano. Civita St. Angelo. Ilece.

The river Salino. Porto St. Angelo.

The river Sino. Cassilento. Pignano. Serra.

The river Tavo. Civita di Penna.


and running along, enters into the River Tordino, by Pliny called Iuvan^^o,
which also flows from the Apennine, near to the foot of the said Hill Corvo.
Among the said Rivers appears Teramo, a City full of civility, the Bishop
thereof is ennobled with many Titles of dignity, and the Lord is called a Duke.
The said City is the head of all this Country, named by Pliny and Ptolomy,
Interamnia, the which name it had because it is situated among the Rivers, for
a little above it runs into Tordino, a swift stream called Fiumicello, near
the which are three Countries so near, that they are all called by one only
name Campio. Above the Fountain of the River Vicola, are these Castles, Bisigno
and Rugnano, from the River Tordino to the River Vomano, by the seaside are
only six miles, and between the one and the other are many Countries and
Castles, some in the midst, and others nearer to the one then the other,
because the Rivers in their courses make many turnings.

It were requisite to declare with what order all these are placed from the
head to the feet, and first is Murro, Locaristo, Guardia di Vomano, the old
Castle, Transmondo, Cauti^no, Forcella, Miano, Rapino, Colle Vecchio,
Forna^olo, Montorio, Poggio, Vmbreco, and Rosseo: and where Vomano springs
from the Apennine, are many Villages well inhabited, as Compotosto, and Poggio,
which is a Castle, and Massione on the left hand of Vomano; and within the
Country are situated these Castles, Motola, Monteverde, and Montegualco; and
here ends (as Pliny says) the Precutini. And following the same course, we
come to speak of the Marrucini, which Livy says, caused themselves voluntarily
to be enrolled among the Soldiers that went with Scipio into Africa. Now then
after the River Vomano, comes another River called Piomba, where is another
Castle which is called Porto d'Adria; and a little higher is a Country called
Silva; five miles within the Land, and almost in the midst between the said two
Rivers, upon a high Hill is the City of Atri, called in old time Hadria, which
was a Colony of the Romans. Here was born (as Celio the Spartan writes) the
Roman Emperor Adrian. P. Vittore believes that the Adriaetick Sea had its name
from this City, the which also Sesto Aurelio affirms in his book of Cesars.
Above Atri, or Hadria, upon the right hand of the River Piomba, is the Castle
of Celino, and above where this River springs, is the Country of Schiarano,
on the left side of Piomba, two miles within the Land, is Civita S. Angelo,
which Pliny and Ptolomy names Angolo; above the said Country, near the River,
is the little Country of Hece. From Piomba, three miles from the Sea, is
another River called Salino; on the right hand whereof on the shore is a Castle
called Porto S. Angelo, and a little above within the Country enters into
Salino another River called Sino, which flows from the Apennine, at the foot
of the Hill Corvo, on whose right side are eight Countries and Castles, the
which shall be named the one after the other, Cassilento, Montesicco, Pignano,
Bisento, Corvignano, Serra, and Valviano; and a little below the mouth of the
River Sino, does also run into Salino another River called Tavo, which rises
near Corvo in the Apennine. In the midst of these Rivers, five miles distant
from the Sea, is Civita di Penna, an excellent Country, and very famous in old
time, Pliny calls this City Pinna, and places it among the Vestini. Of this
City was the most valiant young man Pluton, of whom Valerius Maximus makes
mention; but much more it is honored for bringing forth that famous Lawyer,
called Luca of Penna, who learnedly writ upon the three books of the Code
wherein appears his great knowledge both in Divinity and the Law, Valerius
Maximus de pietat^ erga parents. Luca de Penna.
and particularly of the constitutions in the municipial Laws and customs of
this Kingdom, as he shows to be very judicious and skillful in diverse places,
and especially in Law-Causes, de senten. advers. fiscum latis retractandis lib.
12. In the Rubric C. de Magistris sacr. scrinioruus lib. 12. where he teaches
the Office of a principal Secretary of the Kingdom. And in the l. a palatinis,
C. de privilegiis little qui in sacro palatio militant, where very diffusedly he
disputes of one of the prin^ipal constitutions of the Kingdom, alleging
Andrea of Isernia, Prince of the Feudists. All this I thought good to declare,
what a worthy man has been of this City, although otherwise modern writers
have fasly christened him for a Frenchman, defrauding his Country, where at this
present in the Hall of the public Palace is to be seen his ancient Picture,
with the late named young Pluton, Laureto. The (...) Corvino.

The river Aterno, now called Pescara. The river Nuria. Montesilvano. Moscuso.
Pianello. Capogatto. Rossano. Alendo. Castiglione. Offena. Busso. Capistrano.


and besides yet stands his house where he dwelt. Afterward not much distant
from the River Tavo, appears above the Hills the pleasant country of Laureto,
and the Hill Corvino. Then comes near upon the shore the mouth of the river
Aterno, now called Pescara, which is one of the principal rivers of the
country; and near the Monastery of Casanova, runs into it another river
which rises on the right hand on the side of the Apennine called Nuria, on
whose right side are Montesilvano, Spotorio, Moscuso, Pianello, and Capogatto,
all Castles; and under the fountain of the said river is the noble Monastery of
Casanova, of the Order of Cistello, which is not only beautified with sumptuous
buildings, but with great riches. Above Nuria on the right hand of Pescara, are
Rossano, Alendo Petranico, the Towers of Antonello, and a little above is
Castiglione. And coming down from thence we encounter a river called Capod'
acqua, who has a very great spring, and near the fountain is Offena, and on
the left hand is Busso, between the which two Castles, but two miles distant is
Capistrano, the natural place of the holy John Capistrano of the Order of the
Minors of St. Francis, who in his life did many miracles. Above Capistrano
within the Land is Carapello, and at the ascent of the Hills near to the river
Pescara, is Vetorito, and Raiano; Carapello. Vettorito. Raiano. Amiterno.
and going but a few miles higher upon the ridg of a Hill is to be seen the
ruinated City of Amiterno, by Strabo named Amiternum, whose magnificent
buildings both of the Theater, and certain great Churches, and mighty Towers
declare what greatness it was in old time, and Livy writes that Spurio
Cornelio Carvilio the Consul, took Amiterno, and there were cut in pieces 2800
Citizens, and 4280 made prisoners, and notwithstanding the same Livy adds,
that L. Scipio going into Africa, they voluntarily offered themselves to go
with him in that action with the Umbri, Norcini* and the Reatini; Amiterno is
called by Virgil, full of Towers. Livy lib. 10.
There are to (...) among the ruins of the said City, graven in Marble, the
triumph of the Sannites, when they caused the Roman Army to pass under the yoke
at the Gallows of Caudine, and the Sepulcher of the daughter of Druso, Virgil.
lib. 7.
and near to the Theater is the Temple of Saturn the founder thereof. This City
had among other famous Citizens Caio Crispo Salustio, Proconsul for Caesar in
Africa, Crispo Salustio.
and the first writer of the Roman History, and the Bishop Vettorino, who died
for the faith of Christ, as Ptolomy and Lippomano says, in the Empire of
Nerva, whose name remains in a Castle built (...) the stones of those ancient
ruins, where are his bones and 83 Martyrs; by whom the said City was destroyed
I cannot yet understand.

Going from hence two miles (...) Civita Tomassa, a little Castle, Civita
Tomassa.
in whose circuit are to be seen many ruins of ancient buildings, with many
inscriptions, Foruli.
which apparently shows that here was the ancient City of Foruli, celebrated by
Virgil in his seventh book of Eneid. and of Silio Italico in his eight book,
and Strabo makes also mention thereof, and places it among the Sabines. And
following that way about three miles there are to be seen great foundations of
square stones, which the country people call Furconio, whereupon it is not to
be doubted that there stood the City of Furconio, the which was not so ancient
nor populous, nor so rich as Amiterno, Furconio.
but of greater dignity and honor in the time of the Christians, for in all
the Councels for the space of 800 years following, which had been in Rome or
any other place of Italy, we read the Bishop of Forconio. Here was thrown down
from a high Tower, that young and holy man Massimo, whose miracles moved Pope
John the 16. and the Emperor Otho to visit his relics, giving to the
Bishopric twenty thousand crows yearly, of the which it is almost wholly
deprived, and by Alexander the fourth bestowed upon the City Aquila. In this
place is the Furnass wherein Giusta, a most holy Virgin, was condemned to be
burnt, but by the providence of God was delivered by an Angel, and enclosed in
the Mount Offido, which is now called Bazzarano. The said City was destroyed by
the Longobards, the people whereof being dispersed, The hill Offido.
were united with the Amiternini, Abiensi, and the people Duronii, which
likewise fled the wrath and fury of the Longobards; and so under the conduct of
an Amiternin their Captain called Aquila, they built in a pleasant place upon
the ridge of a plain and low Hill, a City called by the name of their Captain,
The City Aquila.
Aquila; which in process of time increasing with people, was beautified, and
afterward enlarged by the Emperor Frederick the second King of Naples, to the
greatness which now it seems, a City truly very worthy, Robert Guiscard the
Norman created Duke of Puglia and Calauria. 1060.
famous and rich, and the head of this Province. Here Pope Nicolas the second,
being much molested by the Roman Barons, came to the Parliament with Robert
Guiscard the Norman, who restoring Benevento, and all that which he held of the
Church, was by the said Pope created Duke of Puglia and Calauria; the which (as
we have also declared in the lives of the Kings of Naples) was in the year
1060. The said City is in compass four miles, and without the walls it has a
very pleasant valley of excellent pasture, compassed with trees, and watered with
crystalline and fresh Springs, besides the profit which proceeds from the river
Aterno, which dividing it with a pleasing current, yields also a great
commodity by the Mills. The length of this plain is not above four and twenty
miles, and three in breadth; but every where fruitful. It has great abundance
of all sorts of wood, and plenty of corn, wine, oil, and every other thing
which serves for the use of living creatures: their Orchards are such as
neither through cold, or the heat of Summer they ever fail in yiedling their
fruits. Whereupon Martial says, Nos Amiternus ager, felicibus educat hortis.

The wares and Merchandise wherein this City most abounds, are very fine flax,
saffron, silk, cloth, wool, great plenty both of great and small cattle, that
it serves the most part of Italy with flesh: The number of the Churches of
Aquila.
the horses are excellent coursers and very swift. There are in this City an
hundred and eleven Churches all richly beneficed; and besides, they have many
Relics of Saints, among the which are the four Protectors of the City,
carefully and richly kept, and faithfully worshipped. And within a Coffin of
silver* of the value of 1800 crowns, is to be seen the body of St. Bernardino
Senesi of the order of the Minors of St. Francis, the first reformer of the
regular life of that religion. And in the Church of Collemaggio are to be seen
the bones of St. Pietro of Marrone, called Celestino the fifth. The other two
Protectors, that is to say, St. Massimo in Duomo, and St. Equitio in St.
Lorenzo, and every one of these had a statue or Image from the middle upward,
of their natural bigensse of pure silver. Moreover, there is besides the said
Churches twelve magnificent and stately Monasteries of religious Nuns.

This City is much commended for the Conserves and Preserves that are there
made: The Citizens thereof for the most part, exercise merchandise, and making
of cloth, The nature^* and manner of the Aquitani.
and in every thing show prompt and ready wit: In Arms they are fierce and
cruel, and very costly and magnificent in civil matters; they are courteous,
and in their apparel and conversation very civil. The Lady Margarite of
Austria, the natural daughter of the Emperor Charles the fifth, governed this
City many years, the Citizens for the benefit they received by her, made her a
stately palace in length 256 hands breadth, and in breadth an hundred and
sixty, with an hundred windows round about, a very costly building. But it is
not fit that I should omit the remembrance of the strong and well fortified
Castle which is in the said City; for to them that know it* it seems one of
the goodliest Forts in all Italy. This City by the tolling of a Bell is able
to arm 15000. men. It has a great county, rich and much exercised in Arms, the
situation is for the most part mountainous and strong. Pontano speaking of this
City, thus says: Pontano de bello Neapolitano.
-- Auctus post civibus, atque opibus prolatis etiam confinibus, facta est
Aquila urbs quidem ipsa civibus, auctoritate, and opibus clara, regionisque
totius caput. And in another place speaking thereof, says the like words; Nam
and populus ipse, quamquam lanificio deditus, ac texture, maxim tamen
bellicosus est, finitimisque undique formidini, nec minus regibus qui Neapoli
imperant. And John Albino in his 5. book de Bello intestino, Alphonsi 2.
Aragonei Ducis Calabriae, declaring the riches and great power thereof, thus
writes, Reges praeterea urbes, caeterosque primores, per tot annos tributo
exaustos, veteri quodam odio in regem, Apostolicae sedis signa intrepide
secuturos, populis insuper quotidianis injuriis supra modum lacessitis invisos,
rerum omn ium egenos, undique bello cintos, brevi regno ejici posse praesertim,
quod ditissima, ac populosissima urbs Aquila* totius regionis caput,
Apostolicae sedis Imperium datis obsidibus subire deposcit, cujus urbi^
defectionem ad Aragonci nominis internecionem satis esse putaret, etc.

Aquila was made (as we have said) a Bishops Seat by Pope Alexander the fourth,
in the year of our Lord 1257. the which Bishop, besides many other prerogatives
which he has, acknowledges not any other Metropolitan, or any other superior,
except the Bishop of Rome. Basilio Pignatell, a Neopolitan Gentleman, is now
Bishop of this City, a most careful and vigilant Prelat, and of great
sincerity of life.

There are in this City many noble Families, which are these following,
Angisili del Cardinale Antonelli, Alfieri, Angelini, Baroni, Baroncelli,
Branconii, The noble families in Aquila.
Bucciarellis, Camponeschi, Caselli, Carli, called Cardicchi, Caprucci,
Castiglioni, Colantonii, Crispo, Dragonetti, Emiliani, Eugenio de Matteis,
Emiliani, Franchi, Gigli, Lucentini, Piccolomini, Legistis, Lepidi, Lepori,
Maneri, Mariani, Mattucci, Micheletti, Nardi, Oliva, Orsegli, Pasquali,
Porcinarii, Prati, Pica, Paoli, Perelli, Rustici, Rosis, Rivera, Simconi,
Vgolini, Salvati, Trentacinque, Valla, Vetusti, Vinio, Zechieri.

The Families extinguished are these following, Bonaginiti, Findazi, Roiani,
Pretatti, Camponeschi, Gaglioffi, Mozzapiedi, Todini, Miraluce, Cocci, and
Orsegli. There are besides many other honorable Families of strangers, endued
with all true nobility, which being more then we purposed to speak, we will at
this time omit.

The said City has brought forth many excellent men, and famous as well in
Arms as in Learning, as Ansalda of Aquila, General of the Army of William the
evil, King of Naples and Sicilia, Antonuccio Camponesco, General of King
Ladislao, and Captain of the Venetians, and was afterward by Pope Eugenio the
fourth, created General of the holy Church, Minicuccio Vgolino, Captain of King
Alfonsus of Aragon, Guelfallione Fonticulano, was General of the Perusini,
against Braccio, and took in battle Nicolo Piccinino, and to his great honor
defended Padova from the fury of the Venetians; Geronimo Gaglioffa was a
Colonel of Charles the eight King of France, and Master of the Camp of King
Lewis the twelfth in the Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples; Francesco Rustico
was Captain of the Crossbow-horsmen of King Ferdinando the second. In Learning
there have been very famous men, as Pietro, called Scotello of Aquila, a
religious Friar of the Order of St. Francis, which learnedly writ upon the four
books of the Master of Sentences. John Aquilano, a Friar also of the Order of
Saint Francis, a famous Preacher of his time; he composed a book which he
entitled, Viti^rum lima. Francesco Vivio, a most famous Lawyer, who now
lives, and has lately published the Forest of diverse opinions, and has done
many things besides, and of the decisions of the Kingdom, of the Audience of
the Country of Bary, where he was the Kings Auditor, whose works are very
profitable to the professors of the Law. Giovanni Crispo, called de Monte, writ
three books of Law, one de Gradibus, the other de Haered. qui ab intest. de.
and the last de actionibus. Gioseppo Rustici, a Doctor of great account, which
is now a Counceller of the great Duke of Tuscane, has written and published a
Treatise, An, and quando liberi in condition positi vocentur, and very shortly
he is to publish another discourse. De utraque condition si sine liberis
decesserit, ad L. cum avus, F. de cond and demonst. Iacopo Carli, a learned
Doctor, has written in Law a book entitled, Gemmatus Pavo in quo juris
canonici, and civilis materiae tanguntur. Alexander Trentacinque, a most noble
and renowned Doctor of Law, writ de Substitutionibus, with other subtle and
witty advisements. John Aquilano, a famous Phisician, writ a discourse de
sanguinis missione in pluritide. Bernardino Cerillo writ the Annals of the City
of Aquila, his natural Country, and the History of his time. Serifino Aquilano
was the mirror of his time for Poetry, whose Works are well known, over whose
Sepulcher Aretino caused these Verses to be engraven, Qui giace, Serafin
Partirti hor puoi,
Sol d' haver visto il sasso, che lo serra
Assai sei debitore a gli occhi tuoi.
Here lies Serafin depart in peace,
Enough thou art indebted to thy eyes
To have seen the stone under which he lies.


Sebastian Aquilano* a Phisician, has published a discourse de Morbo Gallico,
and another de febre sanguinis. Caesar Campana, which now abides at Vicenza,
has writ with an eloquent style in the vulgar tongue the History of the World.
John Angelo Contecelli has published a discourse de differentiis febrium, and
another de Sanguinis missione. Blasio Pico a Phisician has writ the
contemplative Grammar. Angelo Fonticulano, a worthy Historian, writ very
eloquently in the Latin tongue the Wars of Braccio of Montone with the Aquilani.

There remain many other noble and learned men, which have much ennobled this
City, as I have understood; but because I have no true information thereof, I
think it not amiss to omit them.

The Territory of this City brings forth besides other things, great abundance
of Saffron* which as the Aquilani themselves affirm, there is made thereof
every year more then ^0000 crowns. Monte Reale.
Above Aquila in the Apennine under the River of Pescara* is Monte Reale,
called in old time Monte Pireo, but enlarged and beautified by King Charles the
second of Angio, abandoning the first name, it is a city very fair civil, and
rich, compassed round about with a very strong Wall; here with great reverence
lies in the church of St. Mary of Piano, the body of Saint D^minick, of whom
the Chronicle of St. Francis makes mention; and in the church of St. Augustine
is to be seen the body of St. Andrew, which in token of his holy life it
pleases God (as they say) to show many miracles. There now lives with much
honor to this country, Pe^tio, Pompeo, and John Circii, all three Doctors of
Law, and great learned men, of whom there is much commendation by Vivio in the
Forest of common opinions. The Territory of this country is very fertile, for
the spacious valleys and pleasant hills yield grain, wine, fitches, beans, slax,
hemp, and other fruits. A little distant from the said country is the River
Pescara, and at the mouth thereof on the left side is the city called Pescara,
The river Pescare. Pescara, called in old time Aterno.
named by Pl^^y and Ptolomy, Aterno, a most ancient city, which they also so
called the said River, which according to the common opinion was held the
swiftest and cold^st of all the Rivers in Italy. The said country is honored
with the dignity of a Marquisat subject to the house of Avolo.

Somewhat higher in Pescara runs another River called Alba, and into Alba
comes two little streams, which flow from the Mount Maiella, between the which
is Manopello; The river Alba.

Manopello. The foot of M^lise. T^rre.


and a little higher on the side of Maiella is the Fort of Molise* and
undernea^h is Cosano, and upon the bank of Pescara is Torre, a little country;
and on the side of the River Pescara is Lucolo, a populous country; and not
very fa^ is Caramanico, a very good country, and hard by lies Cantalupo, in
whose Territory rises under a Hill, a quick spring of Petronical Oil. Near the
bank of Pescara is the country of Tocco, which has an excellent Territory,
wh^re is made the best Oil in all Abruzzo, and the purest Wine; and four mile
(...) Popoli* Luculo.
a most noble and populous country which has the title of a Dukedom, it is
very strong every way, partly by the Rivers which cannot be past as a pl^sh of
water, Caramanico.
and also by the Forts which guard it as a Wall. And going certain miles we
come to Tagliacozzo, Cant^lup^.
a country well inhabited, and very rich; but not very ancient, (...) B^n^face,
the 4 Pop^

When the n^me of the M^rsi were changed.

The Marruvii.


it has the title of a Dukedom, governed by the Family Colonna

But we are now come to the country of the Marsi, destroyed long since by
Hannibal, with all the other people round about; in this country was a city
called Valeria, the natural country of Pope Boniface the fourth, who obtained
of the Emperor Phocas the Temple Pantheon in Rome, dedicated to all the gods of
the Gen^iles, which he dedicated to all the Saints. This city in the time of
the Longobards, had the name of Marsi changed into Valeria; Pliny says that
Marsi was a city from whence all the country took its name. These people were
also called Marruvii of Virgil, when in his seventh book he says, Quin, and
Marruvia venit de gente sacerdo^. Virgil lib. 7.


The which words Servio declaring, says, that they were the people Maruvii,
which inhabited near the Lake Fucino, as it were Inhabiters about the Sea, so
called for the greatness of the Lakes which were in those days, although
others affirm it was so named by Marro their King, the companion of Marsia. And
the said Servio says, that Medea which followed Jason, came at length into
Italy, and taught certain people which inhabited near the Lake Fucino, the way
to charm Snakes and Serpents with words, and likewise showed the remedies
against the venom of these creatures, whereupon it was by these called Medea
Angitia, as if it vexed and afflicted the Serpents with their charms: the which
people were also named Agnitii, The Agnitii.
of which Virgil in his seventh book thus says, Et Marsis quaesitae in
montibus herbae, Virgi lib. 7.

Te nemus Angnitiae, vitrea te Fucinus unda.


Pliny says, that in his time this generation of Marsi also continued,
descended (as he supposed) from the son of Cerces and therefore had this virtue
against Serpents. Guilio Capitolino writes, that the Emperor Heliogabolus
gathered a great company of Serpents with the incantations of the Marsi, the
which he caused on the sudden to be thrown in the place where the people
assembled, to see their public sports; whereupon many being bitten, fled with
great terror. Neither is it to be held as a fable which is written of these
Incantations, because the Prophet David singing his Psalms, makes a similitude
of the deaf Adder which stops his ears to avoid enchantments. And St.
Augustine expounding it says, That that similitude was meant of the Marso,
which makes his charm to draw the Adder out of his dark obscure hole into the
perfect light; and the serpent which loves darkness to avoid the sound of the
charm, which he knows will enforce him, lays one of his ears to the ground,
because he would not hear; and the other he covers with his tail. Livy
writing the wars of Italy begins from the Marsi, calling it Marsica, and
among the people that rebelled against the Romans, Livy lib. 2.
here he names the Marruci, and the Marsi, and in another place says, that
the Marsi being overcome by L. Murena, and Cecilio Pina, desired peace of
Silla. In the which war M. T. Cicero, being a follower and fighting therein,
M.T. Cicero abandoned the wars, and applied himself to the study of learning.
grew into so great a mislike of the Romans cruelty, that he utterly abandoned
his military profession, and wholly employed his time to the study of learning:
Whereupon it so fell out, that Rome had yet a wit comparable to the greatness
thereof. Silio Italico speaking of the Marsi, thus says, Marsorum novit terra
gens nota per omnes
Et bellare manu, and chelydris cantare saporem
Vipereumque herbis hebetare, and carmine dentem.
Aeaetae prolem; Angitiam mala gramina primam.
Monstravissae ferunt, tactuque domare venena.
Et lunam excussisse polo, stridoribus amnes
Frenantem, ac sylvis montes undasse vocatis,
Sed populis nomen posuit metuentior bospes,
Quum fugeret Phrygios trans aequora Martiarenos,
Migdoniam Phochi superatus pectine loton
Marruvium veteris celebratum nomine Marri
Vrbibus est ille caput interiorque per udos
Alba sedet campos, pomisque rependit aristas
Caetera in obscuro famae, and sine nomine vulgi,
Sed numero castella valent, and milite forti.
Now ten miles distant from Tagriacozzo is the fishy Lake of Celano, or rather
of Alba, The lake Fucino, now called Celano.
or of Marsi, named by Strabo the Lake Fucinus, and likewise of other writers,
the which for the length thereof seems as a Sea, being thirty miles in
compass; and has in it great plenty of fish, and excellent fowling for
Mallards, Wygens, wild Geese, Swans, and Moor-hens. There is in this Lake a
fish (according to Pliny) which has eight pair of fins, all other fishes
besides having but four. The water Martia brought to Rome.
The water of this Lake was brought to Rome by Martio being Edile; whereupon by
his name it was called the water Martia, which was reputed the best water of
all the conduits in Rome. Gallano a grave writer reherseth, that in the said
Lake was drowned Archippa, a very goodly city, which was builded by Marsia King
of the Lidi. And Suetonius writes that the Emperor Claudius maintained eleven
years continually 30000 men to damm up the said Lake. There enters into the
said Lake the River Giovenco, The city Archippa drowned in the lake Celano.
and runs upon the water, to be discerned in such manner, that as it comes
in running upon it, so it returns without mingling it self therewith, as Pliny
testifies, and Vibio Sequestre, by whom it is named Pitornius, thus says,
Pitornius fluvius, per medium lacum Fucinum Marsorum ita decurrit, ut aqua ejus
non misceat stagno. Round about it are these castles, Paterno, Transaco, S.
Apetito, Giaiano, Avezzano, S. Iona, Magliano. Pliny lib. 2. Vibio Sequestre.
Paterno. Transacco. Giviano. Celano.
Celano is under the title of a Count very rich, and a populous country, and
the bounds of the country of the Latins. There was of this country (as is read
in the book of the conformity of St. Frances in the rubric de Provincia
Pennensi) St. Thomas which writ the first legend of St. Frances, and composed
the sequence of the dead, which was sung in the Mass, that is, Dies irae, dies
illa Solvet seclum in favilla, etc: This city was destroyed by the Footmen of
the Emperor Frederick the second King of Naples, because the citizens thereof
were confederate with Otho Duke of Saxony, Wherefore the Emperor Frederick
destroyed Celano.
yet it continued not long but the said citizens newly repaired it. Three miles
distant from the Lake upon a high hill toward the Apennine, appears the
ancient ruins of the city of Alba of Marsi, which was made a colony of the
Romans at the same time with Sora, whither were brought six hundred
inhabitants: L. Genutio, The city Alba.
and Servilio Cornelio being Consuls, as Livy declares. This city was one of
the twelve colonies that refused to aid the Romans in the time of Hannibal.
This city was accounted by Pliny in the fourth Region, wherefore Silio makes
mention in the eight after this manner, Livy lib. 10. Cesa.
Alba sedet campos, pomisque rependit aristas. From Alba four miles distant at
the foot of the hills is Cesa, a little castle, the natural place of Pietro
Marso, a man very learned, as his works do well testify, and especially his
commentaries made upon Silio Italico. Pietro Marso. The river Castellano. The
river Tronto. Ascolo.
And going up certain miles into the region of the Pregutini is the river
Castellano, which descends from a valley of the Apennine, named the valley
Castellana, and runs for a little space toward Ascolo, and after a while
ends in Tronto, which compasses the said city on the other side. Strabo,
Pliny and Ptolomy, places the city of Ascolo in Piceno, but to me it seems
better to account the said city in this present Province of Abruzzo on the
other side, not only because it is on this side Tronto, but also for that in
former time it was under the jurisdiction of the Kings of Naples, Ascolo
restored to the church by Queen Ione the second. Bettutio Barro, a famous
Orator.
but Queen Ione the second restored it to the church. The said city is situate
upon a very strong place, fortified with a good wall, and compassed with high
hills; it abounds with all things necessary for the sustenance of living
creatures. Bettutio Barro, a most eloquent Orator was born in Ascolo, to whom
Cicero gave the honor of the victory above all the Poets of that age, as it
appears in Bruto, and Ventidio Basso the victorious Captain of the Romans,
which went with an Army against the Parthians, of whom were written these
words, but too nipping, Now he is made a Consul, which lately was a Mule-keeper
(forasmuch as before he had the command of Mules) of whom the Satirical
Giovenal says in the seventh Satire, The famous men of (...) Ventidio Ba^^
Si fortuna volet, fies de Rhetore* Consul,
Si volet haec cadem, fies de Consule Rhetor.
Ventidius, quid enim, quid Tullius? an ne a^iudque
Sydus, and occulti miranda potentia fati.
Ascolo had also Pope Nicholas the fourth, a learned, wise, and a virtuous man,
as Petrarck and Platina among the Pontifical Bishops declares; Pope Nicholas
the 4.
although Biondo says he was the third; likewise Cecco de Ascolo was a Citizen
thereof, an Astronomer, a great Philosopher, and a famous Negromancer. And
Enoc, an eloquent Orator endued with the Greek and Latin tongues, through
whose diligence were found out Marco Celio Apitio, and Pomponio Porfirione upon
Horace in the time of Pope Nicholas the fifth. The same City has also brought
forth Gratiadio of the Order of Preachers, an excellent Divine and Philosopher,
which writ the Commentaries upon the old art, eight books of natural
Philosophy, and three of Aristotle, de anima, wherein he shows his great
learning. Afterward going along from Vallecastellana, we come to the rich and
populous country of Amatrice, situated under the fountain of Tronto. Then
follows Civitella, Amatrice. Civitella.
lying not far off among the hills, in a country very strong through the nature
of the place, and the strong wall that compasses it round about, which country
was valiantly defended by the Duke of Guise. Now being come to Tronto, in the
which place are not only the bounds of the Pregutini and Sanniti, which are in
Abruzzo, but also of the Territory of the Kingdom of Naples, I am now forced to
finish the description of this Province, somewhat noting the nature of the
inhabitants, which are of a bigg and tall stature, strong bodied, of a white
complexion, fierce countenance, and a resolute mind, courteous toward
strangers, in bargaining simple, accustomed to the mannaging of Arms, and much
inclined to Wars, The nature and quality of this Province.
and very cruel to their enemies. They are also very forward in learning. The
men which inhabit in the city are seemly and civilly apparelled; but those that
live abroad in the hills and mountains are very barbarous and unhandsom, for
they cloth themselves with very course and base cloth. The Arms of this
Province is Azure upon three mounts united and fixed in bass or, an Eagle
displayed ar^ crowned of the second. The which Arms some think, that the Eagle
signifies the Standard which was taken in battle from the Romans; although
others suppose it signifies the Emperor Adrian, which was born in Hadria a city
of the Province, The arms of this Province.
and say that three Hills or declares the fertility and riches of the country:
neither are their opinions to be mistaken which say that the Eagle signifies
the city of Aquila it self, the head and principal of all the country.

The County of MOLISE, The eleventh Province of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
THe County of Molise is the least Province in the Kingdom, for it is part of
Sannio, wherein is Esernia, and Boiano. This Province was so called from the
city of Molisia, from whence they also had their name which governed this
country, Pontano. lib. 5.
and Pontano witnesses that in his time there was also standing the noble
house of Molisia, the which he sets down in his fifth book of the History of
the Neopolitan War; Cui adjungitur ab iisdem quaestoribus: Sannii quoque pars
ea, in qua est Bovianum, and Aesernia, qui ager recenti nomine est Molisius,
The ancient bounds of this country.
Molisio ab oppido, a quo originem duxere qui agro quondam imperaverunt. Qua re
familia quoque Molisia hodie agnoscitur. The inhabiters of this country are the
Sanniti, Frentani, and Caraceni, the confines of the which people anciently
were (according to Ptolomy) the river Fortoro on the East, the river Sanguine
on the West, the Adriatic Sea on the North, and the Apennine Hills on the
South. At this present the bounds thereof extend not so far in respect of the
new division made by the Kings Exchequer, of which country now a great part is
under Capitanato, the Principality on the other side, the country of Lavoro and
Abruzzo. Pliny declaring the confines of the Frentani, writes thus, Flumen
portuosum Frento, Teanum Apulorum, itemque Larinum, Cliternia, Tifernus amnis,
Plin. lib. 3. c. 11
inde regio Frentana; and in another place says, In ora Frentanorum a Tife^no
flumen Trinium portuosum. Oppida Histionium, Buca, Ortona, Aternus amnis. Intus
Anxatini cognomine Frentani, C^rentini supernates and infernates, Lanuenses.
These people were so named of the City Frentana near to Teano of Puglia, the
which City at this present is called Francavilla. These people becoming very
puissant, made war against the Romans; but being overcome, (as Livy writes) by
the Consul Q. Aulio in the year 433. with one battle, were sworn to the
keeping of their faith, and so obtained peace from the Senate. Caesar makes
mention of the Frentani in the first book of his Commentaries, and also
Polybius. And Cato writes, that these people had their original from the
Liburni, and Dalmati, The original of the (...) The things most plentiful i^
this country.

The description of this Province.

Campobasso. Campo di pietra Macchia* Celentia, Riccia, Gambatesa.

The Castle of Motta. St Julian, Colletort* Gel^ono. Circo.

The river Fortorio. Vinchiaturo. Baronello, Busso, M^rrone. Gerione, Livy lib.
2^. Montenegro, Riofredo, Forolo, Fornello.

The valley Porcina, Esernia, Andrea of Esernia, a famous Doctor of the law,
Supino, Guilliniaco, Lupara, Catabuttaccio Lucito, Limosano, Castelpignano,
Rocchetta, Casal reparande Lespinato,


and afterward from the Toscous, and their principal City was Larino. This
Province is almost wholly plain, and has a very plentiful Territory; for it
yeildeth grain in great abundance, and all other sorts of corn, there is also
flax, silk, bombace, saffron, annice, corianders, honey, and good wines, and
very fruitful trees, and great plenty, the air is temperate and healthful,
sweet rivers, and great store of cattle; there is excellent hawking and
hunting, but no ravenous creature is therein except Wolves. I will begin to
describe this Country from Campobasso, a City built in the midst of the Hills,
on this side the Apennine, from Boiano twelve miles distant, for here begins
the first country of Puglia. The said country is very populous and rich, from
whence the counties of Campobascio have had their original and surname. Going
from this country toward Luceria four miles, is Campo di Pietra, which has a
good Territory; and following that way no more then six miles, appears upon the
top of a high hill the Castle Pietra; and from hence five miles is Macchia,
which has the title of a County. And from Campobascio sixteen miles, is the
Castle Celantia, and from hence seven miles is Riccia. opposite to whom is
Gambatesa, and after eight miles, is the Castle of Motta; and a little higher
are these Cities and Castles, St. Gintiam Coletort, Geldono, and in the top is
Circo the great, where the river Fortore springs: six miles from thence is
Vinchiaturo, afterward is Baronello, Busso, Ratino, Rocchetta, Montesaggiano,
and following that way near the river Fortore are these Countries and Castles,
Petrella Castle de Lino, Morrone and Giovenisso. Then we come to very large and
spacious fields, which continue the space of eighteen miles, even to the sea,
and therein are to be seen the ruins of the ancient Gerione, so often named by
Livy, near whose walls he writes that Hanniball made his stay. Upon the Hills
which join with the Apennine, and are above the fountain of Vulturno, on the
right hand, are these Castles, Montenegro, Riofreddo, and a little below is the
Castle Forolo, so called also in old time: then coming down by the course of
the river three miles, near Fornello is a new country, but very populous and
rich, which yields the best wine in all the country: Directly against
Fornello, there belongs to Vulturno a valley called Porcina, and then somewhat
lower there enters into Vulturno, a River which comes from Esernia, an ancient
Colony of the Romans, to which City that learned Lawyer Andrea of Rampino,
called by the Surname of Esernia, has given much honor, whose works are of
great estimation with learned men: he was a man of great account, and of the
counsel of Queen Ione the first, and (as Liparulo writeeth) was slain by
Currado of Gottis, a Dutch Baron for giving judgment against him. This City
has a very fruitful Territory, and the Citizens for the most part are
employed in merchandise. Not far off is Supino, a fair and an ancient city,
called in old time Sepinum; of whom Pliny calls the Inhabiters Sepinates.
Ascending then toward the Mediterrane, within a mile of the river Fortore, and
eight miles from the sea, is the noble Castle Guilliniaco, and as much more
higher is Guardia Alferes, so named, above the which is Lupara, Cartabuttaccio,
and Lucito which has a fair and fertile Territory, the Lord thereof is Alfonso
Pescicello a Neapolitane Gentleman, a generous young man, and wise, and much
inclined to learning. And keeping on that way, there is to be seen Limosano,
Castelpignano, Rochetta, Casal reparando, and Lespineto which was repaired by
Queen Ione the first, by the mediation of Pietro Cardillo a Neapolitan, her
Favorite. Reg^st Reginae, anno. 134^, litera A, f^l. 117, Boiano. Livy lib. 9,
and 10.
Of the which mention is made in the Register of the Exchequer Rolls of the
said Queen; of which Family there remains at this present a branch of the old
stock, even that learned Ottanio Cardillo, a man indewed with much knowledge,
and lives with great renown.

Then a little forward appears Boiano, a City once esteemed the richest, and as
it were the principal of Sannio, whereof Livy makes oftentimes very honorable
mention, and sometimes says, that it was sacked and ransack't by the Romans,
and was more preyed and spoiled then ever was all Sannio besides. Moreover,
Silio Italio makes mention thereof when speaking of the Samnits, he says,
Affluit, and Samnis, nondum vergente favore
Ad poenos, Slio lib. 8.
sed nec veteri purgatus ab ira
Qui Batulum, Mucrasque colunt, Boviana quique
Exercent lustra aut Caudinis faucibus haerent.
Et quos aut Rufrae, aut quos Aesernia, quos ve
Obscura incultis Herdania misit ab agnis
Brutius haud dispar, animorumque una juventus
Lucanis excita jugis, Hirpinaque pubes.


In the Book of the Colonies is thus written, Bovianum oppidum lege Iulia,
milites deduxerunt: sine iter Colonis populo iter amplius non debetur quam
pedes Ager ejus per centurias, and Scamna est designatus. Ptolomy calls the
said City Bucianum. The said City is adorned with the dignity of a Duke. Not
very far from Boiano is the Hill Fiterno, The hill Fiterno.

The river Fortore.

The river Trinio.

Roceavivara. Trivento. Iacobo Caldora. Salicito. Fossaseca. Bagnulo. Civita
nova. The nature and condition of the people of the country.


which proceeds from the Apennine, from whom the river Fiterno, now called
Fortore has the name. Passing from thence toward the sea, and going toward
Termine, is the mouth of the river Trinio, which Pliny calls Trinium
Portuosum, on whose left side five miles off, is Castelluzzo Roccavivara, and
the noble city of Trivento, honored with the title of a County, possessed in
the time of the King of Aragon by Iacobo Caldora, a most valiant Captain, but
it is now governed by the house of Afflitto. The most reverend Bishop thereof
Julius Caesar Mariconda a Neapolitan Gentleman, and a Prelate of no less
learning then sincere life, graceth now this city with his great virtue. Then
follows Salicito, Fossaceca, Bagnulo and Civita nova. And coming now to an end
of this province, I will speak of the Inhabiters thereof, which are very strong
and valiant, and much inclined to Arms; they are also obstinate in their
opinions, and in bargaining with strangers very crafty and subtle, for the
most part they exercise merchandise and husbandry, they apparel themselves more
for their own ease, then with any decent or comely civility, although the women
more respect strait lacing then seemly attire.

This Province uses for the Arms thereof in a field gu: a star of 8 points ar:
within a border of Ceres: The Arms of this Province, and what it signifies.
What the said Arms does signify, I do not well understand, yet thus much I
may say, that the garland of Ceres signifies the great plenty of corn which
this country yields; and by the star argent, notes the great good will and
love of the people which they have to retain the memory of the family of Balzo,
which in former time governed almost all this whole country, with other places
of great importance in the kingdom; whereto I give so much the greater credit,
insomuch as the house of Balzo gave in their Arms a star ar: in a field gu:
Therefore I think it very fit not to neglect this opinion in the present
description of this province, although some think that the Star signifies the
prosperity of the country, whereof the Poet says, -- subitoque fragore
Intonuit latuum de coelo lapsa per umbras
Stella facem ducens multa cum luce cucurrit.


Among the Romans the star was placed above the heads of Romulus and Remus,
which sucked the teat of the Wolf, signifying the custody of their proper
Genio or good spirit, who preserved them being children.

CAPITANATA. The twelfth Province of the Kingdom OF NAPLES.
THis noble and fruitful Province of Pugliapiana, which at this present is
called Capitanata, was anciently named Iapygia, The bounds of Capitanata.
Daunia, Mesapia, and Apulia. The said Province stretches from the river
Lofanto, where the country of Bary ends, and passes to the river of Frontone
(now called Fortore) containing in breadth all between the Apennine hills, where
are the Irpini and the Sanniti, and the Adriatic, or rather Ionian Sea, Why it
was called Capitanata.
so that on the East it has the country of Bary, with the river Lofanto, on
the South the Apennine with the Irpini and Sanniti; on the West the Ferentani
and Carraceni, with the river Frontone, and on the North the Adriatic or
Ionian Sea. John Pontano in his second book of Histories handling many things,
says that in the time of the first Normans* and afterward the Greeks, this
Province was called Catapaniata, because those that were sent to rule here by
the Emperors of Constantinople, were called in the Greek tongue Catapini, and
that afterward by corruption of the word, P^ntano lib. 2. de bello Neap.
it was called the Province of Capitanata, and those that governed it Capitani.
The words of Pontano are these. Apuliae pars ea, que ab ^rentone flumine, hodie
Fortorium est, ab Aufidi ripas, sua nunc appellatione est Capitanata: quae
Normanorum prius, ac Graecorum temporibus fuerat Catapaniata: quod qui ejus
moderatione esset ab Imperatore. Constantinopolitano praepositus, diceretur
Graeco nomine Catapanus: quae vox contractis, atque immutatis literis
recentioribus, versa, est in Capitanatam, quique Catapanus fuerat in
Capitinium. Quae vero Calabriae pars olim fuit, in qua Tarentum, Brundusium, ac
Salentinorum maritima est ora, ea ab Hydrunto oppido, Te^r^ Hydruntina.
ad quod est ab Macedonia Epiroque, quam brevissima ad navigatio Hydruntina
hodie terra dicitur. At qui est ab Au^ido tractus ad Calabriae, hoc est,
Hydruntinae fines terrae: quo intractu sunt ad mare posita Barolum, Tranum,
Vigilae, Melficta, Iuvenatium, Barens^is regio.
Barum, Polygnanum, Monopolis? ab urbe Baro, quae caput olim regionis fuit
Barensis vocitata est terra: regiorum quaestorum constitutione ac jussu. Post
eam montana loca, quaeque olim fuere illinc Lucaniae, hinc Apuliae, iisdem
illis temporibus vocari coepta Basilicata. Quae appellatio unde potissimum
ducta sit, jure anceps est, B^silicatata.
ac dubium. Sunt enim qui existiment, haud satis tamen certis auctoribus,
Constantinopolitano olim ab Imperatore regionem eam filiae, ac genero traditam
dotis nomine: very autem aliis videtur esse similius, a Basilio quodam
fortissimo viro dictam: qui per illa tempora loca ea tenuerit, deque regione
ipsa, tractumque omni Salentino, Graecos industria sua pepulerit, atque Poenos,
etc.

This Province (as is said) was in old time called Iapygia, of Iapyge the son
of Dedalus, as Herodotus affirms; but as Servio says upon this verse of
Virgil, Victor Gargani condebat Iapygiis agris. He says that Iapygia was a
part of Puglia wherein stands the Hill Gargano, Why it was called Iapigia
Mesapia.
which reaches even to the Adriatic Sea. It was also called Mesapia of the
people Mesapii which inhabited in a part thereof; although others say that it
was so named of King Mesapo, the son of Neptune. Being afterward possessed by
Dauno the son of Pilumno, and of King Danae, the Grandsire of King Turnus, all
that country was called Daunia. Daunia
After him Diomedes coming with a great number of the people Etoli there to
inhabit, he divided the country between himself and Diomedes. Apulia
Afterward it was named Apulia of Apulo, a most ancient King of these places,
which came hither to inhabit a long time before the Wars of Troy Ptolomy
divides Puglia, the one part from Ti^erno to the city of Bary, called Daunia,
and from thence unto the Salentini (which are the people of the country of
Otronto) called Peucetia^

Puglia came to the knowledge of the Romans rather through Wars then friendship,
for (as Livy writes) with the rebellion of the Sannites the Romans had also
Puglia their enemy, How Puglia came into the hands of the Romans Hannibal did
much harm to Puglia, Strab. lib. 6.

The things which are most plentiful in Capitannta The nature of the earth


whose Territory was laid waste and spoiled by them, and at sundry times after
(as it appears in Livy) came into the power of the Romans. All this region was
from the beginning in great prosperity: but Hannibal and other Wars that
succeeded him, destroyed it and left it desolate, the which Strabo confirms in
his sixth book, when writing thereof he says, Priori tempore universae hujus
terrae secunda fortuna florebat, postea vero, and Annibal sequentia bella
desertam illam reddiderunt. This most fruitful Province brings forth great
store of wheat, barley, and other corn, and more plentiful then any other part
of Italy, although many fields are reserved for the pasture of sundry flocks of
sheep which are brought from Abruzzo. The earth or soil although it be sandy
and light, and the grass which grows thereon be small and slender, it is
nevertheless very fruitful, and storeth Naples, Slavonia, Venice and Tuscane,
with plenty of flesh. This region indureth much water, whereupon the Poet
Horace says that Apulia is full of silk, and in some places it wants trees:
the air is temperate, but in the summer season it is so much (...) ^ith heat,
that it is not only hurtful to strangers, but even to the natural (...) of the
country. All this region is very plentiful of every thing, both horses and
excellent sheep, the wool is softer then that of Taranto, The number of the
cities, countries, and castles that ^re in the said Provinces The (...) of
(...) hill Garga^^*
but not so fine, the honey there is much commended, the valleys which lie by
the plains, makes it a very pleasant country, whereby all the Province is much
inhabited, so that it has in all ten cities, and 52 towns and castles; the
cities are St. Angelo, Manfredonia, Siponto, Lesina, Vieste, Ascoli, Bovino,
Volturara, Te^mole, Troia. This Province contains the Hill Gargano with the
appurtenances thereof, which stretching out as it were an arm of the Apennine
toward the Adriatic Sea compasses in the lowest descent thereof, which ends
in the plain ^00 miles, where appears all the ri^hes of Puglia with plenty of
water; it is also very well garnished, and also richly furnished with trees,
and phisical herbs* for the which there repairs from far countries i^finite
Herbalists and Simplis^^, whereupon it seem^ that nature has endued it with so
great perfection (...) ^or the p^e^^den^e and p^ima^y with all the other Hills
of the Orient. Diomedes purposed to make the said Hill an Island, because the
Istmus thereof is no more then two miles broad, but this and other works he
undertook, were left imperfect, because he returned home to his own house where
he ended his life, although some write that he remained here during his life.
Others feigning, report that he vanished into the Isle of Diomedes, and that
his companions were transformed into fowls.

In this Country is bred the Tarantola, whose venom (as is before declared) is
cured with sounds and singing. Here also breeds the Chersidri, or the
Cavalette, which the country people call Brucoli, which being dispersed here
and there, do feed and wholly devour all the fields with infinite hurt and
spoil. The city of S. Angelo.
In the top of the said hill is the famous and noble city of St. Angelo, from
the which at this present for the most part the hill is so called, for the
Archangel St. Michael which appeared there, where is to be seen the most devout
and honorable Cave, and holy Temple dedicated in honor to the Archangel St.
Michael, which (as every one knows) is one of the most famous Oratories in
all Christendom, and is at all times visited and frequented with great
superstition of infinite people. The said city is very populous, and strong by
nature, and exceeds in the plenty of all things necessary for the sustenance of
living creatures.

This place being possessed by the Saracins, they fortified it and held it a long
time, until Grimoaldo the fifth Duke of Benevento, The Saracins possessed th^se
places, and when they were driven away.
and 11 King of Italy went with an Army against them, and almost slew them all,
which was in the year 652. Grimoaldo being dead, the Saracins newly possessed
it again; But the Emperor Charles the great and King of France coming into
Italy, after he had overcome them, put them all miserably to death with the edg
of the sword.

But now seeing a fitting occasion is presented unto me to declare what the
said Church was, and the beginning of the building, The description of the holy
cave of S. Angelo.
and the great devision thereof.

Here is a cave or vault in a main rock in the aforesaid hill, which descends
many steps very low, before the which descent are in the same rock certain
buildings wrought by hand, where are Tables written of infinite miracles and
favour^ by God vouchsafed unto men through the intercession (as they say) of
that Saint. Below in the cave is a great door of brass very curiously wrought,
which enters into that wonderful vault, the house of the most holy Archangel
St. Michael, which stands toward the East, and round about it is always to
be seen to distill a pure liquor. In the midst is a little quire, which is
ascended by four steps; but as a man approaches near to the holy Altar of the
Angel, he is suddenly stricken with great devotion in the contemplation of high
and celestial things. There is to be seen the little Altar consecrated by the
holy Archangel St. Michael, where he has left the print of his foot, the which
little Altar stands upon another Altar curiously wrought, where the Priests
commonly say Mass. On the left side are certain other Altars cut out of the
rock, all very commodious to say Mass. The floor of the cave is paved with
white and red Marble well mixed and divided. Without above the vault there is a
very fair and pleasant Wood, very strange and wonderful to those that behold
it, because that through a great brow of the hill not any tree can be
discerned, and that which yields the greatest wonder of all is, that so many
great trees grow upon the main rock.

The cause why this place was dedicated to St. Michael, The cause why this
church was dedicated to St. M^chael the Archangel.

An. 1^4.


our Ancestors say grew by this accident: In the year of our Lord 494. in the
second year of Pope Galasio the first, and the third year of the Emperor
Anastasius, there was a citizen of Siponto, called Gargano, a man far richer in
cattle then any one in the country, the which under the custody of many
heardsmen gras^ing upon the Hill Gargano, had a Bull which was strayed among
the Woods, and seeking him a long time through those parts, in the end, one day
found him feeding before the door of the said cave, wherewith Gargano being
offended, put an arrow into his bow, and shot to kill him; but scant had the
arrow touched the Bull, but it rebounded back, and with the point struck
Gargano, the which being held as a great miracle by the Heardsmen that were
there present, persuaded Gargano to find out some holy man of sincere life and
great authority* to whom he (...) this accident. The which Lorenzo hearing
(which was accounted so religious a man) admiring at so great a miracle, caused
the people to fast three days, and with many prayers reconciling themselves
unto God. The Fast ended, and divine Service solemnly celebrated, the night
following St. Michael appeared to Lorenzo, said unto him: By the will of God,
and through my means, it is so come to pass, O Lorenzo, that the Bull has
discovered this place chosen by my self, where I desire a Church should be made
to my name, that I might have a dwelling upon the earth amongst men: Declare to
the Citizens, that in this place I am to pardon in the name of God the sins of
the people which repair hither. The which vision, after Lorenzo had rendered
due thanks unto God, he declared it. Then with general procession and many
ceremonies, they went very religiously to the holy cave, where with great
devotion they said solemn service, and so to the honor of St. Michaell the
Archangell, the place was dedicated.

The Pope understanding thereof sent three Bishops to consecrate the Church,
and the Angel appeared again saying, that needed not to be consecrated by
humane means, which was consecrated by divine providence, and that in token and
sign thereof, they should find the print of his foot upon the Altar. The
morning following they went in procession, and so finding it, after they had
all yielded due thanks unto God, consecrated another hill hard by, which at
this present is called the holy Hill, whither repair infinite people with great
devotion on every side. Now not long after the Neapolitane Army coming to
Seponto, after it had sacked Benevento, the people betaking themselves to
prayer, after they had fasted three days, the night following the Angel
appeared in sleep to Lorenzo, admonishing him, that the next morning he should
cause all the people to arm themselves, and to assail their enemies Camp, and
he would aid them therein The people believing the words of Lorenzo, marched
with their army into the Fields, and invaded their enemies, upon whom came from
heaven even at an instant, so horrible a tempest with lightning and thunder,
that the enemies army was not only scattered and dispersed, but most of them
cruelly slain.

Now the faith and devotion of the people greatly increased, and with much alms
and great gifts of gold and silver, the Church was very richly beautified and
enlarged. All this which is rehearst, his own legend testifies (which you may
believe if you please, and also the learned John Pontano in the second book of
the Neapolitane war, Pontano lib. 2.
writes, whose words are these, Nec vero alienum fuerit (quoniam in templi
mentionem maxim augusti incidimus: ad cujus antrum ab ultimis terrarum finibus
annis singulis plurimi mortales selvendis votis accedunt) de ejus initiis:
quaeque ab antiquis auctoribus habeo comperta, pauca pro meo instituto refer.
Est nativa specus durissimo e saxo, in quam multis gradibus: caeterum non lato
admodum aditu descenditur: specularibus quibusdam lumen praebentibus. Vestit
came part superiore, qua nativa ipsa quidem, Templum S. Michaelis in monte
Gargano.
ac perimosa testudo est, e quercu vasta proceritate lucus, muris tamen
circundatus, pecori nequa pateat ingressus. Ante vero antrum in imum
descenderis, qua specus diffunditur, mira animum religio subit, loco ipso sub
obscuro, and horrido, solaque natura constituta. Admonent religionis tabellae,
votaque passim suspensa, titulos indicantia. Vbi vero arae admotus ad numinis
procumbes statuam, loco solo, and ab hominum accessu s^moto, repent
inhorrescit tacito metu animus: atque in divinarum tantum rerum cogitationem
versus, in preces suppliciaque effunditur. Augent venerationem aliae item arae
nullo sumptu, nullo artificio factae, quibus natura ipsa videtur locum
statuisse. Cur autem Michaeli potissimum dedicata specus fuerit, haec a
majoribus tradita comperior, annos quidem supra noningentos, atque amplius
repetita, qua quidem tempestate Heruli, Goti, Barbaraeque aliae quaedam gentes
per Italiam bacchabantur. Garganum quendam civem Sipontinum cujus praegrande
armentum Gargano pasceretur in monte, a quo and ille nomen duxisset cum
armentalem taurum, qui oberraverat, per silvas suis cum pastoribus quaeritaret,
inventum tandem eum ab ejus, de qua dictum est, speluncae hostium pascentem
animadvertisse, itaque ira percitum, contento arcu, summis in illum viribus
sagittam emisisse, eamque ubi tauri tergus attigisset, retro flexam e vestigio,
recurvataque spiculi acie sagittatorem p^tiisse. Quae res inter pastores in
religionem, cum esset versa, tum Garganum rem hanc sacerdoti expositurum,
Laurentio an^^sio.
Laurentium adiisse, probatissimae vitae antistitem, ibi illum recognita,
factique admiratione ductum, dierum trium jejunio indicto, multis etiam
adhibitis precibus Deum esse consulendum: Gargano respondisse. Itaque absoluto
jejunio, re sacra rite facta, noctu dormiente Laurentio astitisse Michaelem
Angelorum principem admonent^m his verbis. Mea opera, ac Dei jussu factum
Laurentii, qui taurum indicem esse voluerim b^silicae hujus, quam mihi ad
inhabitandum cum hominibus in terris paravi. Haec mea est basilica, meum hoc
sacrarium apud mortales futuro. Enuntia haec civibus, in monente me, per te
intelligant, ea in spelunca, iis in adytis abolituru^ esse me mortalium
peccata, qui ad eam confugerint. Quo accepto oraculo antistes somno exitus, ubi
Deo gratias egisset, re populo indicata, summa civium cum frequentia
venerabundus, indictis supplicationibus pontisicis habitu amictus, ascenso
monte ad speluncam procedit, sacraque ibidem peracta re, non tamen ut ingredi
antrum ausus esset quisquam multis cum precibus decantatis rite divinis
laudibus, Deo gratias egit -- nomenque Michaelis per omnes lauds celebratum.
Ritique rebus his peractis Sipontum rediit, Sipontum.
magna civium laetitia, ingentique vrbis universae gaudio. Nec vero multis post
dicbus. Neapolitanorum exercitus, quorum opes profligatis Beneventanorum rebus
abunde tum pollentes erant: Sipontum obsedit. Igitur solicito de populo suo
antistiti, post indictum dierum trium jejunium, quo triduo fuerant etiam
indutiae ab host impetratae, astitit rursus dormienti Michael, admones, and
pie, and rite factum, quod per jejunium, ac preces a Deo auxilium implorasset:
Michaelem se Angelorum principem jussu Dei illa dicere, imperareque uti
insequenti dio de quarta hora, populus* universus arma caperet, in hostemque
repent irrueret, se ipsum armatum in acie civibus affuturum. Haec igitur
populo tuo experrectus dissere, ac bono animo esse jube. Hora igitur dicta,
armatus atque ad pugnam instructus civis hostem negligentius agentem improvisus
invadit, fundit, sugat validis adeo repent exortis procellis, summoque e
montis jugo prorumpentibus terrifico impetu fulminibus, uti maxim foeda
tempestatis vi, ac fulgurum sescenti ex host examinati referantur. Fugatis
igitur, ac caesibus hostibus, sacris Deo optimo maximo; ac Michaeli rit^
factis, cum antistes decrevisset speluncam ipsam (uti moris est: Christianique
ritus) dedicare Gelasium Pontificem Maximum, per id tempus Soracte agentem de
ea dedicatione consuluisset: Astitit illi tertio inquiens, mihi egomet nulla
adhibita hominum aut art, aut opera vacuum feci hoc saxum, mihi egomet
desertum humano cultu montem dextra hac subaperui, mea ego in lapide hoc
vestigia infixi, mihi ipsemet aedem hanc statui, sacrarium feci, basilicam
dedicavi. Quaecunque igitur ab hac aede basilica, sacrario humana dedicatio
absit, ritusque omnis abesto humanus, Michael ego sum, qui hoc excavato saxo,
hoc antro, hoc habitaculo: his assidue manantibus stillis ablaturus sum, ac
deleturus, mea ad aram consugientium mortalium errata. Age eaepergiscitor
sacerdos, civibusque haec tuis disserito, cumque iis simul rem divinam illic
facito, neque adesse antro meo sacrario meo, meaeque basilicae, tuque poplusque
tuus mortales denique omnis placatum atque propitium sciunt, etc.

On the side of this Hill, which lies toward the East, is the City Vieste*
in old time called Vestice which has a very fair Haven, Vieste*
from whence Pope Alexander the third, aided by William the second, King of
Naples, departed toward Venice with thirteen Galleys to be reconciled to the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. This City was destroyed in the year 1480 by
Acomat Bascia, General of the Army of Mahumet, the second Emperor of the
Turks, whilst he attempted the subduing of Italy. Vieste destroyed by the Turks.
Among other Captains and men of special note which valianty fighting died in
the defense of the said City, Diu Giaime of Aierbo of Aragon, Innico de Vera,
Guilio Acquaviva, Carlo Stella, Diomedes of Tolfa, and Francisco son of the
famous Doctor Paris de Apuzzo Councellor of King Ferrant, King Ferdinando
repaireth again Vieste.
whose Nephews sons of the said Paris, I know in Naples, and are my very dear
friends, neither do they any jot degenerate from their worthy progenitors, for
John Iacobo and John Carlo are Doctors of the law and very learned, and John
Baptista de Apuzzo his Brother, The end of the Adriatic sea.
is employed in the Kings affairs.

The said City was suddenly repaired by King Ferdinando, at the intercession
and mediation of Antonio Miroballo Lord thereof. Ptolomy says, that here being
the second head of the mount Gargano, ends the Adriatic sea, and begins
the Ionian. Near the Sea side passing over the river Lofanto appears the place
where was the ancient City of Salapia built by Elsia Rodiano, but according to
Varro by Diomedes; The City Salapia where Hannibal was inamored.
and here Hanniball the Carthagenian being at the first so fierce a Warrior,
became inamored of a woman, which made him so effeminate as impaired much his
reputation. Not very far is the Lake of Andoria, The Lake of Andoria.
Mansredonia.
by Pliny called Mandurium; hard by is Mansredonia augmented by the ruins of
Siponto, where at this present is a great concourse of Merchants, conveying
from thence great plenty of corn; this City is very populous and civil, and in
it are these noble Families, Beccarini, Gentile, del Avantaggio, Caverletta,
Minadois, Nicastro, Visco, Tontoli, and others. But first before I proceed any
farther to declare what the Monte Gargano is here toward the sea, I will
finish that which lies upon the River Fortore: Above Sanseverino four miles is
Torre the great, which is a Country that has the title of a Dukedom subject to
the house of Sangro, Castelluccio.
which lies from Fortore twelve miles; and as much above Torre the great is
Castelluccio; and a little from thence is Monte Rotano, Monte Rotano. Celenza.
and somewhat higher is Celenza, which has a very fruitful Territory, and is
adorned with the title of a Marquisat, the Lord whereof is Carlo Gambacorta a
Neapolitan Gentleman, a very famous and worthy Lord, whose honorable actions
are well known, having many years with so much wisdom and valor governed
through the grace and favor of King Philip, the two Povinces of Principato,
and Basilicata, and at this present with great honor rules and governs this
present Province.

Not far from Cilenza is a country called St. Marco, and near that is
Volturara, which has a good Territory, and the Lord thereof holds the title
of a Marquess; St. Marco. Volturara. St. Gaudio: Rosseno. Montefalcone. Lesina.
The Lake of Lesina.
and not far off is the country of St. Gaudio, and a little above is Rosseno,
and beyond that, near the river of Fortore, is the Castle Montefalcone.

The River Fortore runs into the Sea near the Lake of Lesina, which contains
40 miles in compass; and a mile from this Lake, and four from the Sea, is the
city of Lesina, from whence the Lake has taken its name, the which city was
built by the men of the Isle of Lesina of Slavonia, some say that the Saracins
spoiled the said city.

Leandro Alberti believes that the aforesaid Lake is named by Pliny in the 10.
chapter of his third book Lacus Pantanus, which breeds good fishes, and great
Eels, and at all times there is good fowling for wild Geese, Mallards, and
Swans. Within the land four miles above Lesina, and within a mile of Fortore
upon a high hill is Cerra Capriola, Serra Capriola.
in a populous and a civil country, the which is well known through all the
Kingdom for the toll or custom of cattle, which pass through it from diverse
countries to winter in Puglia, and for the custom of sheep, where they pay in
that place so much for every beast by the head.

St. Martino. Colletorto. St. Iuliano. Macchia. Campo di Pietra* Geldono.
Circomaggiore* St. Nicandro.
Somewhat higher are these countries and castles, St. Martino, Colletorto, S.
Guilian, Macchia, which is adorned with the dignity of a Count subject to the
house of Regina; and not far off is Petra di Cratello, Campo di Pietra,
Geldono, and in the top is Circomaggiore, near the which springs the river
Fortore; then on the left hand of Fortore is St. Nicandro, five miles from the
Sea, and near the Lake of Cesina on that side which is nearest the Mount
Gargano; then farther within the land is Porcina, a populous and a civil
country, where is also a very stately magnificent Palace made by the Emperor
Frederick the second, for a retiring house of pleasure after his sports of
hunting in those parts.

Going six miles forward we come to St. Seniero, a country very rich, noble,
civil, Porcina. St. Seniero. Strabo. lib. 6.
and populous, whose Territory is so fertile that it is not inferior to any in
this Province; the said country has lately been innobled by the Kings favor
with the dignity of a Prince, which the Family of Sangro possesses.

Strabo writes in his sixth book, that in the Territory of Daunio (although
that imperfect and corrupt book names it Saunio) at a hill named Drio, in the
manner of a Wood, was in his time two Temples, the one in the very top,
assigned to Calcante, The Temple of Calcante, and of Podaliero.
that whosoever came to demand any thing of the Oracle, sacrificed a black ram,
lying down themselves upon the skin. The other Temple was dedicated to
Podalirio; below at the very foot of the Hill, distant from the Sea a hundred
furlongs. From the which Temple did spring a little brook very wholesome and
comfortable to cure the infirmities of cattle* therefore it may the better be
believed, that such Temples have been in these places hereabout, for Strabo
says, In agro Daunio circa tumulum, quem Drion nominant, basilicae
monstrantur? una quidem Calchantis in summo ^erti^e, and cui petentes oracula
ingrant^m im^lant arietem, and strata in pelle dormiunt. Altera Podalirii in
insima montis radice posita, abest a mari stadiorum circiter C. Ex ea rivulus
manat, ad omnis p^corum morbos salutaris.

Now it is time to return to the Mount Gargano, or rather St. Angelo, to the
end I may the better describe certain places which are there.

In the midst then of the said hill, where is the fair and spacious plain of
^lorishing and pleasant pasture, is to be seen the country of St. John Ritondo,
St. John Ritondo.
where every year on the 11 of June are assembled the Bailiffs and Officers
thereabout, a chief and principal magistrate coming thither in the name of the
King, the which after they have well considered the store of grain, barley, and
other corn, with a general consent they proclaim a price of all victuals.

Not far from the said place are Cagnano, and Carpino, which have a fruitful
Territory; the Baron thereof is Antonio Nava, Cagnano. Carpino. St. (...).
Arign^no. St. Nicandro.
so honorable and worthy a Lord, and so virtuously given, as he is generally
honored and loved of every one, and has been the special occasion that this
work is published the second time. At the foot of the said hill near
Manfredonia is St. Vito, a very great country, but wholly abandoned for the
great abundance of Serpens that are therein. Not far off is the Castle
Arignano, and St. Nocandro.

Departing then from the foot of the Mount Gargano, and leaving the places near
adjacent, we come to Foggia in a populous country, which has a very fertile
and fruitful Territory, yielding great plenty of grain, barley, Foggia. (...)*
and other sustenance. Some say that it was built of the ruins of the ancient
city of Argirippa, the which (as Strabo ^aith) was in old time one of the
greatest cities in Italy, and was first called Argostippium, afterward
Argyripa, and at the last Arpe, and says that it was builded by Diomedes.

At this present lives with great honor to the said city, Giovanbattista
Vitale, a very plausible and pleasant Poet of our age.

But it is not fit I should smother in silence the custom of the sheep of
Puglia, The custom of the sheep.
which is one of the greatest revenues that the King has in the Kingdom, and
consists in the rents of the herbage, which comes every year into the Kings
Exchequer by the Officers for the pasture of sheep, and greater cattle, of the
which rents in truth, some pay 13 ducats for a hundred sheep, and some 12. and
some 10 and a half, and some 9. and some 6. and some 3. and some 15 carlins for
a hundred, and others 12 crowns for a thousand. But of greater cattle some pay
37 ducats and a half for a hundred, and others 22 and a half, and some 18
ducats and three quarters the hundred; whereupon the said receiver satisfies
to the Masters of the herbage, according to the quality and goodness of the
pasture; as it falls out. The number of the cattle that were customed in the
year 1592.

The custom of the revenue of the sheep made in the year 1592. The payment for
sheep has bin very ancient in the Kingdom.

Alfonsus of Aragon, King of Naples (...) to the c^stom of sh^^p.


As in the year 1592. there was allowed to the said custom four millions four
hundred seventy one thousand and four hundrey ninty six sheep; and of greater
cattle nine thousand and six hundred. Of which sheep and cattle in general is
paid unto the Kings receipt six hundred and two and twenty thousand and a
hundred seventy three ducats and seven carlins, of the which sum is abstracted
380492 ducats for the payment of the herbage to diverse particular persons,
with the alms bestowed upon the poor, and other charges, yielding to the Kings
Exchequer 241264. the which sum of money was carried into the Kings general
Treasury.

This kind of payment of custom has been very ancient, for the like was paid
in the time of the Romans, as it appears by Varro, and other ancient Writers.
But this Kingdom being invaded by diverse Nations, the custom decayed through
the extremity of long wars, until the time of the worthy and renowned Alfonsus
of Aragon, first of this name, King of Naples; who newly restored it in an
excellent order, and constituted Francisco Malubre, Commissary for the
reformation thereof, and was the first receiver, to whom he allowed for his
pains 700 ducats with the pasture of a thousand sheep, as Marino Trezza in his
second book de sub. feu. the which the excellent Lawyer Carlo Tapia Neapolitan,
relates with great learning and eloquence, in the first book of his
Commentaries in the Rubric and final Law, F^de constitutionibus Principium
number. 98. This worthy man lives with much admiration for his virtue and
honorable qualities, and at this present with general applause exercises the
office of the criminal Judge of the great Court of the Vicaria.

Luceria of the the Pagans.
Departing from Foggia 12 miles, appears upon a little hill, situated in a
Plain, the fair City of Luceria, in the which city in the time of Strabo, was
the stately Temple of Minerva, where were many and rich gifts, the which city
was the ancient seat of the Daunii, and was also built by Diomedes. It is true,
that it was destroyed in the time of Strabo; whose ruins even at this present
declare how great it was, and what power and authority it had; it was afterward
repaired with the fragments of the old ruinated buildings, and so continued
even to the time of Constantius the son of Constantine the third Emperor of
Constantinople, who destroyed and spoiled it in the time of Vitaliano Bishop of
Rome, as Paolo Diacono writes in his fifth book, and Biondo in his ninth book
of Histories. Where having slain all the Citizens, Paolo Diacono, lib. 5.
sacked it, and afterward burnt it; yet within a little time following it was
reedified, but nothing so fair and magnificent as at the first. The which city
being given by the Emperor Frederick the second, to the Saracins, was so
strongly fortified that it became very powerful, commanding and domineering
over all the bordering places; neither was any man able to expel them until
the year 1271* Charles the second King of Naples after many conflicts confounded
them, Charles the 2 King of Naples drove the Saracins from Luceria, and from all
the Kingdom. The body of St. Augustine in Luceria.
and enforced them to forsake their hold. The Territory of the said city is
very plentiful, and yields all sorts of victuals. To the which city twice in
the year do assemble almost all the Merchants of Italy, Grecia, Sicilia, and
Slavonia, and from other countries to traffic and sell their wares; and this
city is the head of the whole Province, for there resides the Kings Audit with
his Viceroy. In the Church of St. Dominicho, which is therein, lies the body
of St. Augustine the Hungarian, of the Order of Preachers, sometime Bishop of
the City, where he is highly reverenced by the people, and was canonized by the
holy Church, naming him St. Augustine, by consent and agreement of the
Apostolic College; God showing to his creatures (as they they say) how
acceptable the merit of this man was unto him, in the bestowing upon them
infinite favors by the means of his Sepulcher.

By whom Troia was built.
From Luceria eight miles upon a small hill is the noble and rich city of Troia,
which has a fertile and plentiful soil; under the North side of this little
hill runs the river Chilone, which flows from the Apennine, this city was
builded by Bubagano Catapano of Greece, and not a Captain of the Greeks, as
Friar Leandro affirms. Of the original thereof Leo Bishop of Ostia makes
mention, after whom Carto Sigonio a diligent writer of Histories in our time,
following, accounts the building thereof about the year 1016. Some hold
opinion that it was the ancient Esana, which was beaten down by the Emperor
Constantine. There are in the said city these noble Families, De Claritiis del
Vasto, Lombardo, Palonibo, de Tucciis, Gioioso, de Rubeis, Sangro, Saliceto,
Silvei, Sassone, Tancredo, and others. Here was held a Council in the year
1092. by Pope Urban the second, The Council of Troia.

The bodies of Saints in Troia.


for to reform certain customs of the Clergy, as Biondo and Platina declare in
the life of the said Bishop. In the principal Church that is therein, lies the
bodies of Eleutherio Martyr, St. Pontiano Bishop, St. Secondino, and of St*
Anastasio.

Walking along by the fields, we may see the castle Carignola, where the French
men were overcome, the Duke of Nemors their Captain General and Viceroy of
Naples; for Lewis the twelfth King of France and Naples being slain, by
Consalvo Ferrando of Cordova, Captain of Ferdinando the Catholic King of
Spain, having in his company the valiant Captains, Fabritio and Prospero
Colennesi, Romans, in the year 1503. as we have written at large in the lives
of the Kings of Naples.

Going a little farther in the descent of the Apennine, appears Orsara, and
afterward the city of Bovino, the Lord whereof has the title of a Duke. Four
miles farther is Dellicito; and from hence seven miles is the ancient city of
Ascolo, innobled with the dignity of a Prince. Ascolo di Satriano.
And this city is surnamed by Writers, Ascolo Satriano, as a difference from
that of Abruzzo. This city was ruinated by Ruggiero the Norman, having
understood they purposed to rebel against him, his father being then in
Dalmatia, the which was afterward repaired again by his father, but not with
that greatness. Walking then toward the Sea, The Church of St. Leonard given
to the Knights of St^ Mary of Prusia
we come to the sumptuous and stately Church dedicated to St. Leonard by the
Emperor Frederick the second, where is a worthy Monastery assigned to the Dutch
Knights of the Order of St. Mary of Prusia, allowing them great revenues, who
governed the said holy Temple a long time with great religion and devotion. In
the and they decaying, the said Monastery was given in commendum, whereby at
this present it is very ill governed. This worthy Church is in great reverence
not only with the people near inhabiting, but also among all the Italians; and
there are to be seen great heaps of iron pieces of sundry fashions, as chains,
shackles, collers, and others of like sort to hold prisoners, and to inchain
men, the which were all (as they say) miraculously delivered, and the persons
set at liberty through the prayers and intercessions of that worthy St.
Leonard, both from prisons and the Galleys, in the Church rests his said
body. Directly against this Province are situate the Isles of Trinity, which
was in old time called Diomedes, which had that name for the Fable which the
Greeks feigned upon the companions of Diomedes transformed into fowls, being
of the bigness of the Magot-a-py, seeming also in their tune to imitate a
humane voice, but not so pleasing, according to the fixions of the Poets in the
ancient time of the foreign Greeks, the which declared with their singing and
flying, the content of their arival, The Isles of Diomedes. now called Trinity.
being shunned and despised of all others, bewraying by the clapping of their
wi^gs, and their pitiful scrieking, the contempt of their company; but now in
truth they are much available, and do great good by their fatness, to those
which are benumbed, or swollen in any member with any cold humor. There is in
this Isle a Fortress, and a very fair Monastery of Canonical regular Priests.
The women of this Province are all in general very fair, the men great and well
proportioned, but inclining to a brown complexion, The quality and condition of
the people.
which proceeds of the great heat. Their proper language is all after one
manner, but somewhat rude and impolished. They have very strong arms, wherefore
they often exercise wrestling, and the managing of weapons. They are not very
neat and curious in their apparel, but very ingenious and sharp witted, they
follow not the affairs of the Sea, for almost all employ themselves in the
profit of the fields. They inhabit in Castles and Cities, and in the time of
tillage, and the gathering in of their fruits they go to the fields with
carriages of bread and wine, and other necessary things for so many days, and
with their oxen they remain day and night until they have tilled and sowed, or
gathered in their grain, barley, and other corn; that being done, they fire the
straw, and returning with the rest home to their dwellings, where they continue
till time requires again to manure and sow their ground. They are all rich and
very courteous and careful to keep their word, and in bargaining very free.
The Arms of this Province is azure on a mount of Ceres fixed on bass St.
Michael or. The Arms of this Province.
the which arms signify the apparition of the Angel Saint Michael upon the
Mount Gargano, and the ears of corn the great plenty of the Province.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Kingdom of Naples
The second Book.
WE having finished the first book of the description of the Provinces of this
Kingdom, it were requisite to speak more particularly as we have promised; to
the end the reader may be the better satisfied of so much as he desires to know
thereof.

The Kingdom then of Naples (as has been said) is divided into 12 Provinces,
the which contains 2700 popularities, of which there are 20 Archbishops, and
127 Bishops, and 1464 Countries; in which places live at least two millions of
people; for in the Province of the Country of Lavoro was taxed in the Kings
Schedule by Families 58152 The Principality on this side by Families 47562 The
Principality on the other side by Families 30535 Basilicata by Families 38747
Calauria on this side by Families 50878 Calauria on the other side by Families
55457 The Country of Otronto by Families 50874 The Country of Bary by Families
39141 Abruzzo on this side by Families 27046 Abruzzo on the other side by
Families 48689 The County of Molise by Families 15693 Capitanata by Families
20804
Whereupon the abovesaid number of Families being collected together, make in
all 4834^8. and this is the number at this present of all the Families in the
Kingdom; in the which number the City of Naples is not comprehended, nor the
hamlets belonging thereto, for the freedom and privileges which the
Neapolitans hold. The revenue of the Crown both in the ordinary and
extraordinary, arises very near to three millions of Crowns, yet excepting the
donative: which is now reduced into an ordinary revenue. The dignified or
titular Barons of the Kingdom in this year 1596. are 155. whereof 20 are
Princes, 34 Dukes, 40 Marquisses, and 53 Earls; but the Barons without title
are about 1400. the which are all bound to serve personally for the de^ence of
the Kingdom. The Duke of Alba in the year 1556. in the War against Pope Paolo
the fourth, had 20 thousand footmen, 7 hundred armed men, and a thousand seven
hundred light-horsemen. Now at this present the King maintains ordinarily for
the defense of the Kingdom, 4000 Spanish footmen under many Captains, with a
Master of the Camp, and an Auditor; and this Corporation of people is called
the third of Naples. In the Castles of the Kingdom, and Fortresses made for the
guard and defense of the Sea are held 1608 footmen ordinarily Spaniards,
comprehending also the Officers which remain in the Castles for the service of
them. There are also 1020 armed men ranged into 16 companies, that is to say
five Spanish, and eleven Italians, 60 men in a company; there are besides
reserved for the Viceroy-General of the Kingdom a hundred men, and 80 for the
great Constable. But for light-horsmen there is not above 450 ranged into five
companies. And for the guard and service of the Viceroy he has an hundred
Almain Holbardiers, besides a hundred Gentlemen, that is to say 60 Spaniards,
and 50 Italians, that are continually attendant, whose duty is to frequent the
Court, to accompany the Viceroy in time of peace and war, and therefore they
are bound to have their arms and their horses. Moreover for occurrences in
defense of the Kingdom, there is maintained in exercise of the war an Army of
24078 footmen of the Kingdom, the which has not been very long since it was
ordained, for because that in all the Provinces of the Kingdom there are
ordinarily limited five footmen for every hundred Family; these footmen in
every Country of the Kingdom are chosen by the Electors of that Country;
therefore if the soldiers named do not please their Captains, they ought to
choose others that may content them; these footmen are bound both in the
occurrences of the Kingdom, and out of the Kingdom to serve five years, and
then in change of them to choose others. And in the same manner is paid to the
said soldiers, to Captains, Ensigns, Sargeants for that time which they serve,
the same pay that is given to Spanish footmen and their Officers. These
soldiers of this new Army (which together are so named) enjoy certain
privileges of freedom. The strength of the Kingdom consists also in 30
Galleys, with their helps which are 27. but the principal Fortresses are
Naples, with three Castles, Gaeta la Mantia, Trani, Cotrone, Gallipoli,
Monopoli, Taranto, Bary, Brindesi, with the Fortress of St. Andrea, Barletta,
Otranto, Manfredonia, Monte de St. Angelo, and toward the Mediterrane, Capoa,
Cosenza, Catanzaro, Civitella, Aquila. All the men in general are strong,
valorous, painful, well made, and comely, ingenious, courteous, inclined to
piety and virtue, desirous of novelty, litigious, given to pleasure, religious
aad devout, the which the many and great magnificence of the Churches, and
riches of the Clergy do testify. In the wars they declare their valor and
courage. The Nobility are liberal, magnanimous, warlike, and make particular
profession of policy and chivalry. The nature and disposition of the people.


Now forasmuch as we have spoken somewhat of the Revenues of the Crown in this
Kingdom, it will not be amiss to discourse more particularly thereof.

The REVENUES of the CROWN in the noble and most happy Kingdom OF NAPLES.
BEfore I discourse of the Revenues which the king of Spain has in this noble
kingdom of Naples, it were requisite for the better satisfaction of the Reader,
first to declare in what manner the kings in former time have received it. The
Royal revenue under the Kings of the Normans was received by a price.
Therefore to let you understand that under the kings of the Normans the
Revenues pertaining to the king was received by a price, that is to say for
every twelve marks of Revenue was paid three fiorines. The which continued
until the time of the Emperor Frederick the second, who disliking that kind of
payment, called a general Parliament, where assembled all the Barons and
Feuditarie persons of the kingdom, subject unto him, and thither also repaired
all the chief Magistrates of the Cities and Countries, after the king had made
an excellent Oration in commendation of the kingdom, he exhorted them all, that
for a general benefit, and aid, and confirmation thereof, should be decreed and
ordained a certain and ordinary Revenue, to the end that the poor might not be
oppressed by the rich and mighty; but that every one might pay so much as were
fit and requisite.

This Proposition of the King seemed unto all just and convenient, and so
willing to satisfy the desire of the king, desired eight days respit to
consult thereon, which was gently granted unto them. After which time expired
they met the 16 of April 1218. at the Parliament in the Castle of Vovo, where
was decreed and concluded by all the Barons, Feuditaries and Burgises of the
Cities and Countries, that the Regal Revenues for the aid and defense of the
Kingdom, should be received by collections per aes, and libras, that is to say,
he that had most wealth should pay most, and who had not should pay least, the
which payments because they were not sufficient for the supply and succor of
the Kingdom, they increased it to the number of six collections, and these were
called ordinary Exchequer payments, as Luca da Penna testifies in the L. 1.
number. 3. C. de indic. lib. 10. and Antonio Capece in the invest. ver. feudorum
clausulae ver. collectis colum* 5. in fi. and in prin. and Andrea of Isernia in
c. 1. and extraordinaria, in prin. and ^um. 62. quae sint reg. The which
likewise Fabio Giordano Neopolitan in his Chro^^ele thus writes, Post quam
Neopolitanum Regnum in Federici secund. Imperatoris (...) ionem veuit, noluit
ille, ut redditus, ad fiscum pertinentes licitacione exiger^t^^ quemadmodum a
superioribus Regibus factum erat, nam usque ad ej^s tempora (...) ^^odenis
Marchis, t^es argentei flor^ni solvebantur, hinc animadvertus provi^^^
^mperator pauperes haec ratione nimium vexari, and opprimi, anno millesimo
(...) ducentesimum decimum octavum, octavo Kalendas Maias in arcem Lucullia^^^,
Castellum Normandiacum etiam dictum; publica comitia haberi voluit, quo
convenientibus omnibus fere Regni hujus Regulis, and feudatariis, sic dictis,
oppidorism dominis, atque etiam nonnullis urbis praetoribus Fredericus ex
excelsa sede, regalique solio elegantem, ac doctam in Regni laudem orationem
habuit; universos abhortatus, ut pro publico omnium commodo stabilique Regni
quasi praecidio praecipuus, ac certus quidam per singulos annos censu^
designaretur, ne singuli nimis, ac ultra modum vexarentur. Imperatoris oration
universis placuit, a quo satis humaniter octo dierum spacium his fuit
concessum, ut ea de re inter se maturius deliberarent, quo dierum curriculo
elapso cuntis Regulis visum fuit, ut Regni census post hac non licitacione, sed
per collectas colligerentur, ut qui plura possideret bona, plus solveret; qui
vero pauciora, minus, hic exactionis modus ad breve duravit tempu^, ^am cum non
esset satis ad Regni necessitatibus subveniendum, procedente tempore crevit
usque ad sex collectas, quae ab omnibus solutiones siscales vocabantur.

This manner of receiving of Collections continued until the time of the most
famous and renowned King Alfonsus of Aragon, who purposing better to establish
the affairs of the Kingdom, assembled in Naples the 28 day of February 1442 a
general Parliament, and required that in place of the six Collections, should be
levied on every Family ten carlines. And although Matteo de Afflitto in the
cap. and plaustorum number 6. quae sint reg. says that that Parliament was held in
the City of Benevento, nevertheless in the chapters of the Kingdom, cap. 1.
Regis Alfonsi appears the contrary, because he says that the said Parliament
was held in Naples in the Church of St. Lorenzo. In the year following 1449,
the 20 of September (as it is noted in the Register entitled Literarum curae
secundi anni 1451. fol. 133* which is preserved in the Royal Chamber of the
Summary) the said King being in the Greek Tower, caused there a general
Parliament to assemble, where the King so propounded, that he maintaining so
great an Army, as well by land as sea, to no other end and purpose but to
secure and defend the Kingdom from the incursions and invasions of enemies,
which neglected no opportunity to prejudice and endanger it, the Royal Revenue
of the Kingdom being not sufficient, he was enforced either to increase it, or
to give way to the enemy, therefore he had considered that for an universal
benefit, it would do well that there should be imposed five other Carlines on
every Family besides the ten, the which payment being not grievous nor heavy
but lawful and honest, may be easily supported of all: And to the end they may
know, it is not our purpose to impose new Taxes, nor through a covetous and
greedy desire to heap treasure together, but only to secure them from the
Tyranny of others, and therefore at this present I promise to give to every
Family of the Kingdom a bushel of salt.

The King having finished this Speech, they all cried out with a loud voice,
saying, Whatsoever your sacred Majesty commands shall be done, and in token of
faithful Subjects, since that you have vouchsafed to bestow salt on your most
loyal Kingdom, we humbly desire that your sacred Majesty will accept of us in
behalf of the whole Kingdom, two grains more for a Family, as a gratification
for the said salt, which shall be at the appointment of your Majesty's
Officers, the which was accepted of the King; the number of which Families as
it then appeared in the Royal Taxation, with all the Cities and Countries of
the Kingdom (except 58^4 families of the exempted and disburthened Countries
until this new and last numeration, which was in the year 1595.) were 475727
families, and the sum of money which was gathered of these payments amounted to
719095 ducats, under which number of Families the Albanesi, and Illirici are
not comprehended, which under one only name are called Slavoni, the which paid
no more then eleven Carlins the year, therefore they had no salt given them,
and every year were numbered, being lawful for them to go from one place to
another in the Kingdom, the number of which extraordinary families were 4451.
and paid according to the said taxation every year 4896. ducats and ten
grams. There are also exempted from the said usual and common payment the
Companies which have perpetual free privileges, which import 41510 ducats,
two carlins, and seven grains, the which with the noble City of Naples, are in
all the Provinces of the Kingdom (as we have before said) in number 54. There
are also exempted the Universities which are free for some prefixed time, which
pay not the said payments, which import 2609 ducats, eight carlins, and eight
grains, the number whereof are but four. They are also excepted which pay by
covenant and agreement, which import 23794 ducats eight carlins and three
grains, and are 25 companies. Moreover there are exempted many particular men
which hold privileged immunities, which import 1203 ducats, two carlins and
five grains. So there is received clearly, exempting the privileged
Universities, those that are free for a time; and the Universities which pay by
covenant, and the privileged men 654873 ducats, six carlins, and seven
grains. This then is the ordinary payment which the King receives every year
of all the families of the Kingdom.

There is likewise another ordinary payment called Adogo, which signifies royal
service, this is paid by the Feudaries in place of personal service, because
every one is bound to present himself personally before the King when he goes
to war. At the which service the feudary was bound personally to be ready with
his only person, when he possessed an entire fee. It was held an entire fee,
when the revenue thereof did amount to 20 ounces, the ounce is 6 ducats, What
a whole entire fee was Andrea d' Isernia. Capece.

A feudary was bound but to 3 months service.

The Chap. of King Charles.


by the which entire fee the said feudary was bound to continue his said
service the space of three months at his own charges with three horses and
arms, as Andrea de Isernia affirms in C. 1. similiter potest, nu. 14. ver. in
Reg. Sici. de cap. qui cur. vend. and Capece in the cap. Imperialem, praeteraea
si quis in feudatus 10 col. ver. item nota quod quando de prohib. feu. alie.
per feder. And in the decision 10. nu. 14. Neither was the feudatary enforced
to serve longer then the said time, unless the King would have him near unto
him for his service, and then the King ought to give him pay, the which appears
in the Chapters of King Charles the second, which begins Item statuimus quod
Comites, Barons, etc. The which three months of service which the said feudist
ought to do, should begin to be counted from the day that the muster was taken,
the which that great feudist Andrea d' Isernia thus declares in consti.
Hostici. 3. Col. ver. sed quaero quando, and a quo tempere. But if the feudist
serve not personally, he ought to provide another fit to send in his place, The
feudary when he served not personally to what he was bound.
that may content the King, as was ordained by the Emperor in Cap. Imperialem,
firmiter de probib. feu. alien. per Feder. And this was when the feudist did
possess the said whole entire revenue; for when the revenue did not arise unto
the said quantity of 2. ounces, then more fees or tribute were joined together,
that might make up the whole fee of 20 ounces, and so amongst them sent one
soldier with three horses and arms, which for three months followed the Kings
service, from the which conjunction of feudists, as Andrea d' Isernia says in
cap. 1. number. 9. Versi and quantum adoha^^entum de contro. feu. apud par. term.
This said royal service was called Adogo, as it were a uniting. And in very
truth, although the said feudists contribute their money to the said service of
the King, at that time which they paid for the said whole fee of 20 ounces the
half, and somewhat more, that is to say ten ounces and a half; yet for all this
they shall pay at this present, that is for every hundred ducats of revenue he
pays the half, which are 50 ducats and five grains besides for a ducket
more, which are in all 52 ducats and a half, and this payment is meant when
the fee consists in slaves. But if the fee be without slaves, because the
feudist could not have aid or assistance, he ought only to pay six ounces. And
if the fee consists in money, that is to say in penal payments, or alienated
revenues established, he pays only five ounces because that revenue may be
augmented, as Isernia says in cap. 1. fin. quis dicatur dux, Marchio, and in
the cap. Imperialem. firmiter in 2. col. ver. idem videmus quod solvitur. So in
like manner to do that royal service when the feudists have not the whole fee,
they are to join together in the manner abovesaid, and to pay for one soldier,
according to the said sum of ten ounces and a half, the which the said Isernia
says in the said cap. 1. nu. 9. de contro feu. apud par. ter. di verse. and
quantum ad adohamentum. And moreover also it stands in the election of the
feudatory, if he will personally serve, he cannot be enforced to pay for the
Kings service; but if the feudist be not fit and able, or not in health, he
ought then to send another in his place of sufficient strength and ability, the
which the aforeleadged Author writes in the said Chapter Imperialem, firmiter,
nu. 32. For these services then which belong to feudists, are certain slaves,
or rather lands to help toward the moiety of the said service held by the
Barons at the rate of five carlins a Family, for these Families which the
Universities are taxed, if the land consist not of so many Families, which at
the rate of five carlins a Family, comprehends not the moiety of the payment
of the said taxation of the Baron, that University or Country is not bound to
any further charge, but for so many families as are taxed, paying at the rate
of five carlins a family, and for that which wants the Baron is enjoined to
pay together with some other moiety which he has. But if the number of
Families be so many that the payment of every family at the aforesaid rate of
five carlins exceed the moity of the contribution which belongs to the
University, then that overplus which grows is to be divided among the
Families, to the end that the only moity which belongs to the aid and help of
the Baron may be received. Of which Afflitto does very largely discourse and in
cap. Caroli 2. which begins Comites Barons, Afflitto.
sub rubr. de subven. Vassal. The which help of Vassals was thus divided by
Charles the second, as it is noted in the said Chapter. Charles 2.
Comites, Barons, and feudatarii, sub rubr. de subven. Vassal.

Afterward the Kingdom came into the Jurisdiction of Ferdinando the Catholic
King, who understanding the many contentions and strifes which were in the
Kingdom between the Barons and Vassals for the payment of this Imposition of
the Adogo, to settle things in order, appointed that all the Barons and
feudists, with their revenue should be noted, and that all the Cities, and
Countries, and Families of the Kingdom should be newly numbered, and ordained
that the helps of the moity of the taxations which the vassals paid to the
feudists by reason of the Kings service, should be no more received by the
feudists, but by the Kings Treasurers and Officers. The sum at this present did
amount, which was paid every year by the feudists into the Kings Exchequer to
75616 ducats, and as many more were received of the vassals. But the whole
entire Adogo which every Province paid, wherein the Barons and feudists of the
Kingdom were taxed, appears here underwritten.

The Country of Lavoro ducats 18346 The County of Molise, ducats 3152 The
Principality on this side, ducats 12489 The Principality on the other side,
ducats 10348 Basilicata, ducats 14671 Calauria on this side, ducats 6962
Calauria on the other side, ducats 7317 The Country of Otranto, ducats 13495
The Country of Bary, ducats 8^42 Abruzzo on this side, ducats 7280 Abruzzo on
the other side, ducats 8651 Capitanata ducats 9669 The sum of the ducats,
12056
When it happens in the Kingdom to bestow a Donative upon the King, the Barons
use to examine what every one of them holds, deviding the payment by the rate
which they pay of the Adogo, the which Adogo (as we have said, which at this
present is present is paid) is 52 ducats, ^.10. for the hundred, if the fee
consist in vassals; but being without vassals, he pays for his Adogo 26
ducats and a quarter, which is the moity of the whole fee; but if the Baron
possesses a fee that is disinhabited, he pays for the Taxation of the Adogo
30 ducats for a hundred.

And it is also to be understood, that when the Baron or Feudist dies, the
heir of the dead does not pay for the first year the Adogo into the Kings
Exchequer; but the year ended, after the death of the said Baron, the heir
pays his Livery, which payment is half the revenue which the Baron has by
the year; and if it so fall out that the heir do not reveal the death of the
Baron, the year being past he forfeits nine times the value, which the Livery
of the Baron imports, therefore when the Livery is paid, all the Countries
and debts are levied which the dead Baron is found to have.

The Cities also and Lands of Demains pay the Livery to the King every fifteen
year, even as at the death of a Baron, Places of Demains which yay the Livery.

Extraordinary payments, on whom, and when it is imposed.

The imposition of 3 grains made by Don


Thus have I briefly declared the ordinary Impositions which the Families and
Feudists of the Kingdom pay. Now remain eth to declare the extraordinary
payments which every Family paieth yearly into the Kings Exchequer.

First of all every Family pays four grains, the which payment is received
every month. This Imposition was made by Don Pietro of Toledo Viceroy of the
Kingdom the second of May 1542. the which first imposed three grains upon the
Spanish Footmen to pay, and appointed the said payment to be received every
fourth month, as it appears by a Letter of the said Don Pietro, inserted in the
Letters of the Kings Chamber, under the date of the 22. of May 1542. In the
year after 1544. in the month of September, the said Imposition was increased
to four grains, as it is expressed in a Letter of the said Viceroy enclosed in
a Commission of the Kings Chamber, dated the third of September 1544. At the
last in the year 1566. Don Perasenno de Rivera Duke of Alcala ordained that the
said Imposition should be received of all the Families of the Kingdom according
to the former Order, the which even at this present is received.

The Imposition levied on the free Companies, the which pay no other
Impositions then above written, contains yearly for the number of ordinary
Families 215216 ducats six carlins, and six grains; and for extraordinary
Families 1019 ducats and 8 carlins, the which sum joined together are 216236
ducats 4 carlins 6 grains.

There is also an Imposition paid for the wages of the Barigelli of the fields,
which are those that guard and keep the highways, and go against Outlaws.

This Imposition was made by Don Pietro of Tolledo the third of August in the
year 1550. only in the Provinces of the Principality on this side and the
other, and the County of Molise, Capatanata, and Basilicata, to avoid the
robberies which were daily committed, for which cause were appointed the
Universities to pay all those losses which were there committed. It was
afterward ordained that the said Imposition should be gathered of all the
Provinces except the Land of Lavero; but for the service which the said
Barricelli did in that Province, they should be paid out of the Kings
Exchequer. The said Imposition was received of every Province diversely, the
which we have declared in their places. This Imposition rises to 18506
ducats, seven carlins and two grains yearly.

There is another Imposition which is paid for the guard and defense of the
Towers and Castles, the which Imposition was instituted by Don Perasanno de
Rivera Duke of Ascala, to the end the Kingdom might be secure from Rovers, by
the which imposition all the whole Kingdom paid for every Family seven grains,
The sum of the imposition for the Castles
and the twelfth part of a grain. But the Countries which were distant twelve
miles from the Sea paid the half of the said payment, the which amounted to
25348 ducats yearly.

There was likewise gathered of the Universities the payment for the building
of the Castles, when they were builded, and there was received according to the
payment which they paid for the guard of the said Castles. And because at this
present there are not any Castles builded in the Kingdom, therefore that
payment is no long^r continued:

There was also gathered another Imposition of three grains of every Family of
the Kingdom for the repairing of the streets and highways of the Kingdom.
This Imposition was instituted by the Duke of Alcala the 20 of July 1539. as it
appears by a Letter inserted in a Commission of the Kings Chamber of the
Summaria, The sum of the imposition for repairing the highway^.
dated the first of July, registered in the Royal Register, Litterarum Curiae
xxi. fol. 93. the which payment contains 41640 ducats yearly.

The Families also of the Kingdom paid 17 grains for to pay the soldiers and
men of arms which guarded and defended the Kingdom, this payment in the year
1555. was received 45 grains for a Family, in the year after 1559. the Kingdom
being augmented by the means of Don John Manriquez Viceroy of the Kingdom, The
sum of the payment for the soldiers and men of arms.
the said payment was deducted to 36 grains. And last of all because the number
of Families were very much increased, it was brought to 17 grains a Family, the
which payment amounts yearly, excepting the free Universities 74900 ducats
two carlins and eight grains.

Finally the Universities and Families of the Kingdom pay two grains through
the decay of 5804 Families. These are extraordinary payments, which the
Families of the Kingdom pay into the Exchequer.

Also the Kings Exchequer receives from the said Kingdom other Revenues and
Rents, which consist in diverse things, which are these following,

The custom of the sheep of Apulia, which is one of the principal Revenues
which the King has in the Kingdom, The custom of the sheep of Apulia.
the which consists in the herbage, which the Kings customer renteth every
year to the husbandmen for the pasture of sheep, and greater cattle, whereof
some pay thirteen ducats and eight carlins for a hundred sheep, and some
twelve, and some ten and a half, and some six, and some three, and some fifteen
carlins for a hundred, and some twelve crowns for a thousand; but for greater
cattle there are some which pay thirty seven ducats and a half for a hundred,
and others twenty two and a half, and others eighteen ducats and three
quarters. Therefore the receiver satisfies to the Masters of the herbage
according to the goodness and quality of the pasture: As in the year 1592.
there was assigned to the said custom four millions, four hundred seventy one
thousand, 496 sheep, and of greater cattle nine thousand six hundred, of which
sheep and greater cattle is paid into the Kings Exchequer 622172 ducats and
seven carlins, from the which sum is deducted 380492 ducats and five carlins
and two grains, for the payment of the herbage given to diverse particular
persons, with the alms bestowed upon the poor, and other charges, returning
into the Kings Exchequer 241264 ducats, The custom of Puglia very a^cient.
four carlins, and five grains and three quarters, the which sum is carried
into the Kings Treasury. This customary payment has been very ancient, for in
the time of the Romans the like was paid, as it appears in Varro, and other
ancient Writers. And as we have before said, the Kingdom being invaded by
diverse Nations, the custom decayed through the long wars, The custom of Puglia
newly instituted by King Alfonsus.
until the coming of the worthy and renowned Alfonsus of Arragon, first of
this name King of Naples, the which newly restored it, in the year 1447. with
excellent orders, and made Francesco Maluber Commissary for reformation
thereof. In the year 1501. Lewis the twelfth King of France, having divided the
Kingdom with King Ferdinando the Catholic King, and Apuglia and Calauria being
allotted to King don Ferdinando, he created Frederick Menidois Neopolitan
cust^mer of the sheep, who received by means of the rents of the herbage 83280
ducats. The French King perceiving so great a revenue, challenged the custom,
saying it belonged unto him, through which discord after long wars, the
Frenchmen were driven out of all the Kingdom. Leaving as an example for others,
that who seeks all, commonly loses all.

The second revenue is the custom of Silks* which is one of the best revenues
in the Kingdom, and this is in the Province of Calauria, for all the silk which
was there made, and in other places, they anciently paid five grains in the
pound. This custom was in the year 1483. by King Ferdinando the first, sold to
the Prince of Bisignano for eighteen thousand ducats. The cus^om of silk sold
to the Prince of Bisignano.
In the year after 1541. Don Pic^ro of Toledo Viceroy of the Kingdom, imposed
five tornese more upon the pound, and assigned it to the said Prince, because
of the right which he pretended unto the County of Milito. This revenue now
yields seventy thousand crowns yearly. In the same year the said Don Pietro in
the name of the Emperor Charles the fifth imposed five other grains more upon a
pound of silk, and this he did because of the fortifying of the Castle of
Cotrone. In the year 1555. Don Berardino of Mendozza, being Viceroy of the
Kingdom, ordained that of all the other Provinces should be gathered one carlin
for a pound of silk, and appointed that that imposition should be paid in the
time that the silk grows. Afterward Don Francesco Pacecco, Cardinal Saguntino,
Viceroy of the kingdom, imposed in the year 1557* upon all the silk which went
out of the kingdom another carlin in the pound. Last of all in the year 1580.
Don John Zunica, Prince of Pietra Pertia, purposing to take away the deceits
which by means of the said extractions were committed, with the will and
consent of the kings collateral Council, ordained that even as in the Province
of Calauria was received fifteen grains on the pound at sund^y times, he would
have the same at one entire payment, that is, to be paid in the time that the
silk grows; and also he would that in the other Provinces should be received
two carlins on the pound. By the which order the said revenue was much
augmented. To the which Imposition is also annexed Saffron, The sum of the
imposi^ion upon s^^k and saffron.
of which is paid one carlin the pound. The receipt of this revenue arises
yearly to the sum of 148003 ducats.

The third revenue is the custom and profit of Iron, the which Imposition was
ordained by the Emperor Frederick the second, The custom or Iron* and by whom
(...) was ^^s^ituted.
who made it unlawful for any man to bring iron into the kingdom to sell,
except to the kings Paymasters or Tenants, and the price was rated throughout
all the Provinces. The which custom although at sundry times it was diversely
received, nevertheless at this present for the most part, the third part
thereof is paid, which is the half of the price, which is paid for the iron
brought into the kingdom to the paymasters. Therefore the said price is imposed
by the kings Chamber of the Summaria, over which before the price was
established, it caused to be taken in Naples a diligent information of that it
stood the Rentmaster in. And so goes the fourth part of steel, and the fifth of
pitch, the which revenue amounts to the sum of 61836 ducats: And according
to the same rent go the custom of the mercerie wares of Calauria.

The fourth revenue is the regal custom, The great custom of Naples and the
revenue thereof.
and the greatest storehouse of the City of Naples, because there is received
18 grains by ounce of all the merchandise which are sold by the Merchants, by
reason of the custom there are received also diverse other payments, that is to
say 15 grains by the ounce by reason of the storehouse: the which custom
amounts to 115025 ducats.

The fifth Revenue are the Royal Customs of the Merchandise of the Provinces of
the Countries of Otranto, Bary, Basilicata, and Capatanata, The sum of the
(...) r^venue.
the which revenue arises to 97300 ducats.

The sixth Revenue is the Regal custom of the thirds of Wine, which is half the
price of the Wine which is paid to the king, The reven^^ of (...) cu^^om of
(...).
being called the Custom of the thirds of Wine, as a difference from another
which is paid to the City of Naples The revenue of this Royal Custom amounts
to 970013 ducats:

The seventh Revenue is the new Impost of Oil and Soap, which is paid at the
rate of one carlin for every stare, Of Oil and Soap.
which is the measure of oil in Naples so called, the which revenue contains
10400 ducats.

The eighth Revenue is the new Impost of Wine which is transported out of the
Kingdom, Of Wine conveyed out of the kingdom. The custom of Cards.
the which Revenue arises to 104000 ducats.

The ninth Revenue is the custom of playing Cards, this new Custom was Imposed
in the year 1578. and for every pair of Cards the customer received a carlin,
which yielded 15310 ducats.

The tenth Revenue is the Custom of the Marketplace of Maiure, called otherwise
the place of Small-Wares, the Revenue whereof arises to 9390 ducats.

The eleventh Revenue is the Custom of Eggs, Kidds, and Birds, which are
brought into the City of Naples, Of eggs, birds, and kidds. Of Manna.
which arises to 2300 ducats.

The twelfth Revenue is the Impost of artificial or enforced Manna which is
paid at the rate of one carlin the pound, which contains 700 ducats.

Of the race of Horses.
The thirteenth Revenue are the two Races of Horses which the Kings Court
maintains in Puglia and Calauria, which is received by the sale which is made
of the said horses, and other things, 5670 ducats.

The fourteenth Revenue are the profits, forfeitures, and compositions which
proceed from the Kings Chamber, Of forfeitures to the King
and from the great Court of the Vicaria, and from the kings Audit of the
Provinces of the kingdom, which yearly amount to the sum of 34000 ducats.

The fifteenth Revenue is the Custom of Horses which are bought of strangers in
Naples, Of horses that are bought.
which imports 500 ducats.

The sixteenth Revenue is the due of Ius salmarum for the conveying of Grain,
Barley, Of the conveying of corn.
and Pulse, which is transported into the kingdom, the which Revenue arises to
4000 ducats.

The revenue of times, why it was so called.
The seventeenth Revenue are the Customs which are commonly called the fines of
the Annunciata, which consist in a certain duty, and is received at the four
Gates of the City of Naples And in the Marketplace of the said City is
received the kings due for the slaughter of Cattle. And this Revenue of the
Fines of the Annunciata, was so named because the king Don Frederick of
Arragon, having taken up a certain quantity of money at Interest of Merchants,
he agreed with them that they should be paid out of those duties, therefore he
appointed that they should always be paid by the Masters and Governors of the
Hospital of the Annunciata, to the end every one might be satisfied his due.
The which even to this present with great diligence is received by the said
Governors, paying it to the said Creditors, and the overplus of the said
Revenue they return into the kings general Treasury. This Revenue arises
yearly to 247001 ducats, which discharges the said debt, the which does
amount yearly to 2247 ducats, three carlins and three grains, so there remain
to the king no more then 2339 ducats.

The eighteenth Revenue are the helps and aids of Tuscan, which do amount to
13000 ducats. The aids of Tuscan.


The ninteenth are the Revenues of the City of Vesti, of St. Severino, and of
the Fee of Tacina, The revenue of the City of Viesti and others.

A new imposition upon Brimstone. The new imposition on hemp.

A new imposition on the infidels.


and many others, the which sum imports 24577 ducats.

The twentieth Revenue is the new Imposition upon Brimstone which is dug in
the kingdom, and is paid at the rate of three carlins for a kintal, the which
commodity is now omitted.

The 21 revenue is the new Imposition of Hemp, which is paid at the rate of 15
carlins for the kintal, the which commodity is also omitted.

The twenty two revenue is a new imposition upon the Infidels, which are
ransomed and are received in this sort, from two hundred crowns downward is
paid eight ducats by the poule, from two hundred to five hundred is paid ten
crowns by the poule, from five hundred to a thousand is paid fifteen crowns by
the poule, and when the ransom is of some quantity, the more is paid in respect
of the said taxation.

The due of Salnitro.
The twenty third Revenue is the custom of the extraction of Salnitro, which is
received at the rate of a crown for a kintall, the which commodity is omitted.

Twentifourth Revenue is the industry and labor of Salt, and Salt Pits of the
Kingdom; and although at this present there is not any commodity thereby,
nevertheless the King has a Rent, and according to the charge of the said
Rent, The industry and labor of Salt.
they are constrained to fetch salt out of the Kingdom, to maintain their
Storehouses furnished, and for the provision of Officers and other occasions,
the Kings Court pays to the Rent-Masters by the year 17700 ducats, and
receives no profit or benefit by the sale, but they are bound to deliver to
the Universities of the Kingdom bay salt at the rate of a bushel for every
Family by the year, and when they give white salt, they are bound to give the
more according to the rate that the bay salt is valued. And so they are
enjoined to give to all the Officers and servants of the Kings Chamber, salt
answerable to the rate of the charges which they are above enjoined.

The twentififth Revenue are the duties for the custom of Grain, Barley, The
duties of the commodities of grain and others.
and Pulse, going out of the Kingdom, the which is laid up for the store of the
Kingdom, but being brought out, there is great abundance.

The twentisixth Revenue is the devolution for the dead, and the end of the
lines of Barons of the Kingdom, The end of the lines of Barons, and the Kings
Offices that are void.

The revenue of Liveries of heirs and forfeitures and others.


and of Offices that are void by the death of them that held them; but because
these things are extraordinary, there is no particular account kept of the
Revenue thereof.

The twen^iseventh Revenue are the Liveries of heirs, profits of penal
amerceaments, forfeitures of Statutes, Encroachments, and other extraordinary
Revenues which falls to the King, through many and sundry causes; which being
no certain nor constant revenues, I make no distinction of them. But as it is
judged by John Baptista d' Assaro, Cesard d' Acampora, and Alfonso Crivella,
the most diligent and reasonable Arbitrators of the Kings Chamber, say the
revenue is worth 150000 ducats.

Moreover the King has in this Kingdom 24 Cathedral Churches, the which held
more then fifty thousand crowns yearly. The Cathedral Churches of the Kingdom.

The Abbats of the Kingdom.




He has also profit from many Abbots, which are the ancient patrons of the
Kingdom, the which yield ten thousand crows yearly.

The sum of the Revenue which the King has in all the Kingdom (except the
donatives) is two millions, nine hundred ninty six thousand, nine hundred
thirty seven ducats, seven carlins and four grains 2996937.

Thus have I briefly discoursed, only to note the greatness of his noble
Kingdom the which is not to be wondered, that at sundry times there have
repaired so many sorts of barbarous Nations from far, and even remote parts of
the world (as is well known) to make spoil thereof. But now through the
providence of God, it remains in much peace, and secure under the protection
of the puissant King Philip 2d, the people having never enjoyed so peaceable a
times, with the great benefit and abundance of all things.

The Donatives which have been made at sundry times by the Noble City of NAPLES
and the KINGDOM to their KINGS.
AMong other Privileges which the faithful City of Naples and the Kingdom
holds, one is, that the King cannot for any occasion demand a Donative or
assistance; nevertheless it has been known that in times of calamity and the
great necessity of their Kings* they have been succored and assisted with all
their strength, their money, and their men. Therefore for these worthy deeds
they have deserved to be called no Vassals, but faithful friends.

I now purposing to discourse of the Donatives which have been made unto the
Kings, beginning from the year 1507. and having a desire for no other cause
there to begin, but because from thence I have had a true information of
writings, being always a more laudible thing to declare few things and true,
then many and ambiguous.

In the year then 1507. the last of the month of January, was held a general
Parliament by the Deputies of the noble City of Naples, in the Monastery of
Mount Olivet, where met (according to the custom) the Princes, Dukes,
Marquisses, Earls, Barons and Feudists, and Burgises of the Cities, and free
Towns in the Kingdom, in which general Parliament was concluded, that to the
Catholic King Ferdinando, in respect of the former Wars, and the present
affairs, and to maintain the Kingdom in peace, should be given a donative of
three hundred thousand ducats the which being propounded, the speaker or
advocate of the Cities and Commonwealth, after he had used some few plausible
words, desired that besides that day, they might have three days respit to
consult thereon. And the time being come, it was generally concluded, that it
should be paid in this manner, that is to say, by the rate thereof, the Barons
should pay fifty thousand ducats, levied by the rate o^ the Adogo, and that
the said sum should be all paid by August 1508 and the remainder the people of
the whole Kingdom should pay, as well landed men, as he Barons, eleven carlins
a family, that is to say three carlins the next months of April or May, and
three the months of October and November of the same year 1507. and two in the
months of February and March in the year 1508. and three in the month of
October the same year. Of which donative was no man exempted, except the noble
City of Naples, and the Hamlets belonging thereto.

The 26 of November in the year 1520 was held (according to the custom) a
public and general Parliament, in the which the Barons of the kingdom
considering the great charges which Charles the fifth had been at, then king of
the Romans, about his Coronation in Aquisgrane, they gave him thirty thousand
ducats, and concluded that it should be paid within the time of three years,
levying the first payment of the three, at the birth of our Lord next ensuing,
in the year 1521: and was levied in the selfsame manner, which was paid to king
Ferdinando, neither was it permitted that any person should be exempted, except
the City of Naples.

In the year 1523. the first of September was held in the Monastery of Mount
Olivet, a public Parliament, where was concluded that to the Emperor Charles the
fifth, for the necessity which he had to pay his Army, should be given him two
hundred thousand ducats, which should be received at three payments, that is
to say, at Easter, the birth of our Lord, and in August, and it was decreed
that of this Donative not any person, though privileged, should go free,
except the City of Naples and the Hamlets belonging thereto.

The 16 of the month of July 1524. in the Monastery of Mount Olivet (according
to the accustomed manner) was held a general Parliament, and concluded that to
the Emperor should be given 50 thousand ducats by reason of his Army which he
had in Lumbardy, and of this payment were only freed the venerable Churches,
and Hospital of the Annunciation, with the City of Naples, and the Hamlets.

The 19 of May 1531. was held a general Parliament, where having a principal
respect to the Wars which the Emperor made with the Turk, and although the
kingdom had been much exhausted through long wars, dearth, and pestilence,
nevertheless the Barons showing a generous mind to serve the Emperor, made a
donative of six hundred thousand ducats, of which the Barons paid an Adogo and
a half, not by the way of an Adogo, but a pure and free Donative, and the
remainder the people paid. This Donative was levied and paid in four years, and
thereof was only free the City of Naples, and the jurisdictions of the
Annunciation.

The 20 of August 1534. was held (according to the accustomed manner) in the
Monastery of Mount Olivet a general Parliament, where with a general consent was
agreed, that there should be given unto the Emperor one hundred and fifty
thousand ducats to the end to chase away the Fleet of the Turks, which had
given out to invade the coast of the kingdom, and this Donative was levied at
three payments, that is to say at September next ensuing, at the birth of our
Lord, and at Easter 1^35. and the Barons contributed for the aforesaid donative
fifty thousand ducats, the which payment they paid not by way of an Adogo, but
as a simple donative, and the remnant of a hundred thousand ducats were paid
by the people. From the which payment was not exempted any person, though he
were privileged, except the famous and renowned City of Naples, and the
Hospital of the Annunciation.

In the year 1536. on the eight day of the month of January, in the Church of
St. Laurence was by the Deputies of the renowned City of Naples, held a
general and public Parliament, at the which (according to to the usual manner)
met the Princes, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Barons, Feudaries of the kingdom,
and also the Burgises of the Cities and free Towns, in the which Parliament
considering the charge of the Emperor to return into Spain, it was concluded
there should be given him a donative of a million, and fifty thousand ducats,
and this donative was the greatest that ever was made to any king whatsoever of
the said kingdom, and was enacted with these Conditions and Covenants
following, that is to say, that the quantity which was to be paid by the Barons
might be so much as would amount to the sum of three Adogoes, but yet not by
way of an Adogo, but as a free donative, according to the taxation which at
this present is to be seen in the Royal Chamber of the Summaria, and the
remainder was appointed that the people, Cities, Countries, and Castles of the
kingdom should pay. Of which donative fifty thousand ducats were levied in a
year, and the Barons paid thereof one Adogo; but for the contribution of the
million, which was agreed to be paid in five years, the two Adogos were not
paid, and the people discharged the rest. The Emperor seeing the great
affection which the kingdom did bear unto him, purposing in some measure to
remunerate their good will toward him, granted both to the Kingdom and Cities,
many privileges.

In the year 1538. and the 27 day of March, according to the accustomed order,
was held a public Parliament in St. Laurence, where was decreed that there
should be given to the Emperor a donative of 360 thousand ducats, and that of
it the Barons should pay so much as did amount to the quantity of half an
Adogo, not by way of an Adogo, but as a simple donative, and the remainder to
the complement of the said sum, the people should pay. The which donative was
levied and paid in five thirds, and the City of Naples was exempted, and the
Lands of the venerable Church and Hospital of the Annuntiation.

In the year 1539. the 15 of March was held a public Parliament (according to
the accustomed manner) in St. Laurence, and was concluded, that in regard of
the Occurrences which the Emperor had to pay his Army, should be given him a
donative of 260 thousand ducats, with condition that the Barons part should be
so much as would amount to half an Adogo, not by the way of an Adogo, but as a
free donative, and the rest the people, Cities, Countries, and Castles of the
Kingdom should pay. The said donative was received in three thirds, and paid.

In the year 1540. the 27 of November was held (according to the usual manner)
a public Parliament in St. Laurence, where was agreed that it were requisite to
sustain and succor the great necessity, and charge which the King was at for
the defense and security of the kingdom: but the kingdom being greatly
exhausted, there should be given a donative of the quarter of an Adogo, but not
by way of an Adogo, but as a simple donative, and the Cities, Countries, and
Castles should pay 16 grains for a Family.

In the year 1541. the 29 of July was held (according unto the accustomed
manner) a public Parliament in St. Laurence, wherein seeing the necessity of
the King, and the great preparation of the Turk to invade the Kingdom, to the
end soldiers may be entertained, and also to fortify and provide that the
Cities and Countries may be able to resist the said invasion, it was concluded
that there should be given a donative to the Emperor of 800 thousand ducats;
of which the Barons paid an Adogo and a half, yet not as an Adogo, but as a
simple and free donative, and the remnant the people of the Kingdom paid.

In the year 1543 was held (according to the accustomed order) a public
Parliament in St. Laurence, wherein was agreed that a donative should be given
to the Emperor of a hundred and fifty thousand ducats, and fifty thousand more
to make the complete sum of 200 thousand, and it was ordained that it should be
given by reason of the want of money.

In the year 1545. was held (according to the usual manner) a public Parliament
in St. Laurence, wherein was decreed that to the Emperor should be given a
donative of 600 thousand ducats, to pay the Spanish Footmen, the repairing of
the Streets and Lakes.

In the year 1546. was held (according to the accustomed order) a public
Parliament in St. Laurence, wherein was concluded, that to his Catholic Majesty
should be given a donative of 240 thousand Ducats.

In the year 1548. was held (according to the ordinary manner) a public
Parliament in St. Laurence, wherein was decreed, that for the marriage of the
Lady Mary of Austria the Emperors daughter, should be imposed five carlins on
a Family, the which sum imports a hundred and fifty thousand ducats.

In the year 1549. was held (according to the accustomed manner) in St.
Laurence, a public Parliament, wherein was decreed that there should be given
to his Majesty, a donative of 600 thousand ducats, of which donative the
Barons paid 200 thousand ducats, and the rest the people of the Kingdom.

In the year 1552. was held (according to the wonted manner) a public
Parliament in St. Laurence, wherein was concluded that there should be given
unto his Majesty a donative of 800 thousand ducats, and 22 thousand ducats
was granted, which was given unto the Viceroy, because he was a great favourer
of the Kingdom with his Majesty.

In the year 1553. was held (according to the accustomed manner) a general
public Parliament in St. Laurence, wherein was decreed, that there should be
given to his Majesty a donative of 30 thousand ducats.

In the year 1554. was held* according to the accustomed order, a general
public Parliament in St. Laurence, where was concluded that there should be
given to his Majesty for the payment of his Army, 30 thousand ducats.

In the year 1555. was held (according to the wonted manner) a public
Parliament in St. Laurence, where was decreed that there should be given to his
Majesty a hundred and six and fifty thousand ducats to pay the Companies.

In the year 1556. was held (according to the accustomed manner) a public
Parliament in St. Laurence, where was concluded that there should be given to
his Majesty 400000 ducats.

The which sum of money was divided in this manner, that is to say, the City of
Naples should pay 1000 ducats, and the Barons 225000 ducats, and the rest the
people should pay.

In the year 1557. was held (according to the usual manner) a general public
Parliament in St. Laurence, where was concluded, that for the great necessity
which his Majesty had to pay the Spanish Footmen, and the Dutch Companies,
there was granted unto him a hundred thousand ducats, and this payment was
divided between the Barons and the people of the Kingdom.

In the year 1558. was held a general Parliament in St. Laurence, where was
decreed that there should be given to the King a million of gold, and 25
thousand ducats to the Viceroy of the Kingdom, and besides nine thousand and
two hundred ducats to Signor Marc. Antonio Colonna, the which donatives were
paid by the Barons and the people of the Kingdom.

In the year 1560. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence*
where was concluded, that to the Kings Majesty should be given a million and
200 thousand ducats, and to the excellency of the Viceroy of the Kingdom 27
thousand and five hundred ducats, the which sum of money the Barons and people
of the Kingdom paid.

In the year 1562. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was decreed that to the Kings Majesty should be given a million of gold,
the which donative the Barons and people of the Kingdom paid.

In the year 1564. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was given to his Majesty a million of gold, and sixty thousand ducats to
the renowned Prince of Spain, and Duke of C^lauria his son, the which sum of
money the Barons and people of the Kingdom paid.

In the year 1566. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was given to the King a million and two hundred thousand ducats, the
which donative the Barons and people of the Kingdom paid.

In the year 1568. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was decreed that to his Majesty should be given a million and 200
thousand ducats, the which donative was paid by the Barons and people of the
Kingdom.

In the year 1572. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was concluded that to the Kings Majesty should be given a million and 200
thousand ducats, the which donative the Barons and people of the Kingdom paid.

In the year 1574. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was given to his Majesty a million and 200 thousand ducats, the which
donative was divided between the Barons and the people of the Kingdom.

In the year 1577. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was concluded that to the Kings Majesty should be given a million and two
hundred thousand ducats, the which donative was divided between the Barons and
the people of the Kingdom.

In the year 1579. was held a public and general Parliament in St. Laurence,
where was decreed that to his Majesty should be given a million and two hundred
thousand ducats, the which donative was paid by the Barons and people of the
Kingdom.

In the year 1581. was held (according to the accustomed manner) a public and
general Parliament in St. Laurence, where was concluded, that to the Kings
Majesty should be given a million, and two hundred thousand ducats, the which
donative was divided between the Barons and people of the Kingdom.

In the year 1583. the second day of January was held a public and general
Parliament, and was decreed, that to the King should be given a millon and two
hundred and fifty thousand ducats, the which donative was paid by the Barons
and people of the Kingdom*

In the year 1585. was held (according to the usual manner) a public and
general Parliament in St. Laurence of Naples, where was concluded that to the
Kings Majesty should be given a million and two hundred thousand ducats, the
which donative was paid two parts by the people of the Kingdom, and one by the
Barons, of which payment only the City of Naples, and the Territories of the
Annuntiation were free:

In the year 1587: according to the custom, was given a donative to the King,
of a million and two hundred thousand ducats.

In the year 1589. was given, according to the usual custom, a donative to the
King of a million and two hundred thousand ducats.

In the year 1591. was given by the Barons and people of the Kingdom, a
donative to the King of a million and two hundred thousand ducats:

In the year 1593: was given, according to the accustomed manner, a donative to
the King of a million and two hundred thousand ducats:

In the year 1595. was given a donative to the King of a million and two
hundred thousand ducats:

A Description of the Rivers, Lakes, Fountains, Baies, Mines, Hills, and Woods,
which are in this Kingdom.
A
THe River Acida runs near Niceto, now called Donato. The River Amaseno
runs near Abbadia. The River Alabro runs near Supino The River Albula,
otherwise called Matrino, runs near Musignano. The River Aterno, now called
Pescara, runs near to Civita di Chieti The River Avinio runs near Fratte
The River Aventino runs near the Fort of Rasino The River Alandra runs
near Sala The River Acheronte, now called Campagnano, runs near Castello
Franco, called in old time Pandosia, where was slain (as he was foretold by the
Oracle) Alexander King of Molossus, whilst he understanding not the deceits of
the devil, remained secure, having escaped another River of the same name in
his own Country of Epire. The River Ancitula runs near Francica The River
Alaro, called in old time Sacra, runs near Roccella The River Aesaro, called
also Aesano, runs near St. Severina, and the City of Cotrone The River Alex
runs near the City of Alesio The River Areus runs near Cosenza The River
Arentho runs near Cosenza The River Abuceto has his original from the Hill
Abuceto, which is in the Isle of Ischia The River Angitula runs near
Angitula The River Agatha runs near Regio The River Aterno, now called
Pescara, runs near Pescara The River Alba runs near Manupello The River
Asinella runs near Vasto The River Ag^ra, is in Calauria, and runs into
Faro of M^ssina The River Alore in Calauria The River Au^ido has his original
from the Hills Hirpini, and runs by Canosa, and after into the Adria^ick Sea*
by some it is called Can, in respect of a City of the same name, not far off,
which is very famous for the great victory of Hannibal, by the overthrow which
he gave to the Roman Army, by which victory Hannibal had from the hands of the
Roman Knights three bus^^ls of Rings of gold; the said River is now called
Lofanto The River Anfure, now called Ufente, runs near the City of
Terracina, called in old time Ansure The River Acri runs near Saponara The
River Arnone runs near Castelluccia
B
THe River Bathino, called in old time Tordino, and Juvatino is near
Montepagano The River Basento runs near Cosenza, which River is very famous
for the Sepulcher of Alaricus the Goth* with certain treasure that is there
hid, and the ^light of the Emperor Otho, which was overthrown by Basilius the
Greek. The River Bato runs near Scalea. The River Bradano runs through
Basilicata
C
THe River Calore runs near Benevento, and rises in the Mountains of
Crepacore The River Cervano runs into the Haven of Taranto, called the
little Sea The River Coraco runs near Roccella The River Croccia runs
near Simari The River Crate runs near Cosenza, the water whereof makes hair
yellow, and woll white The River Cratallo runs near Catanzaro The River
Cacino runs near Seminara The River Cardono runs through the territory of
Cosenza, and is full of golden sand The River Cato Castro runs near Mantea
The River Cochile, called in old time Sibari, whereupon Sicel^o in the year of
the world 2409. says, the ancient City Sibari was builded, the which increased
through the amenity of the Country in such greatness, that it could arm
sometimes three hundred thousand men; this River runs near Cassano The River
Coloneta runs near Rossano The River Calabrice enters into the River
Sibare, and runs near Pagiano The River Clanio, called also Glanio, runs
near Cerra The River Can runs three miles distant from the City of Venosa,
and enters into the River Lofanto, near the which Rive was in old time the
beautiful City Can, called of the Latins Canusium, the which place is so
famous (both by Poets and Historians so much named) for the great overthrow
which Hannibal gave to the Romans, thorough the tim^rity and presumption of
Terentius Varro, as Livy apparently declares in his 21 book, and Sillio Italico
in his 9 book, Plutarch in the life of Hannibal, and of Scipio, with many other
Writers, in the which overthrow was slain the Consul, P. Emilio, L. Ascilio, L.
Furio Bicacculo, Treasurers of the Wars, 21 military Tribunes, and many
Pretors, Councellers, and Ediles, whereof were Gn. Servilio, and Gn. Minutio
Numantio, the which had been the year before Master of the Cavaliery, and 80
Senators. There was slain in this great overthrow 40000 footmen, and 2700 of
the Roman Cavalry, and as many of their friends and con^ed^rates and many
prisoners taken. Ptolomeus otherwise names this place Canusium, and Martial
making mention of Can, thus says, Haec tibi turbato Canusina simillimamulso
Munus erit gaude, non fiet cito anus* The River Clanto runs near Loriano The
River Cosano runs near Asserolo The River Casinio now called Sanguino,
runs near Venafro The River Cales runs near the ancient City of Cales,
now called Calvi The River Cerbalo runs near Civitella in Puglia The River
Calabrice runs near Fagliano, and enters into the River Sibare
D
THe River Diama passes near to Cerella
E
The River Esaro runs near the City of Corrone The River Eterno passes near
Teano The River Evoli passes near Evoli
F
THe River F^^miceilo runs near the City of Termole The River F^umiculo
runs near Civitella The River Fiterno, now called Salino, passes near the
City of S^lino The River Freddo passes near the City of Freddo The River
Frento, otherwise called Fortore, runs near Larino a ruinated City The River
Furore passes near Vieteri The River Fanes, called also Siris runs near the
City of Benevento The River Fineto passes near Regina The River Fibrena
runs between the City of Arpino and Sora
G
THe River Glanco passes near Valerosa The River Gineto, called also Thieto,
runs near the said Country The River Gronde passes near the territory of
Balbino in Calauria The River Garga runs two miles distant from the Country
of Summoranno The River Grande runs near Altomonte The River Galesso runs
into the haven of Taranto, called the little Sea The River Garigliano, called
in old time Ganicus, and now Liris, passes near the ancient City of Minturna,
destroyed long since
I
THe River Isauro passes near the City of Nieto, now called Donato The River
Isclaro passes near the City of Caserta The River Isauro runs near the City
of Agatha The River Ispica passes near the City of Pietra Fitta The River
Ipoleto passes near Nicastro
L
THe River Lite, called in old time Liris, and sometime Glanicus, is now called
Garigliano; the said River runs between Arce and Sora; Pliny says that this
River has its original from the Lake Fucino The River Librata, of the
Ancients, and among others, Pliny calls it Albula, for the whiteness thereof;
the said River passes into Abruzzo, and runs not far off from Civitella of
Tronto. This River springs from the Apennine The River Leudo runs near the
Country of Paolo The River Lavo, called also Laino, runs near Scalea The
River Lento passes near the Monastery of St. Liberatore, and the City of
Frantana, now called Francavilla; this River springs from the Hill Maiella
The River Lucinio passes near Rossano The River Linterno passes not very far
from the River Vulturno The River Lofanto called also Aufido, runs near
Canosa, by Pliny it is named Aufidus, and it is also so called by Strabo, by
Pomponius Mela, and by other ancient writers. This River rises from a little
Fountain of the Apennine hills, among the Irpini, not far distant from the City
of Nosco, and from hence descends as a little brook of water, which in
summer, the course or current thereof can hardly be perceived to run 30 miles;
but in the winter season it is so much augmented by other Rivers and streams
which pass into it, and besides through the showers and dews that are very
often in that season, it overfloweth the greatest fields of Puglia, so
comforting and watering the Country, that it seems a large, long, and great sea
The River Larasca springs in Taranto
M
THe River Melpi runs near the City of the ancient Atinagia, now ruinated
The River Moscano passes near Piesco The River Metauro runs near Maida The
River Mesina runs near Policastro The River Moro passes near Ortona to the
Sea The River Moncata runs near Lacania, and Maida in Calauria, in the
Territory of which Country grow the Plantane Trees, a thing very rare in Italy
The River Medama passes near Belloforte The River Metauro passes near
Nicotera The River Marno passes near Terranova The River Melfa runs near
the ancient City of Atina, which was one of the five Cities which were built
for the defense of Turnus against Eneas, as Virgil says in the seventh book of
his Eneidos The River Musanio springs in the mountains of Crepacore
N
THe River Nursa passes near the Abbey of St. Clement The River Neta passes
near Torana and Regia The River Neeto passes near Crotrone
O
THe River Ocinaro, called also Sabatio, passes near Martorano The River Obvio
passes near Capestrano
P
The River Piomba runs near Toritto The River Paola runs near the City of
Paola The River Pratello passes near Piedemonte The River Petrace runs near
Gioia Lhe River Pesipo runs near Nicastro The River Panopleto passes near
Maida The River Pitornio runs near the Lake Fucino The River Plumba passes
near Hadria
R
THe River Rufeo runs near Caramanico The River Raino runs near Paleno
The River Reatio runs near Messuraca, called in old time Reatium
S
THe River Sabuto passes near Nocera, and the ancient City of Teberina, which
was destroyed by Hannibal of Carthage (and as the Ancients do affirm) Ligia,
one of the Sirenes inhabited upon the mouth of the said River The River Sebeto,
called by the Latins Sebethos, is a little River which passes without the
walls of the noble City of Naples, which the Neopolitans call the River
Magdalena, by reason of a Church dedicated to the said Saint, near which the
said River passes, Papin. Statio makes mention of the said River u^ his first
book de Selve, saying, Et pulchra tumeat Sebethos alumna. It is also named by
Virgil, by Statio, and by Colomella, and by many other writers The River Senno,
called in old time Siri, runs near Amendolara, and the ancient City of Sino,
which was afterward named Heraclea, where the Statue of Minerva is very famous,
which rouled the eyes against the Ionii which sacked the City, not respecting it
The River Sapre runs near the ancient City of Sapri, now ruinated The River
Semiro runs near Squillace The River Seminara runs near the said Country
The River Sebatio, called also Ocinaro, passes near Abatio The River
Salinello, called also Suino, passes near Villanto The River Sino runs near
Corvignano The River Sarno, called also Scafato, passes near the City of Sarno
The River Soricella runs near Grotta The River Sabaro, called by the Latins
Sibaris, runs near the ancient City of Turia, in Calauria, the water whereof
being drank by oxen, sheep, and other cattle, makes their skins to become
black, where very near is the River Crate, which works the contrary effect
The River Saro, now called Sangro, passes near Fossa Ceca The River Sento
runs near the hill Zalario The River Scosa passes near Niceto The River
Sagara, very famous in Calauria, for the cruel battle between the Locresi and
the Crutonesi
T
THe River Targine passes near Crotone The River Tauro passes near Civita di
Penna The River Tara rises under Massafra near Taranto The River Tordino,
called by Pliny, Vivantium, runs near the ancient City of Flaviano, now
called Castello nuovo The River Trinio runs near Vasto aimone The River
Tamaro passes near Castello franco and the City of Morcone The River Tiro
runs near the Territory of Baldino in Calauria The River Trero passes near
Ceccano The River Tavo runs near the City of Tavo The River Tinnaria runs
near Paola The River Turbido passes near Torano The River Triferno, called
also Piferno, passes near Termole The River Tropoalto runs near Ariano The
River Trigno has his beginning from Vasto, and fetching a compass, divides
Puglia from Abruzzo. The River Tronto, called by Ptolomy in his third book
Truentinum; and by Strabo Druentum, and by Pomponius Mela is named Truentium;
this River rises from the Apennine. Strabo and Pliny says that in old time
was builded the Castle Truento, near the mouth of the River, by the people
Tiburni of Dalmatia, and called it Truentium, which at this present remains not
any mention thereof, neither can it be known whether the River was named from
it, or it from the River; this River runs within 5 miles of Crapolle
V
THe River Ufente, called in old time Ansure, from the ancient City of Ansure,
now called Tarracina The River Viciola runs near Canzano The River Vomano,
called also Homano, runs near Calvano The River Volturno passes near the
ancient Volturno, now it is called the River of Capua, because it runs by
the said City The River Variano passes near Cusano The River Verre runs
near Bellomonte The River Vado runs near Sinopoli The River Verde springs
in the Hill Maiella, between the Monastery of St. Martine, and the Castle
Faran, of the Peligni (now called Abruzzo) the said River runs near the City
of Casale, and of Colle Macine. Upon the bank of the said River was the body of
Manfred, King of Naples, buried by the commandment of the Pope, and upon his
Tomb was engraven this Epitaph,
Hic jaceo Caroli Manfredus Marie subactus,
Caesaris haerede non fuit urbe locus,
Sum patris ex odiis ausus confligere Petro
Mars dedit hic mortem, Mors mihi cuncta tulit.
Of the Hills which are in the Kingdom.
ABuceto is a very high Hill in the Isle of Ischia, called in old time Enaria,
Inarime, and Pithecusa, upon the which Hill springs a River of the same name.

Aburno is a Hill in the Province of Lucania, now called Basilicata, which was
a part of Calauria. This Hill is called of the Latins Alburnus, because it is
all white. Virgil makes mention of the said Hill in the third of his Georgicks,
saying, Primus Alburnum Volitans.

Atheneo, a Hill called in old time Prenusso, Sirreo, Minervio, and the Hill
Equano, and now it is called the Hill of Massa, from the City of Massa which
stands but a little distant from the City of Surrento. There is to be seen on
the said Hill toward the Sea, a great part of the ancient Temple of Minerva.

Astruno is a high Hill, which stands but a little distant from Pozzuolo, in
the midst of which Hill is a Plain very low, reduced into a circle, two miles
in compass, where is a little Pool with Sulphure-water which issues out on
every side, very comfortable and wholesome for those that are diseased and
feeble. Savonarola makes mention of the said Baths, calling them Astrana.
Vgolino calls them Struna balnea.

Circello, named by the Latins Mons Cerces, and Circeus, and of Ptolomy,
Girceum promontorium. Circes the daughter of S^le, and Perse.
This Hill lies near to Gaeta, and was so called of Circes, the daughter of
the Sun, and the Nymph Perse, sister of Aethe, King of the Colchi, the great
Magitian, who being married to the King of the Sarmatians, poisoned him through
the desire she had to domineer and bear rule her self, the which was the cause
that she was chased away by all the people, and so she came to inhabit in this
Hill, which did abound with great plenty of excellent herbs, and there made
her residence, with the which herbs the Ancients have feigned that she
transformed men into beasts. There was upon the said Hill in old time a very
beautiful and goodly City of the same name, with the Temple of Circes, and the
obscure Cave of Minerva, where was showed in the time of Strabo for the truth
thereof, a Cup wherein Ulysses drank. Into the said City Tarquin the proud
brought many inhabitants, because the fields Pometini very large and fair were
near the Sea, subject to the said Plain, as Dionysius of Alicarnassus writes
in his fifth book, and Livy in the first. Much is written of the said Hill in
many places, both by Dionysius, Strabo, Livy, Pliny Pomponius, Mela, Solina,
Procopio, and also Virgil in his seventh book. The said City being afterward
ruinated, in place thereof was made a very strong Castle, which was a secure
passage for many Roman Bishops.

The Hill Carcino, now called Capo di Stilo, and by Ptolomeo named Promontorium
Carcinum, is the longest Promontory in all Italy* as Pliny writes by opinion
of others. Barbaro in the corrections of Pliny, says that it ought to be
called Cocintum, as the ancient books of Pliny declare, and also of Polybius;
Barbaro besides says, that the book of Pliny was corrupted when he says the
Castle of Carceno was near to Petilia, because he should have said Caecinum, of
which speaks Filisto saying thus, Caecinum est oppidum non multum a Sicilia
distans.

The Cape of Squillace is a Hill upon the which in old time was the City of
Squillac^ called by Pliny, Scyllatius, and by Strabo, by Solinus, and by
Pomponius, Mela Scyllatius. The said City was builded by the Atenesi, the
companions of Menestro, which arived there.

Crepacore is a great back or brow of the Apennine, the which for the steepness
and difficult ascent has been so called, yet in old time it was called Grumo,
from the which flows the River Moscano. The said Hill is near to the Cave
Menarda.

Cecubo is a Hill which joyneth to the Gulf of Gaeta, and near Castellone; the
said Hill is very famous for the excellent Wine it yields, for it brings
forth the strongest Grape, the Wines of Cecubo are accounted with the best, as
the Fondani and Setini, whereof Martial says, Caecuba fundanis generosa
coquuntur Amydis
Vitis, and in media nata palude viret:


Casino is a high Hill, which is not very far from the City of Aquino, and the
Castle Secca, both being in Campania felix. In the said Hill was in old time
the City of Casino, a Colony of the Romans, as Titus Livius writes in his
ninth book, declaring that thither was brought a Colony at the same time with
Minturn. And also Antonio in his Commentary speaks likewise thereof in his 36
book; And Strabo says that in his time there was the glorious City of the
Latins. And Sillo names it thus in his twelfth book, Nymphisque habitata
Casini, rura evastantur:

Here was the Temple of Apollo, where was afterward builded the Stately
Monastery of Casino, so named by the ruinated City. The said Monastery was
built by St. Benedict for his Monks, although the buildings of the Monastery at
this present are not those which the Father St. Benedict builded, Totila King
of the Goths apparelled like a Page.
for not long after his death all things were ruinated by the Longobards,
Totila King of the Goths moved by the sanctity of St. Benedict, went up into
the said Monastery, purposing to try if that were true which he had heard say
of him, that is to say, that St. Benedict through a prophetical spirit did know
any secret or hidden thing, apparelled himself like a page, causing another to
go before him clothed in Kingly attire, who feigned himself to be Totila, but
the Saint knowing of God the deceit, requested him with a cheerful countenance
to come in with the rest of his followers, and pointing to the King which was
so basely attired to come foremost into the Monastery. But neither this, nor
any other signs of sanctity which St. Benedict showed to the Longobards, were
sufficient to bridle the fury of these Barbarians from the spoil of this
Monastery, the which had been foretold to the Monks by the Father St. Benedict.
It was afterward reedified upon the first foundations, and also enlarged about
a 112 years after by Petronio Petronasso Bresciano, through the persuasion of
Pope Gregory the second, Petronio Petronasso reedified the Monastery of the
Hill Casino.
as Paolo Diacono writes in his sixth book of the Histories of the Longobards,
and Elia Capriolo in his fifth book of his Brescian Histories. The Monks
thereof have more in revenue every year then fifty thousand ducats. In the
said Monastery do lie the bodies of many Saints, and chiefly that of St.
Benedict the Founder and Head thereof, and of St. Scolastica his sister, whose
bodies were found in the year 1543. Pliny declares in the fourth chapter of his
seventh book, that in the said City of Casino, in the time of the Consulship of
Lucinius Crassus, and of Caio Cassio Longo, a certain girl was converted to a
male kind, A girl converted to a male.
which by advice of the South-sayers was carried away into a desert Island.

Caulo, called in old time Caulon, is a high Hill in Calauria, upon the which
is situated the City of Caulonia, near Locri, the said Hill is very full of
Vines, whereupon the Ancients consecrated it unto Bacchus. Virgil speaks of
this Hill in the third of the Eneidos saying, Caulonisque arces, and naufragum
Scyllaceum. Pliny in the third Book and tenth Chapter also discourses of the
said City, Strabo in his sixth Book, Pomponius Mela in his second, and Stephano
of the City calls it Caulonia.

Christ's Hill is a high Hill, which is near the City of Pozzuolo, in the very
same place which was called the Bath of Trepergole. It is said that in the time
that our Savior Jesus Christ arose from death to life, and descended into
Hell, at his resurrection he took the said great Hill and stopped the hole or
mouth of Hell which he made coming from thence, and for this cause (they say)
it was called Christ's Hill; whereupon the Poet Eustasius thus says, Est locus
Australis, quo portam Christus Averni
Fregit, and eduxit mortuus inde suos
Haec domus est triplex, hinc jure Tripergula dicta.
Vna capit vestes, altera servat aquam,
Vtilis unda satis multum sudantibus aufert
Defectum mentis, cum gravitate pedum.
Haec stomachi varias facit absentare querelas,
Flebile de toto corpore tollit onus.
Debilis, atque piger, quibus est non multa facultas,
Consulimus tali ut saepe fruatur aqua.
Hujus amator aquae symptomata nulla timebit,
Incolumi semper corpore laetus erit.
But I believe with the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, The belief of the
Au^h^r.
that our Savior Jesus Christ the son of the omnipotent God, descended into
Hell, as all the Prophets and holy Apostles have said; and I also believe that
he arose the third day from death, as the Scriptures verify unto us; but that
he should rise from this place, or any other, I am not so foolish to affirm it,
or say that which I know not: For which thing I think better (as St. Augustine
says in the 8 upon Gen) to doubt, de occultis quam litigare de incertis.

The Hill Cibele, now called Monte Virgin.
Cibele is a Hill near the City of Mercogijacono, on the top whereof was in old
time a stately Temple dedicated to the honor of Cibele, Mother of the Gods.
Antonio Pio in his Commentary makes mention of this Hill, describing the way
from Benevento to the Pillars; he places first Mercuriale, and afterward
Cibele* Mother of the Gods. The said Temple was afterward dedicated by St.
William unto the Virgin Mary; the which hill after the consecration abovesaid,
the name of Cibele was changed into the name of Virgin, as it is called at
this present, and the Congregation of the Fathers which are there is called de
monte Virgin. This high Hill is separated from the Apennine, and also from the
other Hills, except they touch a little at the bottom.

In the great Altar of the said Church are preserved the bodies of the three
children which by the commandment of Nechadonozor King of Babylon were put into
the burning Oven, The bodies of Sidrack Mesheck, and Abedneg^ preserved in
Monte Virgin.
because they would not adore the golden Image. In the said Church is a
Reliquary of so much beauty and ornament for the gilding of the place, and for
the many Relics put in fair Vessels of silver and gold, that it would be very
difficult to find a better, and perhaps not the like in all Christendom, as all
strangers say which come thither from far Countries. In the said hill, whether
by the will of God, The admirable (...) in Monte Virgin.
whom it pleases many times to work marvailous effects in sundry particular
places, or by any other accident, neither within the Monastery, nor the
distance of 500 paces round about, can be eaten or carried any flesh, or eggs,
or milk, or any white-meat whatsoever, but presently it corrupts and becomes
full of worms, although it be powdered, boiled, baked, roasted, Flesh and milk
carried into Monte Virgin, become^ full of worms.
or howsoever, the which thing is so manifestly known to all men, that of all
those which come thither at all times of the year, none dare carry any thing,
and if any w^ll carry, it will not be without that aforesaid sign.

Epopon was a Hill in the Isle of Ischia, from whence fire ascended with great
fury, but is now become plain.

Falerno is a Hill near to Pozzuolo, the which was so named of a man, as Servio
writes, The Wine took its name of Falerno, which is very excellent that is had
from this Hill, whereof Sillio speaks in his seventh book: Gravidae cui
nectare vites,
Nulli dant praelis nomen praeferre Falernis.
And Pliny in the sixth Chapter of his fourteenth Book does largely discourse
of the said Wine. Whereupon Varro in praising Italy, thus says, Quid in Italia
utensile non modo non nascitur, sed etiam non egregium non fit? Quod far
comparandum Campano? Quod triticum Apulo? Quod vino Farlerno? Quod oleum
Venafrano? Many Writers make mention of the Wine Falerno, among whom Tibullo
thus says, Nunc mihi fumosos veteris proferte Falernos. And the same says,
Non tibi si pretium Campana terra daretur:
Non tibi si Bacchi cura Falernus ager.
Martial also speaks of it saying, Resinata bibis vina Falerna. The said
place is now called the Fort of Mondragone, and the Territory thereof passes
along even to Volturno. In the Plain of the said Hill is Campo Stellato, now
called the Territory of Carinola, and also by the common people it is called
Mazzone. Of what excellency this field Stellato was, may easily be understood
by the words of Cicero written in his Orations against the Laws de Campi,
forasmuch as in it he was forced to persuade that the field Stellato by no
means ought to be sold by the Magistracy of ten men, when he says, At enim
ager Campanus, hac lege amittitur, orbis terre pulcherrimos. Whereupon Cicero
declares that it was the proper ground of the people of Rome. Suetonius writes
that Caesar divided the field Stellato between 2009 Citizens of Rome, to get the
good will of the people.

Guaro, or Gualdo, called by the Latins, mons Guarus, and Gauros, but now
commonly called the Hill Barbaro, the said Hill is not very far from the Lake
Averno, the foot whereof stretches even to Cuma, and to Baia. This Hill
brings forth very fruitful Vines, the which three times in a year yield
excellent Grapes, and very precious and pure Wine, The fertility of the Hill
Gauro.
for which cause the Poets feigned that here was the habitation of the Nymphs.
Ausonius makes mention, Idyl. 8. Pli. 14. cap. 6. and 3 book, cap. 5. Lucan
lib. 2. Floro. in lib. 1. cap. 16. Giovenal, in the 8 and 9 Sat. Galen 12.
Methodi, de cib bonis, and malis suc. cap. 13. and 1. de Antidot. Gioviano
Pontano in the 2 Partheniae, Cicero against Rullo. Statio lib. 3.

Gargano is a famous Hill, and stands in the Plain Puglia, now called the
Province of Capitanata. There are in the said Hill some pleasant Woods, and
although for the most part it be without Trees, nevertheless there are gathered
many kinds of medicinable herbs for diverse infirmities* This high and famous
hill proceeeth from the Apennine, and the circuit round about even to the lowest
dissent, contains ^00 miles, and on the top of the Hill is the renowned and
noble City of St: Angelo, from the which all the Hill is now so called, and
there is a very fair and goodly Church in the honor of St. Michael the
Archangel, whether infinite people resorts from sundry places of Christendom,
with great superstition and frequency at all times. Many ancient Writers make
mention of this Hill Gargano, among whom is Strabo, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and
Virgil in his 11 book, saying, Victor Gargani condebat Iapygis. And Lucan in
the 5. Apulus Adriacas exit Garganus in undas. And Horace in the second of his
verses says, Querceta Gargani laborent.

Hermete is a pleasant Hill which approaches even to the City of Naples, and
is commonly called the Hill of S. Hermo, because in the top thereof there is a
Castle of the same name, made by King Charles the second of Angio. That
excellent Poet Pontano says in his Lepidinia, that the said Hill was so called
by the fair Nymph Hermete which dwelt in the eminent and highest part of this
Hill. Galen and Martial call it Trifolius mons of the three-leafed grass, which
grows there every where.

Hidro is a high Hill which is in the Province of the Country of Otranto, the
which hill is called by the Latinists Hydruntum, and by Pliny and Strabo,
Hydrus, and Hydruntis.

The Hill Miseno, or the Promontary of Campagna felix, stands but a little
distant from Cuma, it is named Misenus by Strabo, Dionisius of Alicarn. Pliny*
Antonino, Virg. Tacitus in his 5, 14, and 15 book, and by Ptolomy it is called
Promontorium Misenum. Likewise Sillio makes mention in his 8. It was so named
according to Dionisius in his first book by Miseno, a worthy man, and a
follower of Aeneas which died there, the which Virgil affirms in his 6 book of
Eneidos, Why it was called the Hill Miseno.
when he recites that Miseno being dead, Eneas wholly discomforted, demanded
of Achate, what they should do, and where they should bury him. And at the last
was here buried, The hill Miseno, called in former time Aereo.
and of him was called Miseno, for before the coming of Eneas the said Hill was
called Aereo. For Virgil says in the sixth of the Eneid. Praeterea jacet
exanimum tibi corpus amici. And somewhat lower, Quem socium exanimum vates,
quod corpus humandum
Diceret* atque illi Misenum in lictore sicco
Vt venere vident indigna morte peremptum:
Misenum Aeolidem, quo non prestantior alter
Aere ciere vos, Martemque accendere cantu,
Hectoris hic magni fuerat comes.
And a little farther, Nec minus interea Misenum in lictore Teucri
Flebant: and cineri ingrato suprema ferebant.
In describing the manner of his grave after a few Verses says, At pius Aeneas
ingenti mole sepulchrum
Imposuit, suaque arma viro, remumque tubamque
Monte sub Aerio, qui nunc Misenus ab illo
Dicitur, aeternumque tenet per secula nomen.


Pomponius Mela, and Solinus say, that this Miseno (from whom the said Hill
takes its name) was the Trumpeter of Eneas. And Servio upon the third and
sixth of the Eneid. says that Eneas being desirous to raise the souls of the
dead which remained in Hell, out of the Lake Averno, but being unable to do it,
unless he first killed some man, Aeneas killed his Trumpeter Miseno, and
sacrificed him to the Gods of Hell.

The Tower of Faro.


and after sacrificed him to the Gods of Hell; to this effect he killed his
beloved Trumpeter Miseno, and after the sacrifice ended he obtained his desire.
Upon the said Hill was in old time a Tower called Faro, on the which both day
and night did burn a continual light, as a sign for Mariners to sail with the
more security. The said Hill is straightened in the manner of a Promontory of
three breadths compassed with the Sea, and in the said Cape where it begins to
be narrow, although it be naturally full of Caves, it is so hollow and vaulty
by means of the buildings that are thereon, raised and supported with Pillars,
and built with Marble, that it seems as a Hill down-hanging, and within there
was (as is to be seen) Baths, and very delicate banqueting places, among the
which there was one called the Cave Traconaria, so named of Traconibus, for
that (...), signifies watercourse, as Francisco Titelmanno notes in 148
Psalm. The said Cave is very large, long, and high, built in an admirable
manner, and part of it is standing, and part half ruinated, and also some part
wholly gone. That part which is to be seen lies in this sort, It has in the
midst an entry of 200 handsbreadth in length, and 18 in breadth, having on
both sides four lodgings vaulted in largeness some 12 and some 16 hands
breadth, being between some of them the space of 12 hands breadth, and between
others 18. In these spaces are 4 doors, every one the breadth of 12 hands, the
one distant from the other 16, except the first distance, which is in the
entrance 18. but the other distances between the said doors are equal. The
Arches are supported and made with cross interlacing. It is a thing very
certain (as it is commonly judged of all) that the said Caves were made to
preserve water. On that side of the Hill which lies toward Cuma, the said Hill
has a poole of the Sea called Mare Mortuum, and round about upon the brow and
edg of the main-land appear the ruins and goodly foundations of ancient
buildings, and this was the place where Suctonius says that Octavius Augustus
kept his Army by Sea near Miseno, for the guard and defense of the Terrene Sea,
of France, Spain, Mauritania, and of Africa, and of the Isles which lie in the
midst thereof, Octavius Augustus kept his Fleet in Ma^^ Morto, for the defense
of the Tirrene Sea.
of the which Army Plinio Veronese was Captain at the time that the Hill
Vesuvio burnt, where he died whilst he attempted to see the great exhalations
of that Hill, which cast the ashes even into Africa, Siria, and Egypt,
Afterward within the land appears Foundations, incredible to those that have
not seen them, where they now say is a wonderful Lake, for these being (as it
seems) the foundations of a goodly Palace that was in this part, which
remains there standing, supported with very high Pillars, being a hundred and
sixty paces long, and in breadth 250. and so fair that it seems new, and I
believe it was the Palace of L. Lucullus, which he had near Baia to dwell
pleasantly in the time of Winter, because it stands in a very warm place.
Whereof Plutarch makes mention in the life of the said Lucullus, declaring
that L. Lucullus having invited Pompey in the Summer season to his house
Frascato, which is near Rome, seemed to jest and flout at him, saying he was
not well advised, Pompey flouteth L. Lucullus.
to build so goodly and stately a house as that was, being full of so many open
Galleries, and broad Windows, and exposed both to the winds and cold; that
though in Summer he might well inhabit, yet in Winter time it was utterly to be
abandoned. To which he says, that Lucullus also scoffingly, answered him, The
answer of Lucullus.
that Pompey was deceived in him, because he had better played the wise Crane,
then he had done, for that house he only built for the Summer-season, having
another as fair at Baia for the Winter, where was a continual Spring. The Tombs
and Relics of this Palace, and other ancient Monuments, which are half
standing and half ruinated, which are to be seen in these places, are such,
that it seems as if there had been an absolute City, rather then a House. Of
the said Hill Miseno, Strabo makes mention in his fifth book, Cicero in the
second of his Filippice, Antonio in his Commentary, Ptolomy in his third book,
The Authors which make mention of the Hill Miseno.
Suetonius in the 2 cap. 49. Plin in the 3. cap. 16. Tacitus in the 19 book,
Sill. in the 8. Proper. in the 3. and in the 18. Statio in the 3 Sat. 1. and of
modern Writers John Pontano in his 6 book of the Wars of Naples.

Massico is a famous Hill which stands in Campania felix, The Hill Massico.
and is now called the Fo^^ of Mandragone, of a certain City that is there,
which has the title of a Duke. This excellent Hill is very famous, as well in
old time as in these our days, for the singular and delicate Wine which it
yields, being of a golden and amber color, of a sweet and odoriferous savor,
and of a most delicious and pleasing taste; these Vines grow in the top of the
Hill The Territory thereof in old time extended even to the Walls of Sinuessa,
a Colony of the Romans, and with the back and ridg thereof the said Hill
stretches to Cali, now named Calvi, even to the left side of the Territory of
Venafro, so that it confined on the one side with the Territory of Falerno, now
called Gaudo, which in like manner brought forth these precious and excellent
Wines of the color of gold, which were so pleasing to the Roman Empero^s, and
of whom Julius Caesar, The wine F^lerni in great estimation with the Romans.
as Pliny in the 15 cap. of the 14 lib. writes, honored therewith his Feasts,
and most renowned Banquets which he made in Rome. Of this Hill Massico, Virgil
makes mention in many places, and chiefly in the second book of his Georgicks,
saying, Sed gravidi fruges, and Bacchi Massicus humor. And in the 7 of Eneid.
The Author^ which make mention of the hill Massico.
Verunt soelicia Baccho Massica. Sillio Itallico in his 7 book, Massicus
uviferis addebat nomina globis And the same says in another place, Massica
sulcabit mulcere Falernus in aevo. And Horace in his first book of Verses, Est
qui nec veteris pocula Massici. Of the Wine Falerno, Galen makes mention in his
second lib. de ar. cur. de san: tuen. cap. 6, The Authors which make mention of
the Wine of Falerno.
and in cap. 5. and in many other places; and if any man desires to know more,
he may read Persius in the third Satyr, Giovinal in the Sat. 8. Sillius in the
7 lib. Tibullus in the second; Horace in the second book of Verses, Ovid in the
fourth de Ponto, Titus Livius in the first, Plin. the 14 book cap, 3. Macrobio
the third de Saturnali, L. Floro in the first book, and of modern Writers,
Iacobo Perfetto, and John Baptista in the book of the nature of Wines.

Minervio is a Hill, or rather a Promontory which stands directly against the
Isle of Capre, Minervio.
where upon an arm of the Hill are situate these Cities, Surrento, Massa, and
Vico. The said Hill by Pliny and Pomponius Nola, is called Promontorium
Minervae, and by Strabo it is named Sirreum Atheneum and prenussum. Now it is
called the Cape of Campanella, because there stands a Tower as a guard which
with the sound of a Bell makes a sign of the discovery of such Ships and
Galleys as sails upon the Coast.

Maiella.
Maiella is a very high Hill which is separated from the Apennine, and stands
in the Province of the Peligni, and Sanniti, now called Abruzzo, the said Hill
is discovered very far through the great height thereof, whose top is almost
continually covered with snow; it is very rough and craggie* and the passage
very difficult to the top on every side, near to the which are many Cities and
Towns, many Rivers flow from it, and there are many Woods full of wild beasts,
and chiefly Bears and Wolves. St. Peter of Morovo the Hermit, inhabited in this
high Hill, being afterward called Pope Celestine the fifth, from whom the
Religion of the Celestini had their original. Olibano, now called the Hill
Libano. The said Hill stands but a little distant from Pozzuolo, Olibano.
and is full of very hard flint-stones, and therefore very barren and without
Trees, it was called Olibano, because in Greek (...) is as much as to say, all,
and (...) barren. Suetonius says in his fourth book, c. 37: that the Roman
Emperor Ca. Caligula caused the said Hill to be cut and dug, and commanded
that all the Streets in Italy should be paved with the flints thereof. The
Emperor C. Caligula caused the hill Olibano to be cut.
Antonino Panormita makes mention of the said Hill in his fifth Epistle,
directed to Nicolo Piscicello Archbishop of Salerno. At the foot of the said
Hill, on that side which lies toward the Isles of Nisita, are two Baths, the
one called the little Bath, and the other the stony Bath; it was called the
little Bath, for the little Fountain thereof, nevertheless it is of so great
virtue and efficacy, that the weak and diseased think that here is not only
water* but even God himself, because it comfort the head, the stomach, and
all the other parts of the body, it clears the cloudie thickness of the eyes,
and restores a weak sight, it drives away the Quartane, continual and
quotidian Fever, and to conclude, it cures any grief, caused by what disease
soever. The Neopolitans were wont to make use of this water before any other.
Whereupon the worthy Poet Eustasius of Matera speaking of this Bath says,
Inter aquas Pelagi propre littus sub pede rupis,
Magnus in effectu fons breve nomen habet.
Balneolum dictum tantae virtutis amicum,
Vt patiens illic sentiat esse Deum.
Nam morbo quocunque dolet, seu rheumate quovis,
Lotus aqua tali tempore liber abit,
Et caput, and stomachum, renes, and caetera membrae
Comfortat, tepidam si renovabis aquam.
Haec prodest oculis, oculorum nube fugata,
Consumptos reficit, quos tenet aegra fames.
Materiamque rudem consumit, and amphimerinen.
Plus aliis hoc gens Parthenopaea sovet.


Of this Bath Savanarola, Vgolino, and Franciotto makes mention, calling it
Balneum foris crypte; Mengo says that the Mine thereof is Alume, Copper, and
Iron.

Under the Rock of the said Hill Olibano (as we have before said) is the stony
Bath, and is so called because the said Fountain springs from a Rock; The
bath of the rock, and the virtue thereof.
this Bath breaks the stone in the bladder, provokes urine, purges the
sand, and expels gravel, it heals the pain of the head, clears the
sight, makes the deaf to hear, and drives the sound and noise from the ears,
it greatly comforts the heart and the stomach. The water of the said Bath drank
lukewarm, purges the intrails and inward parts. Of this stony Bath thus
writes Eustasius, Cui Petra dat nomen, mirum reor esse Lavacrum,
Quod lapidem possit frangere, nomen habet.
Infestos capiti solet hoc arcere dolores.
Auribus auditum praestat, and addit opem.
Lumina tergit, nebulis maculosa fugatis,
Pectoris, and cordis esse medela potest.
Vesicas aperit renes expurgat arena,
Interiora lavat potus, and hujus aquae.
Quam pluries vidi calidam potare petrosos,
Queis Vrina fuit post lapidosa satis.
Vos igitur, quibus est durus cum pondere mictus,
Assiduus talis liberat usus aquae.
From that part of the Hill which lies toward Pozzuolo, at the foot thereof
is another Bath called Ortodonico, The bath Ortodonico, why it was so called.
and is so named because it springs in the Bishops Garden, the passage into
it is to be descended by certain stairs, and the door thereof stands toward
the South, and therefore it is very dangerous for a man to enter into it,
because the South wind blowing, the heat of the exhalations enclosed, seeking
to get out, easily stisleth whosoever is within it; but the water being carried
out, it reviveth and comfort the bodies which are made faint and feeble
through fevers, helps the stomach, and takes away the nauseousues and
desire to vomit, and cures the fever. Alcadino writes of this Bath in this
sort, Haec manet absconso telluris lympha meatu,
Hanc via sub terris plena timoris habet.
Tu cave ne subeas thermas spirantibus Austris,
Ne calor inclusus sit tibi causa necis.
Haec aqua mira nimis consumptis est bona valde,
Restaurat corpus nobilis usus aquae.
Infirmos sicubi febris tenuaverit artus,
Et putat extremam tristis ad esse diem.
Has fidens intrabit aquas, and sepe frequentans,
Sentiet in robur se rediisse vetus
Phthisis, ephermerine febres and nausea turpis.
Pellitur his thermis, hectica victa fugit.


Palinuro is a Promontory so named in the Province of the Principality on this
side, and of the Ancients was called the Promontory of Palinuro, Palinuro.
from which a little distant was in old time the ancient City of Hielia, The
City Hielia.
which was afterward called Velia, and (as Strabo says) was endued with
excellent Laws and Statutes, and environed with a strong Wall, and valiant
people, and contended a long time with the Lucani, and Possidoniati. Of the
which City the ruins are to be seen, and was distant from Possidonia, (as
Strabo says) 200 furlongs; Writers affirm, and especially Pomponius Mela, and
Servio upon this Verse of Virgil. in 6. Nigens crudelis, etc.

Why it was called Palinuro.
That the said Province of Palinuro was so named of Palinuro of Phrigia, a
Stiler of Eneas ship, which was there buried of which mention is made in many
places, and among others in the seventh book, where he does describe very
particularly his death, and his grave, much commending him.

The Promontory Poss^untio of the Province of Principato on this side, is now
called the Cape of Pisciotta; Strabo calls the Country, the River, and the
Haven Possiuntum.

Pausilipo is a very pleasant and fruitful Hill of Campania felix, wholly
manured and adorned with goodly Towns and Villages, Pausilipo.
and is but a mile distant from Naples, and stretches toward the South even
to the Sea, making many dales, which is the cause that all the discents and
banks are very pleasant and delightful through the many Va^lies. There are
also many Gardens full of fruitful Trees, and especially Oringes, Citrons,
Limons, and other fruit. Pliny says in his 9. book, and cap. 53. that in this
pleasant Hill Caesar had a very beautiful house with Fish pools, wherein was
cast a Fish by Pollione Vedio* which lived 60 years; Pollione was Lord of the
said place, and dying, bequeathed it (as Dion says) to Augustus. This house
was near to the highest part of the said Hill, in the place which is now called
the fatal Cave, where at this present are to be seen the Baths which Caesar had
there, whereupon by this it may be judged how pleasant this excellent Hill has
been, and especially for the banishing of sadness and melancholy from frail and
feeble minds; for which cause it has that Greek name, for (...) signifies in
Latin queis, and (...) is as much as to say sadness. Near the side of this
pleasant and delightful Hill, are to be seen round about infinite buildings of
Antic stately workmanship, which time has utterly defaced; and on the side
toward Naples, is the fair Village of the Prince of Stigliano, called Serena,
and toward Chiaia at the foot of the Hill is the pleasant place of Morgilino,
so named by the swimming of the fishes, where the learned Iacobo Sannazaro the
darling of the Muses composed his divine Eg^ogues, and reedified a Church to
St. Mary of the birth, in whose honor he composed Latin Verses, a most
excellent and rare work of the deliverance of the said Virgin, in which Church
in a goodly Tomb of Marble, with his picture carved thereon is he buried, on
the which Sepulcher the Cardinal Pietro Bembo caused this Epitaph to be
engraven, D. O. M.
Da sacro cineri flores, hic ille Maroni
Syncerus Musa, proximus, ut tumulo:
At the foot of the Hill on the side toward the Sea, is the delightful place
of St. Mary of Piedigrotta, and on this side lies the Cave of Cocceio, which
some attribute to Basso, and some to Lucullus, made after the manner of that of
Cuma, the which is wholly cut artificially out of the Rock. Upon the hill in
the right side toward the entrance of the Cave, in the way toward Naples, is
Virgils Sepulcher, the which neither Biondo nor Razzano could find. But being
found in these days, I went to see it with that excellent Lawyer Fabio di
Giordano, a worthy Poet, and a great Herbalist, and a searcher of Antiquities,
and with us also went the Lord Geronomo Colonna, and Paolo Portarello, persons
of great judgment and wisdom: Being come to the place, we found upon the said
Cave a Chapel smoothly vaulted round about with Marble, and within were places
for Images to stand, in the midst was a Tomb of Marble with four little Pillars
likewise of white Marble, the which supported a Coffin whereon were engraven
these Verses, Virgils Sepulcher.
MANTVA me genuit, CALABRI rapuere, tenet nunc
PARTHENOPE, cecini paseua, rura, Duces.


Opposite thereto without the Chapel, was an Epitaph of white Marble, with
these modern Verses engraven, Qui cineres tumulo haec vestigia? conditur olim
Ille hoc qui cecinit pascua, rura, Duces.
After we had well considered the place, and among other things worthy to be
noted, which we beheld looking up to the top of the said Chapel, was a great
Bay Tree naturally growing, A Bay Tree that grew naturally over the Sepulcher
of Virgil.
for the roots thereof took hold through the chinks and crevises of the Wall.
Whereupon I presently thought that this was the very true Sepulcher of Virgil,
and that nature had caused that Bay Tree to grow as a sign to discover unto us
that here lay the ashes of that great Poet* So Seignieur Colonna said* my
masters, this requi^^th matter for us to do something worthy memory, and he
would not de^ert from thence till every one of us had made certain Verses; and
because I was the youngest of the company* he said unto me, Seignieur Scipio*
by the rule of the Law, you ought to begin first. And so presently we made
those Verses. Quod sacr^ Va^is cincres, tumulamque Maronis
Sponte sua hic viridis laurus adulta t^gat.
Indicat, and musis, and di^is s^^iper amicum
Virgilium, speret cui fore nemo parem.
Then said the worthy Fabio, Busta ubi grandi loqui s^eterant* tumulumque
Maronis,
Vastaque saculorum pondera saxa ruunt:
Delphica formosis increvic frondibus arbor:
Atque injussa sacras explicat alta comas
Ne tanti cineres vati^ sine honor jacerent,
Ossicium praestat laurus amica suum.
Seignieur Fabio having ended, D. Paolo began to say, Quod super hunc tumulum
crevit Parnasia laurus
Sponte sua manesque pios atque essa Maronis
Atque loci genium viri^ant^ protegat umbra
Divini vd^is signat reverenter honores
Vt quoniam nemo ante illum* nec post erit unquam
Qui sid ruris opes, tali vel carmine reges
Diceret, illius vigat per secula nomen
Laurus ut haec tumulo foliis frondentibus extat,
Observatque memor sacri monumenta poetae.


Sarno is a Hill so called of the City of Sarno, Sarno.
which is situated at the foot of the Hill, where also a River takes its name
which runs hard by, near to the mouth whereof was Pompey, and not far from
the Hill Vosco^o, as Pliny says, they were named the Pompeians (as Solino
affirms by Hercoles) which brought thither his oxen with great pomp from
Spain. The Pompeians had a long Country full of goodly Villages. The said
Country began at the point where is now the Tower of the Annuntiation, and
stretches even to Castello a mare, The Country of Pompeians one of the
beautifullest parts of Campagna spoiled by fire of the Hill Vesuvio. See Corn
Tacitus in 15 book of Histories.
beyond the River Sarno. In old time (as Strabo declares) in these places did
first inhabit the Osci, and after the Toscani, the Peligni, and also the
Sanniti, the which were driven out by the Romans. This pleasant Country
yields excellent Wines. Pliny writes in the 6. cap. of the 14 book, that the
said Wines grew still to their greatest perfection and goodness even till ten
years, age not any thing impairing them. This fair and pleasant Country of the
Pompeians, was for the most part destroyed by an Earthquake in the time of
Nero, which was one of the best parts of the Province of Campania felix.

Taburo is a high Hill near Capoa; in old time it was called Mons Taburnus, as
Virgil declares in the 2 of the Georgicks, Neu segnes jaceant terrae, juvat
Ismara Bacco
Conserere, atque olea magnum vestire Taburnum.
And elsewhere of the said Hill, and particularly in the twelfth book is made
mention, saying, At velut ingenti Sylvae summoque Taburno.

Trifolino is a Hill which joyneth even with the City of Naples, and called by
the common people, the Hill of St. Hermo, and sometimes of St. Martino, because
upon the top of the said Hill there is a very fair Church, and a Monastery of
Carthusian Monks, under the name of St. Martin; the other Church of St. Hermo
stands within the Castle, which was builded by Charles the first of Angio King
of Naples, for a defense and guard of the said City. The said Castle was newly
fortified by the Emperor Charles the fifth. All this Hill is beautified with
goodly buildings, The Wine of Trifolino.
and other worthy edifices; this pleasant Hill yields excellent Wines, which
are much commended by Galen 5 Salubrium. and 1 de antid. and Martial in Xenia
speaking of the Wine Trifolino, thus says, Non sum de primo fateor Trifolina
Lyaeo
Inter vina tamen septima vitis aero.
It is called the Hill Trifolino by reason of the three-leafed grass, which
grows there very plentifully.

Tifata is a Hill which lies above Capoa, whereof Sillio speaks, Lib. 13.
Tifata umbrisico generatum monte Calenum. Titus Livius likewise names it in
the seventh and twentisixth book, describing that Hannibal departing from the
Brutii, came into these places to relieve Capoa, besieged by Q. Fulvius, and
Appius Claudius, the Roman Consuls, and pitched his Camp in a Valley but a
little distant from the said Hill, with the greatest part of his Army, and with
30 Eliphants.

Vesevo, or Vesuvio, is a hill that stands over against Naples, and opposite to
the Pompeians, Why it was called the Hill Vesevo.
divided on every side with high hills, and has at the foot thereof round about
many pleasant Woods, but in the top is very dreadful, hideous, and unpassable,
in the midst whereof is a great hole made with fire, which seems as a Theater
dug even out of the bowels of the Hill, from whence in old time did ascend
great abundance of fire. Of these flames Beroso the Caldean in his fifth book
of Antiquities makes mention, saying, that in the last year of the King Arli,
the 7 King of the Assirians, the said Hill burned. Suetonius in the life of
Titus says, that in the time of the said Emperor it yielded also great
abundance of fire. Of the like fire in the same manner relates Dion the Greek;
the said fire burned two Cities that stood near unto it, that is to say,
Erculanio, and Pompey. After the fire had continued three days and three
nights, it cast so many ashes with so great violence, that they were carried
with the force of the wind even into Africa, into Syria, and into Egypt;
whereupon Pliny being desirous to see the cause of these fires, went even to
the Tower Ottavi, and there was stifled with the smoke which rose from the said
hill. This burning was the cause that the Curati were created in Rome for the
Country of Lavoro, whose office was to provide for those inconveniences in all
that Country. Vesevo is now much tilled, and yields excellent Greek Wine, and
great store of Corn, and there is also gathered great plenty of good fruits; it
is now called the Hill of Somma, because it stands over against Naples. On
the one side it has the Fields, on the other the Sea; at the foot of the hill
is the fair City of Somma, which is adorned with the Title of Duke. Of the said
Hill thus says Sillio Italico in the 12 book, Monstrantur Veseva juga, atque
in vertice summo
Depasti flammis scopuli, fractusque ruina
Mons circum, atque Aethnae satis carentia saxa.
And Martial in the 4 book of his Epigrams, Hic est Pampineis viridis, vesuvius
umbris
Praesserat hic madidos nobilis uva locus.
Haec juga quam Nysae colles plus Bacchus amavit
Hoc nuper satyri monte dedere choros.
Haec veneris seeds Lacedaemone gra^ior illi
Hic locus Herculeo nomine clarus erat
Cuncta jacent flammis, and tristi mersa favilla
Nec superi vellem hoc licuisse sibi.


Some say that Vesuvio was so called for the sparkles of fire which in old time
it cast out, as it were full of sparkles, for in old time a sparkle was called
Vesuvia. Others say that it was also named Vesbio, of Vesbio Captain of the
Pelasgi, which did domineer and command the said Hill. Servio was deceived in
expounding those words of Virgil in the 7. saying, Et vicina Veseva ora jugo.
because he says that Vesevio is not the same that is Vesuvo, and that the
first stands in Liguria, from whence the River Po flows, and that the
second is in Campania felix. Nevertheless by the authority and testimony of
excellent and grave Writers, that hill of Liguria has been called Vesuvio.

FENNS.
THe Fenn Pontana, called of the Latinists Palus Pontina, was so named (as
Strabo says) from the City of Pometia, sometimes a Colony of the Romans, made
at the same time with Suessa, according to T. Livi^s in his 9 book. It
proceeds of two Rivers, the one called Aufido, the other Vfente; of the first
Virgil makes mention, saying, Et in mare volvitur Vfeus. And in the 7. Vfeus
insignis fama. Now it is vulgarly called Aufente, and also Baudino. This Fenn
is so large, that as Pliny says, with the authority of Mutiano, that there
were 24 Cities. Titus Livius writes in his 47 book, that the said Fenn was
dried up by the Consul Cornelio Cethego, and the ground became solid and firm
to sow corn. Cornel. Cetego, the Consul dried up the Fen Pontina.
But in process of time, care being not had thereof, it returned to its
pristinate state, and was all filled with water; the which Theodorico King of
the Goths noting, caused it to be made dry another time. At this present the
said fields are become for the most part so moorish, as well by the means of
the said Rivers, as the great flowing of the waters, which spring from the
bottom of the bordering hills round about, and there settle and remain, their
ancient passages being stopped, whereby they were wont to depart and pass into
the Sea. So by this means there is to be seen a great Moor: Upon this Fenn or
Moor was the City of Terracina, called in old time Ansure, which was the chief
and head City of the Vlosci. Strabo says that in former time it was called
Trachina, which is to say sharp and rough, by reason of the stony ^ils where it
is situate. Servio says, that in Terracina was adored a little Jupiter called
Ansur^, Jupiter Ansure.
which in Greek signifies as it were not shaven, because he had no beard by
reason of his youth; whereupon Martial in the 10 of his Epigrams, writing to
Faustine, thus says, O nemus, o fontes, solidumque madentis arenae,
Lictus, and aequoris splendidus Anxur aqueis.
And Horace in h^s Poetry says, Sterilique diu palus, aptaque remis
Vnicas urbes alit: and grave sentit aratrum.


Servio also says, that not very far from Terracina, was a City called Satura.
Suetonius Tranquillus writes that Tiberius being invited to a Feast at
Terracina, in a place called Pretorio, suddenly fell from aloft many great
stones, which killed many of his friends and followers, and himself hardly
escaped. Spartiano says, that Antonino Pio repaired the Haven of Terracina.
This City had also the immunities and privileges of Anzo, and of Hostia, the
which were likewise suspended at the coming of Asdrubale into Italy.

Acherusa is a Fenn or Moor, which is now called Coluccia, and are certain
waters of a rusty iron color, which amaze whosoever see them, and overspread
much ground between Capoa and Aversa, infecting the air, and making the earth
unfruitful, through the great abundance in that Plain, whereby the Country
becomes altogether unprofitable. It stretches even to Cuma, overflowing every
place, the which is so plain, that the water runs not, but in summer is
accustomed to be dry. Of the which water none in old time would taste,
believing it was an infernal water, which distilled from the near adjacent
waters, through the great heat of Fl^giton; whereupon they builded there a
Temple to Pluto the God of Hell. The Ancients have also said that Hercules at
his departure from Hell, took the Crown from the head of Oppius, and planted it
for a memorial on the side of the said Moor; whereupon the Poets afterward
feigned that all the Poppies that grew there had black leaves. Pliny makes
mention of this Moor in his 3 book, Strabo in the 5 book, Sill. in the 8.
Virgil in the 6 of Eneid. saying, Vnum oro, quando hic Inferni janua regis
Dicitur, and tenebrosa palus Acheronte refuso.


Of LAKES.
ANsanto, of the Latinists called Amsanctus, is a Lake which lies between
Lucania and the Irpini, the water whereof yields a stinking savor like
Brimstone, and therefore all the fowls that fly over it fall down dead to the
earth. Cicero names this Lake in the 1 of Divinat. saying, Mortifera quaedam
pars est, ut Amsancti in Hirpinis, and in Asia Plutonica, quae vidimus. And
Virgil in the 7. of the Eneid.

Est locus Italiae in medio sub montibus altis,
Nobilibus, and fama multis memoratus in oris.
Amsancti valles.
Agnano is a Lake which lies near Pozzuolo, and is environed with high Rocks,
the said Lake is very deep, and yields not any thing but Frogs. In the Spring
time there are often seen many heaps and bundles of Serpents, which are
smothered and stifled in the water by divine providence, the which permits
not that they multiply and increase, being so pernicious to humane nature.

Averna is a deep Lake which is three miles distant from Cuma, and is called of
the Latinists Avernus, The Lake Averno.
it was so named (as Nonio Marcello says) for the mortal and deadly savor of
the water against birds and fowls, which incontinently die if they fly but
over it. It is compassed round about with high Hills, except at the entrance.
Round about it are very delightful and pleasant places; in this Lake were men
sacrificed, and here also, as Homer declares, was Elphenore slain by Ulysses,
and sacrificed, and likewise Miseno by Eneas. The water of this Lake has a
brackish and salt taste, and a black color. In old time the said Lake was
environed with thick Woods, through the shadow whereof it was always obscure
and fearful; whereupon Augustus caused all the Woods to be cut down: On the
left hand in the turning of the Lake, is the Cave of Sibilla; and a little
farther near the water is the Temple of Mercury, the ruins whereof are yet to
be seen. Of this Lake Aristotle makes mention, de admirabilibus mundi. Valor.
Flac. lib. 2. Seneca in Troade. 9. Curt. lib. 8. Dion. in 5. of Antiquities,
Vibio Sequestre, Nonio Marcello, Strabo, Pontano, in the 2. and especially
Virgil in the 6* saying. Inde ubi venere ad fauces graveolentis Avern^
Tollunt se celeres.
And a little farther, Quam super ^aud ullae poterant impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis, talis sese halitus arris,
Faucibus effundens supera ad convexa fetebat,
Vnde locum Grai dixerunt nomen Averni.


Very near the Lake Averno is the Lake Lucrino, whereof we will speak in its
place.

Andoria is a Lake in Puglia, and named by Pliny, Mandarium, and by Boccas in
his book of Lakes Andurium, from a Castle very near unto it, called Andurio,
Plin. lib. 2. cap. 106.
the said Lake is not very far from the shore.

The Lake Fucino, named by Strabo, Lacus Fucinus, and likewise by other
Writers, the said Lake is commonly called Celano. This lake is in the Country
of the Marsi, now called Abruzzo on the other side; it is in compass 30 miles,
and is very full of excellent fishes, where is also great fowling for Mallards,
wild-Geese, and Swans. Round about the Lake are the Castles of St. Apetito, and
St. Iona, and these other places and Cities also Paterno, Transaco, Giagano,
Avezzano, Magliano, and Celano, is under the title of a Count, a very rich and
populous Country, from whose name this Lake was also called Celano. The River
Giovento enters into the said Lake, and runs upon the water easily to be
perceived, in such manner, that as it enters in, and runs upon it, so also
it returns without mingling it self with it. In the said Lake was swallowed up
the magnificent City Archippa, built by Marsia, King of the Lidi. John Pontano
declares in his book de Magnificentia, that the Emperor Claudius maintained
eleven years continually 30 thousand men to dam up this Lake, the which water
Martia in his Edileship conveyed to Rome, and called it by his name, which was
esteemed and commended before any other water that was brought thither; Martial
besides makes mention of this Lake, saying, Fucinus, and pigri taceantur stagna
Neronis.

Lusina is a Lake so called of Lusina, a City of Capitanata* this Lake is
distant from the said City little less then a mile, Plin. lib. 3. cap. 10. The
Lake Lucrino, why it was so called.
near to the which the River For^ore runs into the Sea. This Lake is forty
miles in compass, and by Pliny is called Lacus Pantanus, which breeds
excellent fishes.

Lucrino is a Lake near the Gulf of Bain, in Campania felix, directly against
Pozzuolo, it is commonly called the Lake of Licola. This Lake Lucrino was
fortified by Hercoles to keep his oxen he brought from Gerion: It was afterward
much better amended and ordered by Agrippa. Strabo says that he made it in
that sort that boats might pass into it; some say that this Lake Lucrino was so
called de Lucro, that is to say from the gain and commodity that arise of the
fishes that are therein taken, and from this Lake there goes a way to Averno.
In this Lake Lucrino, there is plenty of Oysters, whereof Martial speaks, Non
omnis laudem, preceumque Aurata meretur
Sed cui solus erit Concha Lucrina cibut.
And in another place says, Ebria Baiano veni modo Conca Lucrino
Nobile nunc sitio luxuriosa Garnum.


Pliny writes in the 9 lib. cap. 8. that in the time of Augustus, there was a
Dolphin in this Lake Lucrino, and that a poor man's son which daily went to
school to Baia by Pozzuolo, The History of a Dolphin.
seeing him, began to call him Simon, and very often with pieces of bread which
he carried for this purpose, so enticed and allured him, whereupon the Dolphin
grew greatly in love with him; by which means being called by the boy at any
time whatsoever, though he were hid, and in the bottom of the Lake,
nevertheless he would presently come and take the meat from the boys hand, and
afterward suffer him to mount upon his back, laying down his sharp fin, and so
take him up and carry him to Pozzuolo, playing with him through a great part of
the water, and in like manner would return with him, and this he continued for
many years, until the boy died; and the Dolphin coming to his accustomed place,
and missing him, so lamented and sorrowed, till in the end he pined away; and
also died with very grief.

The Lake of Patria is a very great Lake, and full of fish, and i^ near to
Linturno in Campania felix. On the right hand of the said Lake, not very far
from the Sea is to be seen at this present, a Tower not very ancient, called
Patrio, built upon the ruins of Linterno, The Sepulcher of Scipio Africano.
which was the Town of Scipio Africano, for Ptolomeo, Pliny, and Mela, and
Livio, placed Linterno between Vulturno and Cuma: Scipio Africano made choice
to live rather in Linterno, as a voluntary exile, then to abide in Rome among
such ungrateful people, because he had experience of that true Proverb, That a
benefit is seldom rewarded but with ingratitude. Scipio dying, A Proverb.
left in his Will, that this Epitaph should be engraven upon his Tomb, Devicto
Hannibale capta Carthagine, and aucto
Imperio, hos cineres marmore tectus habes,
Cui non Europa, non obstitit Africa quondam
(Respice res hominum) quam brevis urna praemit.


The Lake Fondano, named Fandanus through the error of Pliny, instead of
Fundanus, as the learned Barbaro notes. The said Lake is in the Province of
the Country of Lavoro, near Formia, and Villa Castello. There are very good
fish had from this Lake, and especially great Eels.

The fame and report being every where spread, that S^ipio remained at
Linterno, thither repaired certain notorious Pirates to visit and honor him,
See the Elegy of Giovio in the life of Scipio Afr.
drawn by the fame and renown of his many victories. By this clearly appears
the force of virtue, how powerful and puissant it is even amongst all people,
that it inforceth not only the good to love it, but also the wicked and
reprobate to honor and embrace it.

Salapia is a Lake in Pugli^ Daunia, which is now called the Province of
Capitanata:

The Lake Varrone, called in old time Gerne, lies in the Province of
Capitanata* and is thirty miles in compass, where are these Cities, Cappino,
Cognato, and Iscitella. The said Lake breeds very good ^ishes and Eels.

Of the WOODS.
AGnitia is a Wood which stands near the City of Alba in the Territory of the
Marsi, now called Abruzzesie, of it Virgil makes mention in the seventh book.

The Wood Hami, called in old time Sacer Lucus, this sacred Wood is three miles
distant from Cuma, a City of Campania felix. The said Wood, with the Temple
standing upon a high Hill, was within a mile and half of the Baths of
Tripergota; the which Hill was planted on every side with sumptuous buildings
even to the top. Of this Hill Livy makes mention in his third book ab urbe
cond. saying that they sacrificed there in the night. We have written at large
thereof in the book of the Antiquities of Pozzuolo, whereto I refer the Reader.

Lusilla is a Wood in length three miles, where are very goodly pastures for
droves and herds of Cattle. It is distant from Lusilla two miles, and a little
more from the ancient Lavo, called Laino, a City of Calauria on this side.

Daunia was in old time a very fair Wood all of Oaks, in the midst whereof was
a stately Temple dedicated to Jupiter Dodon^o, whose Statue was very much
honored, because it revealed things by the means of a Pidgeon. This Wood stood
in Puglia, and was so called of Dauno the son of Pilumno, and of Da^ao the
Grandfather of Turnus, which ruled Puglia, the which Province was afterward
called Daunia.

Sila, called for the excellency thereof, Sila Brettiana, is a very fair Wood,
which contains 200 miles in compass, and stands near Cosenza, a City of
Calauria on this side; this famous Wood is not so hideous and loathsome in
Winter, through the continual snow and ice, as it is pleasant and delightful in
Summer, where the fresh air with delicate streams of water full of fish, the
sundry parts in fowling and hunting, the infinite droves and herds of cattle
which plentifully feed, represent in effect that which the Poets feign of their
Arcadia. In this Wood are Trees which yield Pitch and excellent Turpentine,
whereof Strabo in his 6 book thus says, Est Syla picis, ferax optime Brettiana
dicta proceris arboribus and aquis recentibus r^ferta ad 97 longitudinis. Of
this Sila, Virgil makes mention in the 12 book, saying, Ac velut ingenti Syla,
summove Taburno.
Cum duo conversis inimica in praelia tauri
Frontibus incurrunt, pavidi cessere magistri
Stat pecus omne metu mutum, mussamque juvencae
Quis p^cori imperiet, quem tota armenta sequantur.


Dioscorides in his first book does much commend the Pitch which comes from
thence, and Galen also does greatly praise it in his book de Antido. and in the
3 de copia medicamentorum, and in other places; it is also commended by Paulo
Agineta in the third book de art medendi, of Aetio in the fifteenth book of
Pliny, Phil. lib. 14. Columella lib. 13. Vegetio. l 4.
of Columella, of Vegetio, and of Scribonio an excellent Physician, which
flourished in the time of the Emperor Tiberius

Of the Mines in the Kingdom.
In the Province of the Country of Lavoro, called in old time Campania felix.
IN the Isle of Ischia, called in old time Enaria, is a Mine of Gold, and of
Alume, the which Bartholomeo Perdice Genoway found in the year 1465.

In the Territory of Pozzuolo is a Mine of Alume, of Brimstone, of Copper, of
Iron, and of Saltpeter.

In the Territory of Sessa is a Mine of Gold and Silver.

In the Hill of Somma, called Vesevo, and Vesuvio, are Mines of Gold,
Brimstone, and Alume.

In the Province of the Principality on this side.
In the Territory of Olibano is a Mine of Silver.

In the Province of the Principality on the other side.
In the Territory of Prata is a Mine of Gold and Silver.

In the Province of Abruzzo on this side.
In the Territory of Lietto Manupello, is a Mine of Pitch in the manner of
Tarr, and is of the same operation that Pitch is, this was found in the year
1577.

In the Territory of the Country of Cantalupo, at the bottom of a Hill does
flow a certain Liquor called Petronical Oil, which is very sovereign and
medicinable.

In the Province of the Country of Otranto.
In the Territory of the City of Matera, are Mines of Bolearmenick, and of a
certain earth called by the Latinists terra Lennia, and terra Sacra, it is much
commended by Galen, and many other Physicians, as an excellent remedy to heal
wounds, and the bloody flux, and pestilent diseases, and the biting of venomous
creatures, and to preserve a man from poison, and to vomit poison already
taken, and for other infirmities. There is also a Mine of natural and
artificial Saltpeter.

In the Province of Calauria on this side.
In the Territy of the Country of Martorano, is a Mine of Steel.

In the Territory of the City of Cosenza, near the River Iovinio, are Mines of
Gold, and Iron; and in a place commonly called Macchia germana, is a Mine of
Gold, of Lead, and Brimstone; and a little farther in another place called
Miliano, is a Mine of Salt and Alume.

In the Territory of Pietr^ fitta, near the River Ispica, are Mines of Steel,
Lead, and Salt.

In the Territory of the Country of Regina, are Mines of Alabaster, of
Brimstone, and of Coperas.

In the Territory of the Country of Longobucco, are Mines of Silver, and
Quicksilver.

In the Territory of Rossano are Mines of Salt, and of Alabaster, and the
Marchesite stone.

In the Territory of Alto monte are Mines of Gold, of Silver, of Iron, and of
Alabaster, and there grows Cristal, and there also mighty Hills of white salt.

In the Province of Calauria on the other side.
In the Territory of the City of Regio are Mines of Alabaster, of Brimstone and
Saltpeter.

In the Territory of the City of Taverna is a Mine of Antimonium, which is a
stone of the color of lead, and very brittle, like that which grows in Britany.

In the Territory of the Country of Agata is a Mine of Iron, and Steel, and of
the Adamant stone.

In the Territory of Belforte, is a Mine of Gold, and of Iron, and there grows
Coprass and Cristal.

In the Territory of Calatro is a Mine of Iron.

In the Territory of Belvedere are Mines of Silver, of Iron, of Brimstone, of
Alume, of Salt, and of white and black Alabaster, and there grows a stone which
shines like Silver.

In the Territory of Soriano, is a Mine of Quicksilver.

In the Territory of Nicastro is a Mine of Quicksilver, and there are also
goodly Hills of mixed Marble

In the Territory of Mesuraca is a Mine of Earth, which yields a color called
of Latinists Giluus.

In the City Cotrone grows a Thistle which yields Mastick, and also it grows
in Castrovillare, and in many other places of Calauria. And to conclude,
Calauria is a very goodly Region, and yields plenty of all good things.

The Castles and Forts of defense which are in the Kingdom of Naples, with the
number of Soldiers which remain in every Guard, and their monthly pay.
The names of the Castles The number of soldiers The pay, what it monthly
imports In Naples are these 3 Castles, Ducats: 1. The new Castle. 167 775.2.12
2. The Castle of Eramo. 110 452.2.9 3. The Castle of Vovo. 25 90.4.11 The
Castle of Baia. 69 233.0.13 The Castle of the Isle Ischia. 34 116. The Castle
of Gaeta. 86 322.3.3 The Castle of Capoa. 51 200.1.13 The Castle of Aquila. 53
197.1.13 The fortified Castle of Brindesi. 56 175.3 The Castle of Leccie. 54
201.1.13 The Castle of Otranto. 86 144.1.13 The Castle of Civitella. 94
Ducats, 321.0.13 The Castle of Pesara. 62 303.2.10 The Castle of Viesti. 36
247.1.13^ The Castle of Momfredonia. 34 137.1.13 The Castle of Barletta. 52
194.1.13 The Castle of Bary. 28 118.1.13 The Castle of Monopoli. 29 140. The
Castle of Brindesi. 41 151. The little Castle of Brindesi. 63 223.4 The Castle
of Cosenza has only a Capt. with the pay of 10 crowns monthly 1 10* The Castle
of Gallipoli 30 Ducats: 125.1.13 The Castle of Taranto 46 176.0.4 The Castle
of Cotrone 39 136.3.6 The Castle of Bi^eglia has but only a Captain 1 10 The
Castle of St. Germano has only a Captain with the allowance of 200 ducats
yearly 1 17 The Castle of Trani has only a Captain with the pay of 10 crowns
monthly 1 10 In the Isle of Nis^ta the Court maintain^th a Ga^ison Ducats. The
Fort of the City of Aman^e^ maintains 6 soldiers 6 20.4 The Fort of St.
Cataldo maintain there 6 262. In the Isle of Tipare are two Gunners 2 2

A CATALOGVE Of the Earls and Dukes of Puglia and Calauria; and of all the
Kings of Naples, Normans, S^evi, Angioini, Durazzeschi, Aragonesi, Castilliani,
and Austriaci.
ALthough I have more at large written in another book of the lives of all the
Kings which have ruled the Kingdom of Naples; but being now to speak of the
same subject, I will handle every thing with as much brevity as may be, hoping
that as it will be no small ornament to this work, so it will give no little
contentment to the Reader.

It is then to be understood, that in the year of our Lord 987. the last year
of the reign of Lewis the fifth King of France, avaliant Norman soldier, and
of great magnanimity, called Tancred, having twelve sons which he had by two
wives, that is to say, of Moriella Lucha his first wife, he had Frumentino,
Gotfredo, Sarno, Tancred, Malugero, Dragone, Godfredo, and Alberedo; of the
second wife, called Fresanda Rotaria, the daughter (or as some write) the
sister of the Earl of Altavilla, he had Guglielmo Feraback, Vnfredo, Ruberto,
Guiscard, and Ruggieri Bosso, with these twelve sons Tancred determined to seek
out some new Country to inhabit, and to try some new and better fortune, with
hope to find some other place to live better, and more richly, through his
industry and wit; and coming into Italy, first arived in Romagna, and
perceiving that Landolfo Prince of Salerno, was much oppressed through the
excursions and outroads of the Saracins, sent in his aid six of his sons, who
being well provided by the Prince, both of horse and arms, in three battles
wherein they incountred the enemy, made an admirable slaughter of them,
whereupon they returned as it were in triumph to Salerno, and were by the
Prince and all the people received, and with much entreaty were solicited to
remain in that Court. But they declaring that what they did was not for any
human pomp, nor for any other end but the service of God, refusing all gifts,
returned to their own habitation. But within a few years following, there fell
certain controversies between Pandolfo of St. Agata, and Guaimaro Prince of
Salerno, Pandolfo sent Ambassadors into Romagno, requesting Guglielmo, Dragone
and Vmfrido, three sons of Tancred, with many promises and offers to serve
under his pay; which that he might the better do, in the manner of another
Narsetes, sent them not only rich furniture for horses, and costly apparel for
themselves, but great store of money. These worthy men made no delay to come to
the Prince Pandolfo, through whose assistance the enemy being foild, was forced
with shame and sorrow to retire; but Pandolfo being brutish and ungrateful,
made no great account of them, which they perceiving, for this cause, the time
of their service being expired, took part with Guaimaro, who by their worthy
deeds, in a short time recovered much. Through these famous atchieuments the
Normans gained the reputation of valiant Warriers with every one. In the mean
time died Tancred their Father, which was Earl of Altavilla, the which Count
descending to Gugli^lmo Ferrabach his eldest son, omitted no time to go into
Normandy to take possession thereof, where after he had settled the affairs of
his State, returned afterward into Italy, bringing with him no less then
fifteen thousand Normans into Romagna, and in process of time got not only the
dominion thereof, but also the most part of Tuscan.

Things resting in this manner* the Saracins possessed all Sicilia, and Sardinia,
and many times did much prejudice the Coast of Italy, The Saracius possess
Sicilia.
whereupon Pope Sergio the 4 fearing, and much suspecting they would overrun
all Italy, demanded aid of Guglielmo Ferabach. Guglielmo through the persuasion
of the Pope, went in this expedition with eleven thousand of his soldiers,
together with Maniace, Captain of Michele Paslagone the Greek Emperor, to the
recovery of Sicilia, and with much valor and courage expeld the Saracins* out
of all the ^sle; but Maniace not observing the agreement, that what was gotten
should be equally divided between them, Farabache growing wrathful, past with
his Normans into Puglia, making a mighty slaughter, subdued the greasted part,
and finding a fit and secure place builded the City of Melsi in a difficult
place, and well fortified by nature. The which Maniace understanding, came upon
him with a strong Army; but Ferabach braving the enemy, which besieged him,
being wearied with travel, Ferabach makes War with the Greek^.
came out against them, and encountering them, gave them a mighty overthrow near
the River of Lofonte in Puglia, the Normans remaining Conquerors, and so rich
both of reputation and spoil, mounted mightily in state, endeavoring both by
might, and other Military means to obtain other places and Cities in Puglia,
the which atchieuments succeeding with so great felicity to the Normans, it
followed that all Puglia came into the possession of the said Guglielmo, who
through his valiant acts, had the name of Ferabach, that is to say, strong-arm,
of which dominion he afterward took the title of an Earl. Afterward Guglielmo
died in the year of our Lord 1042. and because he left no child, Guglielmo
Ferabach Count of Puglia.

The death of Guglielmo 1042 (...), Count of Puglia.


his brother Dragone succeeded in the County, which was Lord of Venosa, who had
at his beginning a great overthrow by Melo, Captain of the Greek Emperor, and
lost a great part of Puglia; but being aided by Guaimaro, Prince of Salerno, he
oftentimes fought with the Greeks, without any advantage; yet in the end in a
great conflict he overthrew and dissolved the Greek Army, and not only
recovered that which he had first lost, but also got many Castles and Holds,
which the enemies possessed upon the Seacoast of Puglia. At this time the
Emperor Henry the second came into Italy, and having pacified the affairs of
the Church, went into the Kingdom, and confirmed to Dragone the County of
Puglia, from whom he received not only much money, but had also the best and
fairest horses that were in all the Kingdom. The Count of Puglia consumed by
the Emperor Henry the 2 to Dragone. 1051. Vm^rid^ Count of Puglia. Anno. 57.
Baielardo, Count of Puglia. Roberto Guiscard* Count of Puglia.


The Emperor departing Italy, the Earl Dragone moved the Beneventani to War,
and in two battles which he made, his Army was overthrown, and he flying, was
slain by the enemies. His brother Humfrido took the possession of the Earldom,
at which time Guaimaro Prince of Salerno was cruelly murdered by his own
people, and his son was made Prince, with the help of the Normans, which the
said Count labored with long War; in the end the Count ill demeaning himself
with the Pugliesi, was for his cruel nature slain in the year 1057. Baielardo
his son succeeded in his fathers Dominion, the which being chased away in the
same year by Ruberto Guiscard his uncle, this Ruberto became the fourth Earl of
Puglia, who being a valiant man at arms, and of a great spirit, suddenly
besieged Reggio, and having taken it, went with prosperous victory subduing
other parts and Cities of Calauria to his dominion. Afterward he returned into
Puglia, took Troia, and in such manner never rested, taking from hand to hand
many Cities, and brought all the Normans of that Country under his Empire;
Ruberto Guiscard attributes to himself the title of Duke of Puglia and
Calauria.
and being fully resolved to continue no longer an Earl, with a general consent
caused himself to be called Duke of Puglia and Calauria. At this present
Nicholas the second, Bishop of Rome, being much encumbered with the Roman
Barons, came in the year 1^59. to the Parliament with Guiscardo, in the City of
Aquila, and Guiscard having with much humility adored the Pope, made peace with
him, and restored unto him the City of Benevento, Nocolas the 2 Bishop of Rome,
came to the Parliament with Guis^a^do, an. 1059.
and all other places that he had belonging to the Church, for the which the
Pope not only received him into grace and favor, but confirmed and invested
him with the Title of Duke of Puglia and Calauria. The which act was registered
and confirmed with a solemn Oath, and so Ruberto was now made a Vassal and
Liegeman of the Church. Sigonio writes two Acts of the Oath which Ruberto at
this present made to the Pope, Robert Guiscard invested with the Dukedom of
Puglia and Calauria.
the one to pay the yearly tribute, the other loyalty and homage, the which two
Acts I thought good to insert in this place, to the end the Reader may know how
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction began in the Kingdom of Naples:

The first is in this sort.

The oath of loyalty and homage of Duke Robert^.
Ego Robertus Dei gratia, and St. Petri Dux Apuliae, and Calabriae, and utroque
subveniente futurus Siculis ad confirmationem traditionis, and ad recognitionem
fidelitatis de terra S. Petri, promitto me quotannis pro unoquoque jugo boum
pensionem duodecim denariorum Papiensium persoluturum B. Petro, and tibi D. meo
Nicolao Papae, and omnibus successoribus tuis, aut tuis, aut tuorum successorum
nunciis ad S. Resurrectionem obligans me, and meos haeredes, sive successores
tibi, and successoribus tuis. Sic me Deus adjuvet, etc. The second is thus: Ego
Robertus Dei, and S. Petri gratia Dux Apuliae, and utroque subveniente futurus
Siciliae ab hinc in posterum fidelis ^ro S. Romanae Ecclesiae, and Apostolicae
Sedi, and D. meo Nicolao Papae. The second oath.
Neque ero auctor, aut adjutor, ut vitam, aut membrum amittas, aut capiaris
mala captione, consilium quod mihi credideris, and ne enunciem imperaris, non
enunciabo in tuum detrimentum sciens S. Romanae Ecclesiae ubique adjutor ero ad
tenenda, and acquirenda regalia S. Petri, ejusque possessiones pro viribus meis
contra homines, and adjuvabo te, ut secure, and honorifice tenens Pontificatum
Romanum, terramque S. Petri* Et Principatum nec invadere, nec subigere tentabo,
nec praedari contendam sine tua, tuorumque successorum licentia. Pensionem de
terra S. Petri, quam ego teneo, aut tenebo, sicut statutum est, recta fide
studebo, ut quotannis Ecclesiae Romanae persolvam, omnes Ecclesias, quae in mea
consistunt ditione cum earum possessionibus in tua potestate dimittam, and
defensor ero earum ad fidelitatem Romanae Ecclesiae. Et si tu, vel tui
successores ante me ex hac vita decesserint, pro ut monitus fuero a primis
Cardinalibus, clericis, and laicis Romany, opem feram, ut Pontifex erigatur,
and ordinetur ad honorem S. Petri. Haec omnia suprascripta servabo S. R.
Ecclesiae, and tibi and successoribus tuis ad honorem S. Petri ordinatis, qui
mihi firmaverint investituram a te mihi concessam. Sic me Deus adjuvet, etc.

Afterward by commandment of the Pope, Ruberto went with his Army against the
Roman Barons, and never ceased until he had subdued them all, and made them
obedient to the Pope. Having then a purpose to expel the Saracins out of
Sicilia, made many progresses into that Isle, took Messina, surprised Rimeto,
built in the Valley of Demona, the Castle of St. Mark; and from hence returning
into the Country of Otranto* took Taranto by assault, four years after it was
besieged, through the faction of Argirizo of Bari, returned again into Sicilia,
and with a puissant Army besieged Palermo, the which City when he had taken,
committed the Government of that Isle to his brother Ruggieri Bosso, determined
for a difference risen between him and the Prince Gisulfo his brother in law,
P^terno taken by Robert Guiscard.
to subdue Salerno, whereupon with a mighty siege he begirt the said City, into
the which he entered by a breach in the Wall, and easily obtained it, as he had
done many other places, and so became Lord of Salerno in the year 1076. and
without any delay followed the conquest of the rest of Campania, Salerno taken
by Guiscardo in the year 1076.
and for so much as he had an ingenious and deep conceit, took advantage by the
dissension and ill government of the Grecian Princes, purposing to make war
upon them, because many years before they attended no other thing but the
chasing and dispossessing the one the other. Then he past the Sea with an Army
of 15 thousand ^ighting men, and meeting with the Army of Alessio, gave him a
mighty overthrow. Not long after Pope Gregory the 7 being afflicted with cruel
war by the Emperor, Henry the 4. requested aid of Ruberto Guiscardo, and for to
induce him the rather to his desire, they met together at Aquino, and after at
Ceperano, and there the Pope confirmed to Roberto the same things which
Nicholas the second, and Pope Alexander had first granted unto him. And so
Roberto was again made a Liegeman of the Church, Pope Gergory the 7 con^^emed
to Ruberto the Dukedom of Puglia and Calauria.
and took his Oath in this manner, Ego Robertus Apuliae Calabriae and Siciliae
Dux, post^ac ero fidelis tibi Domino meo Gregorio Pontifici, neque auctor ero,
aut operam dabo, ut vitam, aut membrum amittas, aut dolo malo capiaris
consilium, quod mihi communicaveris, in tui damnum sedens non enunciabo. S.
Romanam Ecclesiam. and te adjuvabo, ut teneas, acquiras, and desendas regalia
Sancti Petri, ejusque, possessiones pro meis viribus contra omnes homines,
praeter partem Firmanae, Marchiae, and Salernum, and Amalsim de quibus adhuc
non est decretum, and adjuvabo te, ut tuto, and honorifice teneas Pontificatum.
Terram S. Petri, quam nunc tenes, vel habiturus es, post quam sciero tuae esse
potestatis, nec invadere, nec acquirere conabor, nec praedari audebo, sine tuo,
tuorumque successorum permisit: pensionem de terra S. Petri quam ego teneo, aut
tenebo, quot annis bona side persolvam S. Romanae Ecclesiae, omnes ecclesias,
quae in ejus sunt ditione, tuae potestati dimittam, easque desendam. Si tu, aut
sucdessores tui ante me ex vita ingraverint, pro ut monitus fuero auxilio ero,
ut Pontifex eligatur, and ordinetur.

Guiscardo having finished his saying, Gregory thus replied, Ego vero Gregorius
Pontifex investa ^e Roberte de terra S. Petri, quam tibi concesserunt
antecessores mei Nicolaus and Alexander. The investing made by Pope Gregory.
De illa autem terra quam injuste tenes, Salernum dico, and Amalsim, and partem
Marchiae Firmanae, nunc te putienter sustin^o in considentia Dei omnipotentis,
and tuae bonitatis, ut tu postea ad honorem S. Petri ita te geras, sicut and te
gerere, and me suscipere decet sine periculo animae tuae, and meae. Presently
Ruberto answered in this manner,

Ego Robertus Dux ad confirmationem traditionis, and recognitionem fidelitatis,
de omni terra, quam ego teneo proprie sub Domino meo, promitto, me quotannis
pro unoquoque jugo boum pensionem duodecim denariorum Papiensium soluturum B.
Petro, and tibi Domino meo Gregorio Pontifici, and omnibus successoribus tuis,
aut tuis, aut successorum tuorum nunciis, ubi dies Sanctae Domini
Resurrectionis advenerit.



Within a while after the Emperor Henry begirt Pope Gregory with a very
dangerous siege, the which Guis^ardo understood, being in Grecia with one part
of his Army, leaving the other to his son Boemund, came with all celerity to
relieve the Pope, and entering in by the port del popolo, drove the Emperor away
by force, Ruberto delivers Pope Gregory being besieged.
and delivered the Pope from the siege, and conveyed him to Montecasino, and
afterward to Salerno, where he lived the remnant of his life. Guiscard
afterward returned to his enterprises beyond the sea, where having done many
worthy exploits beseeming a most valiant Prince, died in Corfu of Grecia the
year of our Lord 1085. in the month of July, being 62 years of age, his body
was afterward conveyed into Italy, and buried in the City of Venosa in Apulia.
Ruberto was of a high spirit, provident, The death of Duke Ruberto Guiscardo
an. 1085.
and very ingenious, whereupon he was called by the Normans for his surname,
Guiscardo, which signifies subtle and witty. He had successively three wives,
the first was Albereda, sister to the Prince of Capoa, which brought him
Ruberto, who died young, and Boemundo. Sigelaica his second wife, sister to the
Prince of Salerno, by whom he had Ruggieri, Sivardo, and Eria. Of his third
wife, named Isabella, the daughter of Vgone, the first of this name, King of
Cypris, he had not any child. After the death of Ruberto, Boemundo his eldest
son was altogether employed in the war which he had in Grecia; in the mean time
Ruggiero his younger brother, with great cunning, Ruggieri the Norman, Duke of
Apulia and Calauria.
took upon him the Government of the Dukedom of Apulia and Calauria, and
obtained of Pope Urban the second, the confirmation of the State, in the
Council which was held in the City of Troia, the which Boemund understanding,
came with his Army to drive him away; but forune offered him the opportunity of
a more glorious enterprise, for so much as in he Council held in France, in
Chiaromonte of Alvernia, the voyage beyond the Sea to recover the Sepulcher of
Christ from the hands of the infidels was made manifest, whether went so many
Christian Barons, French, Germans, and Englishmen; Boemond being of a generous
mind, and full of magnanimity, animated by emulation of the glory of so many
honorable men which went in this noble enterprise, leaving all things to his
brother, went with these to the Conquest of the Holy Land, where having
straightly besieged Antiochia, took it, and was therefore by the general
consent of the Army, Boemund created Prince of Antiochia.
for that enterprise, made Prince, and Earl of Tripoli: he afterward married
Constance, the eldest daughter of Philip King of France, which brought him a
son named Boemund, which succeeded in the said Principality.

But returning to Ruggieri, who having held the Dukedom of Calauria and Apulia
25 years, Ruggieri died in the year 1110.

William the Norman, Duke of Apulia and Calauria in the year 111^. Ruggieri,
Count of Sicilia, the son of Ruggieri Bosso, possesses the Dukedom of Puglia
and Calauria.

An. 1123. The death of Duke William.


died in the year 1110. and left William his eldest son, his heir, born of
Adelandra his wife, daughter of Robert Frisone Earl of Flanders. This Duke
William peaceably possessed his State, and made Pope Galasio his special friend,
by whom he was invested in the said Dukedom of Apulia and Calauria in the year
1118. The year following the Duke thinking to marry the daughter of John
Comneno, Emperor of Constantinople, being promised unto him, embarked himself
to go thither, and committing the tuition of his State to Pope Calisto the
second. In the mean time the year 1123. Ruggieri Earl of Sicilia his Nephew,
the son of the aforesaid Ruggieri Bosso, following so fit an opportunity,
nothing esteeming the Pope, invaded Calauria, and before the Pope could well
bethink himself how to relieve it, he had got the possession of all Calauria
and Apulia.

The Duke William being deceived, and returned without his wife, retired
himself to the Prince of Salerno his kinsman, where not long after, without
leaving any issue, he died in the year 1127.

The Kings of NAPLES.
Ruggieri 1. King of Naples.
RVGGIERI by force of arms, and by the right of inheritance, being Lord of so
great a State, An 11^8.
with whose power the Pope Honorius the second being not able to contend, made
peace with him, and received of him an Oath of Loyalty and homage, and so
created him Duke of Apulia and Calauria. The said Act was solemnly done and
registered in Troia, a City of Puglia, in the year 1128. Ruggieri entituleth
himself King of Italy.
Afterward Ruggieri began War with the Prince of Capoa, and so afflicted him,
that in the end he usurped his Principality, but growing proud with this great
prosperity, would be no longer called Duke of Apulia and Calauria, and Earl of
Sicilia, Innocent the ^ warreth upon Ruggieri.
but entitled himself King of Italy; the which thing Honorius seemed to
dissemble; but Innocentio the second which succeeded him, could not by any
means endure, being moved with rage, without measuring otherwise his strength,
Duke Ruggieri besieged in the Castle Galluccio.

Ruggieri delivered from the siege.


raised a sudden tumultuous Army, and with all expedition and violence came
against Ruggieri, which knew nothing of that preparation, that he chaced him
from St. Germano, and through all the Country of Abadia, and besieged him being
within the Castle Galluccio, above Sessa, where flying, was forced to retire
back again. The other William, son of the besieged Ruggieri understanding
thereof, with great celerity came to relieve his father, and did a very
admirable exploit, in breaking their forces, and taking the Pope prisoner, with
many Cardinals, The City of Naples given by the Bishop to Duke Ruggieri.
and at the same instant delivering his father from the siege. Ruggieri through
his great courtesy and reverence used to the Pope, obtained without the Title
of King, particularly the City of Naples, which till this time had been under
the Greek Empire. Ruggieri perceiving the good will of the Neopolitans, created
150 Knights. Innocentio being set at liberty, returned to Rome, and found that
in his absence had been created one Pietro an Ante-Pope, the son of Pier Leone,
a very powerful and factious Citizen of Rome, which was called Anacleto the
second. Ruggieri created King of both the Ci^ilies An* 1130.
Innocentio having no doubt thereof, with the help of the Pisani, past into
France. Ruggieri went to Benevento, and visited Anacleto, and obtained the
Title and Crown of King of both the Sicilies, which was done the 25 of July
1130. and was the first that in this part of Italy had the Title of King,
Sig^nius in his ^ book of Histories An 1130.
and was made a Liegeman and Vassal of the Church,: the which Instalment (as
Sigonius notes) was the same that the aforesaid Pope Innocentio afterward
confirmed in the year 1139. declaring him lawful King of Sicilia, Duke of
Apulia and Calauria, and Prince of Capoa*

The death of King Ruggieri, anno 1153.
Ruggieri having performed many noble enterprises, died in the year 1153. being
59 years of age, his body was laid in a Costly and stately Tomb of Porphery in
the Church of Monreale of Palermo, where these Verses are engraven, Si fastus
homines, si regna, and slemmata ludunt,
Non legum, and recti sit norma Rogerius is it is
Est lusus rebus, comite a quo nomine natus
Virtutem his splendour situs diademaque Regum,
Vixit ann. LIX. Regnavit an. XXIII.
Menses V. obiit an. MCLII.


Ruggieri had four wives, the first was Airolda, the daughter of the Earl of
Caserta; the second was called Albira, daughter of the King of Spain; the third
named Sibilla, sister of the Duke of Burgony; the fourth was called Bettrice,
which was the daughter of the Earl of Resta; of his two first wives he had not
any children, Sibilla brought him Ruggieri, which was Duke of Apulia and
Amalso, and Guglielmo which was Prince of Capoa and Salerno, which died both in
their fathers time. Of Bettrice his last wife he had William, Prince of
Taranto, which was afterward King of Naples, and a daughter named Constance,
who by the advice and Council of the Abbot Giachimo Calaures, the King put her
into a religious house of Nuns. He had a base son called Tancredi, who was Earl
of Leccie, and King of Naples.

William the wicked, the 2. King of Naples.
WILLIAM, called by his surname the wicked William, the first begotten son of
Ruggiero his father, An. 1153. William excommunicated by Adrian the 4.
succeeded in the Kingdom, and in the beginning of his State usurped by force
of arms Ceperano with the Suburbs of Benevento, and Banco, with other places
belonging to the Church; for which cause he was excommunicated by Pope Adrian
the fourth, and deprived also of the title of King, and discharged his subjects
of their obedience toward him. William conceiving a most violent hatred
against the Pope, raised a mighty Army with a purpose to go for Rome, but being
for his perverse nature hated of his Barons, many of them rebeld against him,
and called the Pope into the Kingdom. The Pope is called into the Kingdom.
The which was the occasion that William changed his purpose, and converted his
fury against the Prince of Capoa which had been the Author of that conspiracy.
The Pope which saw all the Kingdom in Arms, with admirable celerity made a
mighty Army pass to Benevento, and without any resistance took a great part of
the Kingdom, by the which victory the Barons which called him, did swear unto
him loyalty and homage. William understanding that Emanuel, Emperor of
Constantinople, and Frederick Barbarossa, the first Emperor of Germany, made
expedition to aid the Pope, therefore he thought it his best way to be
reconciled with the Church, sent an honorable Embassage to the Pope, wherein
much humbling himself, desired to be restored to the grace and favor of the
Church, and possession of his Kingdom, and promised to restore whatsoever he
wrongfully detained from the Church. William makes peace with the Pope
The Pope willing to extinguish the War, went to Benevento, and expected
William, who prostrate at the Popes feet, desired absolution, and took an Oath
of Loyalty and homage, and first restoring whatsoever he had taken from the
Church, was invested in the Kingdom the year 1156. William afterward lived
always in peace with the Church, but was ever much troubled and molested by
his Barons, and hated of the people, and surnamed for his evil conditions,
William the wicked. He departed this life the year of our Lord 1167. and lived
47 years, and in the principal Church of Palermo, near his fathers Tomb was
buried. He had by his wife Margarite the daughter of Garzia, the second King of
Navar, Ruggieri, Anno 1156.
which was proclaimed King by the Sicilians. William Prince of Taranto, which
succeeding in the Kingdom, was called William the good, and Henry Prince of
Capoa.

William the good, 3. King of Naples.
WILLIAM Prince of Taranto, called the good, as differing from his father, was
after his death Crowned King at eleven years of age, Anno 1167.
and presently pardoned all those which had been Rebels to his father, and took
away all the grievances imposed by him upon the people; defended always the
affairs of the Roman Church, against whosoever sought to molest it; and
especially in the time when the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa strongly besieged
Pope Alexander the 3: within Anagni. Whereupon Alexander ignorant of the coming
of William, not only with great courage and stoutness maintained the Pontifical
dignity, but many times foiled the Imperial Army. But being afterward persuaded
by Philip King of France to retire with his honor from the said siege, had
from King William a Gally, which for that purpose he had secretly sent, wherein
he being embarked with certain of his Cardinals, went to Clarimont in France,
for his better security, where he excommunicated and deprived the said
Frederick of the Empire, and aggravated likewise the censure against Octavian
the false usurping Pope.

William strongly armed himself both for Sea and Land against Andronico the
Emperor of Constantinople, for the injuries done in Italy. He afterward
defended the City of Tire, and with his Navy foiled the Forces of Salandine,
and afterward cleared the Sea from Rovers:

And this good King having honorably ended all his actions, after he had
reigned 21 years, and lived 32. died in Palermo in the year of our Lord 1188.
his body with great honor, Ione his wife, sister to King Richard of England,
caused to be laid in a Tomb of Marble, curiously wrought and embossed, upon
which caused this inscription to be engraven. Hic situs est bonus Rex
Gulielmus: The said Sepulcher being ruinated and spoiled through the injury of
time, has newly been very magnificently repaired and renewed with fair Marble
by the Archbishop of Torres, where this new Epitaph is to be read.

In^lita quas verbis, sapientum turba recenset
Virtutes solus factis, hic praestitit omnes,
Egregius quare bonus est cognomine dictus
Vtque bonus magno long est praestantior illo.
Major Alexandro sic Rex Guillielmus habetur,
Artibus ipse etenim pacis, bellique fuisti,
Clarus, ut semper justa, ac pia bella gerebas,
Sic quoque laeta tibi semper victoria parata est:
Et nunc ne vilis, jaceas Rex optime, praesul,
Te decurat tumulo hoc Ludovicus Torrius
Hoc ipso in templo quod tu Guillelme dicasti.
Tancred the 4. King of Naples.
TANCRED Earl of Leccie, the natural son of King Ruggieri, Anno 1138.
and Uncle to the good William, was by the death of his Nephew, which had not
any child, created King of both the Sicilies in the year 1188: Pope Celestine
the third being desirous to bring the Kingdom under the jurisdiction of the
Church, Henry the 6. Emperor, by some called the 5. Constance a nun, given for
wise to the Emperor, Henry the 6. The coronation of the Emperor Henry, and
Constance, an. 11^1. ^^ples besieged.

The death of Ruggieri, the son of King Tancred.


as feuditory of the Apostolic Sea, invested in the year 1191. Henry the sixth
Emperor, the son of Frederick Barbarossa, with these conditions, That he should
recover at his own charge the Kingdom of the two Sicilies, with acknowledging
the Church, and to pay the accustomed Tribute; and to the end it might seem
more colorable, and be the better done, he gave under a pretense of
Inheritance, as a dowry for his wife Constance, the lawful and natural
daughter of the aforesaid Ruggieri, whom secretly he caused to be brought from
the Archbishop of Palermo, from the Monastery of St. Mary, in the City
aforesaid, where she was Abesse, being now 52 years of age, very unfit for the
procreation of children, dispensing with her, although she had been a professed
Nun, and Crowned them in Rome, of both the Sicilies in the year 1191.

The first thing then which Henry did, he went to besiege Naples; but in the
beginning of the third month, the Plague growing very hot, he returned into
Germany without any more ado. The Emperors Army being departed Italy, Tancred
having recovered his Kingdom at the same time, among these affairs, his son
Ruggieri died, which was also Crowned and proclaimed King, and had married
Irene, King Tancred died in the year 1194.
the daughter of the Emperor Isacio; and within a little while after him,
Tancred his father, conceiving so passionately the death of his son, growing
grievously sick, died. His body was buried in the principal Church of Palermo,
and in the same Tomb they laid his son Ruggieri. Tancred departed this life in
the end of the month of December, the year of our Lord 1194. having reigned
little more then eight years. He left behind him three daughters, and one son
called William, The wife and children of Tancred.
whom Sibilla his mother caused instantly to be crowned King of Sicilia.

The Emperor Henry understanding of the death of Tancred, pretending that the
Kingdom appertained to him, The Emperor Henry enters the Kingdom, and takes
it.
as before is recited, returned from Germany in the year 1195. and with a
mighty Army entered the Kingdom of Naples, which he finding full of civil
discord, easily obtained without the loss of much blood, and took prisoner
Magarito, King of Albania, which was come thither in the aid of Tancred. He had
afterward Sibilla in his hands, the late wife of Tancred, The wife and children
of Tancred made prisoners.
together with his son William, and three daughters, that is to say Alteria,
Constanza, and Modonia, and sent them all prisoners into Germany, and afterward
caused William to be gelded, to the end he should be unable to beget children,
and afterward blinded him, and then released the said daughters. Alteria was
married to the Earl Gualtiero of Brenna, son of the Earl Girardo of Brenna, and
brother of John of Brenna, which was afterward King of Jerusalem. Modonia was
married with John Sforza, Frangipane, a Roman Lord, which was Earl of
Tricarico. Constanza was the wife of Pietro Ziano, Earl of Arba, and Duke of
Venice, who being old, with the consent of his said wife, became a Munk of the
Order of St. Benedict, which was in the year 1229.

Thus ended the ancient and noble masculin race of the Norman Guiscards, in the
Kingdom of Naples and Sicilia, which from the time of William Ferabach
continued 188 years, and governed the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilia, with much
honor and renown.

SVEVI.
Henry the Suevian, sixth Emperor, and fifth King of Naples.
HENRY the Emperor having extinguished the male-issue and progeny of the
Normans, Anno 1195.
and remained absolute Lord of both the Sicilies, caused Frederick his son to
be Crowned by the Electors of the Empire, King of Germany. Afterward purposing
better to establish the affairs of the Kingdom of Naples, sent thither a
Lieutenant one of his Barons called Marqueredo d' Amenueder, whom within a few
months following he created Duke of Ravenna, and Romagna, and Marquess of
Ancona; and at the same tine gave to Philip Duke of Suevia his brother, the
Dukedom of Toscane, with the Lands of the Countess Mattilda. So Henry being
careful to range his Army to invade England, for certain hatreds conceived
against Richard the first King of that Land, altered his mind in Messina,
through his delight in hunting, being in the time of Harvest, whereupon the
Fever growing grievously upon him, ended his life the 8 of May, in the year
1197 having ruled the Empire 9 years, Henry the Emperor (...) in the year 1197.
and governed in peaceable possession the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilia four
years and one month. His body with the stately pomp of solemn obsequies, was
buried in the Church of Monreale in Palermo, in whose sumptuous Tumb of
Porphyrie is engraven this Epitaph.

Imperio adjecit Siculos Henricus utrosque,
Sextus Suevorum candida progenies.
Qui monacham sacris uxoris duxit ab aris,
Pontificis scriptis hic tumulatus inest
Imperavit an. 9 men. 1. obiit Messanae
Anno 1197.
Frederick 2. Emperor, and 6. King of Naples.
FREDERICK the second Emperor, the son of the aforesaid Henry, succeeded in the
Kingdom of Naples and Sicilia, and because he was a child, An. 1197. The
coronation of Frederick the 2 Emperor, an. 1198.
and but three years of age, Constanza his mother, caused him to be Crowned
King of both the Sicilies, and with him, in his name began to govern the
Kingdom, and had the enstalment of the Kingdom from Pope Innocent the third, in
the year 1198. Frederick being of perfect age, married Iola, the only daughter
of John Count of Brenna, and of Mary the daughter of King Conrado of
Montferrato, and for her dowry among other things, had the title and the right
of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and hereupon Frederick, and all the rest which
succeeded in the Kingdom of Naples, were called Kings of Jerusalem. Why the
Kings of Naples are entitled Kings of Jerusalem, Anno 1220.
In the year 1220. two years after his Coronation of the Empire, Frederick
being in grace and favor with the Pope Honorius the third, and with the
Church, made and published in Rome that Law which begins, Ad decus seu nos
Fredericus, the which Law is registered in the book of the feuds, under the
Title De statutis, and consuetudinibus contra libertatem Ecclesiarum, the which
Law the said Pope confirmed and approved. A Law made by Frederick.
Frederick also made at the same time the constitutions of the Kingdom, which
afterward the learned Doctor Afflitto expounded. Frederick having ordered his
affairs in Germany, went in the time of Gregory the 9 into Soria, Frederick the
Emperor crowned King of Jerusalem, An. 1229.
and after much wars, made peace with Salandine for 10 years, and for that
cause had Jerusalem, and all the Kingdom thereof, except a few certain Castles,
whereupon on Easterday in the year 1229. he took the Crown of that Kingdom in
the City of Jerusalem. Afterward there grew between him and Pope Honorius great
discord, because he took upon him to bestow the Bishoprics in Sicilia, and
Frederick pretending he might lawfully do it, and dispose at his own pleasure
by reason of a Bull, Discord between the Pope and the Emperor Frederick.
which by Pope Urban the second was granted to Ruggieri the Norman, concerning
the Monarchy of the said Isle, the Pope misliking the presumption and
ostentation of Frederick, excommunicated him, and deprived him of the Empire
and the Kingdom, the which censure Pope Innocent the fourth confirmed in the
year 1245. Frederick lived five years after in continual trouble and vexation,
and at length having ruled the Empire 33 years, and the Kingdom of Naples and
Sicilia 51. and that of Jerusalem 28. died of an infirmity that grew in his
throat, the 13 of December, in the year 1250. in the Castle of F^orentino in
Apulia, having lived 54 years. The death of the Emperor Frederick.
Manfred his base son caused his body to be carried with great pomp and honor
into Sicilia, to the stately Church of Monreale in Palermo, and there buried
him in a sumptuous Tomb of Porphiry, whereupon these Verses were engraven. Qui
mare, qui terras, populos, and regna subegit,
Caesareum fregit subito mors improba nomen,
Sic jacet, ut cernis Fredericus in orb secundus,
Nunc lapis hic totus, cui mundus parvit arcet.
Vixit an. 54. Imperavit an. 33.
Regni Jerusalem an. 28.
Regnorum utriusque Siciliae 5 ^.
Oblit an. Domini 1250.
He left of six wives which he had, many children; of the first, which was
Constance of Aragon, The wife and children of the Emperor Frederick.
the sister (or as others write) the daughter of Don Ferdinando King of
Castile, he had Conrado, which died young. Henry and Giordiano; Henry was King
of the Romans, who in the year 1236. he put to death because he favored the
Popes faction. Of Iola his second wife, the daughter of John of Brenna King of
Jerusalem, he had Conrado, which was Emperor of Germany, and afterward King of
Naples. Of Agnese his third wife, the daughter of Otho Duke of Moravia, he had
not any children. Of Ruthina the fourth wife, the daughter of Otho Earl of
Vvolfferzhausen, he had Frederick, which died in his infancy. Of Elizabeth his
fifth wife, the daughter of Lewis Duke of Bavaria, he had Agnese, which was
married to Conrado the Landtgrave of Turingia. Of Matilda his last wife,
daughter of John of England, he had Henry, which was King of Sicilia, and
Constance, who was married to Lewis the Landtgrave of Nescia; Frederick had
also by Blanca Anglana of Aquosana his concubine, these children, Manfred
Prince of Taranto, and usurper of Naples, Enzo King of Sardinia, Anfisio, of
whom he made small account, and Frederick Prince of Antiochia. Of daughters he
had Ann, which was married very young to John Dispote of Romania. The natural
children of the Emperor Frederick.
Of Henry, and of Margarite the daughter of Lupoldo Duke of Austria, was born
Frederick, which was Duke of Austria, and Henry. Of Conrado and of Elizabeth
the daughter of Otho Duke of Bavaria, came Coradine, which coming to the
conquest of the Kingdom, was taken by Charles of Angio King of Naples, and
beheaded. Of Manfred his natural son, which married Helena the daughter of
Michel Dispote of Romania, came Henry, Godfrey, Aufisio, and Elena.

Conrado the 4. Emperor, and 7. King of Naples.
CONRADO the son of Frederick understanding the death of his father, Anno 1251.
came with a great Army into the Kingdom, and was received with great joy and
honor by Manfred, in Barletta of Apuglia; and being informed that Naples,
Capoa Aquino, and the whole Abbey of St. Germano, were become Rebels through the
instigation of the Earl of Caserta, and dinoted to the Church, conceived
thereat so great indignation and ire, that with his Army he wasted and overrun
the Country, and made Tomaso Earl of Cerra to come and submit himself to his
mercy, and had by agre^ment St. Germano, and all the State of the Earl of
Caserta. He afterward besieged Capoa, and having spoiled and destroyed all the
Country, took the City, and threw the Walls thereof to the ground: he did the
like to Aquino, the which he sacked and burned. Capoa, Naples, and Aquino taken
by the Emperor Conrado.
Afterward he besieged Naples both by Sea and Land, and after eight months had
it by agreement; but they not observing their Covenants, he caused afterward
the Walls to be ruinated, and the Fortresses of the City, and many Noble houses
of Gentlemen and Citizens he banished. Conrado having Naples, at the same
instant had the rest of the Kingdom. He now remaining in peaceable state, and
given to his pleasures, being inhumane and of a cruel nature, caused Henry his
Nephew to be slain upon the highway, the son of Henry, Henry slain.
King of the Romans, which was come from Sicilia to visit him. But that revenge
was not long delayed, for Manfred his natural brother, which endeavored by all
means to become King, with a poisoned potion upon a light occasion killed him,
which was in the year 1254. and the 3 of June, having held the Empire 3 years
and 5 months, the death of Conrado. Anno 1254.
and the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilia 2 years and 19 days. His body was
buried in the principal Church of Naples, under a little narrow Marble stone.
Conrado before his death made his Will, and ordained his youngest son his heir
general, born of Elizabeth the daughter of Otho Duke of Bavaria.

Manfred the 8 King of Naples:
MANFRED Prince of Taranto, An. 1263. Anno 1295. For the better understanding
of the Reader, the said Bettrice of Aragon was the daughter of Don Raimondo
Berenguer of Aragon, Earl of Province, and of Bettrice the daughter of Thoma^
Earl of Savoy, which was married with Charles of Angio.245. the which Bet^trice
as the eldest of all the other sisters, inherited the said Count of Province.
Berenguer is as much as to say Berengarius in Latin, and was a name of honor
among the Spaniards for the many victories which the most valiant Berenguer
obtained.
the natural son of the Emperor Frederick the second, having usurped the
Kingdom, was by Pope Alexander the fourth excommunicated. The said Pope died
within a while after, and Pope Urban the fourth, a Frenchman, was created in
his place, who fearing the threatenings of Manfred, called unto the conquest of
the Kingdom Charles of Angio, Earl of Province, brother of St. Lewis the 9 King
of France, to whom he gave the oath of both the Sicilies, with the right and
title of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and at his own charge should maintain the
War, and conquer it. Charles being animated by his brother and others of the
Nobility, with a valorus courage undertook this famous enterprise. In the mean
time Urban died, leaving the Papacy to Clement the 4. in whose Popedom, Charles
with a most glorious Army came to Rome in the year 1265. and was then with
Beatrice Berenguer of Aragon his wife, in the Church of S. John Lateran, by
Pope Clement again invested, with solemn ceremony, and Crowned with an Imperial
Crown, King of both the Sicilies, and of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and made
exempt from the Empire, with Covenant that neither he nor his successors that
should be chosen Emperors, should by any means accept thereof, the which was
done with solemn oath, and so Charles was made a Liegeman and Feudary of the
Church, and promised to pay for tribute a yearly Rent of 40 thousand mark^ to
the Bishops of Rome. Charles toward the end of February in the year 1265. came
into the Kingdom, and incountred with Manfred, and after diverse fortunes, both
on the one and the other side, Charles remained conqueror, and Manfred was
overcome. Manfred reigned 10 years 4 months, and 16 days.

ANGIOINI.
Charles of Angio, the 9 King of Naples.
CHARLES remaining Conqueror, was received by the Neopolitans with royal pomp,
and proclaimed King, and having ordered the affairs of both the Kingdoms, was
made by Clement the 4. Deputy of the Empire of Italy. Understanding afterward
that Corradine the Suevian, Anno 1265.
the son of the Emperor Conrado, sometime King of Naples, was come with a
mighty Army to recover the right of inheritance of his Kingdoms, made great
preparation of War. Corradine enters the Kingdom, and after diverse and sundry
skirmishes, at length Corradine was overcome, and flying disguised, was taken
in Asturi by John Francipane Lord of that place, which sent him to Charles, who
after he had kept him more then a year in prison, caused him to be beheaded in
the midst of the Marketplace of Naples, which was in the month of October
1269. and so Charles with little labor recovered all the Kingdom. He made
afterward great Wars with the Saracins, and especially with Arageno King of
Tunis, because that barbarous King refused to pay the Tribute, which was
accustomed to be paid to the Kings of Naples, Charles did in such wise afflict
him, that he enforced him not only to pay the charges of that War, but also
doubled the Tribute. In the year following, 1276. Vgone Lusignano the 11 of
this name, King of Cypress, and Mary the daughter of Melisenda, and of Raimond
Rupini, Prince of Antiochia, contending about the inheritance of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem. Mary being at variance with Vgone, came to Rome, and caused the said
King Vgone to be convented before the Pope; the Pope by his decree commanded
that the examination and decision of the cause should be determined by the
Barons of the Holy Land, and the Master of the Hospital and the Temple, who
were accustomed to have a voice in Council in the election of the Kings of
Jerusalem. The which the Princess Mary considering, being a woman very aged*
faint, and wearied with travel, and the dangers of so long a journey, being
advised by her friends* and by Pietro Manso knight of the Temple his
Ambassador, compounded with King Charles, Mary resigneth to King Charles the
Kingdom of Jerusalem.
and receiving of him a great sum of money, resigned all her right and Title
which she had unto the said Kingdom. Whereupon Charles afterward by means of the
Pope, obtained a favorable sentence, and was declared lawful and absolute
King of that Kingdom, as well by the ancient right of F^ederick, as also by
that of Mary.

Charles afterward for the more security of things, See the Register of King
Charles 1. of the year 1268 ^^d. 6. li^era A. ^ol. 55.
sent the Earl Ruggiero Sanseverino Governor into Soria, who in the name of
Charles, received the faith and oaths of homage of the Knights and Barons which
were in the kingdom. By these aforesaid reasons, all the posterity of the said
Charles, and also all the other Kings of Naples, as heirs, are always entitled
Kings of Jerusalem. Charles reigned 19 years, 2 months, and 26 days.

Charles the second, 10 King of Naples.
Charles the second, son of Charles of Angio, reigned 25 years and 17 days.
Charles was also King of Hungary by the right of Mary his wife, Anno 1285.
the daughter of Stephen, the 5. of the name, the King of that kingdom, who
being slain by the Cumani, Ladislao the fourth son of the aforesaid Stephen
died without any heir. Whereupon Charles, as husband of Mary, was crowned King
of that kingdom, together with Charles Mart^l his son.

Robert 11. King of Naples.
RObert the third begotten son of Charles the second, reigned 33 years, Anno
1309.
four months, and 24 days. This Robert was a wise and prudent King, he made
honorable wars with Henry the seventh Emperor, with Frederick King of Sicilia,
and in Tuscane in behalf of the Florentines, where in the famous overthrow of
Montecatino, between the Guelfi and Gibellini, he lost Philip Prince of
Taranto, and Pietro Earl of Graunia his brothers. He sent his son Charles,
surnamed Without land, against Frederick King of Sicilia, and went against
Castruccio Castricani the head of the Gibellini in the time that the dominion
of Fiorenza was given to Charles Without land. Robert was a religious King, and
a lover of the learned, whereof two things do sufficiently witness; the
mavelous stately Church, and other things which he builded in Naples, and the
great familiarity with the two Tuscane lights of learning, Petrarke and Boccace
had with him. Robert died the 20 of January, 1343.

Joan 1.12 Queen of Naples.
JOan 1. of this name, Niece to Robert, and daughter of Charles Without land,
Anno 1343.
called also Famous for his prowess and valor, succeeding in the kingdom, was
married with Andreasso of Hungary, her Cousin germain once removed, to whom she
gave herself and kingdom in Dowry. But afterward she being not able to endure
the insolency of her husband, oftentimes falling into discord, caused him
unawares to be hanged by the neck in a Gallery, in the year 1346. The which
being done, was married again to Lewis the son of Philip Prince of Taranto, the
brother of King Robert. After whose death was married anew with Giac^mo of
Aragon, the Infant of Majorica, who living also but a small time, Joan in the
year 1376. was married once again, and took for her husband Otho of Este, Duke
of Brunswich in Saxony. She afterward favoring the part of Clement Antipope,
was by the censure of Urban the sixth deprived of her kingdom, and Charles of
Durazzo invested therein, and so through fear she adopted for her son Lewis
Duke of Angio, the second begotten son of John King of France. Charles of
Durazzo being come with a most puissant Army into the kingdom, had Ione in his
power, and caused her to be hanged. Ione reigned 39. years 4. months and 12.
days.

DVRAZZO.
Charles the 3. of Durazzo the 13 King of Naples.
Charles of Durazzo, the third of this name, King of Naples, Anno 1^81.
remained absolute possessor of the kingdom; he had great wars to preserve and
defend it, and especially with Lewis of Angio: And being afterward called into
Hungary to take the possession of that kingdom, went thither, and was solemnly
crowned in Alba Reale; but afterward by the means of the old Queen Elizabeth,
was killed in a Parliament, which was in the year 1386. Through the right that
Charles had in the aforesaid kingdom, all his successors, and the other Kings
which succeeded in the kingdom of Naples, were called kings of Hungary. Charles
reigned four years, three months, and nine days.

Ladislao the fourteenth King of Naples.
LAdislao after the death of his father had great troubles by Lewis of Angio.
Anno 1386.
In the year 1403. being requested by the Barons of Hungary to take the Crown
of that kingdom, as belonging unto him by lawful inheritance, went thither;
and coming to Zara, was received with great joy of all, and the fifth of August
by the Bishop of Strigonia (according to the accustomed order) was crowned King
of Hungaria, Dalmatia, Croatia, Servia, Galitia, Lodomeria, Comaria, and
Bulgaria. He returned into Italy, and after he had settled the affairs of the
kingdom, being desirous to enlarge his Dominion, dominiered even to Rome,
wherein he entered in triumphant manner, being called with the cries and clamors
of the Soldiers, Emperor of Rome, which was the 25 of April in the year 1408.
And having in the end disquieted Italy, and himself, died the sixth day of
August in the year 1484. without leaving any child, having reigned eight and
twenty years, eight months and thirteen days.

Ione 2, 15 Queen of Naples.
JOne the second of this name, after the death of Ladislao her brother,
succeeded in the Kingdom. Anno 1414*
But growing afterward into discord with Pope Martin the 5. was deprived of her
Kingdom; and Lewis the 3. of Angio, Duke of Lorain and Bar, the son of the
second Lewis, was proclaimed King. The which thing was the only foundation and
ground of all the mischiefs which for a long time afterward followed to the
miserable and unhappy kingdom. This Alfonsus was the ^. ^f that name K. of
Aragon and (...) in the history of the Tu^ks in the 5. Book w^ites that that K.
^lfonsus of Aragon was of the House of Med^na.
For the Queen was constrained, being not able to defend herself against the
power of Lewis and the Pope, to adopt for her son Alfonsus King of Arragon and
Sicilia, the son of King Ferdinando. Alfonsus being called by the Queen,
abandoned the assault and siege of the Castle of Bonifatio, the principal Fort,
and of greatest importance in the Isle of Corsica, and provided 28 Galleys well
furnished, and other Barks, and led with him many valiant Captains, and came to
Naples in the year 1621. Now began the Queens affairs to appear, which before
was trod under foot, and to change countenance; and what through counsel,
courage, and the aid of King Alfonsus, the Queen was at liberty, and her
affairs increased with much reputation. But the year following, 1423* the Queen
growing contentious with him, under color of ingratitude, sought to annihilate
and disanull the said adoption, Anno 1423.
and adopted for her son, calling to her assistance the same Lewis, through
whose war she was constrained to make the first adoption, and chased away
Alfonsus by force of arms from all the kingdom, and so lived peaceably all the
rest of her life. The year 1434. Lewis dyed; and before a year was expired from
the time of his death, Anno 1434.
the Queen received continual molestations and prejudice by John Antonio Orsino
Prince of Taranto, and by Giacomo Caldora, and other followers of the
Aragonesi, through the vicinity and neighborhood of Sicilia, where Alfonsus
maintained a great Army. So partly being oppressed with a fever, and troubled
with a discontented mind, in the year 1434. the second of February, the life,
the line of Charles. 1 of Angio, and the house of Durazzo of the French blood,
which only rested in her, ended all regality, having reigned 20 years, 5
months, and 26 days. And because she had no child, she made her heir (as was
reported) Renato of Angio Duke of Lorain, and Earl of Provence, the brother of
Lewis her adopted son.

After the death of the Queen, the Neapolitans created sixteen men of the
principal in the City, which they called Governors, because they should have
care and charge of the City, and of the Kingdom. These sixteen Governors, in
all the business and affairs they dispatched, writ thus the Title of their
government, Concilium and Gubernatores Reipublicae regni Siciliae ordinati per
clarae memoriae Serenissimam and illustrissimam Dominam nostram Dominam Ioannam
secundam, Dei gratia Hungariae, Jerusalem, and Siciliae reginam, etc.

Within a little time after rose in the City diverse contentions, because Pope
Eugenio the fourth understanding the death of Ione, sent a Legate to Naples the
Bishop of Recanati, and Patriarch of Alexandria, giving the Governors to
understand, and the Council of the City, that the kingdom of Naples was
fallen to the Church as his Feud or Fee, willing them not to bestow the
dominion upon any but him whom he shall nominate and invest King. The Governors
answered, that they would have no other King but Renato Duke of Lorain, whom
their Queen had left as her successor. By this means the kingdom understood the
admonition of the Pope, and the answer of the Governors, wherewith many of the
Princes and Barons of the kingdom much misliked the succession of Renato; and
being published that that Will and Testament was falsely forged by the
Neapolitans; one part of the Barons, and people which were of the faction of
the Aragonesi, called King Alfonsus of Aragon: Whereupon through contrary
consents and inclinations rose the sactions of the Angioini and Aragonesi. The
Governors being likewise at discord among themselves, the whole kingdom was
divided, and put into great trouble and molestation. In the mean time the
greatest part of them sent Ambassadors to Marseli^ for Renato. That part of the
Duke of S^ssa, the Earl Venafro, and many other Barons, called Alfonsus, who
being full of military courage, and inflamed with an incredible desire of
glory, having his Army ready in the year 1436. came to Gaeta, and was received
by the Duke of Sessa, and besieging the said City, came with his Navy to
battle with Bai^gio Captain General of the Fleet of the Genowayes, and
Alfonsus valiantly fighting, was at length overcome, and taken prisoner, and
carried to the custody of Philip Duke of Miltane, who afterward knowing the
singular virtue of Alfonsus, King Alfonsus taken prisoner
being desirous to hold, him his companion and friend, made a league with him,
and suffered him to go at his own pleasure, together with the other Lords which
were also prisoners.

ANGIOINI.
Renato of Angio the 16 King of Naples.
REnato of Angio being at that time prisoner to John Duke of Burgonie, Anno
1381.
the Neapolitane Ambassadors deprived of all hope to have Renato, caused
Isabellae his wife to come in his stead, a very wise and worthy Lady, who made
great wars with Alfonsus. Afterward Renato being set at liberty by the Duke of
Burgonie, in the month of May 1438. came to Naples, whose coming gave great
hope and expectation to the Angioini, and was royally received, and presently
prepared all necessary things for the wars, and retained many principal and,
excellent Captains, through whose valor he obtained all Calauria, and the
Dukedom of Mel^i, in Abruzzo he had at his command many places. In the month
of June, 1438. he had from Pope Eugenius the instalment of the kingdom of
Naples and Jerusalem. Many actions and battles fell out between Renato and
Alfonsus; but at length the party of the Aragonesi prevailed. Alfonsus in
month of June 1442. by the way of an Aquaduct, which brought water into the
City, took Naples, and the third day with the will of Renato he had the Castle
of Capoa and other forts. Renato growing into despair not to be able to recover
the kingdom, with Isabella his wife, and his children, returned into Provence,
where he past all the rest of his life in peace, having held Naples, and part
of the kingdom in an uncertain and troublesome possession four years and ten
days. Being come to the age of 64 years, married Joan della Valle, a noble
French Lady, with whom too excessively satisfying his pleasure, became weak and
feeble, and so died the 19 of Fbruary in the year 1481. and was buried in
Nansi, a plentiful place, and a principapll City of the Dukedom of Lorane, and
upon his Tomb these four verses engraven.

Magnanimum tegit hoc saxum, fortemque Rhenatum,
Mortales heu, qua condition sumus,
Invidia factis hujus fortuna subinde
Ne tanti, and tanto celsus honor foret.
ARAGONES I.
Alfonsus 1. of Aragon, called by his surname, The Magnanimous, 17 King of
Naples.
ALfonsus King of Aragon and Sicilia, after many dangers and infinite travel,
Anno 1442.
entered Naples in triumph upon a golden Chariot; and by the means of Francesco
Orsino President of Rome, made peace with the Pope Eugenio, and obtained a very
large instalment of the Kingdom, for he was also invested in the Kingdom of
Hungary, by the right of Joan his mother: And besides that, obtained from the
said Pope, that faculty and power, that Ferdinando his natural son was
ordained his heir, and to succeed after his death in the instalment and
possession of the Kingdom: the which investing was likewise afterward confirmed
by Pope Nicolas the fifth. Alfonsus was very magnificent in buildings, he
reduced the new Castle in Naples into the form it now appears, truly a very
Royal and stately piece of work. He enlarged Mola, and caused the Fens about
the City to be made dry. He took the Isle of Zerbi, overcame in battle the
King of Tunis and made him tributary, and subdued certain Cities in Barbary; he
oftentimes sent Armies against the Turks, and at the instance of the Pope,
chased away Francesco Sforsa della Marca. He was very studious in learning, and
made great account of learned men, whereof he kept very many in his Court. And
to conclude, he was a Prince of great magnanimity. He reigned sixteen years,
one month, and one and twenty days. He died the 28 of June in the year 1458.
being 64 years of age: He had for his wife, Mary the daughter of Henry the
third King of Castile, surnamed the Weak, by whom he had no Childern. The
Neapolitans buried the body of Alfonsus with a stately Funeral, and laid him
in a Coffin covered all with cloth of gold, the which at this present is to be
seen in the Vestry of St. Dominick in Naples, and at the foot thereof are these
Verses, Inclytus Alfonsus, qui Regibus ortus Iberis
Hic, regnum Ausoniae primus adeptus adest.


Ferdinando 1. of Aragon 18 King of Naples.
FErdinando the first of this name, after the death of his Father, Anno 1458.
succeeded in the Kingdom, and was by the Institution of Pope Pius the second,
anointed and crowned King by Latino Orsino the Cardinal. But very often was
like to lose it through many wars, and espe^ially by John of Angio, the son of
Renato, which had a great Train and Troop of the Barons of the Realm, which
drew unto them a great number of Rebels. In the year 1481 died. (as is
declared) Renato of Angio, who having no male children, made heir of all his
state and inheritance. Charles of Angio Earl of Main his brothers son, who dying
within a while after without children, bequeathed his inheritance to Lewis the
11. King of France, to whom not only descended, as supreme Lord, the Dukedom
of Angio, but also of all Provence. Ferdinando having afterward intelligence,
that Charles the 8. King of France, made preparation with a mighty Army to
recover the Kingdom of Naples, by the right of the Angioini, who by the death
of King Lewis his father was interessed therein, began to make provision of
men; and being very careful in the preparation of the war, growing sick, died
the 25 of January in the year 1494. having reigned 35 years, 5 months, and 25
days.

Alfonsus 2. the 19 King of Naples.
ALfonsus the second of this name, after the death of Ferdinand his Father,
Anno 1494.
obtained the kingdom; and in the beginning of the fourth month was crowned in
the Cathedral Church of Naples by John Borgia Cardinal of Montereale, Legate
of Pope Alexander the sixth, with greater pomp and majesty then was ever used
to any King of Naples, But understanding that Charles the 8. K. of France, gave
order for the pretended war, fearing because he was become odious to the people
of the Kingdom, through his austerity, resigned the Kingdom to Ferdinando his
son Duke of Calauria, a young man much differing from him in nature, which
every one loved, and retired himself into the country of Mazara in Sicilia,
being before time given unto him by Don Ferdinando the Catholic King of
Spain, where he spent the remainder of his life, having reigned one year and
three days.

FRANCES I.
Charles the fourth the twentieth King of Naples.
CHarles de Valois the eighth of this name King of France, and fourth of the
same name King of Naples, Anno 1495.
came in the beginning of January 1495. to Rome with a mighty Army. Pope
Alexander full of incredible fear and anguish, fled into the Castle of St.
Angelo. But the King having no purpose to offend the Pope, met with him, and
concluded friendship, and a perpetual confederacy for the common safety and
defense. Charles was invested conditionally by the Pope of the kingdom of
Naples, ^
and obtained also from the said Pope Zizimo Gemni Ottoman^ the brother of
Bajazeth, Emperor of the Turks. After Charles had re^^^ined a month in Rome,
he past into the kingdom, and although some small resistance was made by
Ferdinando, at length he got the dominion of the whole kingom* Ferdinando after
that the C^stles of Naples were yielded, departed with fourteen Galleys ill
^rmed into Sicilia. Charles after he had pacified the kingdom, demanded of the
Pope the ^ree installment of the Realm of Naples, the which although it were at
Rome granted him, yet it could not be thought sit in respect of the Aragon^si,
whereupon the Pope refused to give it him. Charles afterward being departed to
return into France, many of the Barons rebelled through the severity and cruel
demeanor of the Frenchm^n. Whereupon Ferdinando was recalled, who chased away
the adversaries. Charles reigned ten months and 26 days, he died a sudden death
the ^ight before the 8 of April in the year of our Lord 1497. being returned
from playing at Tennis. He was buried in the Church of St. Denis of Paris in
France, and on his Tomb this Epitaph was engraven.

Hic Octave jaces Fran^orum Carole (...),
Cui victa est forti Brit^nis (...)
Parthenop^ illustrem tribuit capti^a t^^iumphu^,
Claraque Fornovio pug^^^ pera^^a sol^.
Caepit Henricus regno depulsus ajuto
Bellare auspici^s sceptra Britan^^ tuis.
O plures longinqua dies si futa d^^issent
Te nullus toto major, in orb foret.
ARAGONES I.
Ferdinando the second the ^1 King of Naples.
FErdinando the second of this name, a valiant man, Anno 1495.
endued with Princely qualities of liberality and Clemency, who for to
strengthen and corroborate his affairs with a more firm conjunction with
Ferdinando the Catholic King of Spain, took for his wife (with the Popes
dispensation) Joan his Aunt, born of of Ferdinando his Grandsire, and Joan the
sister of the aforesaid King; and at the same time had of Pope Alexander the
sixth, the instalment of the kingdom. And being placed in great glory, fell
sick and died the 8. of October in the 1496. He reigned one year, 8 months and
14 days.

Frederick the 22 King of Naples.
FRederick Prince of Taranto, the son of Ferdinando the first, by the death of
his Nephew succeeded in the kingdom, and in the year 1497. obtained of Pope
Alexander the sixth, the instalment of the kingdom. And being much troubled
with continual war, because Charles the 8. King of France, died without leaving
any children, the kingdom fell to Lewis Duke of Orleans, as the nearest in
blood by the masculine line, and was the twelfth of this name. This Lewis came
upon him with a mighty Army; but Ferdinando the Catholic King being
confederate with Lewis to his own prejudice (for a displeasure conceived
against Frederick) yet conditionally, that Lewis should divide the kingdom with
him. Frederick that was not able to make head or resist the puisance of so
great forces united against him, especially finding his kingdom exhaust, and
ill provided, retired into the Isle Ischia near to Naples with all his Family,
and afterward gave his kingdom wholly into the possession of King Lewis his
enemy, not bequeathing any thing to the Catholic King Ferdinando, reputing
himself to be ill dealt withal by him, that in stead of a friend and defender,
he was come to the contrary to dispossess and deprive him of his kingdom.
Frederick was very courteously received by Lewis, and he assigned unto him the
Dukedom of Angio, and so much revenue as amounted yearly to thirty thousand
Crowns; and the French King obtained in recompencee from King Frederick all the
right and interest which he had in the kingdom. Within a little time following
Frederick fell sick at Torse in France, where his pain increasing upon him,
died the ninth of September in the year 1504. He had to his wife being Prince
of Taranto, the Lady N. della valle Bertania, Anno 1504.
of the worthy Family of Alibret, blood in Gasconie, the kinswoman of the
father of Charles the eighth, King of France, by whom he had one only daughter
called the Lady Carlotta, which was brought up in the French Court, and
afterward succeeded in her mothers inheritance. Of his second wife Isabella the
only daughter of Pirro del Balzo Prince of Altamura, and Duke of Andry, he had
six children, that is to say, three male and three female; the male children
were Don Ferdinando Duke of Calauria, and Prince of Taranto. Don Caesar and Don
Alfonsus, the which two last died in their Fathers time. The women kind, the
first named the Lady Iulia, was married in the year 1533. to Giorgio Paleologo
Duke of Montferrato, and Marquis of Sanluzo, of the noble blood of the
Emperors of Constantinople. The Lady Isabella and the Lady Caterina were never
married. The Queen Isabella after the death of King Frederick, seeing herself
deprived of all humane comfort, because that being discharged of that kingdom
by the King of France, by reason of the Articles of peace concluded between the
Catholic Ferdinando and the said King, returned with her children to Ferrara,
where she was very courteously received by Duke Alfonsus of Este her kinsman,
where she died in the year 1533, her children remaining desolate: and much
persecuted by Fortune, went to Valentia in Spain, where was the Duke Ferdinando
their brother; and no long time following, the one after the other died. And in
the year 1559. the fifth of August, the aforesaid Duke ended his life, without
leaving any issue. And so in him was extinguished the Progeny of the old King
Alfonsus of Aragon.

FRANCES I.
Lewis the 12 King of France and 23 King of Naples.
LEwis the twelfth of this name King of France, divided with the King of Spain,
according to their covenants, the kingdom of Naples, Anno 1501.
and obtained of Pope Alexander the sixth the instalment, according to the
tenor of those conditions which he had made. But in the year 1502. their
Lieutenants growing into difference about the Confines, fell to Arms, and at
last the Frenchmen were driven out of that kingdom, through the valor of that
worthy Captain Consalvo Fernando; and Ferdinando the Catholic King remaining
absolute possessor thereof. King Lewis held the Realm of Naples one year and
ten months; but in France he reigned sixteen years, and died in the beginning
of the year 1514.

ARAGONES I.
Ferdinando the Catholic 24 King of Naples:
FErdinando the Catholic remaining absolute Lord of the kingdom, maintained
it in great peace all the time of his life, Anno 1503*
and obtained of Pope Iulio the second the investing of all the kingdom.
Finally, after many victories achieved in diverse parts, he died in Madrigaleio
a City of Castile, the 22 day of January in the year 1516. having been King of
Naples twelve years and three months. His body was buried in the Royal
Chapel of the City of Granata, and upon his Tomb this Inscription was
engraven Mahometicae-sectae prostratores, and haereticae pravitatis extinctores
Ferdinandus Aragonum, and Helizabetha Castellae, vir, and uxor unanimes
Catholici appellati, marmoreo clauduntur hoc tumulo.

Ione the third, 25 Queen of Naples.
IOne the third of this name, daughter of Ferdinando the Catholic King, being
now the widow of Philip Archduke of Austria, Anno 1516.
succeeded in the kingdom, and having fourteen months governed all her
kingdoms, substituted her heir Charles her eldest son; who had scant
accomplished 16 years of age. Charles remaining at Brussels in Flanders and
being much exhorted by the Emperor Maximilian his Grandsire, reformed in the
year 1516. the order of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, and so reduced them
to the number of 31. And because many through death were void, he elected to
the said Order amongst others, these Lords, Francis 1. King of France, Don
Ferdinando Infant of Spain, Emanuel King of Portugal, Lewis King of Hungary,
Frederick Count Palatine, John Marquis of Brandenburgh, Charles de Lannoi Lord
of Sanzelle. Moreover, Don Lodovico of Vaimonte, great Constable of the kingdom
of Navarre, took in Naples the possession of the kingdom for the said Queen.
Charles so soon as he was invested by the Queen his mother, sailed into Spain,
and was received of all the people with infinite joy; but yet many of the
greatest Nobility, and principal of the kingdom, would not accept him as King,
but only as Prince, for offering wrong to the Queen Ione, since by Testament
of the Catholic King her father it was decreed, that after the death of Ione,
Charles of Austria should succeed: Upon the which succession grew great tumults
and contentions; but in the end things were well qualified, admitting him for
King, together with the Queen his mother, to be done with this condition, That
the affairs of the kingdom should be governed in both their names, the money
stamped, and so all other business whatsoever. And so once again on the 25. of
March, in the year 1517. the said Queen confirmed to Charles the former
endowment. The year ensuing the 13 of April, Charles was proclaimed King
together with his Mother: Anno 1517.
And the 18 of the month of May Prospero Colon^a took in Naples the possession
of the kingdom in the name of Charles, which was done with all solemnity. Charles
then being received to the Administration of Spain, sent also to the
administration of all the other kingdoms. In the year 1519. Charles elected into
the number of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, in place of Gismondo K. of
Polonia lately dead, Anno 1519.
Christerno K. of Denmark, and Frederick of Toledo, Duke of Alva. In the mean
time died the Emperor Maximilian, and the Electors of the Empire assembled
according to their ancient custom, at Francford, a City of low Germany, for
the election of a new Caesar; and by a general consent the 18 of June in the
year 1520. they chose Emperor Charles of Austria King of Spain. Anno 1520.
Ione having reigned (as we have said) absolutely 14 months, and together with
Charles the 5 Emperor her son 38 years, and four months, retired herself to
Tordezilla a City of Spain; where within a little while after she ended her
life the thirteenth of April in the year 1555.

AVSTRIACI.
Charles 5 Emperor, and 26 King of Naples.
Charles the fifth Emperor, after the death of Ione his mother, remained
absolute Lord of all his kingdoms; Anno 1526: Charles 5 marries Isabella of
Portugal.
and being (as is said) elected Emperor, the same year past the Sea from Spain
into Flanders, and from thence into Germany, where he was received in the
month of October in Aquisgraue, a noble City both for the ancient residence
and the famous Tomb of Charles the Great, with a mighty concourse of people was
first crowned. In the month of January 1526. Charles celebrated his marriage in
Hispali with Isabella of Portugal his wife, the sister of King John of
Portugal. Afterward he went into Spain, where being arrived, proceeded very
severely against many who had been authors of sedition; all the other he
pardoned and discharged. And to join with justice and clemency examples of
gratitude and remuneration in the acknowledging of that wherein he was engaged
to Don Ferdinando of Aragon, Duke of Calauraia, (who having refused the Crown
and the kingdom of Spain offered unto him by the States thereof, though he were
a prisoner) set him at liberty, and with great honor called him to the Court,
and married him to the richest Princess then living, even the Widow of the
Catholic King Ferdinando, by which means he much gladded the people, and the
Duke received honor, liberty, and infinite wealth, and was created for his life
time viceroy of Valentia. The Emperor without any charge, or the expense of a
penny, got the friendship of the Duke, the love of the people, and great
security to his State. The year ensuing 1527. on the 21 of May the Emperess
Isabella was delivered of her son Philip in the City of Castilia, Anno 1527.
The birth of Philip King of Spain. Anno 1528.
through whose happy birth was made every where general seasting and triumphs.
In the month of October 1528. the Emperor by the death of Don Carlo de
Lannoi, sent for his Viceroy into Naples Don Hugo Moncada, a man very expert in
Arms, and a valiant Captain, in the which year Monsignor Odetto Fois Lotrecco
went with thirty thousand Footmen and six thousand Horsemen into the kingdom of
Naples, in the name of King Frances, and overcame Melfi, Venosa, and many other
places in Basilicata and Apulia, Monsig. Lotrecco besieges Naples.

This siege was the 29 of April 1528.


and with the success of victory besieged Naples, the which siege continuing
certain months, in the mean time Andrea d'Oria sent the Count Philip d'Oria
his Nephew with eight Galleys to annoy the Gulf of Naples; wherewith Moncada
being much discontented, seeking to remedy the same, he caused to arm six
Galleys and two Foists which were within the Haven, and putting therein the
very flower and principal of the people that were in the City, he in his own
person, with the Marquis of Vasto, Ascanio Colonna great Constable, Cesare
Ferramosca, and many other worthy men, with a resolution to encounter the
enemy, The battle of the Emperors Galleys with the Genoways.
and confidently to overcome, were embarked there. The Count which suddenly
perceived the Imperial Galleys to go forth of the Haven, retired himself
presently to the sea, and encountering together at the Cape of Orso, the
Imperial Forces were overcome, and there dying with many others, Don Vgo, and
were taken prisoners the Marquess Vasto, and Colonna the great Constable, with
other worthy men. The Count obtaining the victory, The victory of the Count
Philip d'Ori^.
presently victoriously went to Genoway to find the Admiral Andrea his Uncle,
who disdaining the dealing of the French King, because he had taken from him
the office of the Admiralty and General of the Sea, and given it to Monsignor
Barbigios; he agreed by the means of Vasto with the Emperor, and brought
Genoway and Savona under his Crown. Andrea d'Oria* leaves the service of the
French King, and the cause why.
Whereupon he went with all expedition into the kingdom in the behalf of the
Emperor, and discharged the French Army which lay at the siege of Naples.
Afterward Charles made peace with the French King, and gave him for wife the
Lady Elinora: and the King forsook Barletta, and that which he held in the
kingdom of Naples, and paid to the Emperor for a fine, one million and two
hundred thousand crowns, Peace made with the French King,
and yielded up unto him all the right and possession that he held in the
Dukedom of Millane and the kingdom of Naples. The Emperor having ended his
peace, went by Sea to Genoway; from thence he past to Bolonia, where in the
month of February 1530. was by Pope Clement the seventh, which was come
thither with his whole Court to that effect, Anno 1530
and was solemnly crowned with the Imperial Crown. Afterward the Emperor
departed from Bolonia, and went into Germany, and what he afterward did there,
is written in Histories. Charles the fifth crowned Emperor.

Anno 1535. The enterprise of Tunis.


In the year 1535. Charles having made a voyage to Tunis, and there subdued
M^leasson the lawful King of the Moors, and made him his Feudary with certain
conditions. went into Sicilia. From whence afterward he departing, came to
Naples the 23 of November in the same year, and entered in, in triumphant
manner; where were made him by the City many triumphant Arks and huge
Colosses, Charles the fifth goes in triumph through Naples. Novem. 23. 1535.
with diverse and learned Inventions. Charles remained with great delight in
feasting and tilting all that Winter in Naples; where understanding that the
French King was entered into Italy with his Army, and not knowing to what end
and purpose, was much moved and displeased with him, went to Rome, and so
proceeded in his journie. But at length the Emperor becoming a mortified man,
and growing into contempt of the world, being unwiliing to sustain any longer
the heavy burden of the Empire, wisely determined to renounce it: And to that
end having caused all the Knights of the order of the Golden Fleece to assemble
at Brussels, and all the States of the Low Countries, the first thing he did
the 25 of October in the year 1555. he made King Philip his son head of the
Knights of the Golden Fleece, The resignation made by Charles 5. of his kingdom
to Philip his son.
and after dinner solemnly resigned unto him all Flanders, with the other
States, and Titles, and right of Burgony, descending unto him from his
predecessors. Not long after the Emperor continuing his determination,
resigned and renounced in like manner in Brussels to the forenamed King Philip,
the kingdom of Spain, Sicilia, Majorica, Minorica, with the new Countries
called America, and the new world, reserving only certain rents and revenues
to sustain himself and his family, reduced to a small number of servants. His
Majesty also giving not only full and absolute power to the King of the Romans
his brother, to govern and rule (as some write) the Empire in his place, The
resignation of the Empire made by the Emperor Charles 5.
but also freely resigned the Title, the Scepter, and Imperial Dignity. So
Caesar voluntarily deprived himself of his Monarchy, a thing truly worthy of
consideration, that from the Emperor Lotharius till this present, never in so
many ages chanced the like, although Amurath the great Turk resigned the Empire
of Constantinople to Mahume^ his son. Anno 1556.
In September 1556 Charles departed from Brussels with a great Fleet toward
Spain, carrying with him Queen Elinor and Queen Mary his sisters, and so
sailing with fair weather and a prosperous wind, they soon arrived in safety.
Charles constantly persevering in his purpose, retired himself to the Monastery
of of St. Iusto, near to the village called Sciarandiglia eight leagues from
the City of Piacenza in the Realm of Castile, where living godly, and with
great devotion, he ended his days the 21 of September in the year 1558, being
of the age of 58 years. having ruled even to the time of his renunciation 37
years, The death of Charles the 5. Anno 1558.
2 months, and 3 days the Empire, and 37 years and 8 months the kingdom of
Naples, which he resigned to his son Philip. He was married (as is before
declared) to Isabella of Portugal, the sister of John King of Portugal, by
whom he had the Catholic King Philip, and two daughters, the one called the
Lady Mary, which with the Popes dispensation was married to Maximilian King of
Bohemia, The wife and children of Charles.
the son of the Emperor Ferdinando his brother. The other called the Lady
Ione, was espoused to John the King of Portugals son. He had children by
another natural means, as Don John, and Margarita, which was first married to
Alexander de Medici Duke of Florence, and afterward to Octavio Fernese Prince
of Parma and Piacenza. Upon the Supulcher of this invincible Emperor, are
engraven these two Epitaphs.

1.
LIquisti exuvias gelido sub marmore, sed non
Quantum eras Caesar marmor, and urna capit.
Pro tumulo ponas orbem, pro tegmine coelum,
Pro facibus stellas, pro Imperio Empireon.
2.
Non aurum, non marmor erunt, non gemma, sed omnis
Carole terra tui corporis urna decens,
Conteget immensum quantum patet undique coelum,
Sol tibi funerea pro face lumine erit,
Proque tua memori fama, pro nomine stabit
Aeternum tempus, quod tua facta notet.
Natura effundat lachrymas, elementa gemiscent.
Persitient tumulum vix satis ista tuum.
Philip of Austria 27 King of Naples.
Anno 1554.
PHilip of Austria, the most puissant Catholic King, which reigns with all
Triumph and Honor, after he was invested in the kingdom, and the Title of the
kingdom of Jerusalem by the Emperor his Father, by reason of the ensuing
marriage between him and Queen Mary of England, he sent in his name to Naples
the Marquess of Pescara, to take the possession of the kingdom.

Afterward in the year 1556. Pope Paul the fourth entering in, invaded Marc
Antonio Colonna of Paliano, and spoiled the rest of his estate, and ministered
occasion of War to the King. Whereupon the Duke of Alva the Kings Lieutenant,
with an Army of twelve thousand Footmen, and fifteen hundred Horsemen, invaded
the Dominion of the Church, and the war ensued, called War of Campania of Rome,
which continued a year.

Afterward peace was concluded between the Pope and the King. In the mean time
Queen Mary the wife of King Philip died, without leaving any children.

The King after many controversies had with Henry the second King of France,
made peace with him in the year 1559. And for a greater confirmation thereof,
and true reconciliation, the Catholic King married Isabella the daughter of
the most Christian King, who died in childbed in the year 1568.

The King fearing the want of issue in the year 1570 married Anna the eldest
daughter of the Emperor Maximilian, Anno 1570.
who died in the year 1580. and left behind her a Son called by the Fathers
name, Philip the second, which lives, and is now King of Spain.

PSALM 19. Domine salvum fac Regem, and exaudi nos in die qua invocaverimus te.


The Titles of Dignity which all the Kings of this Kingdom have used.
1. ROgerius Dei gratia Siciliae, and Italiae Rex, Christianorum adjutor, and
clypeus Rogerii primi Comitis haeres, and silius.

2. Gulielmus Dei gratia Siciliae Rex, and Christianorum defensor.

3. Gulielmus 2. Divina favente clementia Rex Siciliae, Apuliae Dux and
princeps Capuae, religionis Christianae adjutor and defensor, etc.

4. Tancredus D. gratia Siciliae Rex, ac Aletii Comes.

5. Henricus 6. Dei gratia invictissimus Romanorum Imp. semper Augustus ac
Siciliae Rex.

6. Imperator Fredericus 2. Romanorum Caesar semper Augustus Italicus Siculus,
Hierosolymitanus Arelatensis foelix victor, ac triumphator.

7. Conradus 4. Divina favente clementia electus Romanorum Imperator semper
Augustus, ac Siciliae, and Jerusalem rex.

8. Mansredus D. G. Siciliae and Jerusalem rex, ac Tarenti princeps.

9. Carolus Dei gratia rex Jerusalem, Siciliae, Ducatus Apuliae, and
principatus Capuae, almae urbis Senator, princeps Achaiae, Andagaviae,
Provinciae, Forcalquerii, and Corciadoni Comes, ac Romani Imperii in Tuscia per
sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam vicarius generalis.

10. Carolus 2. D. G. rex Jerusalem, Siciliae, Vngariae, Ducatus Apuliae and
principatus Capuae, Provinciae, and Forcalquerii, ac Pedimontis Comes.

11. Robertus D. G. rex Jerusalem, and Siciliae, Ducatus Apuliae, and
principatus Capuae, Provinciae, and Forcalquerii, ac Pedimontis Comes.

12. Ioanna D. G. regina Jerusalem and Siciliae, Ducatus Apuliae, and
principatus Capuae, Provinciae, and forcalquerli, ac Pedimontis Comitissa.

13. Carolus 3. D. G. rex Vngariae, Jerusalem, and Siciliae, Provinciae, and
Forcalquerii, ac Pedimontis Comes.

14. Ladislaus D. G. Vngariae, Jerusalem, Siciliae, Dalmatiae, Croatiae,
Romae, Serviae, Galitiae, Lodomeriae, Comuriae, Bulguriaeque rex, Provinciae,
et Forcalquerii, ac Pedimontis Comes.

15. Ioanna 2. D. G. Vngariae, Jerusalem, Siciliae, Dalmatiae, Croatiae,
Romae, Serviae, Galitiae, Lodomeriae, Comuriae, Bulguriaeque regina,
Provinciae, Forcalquerii, ac Pedimontis Comitissa.

INTERREGNO. Consilium, and Gubernatores Republicae Regni Siciliae ordinatis
per clarae memoriae Serenissimam and Illustrissimam Dominam, nostram Dominam
Joannam secundam, Dei gratia Ungariae, Jerusalem and Siciliae reginam.
16. Renatus D. G. Vngariae, Jerusalem, and Siciliae rex, Andagaviae and Bari,
Lotharingiae Dux, Pontis Marchio, Comitatumque Provinciae, Forcalquerii,
Cevoviam ac Pedimontis Comes.

17. Alfonfus D. G. rex Aragonum, Siciliae citra, and ultra Farum, Valentiae,
Jerusalem, Vngariae, Majoricarum, Sardiniae, Corsicae, Comes Barchionis, Dux
Atenarum and Neopatriae, ac etiam Comes Rossilionis, and Ceritaniae, etc.

18. Ferdinandus Aragon, D. G. rex Siciliae, Jerusalem, Vngariae, Valentiae,
etc.

19. Alfonsus 2. Aragoneus D.G. rex Siciliae, Jerusalem et Hungariae, etc.

20. Carolus 4. D.G. rex Francorum, Neapolitanorum et Jerusalem.

21. Ferdinandus 2. Aragoneus D. G. rex Siciliae, Jerusalem, etc.

22. Fredericus Aragoneus D.G. rex Siciliae, Jerusalem, etc.

23. Ludovicus D.G. Francorum, Neapolitanorum et Jerusalem rex, dux Mediolani.

Ferdinando the Catholic King having divided the kingdom with Lewis King of
France, did entitle himself so long as he so continued, Duke of Apulia and
Calauria. 24. Ferdinandus et Elizabeth Dei gratia rex et regina Castellae,
Aragonum, Siciliae, Granatae, Toloti, Valentiae, Galitiae, Majoricarum,
Hispalis, Sardiniae, Cordubae, Corsicae, Giennis, Algarbii, Gibraltaris, et
Insularum Canariae Comes, et Comitissa Barchinonae, Domini Viscayae, et
Molinae, Duces Calabriae et Apuliae, ac Athenarum, et Neopatriae, etc. After
the said King had chased away the Frenchmen from all the Realm, and made
himself absolute Lord thereof, he used this title,

Ferdinandus D.G. rex Catholicus Castellae. Aragonuum. utriusque Siciliae.
Jerusalem. Granatae. Toleti. Valentiae. Galitiae. Majoricarum. Hispalis.
Sardiniae. Cordubae. Corsicae. Giennis. Algarbii. Gibraltaris. Insularum
Canariae* Comes Barchinonae Dominus Vizcoyae et Molinae. Dux Athenarum et
Neopatriae. Comes Rossilionis et Ceritaniae. Marchio Oristanii et Gotiani.

25. Ioanna 3. D. G. regina Castellae* Aragonum. utriusque Siciliae.
Jerusalem. Granatae. Toleti. Valentiae. Galitiae. Majoricarum. Hispalis.
Sardiniae. Cordubae. Corsicae. Giennis. Algarbii. Gibraltaris. Insularum
Canariae, Comitissa Barchinonae. Domina Vizcayae et Molinae. Ducissa Calabriae.
Athenarum et Neopatriae. Comitissa Rossilionis et Ceritaniae. Marchionissa
Oristanii et Gotiani.

26. Carolus 5. Divina favente elementia Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus
rex Germaniae, et Ioanna ejus matter, et eidem Carolus Dei gratia Reges
Castellae. Legionis. Aragoniae. utriusque Siciliae. Jerusalem. Vngariae.
Dalmatiae. Croatiae. Navarrae. Granatae. Toleti. Vulentiae. Galitiae.
Majoricarum. Hispalis. Sardiniae. Cordubae. Corsicae. Murtiae. Giennis.
Algarbii. Alzezirae. Gibraltaris. Insularum Canariae. Indiaram. et terrae
Firmae. Maris Oceani. etc. Rex. Archidux Austriae. Duc Burgundiae.
Lotharingiae. Brabantiae. Stiriae. Corinthiae. Carniolae. Lymburgiae.
Lucembargiae. Geldriae. Calabriae. Athenarum. Neopatriae. Virtembergae. etc.
Comes Flandriae. Habspurgi. Tirolis. Barchmonae. Archois et Burgundiae. Comes
Palatinus. Hannoniae. Hollandiae. Selandiae. Ferretti. Kiburgi. Namurei.
Rossilionis. Ceritaniae et Zutphaniae, etc. Lantgravius. Alsatiae. Marchio
Burgoniae. Oristani. Gotzani. et sacri Romani Imperii. princeps Sueviae.
Cathalaniae. Asturiae. Dominus Phrisiae. Marchiae Sclavonicae. Portus Naonis.
Biscayae. Molinae. Salinarum. Tripolis et Mechliniae. etc.

The Title which Charles used afterward, when he was absolute King.
Carolus 5. Divina favente clementia Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus, rex
Germaniae. Castellae. Legiones. Aragoniae. utriusque Siciliae. Jerusalem.
Vngariae. Dalmatiae. Croatiae. Navarrae. Granatae. Toleti. Valentiae. Galitiae.
Majoricarum. Hispalis. Sardiniae. Cordubae. Corcicae. Murtiae. Giennis.
Algarbii. Alzezirae. Gibraltaris. Insularum Canariae. Iudiarum et Terrae
Firmae. Maris Oceani. etc. Rex Archidux Austriae. Dux Burgundiae. Lotharingiae.
Brabantiae. Stiriae. Corinthiae. Carniolae. Limburgiae. Lucemburgiae. Geldriae,
Calabriae. Athenarum. Neopatriae. Virtembergae. etc. Comes Flandriae.
Habspurgi. Tirolis. Barchmonae. Archois et Burgundiae. Comes Palatinus.
Hannoniae. Hollandiae. Selandia^. Ferretti. Kiburgi. Namurci. Rossilionis.
Ceritaniae et Zutphaniae. etc. Lantgravius. Alsatiae. Marchio Burgoniae.
Oristani. Gotzani. et sacri Romani Imperii. Princeps Sueviae. Cathalaniae.
Asturiae. Dominus Phrisiae. Marchiae. Sclavonieae, Portus Naonis. Biscayae.
Molinae. Salinarum. Tripolis. et Mechliniae. etc.

27. Philippus D. G. Catholicus defensor fidei, Hispaniarum, utriusque
Siciliae. Jerusalem. Portugalliae. Vngariae. Dalmatiae. Croatiae. Sardiniae.
Corsicae. Majoricarum. Insularum Canariae. Orani. Insularum Indiarum. Terrae.
Firmae. et Maris Oceani. Archidux Austriae. Dux Burgundiae. Mediolani.
Lotharingiae. Brabantiae. Limburgi. Lucemburgi. Geld^iae. Calabriae. Athenarum
et Neopatriae. Marchio sacri Romani Imperii Oristani^ et Gotiani. Comes
Barcinonis. Ruscinonis. Ceretaniae. Flandriae. Artesiae. Hannoniae. Hollandiae.
Selandioe. Namurci. Zutpheni. Burgundiae. Haspurgi. et Tirolis, Dominus
Cantabriae, Molinae. Phrisiae. Mechliniae. Vltrajecti. Transisalanae. and
Gruningae, etc.

Of the Coronation of the Kings of NAPLES.
I Have thought it a thing very fit and convenient, having declared what the
Kings were of this noble and renowned kingdom, to receive also the manner and
the ceremony which is used in the time of their coronation. But before I
proceed any further, it is to be understood, that there are but only four Kings
that are crowned and anointed by the order of the Pope, as is noted in the
Records of the Roman Church, the which Alberico de Rosato also confirms,
which are these following, the King of Jerusalem, the King of France, the King
of Naples, commonly called Sicilia, and the King of England. All the rest are
crowned by their Archbishops or Bishops by a certain custom. The Emperor is
anointed and crowned in the same manner as are the said four Kings, and
therefore all the other Kings are called by the name of Highness, and not
Majesty, except those that are anointed by the order of the Pope, as is said.
In the coronation then of the King of Naples the Pope sends a Cardinal his
Legate, or a Patriarch, but he must have holy Orders, because the said Legate
not having the said holy Orders, another ought to come which has the said
dignity. There also assembles (according to the accustomed manner) all the
Archbishops of the kingdom, which crown this Prince with the greatest pomp^
and state that may be done to any Christian King. The principal thing before
the King takes this dignity, the seven Officers of the kingdom, which are
seven principal secular Lords, that meet together at this coronation, are
clothed in Purple, lined with Ermins, with very rich attires upon their heads,
and repair together with the Recorder of the City into the Cathedral Church
of Naples, where is the ancient Tomb of Charles of Angio, which was the first
that was crowned with an Imperial crown, Charles of Angio was the first that
was crowned with an Imperial Crown, King of both the Sicilles.
and invested King of both the Sicilles and Jerusalem; and there the Apostolic
Legate, with the other Archbishops pontifically clothed with Miters and
Rochets, and the other Prelates in Purple Vestments, attend the Kings coming at
the Church Door. Afterward when the King comes that is to be crowned, he
enters into the said Church, accompanied with all the Princes, Dukes,
Marqueses, Earls, Barons and Lords of the kingdom, and the Legate suddenly
kissing his forehead, receives him, and says unto him with an high and
intelligible voice these words, The Kings of Naples are written sacred Royal
Majesty. See the Gloss in the Preambles of the Constitution of the kingdom in
the second colum.
I am come by the appointment of the supreme Bishop Pope N. to crown thee King
of Naples and Jerusalem. After the Archbishop with the other, that have charge
to say Service in the said Church, receive the King at the Altar, and there
causing him to kneel down, and after is made by the Archbishop of Naples, of
Capoa, and of Salerno, devout prayers for his Majesty, one of the Bishops
demands of him in Latin, if he will promise to maintain always the Faith and
Christian Religion? Defend the Widows, the Fatherless, and the Poor? Establish
the kingdom, and minister justice to every one? And last of all, if he will
always yield due honor to the supreme Bishop? To all which things the King
answering, He will, two Archbishops take him by the arm, and lead him to the
Altar, where he solemnly swears to observe all that which the Archbishop has
demanded of him. This done, the Archbishop of Naples demands with a loud
voice of all the Princes, if they will promise loyalty and service to his
Majesty? Where being answered by all, That they will very willingly. Then two
Archbishops lead him into the Vestry, and being there apparelled with
Sandalles, richly set with Jewels and Pearls, with a Surplice like a Minister,
and a Cope, lead him again to the Altar, and saying certain prayers, the
Cardinal Legate accompanied with the Archbishops, rising from their seats with
Miters on their heads, go unto him, and finding the King kneeling, with a loud
and solemn prayer recommend him unto God, in whose hands are all Empires, that
it would please him to make his kingdom stable and perpetual, replenished with
victory, piety, and honor. The King remaining on his knees, one of the
Archbishops goes to the Altar, and begins the Letany, and devoutly prays
for his Majesty, the Archbishop of Naples, with the rest of the Bishops undoing
his Surplis, with certain zealous prayers, anoint his shoulders and his right
arm, to signify, that he sustaineth the burden of the affairs of the kingdom,
What the anointing of the Kings shoulders and right arm signify.
and draws his sword for the conservation thereof: And moreover, the Royal
purple Robe reaching down even to his foot, lined with fables, and richly
embrodered with gold and pearl, signifies Charity. That done, he still
remaining in devout meditation, the Apostolic Legate standing, the King
kneeling before him, delivers into his hand the golden Scepter, all wrought
in the top with Pearls and Jewels, wherewith religiously he commands the
people. The Royal purple Rob^ signifies Charity.
Then he puts a naked Sword into his right hand, wherewith he pursues his
enemies in the name of Christ. After that he puts a Ring on his finger, and a
Bracelet upon his arm, to the end he may be faithful and pure in good works.
Tullius Hos^^^^u^ King of Rome after he had overcome the (...), was the best
King that use^ the purple robe.
Then he presents unto him the golden Apple, to figure the kingdom, which he
ought to govern with singular piety, virtue, and perseverance. And finally, he
puts upon his head the Imperial Crown, divided into two parts, garnished
with many Jewels, to signify honor and glory, The King religiously remaining
on his knees, the three Archbishops lifting him up, lead him to the Altar,
where again the Lords that have the 7 offices of the kingdom, cause him to
swear to do the duty of a good Prince, and to observe the privileges and
immunities of the City and Kingdom. Afterward they lead him to sit on the left
hand not far from the Legate in a chair of state covered with cloth of gold,
The Golden Scepter and the sword, the one signifies that he commands the
people, and the other that he pursues the enemies in the name of Christ.
and the Legate with a loud voice proclaims him King of Naples and Jerusalem:
And the seven officers of the kingdom, with the Recorder, in token of obedience
kiss his hand, and the like is done by the Princes and Nobility of the kingdom

These ceremonies finished, the King receives the Communion, where begins to
sound the Organs, Trumpets, Cornets, and other Instruments, discharging the
Artillery, and making great triumph and joy; and so Mass being ended, the King
uses to invest many Lords into their States. The King being mounted upon his
horse, enters under the Canopy embrodered with gold, in the top whereof gently
wave up and down the Kings Arms, both of the Kingdom, of the City, and of the
Provinces, carried by men of dignity and honor, The Ring and the Bracelet
signify faith and purity.
which at one and the same time succeed in their honors and in their labors.
Then begins the order of the pomp and state to march forward; the which I
will omit to declare, lest I should seem too tedious, leaving it to every one
to consider thereof. The Apple signifies the Kingdom.


And this great King is exempted from the Empire* neither acknowledges he any
superior being a feudist of the Church, the which Andrea d' Sormia confirms
in his Preambles concerning tribute in the ninth column: and likewise Mattheo
d' Afflitto, The Crown declares glory.
and many other worthy Lawyers discourse thereof, the which the most say, that
the King of Naples is one of the aforesaid four Kings that are anointed, and
crowned by the order of the Pope. Besides, he goes before the elected Emperor
being not crowned; The King of Naples is crowned with an Imperial crown.
because that before his coronation he is called King of the Romans: but being
anointed and crowned, he is then called the Roman Emperor. Moreover, the said
four kings do not follow behind the Emperor, as other kings that are subject to
him, but go by his side; whereby it appears, that the King of Naples is one
of the great Kings of the world, as well in dignity as honor of the Empire,
therefore I think it not much expedient to take any great pains in expressing
it, since the reputation thereof is well known to all that have any experience
in learning. Sufficient is said hereof, for the Emperor Charles the 5. in the
year 1554. marrying his first begotten son Philip Prince of Spain, to Queen
Mary of England, would not invest him with any other Title, then the kingdom of
Naples and Jerusalem, to the end he should not be inferior to so great a Queen.
And so much concerning the coronation of the Kings of Naples.

A brief Discourse of the Kings of JERUSALEM; Beginning from Godfrey, where is
showed the true cause, why the Kings of NAPLES are entitled to that Kingdom.
THe subject of this Discourse we have here to handle, requires that I also
show and declare the reason and cause by what right all the Kings of Naples
have been entitled to the kingdom of Jerusalem, a discourse both for the
greatness and excellency of the matter, worthy to be known, from the true
understanding whereof, every one may evidently see and perceive the great
dignity and honor of the Kings of Naples, and by what right and title the said
kingdom more justly belongs to them then any other. For the better knowledge
whereof it is necessary I briefly begin from the first Christian King of that
kingdom.

In the year of Christ 1099. the Christians having begirt Jerusalem with a
strong siege, Anno 1099. Godfrey of Bullen conquereth Jerusalem.

Baldwin the brother of Godfrey. Godfrey created King of Jerusalem. The
wonderful virtue and magnanimity of Godfrey. The death of Godfrey.


after the thirtieth day took it with a great effusion of the enemies blood,
and and the first that mounted the walls was Godfrey of Bullen, Duke of
Loteringia and Loven, the which he valiantly conquering, gave the spoil thereof
to Baldwin his brother, Count of Bolonia, who assailing one of the Gates,
surprised the enemies therein. This being done the 15 of July, the Christians
bestowed eight whole days in visiting the holy Sepulcher, and other sacred aad
religious places. After this they advanced the said Godfrey by a general
consent and decree to the Royal Throne, who accepting the dignity and
government of the said city, yet utterly refused to be crowned, saying, It was
not fit for him to wear a crown of gold, when the King of Kings had but one of
thorns. This good King reigning but one whole year, what through the toil and
labor of the passed war, or the distemperature of the air, died of a Fever,
and was buried with general lamentation in the sacred Temple of that most holy
Sepulcher, in that very place of Calvary where Christ our Redeemer was
crucified. This Godfrey was the first who for his Ensign or Arms of the said
kingdom had not a Cross, (as commonly it was supposed) but a name abbreviated
by two great Letters in a field Ar* which letters were an H with this letter I,
which being joined together, made this Mark or Character, which signified the
name of the City and kingdom of Jerusalem, The Arms of Jerusalem (...) by
Godfrey.
and the four corners of the said letters or name abbreviated, were charged
with four Crossets Or, the which Arms though they were compounded of metal
upon metal* that is to say, of gold and silver, yet they were only
privileged amongst all other Arms whatsoever, because Godfrey with the consent
and general agreement of all the Nobility that were with him at the conquest
of the holy Land, did wholly condescend to bear the same, expressing by these
two letters of gold the name of Jerusalem. Wherefore it is no marvel if
(nowadays) they fail in the true form of these Royal Arms, and the proper
signification, being ignorant of the meaning and mystery thereof, besides age
altering the use, and ignorance increasing, they knowing them no otherwise but
by the outward show of the figure, taking it to be a cross, not marking the
truth thereof, nor to what purpose Godfrey put the other four Crossets, if one
only would have sufficed? Baldwin de Burco Earl of Edissa, 2 King of Jerusalem.
Therefore we may think these Arms were not invented of so wise a King by
chance and adventure, but resolved upon with great judgment and discretion.
Having now made a little digression, though very necessary for the purpose, I
will return where before I left.

After the death of Godfrey, was Baldwin beforesaid Count of Edissa his brother
made King of Jerusalem in his place, which was a man of great valor, Edissa a
City of Mesopotamia, from whence Tobias sent his son to Gabellus, and where
Thaddeus the Apostle was converted to the Christian faith.
for he wan the City of Tiberiade in Galile, Sidon, Accaron, and many more
upon the Seacoast, and with the help of the Genoways and Venetians afterward
overcame the strong City of Tolomaida, he had also the Castle of Soball, which
stands upon the river of Jordan, and did much increase his dominion. At length
having reigned 18 years, ended his life without children, and was buried in the
same Sepulcher with his brother. By the death of Baldwin, was Baldwin the
second of Burges. in France, made King by the general consent of the
Christians, who was cousin germain to the two aforesaid Kings of Jerusalem; and
in the second year of his reign, the Prince of the Turks in Asia minor, coming
upon Gaza with a mighty Army, he valiantly encountered, overcame, and took him
prisoner. And in the year following, The victory of Baldwin.
the King of Damasco suddenly besieged the gates of Jerusalem with fifteen
thousand fighting men: Baldwin courageously issuing out, and valiantly charging
them, at length put them to flight, and slew two thousand of them, and took
their King with a thousand prisoners, and lost but only thirty men. Not long
after, Baldwin taken prisoner
Balach King of the Parthians arriving with a mighty Army, encountered with
Baldwin hand to hand, overcame him, and carried him prisoner to Cairo, with
many Christian Noble men. But at length Baldwin with the said Christian
Nobility, were released with the payment of a great sum of money, and the King
returned to Jerusalem, where reigning thirteen years, died without issue Male;
and Fulk Count of Anjou his son-in-law, Fulk of An^o^ King of Jerusalem.
succeeded him in the kingdom, who had married his daughter Melesina, against
whom the Barbarians durst never move any war, because of his two sons Baldwin
and Almerich, expert and valiant soldiers, who being employed as Deputies in
his affairs, executed many great slaughters on the Turks. After this valiant
King had reigned 11 years, running in hunting after a Hare, his horse falling
with his head downward, The death of Baldwin the 2.
died presently. Whereupon his son Baldwin the Great, and third of this name,
was made King, who took Ascalon and Gaza, ancient Cities, and gave them to the
Knights of the Temple. Baldwin performing other famous and worthy deeds of
Arms, after he had reigned 24 years, died, and was buried in the holy Temple
with the other Kings, and Almerich his brother succeeded in the kingdom,
Almerick succeeded Baldwin.
a valiant man, who had many conflicts with the Turks, and took the City of
Alexandria in Egypt. Afterward he went against the great and mighty City
Cairo, called in ancient time Carra, and besieged it; and being very likely to
win it, notwithstanding through the instigations of the Citizens, received a
great sum of money, left the siege, and returned again to Jerusalem, and not
long after died, having reign 12 years, The death of Almerick.
leaving behind him three children, Baldwin, Sybilla, and Isabella; to whom
succeeded in his kingdom Baldwin the fourth of this name, his first begotten,
who though he had the leprosy, notwithstanding he did very valiantly and
politickly govern the kingdom, and having no wife, yet because the Realm should
not want a sufficient heir to succeed him, he married his sister Sybel to
William Longspath, Marquess of Montferrato; and Isabell his youngest sister he
promised with Jewels and Treasure to Erfrando of Tours, Governor of the Rhodes.
Marquess of Monferrato the Governor of Jerusalem.
This Marquess William had the government of Jerusalem; but being a weak and
impotent King, did notwithstanding many famous and worthy deeds; but he little
enjoyed the benefit of his victories, for that in the beginning of the second
year of his reign he died, and left after him one only son, called Baldwin:
Baldwin the King being desirous to provide for his Nephew, married again his
sister Sybell to Guy of Puite Lubrun, son of Hugh Lubrun Duke of Merchia and
Governor of Lusignon in France, with this agreement, that after his death the
said Guy should govern the kingdom till Baldwin his Nephew were of sufficient
age. But Guy carrying himself haughty and over-proud in the government of the
said kingdom, was dismissed again by Baldwin the King: This was in the year 1183.
Moreover, he procured Pope Lucius the third to anoint and crown his Nephew
King Baldwin the fifth being but a child, and appointed him Bertrand Count of
Tripoly his Governor and protector of the kingdom. Thus King Baldwin the fourth
reigning 6 years died, The death of Baldwin the 4.
leaving Count Tripoly Tutor (as is said) of young Baldwin the fifth; but he
resigning his charge, being withstood by Sybel the mother of the Boy, The death
of Baldwin the 5.
and Guy her husband: But in the beginning of the eighth month the little king
Baldwin died; whose death the mother concealed so long, as the effecting of her
intended purpose required, insomuch that what with flattering and fair words,
and with large gifts she wan the Patriark Eraclio, with the Nobility and
principal men of authority in the kingdom, to create Guy her husband King. The
Count understanding this, fuming thereat, being incensed with rage, and envying
the prosperity of Guy, made peace with Salandine King of the Sarasins,
promising to aid him against King Guy. The Salandine being now at peace with
the Christians, found opportunity by the discord of these Princes to break it;
because the Christian Prince of Montreale, which governed the country from
that to the river Jordan, being on every side inhabited with Sarasins who
continually carried their commodities to Jerusalem without the Kings knowledge,
suddenly brake the truce; for the Salandine saw the time was now come which he
long expected, assembled together fifty thousand Horsemen, and an infinite
company of Footmen without number, and got many cities of the Christians, and
increasing their Army with the people of the country, took Jerusalem by
covenant after they had besieged it one month. This was done the second of
October 1187 in the third year of King Guy, Jerusalem taken by the Sultan.
having been in the possession of the Christians 89 years. Salandine entering
Jerusalem, caused first the steeples and bells to be thrown down, and of the
Churches he made stables for his horses, only he reserved the Temple of
Solomon, which was washed with Rose Water at his first entrance. Afterward he
went to Tolomayda and besieged it, wherein was the King and Sybel his wife,
with four children, who with the children died together of a bloody flux. Now
(as we have said before) was promised to Erfrando of Turon Master of the
Rhodes, a noble young man, Isabel to wife, the sister of Sybel, a virgin, and
also the daughter of Baldwin the fourth, and sixth King of Jerusalem, who now
by the death of Sybel was next heir to her Fathers kingdom. This expectation
increased a better regard of the Barons and Christian Princes toward Erfrando.
But Conrado Longspath Marquess of Monferrato understanding the sudden death of
Sibel and her children, being desirous of Sovereignty, and also enamored of
Isabel his near kinswoman, secretly stole her away, but with her own consent,
and conveyed her to Tire, Conrado Longa^patho Marquis of Monferrato made King
of Jerusalem.
and there privately married her. And so all the right of the kingdom of
Jerusalem came to him by his wife Isabel; whereupon he was entitled King of
that kingdom. The year 1190 after Philip King of France had solicited Richard
King of England to go into Soria; but King Richard deferred his going till the
year following. Richard afterward observing his promise, came to Messina in the
month of September, where Philip also was, from whence they departed having a
prosperous wind. Cyprus surprised by the King of England.
Philip in a short time arrived at Tolomayda; but Richard by a tempest was
driven to Cyprus, where Chirsack Duke of the Island, denied him harbor; whose
discourtesie he took with such discontent, as by mere force surprised the
Island, and sacking it, planted a strong guard of his own people, and from
thence passed to Tolomayda to join with the Christian Army. The Knights of the
Temple made Governors of Cyprus.
Not long after he sold the said Island to the Knights of the Temple for a
hundred thousand crowns, who ill governing the same, were forced by the power
of the Cypriots to depart thence, and so the Knights restored it again to
Richard, who likewise returned them their money; and with the same conditions
the year 1193, Guy of Lusignon first ^ing of Cyprus.
gave it to Guy of Puite Lubrun Lusignon in France, husband to Isabel, sister
of King Baldwin, who before was enforced to fly Jerusalem, in consideration
whereof he resigned unto him all the Title and Interest he had to the kingdom
of Jerusalem; and for this cause the King of England began to be called King of
Jerusalem; and King Guy took the possession of Cyprus, and was called King of
the said Isle. The which right to the kingdom of Jerusalem was nothing, because
the same by all law now justly belonged to Isabel the daughter of King Baldwin,
wife of Conrado Marquess of Monferrato; therefore can no right or title be
attributed to the King of England herein. Not long after the King Conrado of
Monferrato was slain in Tire by two Sarazins called Arsacides, The death of
King Con^^do.
not leaving any male children, but one only daughter called Mary. The Queen
Isabel married again, and had to her husband Henry Count of Campania, who
endowed her with the Signiory of Tire: but that unhappy young man, The death of
Henry Earl of of Ciampania.
living not many years with his wife, unfortunately sell from a loft or chamber
in his own Palace, and so died, leaving three daughters, Agnesa, Melisina, and
Alicia. Queen Isabel remaining thus a widow, married again the third time with
Almerick Puite Lubrun Lusignon, Almerick King of Cyprus, the third husband of
Isabel.
King of Cyprus, who by the death of Guy his brother, succeeded in the said
kingdom, and was second King of Cyprus; and in the right of Isabell his wife
was also called King of Jerusalem, by whom he had three children, Amarin,
Sybilla and Melisenda, but Amarin died young. King Almerick married Sybil to
Livon, King of Armenia; and Melisenda the youngest daughter was married to
Raymond Rupini, Nephew of the said King of Armenia, and his successor in the
kingdom; the which Raymond was then Prince of Antioch. Of this Melisenda wife
of Prince Raymond Rupini, was born that Mary, who in the year 1276, resigned to
Charles of Anjou King of Naples the claim and Title she pretended to the kingdom
of Jerusalem. At length King Almerick died, leaving his kingdom of Cyprus to
Hugo his son, whom he had by a former wife, the which Hugo not long after the
death of his Father, married Isabell the daughter of Henry Count of Ciampania,
and of his stepmother; and not long after the death of Almerick died also the
Queen Isabel his wife, who by her will and testament bequeathed the kingdom of
Jerusalem to Mary her daughter, whom she had by Conrado of Monferrato her first
husband, recommending the tuition of her to the society of the Hospitalers and
Templers, whom she appointed her Guardians or Overseers. Afterward in the year
1222 John Count of Brenne coming to Rome, having the title of King of
Jerusalem, by the right of Mary his wife, John Count Brenne was made Companion
of the Empire of Constantinople.
daughter (as is beforesaid) of King Conrado of Montferrato, being much
honored, and presented to the Pope, going to Pisa to procure aid for his
enterprise into Soria, gave to the Emperor Frederick the second King of Naples
lately excommunicated (but now reconciled to the Church) his only daughter
called Iole to wife, whom he had by Mary his wife, and in dowry with her all
the right and title he had to the kingdom of Jerusalem. Whereupon Frederick,
and all other that succeeded him in the kingdom of Naples, were called Kings of
Jerusalem. And this is one of the reasons why all the Kings of Naples are
invested with the title of Jerusalem. Afterward Frederick in the time of
Gregory the ninth, in the year 1228, being as it were enforced, went into
Soria, yet managed his affairs with such power and authority, The Emperor
Frederick takes Jerusalem.
that he agreed to conclude a peace with the Soldian for ten years, who
restored unto him Jerusalem, with all the territories and kingdom thereof,
except some few little Castles: Whereupon the Easter following in the year
1229. he was crowned in Jerusalem, and caused the City of Ioppa now called
Zaffo, to be repaired and newly reedified. The Emperor settling and securing
all things to his content, returned home into his kingdom; and in glory of so
great triumph and victory, brought with him Elephants, Panthers, Dromedaries,
Leopards, white Bears, Lions, Linxes, or spotted beasts. After this the kingdom
of Naples and Sicil came into the power and jurisdiction of Charles of Anjou
Count of Provence, for the right and title that his predecessors had, descended
to him as lawful King thereof. Anno 1269.
But Fortune willing to confirm and establish his right, without any cross
encounter, it came to pass that Hugo Puite Lubrun Lusignon the second of this
name King of Cyprus, married Alicia the third daughter of Isabel Queen of
Jerusalem, and of Count Henry of Ciampaania; the which thing discontenting the
Princess Mary daughter of Melisenda and Raymond Rupini, Prince of Antioch and
Borgne, complained much of King Hugo, This Hugo for his virtue and valor was
called the Great.
that being her kinsman, would usurp the title which was her right by Melisenda
her mother being the second daughter, and not Alicia his wife, who was the
third begotten. Hugo not only little esteemed her complaints, but also
otherwise did ill entreat her Whereupon the disdainful Princess Mary came to
Rome, pretending her right to the aforesaid kingdom of Jerusalem as the Niece
of Queen Isabel the daughter of Almerick natural King of the said kingdom,
summoned King Hugo before the Pope, and so began the stir and contention of the
title and possession of the said kingdom: The matter being much debated by the
Ambassadors of King Hugo, who knowing it to be far more available for them to
have the deciding and determining of the cause committed to the Barons and
Nobility of the holy Land; The Pope at the first instance referred the
judgment and deciding of the matter to the Patriark of Jerusalem, the Masters
of the Hospital and the Temple, and other the Barons and Nobility of the holy
Land, who were wont to have a voice in Council, and election of the Kings of
Jerusalem; the which the Princess Mary perceiving, being a woman of great age,
Mary the daughter of Melisenda, and of Raimond gives her right to K. Charles.
weary and irksom of travel, and the perils of so long a journey, being
advised by her friends, agreed with Charles of Anjou, receiving of him a great
sum of money, renounced all her right and title, and resigned wholly unto him
all her interest whatsoever to the kingdom of Jerusalem, confirming the same by
authentic and solemn writings, which was in the year 1276. Whereupon Charles
afterward by means of the Pope, was proclaimed by lawful sentence, King of that
Realm, as well by the ancient right of the Emperor Frederick, King Charles of
Angio is proclaimed lawful King of Jerusalem.
as also that of Mary; Insomuch that by the reasons aforesaid it plainly
appears, that the right and title of the kingdom of Jerusalem lawfully
belongs to the Kings of Naples, and to none other; and so the supposed titles
both of the King of England, and also of the King of Cyprus, are little or of
no worth. Wherefore I do not a little marvel that this last right and title
was unknown both to Pandolfo Colennuccio, that writ a brief Epitome of the
kingdom of Naples, and also to Iacobo Mainolda, who composed that Book of the
title of Philip King of Spain, Naples and Jerusalem, seeing the History is so
apparent. But to return to the matter, Charles for the better security of his
affairs, sent suddenly the Count Ruggier Sanseverin Governor into the holy
Land, who took an oath of the Knights of the Temple, Ruggieri Sanseverina sent
to govern ^erusalem.
and Barons of the Realm, of ^ealty and homage in the name of Charles: and so
King Charles enjoyed not only the said Realm, but also by the means of Ruggier
and other Captains, held a great part of Egypt. And we have often understood
of many brethren of St Francis, and other persons worthy credit that have been
in Jerusalem and in other places in Egypt, that in many stately buildings in
those places, there is yet seen the Arms of King Charles* the which do
manifestly show the great power and valor of that good King. But since occasion
is now offered me, it will not be amiss if I show what the Arms of the kingdom
of Naples are, although we have writ thereof, at full, in the book of the life
of the Kings of Naples; but being rather enforced through the envy of some who
have written concerning the Arms of the said kingdom, The Arms of the kingdom
of Naples.
and briefly discourst thereon. The Ensign or Arms then of this most noble
kingdom, is a Field Azure, replenished with Flour de lices Or, which at first
was charged with a Labell of four points gules, being carried as the impress of
Charles the first of Anjou, with this Motto or Emblem, Noxias Herbas, what time
he came to the winning of the kingdom of Naples, and to expel and drive away
King Manfred enemy to the Church, whom he overcame and slew. Charles in
remembrance of so happy a victory, beautified the kingdom with these Arms,
holding that field and flour de lices with the Labell for a particular Arms in
memory of the said happy victory.

Stopping the mouths of those envious backbiters, who say the Arms of this
Noble kingdom, was an Ass devouring his old furniture or trappings upon him,
looked backward for new, meaning thereby the instability of this happy kingdom,
loving always new Governors like the Asses figure, which was devised by gross
Asses, to dishonor and discredit this noble kingdom; but it is certain this
little kingdom has sustained great oppression, they imputing it to no other
sense, have feigned this Asinine simplicity; which saying the envious have not
stuck to publish in books.

Manner of writing used by the Arragonian Kings of Naples writing to diverse
Princes.
KIng Alphonso to the Emperor of Germany, was wont to write in parchment in
th'infrascribed manner.

To the most renowned Prince, and most excellent Lord, Frederick Emperor of
the Romans, for ever Royal.

The subscription was thus,
Alphonsus by th'grace of God King of the Aragons, Sicilie on this side and
beyond the Pharos, Valentia, Jerusalem, Hungaria, the Majorcas, Sardinia,
Corsica, etc. greeting, and increase of prosperous successes.

And so in the Occurrences he used to write.
Most renowned and most excellent Prince, we would entreat your Sovereignty, or
your Mightiness.

To the Emperor of Constantinople.
To the most renowned and most excellent Lord Drage Paleologo, Emperor of the
Romans, for ever royal, our most dear kinsman. The subscription was as above.

To Prester John of India.
To the most eminent and most unconquerable Monarch, Lord Isaac Prester John,
son of David, Lord of the Tables, Mount Sinai, Aethiopia, King of Kings, our
most dear brother. The subscription in the manner aforesaid.

To the great Turk.
To the most renowned Prince Amorat Bechi, great Lord of the Theucrians, our
most dear friend.

To the great Sultan of Babylon.
To the most Illustrious Prince Abuysac Iamac, great Sultan of Babylon.

To the King of France.
To the most renowned Prince Charles King of the French, our most loving kinsman
and friend.

To the King of England.
To the most renowned Prince Henry, King of England, our most dear kinsman and
friend.

To the King of Cyprus.
To the most worthy Prince John King of Cyprus, our most dear kinsman and
friend.

To the King of Castile and Leon.
To the most renowned and Illustrious Prince, Don Henrich King of Castile and
Leon, our very dear and very loving Cousin.

To the Queen of Arragon.
To the most illustrious Queen, our most dear and most beloved Wife, and
Lieutenantess general.

To the King of Portugal.
To the very Ilustrious Prince Don Alfonso King of Portugal and Algarue, our
very dear and well-beloved Cousin.

To the King of Navarre.
To the most Illustrious Prince Don John King of Navarre, our very dear and
much beloved Brother and Lieutenant General.

To the King of Granada.
To the high Prince Don Machand King of Granada, our very dear and much beloved
friend.

To the King of Tunis.
To the most Illustrious Prince Don Octunne King of Tunis, our very dear and
much beloved friend.

To the Dolphin of France.
To the most illustrious Prince Lewis, Dolphin of Usania, our most dear kinsman.

To the Prince of Austria.
To the most Illustrious and our very dear and much beloved Cozen, Henry Prince
of Austria, first born in the kingdoms of Castile and Leon.

To the Duke of Cleves.
To the most illustrious Prince John, Duke of Cleves, our most dear kinsman and
friend.

To the Duke of Osterlich.
To the Illustrious and mighty Albert Duke of Osterlich.

To the Duke of Brittannie.
To the Illustrious and mighty Peter Duke of Brittannie, our most dear kinsman
and friend.

To the Duke of Burgundy.
To the most Illustrious Prince Philip Duke of Burgundy, our most dear kinsman
and friend.

To the Duke of Burgundy his eldest son.
To the most illustrious Prince Charles, first born of the most illustrious Duke
of Burgundy and Lord Charlois our most dear kinsman.

To the Duke of Savoy.
To the Illustrious and mighty Prince Lewis Duke of Savoy, Chablays our, most
dear kinsman.

To the Earl of Foix.
To the respected and excellent Gascon Earl of Foix, our most dear kinsman and
friend.

Names of all the Viceroys of Naples* which began in the year 1505.
Year of Christ. Number of Viceroys. 1505 1 COnsalvo Fernandes of the House of
Aghilar a Cordonese by Nation, Duke of Terranova, who for his famous victories
was called the Great Captain. 1507 2 Don John of Arragon, Duke of Ripacursa.
1510 3 Don Raimondo of Cardona Count of Albento. 1514 * Don Bernardino
Villamarino. * 1517. Don Francis Remolinis Cardinal of Sorrento were both
Lieutenants. 1523 4 Don Charles della Noia. 1526 * Andrew Carrafa Count of St.
Severina was a Lieutenant. 1527 5 Don Vgo of Moncada. 1528 6 Philibert of
Chalon Prince of Orange. 1530 7 Pompey Colonna Cardinal. 1532 8 Don Piedro de
Toledo, Marquis of Villafranca. 1553 9 Don Lewis of Toledo was Lieutenant. 1554
10 Don Pietro Pacecco Cardinal Seguntine. * 1554 Don Bernardine of Mendoza was
Lieutenant. 1555 11 Don Ernandez Alvarez of Toledo Duke of Alva. 1559 12
Bartholomew Cardinal of Cuova. * 1559. Don Frederico de Toledo. * 1559. Don
John Marique were Lieutenants one after the other. 1559 13 Don Perafan Duke of
Alcala. 1570 14 Antony Perrenotto Cardinal of Granvela. 1577 15 Don Innico of
Mendoza Marquis of Mondesela. 1579 16 Don John Zunica Prince of Pietra Precia.
1582 17 Don Peter Giron Duke of Ossuna. 1586 18 Don John de Zunica Count of
Miranda. 1596 19 Don Henry de Gusman Count of Olivares. 1599 20 Don Ferdinand
di Castra Count of Lemos and of Andrada: Marquis of Sarria and Count of
Villalua, went Ambassador to Rome, sent by Philip the second, and left in the
kingdom for Lieutenant Don Francisco his son, who governed with great wisdom.

The seven principal Offices of the KINGDOM.
High Constable.
THere are seven principal or chief Offices in the kingdom, The first whereof
is, the Great or High Constable, who stands in place of General, or the Kings
Lieutenant in the wars which happen in the kingdom; and in such a case orders
and provides for all such things as belong to the Militia. This Office lasts as
long as the war: And when the King creates such a one, he puts a golden
Truncheon in his hand saying, Take this sacred Truncheon in thy hand to drive
away and keep back the enemies and opposers of my people. And this word
Constable, much used amongst Tuscan Writers, did anciently signify a Captain
of a quantity of Cavallery. But in process of time by Constable was meant a
Commander of Foot-Soldiers, the Captains of Horse beginning to be called
Conductors. Bembo in his Latin History calls the Constable Centurion of
Soldiers. In the kingdom of Naples the office of Constable signified not only
a Captain, but one of far greater authority, it being of the seven offices the
greatest: And as it has been always conferred upon great Lords, so we see it
at this day settled upon the person of N. He by right commands all Martial
persons, as well afoot as on hors-back; And in Royal Parliaments sits next the
King on his right hand. Pontanus in the fourth book of his History of Naples
speaking of the office of the Constable, refused that word as too base and
abject, and not Roman, and so named him in Latin Magnus militiae Magister, the
great Master of the Militia. Some would liken the office of great Constable to
the Praefectus Praetorio, yet there seems to be a difficulty in it, seeing the
Praefectus Praetorio was always created out of the Knightly order, which Rule
is not observed in the High Constable who is always selected from among the
greatest and most illustrious Barons of the Kingdom, I believe their opinion
was grounded upon this, that the Praefectus Praetorio was next to the Prince a
supreme office, depending upon none else, over all the Militia, just as the
high Constable is amongst us; he has 219^ Ducats a year pay, and pretends in
time of service when the war is without the kingdom, he ought to have it
double: Whereupon there is a consultation depending in the Royal Chamber,
which is yet undecided.

High Admiral.
THe High Admiral is the second Office of the kingdom: And though the Great
Justice have pretended to have the second place; yet there arising many years
ago, a controversy for precedencie between the Duke of Somma, high Admiral,
and the Duke of Amalfi chief Justice, and the question being, which of them
should at that time precede, it was thus judged, That for the present the Duke
of Somma as high Admiral, should precede the chief Justice, and this was done
in a summary kind of judgment: for the Viceroy who was at that time, having
called together the Regents before he went to the Chapel on a Sunday morning,
he caused this question to be resolved standing, so far that the Usher was
commanded to say, That his Excellency commanded the High Admiral should go
before the chief Justice, not debarring howsoever the chief Justice of any
reasons which he might hereafter allege for himself. Signior Agnolo of
Costanzo told me that one of those Regents being called by the Viceroy that
very morning wherein he had commanded the Usher to publish that Order, had told
him they were moved to give sentence on the high Admirals behalf; because there
was a very ancient Record sound in the Kings Chancery, by which it plainly
appeared, that in a Parliament held in the time of Charles the third, King of
Naples, Thomas Marzano Count of Squillace, high Admiral, preceded Rogger
Acclocciamuro chief Justice. And this Record is likewise made mention of by
Martin Frezza in his first book de Subseudis page 54. number. 35. And though in
the Parliament held by King Alphonso in Benevento, they seemed to sit in
another order, yet because there was no authentical Record thereof extant, as
of that of Charles the third, judgment was given on the high Admirals side; and
so much the rather, because it seems to be very just, that the General of the
Sea, who is the Admiral, should immediately follow the Land General, which is
the Constable. This Office alone, of all the other seven, retains to this hour
its jurisdiction, which all the rest have lost. And from this also has been
taken away the Generalship of the Galleys of the kingdom, though there yet
belongs unto him a very large jurisdiction both in Naples and elsewhere through
all the kingdom; over all those which any way by industry live upon the trade
of the Sea. The great Court of Admiralty has its name of Great, even just as
that of the Vicaria, and its Tribunal is governed by one or more Judges,
according to the high Admirals pleasure. He chooses his Lieutenant, who carries
in his hand the staff of Jurisdiction, as the Regent of the Vicaria does: And
he as well as the Judge, has a place in the Royal Chapel, next to the last
Judge of the Civil Vicaria, as Frezza says, lib. 3. page 432. number. 23. He may
likewise appoint fifty men for the guard of his person, with fifty Constables
on Horseback, and 25 Commensali, or fellow Boorders, and other persons, as is
contained in his privileges, which may go armed in the City of Naples, and
all the kingdom over with any manner of Arms, though they be prohibited by the
law. He has also all his household Officers, and such Officers also as belong
to his Court. He appoints in every Sea-town a Vice Admiral, a Register, and
two Marshals: and in every Province a Provincial Vice Admiral with six
Marshals, and all subject to his jurisdiction. All shipwracks either of
Infidels or unknown masters are his. When he purposes to keep Court for
execution of justice, he sets up his Flag, has a Captain of the guard, and his
Marshals. His stipend is, besides six Ducats a day, which all the other six
Officers have, which comes every year to 2160 Ducats; every month a hundred
Ducats as he is General of the Sea: He has for every Bark or Boat, a
Carline, by reason of their Pennons which are certain little Flaggs with the
high Admirals Arms upon them, which every master of Boat or Bark is bound to
carry by his Lanthorn, none can put any vessels to sea against the Infidels
without his license, for which he is to pay a certain rate; and of the prizes
also when any are taken, there belongs a share to the high Admiral* He has
also all the bodies of the vessels which are taken, with other pledges, and
those which by chance are sunk in the sea; he has also I know not how many
barrows of Salt of the old measure for his house provision. He pays no Custom
or Toll, nor gives no account for any thing he exports out of the kingdom by
sea, though others pay for such things. He has moreover very many other
prerogatives and preheminencies, which may be read in the Orders of the Office
of the high Court of Admiralty, which for brevity I omit, of which to this day
the high Admiral is possessed.

Chief Justice.
THe third Office is that of Chief Justice, which has the supreme place of
exercising Justice, as well Civil as Criminal in the whole kingdom of Naples.
His Lieutenant is called the Regent of the Vicaria, and has his Judges both
Criminal and Civil, and his Tribunal is the Court of the Vicaria. The Chief
Justice his stipend is two thousand one hundred and ninety Ducats; and the
Regent has six hundred Ducats, he has also the profits of the licenses of
the Sword, which are two and twenty grains and half, for every license, which
may come every year to two thousand Ducats.

High Chamberlain.
THe fourth Office is that of High Chamberlain, and is so called by reason he
has partciular care of the Royal Chamber, and every thing else thereby
belonging to his King. His Lieutenant has his Tribunal, called the Chamber of
the Summaria, where there is nothing treated of neither by his Lieutenant nor
by the Presidents but of such differences as arise between private men, and the
Kings Treasury or Exchequer. His stipend is two thousand one hundred and ninety
Ducats; and has moreover Ius Tappeti of the Captainships which are given
within the lands of Demains of the kingdom for the administration of Justice,
and for some he has six Ducats a year, for some three, and for some twelve,
when they are dispatched: He receives also of Barons which pay homage to the
Royal Court eight Carlines for an ounce, for any such sum the said homages
amount unto, which one year with another are judged to amount to two thousand
Ducats a year. He has moreover from the Royal Court 24 Bushels of Salt, and
36 fine Sugar-loaves every year. Has Lieutenant has one thousand Ducats a
year stipend, and the Presidents six hundred, and they also have their
emoluments.

Grand Protonotary.
THe fifth Office is that of Grand Protonotary, to which Office at first
belonged to read before the King, and keep all his writings. Then the Catholic
King transferred the care of that to the Secretary of the Kingdom, and to the
Clerks of Commissions; so that whereas this Office was at first of great
authority, so now there remains nothing to the Vice-protonotary, but the
creating of Notaries and Judges of Contracts, and legitimating of Bastards. The
stipend he has is according to the rest. He has moreover the emoluments of
Notaries, and of Judges of Royal Contracts which are made within the kingdom,
and the legitimations which are granted, the dues of which emoluments belonging
to him, are these: For a Notariship two Ducats, and six for the judgment when
it is all over the kingdom; but when it is for a Province, four Ducats, and
for every legitimation a Ducket; which emoluments are thought to be worth to
him yearly 1^00 Ducats.

High Chancellor.
THe sixth Office of the kingdom is that of High Chancellor, which serves both
for Secretary and Chancellor in occurrent businesses, and he keeps the Royal
Seal. He takes care also when any one will take the degree of Doctor, to have
him examined by the College of Doctors; by which being approved for
sufficient, in the Kings name he gives him his degree. This Office was wont to
be given by our French Kings to Prelates. His stipend differs not from the
other. He has moreover the emoluments of the Students which come to the
Doctors of the Law, and of Physic, which are worth some 2000 Ducats a year.
He has power to choose and appoint his Vicechancellor, who paticipates of his
emoluments.

High Steward.
THe seventh Office is High Steward, who has particular care of providing all
things which concern the Kings daily ordinary diet, and his Court. The name of
such an Office is thought to have come out of France, from whence came also
that of Marshall, which as we may perceive, seem to have a kind of conjunction
and affinity together. Athenaeus a very subtle indagator of Antiquities, calls
the Steward Elatrus: He says moreover there was such an Office very much
respected amongst the Ancients; he has two thousand one hundred and ninety
Ducats a year.

A Discourse of the order and the fashion or form of the Crowns of the Nobility
of the Kingdom of Naples.


FIrst of all, before I declare how many, and who be the entitled Lords of
this famous kingdom, I esteem it a thing very convenient briefly to set down
(forasmuch as the quality of the matter so requires) the differences of the
Crowns which they use: And although many excellent Lawyers have written
thereon, nevertheless (as I have said) the subject thereof so requiring, I
think it fit to discourse something thereof, the better to satisfy the Reader,
and to leave nothing unperfect. Athenaeo of the invention of the crown.
Athenaeo then writes that the Crown was invented by our Ancestors as a badge
of honor for the ornament of the head, wherein the beginning and foundation of
the senses being placed, nature has put as it were in a rock and fortress of
the whole body, that power of the soul which we call Reason or Understanding.
Aristotle was of opinion that the Crown was first invented by quaffers and
drinkers, to repress the force and inflammation of wine; Aristotle of the crown.
which ascending with the fume into the head, moves some pain in that part;
the which thing being found to be true, it might be then (because it gave also
ornament and comeliness) the means to increase the wonderful estimation
thereof: whereupon by some were added certain little birds, because pinching
another man's forehead suffered him not to sleep, it was also in great use among
Lovers. The Greeks in the solemnity of their sports, used a crown of the Pine
tree, the Achaians Smallage, the Cappadocians Mugwort. Pliny affirms, that
the first that was crowned was Libero, Libero according to Pliny, was the first
which was crowned.
after whom the use of that ceremony so much increased among the Greeks and the
Romans, that in the end it was brought upon the Altars in sacrifice in victory,
and in their sacred contentions; whereupon ambition always increasing, men used
to sit with crowns on their heads in their feasts and Bankets. At last crowns
entering in among Soldiers and men of war, Armies began to give it to their
Captains to honor them, and very often Generals were crowned therewith, which
carried themselves valiantly in any honorable act, either by valor or manhood;
and the like honor was also done to others by the people and the Senate.
Whereupon the Lawyers reasoning to this purpose of the crown, have written,
that it was granted sometimes in token of Empire and honor, sometimes for
industry and military reward, and sometimes in sign of spiritual victory.
Theophrastus describes three sorts of Crowns, Three sorts of crowns according
to Theophrastus.

The crown of Crassus.


one of sweet odoriferous flowers, another of flowers that have no scent, the
third of leaves and green boughs of trees, the fourth which was added by the
rich Crassus, was made of gold and silver by the imitation of leaves, which he
did expose to the view of other men in his sports and games. But passing over
this ancient barbarous rudeness, and resting in the now last use of Crowns,
which are made of massy gold and silver, intermixed with beautiful ornaments
of pearls and precious stones, transforming the leaves into sharp points, and
other curious work, which yield a pleasant and beautiful object to the eye. The
custom of the Athenians was to crown their worthy and virtuous Citizens with a
wreath of two Olive boughs: Of the distinction of the crowns of herbs.
But we speaking again of the first crowns, which take their names of the
effects for which they are employed; for that of Bays is given to him which
goes in triumph, and is called the Triumphale, Posthumio Tuberto used a crown
of Myrtle.
for the Bays is a token of Joy and Victory. Posthumio Tuberto in his triumph
for overcoming the Sabins, with little blood, wore a crown of Myrtle. Likewise
the Ovale crown was given to him which had got a City not by force but by
friendship and covenant. Moreover, he that had delivered a City from siege,
had given him a crown of the grass growing in the territory wherein they were
besieged, and this crown of grass was called Ossidionale. Who first mounted
upon the walls of the enemy, to him was consecrated a crown of gold, with the
form of battlements of the wall; and this kind of crown was called Murale, and
the Emperor did give it with his owns hands. Who first entered into the enemies
camp, to him was given the crown Vallare, which was also called Castrense,
which was of gold in the form of a Bulwark. Who first in battle at sea boarded
the enemy, to him was presented the crown Navale, which was of gold in the
fashion of a ship: The first that had this crown was M. Varro, for overcoming
the navy of Pirates and Rovers, and this En. Pompeius gave him. The crown which
was given to those which had preserved any Citizen in battle, The crown Civica
was of Oak.

The crown Vallare.

The crown Murale.

The crown Navale.


received in token of safety from him, a crown called Civica, which was first
of Oak, and afterward of Holm. Finally, those which were accustomed to be made
of metal in recompense of worthy deeds, were the Vallari, or Castrensi, the
Murali, and the Navali, These were of gold, as were also those in process of
time of Bays, whereupon it was called crown gold, which was given to those who
had the crown made them for triumph. But none among the aforesaid crowns was
ever more noble or more glorious with the Romans then that of grass, after
which the Civiche, the Tirumphale, and those of gold were the next in
estimation, The crown of grass among the Romans was held most glorious. Fabius
Maximus.
because that all the other crowns Captains did give to Soldiers; but this of
grass was presented by the whole Army, as to the preserver thereof. And
sometimes the Senate did give it, and the people of Rome to some particular
person, as to Fabius Maximus when Hannibal departed Italy, and which was also
given to Augustus when he shut the Temple of Ianus, and made peace both by sea
and land.

The Royal crown not used in old time. What the Kingly ornaments were in old
time.

The purple robe as Martial declares, was the ornament of a Magistrate,
whereupon he thus says, Divisit nostras purpura vestra togas. And in another
place says, Purpurate foelix te colit ^^nis honos.


Now concerning the Royal crown according to the use in these days, was by the
Ancients in no such sort observed, athough the Priests of Persia, and the Kings
did wear a round wreath of Linen, and the Meonii, the Syrians, the Phrygians
and the Lydians the Miter, the which is now used by our Bishops as an ornament
over the Scutchions of their Arms, signifying thereby the Nobility of their
House, and their divine profession: But in exchange of the crown the King had
the Scepter, the Chair of State, the purple Robe wrought with gold, and carried
a Diadem, upon their heads, which was a roll of white linen, which the Kings
were wont to wear upon their heads, an invention (as I think) of the Egyptians
and the Hebrews, who using to anoint their Kings upon the Temples or sides of
the head, did roll a veil round about, that the sacred ointment might not be
wiped away. Whereupon to this purpose we find, that Alexander the Great took
from his head the Diadem, to put it upon Lysimacus, who whas therewith wounded
in the forehead, the which accident was prognosticated by the future reign of
Lysimacus. And that Pompey surnamed the Great, was envied because he did wear a
wreath upon his knee, for a certain hurt that did much offend him, as though he
would aspire to the kingdom of Rome.

Now concerning the use of this crown according to the modern custom, the
Emperors and Kings which descended from the Romans, were wont to send to those
whom they exalted to any Royal dignity, a crown in token of honor. And
moreover the invention came from them; From whom the use of the crown descended.
for it is not long since this ceremony was exercised by the chief Bishops and
Emperors, for so much as it was not honor enough for the Pope, as election
should be made of that supreme degree, to sit in St. Peter's Chair. But this
ceremony gathering daily greater force, was introduced, that between the
solemnity of the Mass he should be crowned by the hand of the Bishop of Ostia.
The Bishop of Ostia crowns the Pope.
And likewise the coronation of the Emperors was unknown in the first Ages of
the Empire; for the first of the Roman Emperors that put a golden crown upon
his head, was (as Aurelius Victor declares) the Emperor Aurelianus, Aurelianus
was the first that wore a c^own of gold.
who ruled the Empire in the year of Christ 271. and used apparel embrodered
with gold and pearl, and full of precious stones. Afterward Dioclesian (as
Eutropias writes) begun the fashion of the Royal state of a King, because
that not only in his apparel, but even in his shoes had precious stones
embrodered, Lamp^idio a grave Author writes, that the first of the Roman
Emperors, which wore apparel of Silk, was Heliogabalus.
causing others to do him honor and reverence, and was the first that would be
adored. But the first of all the Emperoers which received the crown of the
Roman Empire from the Pope, was Charles the Great, who having settled the affairs
of Italy, of France and Germany, came to Rome, and with all the honor that
might be, was placed in the seat of Pope Leo the third, which through the envy
of some men was deposed from the Papacy. Charles the Great was crowned in the
year of our Lord 801. The Pope having celebrated the (...) upon the Relics of
St. Peter, by the consent and desire of the p^^ple of Rome, declared Charles
Emperor of the Romans, and put an Imperial crown upon his head, Charles the
Great the first that was crowned by the hand of the Pope.

Three crowns belong to the Roman Emperors, the first is of silver, which is
taken of the kingdom of Germany in the City of Aquisgrain. The second is Iron,
of the kingdom of Lombartly in Medina near Millan, the which crown is of
ancient workmanship without flowers, or points, made within as a plain hoop of
Iron, which binds in the temple; but without is beautified with gold, and
precious stones, the which shows that the Roman Empire has the strength of
Iron by military power. The third Crown is then of gold, of the Empire of Rome,
which the Pope gives in the Church of St. Peter.


the people making great applause and acclamation, and proclaiming with a loud
and high voice three times, To Charles August crowned by God, the great and
peaceable Emperor, Life and Victory. And the Pope anointed him with oil and
balm consecrated to this effect, together with Pepin his son, whom he
pronounced King of Italy; the which things were all done in the year of our
Lord 801. And so Charles began to Occidentall Empire of Germany, which to this
present has continued with great honor and glory. Whereupon the Emperors
which succeeded him, imitating Charles, either because that action seemed unto
them worthy observation, or perhaps because they desired by that means to
maintain the title of the Empire, which Leo gave to Charles, as is said, they
followed from time to time the custom to be crowned. In this manner also were
together with the power annexed the demonstrations of Regal or Princely
fortune, of the which demonstrations of honor they participating more or less,
the which did participate more or less of Kingly fortune, from thence
proceeded the use of Crowns and Chaplets, signifying Royal or Princely
dignity, or the honor of a Duke, or Lordly power and authority, because that
the Roman Empire being fallen from the greatness thereof, and Barbarians coming
into Italy, who like the inundation of a mighty river, carries with it
infinite damage, replenished unfortunate Italy with their brutish manners;
whereupon miserably fell to the earth, not only the beauty of the Roman
tongue, and the perfection and propriety thereof, but all that semblance and
similitude of the ancient customs, and new titles, new fashions, and new laws
were intruded: the word Prince was taken for a new kind of dignity, which being
inferior to a King, and Imperial pre-eminence, takes the precedence of Dukes,
Arechi Duke of Benevento, was the first that was called Prince
Marquesses, and Earls. The first which used this name in Italy, was, as we
have declared (and according as Leone Cardinal and Bishop of Ostia says in
his History Casinense) about the year of our Lord 755, Arechi the second, 14.
Duke of Benevento, who having enlarged his Dukedom, would have his said State
no longer called a Dukedom, but a Principality, and caused himself to be
anointed and crowned by his Bishops; and in the end of his Letters and Charters
of Privilege, caused them to to be thus dated, Scriptum in nostro sacratissimo
Palatio. Afterward his successors continuing, used to do the like. Whereupon by
their example the Princes of Capoa, of Taranto, and of Salerno being allured
thereunto, caused themselves also to be anointed and crowned by their Bishops.
These titles at the (...) of the Kings, were given unto their children, nor any
except the blood Royal (...) partakers of these titles. Whereupon of the
children of Ruggiero, the first King of the kingdom of Naples and Sicilia,
Ainulfo was Prince of Capoa, and Gulielmo which afterward succeeded in the
kingdom, was Prince of Taranto. Charles of Aujou the first of this name, The
dignity of the principality of Salerno.
King of Naples, ordained, that his eldest son should be named Prince of
Salerno; whereupon Charles the second in the time of his father was entitled
Prince of Salerno, and Charles the son of Charles the second, before he came to
the kingdom of Hungary, was also called Prince of Salerno. But because his
brother Ruberto, and not he, succeeded in the kingdom of Naples, which was then
called Duke of Calauria, How the kings elde^^ son was entitled Duke of Cal^^ria.
from thence it so came to pass, that from that time forward they were no more
Princes of Salerno, but the Kings first begotten son was called Duke of
Calauria. So was Charles called his father living, the worthy son of Ruberto; so
was Ferdinando the son of Alfonsus King of Arragon, who first conquered Naples;
and so was Alfonsus the squint-eyed the son of Ferdinando; but it so falling
out, that old Ferdinando alo living, to Alfonsus his son was born a son whom he
also named Ferdinando, to him (because his father Duke of Calauria lived) was
given the title of the Principality of Capoa. The first Prince of Capoa.
The first which was called Prince of Taranto, not descending of the blood
Royal, was Iacobo del Balzo the son of Francisco, which was also the first
that of no Princely family was called Duke of Andri. And so much concerning the
title of a Prince, which signifying the Dignity, Signiory and Jurisdiction
which (...) holds, so it is lawful for them to place over their Scutchion,
or Coat, Armor, o^ their Family, a crown made after this fashion,

The crown belonging to a Prince.


In this kingdom after the dignity of a Prince, the next is the state of a
Duke, which takes place before a Marquess and an Earl. These Dukes have above
their Arms a round hoop without any points or work above: But in place of the
points there are certain pearls, and round about are certain precious stones,
after the manner which here underneath appears.

The crown of a Duke.


See Luca di Penna in l. 1. c. de auro coronario, lib. 10. and in l. 1. c. de
Authle.

Cassaneus in catalogo gloriae mundi, in 1. par. Concl. 9.


The which fashion, although it be now decayed, I have thought good to declare,
to the end the truth thereof may be known, The first title of a Duke in this
kingdom, was that of Benevento, instituted in the year 573. But after they came
under the jurisdiction of the King, the first being not descended of Princely
blood, was Francisco del Balzo (as has been said) made Duke of Andri, by Queen
Ione the first. Not long after was Iacobo Marzano, made Duke of Sessa by King
Ladislaus, and so others from time to time, whereof the number at this present
is very great. This dignity of a Duke increased to a very high and eminent
degree, the which chanced not to any of the other aforesaid dignities, because
Charles the 8. King of France being possessed of this kingdom, created Giliberto
of Borbona Earl of Montpensier his Lieutenant General of the kingdom Archduke
of Sessa, Archduke of Sessa.
and so the said Borbana afterward caused to be set upon his Arms a great
purple cap, garnished with a golden hoop, set full of precious stones, with
certain points without pearls in the top, but only put in the sides thereof,
to the end the dignity of a Prince might have its place, and that he also might
be known for an Archduke.

The crown of an Archduke.


The which crowns as well of the Archdukes as the Dukes, are to be used in the
manner abovesaid, that whosoever ascends to that dignity, ought not to
augment it with flourishing, or otherwise with the ornament of Jewels or
precious stones, for in so doing, they seem to usurp a greater dignity then
belongs unto them, for which as the Lawyers say, they ought to be punished. And
here it is to be noted, that they are not pointed in that manner as some of
them have formerly used, that is to say, after that fashion, as their ancestors
have had them, because they as they were free Lords, and acknowledged not any
superior, (as before has been declared in the discourse of the principality on
this side) might lawfully do it; the which is now otherwise, the kingdom being
under the dominion and jurisdiction of Kings.

After these the next in degree are the Marquesses, the which are adorned with
a hoop set with precious stones, without any thing above, and with a very small
appearance thereof above the Arms, after this manner.

The crown of a Marquess.


Bi^ndo and Pietro Razzano say, that the word Marquess signifies in the
Lombard tongue a perpetual Magistrate, or a perpetual Lordship; but according
as Mario Equicola says in his Commentaries of the Marquesses of Mantua,
signifies in the I^alian tongue, a President. Alciato that excellent Lawyer,
says that the word Marquess is a Dutch name, and that it signifies a Master
of the Horse, forasmuch as the Germans call a horse Marca, and in the French
tongue Marcare is as much as to say, to ride. In this kingdom as the name of a
Duke and an Earl came the soonest, and that of a Prince first, before in any
other place, so that of a Marquess appeared long after; for the first was Cecco
dal Bargo that was made Marquess of Pescara by King Ladislaus.

Then follow the Earls, called in Latin Comiti, because they were sent from
the train and followers of the Emperors to rule and govern some province, Luca
de Penna in Rub. c. de Comitibus, lib. 12.
or some part thereof. Also an Earl, according to Luca de Penna, may put upon
his Arms, in place of a crown, a plain hoop, differing nothing from that of a
Marquess, save only the want of Jewels and precious stones, as the Earls of
Altavilla, of Aquino, of Conza, of Marsico, of Nola, of Isernia, of Milito, of
Potenza, of Troja, This dignity was by Charles the Great, and his son, bestowed
on those which were their Deputies. Afterward under the German Empire that
title was of a proper power and authority.
and others anciently have used.



The Earls had their precedence in the Parliaments of all the other Lords and
Barons which had no title; Marino Frezza in 2. lib. de suffendi in the chap.
Quis dicatur Comes, nu. 54.
being created by the ancient Kings with great state and solemnity, as appears
in Vgone Falcando, where he speaks of the promotion of Riccardo di Mandra,
Constable of the County of Molise, Comes creatus tubis, tympanis, cimbalisque
de more solenniter prae untibus.

FINIS.
CHARLES The fifth Emperor, and the 26th. King OF NAPLES.
FOR completing the History of Naples, I will take my rise from a
High-ground,, from that Heroic Prince that Top of men, CARLOS Quinto; who was
the first of the Austrian Family, that saluted in person the fair Parthenope,
and mounted the Napolitan Courser. From him we will go regularly on, and draw
the thread of the Story to his Great Grandchild Philip the fourth now Regnant.

THE Emperor Charles the fifth, is famous for diverse high Feats of Magnanimity
and Prudence, but the greatest and difficultest Exploit that ever he did, the
most signal Victory that ever he obtained through-out the whole course of his
life which had bin so active, was that Conquest he made of Himself, when he
brought his passions and height of spirit to be so succumbent and co^chant, and
to stoop unto Him in so low a posture, that stripping himself of all his
Imperial and Royal Robes (which he had worn in so much glory the first 36.
years, the other 40. from sixteen to six and fifty) he reached them with his
own hands, the one to his brother Ferdinand, to put on, the other to his son
Philip, denuding himself thereby of all earthly power, command, and wealth; and
pulling off, as it were, all his clothes thereby before he went to bed, and
burying Himself (in a dark Cloister) before he was dead: An act without
controversy most heroic, and discovering a high Soul; For as while we sojourn
here among these frail and mutable Elements, the Conduct of our passions is
held by the Philosophers to be the principal business of Virtue, so the Conquest
of them is the noblest part of Valor; A man need no^ go abroad to seek
Enemies, whereon to exercise his Courage, if he descend into himself he shall
find Foes enough at home; I mean those Inmates and innated rebellious appetits,
those tumultuous irregular humors which lodge within him, and to give Them the
check, is the hardest part of the Play we are to act upon this worldly Stage.

Charles the Emperor did this, when he had but newly finished the eleventh
Luster of his Age, being then not 56. years old; nor did he thus control
himself, by abandoning the pomp and glory of this life, and avoiding public
care, that he might retire to a Country House of pleasure, to hawk and hunt, or
use such pastimes, but he removed from so many Thrones to enter himself into a
Monastery (or Hermitage rather) that by that reclus'd life he might sequester
himself from all mundane negotiations and delights, to have more vacancy, not
only to study the Theory of Mortification, but put it in practice: Besides this
reason he declard at his Resignation, that he was now weary of the incombrances
of worldly affairs, wherewith he had bin laden so many years, for which he was
become now unweldly in regard of Age, as also being afflicted with frequent
fi^ts of the Gout, which made him so crazy and unapt for Government, having
used Tassata stirrops for diverse years. One of his Predecessors, Severus the
Emperor was of an other humor, for he being very sick of the Gout at the City
of York, as the story tells us, one of his Nobles attending him at that time,
told him, that the world did admire how he could govern so many separated
Nations, and make such remote Expeditions, being so subject to that
Arthriticall lame disease, whereunto the Emperor with more vigor then
ordinary, answered; Sir, I would have you know, that I rule the Empire with my
head, and not with my feet, with my temples, not with my toes. Hereunto may be
not impertinently answered, that memorable answer which the late Henry the
Great of France gave to a Spanish Ambassador, who coming to visit him when he
was sore sick of the Gout, and condoling his indisposition, he suddenly rise up
off his Couch, and told him, Ventre de saint Gris sil y avoit ocasion Vostre
Maistre n^ auroit pas plustost le pied dans Lestrier, qu'il ne me trouveroit
monte a cheval non obstant la g^^te. By the belly of Saint Gris, if there were
ocasion your Master (meaning Philip the 3d. of Spain) should not have his foot
sooner in the stirrup, then he should find me on hors-back, notwithstanding the
Gout.

But touching Charles the Emperor, whereof we have spoken; it is much that he
should be so subject to the Gout, if stirring and motion be a Supersedeas
against it as the Physicians hold, because few Princes had bin so active as he
from his very youth; for he made nine journies into Germany, seven to Italy,
ten to Flanders, four to France, two to England, and two expeditions to Afric;
He had made eight Voyages on the Mediterranean Sea, and three on the Ocean.

And what a world of Achievements did he perform in these Expeditions? He sent
away the great Solomon weeping from before the Walls of Vienna, and so stoppd
that huge torrent of destruction, which was like to have overwhelmed all
Germany, and quickly after the rest of Christendom; He made Barbarossa that
formidable Pyrate, and his Dragon the Admiral Gal^on wherein he sailed, to ^ly
before him; what notable Conquests were those of Goletta and Tunis, where the
Roman Eagles had not flown since the time of Scipio and Hannibal, and had not
the Emulation of some Christian Princes found him work at home, and diverted
him, he in all appearance had conquered and civilized all Barbary. To return to
Europe, he took the Duke of Cleve with all his Towns and Territories, he
quashed the Duke of Sax: who was head of the Lutheran party, he imprisoned the
Duke of Milan, he subdued and sacked Rome, he tamed the mutinous City of Gant,
where he first breathed air and had bin rocked in his Cradle; he pierced the
very heart of France, forcing that King to fly to the Turk for his assistance
against him, whom he afterward took prisoner (being the day he was born upon)
yet touching that action (as he himself confessed) though Charles had more of
Fortune therein, yet Francis had got as much of glory, considering all
circumstances, being taken with naked Sword in hand, among a throng of fighting
Enemies, all about him weltring in blood, Colors flying, and Victory
fluttering on both sides with doubtful wings: The full discovery of the new
World was made in his Reign, with the Mines of Peru; In fine, he had such a
continual tide of good success, that it seems that Age was designed for his
glory. He had twenty pitched Battles, and above three hundred Sieges; nor did he
know what a Repulse was, but only at Algier, Marseilles and Mets, where the
wind blew strongly in his face, insomuch that among the Caesar's, Charlemain may
be said to be only parrallell to Charles le Q^int. All this he intimated in a
fluent and vigorous swelling Oration before the two Queens, Elianor of France,
and Mary of Hungary Dowager his Sisters, diverse Knights of the golden Fleece,
and a great confluence of Nobles at the Act of Renuntiation, in Bruxells; but
now he said further, he would court Fortune no longer (who being a Female loves
young men best) and therefore he would recommend his Son unto her. He would no
longer hold those Scepters which he could not sway, nor, a Sword that he could
not draw out, yet he said, that by this Surrendry he did not retire himself
from either Imperial or Regal power, out of any apprehensions of any fear of
future dangers, or revolts, or the power of any Potentates upon earth, nor out
of a resentment of any ill success passed, or the least distrust of the Divine
providence, and any disaffections of his Subjects, but soly to wean himself
from the World, and have better opportunity to make his account with Heaven.

After such generous Expressions and a little pausing, he concludes thus in
Spanish. Que porsus indisposit^ones a que le avian reducido los traba^os del
espiritu estava resuelto de pouer todo el peso de los negocios sobre los ombros
de su Hijo, y Hermano, y assi desde ^atonces renunciava en el uno el Imperio, y
en el otro las Coronas d' Espana, y de las diez y siete provincias de Flandes,
y desobligava a todos sus sudditos del juramento de fidelidad que le avian
hecho. In regard of those distempers which the agitations of his spirit had
reduced him unto, he was resolved to pass over the weight of all businesses
upon the sholders of his Son and his Brother; therefore from that time forward
he renounced and transferred the Empire to the one, and the Crowns of Spain
with all the seventeen Provinces to the other, disobliging and absolving all
his Subjects from that oath of alleagiance which they had sworn unto him;
whereupon his Son Philip kneeling before him bare-headed, his Father melting
all into tears (with diverse of the Spectators) he put the Crown upon his head
giving him his benediction and therewith the Sovereignty of all his Dominions,
that being disburden'd hereof he might the more easily go on in his journey to
the Port of happiness, and dispose himself to the meditation of the supreme
Good, which is the best Philosophy, the highest wisdom, and most consummated
felicity. As he was doing this he presented to the young King his Son, Don
Francisco Eraso, who had bin Secretary, and a most loyal Confident of his many
years; Insomuch that at parting, he said, Quanto os he dado este dia no es
^anto ^emo daros mi Eraso. That which I have given you my Son at this day, is
not so much as the giving of my Eraso unto you.

A little after he sent the Imperial Crown to his brother Ferdinand, by
William Prince of Orange who was slain afterward, contracting with his Sons;
Ferdinand showed himself shy at first in accepting of it, because it was too
heavy for his sholders, at last he took it, saying, No ac^tara si no convini^ra
a la conservation de ^^s salud, pero procuraria imitar sus virtudes en part,
ya que en todo era impossible a la mayor capacidad. He would not accept of such
a Crown, did it not conduce to the preservation of his Majesty his brothers
health, but he would endeavor to imitate his Virtues in part, for to imitate
them all was impossible for the greatest capacity.

The Critics of those times did pass various censures upon this rare
transaction, upon this high affair of State, the sound whereof quickly pass^d
to both the Poles, some taxt Charles of a kind of (laschete) of pusillanimity
and desection of spirit in doing this, others of too much indulgence of
himself, and for his corporal ease, others gave out he did it because he
foresaw those fearful tumults which happend afterward in the Low Countries
by the Lutheran party: But the soberst sort of impartial men did impute it
soly to his indisposition of health, and that this retiredness might tend to
the advantage of his body and soul, which those multiplicities of cares, that
attended so many Crowns as he wore, debarrd him of. It was a saying of one of
our English Kings, That if one did but know the weightines of a Crown he would
not take it up, though he should stumble at it in the high way: If this may be a
caveat to those who are in health, much more should it be to those that are
indisposd and of crazy wasted constitutions: As the gifts of Nature are more
excellent then those of Fortune, so are they, by a well regulated soul to be
preferrd before them. The Ensigns of Majesty, as the Scepter, the Diadem, the
Throne, are glorious objects to behold, but when the rackings of the Gout, the
Colic, or other infirmities wholly distemper him that has them, a healthful
Peasan is far more happy, then such a Prince, if placed in opposition; such a
King may be said to be Tantalizd all the while, for though he have an
a^^luence of all things about him, yet he cannot taste of any with a true
relish; so that what should procure his happiness, increases his punishment, for
though he can command all, yet he cannot convert any thing to his own comfort,
when the agonies he suffers make those which are gustfull to others to become
gall to him.

The pangs of the Gout alone are able to convince Zeno and his senseless sect
of Stoiks, who deny all pain and passion; For all those pleasing Ideas which
the conceit of Majesty and greatness use to instill into the brain, cannot
countervail those torments which some diseases use to inflict upon the body;
Therefore doubtless Charles the fifth had more reason to prefer his health before
his Crowns, it being a jewel so precious, that all the Diadems on Earth have
not the like inchacd in them: It was the speech of Valentinian, That an
Emperor ought to dye standing on his feet, now if he ought to be found dying
in that posture, much more ought he to appear so living: It Is true we read of
some Generals who have commanded in their Litters (as Sir Francis Vere was
carried in a Chair at the battle of Newport to direct the Army) but these
examples are very few.

But we will return to take leave of Charles the fifth; A little after, this
once mighty Monarch, and now mortified man, removd to Flushing, to embark
himself with his two royal Sisters for Spain (the foresaid Mary Queen of
Hungary, and Leonora Queen Dowager of France) and thence to the haven of
eternal rest; being there, he was so thin attended, that one night he had not
a Servant to light some who came to visit him down the stairs but did it
himself: Thence he hoisd sail for Castile, where he cloysterd himself in the
Monastery of Saint Iusto, and that small remnant of time he livd there (which
was not above two years) he imployd in divine seraphicall speculations, in
diverse sorts of penances, concurring with sundry acts of piety and pity.

Thus this great H^ro became a Hermit, this glorious Monarch became an obscure
M^nk, and certainly he well deservd to have worn so many Crowns who did so
freely quitt them, obeying therein only the motions of his own soul, without
any show of constraint, or the lest appearance of suspecting the alleagiance of
his people.

Now touching that Arthriticall torturing disease which afflicted the Emperor
Charles, his Son and immediate Successor had much more cause to be subject
thereunto, in regard of his sedentary and reposefull life, in regard that he
kept for the most part in his Closet, where he would write himself his own
letters, dispatches, and instructions: There he might be said to have a
Prospective, through which he beheld what was a doing in the old and new World,
yea as far as the Antipodes: His Closet was the center whence the lines of his
comands were drawn to the circumference, of so many vast remote Regions, as
will appear in the History of his life, which in regard he was a Prince of a
strange mould, of a close dark nature, that his thought could seldom be
penetrated, I will spend more oil then ordinary to illustrat his Reign.

THE LIFE and REIGN of PHILIP the Second, 27th KING OF NAPLES.
PHILIP of Austria (second of that name) succeeded Caesar his Imperial Father
in all his Hereditary Dominions by a voluntary free Resignation, wherein he
might be said not to be beholden to death, as other Heirs apparent use to be,
but to his Fathers free design: But touching the Kingdom of Naples, it was
transferrd unto him before* to countenance his second marriage with Mary Queen
of England and Ireland: There wanted not some Critiques that would have derogated
from the worthiness of that spontaneous Act of the Emperors, saying, That
King Philip was overheard to say a while after that The second day after the
Resignation was the first day of his Fathers Repentance: But sure that could
not be, if the Historians who were then contemporaries may be beleevd, for this
was don by a long molded preceding resolution, as they write, in regard that
the Emperor had a design to do it six years before, when he was but fifty
years of age; the ground of which proceeded from the speech of an old Captain
of his, who desiring a Pass to retire from Arms, told him, Sir, he who has a
care of his soul must put an Intervall twixt the affairs of the World and
Death. And now to the intended task.

Philip the second was born in Valladolid upon a Tuesdey the 21. of May 1527.
in the Chair-ship of Clement the seventh, a little before that his Fathers
Army had assaulted and sacked Rome, but without the knowledge of the Emperor
himself, and the consent of his Viceroy of Naples at that time, which was the
cause that Philip was not baptized with such Ecclesiastical Pomp and Solemnity
that is usual; at ten months and twenty days old he was declared Prince of
Castilia and Aragon in the Monastery of Saint Hierom in Madrid, his Parents
being present: when he had arrived to seven years of age (wherein Nature does
use to make some visible change, in the progress of humane life) his Father
commanded a house and family to be settled for him; At which time Doctor
Siliceo (who was afterward Bishop of Toledo, and Cardinal) was appointed to be
his Preceptor, who taught him to know, to love, and fear God, to read, and
write, to understand the Latin, Italian, and French tongues, and to have some
knowledge in the Mathematiques: His Mother the Empress, Daughter to Emanuel
King of Portugal, dyed a few years after at Toledo where Philip was bred,
leaving him about twelve years of age, at which time he began to rule Spain in
the absence of his Father, being assisted by Cardinal Tabera, the Duke of Alua,
and others: At fifteen years of age he was sworn Prince of Aragon, where he was
entitled Governor according to the custom: At sixteen years of age he married
the Lady Maria Infanta of Portugal, Daughter to John the third, a Creature of
exquisit bewty, being of the same age with Philip.

Some few years after he was called by his Father to Flanders, leaving the
Government of Spain to Archduke Maximilian his Cosen, and King of Bohemia and
Hungary. He passed over to Italy in a Fleet of thirty eight Galleys, under the
command of Andrea Doria, and landing at Genoa, he passed through Milan and
Mantova to Germany and so to Brussels; Having their received diverse good
Documents from his Father, taken a survey of the Nether-lands, Italy and
Germany, whither he attended the Emperor his Father to a Diet at Auspurg,
having purchased all this experience, he went back by his Fathers order to
Spain, having received a new Commission to govern there in chief, and in the
Indies also: A while after there was an ouverture of marriage made twixt him
and Queen Mary of England, which was quickly agreed upon, therefore he embarked
himself at the Groyn ( Corunnia) in a Fleet of sixty eight Ships, wherein was a
Regiment of four thousand Spaniards, among whom were diverse Noble men and
persons of quality: Being arrived in England and royally attended to London,
the Nuptials were celebrated in great magnificence; hereupon King Philip took
share with his wife in the Government, by the title of King of Naples,
Jerusalem, England, and Ireland, but afterward the Parliament (when he was
departed) began a Cavil and would not have him styled King of England, but
Husband to the Queen of England, during his abode in England, his Queen and he
lived in a sweet way of conjugall love, notwithstanding their disparity of
years, she being above a dozen years elder; It was thought once she was with
Child, therefore she was prayed for at Saint Paul's Cross, but in lieu of a
Pregnancy it proved a Tympany, a Tumor, or Mole, proceeding from indisposition
of body: All the while he lived in England he advanced the Roman Religion, but
being called away by his Father to Flanders, the reformed Religion began to
take footing again; After he was departed from England, Calais was taken by the
Duke of Guyse, who in the dead of Winter did suddenly sit before her and began
his Batteries so furiously, that the noise of his Canons were heard as far as
Antwerp near a hundred miles distant: King Philip while he cohabited with his
Wife often advisd her to have a special care of Calais, and afterward upon a
Treaty of peace twixt Spain and France, one of the Articles were that Calais
should be surrendered to the Queen of England, but she dyed in the interim.

The Family of Caraffa, who were near allied to Pope Paul the fourth, would
needs advise his Holiness to recover the Kingdom of Naples for the Apostolical
See, the times being propitious to such a work: their counsel prevaild in
regard that France obligd her self to assist him, but though the attempt went
very far, yet it could not take effect; That clowd being scatterd in Italy, and
the truce being expird with France, a new War began wherein he gaind that famous
Victory of Saint Quintin, which he took upon Saint Laurence day, and for the
advantage of his advenues he was forcd to batter down a Monastery of Friars,
but with a resolution and vow, that if it would please Heaven to give him the
Victory he would erect such a house of Religion to the honor of God, and of the
Martyr Saint Laurence that the World had not the like, which he performd
accordingly at the Escuriall.

A peace being concluded afterward with France, and having put all things in a
settled and good posture in Flanders, leaving there his Sister the Duchess of
Parma to govern, he made sail for Spain, but as he landed at Laredo, a furious
tempest did rise wherein diverse of his Ships perishd who were very richly laden.
Not long after this his return to Spain, the Moors of Granada did cut him
work to do, and it proud a tedious and difficult task to subdue them, which yet
he achieved at last after many traverses of War: In the greatest fury thereof,
King Philip married the Arch-Duchesse the eldest Daughter of the Emperor
Maximilian, who was brought in great pomp from Germany to Spain.

At the earnest solicitation of Pope Pius the fifth he entered afterward into a
league with his Holiness, and the Republic of Venice against Selim the great
Turk, who a little before had taken the I Will of Cyprus from the Signiory; he
writ^ back to the Pope, that he held his request therein to be equivalent to a
command, and so he sent order to his Viceroys of Naples and Sicily to levy
Forces accordingly; which they did, sending Don John of Austria his natural
Brother, to be his Generalissimo, thereupon happend that famous Naval fight in
the Gulf of Lepanto, upon the success whereof the incolumity of all Italy
depended, but it pleased God to afford the Christians a most triumphant and
blissful victory* which if they had pursued, they might in all probability
have overmasterd all Greece, but their own dissentions hinderd the work: The
Neapolitan Squadrons did most signal services in this great Expedition, for
which King Philip sent a Letter full of grace and thanks, with an enlargement
of some privileges, to the most faithful City of Naples.

Philip had now waded through sundry sorts of difficulties, having putt a
period to the War with the Caraffa's and the Pope, made peace with the French,
and debelld the Mahumetans; therefore he addicted himself to erect works of
piety, and among other, that stupendous Fabrique at the Escuriall, but as he
was most busy about it, news came to him of the troubles of Flanders, and it
was the unluckiest news that ever was brought to Spain, considering what a
long lingering War they brought, wherein all the Princes of Christendom were
directly or col^aterally engagd, it is as impossible to believe as to write the
strange and various traverses of those Wars, the multitudes of men who lost
their life's therein, so that those Provinces were called Sepulchra Hispanorum,
the incredible mass of treasure which was expended, for the Mines of Mexico
and those of Potosi were almost exhausted to feed these Wars, which had they
not happend, the Kings of Spain might have pavd their Courts and tild their
Palaces with Gold and Silver; yet in the greatest brunt and fury of these
Wars, Philip made a conquest of Portugal, for se^ing his title would not be
accepted, whereby he alleged right of Succession, he made it good with his
Sword, and subdued the whole Kingdom, wherein as he said he verified the
saying, that -- Arma tenenti
Omnia dat qui justa negat --


To atchieve this mighty exploit, whom should Philip employ but the Duke of
Alva, who had so trampled upon the Belgians, and though he was then in disgrace
with the King, and in Prison by his immediate command, yet he had studied his
humor so well, how ambitious he was of glory, and how many proofs he had made
of his fidelity and courage, that though he would not admit him to his presence
and to kiss his hands, yet he sent him a Commission to be his Generalissimo in
that Expedition: Nor was Philip out of his account, or deceavd in his judgment
of the genius of the man, for he executed his Commission with such an exactnes
of fidelity, with such rare success, and in so short a compass of time that one
must have a strong faith to believe, with what facility he reducd all
Lusitania, which proud a mighty addition to the Spanish Monarchy, for thereby
the East Indies, so many Islands in the Atlantic Sea, with diverse Territories
in Afric fell under the Castilian yoke: But as Henry the seventh of England was
hanted with walking Spirits (who said they were Edward the fifth) whom he chasd
away by sprinkling of blood, so was Philip the second troubled with two
Hermits, who one after the other said they were Don Sebastian, and so drew a
considerable party after them, but they were found to be Counterfeits, and so
executed accordingly. Moreover Don Antonio natural Son to Lewis one of the
Uncles of Don Sebastian, pretended right to the Crown (as he had had, had he
bin legitimat) therefore he fled to Queen Elizabeth of England for succor, who
accordingly furnished him with considerable Forces by Sea and Land, under Drake
and Norris, but all would not do.

No sooner had Philip thus securd and quieted the Kingdom of Portugal, with
the vast Territories thereunto annexed, but new work was cut him out in Aragon,
where a hideous Insurrection happened, which grew from the imprisonment of
Antonio Perez, the famous Secretary of State, King Philip left him to the
ordinary course of Justice, and being accusd of Homicide to have slain
Escovedo, Don John of Austria's Secretary, and according to the Laws of Spain
being rackt therefore, he confessed the Fact, but he alleged, he did it by the
King his Masters command; and being pressd to discover the causes, he answered,
they were so secret that they were not fit to be published. It Is true that Philip
did not much resent the death of Escovedo, because he had buzzd odd councels
into the ears of Don John of Austria, as to marry without the Kings privity
Elizabeth Queen of England, to conquer Algier or Tunis, and crown himself King
afterward. Antonio Perez by his wives subtlety made an escape out of prison,
and posted away to Aragon with two Confidents of his, where he found such
potent and popular Friends that gave him Sanctuary and protection; and they
drew a considerable party after them to this purpose. Now as one insolency
draws on another, they took opportunity hereby to say, that it was a breach of
their privileges to have a stranger to be their Viceroy, as also to introduce
the Inquisition whereunto Perez was like to be put over. This Commotion was like
to be of very dangerous consequence, for the common people of Saragossa began
to be very violent in it, King Philip raisd an Army of 10000. foot and 1500
horse, under the command of Don Alonso de Vargas, a Veteran and a great
experiencd Captain; they of Aragon having notice hereof, were preparing another
Army in opposition, but the King with his own hand writ to them a gracious
Letter in these words.

No aver levantado aquel Exercit^ si no para passar a Francia, que el era mejor
Aragonez, que los que aconse javan se le estorvasse el passo, y se maravillava
mucho se creyes cosa que a el aun no avia passado por el pensamiento, y menos
romper l^s privilegios a un Reyno a quien amava tanto The Army which he was a
raising was to no other end but to pass to France, he was a better Arrogonian
then those who gave advice that this Army should be stopd in the passage, and he
wonderd much that credit should be given to things that never entered into his
head, where he never habourd the least thought to infringe the privilege of a
Kingdom, which he lovd so well. This Letter was like a gilded Pill with strong
Drugs within, for no sooner was the Letter sent, but Don Alonso followd with
his Army and came to the gates of Sarogosa, his Soldiers crying out for France,
for France, Don Alonso being entered, the chief Justice of Aragon thinking to
fly away was apprehended, and according to a private order Don Alonso had from
the King to dispatch in the first place Don John de Nuza, y que a un mismo
punto le avisasse de su prision y de su muerte who should have notice at the
same instant of his imprisonment and death: Don John being thus apprehended was
hurried into a Coach, and two Jesuits to prepare him for death, he asked by
virtue of what Sentence, hereupon they showed him that short order, which Philip
all of his own handwriting had delivered Don Alonso. That Don John de Nuza was
the prime Officer of the Kindom of Aragon; a goodly fair young man, and of a
gallant presence, therefore his death was very much lamented, specially being
descended of the most illustrious and ancientst Families of that Kingdom; many
other persons of quality and the chief Ringleaders of this Tumult were
executed, and their heads and members set up in quarters upon the gates of the
City; Antonio Perez had made his escape from Saragosa two days before toward
France, to the Country of Bern, where Katherine Queen of Navarr and Mother to
Henry the fourth, gave him protection and entertainment, whereupon a public
Ban was proclaimd that whosoever could bring him alive, or dead should have
6000. crowns, therefore not finding himself secure so near Spain, he fled to
England, and thence removd to Paris, where he did lead the remainder of his
life* gazd upon as he passd the streets as a strange Monster of Fortune, but
cried up for a person of notable sound parts, and politic Speculations.

A little after King Philip, his General Don Alonzo having already dispatched
the principalst part of the business before him, made a kind of progress to his
Kingdom of Aragon, and convokd a Parliament to meet at Tarasona, but a general
pardon preceded his summons, only the Town of Tervel and Albarracin excepted
with 145. persons besides, which he afterward forgave, so he confirmed unto
them such privileges as he thought; he enacted new Laws, and repeald many
old, so the Kingdom gave him a present of about four hundred thousand crowns,
so he returned triumphantly from Aragon to Castille, having thus deprest the
courage of that high crested people; And if ever that Aphorism was verified;
viz. That Rebellion suppressed makes the Prince the stronger, surely it was in
this great Action, as may be inferrd out of the former transactions in that
Kingdom.

Upon crushing of this Aragonian Cocatrice in the shell, there was a monstrous
strange Hydra engendered in France with I cannot tell how many heads: The
Huguenots began to be potent and turbulent there, the Queen Mother Katherine de
Medicis, with the Guisards were great Bigots, and abhorring that faction, being
most fervent in the advance of the Roman cause, they made war against the
Huguenots, upon those grounds; Thereupon Philip being the Catholic King, could
do no less in the quarrel of the holy Church then reach his Arm and assist
them which he did, by sending order to the Duke of Parma his Governor in
Flanders to that end, who accordingly rusht into France and pursued his march
as far as the walls of Paris: At his entrance into France he repaird to the
Cathedral Church of Meaux where he protested and solemnly swore, that he came
to France with that Army (which consisted of 10000. foot and 3000. horse) to no
other intent but to deliver the oppressed friends of the King (then under
minority) from the violence of Rebels and Heriticks, in which quarrel he would
expose his person to any perils whatsoever, and he knew every soul under the
Banners of his Catholic Majesty which were in this Army would do the like:
Having receivd this special command and knowledge of his said Majesty's
pleasure accordingly: This intricat and mysterious War called the Ligue lasted
by intermissions in France above thirty years, and it came to such a
multiplicity of Interests that every Province became Frontire to one another,
insomuch that that gallant and entire complete Kingdom was like to be cut into
fragments and cantonizd. Queen Eliz: of England was offerrd by the Hugonots a
good part, but foreseeing what confusion it would bring, and how much it would
enfeeble the power of that Kingdom, which is the greatest one knot of strength
and entire power that is able to counterbalance that of the Monarchy of Spain,
she refused the proffer, and rather assisted the preservation of the Regal
power in that Kingdom.

King Philip having don such signal Services for the Roman Catholics in
France, and having wownd himself out of the Ligue from warring against Heritiks
(as he called the Hugonots) he turned his Sword against Infidels, he sent a
puissant Army both by Land and Sea, under Don Francisco de Mendosa, who was
Commander in chief for the Conquest of Oran upon the Coasts of Barbary, which
design proud so succesfull that it took effect, yet not without much expense of
blood and treasure, which made the triumph more glorious for -- Turpis sine
pulvere palma: Having thus reducd Oran, and some Territories circumiacent from
Mahumetismie, and the half Moon to be under the Standard of the Cross, he
pursued his good Fortunes and assaulted another Fort in Barbary, called Penion
de Velez which he also carried but not without some difficulty.

After a little breathing from beating the Turk in Barbary, he had opportunity
to meet him at Malta, which being besiegd by Solomon, he sent to his Viceroy of
Naples and Sicily to make what strength they could to assist the great Master
and Knights of that noble Order; The Siege proud very obstinat for four months
and the Canons played upon the walls of Malta incossantly, which batterd some of
them down to the ground, destroyed multitudes of houses, killd within the Town
7000. of all ages and Sexes, with 2000. Cavalliers, and Commanders of all
Nations, who had sacrified their lives for the preservation of Malta, and
thereby transmitted their Fame to Posterity. Don Garcia de Toledo hereupon
returned triumphantly with his Fleet to Naples, where the three Castles and the
Church of Carmine saluted him, with sundry Volleys of great Shot. The next
Design was no less succesfull to Philip, for he made himself absolut Master of
Melilla, notwithstanding that the Mahumetans added witchcraft to their
Stratagems of War to overthrow the Spaniards.

A little after Philip understanding that Florida which belongd to him by right
of discovery, being part of newfound World, was colonied and usurpd by a
Plantation of French Hugonots, whom he abhorrd as Heretics in his opinion, the
chief whereof was John Riblaut, King Philip commanded eight Galeons with 1500.
Soldiers to be made ready at Ca^es, and appointed Pedro Melendez de Valdez
Commander, in chief giving him the title of Adelantado or Governor of Florida,
after a prosperous Navigation thither, he assaulted a Fort which the Frenchmen
had built, and he pursued the point of his Design with that vigor, that he
subdued it with the loss of a 150. men, and so driving the French into the
Mountains and Deserts, he made himself Master of the Country upon Michaelmas
day.

The next year he sent Sea and Land Forces toward the Luzones Islands which ly
the South-east, which had bin discoverd by Magellan before. And he employed
upon this Service Michael Lope de Legaspe, who had such prosperous success,
that arriving at the I Will of Zebu he was receivd with much humanity and
friendship by Tupas who ruld there as King; so he built there a Town called Saint
Michel with a strong Fort, and having some Friars aboard he raysd there the
Standard of the Cross, and many of the Indians were reducd to Christianity in a
short time, acknowledging the Catholic King for their Lord Paramount; many Isles
more (whereof there is such an infinity) rendered themselfs, and in honor of the
King they were Christened las Philippinas, making a Town called Manila the chief,
where afterward the Christian Viceroys resided: and much about that time the
Frontire Town twixt Champagne and Germany took his name, and is called
Philipsburg to this day.

All this while King Philip had the wind in the Poupe, and Fortune on the
Fore-castle, but now growing old that inconstant Female fell from him, and
turned her back, and as commonly one good Success coms not alone, so disaster
and misfortunes when they once com they com like the Surges of the Sea, and one
wave upon the neck of another: And indeed the affairs of this instable World
are nothing but Vicissitudes composd of good, and bad events.

The first frown tha^ Fortune did cast upon King Philip was under the Command
of the Conde of Alcaudete at Mostagan in Barbary, where the said Conde was slain
by the Forces of the Xariphe, a petty Morisco King; and so the enterprizd fayld.

Not long after the Napolitan Galleys with other Christian Forces had very
lamentable success at Los Gelves near Tripoli, where most of the Christian Fleet
perishd: Don Alvaro Commander in chief was taken prisoner and presented to
Piali the Turks General; but there was a great deal of rashness and imprudence
usd in the conduct of that expedition, which happened in the year 1570. For had
the Christian Army set upon Tripoli, which was a place not so strong in the ey
of reason and all humane probability, they might have taken it, having a
competent strength to do it, for the Army consisted of 12000. Soldiers besides
Commanders, 38. Galeons and 26. Galleys, but as Marriages, so Victories are
decreed in Heaven.

Another disastrous Accident happened in the Port of Herradura in the Kingdom of
Granada, where Don John of Mendosa son to Bernardin de Mendoza Viceroy and
Captain-Generall of Naples, who having a considerable Fleet wherein there were
3500. land Soldiers, which were to be quarterd in the Kingdom of Valentia where
an Insurrection was feared, there blew upon a sudden such a furious gust of an
East Wind, that most of the Fleet perishd, and above 5000. Souls.

But this misfortune was inferior to that which happened three years after,
which was in 1574. when Aluch-Ali that famous Turkish General came with a
formidable Army to the coasts of Barbary, wherewith he made himself Master of
Goletta and Tunis, where above 200. pieces of Ordinance were found, which the
Enemy made prize of with other rich Booties; they destroyed all the Churches
and Monasteries, except the great Church which was preservd by a ransom of
money.

This crowd of Disasters ushering in one another, besides that costly and
remote War in Flanders, might in any man's judgment, have daunted the spirits of
King Philip, who before had bin so long habituated to good success, for as the
moral Philosopher tells us, Miserum est fuisse felicem, One of the worst kind
of unhappiness is to have bin happy; but he was a Prince of a marvailous
aequanimity and temper, one who had long studied the mutable condition and
lubricities of this world, insomuch that these crosser traverses did rather
heighten his mind then depress it; for not long after he riggd a mighty Fleet
upon a great Dessign, no less then for the conquest of England, which he
thought to swallow at a bit, which shows that neither his spirits nor treasure
was wasted, notwithanding the vast expenses in the Flemmish Wars, and so many
millions that he buried in building the Escuriall.

The ground of this hardy Enterprise upon England, was that he had receivd
diverse Indignities and his Subjects much damage from his Sister Queen
Elizabeth, though for his part he ever since the death of his wife Queen Mary,
forbore to do any thing that might displease her, during his abode in England,
he had don her such signal and high favors, as to preserve her head from the
Scaffold, to have her allowance enlargd, to divert her Sister from a design she
had to send her beyond Sea to be a Nun; and at his departure from England he
desired not to carry with him but one Ring of 100 l. price, nor demanded he any
thing of his wifes movables after her death: And lastly he had showed no small
love for comprehending the surrendry of Calais to the English in his treaty of
peace with France; But in lieu of these Plums he gave her, she threw the stones
at him, by assisting Don Antonio the Bastard, against him about the Title of
Portugal, by fomenting his own natural Subjects against him, in the revolt of
the confederat Provinces, as far as to send a Governor of her own amongst them,
by giving commissions to rob him in the Indies, by intercepting some of his
treasure in her own Seas going to Flanders, by wronging some of the Haus Towns
who were under his protection: These with sundry lucitements more, causd Philip
to prepare this powerful Fleet to be quit with her at once for all old Scores,
and if all things had fallen right in the intended conjuncture, there was
proportion enough of strength (to speak without flattery) that might in all
probability have subdued England; for there were 130. Galeons, and Galleys; there
were 20000. fighting men aboard, near upon 3000. Canons with Bullets, Ammunition,
and all things requisite; The Duke of Parma was to cross over from Flanders with
2000. fighting men, more horse and foot, but he wanted a Fleet to transport
them, which was the greatest oversight the Spaniards committed in the tracing
and conduct of this business; But this mighty invincible Armada vanished away
into smoke, by contrary winds and horrid tempest which attended the Fleet, from
beginning to ending; for many ill-favord accidents happened at the very
beginning, which might presage the Disasters following: The Generalissimo the
Marquess of San-Cruzd, a long experienced and fortunate Captain dyed a^ he was
ready to set sail for the expedition; the Duke of Medina being chosen in his
place, as soon as he launchd out, he was beaten by an impetuous storm in the
Bay of Biscay upon the coasts of France, where he lost diverse bottoms, and the
winds were so cross, that whereas they thought to visit England in May they came
not till July, where they had such rough welcome that 10000. of their men were
made food for Hadocks, three parts of four of their Navy were sunk, burnd, or
taken, and those which scapd could not return the same way they came, but
coasting by Denmark and Norway fetched a compass about Ireland, and so came home
pitifully shatterd, torn, and tatterd.

This proud a heavy loss to Spain which she could not repair (as they say)
twenty years after: The English push on their good fortune, and the next year
take Cales, which they sacked and plunderd; diverse ill successes did
consecutively happen diverse years to King Philip, so that his Fortune made him
some amends, with his Age, but the reduction of Portugal under the Crown of
Castile, which in modesty he called an Union rather then a Conquest, though it
was a true one: He sealed all his Exploits with this, and it was the last great
action of his life, for ever after he meddled little with public business, but
transmitted them to his Son who usd to sign and seal most dispatches. King
Philip was now entering upon his 71. year (but a good while before he grew
valetudinary and weak) for twelve years before his death he drank not a drop of
Wine, nor did he eat b^t at set hours, and then by weight and sparingly to
starve his Gout, wherewith besides other indispositions he was tormented many
years, insomuch that death did not surpize and assault him upon a sudden, but
she gave him fair warning beforehand; there were diverse incisions made into one
of his legs, and he was content to have one of his fingers sawd off to stop a
Gangrene that happened there; at last it grew to be the pediculary disease, all
which he endurd with much humility and wonderful courage; It might be said
that his body was the field where his foes were incampd, and he the Combatant,
they were both quarterd together; he billited and fed his own Enemies who were
all his Inmates: During his sickness he had frequent symptoms of mortification
which encreasd with his Agonies. The last 50. days before his death he took
the Communion fourteen times, and confessed so often; He began to put his house
in order, and to prescribe the mode how he would be buried, causing them to open
his Fathers Coffin, and to take the mesure of it, for he would be buried in the
same posture, which was in the Frock of a poor Friar: The Surgeons being
lancing of his knee one day, the Prince his son asked him whether it did not
pain him much, he answered, mucho mas me duelen mis pecados, My sins pain me
much more: In the height of his anguishes his speech usd to be, Padre Eterno tu
voluntad se haga y no la mia; Eternal Father thy will be done and not mine.

Some days before his last he called for the Prince his Son, and told him, No se
sentia con fuercas ni capacidad para advertirle lo que era necessario para el
govierno de tantos pueblos que dexava a su cargo, mas que dexava un papel en
poder de su confessor, en que hallaria los mas saludables consejos de sus
experiencias, y los mas justos avisos que su conscientia le dicto My Son, I do
not find my self now to have strength or capacity enough to communicate unto
you what is necessary for the government of so many peeple which are to fall
under your Government, but I have left in the hands of my Confessor a paper,
wherein you shall find the wholsomst advise that my experience and conscience
could dictat; so he causd him to read what Saint Lewis of France said to his
Son Philip before his death; Afterward he commanded an Ivory Cabinet to be
brought, whence he took out a plain Crucifix of wood, and a penitential Whip
all blooded, saying, whereas others use to leave Rings and Jewels at their death
to them whom they love most, I leave you, my Son, this Discipline (meaning the
Whip for so they call it in Spain) which he conjurd him upon his blessing to
make often use of, for as he said, Con esta disciplina podria mesclar su sangre
con la de su padre y su abuelo In using this you may mingle your blood with
that of your Fathers and Grandfathers: And touching that plain Crucifix, he
told him that his Grandfather dyed having it in his hands, and so would he,
wishing his Son to do the like. The next day he took the extreme Unction at
nine of the night, desiring first to be informd by the Archbishop of Toledo
how it was usd to be usd, for he had never seen it don before; he had the
Prince his Son there present, to whom for all his spirits were so much wasted,
he made this rare Speech.

He querido, Hijo mio, os hallassedes present en esta hora, y viessedes como
yo he recebido la santa Unction lo uno porque no os suceda lo que o mi, y
tengais la ignorancia que yo, lo otro paraque veais en que paran las Monarquias
deste mundo; ya veys, Hijo mio, como Dios me ha despojado de la gloria y
Magestad de Rey para daros a vos esta investidura, a mi me pondran dentro de
pocas horas una pobre mortaja, y me ceniran con un pobre cordel, y a se me ca^
de la cabes a la Corona, la muerte me la quita para daros la a vos. Dos cosas
os encomiendo mucho la una que permanescais siempre en la obediencia de la
santa Iglesia Catolica; la otra que hagais justicia, y ameis a vuestros
vassallos, pues vendra tiempo en que esta corona se os cayga de la cabeca como
aora a mi, vos sois mancebo yo lo he sido, mis dias estavan contades, ya se han
acabado, Dios sabe los que tendreis de vida, y tambien han de tener fin, y assi
es menester no desany daros en lo que tanto importa, sino mirar como vivis,
porque la muerte os halle en buen estado siempre que os llame My Son, I was
willing you should be present at this hour, now that I am taking the holy
Unction for two respects, first, that you might be not so ignorant hereof as I
have bin; Secondly, that you may be an Ey-witness what becoms of worldly
Monarchs; you see already, my Son, how God has disrobd me of the Glory and
Majesty of a King, to transfer this investiture to you, they will very speedily
wind me up in a poor sheet and gird me about with a poor girdle (meaning Saint
Francis Cordon) The Crown is upon point of falling off my head, death takes it
from me to give it you; I recommend unto you two things, first, that you would
continue constant in the holy Catholic Church: Secondly, that you would cause
Justice to be don to your Subjects, and that you would love them, for the time
will com that the Crown will also fall from off your head, as it does from
mine; you are young and I am old, my days were reckond, and the Score is onw
striking off, yours also must have an end, therefore it behooves you not to be
careless how much it imports you, but be heedfull what life you lead, that
death may find you in a good condition when he summons you away.

Afterward he much recommended unto him a War against Heretics, and Peace
with France,; The Prince thinking that he was now expird, and to settle the
Marquess of Denia his Favorit, afterward Duke of Lerma, he demanded the golden
Key of his Closet of Don Christo val de mora, he answered, that he could not do
it while the King was living; the Prince being a little movd thereat Don
Christoval complained to the King, who although he likd not his Sons demand por
ser algo temprana, because it was somewhat to early, yet he commanded Don
Christo val to deliver it him, and ask him pardon; Now, the King had a year
before turned his face to the wall toward death, and his back to the world,
from all troublesome businesses, so that the Prince signd most Commissions all
the while.

So on Sunday about five in the afternoon upon the day of rest, Philip went
gently to his last, and he fell with the fall of the leaf in September, being
seventy one years of age, to which age none of the Austrian Family ever arrivd,
as it was observd. The last words which he breathd were these, yo muero como
Catolico Christiano en lafe and obediencia de la iglesia Romana, y Respeto al
papa como a quie^ trae en sus manos las llaves del cielo como al principe de la
iglesia, y Teniente de Dios sobre el imperio de las almas. I die a Catholic
Christian, in the faith and obedience of the Roman Church, and I respect the
Pope as him who carries in his hands the Keys of Heaven being Prince of the
Church, and Gods Lieurenant over the Empire of Souls.

Thus Philip el prudente Philip the prudent (for that Epithet was given him
afterward by a Parliament in Spain, and confirmd solemnly afterward in a
Consistory at Rome) took his last farewell of this World, wherein he had bin
salted, as it were so long, by so many encumbrances and sicknesses. The report
of his death made a great sound up and down the world, specially in Rome where
it was much resented; For the Pope called an extraordinary Consistory the next
day, wherein he declard that if ever the Apostolic See had cause of grief and
affliction, it was for the decease of this Prince, because the holy Church had
left her greatest Champion, and her Persecutors their potentst Enemy, whose
life was no other then a continual combat against Apostasy and Error; so he
compard him to David in his hatred of Gods Enemies, to Solomon in wisdom, to
Josias in reformation of holy things, to Jacob in patience, to Augustus in
valor, to Trajan and Theodosius in obedience to the holy Church; but there were
two things that comforted him for so great a loss, his so immutable and rocky
perseverance in his religion, his admirable resignation of his will to God, and
his incredible patience in his suffrances which were so many. By this pathetic
Speech did Clement the 8th. as it were canonize King Philip, and endear his
memory to the Catholic world: In Spain the condolement for his death was so
universal, that every one did put himself in mourning for him, which they wore
so long, that finding a kind of gravity as well as convenience in black the
Spaniards are more addicted to that color then any Nation ever since; and
questionless he was a Prince of a rare temper, of a large soul, and
extraordinary intellectuals; he was devoted to his Religion in an intense
degree, for he would often say, si el P^incipe su hjjo fuera hereje, scilmatico,
diera el mismo la lenapara quemarle; If the Prince his Son were a Heretic or
Schismatic he would himself find fuel to burn him: What a world of pious works
did he erect, first, he founded the Church of Saint Barnaba* the Apostle in the
Escurial, he built half the Convent of Saint Philip in Madrid, he added a
Cloister to our Lady of Hope in Ocana, another to the Lady (...) where he also
built a royal Chapel; he gave seven thousand Crowns to Saint Hieronimo, seven
thousand more to Saint Benet in Valladolid, with a perpetual rent of eight
hundred Crowns per an: to the great Church there, eighteen thousand Crowns to
the Minorits of Madrid; he made a large College of Antonio Perez house,
endowing with large Rents and calling it Saint Isab^l: He sent mighty presents
to Loreto, he contributed much for erecting the Monarchy of the Mintins in
Madrid, he founded that of Saint Paul in Arevalo, he gave our Lady de
Gu^dalitire twenty thousand Crowns, and so much to the Lady of Monserrat, he
erected many Bishoprics, augmented the number of Prebends in Granada, and not
long before his death he founded a Monastery of Augustins in Huesca, he founded
also diverse Hospitals up and down in Spain; But what shall we say of the royal
Monastery of Saint Laurence in the Escurial, it is better to let it alone,
because it is impossible to speak enough of it, being the eighth wonder of the
world; let it suffice that it cost above twenty millions the building, and
after it was finishd the Founder had the T^uition and pleasure of it for many
years: It would require a Volume of it self to relate what religious houses he
built beyond the Seas in his several Dominions; there were forty Convents
erected in the Indies by his special Order and charge, and if other Kings are
prayed for as being great Benefactors, if they built a College or a Church or
an Hospital; what prayers and praises did this King deserve? Moreover he causd
the holy Bible to be expurgd and to be printed in eight stately Toms upon his
own charge. Much more might be spoken of his inclinations to piety in his way;
now touching his Justice which next to Religion is the greatest colman that
supports a Kingdom, there be diverse examples thereof, for he was the common
Arbiter of difference betwixt Princes, he ended the contest between Ferrara and
Luca, betwixt the Venetians and the Malteses, twixt Genoa and Savoy, twixt
Savoy and Mantova.

He was also very munificent, and an exact rewarder of Services, insomuch that
old Commanders, knowing his disposition that way, would com and boldly demand
Ayuda de costas, or a special reward from him, notwitstanding that they were
paid all their arreares before: One day there happend a facecious passage
twixt an old Captain who had servd him long in the Belgian Wars, and being
delayed by the Council of State, he went to find the King, who was then at the
Escuriall, where it happend he was a hunting; the Captain takes his Mule and
meeting the King single by himself in the field, the King began to discourse
with him, and askd him what he was, the Soldier thinking he had bin some private
man* told him all, how he had servd Don Philip so many years in the
Netherlands, and now he was com to demand his reward from him, the King
replied, asking him whether Don Philip owd him any thing in point of pay, No,
answered the Captain; then said the King you can demand nothing of right, being
satisfied all your arreares, and I believe Don Philip having so many Irons in
the fire, and being deeply in debt himself will hardly give you any thing, the
Captain broke off abruptly and said, Pues que me bese la mula in el culo, Then
let him kiss my Mule in the tail; the King called him again, and askd him what
addresses he had made, he told him that he had often attended the Council of
State and War with his memorialls, but he could do no good, for he could never
light upon the King there; well, said the King, the Council of State and War
sit to morrow and I shall be there, for I am an Officer in that Council,
therefore if you com I shall let you in, and you shall see Don Philip himself to
whom you may make your own tale; the King presided himself the next day in the
Council, and gave special order that if such a man came, giving a description
of him, and his name which he had learnt of him, he should be let in; the
Captain being entered, and seeing the King there and all the Council bare-headed
before him, though he knew him to be the same man whom he head met the day
before in the Escurial, and knew him also now to be the King, yet he was not
much out of countenance; the King asked him whether he rememberd what discourse
had passd betwixt them in the field the day before, yes Sir, said the Captain,
then you remember you said, That if the King would not give you a reward he
might kiss your Mule in the tail, Sir, answered he again, Senot lo dicho dichio*
mi Mula esta debaxo a la puertu, Sir, what I said, I said, and my Mule is below
at the Court gate; The King was not awhit movd hereat, but gave him his hand to
kiss, and commanded a good reward to be given him; Yet King Philip gave another
kind of answer to another Soldier who petitioning him for some act of bounty, he
told him* si a todos los que me piden daria, presto pediria yo, If I should
give to all those that petition me, I should com to beg my self: And it is a
rule in Government, that he who knows not how to deny knows not how to reign.

He had a marvailous equality of mind, and constancy of disposition, which
rendered him a great Master of his passions, and to have an absolut Empire over
them: Neither good or bad news could move him, or make him go from home, or
depart from his wonted self, neither the one could transport him to
extraordinary fits of joy, nor the other to dumps of sadness, he was of such an
admired temper, I will produce a few instances; The worst news that ever came
unto him was the dismal ill success of his fleet in the year 88* and when the
Courtier that brought him the first tidings came puffing and blowing with a
halter about his neck, he was then looking upon a Mason settling a corner stone
in the Escurial but before he would ask him a question or receave the packet, he
stayed till the Mason had don his business, then reading the letter of advice
from the Duke of Medina with all the circumstance of tha^ deplorable expedition
to England, without the least motion or change of countenance, he said only,
welcome be the will of God, I sent my Cosen the Duke of Medina to fight with men
not with the Elements: Two of the most comfortable tidings that ever came unto
him, were those of the Battle in the gulf of Lepanto, the other of the
conquest of Portugal; when the maiden news of the first was brought him, being
heightened with much Eloquence and exaggeration of speech, yet nothing could
move him to go from himself, but without the least motion of extraordinary joy,
he gravely answered Mucho ha aucenturado mi Hermano Don Iuan, my brother Don
John last venturd very far, and it was the first time he stild him brother:
Touching that of Portugal, when the first intelligence was brought how the Duke
of Alua had discomfited the Forces of Don Antonio, and made himself Master of
Lisbon, and so of Portugal, one of the greatest additions that ever befell the
Spanish Monarchy, he calmely said el Duque de Alua es un gran capitan, y muy
hombre de bien. The Duke of Alua is a great Captain, and a very honest man; He
was usd to have a saying often in his mouth el tiempo y yo para otros dos, Time
and I will challenge any two in the world: Indeed he was mighty deliberat and
cautious in all his undertakings and somewhat slow in council, remembering the
saying of his Father the Emperor, That Kings should be like Saturn, which as it
is the highest so it is the slowest of all the Planets in point of movement;
now slowness carries with it commonly a stately kind of gravity which he
affected much, and therein was a true Spaniard, who will hardly change his pace
though it be with a whip.

He very much honored the Sacerdotall dignity, esteeming that reverence which he
did to Gods Ministers to reflect upon his own divine Majesty, A gentleman of
Toledo shot a Musket at a Canon of the Church, though it missd him yet he
causd the gentleman to be beheaded, and another for giving but a cuff to a
Capuchin Friar; There was a process of four and twenty years standing in
Valentia, who should give the Pax at Mass to the Priest, the Viceroy or the
Archbishop, the Duke of Naiara had contested much for it; not long after King
Philip came to his City of Valentia upon some signal ocasions, and being at a
conventuall Mass in a Monastery, he commanded him who carried the Pax to give
it first to the Archbishop, and so the suit was ended; he held that a reverend
aw to the Governors of the Church was the prime support of piety, they having
charge of the noblest part of man which is his Soul: And herein he was much in
the right, for where this awful Reverence is lost, nothing but Sacriledg,
confusion, and Heresy will follow, as we find by late woeful experience, besides
this reverence to Churchmen is often very available to compose tumults: As he
did put a sudden end to that church contestation betwixt the Archbishop and
Viceroy, so he had a Magisteriall and Majestic way of reconciling differences
and emulations among his Nobles: In a Parliament he had once summond there fell
a high debate twixt the two great Cities of Toledo and Burgos (the one being
the head of old Castile, the other of the new) who of them should speak first,
and the debate grew very high, Phillip hearing of it came with all the Ensigns
of Majesty to the Parliment-house, and ended the difference by this witty way,
hable Burgos, que por Toledo hablare yo, let Burgos speak, for Toledo I will
speak my self, so they did acquiesse, but which of them had the better, I leave
it to the judgment of the Reader.

Thus the practice of this King may be a pattern for all Princes to govern by,
his way of ruling may be a rule to reign by, the manner of his living and dying
may be a rule to die and live by; yet a little before his death he commanded
Christoval de Mora to burn all his private papers.

Philip the second had four Wifes, the first was the Infanta of Portugal Donna
Maria, the second was Mary Queen of England, the third Isabel the eldest
Daughter of France, and the fourth, Anne the Emperors Daughter (his Niece) of
whom he had Philip the third who succeeded him; he had in all five Sons and
three Daughters, Don Carlos was his first begotten, who dyed in the flower of
his age, but because there have bin and continue to this day diverse dark
discourses of the cause of the Princes death, I will be more large in the
relation according to the Manuscript I had from a person of knowledge and honor.
Don Carlos eldest Son to Philip the second of Spain, was born in Valladolid
sometimes the Court of the Catholic Kings: In his Fathers absence he was, being
com to the age of foutteen years, bred under the King of Bohemia his Uncle, who
then governd Spain, with his Ant Donna Iuana, during that charge they had of
him, they were more careful of the conservation of his health and growth, then
of his Education, showing herein too much indulgency, and suffering him to have
his will too much; His Father at his return to Spain observd in him some wildish
humors which he connivd at thinking that time would correct them; At sixteen
years of age he was sworn Prince in the City of Toledo, with the greatest
solemnity that ever was seen in Spain; his Father then sent him and his Uncle
Don John of Austria, together with Alexander Prince of Parma, to Complutum or
the University of Alcala to get something of the Latin Tongue, and some knowledge
in the Mathematics; It happend that in a waggery climing up a Ladder as he
came down he fell so unluckily, that he was mortally hurt in his skull and
backbone, the King went instantly to see him, when he found him in a swown,
all the Churches prayed for him, and the body of Saint Diego which is the
greatest relic they have in Alcala was brought, and put upon him a good
while, he then began to com to himself again, so a while after by the care and
skill of Andria Basili he was cured, but to make vent for some congeald
corrupted blood that was within, he was forcd to open part of the Pericraniu^,
which made him ever after to be of a weak brain, subject to extravagancies; he
would sometimes go up and down his Fathers house and abuse his Servants, he would
hurl out some out at the windows, kick and cuff others: One time he made his
Shoemaker to eat a piece of his Boots, because they were too straight for him;
Cardinal Espinota coming one day to Court he grappld him by the Rocket, and
threatened him by the life of his Father. These and such like exorbitances did
much afflict Don Philip his Father, who once intended to have sent him to
Flanders, upon the beginning of the commotions there, and withal the Emperor
Ferdinand seemd to invite him, offering the Infanta Dona Anna to him in
marriage, but the Prince continuing in his maddish fits, the King alterd his
resolution and sent thither the Duke of Alua, who coming to kiss the Princes
hands before his departure, he told him in a great fury, that he should not go
to Flanders, for the voyage belonged unto him, and if he contradicted him he
would kill him: A little after he writ to diverse of the Grandees, that they would
assist him in a business which much concernd him, they returned a respectfull
answer, that they were ready to serve him in any thing, so it were not against
his Father: These Letters were sent to King Philip, and Don John of Austria
being then at Court discoverd unto him the extravagant designs of the Prince,
which was to steal away to Germany, to marry his Cosen the Emperors Daughter,
having for his jorney sent him from Sevill 150000. Crowns, and he exspected
^50000. more; King Philip being then at the Escurial, and having timely notice
hereof, came presently to Madrid, whither he sent for the Duke of Feria with
others of his privy Counselors; In the dead of night he went with them to the
Prince his Quarter, the first who entered was the Duke of Feria, the Prince
^^aring upon him from his bed, said, Duke what do you here this time of night?
presently after appeard his Father whereat the Prince started, saying, que es
esto quiere me matar vuestra Magestad, What Is this, will your Majesty murder
me? the King answered, no, si no poner orden en vuestra vido quietaos, no, but
to take order for the preservation of your life, be quiet; so he took his Sword
which was by his beds-head, and causd a steel Cabinet to be carried away,
telling him it should be returned him again, after some papers of his were perusd;
so the King departed leaving a guard upon him: There was a huge murmur the next
day all the Court over, that the Prince should be thus made a Prisoner, being
the greatest heir in the world, but the King the next day writ to all his
Viceroys and chief Officers, that they should not much wonder at this sudden
action or be too inquisitive to know the cause of it, or trouble themselves to
intercede for the Prince, let it suffize for them to know that it tended to the
common good, that he was his Father, and knew what belongd to things: He sent
also to all the Ambassadors at Court, not to intermeddle, or trouble themselves
about this business; the Prince being thus restraind, and his humors being as
fiery as the season, which was the Dog-daies, he drunk much water coold with
snow out of an artificial Fountain he had, which with some other excesses and
disorders made him fall into a double Tertian, he afterward fell a vomiting,
and to a dysentery proceeding from the extreme cold water he usd to drink so
much: The Kings Physicians did carefully attend him, and usd what Art cold do;
but the Disease proud mortal, and beyond cure; hereupon the Council ^at to
advise whether it was fitting for the King to go visit him, some were of opinion
that the Prince was well disposd to die a good Catholic, and the sight of his
Father might happily discompose him, yet the King went in and gave him his
benediction, but stayed not, and so returned with more grief and less care: A
little after the Prince expird being twenty three years old, he had made his
Will before, which he deliverd his Secretary, wherein he desird his Father to
forgive him, and to give him his blessing, to pay his debts and give his
movables to Churches and Hospitals, and that his body should be buried in
Toledo, which was performd: His Funeral was prepared the same day he dyed, for
at seven in the evening the Grandees carried his body out to the Court-gate,
where the Nuncio with other Ambassadors and a great concours of Noblemen were
ready to attend the Hearse.

The hard destiny and death of this great young Prince with the extraordinary
circumstances thereof may teach the world this lesson, that the love of a Father
must give place to the office of a King, and that jealousy among Princes works
more powerfully then natural affections.

1. This was one of the four Acts for which King Philip made himself so subject
to be censurd abroad in the world, for papers flew in many places that h^ had
poysond his Son.

2. The second was in the transaction of the business of Aragon, where he was
taxd to have falsified his own manifesto, wherein he declard that the Army under
Don Alonso de Vergas was intended for France, whereas it proovd afterward to
have bin expressly raysd to surprise Saragosa.

3. The third was the business of Portugal, for whereas he had declard that he
was willing to refer the right of Title to that Crown to the decision of the
Pope, he invaded and conquered the Country before the Nuncio cold com to the
Spanish Court, though he knew he was upon his way and already landed in Spain
to that purpose; but he sent special Commission to the Towns through which he
was to pass, that they should entertain and regalar him some days, while in the
interim he did his business in Portugal.

4. The fourth was the conniving at the Murder of Escovedo Secretary to Don
John of Austria which was perpetrated with his privity, as Antonio Perez
confessd upon the Rack, which made this Character to be given of him, that
there was but a little distance betwixt Don Philips risa y el cuchillo between
his smile and the Scaffold, his prudence sometimes turning to excess of
severity. But as the hearts of Kings are inscrutable, so their ways should be,
their actions sometimes must be attended with political cunning* and
extraordinary power to crush Cocatrices in the shell to prevent greater
inconveniences, as God Almighty, whose immediate Vicegerents they are, does use
sometimes his omnipotence in exceeding the Rules and common course of nature.

PHILIP THE THIRD, XXVIII KING OF NAPLES.
PHILIP the third of Austria fifth Son to Philip the second, by Donna Anna the
Emperors Daughter, and his fourth Wife succeeded his Father in all his
Dominions, both in the new and old World; He was born the 14th. of April, 1578.
in the Palace of Madrid, and was Christened upon the Feast of Philip and Jacob,
the first of whom may be said to be his Godfather, six years after he was
created Prince of Castile in the Monastery of Saint Ieronimo; the next year
after he was created Prince of Aragon in Monson, the next year after he was
created Prince of Navarr, in the Cathedral Church of Pampelona, and lastly
Prince of Portugal, which made him to have this privilege above all his
Predecessors, to be the first who was Prince of all Spain, in regard Lusitania
had not bin before under the Crown of Castile till the Reign of Philip his
Father; he was a weakly sick Child for many years at first, yet he survivd his
four brothers; (viz. Don Carlos, Don Fernando, Don Carlos Lorenzo, and Don
Diego) so easily is humane judgment deceivd.

The first thing he did was the sending of a new Viceroy to the Kingdom of
Naples, then, after that long destructive War in the Nether-lands which had so
ragd in his Fathers time, he made a Truce with the Hollanders, but in these
ambiguous words son contento de tratar con vos otros como con Estados libres, I
am contented to treat with you as with free States, whereby according to the
Spanish exposition of those words, he intimated they were no free States, by
virtue of this word As, for it is a rule in Logic, that Nullum simile est Idem.
No thing that is like a thing is the same thing; therefore if he treated with
them as with free States, they were no free States: This Truce afforded much
matter of discourse for the Critics of those times.

He did this by the advice principally of the Marquess of Denia afterward Duke
of Lermanhom whom he took for his Privado or his Favorit, to whom he
transmitted the guidance of all great affairs being conscious of some
imbecillities of his own, wherein he discoverd a great point of wisdom, whose
chiefest part is for one to know his own infirmities and incapacities.

But I should have spoken first of the peace he had made with England, which
preceded this, and was the first great action he did, when he began to sit at
the Healm of that mighty Vessel; I mean the Spanish Monarchy, which in his
Fathers time had b^n tossd and weather-beaten by so many impetuous and fierce
Tempests: to conclude this peace, he employed the chiefest Officer of Spain,
the Constable of Castile in a very high and magnificent equipage, in
correspondence whereof England sent her high Admiral; herein he followd the
counsel of Charles the fifth his Grandfather, who had this saying often in his
mouth, Con todo el mundo guerra,
y puz con Ingalat jerra,
With all the World have War,
But with England do not jar.


Before this Embassy to England the common people of Spain were made to believe
by their preaching Jesuits, that englishmen since they receded from the Roman
Church were strangly transformd, some had f^ces like Hogs, some like Dogs, some
like Munkies, but the Constable at his return did rectify his Countrymen in
this point.

Philip being now in peace with all Christian Princes, and being addicted to
devotion in a high degree, he thought it a work acceptable to God Almighty, and
agreeable to the office of a Catholi^ King to clear Spain of the Mahumetan
Moriscos who had planted themselves ^her above seven hundred years: He put the
business to many serious deliberations, the result whereof at last was, that it
would be a high act of Christian Piety, and grateful to Heaven, so there was a
royal Ban of banishment published against the Moriscos who were dispersd up and
down specially in the Maritime parts of Spain, which border upon the
Mediterranean Sea in great multitudes, to the number of many hundred thousand
souls, who were all hurried over to Barbary, but permitted to carry with them
all their movables, and make sale of their other goods, the King providing
Ships, and paying for their transfretation; the motive that inducd Philip to
this Act was, that he thought it a thing unpleasing to God, that so many
Infidels and Mahumetans should mingle so thick with Christians, that many
thousands had bin bapti^d, but they apostatizd and grew greater enemies to
Chrsts then before, that there were sundry plots and machinations discoverd, as
also the intelligence they kept with the Turk the common enemy of Spain. The
first advice whereof was given by the English Ambassador the Earl of Notingham,
who brought Letters with him that had bin sent King James, how the said
Moriscos had a secret design to introduce the great Turk, and so to join with
him for the conquering of Spain, as the Conde Don Julian did with the Moors.
Henry the fourth of France sent him also intelligence tending to that end. So
in a short time the Country was rid of them, as it was formerly of the Jews,
in the time of Ferdinand and Isabella; But there were some incommodities
followd, for Spain was much depopulated and impoverisht hereby, specially for
Corn and other Vegetals, for those Moriscos were an industrious people, and
would grub up Corn and Pulse with other things, out of the tops of those craggy
Hills wherewith Spain is bunchd in most places, so that the Spaniard who
naturally is slothful unless it be in the Wars (as the Turks are) had nothing
to do, but having put on his Sword and swelling ruff, but go with his Ass to
the Market, and buy corn of the Moriscos, who usually fed upon bread made of
Maiz, or some other Pulse, so that the Spaniards for the most part did eat by
the sweat of other men's brows.

Philip the third having as formerly it was spoken, concluded a peace with
England, and a Truce with the Dutch, passd most part of his Reign in quietness,
which suited best with his disposition, he being a Prince wholly devoted to
exercises of piety, being always fingring his Beads; He sympathizd in nature
much with Edward the sixth of England, but was not so infortunat as he, for he
preservd what his Father left him, whereas the other lost France where he had
bin Crowned King in his Cradle. And this happiness of Philip may be imputed to
the sage conduct of the Duke of Lerma, who was a sound and well-weighd Minister
of State, of a Debonnair and affable deportment quite contrary to the genius of
his Successor Olivares who was of a rough rigid humor.

Philip the third after he had reignd 23. years died, as he lived in a sweet
peaceable way, and he was called Philip el Bueno, Philip the good, as his
Father was called Philip the prudent.

Philip the third to pay his Fathers Creditors, and disburden the Crown of
those vast Arrears wherewith it was most heavily laden, in regard of so many
Irons he had to beat all his lifetime, was forcd to inhance the Gabels, and
lay new impositions, as in other places so specially in the Kingdom of Naples:
Now those who cut out Philip the second most work to do, were Henry the fourth
of France, and Elizabeth Queen of England, the one was said to play the Barber
and shave him, which Harry did so nimbly and dexterously as if he had bin born
to the Trade, and old Bess held the Basin while he washd Philips head and face,
but it was given out that he did this without Camphire Ball, or any Soap at
all, but with stale Ly and strong standing Urine.

There was about that time a witty Italian Author, whose fancies are fresh to
this day, who being no friend to the Spaniard, writ many things by way of
drollery against his mode of Government in Sicilie, Milan and Naples, specially
in the last; And as he descants upon the Servitude which that wavering and
wanton people were reducd unto, for their so frequent Sollevations and Revolts,
he says, that to punish with some severity the Napolitans for their infidelity
and murmurings against their former Kings, it pleased the Majesty of the
heavenly Judge to deliver them into the hands of Pharo to receive law from him,
meaning the Spaniard, who having felt the pulse of that luxurious people, by
his interior Cabinet council, was advisd that there was no better way to
preserve Naples in a constancy of obedience, then to bring down the flesh, and
tame that hot metteld, and spirited Horse or Courser which she gave for her
Ensign: thereupon there were appointed Riders, Grooms, Smiths, and others to
look to him, and break him, they found that he was so wanton that he would
hardly receive Bit, Bridle, or Saddle, that he was of a mighty strength,
therefore it was fitting so pamperd an Animal should be brought low and
mortified: Something was don in Charles the fift's time to this purpose, but his
Son Philip did finish the work, who had almost rid him quite of his legs;
insomuch that at the beginning of Philip the thirds Reign, there was a special
^unta appointed to meet in the Piazza at Naples to take a view in what case he
stood; The poor Beast was brought forth, and he was grown so feeble that his
legs could hardly serve him to be softly led into the Marketplace: It was a
most pitiful object to see how that generous Courser who had once so much
spirit and strength as to carry two Kings at once, should become now so weak and
meagre that he could not bear a Pigmey, one might now tell his ribs, his back
also was miserably gald by carrying of Panniars, and withal he was found full
of bunches, his feet foundred and one of his nostrils slit, yet those who had
the chief care of him, kept locks on his feet, and a strong halter about his
neck and face, with dark Spectacles on his eyes; now there was exquisit search
made in the Junta how he was grown so poor, answer was made, that though he be
low in flesh, yet he is as high in spirit as ever he was, and was ever and anon
ready to kick and winch, therefore it was fitting that the allowance of
Provander which he has now should be rather diminisht then mended; Therefore the
grave members of the Junta appointed that the Rack should be raisd a span
higher, and that the third part of his Provender should be taken off.

When this happened, their chancd to be present in the Piazza, some learned men
and Philosophers, who resenting much, and taking to heart that woeful
Spectacle, out of pure pity asked the Junta how they could find in common
compassion, which obliges every one to be good to his beast, to diminish the
Nutriment of that poor Animal, who was so wasted and worn away, that there
scarce remained any thing of him but flesh and bone; The oldest man of the
Junta gave a short answer to the said Philosophers, telling them that they
should do better to attend their own calling, to dispute of Entities and
Quiddities, then to intermeddle with political matters, wherein they seemd to
be such Simpletons: For in case that Caprichious beast were usd better, he would
quickly repay their mildness with biting and kicks, as he had most ingratefully
usd some of his former Riders who were so open handed unto him, diverse of whom
he had thrown of into ditches, by his excess of mettle, and if one should mend
his commons that instable Animal would foam at the mouth as much as ever, and
raise tumults and seditions against his benefactors and keepers: Therefore
whosoever will enter into an exact and judicious ponderation of things and of
the true Mode whereby that flouncing Animal should be kept, he must not look upon
the meagernes of his belly, or buttocks, but upon the mischievous quality of
his genius, who is still as caprichious a lover of novelty as ever he was:
Therefore woe be to the Catholic King if that ferocious Napolitan Horse should
have strength and opportunity to put in execution what he does incessantly cast
and chymerize in his own brain against the present government; Therefore if any
thing be to be complaind of it proceeds from the ill nature of the beast,
rather then the severity of the Spaniards; nor can any deny but it is a high
point of wisdom, and no less of charity with well weighd councels and prudent
artifices to take of by way of prevention the means of doing ill from him who
always intends mischief, and is not capable to judge when one does use him well
and do him courtesies, insomuch that there is no medicament can cure the
chanchrous humors of the Napolitan, then by applying thereunto some corrosives
of the Spanish severity.

The same Author proceeds further* and fains that Almansor King of Granada,
meeting casually with the Kingdom of Naples, they jointly condole their
calamitous condition of servitude causd by the tyranny of the Spaniards, as
they walkd and mingld speech a good while together, Almansor observd the
fashion of that Chain which the Kingdom of Naples carried on his legs, because
it lookd like a Morisco Manufacture, and surely he had seen and handled that
Chain before, so looking near upon it, he struck his breast in a kind of
astonishment, saying that he was well aquainted with that Chain, for it was the
very same wherewith he and his Antecessors the Morisco Kings had kept most of
the Kingdoms of Spain the space of seven hundred years and upwards in obedience
and servility, therefore he earnestly desired to know how, by whom, and when
Naples had got on that Chain.

The Kingdom of Naples answered, a most excellent memory have thou King
Almansor, for this unhappy Chain which I carry was brought first from Spain by
Gonsaluo de Cordova called the great Captain, therefore it is very likely that it
is the same you speak of; and now it is above an age passd, I mean a Century of
sad Winters that I am fallen into such a deplorable kind of slavery, whereof I
know not whether I shall ever rid my self, because I find that the Spaniard is
mounted to such a height of power that it has made me loose all hopes I should
have in the arm of man for recovery of my lost liberty, it is the only
omnipotent hand of God can do it, by doing such another miracle as he did in
the Red Sea.

Almansor replied, the calculation falls pat you speak of, for it was about the
very same time that the Spaniard shook off the Chain wherewith you go now bound;
but let it not be uncouth unto thee most noble Naples, to relate how it was
possible that the Spaniard should impatronize himself so easily of a Kingdom so
far distant from him by Sea and Land: Naples rejoynd, It was by fraud that the
Spaniard introducd himself to Italy, for by pure force he could never have made
such acquests so far beyond the proportion of their strength; therefore listen
well to me, and you will be astonished of the large conscience which one King of
Spain carried about him, though he made himself appear to the world like
another Saint Macarius-painted upon some wall.

Alphonso my King to draw on his last, and my principal ruin, gave Isabel his
Niece (for I will take the rise of my Relation from this unlucky Marriage) to
John Galeazzo Duke of Milan in marriage; In regard of the stupidity of John
Lodwick Sforza occupied the state of his Nephew, King Alfonso as nature obligd
him thought to prevent that usurpation, Lodwick knowing well that he could not
com to the end of his aims without the destruction of my Kings, took a
precipitat resolution to call in the French for the Conquest of me, an action
which afterward proved so funestous to all Italy: My Kings thereupon to
counterbalance France, had recourse to that holy Soul Ferdinand King of Aragon
their Cosen, who showed himself so loving a Kinsman, and faithful Confederat,
that in lieu of chasing away the French he parted stakes with them, and divided
me amongst them, but afterward they fell out like Dogs about a bone, and
Ferdinand made the French find their way again ore the Alps to repass
shamefully to their Country; so Ferdinand made himself my absolute Sovereign,
and without any scruple of conscience* and for my kind invitation he was the
first who gave me this Chain you see, which as you say is of the Manufacture of
Barbary: And this the holy Ferdinand did so a little after that he had receivd
the Title of Catholic King from the Apostolical See; nor do I think King
Almansor that you ever heard or read of an Act of more infidelity and
ingratitude, by Saracen, Infidel, or Pagan.

Almansor went on, and said, truly I have conversd with diverse Chronicles,
wherein I have met with many odd foul traverses of State done by ambitious
Princes in hope to reign, But touching this Act of Ferdinand, I do not
remember to have read any that can parallel it.

Naples said again, but O King Almansor if your Nation kept fast Spain so many
years in that Chain, what way did they use to shake it off? Almansor said,
that cursed Union which was made twixt Castile and Aragon by the nuptials of
Ferdinand and Isabella, was the cause of my ruin, and of my Successors after
me, as also of the servitude whereof you complain, a most fatal union, which
all the Potentates of Europe, specially of Italy, have as much cause to curse
to this day, as I have; for the jealousies twixt the Castilians and Aragonians
securd always my Kingdom of Granada: Add hereunto that the countenance and
succors which the Popes gave to Ferdinand did accelerat the work.

Hold there, King Almansor, said Naples, for since you were cast out of Spain,
the Popes have sufferd more by the ambitious designs of the Catholic Kings
then they did before; for nothing could be so disadvantagious to Rome, as to
have so potent a Prince so near a Neighbor unto her, witness that Siege and
lamentable sack which she sufferd so soon after my servitude by the Spaniard
Bourbon being his General, whereby he hansomly paid her for that assistance she
gave him for the Conquest of Granada; since which time the ambition of Spain
has bin felt in Italy, and in other places so that it had bin more for the
tranquillity of Europe that the Moors had still continued in Spain. Add hereunto
that these new additions of power to Spain have tended much to the disorders
ever since that have happened unto you in matters of Religion; The jealousies
that Germany had of the growing greatness of Charles the fifth, were the cause
that many Princes revol^ed from him and Rome; but since the Spaniards have
taken such firm footing in Italy, the main reach of their policy is to join me
and Milan in one entire piece, by subduing all the interiacent Territories,
which if it happen, farewell the freedom of all Italy as well as mine.

But said Almansor, how are the Milaneses usd your Conterranean fellow Subjects?

Naples answered, that they of Milan were washd only with dashes of Rain water,
but a whole deluge has over-whelmd me: Moreover the disposition of the Lombard
differs from mine, for the Noblemen and Gentry there are more free and
resolute, and more far from vice, they are better Patriots and careful of
their Countries liberty, insomuch that I dare say, if there were but one true
Cremona brain among my Napolitan Barons it would be enough to dash that forcd
Donative which is exacted of me ever and anon, which brings me often to feed
upon bread and Onyons: Add hereunto that the confines of the Grisons, of the
Duke of Savoy, and the Venetian who are all jealous of the King of Spains
growing power makes him proceed with more discretion and caution in his
Territories in Lombardy.

This dialog twixt Naples and Almansor being ended, the same Author faignes all
the States of Europe to be summond before the oracle at Delphos to be weighd in
a great balance held by Lorenzo de Medici, where the Monarchy of Spain making
her appearance in a high majestic garb, among other passages, there was a Book
presented unto her by one of the Wits, the substance whereof was to discover a
way for Spain to reduce to her ancient splendour and freedom the most noble
Parthenope, and the once most flourishing Kingdom of Naples, whereas by
plundrings of the Soldiers, the corruption of the Judges, the fleecing of the
Barons, the rapacity of the Viceroys, who are sent thither as Hoggs to a sty
only to fatten, the former luster of that delicate Country is quite decayed.
The Author receavd twenty Crowns of the Spanish Monarchy for a guerdon for this
Book, promising that she would deliver that discourse and avisos to her Confessor
to consider of: Another pure Politician presented Her with a Treaty clean
contrary, showing her a way how the Napolitan Courser might be brought to bear
a Pack-Saddle of a heavier burden, and to be made so docil, that he might be
fit to draw her Coach upon ocasion: To the Author of this discourse the
Monarchy gave 12000 Crowns, and a little after he was Grandee of Spain.

At this great Assembly in Delphos there was a Contrasto happend twixt Rome and
Naples, who should have the precedence; it was decided, that for the Majesty of
a City, Naples must eternally veil to Rome, and Rome to Naples, for a delicat
situation; that Rome must confess there are more people in Naples, but that
Naples must acknowledge there are more men in Rome: Moreover it was necessary
that the Wits and Wines of Naples should be transported to Rome to receave
perfection; it was also decreed that Naples had more skill to break Colts, and
Rome to tame Men; It was confessd further that there were more Cavaliers in
Naples, and more C^mendums in Rome: That among the Romans they were only called
Knights who carried a red Cross upon their Garments, but in Naples all men
indif^erently might be called Knights, because the Spaniard made them carry
Crosses upon their very skins.

Thus this ingenious Italian does descant upon the comportment of the Spaniard
in Italy, and his Book kept a great noise in the World, but the Spaniard owing
him a revenge, and after a strict and long inquisition, not lighting upon him
in any of his own Dominions, there were two Valentones, two Banditi, two
Hirelings for blood, found him out in Verona, and watching their opportunity,
they went to his Lodging, under color of a visit, and every one of them having
a bagg of Sand in his pockett, they so crushd his bones, that they rattled
within his skin, and having so dispatchd poor Boccolini out of this World, they
fledd, having stoned him to death with Sand.

PHILIP The Fourth of AUSTRIA, xxix. King OF NAPLES.
PHILIP the third left behind three Sons and two Daughters: the Sons were
Philip (who succeeded him in all his Dominions) with Charles and Ferdinand, who
was Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo; they both dyed young in the Meridian of
their years, one in Spain, the other being Governor of Flanders; The two
Daughters were Anna of Austria, and the Infanta Donna Maria; the first was
married to Lewis the thirteenth King of France yet living, the other to the
Emperor Ferdinand now Reigning; King Philip was but young when he took the
Reins of the Government, being but sixteen years of age: There was a Treaty
commen^d a little after for a cross marriage twixt Spain and France, which took
^ffect though there was much opposition in France about it made by them of the
Religion and their party; The Ceremonies of these reciprocal Nuptials were
performd the one at Burgos in Spain, the other at Bourdeaux in France. In the
first the Duke of Lerma married the Infanta by commission from King Lewis* In
the second the Duke of Guyse married Isabel Daughter of France by proxy from
King Philip; the exchange of the two Princesses was made upon a River called
Bidasso hard by Saint John de Luz which separates the two Nations: There were
two stately Barges provided to transport them, with diverse sorts of inventions
of wit: the Spaniards on their side had a huge vast Globe, representing the
world raisd upon a Pavilion very high, which made an ostentous show; the Duke
of Guyse took exception at it, protesting that he would never bring ore the
Princess till the said Globe was taken down, which was done accordingly; the
next day the young Queen came to Bayon, where Luynes then Favorit to the French
King attended her with a Letter all written with the Kings own hand, in these
words.

Madam,
SInce I cannot, according to my desire find my self near you at your entrance
into my Kingdom, to put you in possession of the power I have, as also of my
entire affection to love and serve you; I send toward you Luynes one of my
confidentst Servants to salute you in my name, and tell you that you are
expected by me with much impatience to offer unto you my self, I pray therefore
receive him favorably, and believe what he shall tell you: Madam from your
most deer Friend and Servant,

LEWIS.


Luynes delivered her also from the King two rich Standerds of Diamonds* which
she receivd and kissd, and from her own Table she sent him a dish of meat* In
the morning she returned the King this answer.

Sir,
I much rejoiced at the good news Luynes brought me of your Majesty's health, I
com therewith, being most desirous to arrive where I may serve my Mother, and so
I am making have to that purpose, and to kiss your Majesty's hands, whom God
preserve.

ANNE.


THe Kingdom of Naples to congratulat the Kings Espousals, presented him that
year with a Donative of two millions.

Not long after there was a Treaty set on foot for a marriage twixt the Prince
of Wales, and the Infanta Donna Maria the Kings second Sister, but there had
bin an ouverture made before by the Duke of Lerma, for a match twixt our Prince
Henry of England and the eldest Infanta Anne now Queen of France, as has bin
spoken.

This Treaty with England was above ten years in agitation, it was a Web that
lay long upon the Loom of Policy, and afterward was torn off being just
wrought to the point of perfection: By the endeavors of Count Gondomar in
England, and the Earl of Bristol in Spain, matters were brought to such a
hopeful pass, that it inducd the Prince of Wales to undertake that hazardous
youthful journey to Spain, traversing the whole Diameter of France under a
disguise, being accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, who was not only his
Companion but had bin his chiefest Counselor herein; they came both in an
advantageous time to Paris, for they were admitted to see a Mask, being
Carnival time, where the Prince had a full view of the Lady Henri^tta Maria, who
was designd by Heaven to be his wife afterward, though he little dreamt of
such a thing then; Thence by the name of Iac and Tom: Smith: they posted to
Spain, but two days after it was discoverd in the French Court what they were,
therefore being sent after withal possible speed, if they had stayed but three
hours longer at Bayon Monsieur Gramond had had order to stay them.

Being arrivd at the Earl of Bristols House in the Court of Spain at the close
of the day, in the evening he was struck with amazement to see such objects
there, having no fore-knowledg at all of the Plot, saying, I am afraid we are
all undone; The next day there was a buz abroad that some great man was com from
England, but none imagind he could be the Prince: In the evening of the next
day, the Duke of Buckingham went in a close Coach to the King of Spain, where
he had private audience, and he was returned no sooner but Olivares was sent to
visit the Prince, which was done with extraordinary expressions of joy and
complement, Oliuares saying, that Spain and England would divide the World
betwixt them; The next day, somewhat late at night the King himself came in a
close Coach to visit him, but the Prince having notice of it met him half way,
so they greeted one another with mutual embraces, there were diverse great
Lords appointed to be the Prince his Officers and a part of the royal Palace
was preparing for his Quarter, whither the next Sunday he removd and rod in
triumph, under a large Canopy of State, the King accompanying him all the way,
and giving him still the upper-hand, all the Grandees, Noblemen, and Officers
attended them in the same manner as they usd to do at a Coronati^n: Now it
seems that Gondamar was the chief man who tracd this journey, for the next day
after the Prince his arrival he was made Privy Counselor, and suddenly after
coming to visit the Prince, he told him, that he was com to tell him strange
news, which was, that an English man was sworn that morning Privy Counselor in
Spain, meaning himself in point of affection: The third day after the Prince
had bin there, the King of Spain with the Queen and the Infanta, who wore a
blew Ribon about her left arm, that she might be distinguished, came abroad in
an open stately way, of purpose that the Prince might see his Mistress, which
he did out of a close Coach* wherein Count Gondamar attended him, with the
English Ambassadors.

So much for matter of Ceremony; now touching the substance of the business it
self, when the Prince came thither, matters had bin brought to that perfection
by the activity of Ambassadors, that there wanted nothing for the consummating
of all things but the Popes dispensation, which upon news that the Prince was
com to Spain, was retarded, and some advantages taken to clog it with further
clauses; The Pope demanded caution for performance of such Articles that were
granted, in favor of the Roman Catholics in England upon this match; hereupon
Sir Francis Cotington rid Post about it from Madrid, Touching that point King
James answered, that he would take his oath upon the Evangelists to accomplish
the said Articles, and his Son the Prince should do the like; His privy
Counselors also should firm and subscribe the said Articles, and this was all
the security King James cold give: Now whereas the Pope demanded that some Roman
Catholic Prince should undertake for him and his Son in point of performance of
Articles, he answered, that he had not such an interest in any such Prince, so
matters began to gather ill blood, and were almost quite off the hinges,
insomuch that there was a dark rumor abroad, how the Prince had a design to
get away privately, and in a disguise as he came; The Englishmen that were then
attending the Prince, whereof there were a good number that were dyeted at the
Kings house, and waited upon by Spaniards, would often times break out into bold
speeches, by disdaining the Diet and barrenness of Spain, and jeering their
processions, whereat there were exceptions taken, and the main business receivd
some prejudice by their indiscretions: Archey the Fool, being then in Madrid,
was admi^ted one day to see the King of Spain at Dinner, where he ^ell a
tal^ing and strutting up and down, The King asked what he said, an Interpreter
told him that the Fool said, King James his Master was likest to God Allmighty
of any King upon Earth, the King asking him his reason, he replied, That God
Allmighty had but one s^n, and he sent him to be Crucified among Jews, So the
King of England had also but one S^n, and he sent him to be Crucified among
Spaniards.

In the interim the Prince showed himself passionatly in love with the Infanta*
and courted her in a very high way; He had the sight of her often in public,
and at Comedies, which are once a week in the Kings Court, where he would fix
and fasten his eyes upon her immovable a long time, without looking upon the
Action of the Stage Players, to the wonder of the Spectat^rs. The King had the
other side of the River Man^^^mares, whereon his Royal Palace stands a
Somerhouse of pleasure, where the Infanta was usd to go betimes in the morning
to gather May dew, the Prince got up betimes one morning, and taking Mr Ed:
Porter only with him, he got into that Somer-house, and was let in into the
fore-Garden, but no further, because the Infanta was in the other, thereupon the
Prince got on the top of the Wall, and leapd down where the Infanta was, she
espying him gave a kind of s^rich, whereupon the old Marquess who attended her
(with some women) came and kneeld before the Prince, desiring him to advance no
further, because his life lay upon it, for he was to admit no man breathing to
the company of the Infanta who was then his charge, so the Prince retird, the
Marquess waiting upon him to the door of the Garden, and opening it with much
humility, whereas before he had com ore the Wall.

As matters were thus at a doubtful stand, because of the Popes demand in
point of caution for the performance of those Capitulations which were
stipulated in favor of the English Catholics, by virtue of this match, The
King of Spain gave the Prince a visit, and told him, that rather then a Treaty
of so many years agitation should fall to the ground, and that those noble
affections which he had showed his Sister (for whom he had put hi^ person to so
much hardship and hazard by that heroik journey) should be now quite frustrated,
he himself would undertake to satisfy the Pope in this point* and offer himself
to be a Pledge and Bail for the King of great Britan, and his Highness to
perform the said Capitulations; the Prince thanked him in the highest degree
that could be, saying, that this Favor transcended all the rest whereof he had
receivd such multitudes from his Majesty: Hereupon the Pope being thus
contented, there were Bonefires of joy, baiting of Bulls with men, and other
Actions of triumph in the Court of Spain; So the dispensation being completely
com a little after from Rome, the Desposorio's, or the day for a contract
betwixt the Infanta and the Prince was nominated. In the interim the Nuncio was
privately admitted with a Letter from the Pope to visit the Prince, who made
him this civil answer by an Interpreter; That he kissd his Holiness feet for
the Favor and Honor he did him, which was to be so much the more esteemed, by
how much the less it was deserved by him, but his Holiness should see for the
future what he would do, and he doubted not but his Father would do the like, so
that his Holiness should not repent himself of what he had done.

A little after the King and the Prince had a solemn enterview in the private
Gallery, for signing, sealing, and swearing unto the Articles. The King had the
Patriarch of the West Indies, the Duke of Infantado, Oliuares, and Gondamar
with him; The Prince had the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Bristol, and the
Lord A^hton with him: so the Patriarch administered the Oath upon the Holy
Evanglists unto King and Prince, which they interchangeably took. But as Heaven
would have it, Some few days before the betrothing day was com, it chancd that
Pope Gregory the 15th. dyed, and Urban the 8. who succeeded him fell suddenly
sick; hereupon the King of Spain gave the Prince another visit, telling him
that he had received ill news from Rome, for his holy Father the Pope was dead,
who was so good a friend to this Match, and now he cold proceed no further for
the completing of the work without a Ratification of the former dispensation
by the present Pope, whom he was to obey as his Spiritual Father, which task
he would undertake to do by his own Ministers without putting his Highness to any
trouble, and the business was of that consequence that he feared it would require
some time, in regard of the indisposition of the new Pope, therefore he desired
his Highness patience in the interim, and now that he had stayed so many years
for a wife, he should not think it much to stay a few months longer; the Prince
answered, That he was sorry for the news from Rome, and whereas his Majesty had a
Spiritual Father, he himself had a Natural Father to obey, who was now become
crazy and indisposd in his health, which encreasd by his so long inexpected
absence from him being his only Son, therefore he had sent him a peremptory
command to be in England in such a month because Winter came on a pace, to
which purpose he had sent a royal Fleet for him under the command of the Earl
of Rutland; besides, he had intelligence that there were some murmurings in
England for his so long abode in Spain, which might break out into dangerous
consequences, and hazard the rupture of the Match which had there so many
Enemies among the Puritans: Moreover he said, that when he came to Spain he
thought he came not to treat of a Marriage, but to fetch home a wife whom he
was loath to trust with any but himself; the King replied, then your Highness may
please to leave a Proxy behind you to do the work, and I shall take it for an
honor if you make me your Deputy to perform the Rites of the Espousals, which
upon the faith of a Catholic King shall be performd the same week, after that
the Ratification shall com from Rome, to which purpose he would engage his
Contratation house in Sevill, if need requird. The Prince showed himself to be
mightily taken with this proposal, so he left two Proxies behind in the Earl
of Bristols hands, one for the King and another for Don Carlos his brother, to
be his Substitutes the wedding day; so the Prince put himself in an Equipage
for his return to England, and the King with his two brothers and Grandees
accompanied him beyond the Escuriall on his way, and would have done it to the
Seaside, had not the Queen bin then big with Child: At their parting King and
Prince often embracd one another, but Oliuares and Buckingham did not part so
kindly, for the Duke told him that he was infinitely beholden to their
Majesty's of Spain for many royal Favors, as also to the Lady Infanta, and
that he would live and die there Servant, and continu to do his best Offices for
continuance of peace twixt tht two Crowns, but for your self Count Oliuares he
said, I must tell you plainly you have disobligd me so far, that I cannot make
further profession of friendship unto you without flattery; Oliuares turned
about and made this short answer, aceto lo diesto, I accept of what you say,
and touching the first part of your Speech, if you perform what you promise you
will do well, and I must tell you that your own safety depends upon it, but for
any particular correspondence of friendship twixt you and me, it matters not
much, and so I bid you farewell.

Thus the King of Spain and the Prince of Wales parted with many interchanges
of endearment, in a field called el Campa de Balsain* not far from the Escuriall
at the bottom of a great Hill, upon which departure this monumentall
Inscription was erected.

In campo Balsain.
HEic; ubi fausta sors tulit, ad praerupti montis radices in late patente
campulo, solenni Regum venatione nobili, sed in solenni Rei e ventu long
Nobiliori; Philippus Quartus Hispaniarum Indiarumque Rex Catholicus, and
Carolus seremissimus Wallie Princeps pactis cum Maria serenissima Infant
Nuptijs, ad quas petendas ( --) It Fama per orbem) in Hesperiam properabat,
dextras dederunt, and in amplexus mutuo ruentes pacis and Amicitia aeterna
faedera nodo astrinxerunt Herculeo: O magnum and invictum Regum Par, sine pari,
Nullus mehercule Hercules contra duos, Ipsi potius contra omnes, perfidia
fremente duo Aleydae solo and salo Iusuperabiles; siste Fama, non plus ultra;
viderunt, suspexerunt, stupuerunt duo Austriacae sobolis Incrementa maxima
Carolus and Ferdinandus serenissimi Infantes, Gasper Oliviariorum
excellentissimus Comes, a Belli Statusque Concilijs, Sacri Cubiculi, and Regis
stabuli summus Praefectus, Didacus Carpentis Marchio cui fas per sacratioris
Aula limen; Ex Britannis Johannes Comes Bristoliae Orator Extraordinarius,
Gualterus Astonus eques and Legatus ex munere Baro Kensingtonius praetorianae
militiae Angliae Dux

Posteritati sacrum.

In the field of Balsain.
Here by the conduct of a propitious Star at the foot of a craggy Mountain in a
spacious field, ennobled by the common hunting of Kings, but grown more noble
now for the solemn event of the Thing; Philip the fourth Catholic King of both
the Spaines and the Indies, and Charles the serenissim Prince of Wales,
Nuptials being agreed upon with the Lady Mary the serenissim Infanta, to seek
which (sa the Fame of it flies through ^he world) he posted to Spain, the said
King and Prince plighted their Troths, and running into mutual embraces they
tied with an Herculean Knot, an eternal league of peace and friendship: O
mighty and invincible peerles pair of Kings, no Hercules can be against these
two, and they two enough against all; let disloyalty rage never so much, two
Alcides insuperable both by Land and Sea. Fame stop thy mouth, for thou can
go no further; Two of the Royal branches of the Austrian Tree Don Carlos and
Don Ferdinand saw, beheld, and stood astonished hereat, as also Gaspar the most
excellent Count of Olivares, chief Gentleman of the sacred Bed chamber, and of
the royal Stables, as also Didacus Marquis of Carpio who had the golden Key,
among the British Heroes John Earl of Bristol Ambassador extraordinary, and
Walter Ashton Ambassador ordinary, with the Baron of Kensington, Captain of the
English Praetorian Bands.

Sacred to Posterity.

In this Inscription the Duke of Buckingham was not mentiond, though he was
there present all the while, which shows that the Spaniards did not so much
affect him, yet was he at first much esteemd, in regard of the charge and trust
he had being the Princes Guardian, but afterward he began to grow out of
request by his French carriage, and over familiarity with the Prince etc.
Insomuch that his Commission being examind it was found to be signed only by
King James and the Prince, whereas the Commission of Bristol and Ashton was
signd also by the privy Council, and exemplified under the great Seal of
England. Therefore the King of Spain being instructed by Olivares, sent him word
that he should not trouble himself any further in point of audience about the
match, for he was resolvd to treat only with the two Ambassadors, who had a
more plenary power, and understood the business better; so il blood began to
engender betwixt Olivares, Buckingham, and Bristol. The Prince was attended by
some of the Grandees, and Count Gondomar to the Seaside, where being com not
without some danger, aboard the Prince-Royall, he sent Mr. Clerk a Creature of
Buckinghams to Madrid, with a private Letter to Bristol, not to proceed in the
business of the Match till further order from England notwithstanding that the
Ratification should com from Rome; Clerk lay in Bristols house, but was not to
deliver him the said Letter till the Ratification should com, the Earl of
Bristol suspecting such a thing, causd a rumor to be spread that the
Ratification was com, hereupon the Letter was deliverd him, so he went to
confer with my Lord Ashton about it, who was in joint, Commission with him to
conclude the Match; he asked him whether upon that Letter he would suspend the
business of the Match, and Ashton answering, that the Letter was to be obeyed,
Bristol replied, that then he would protest against him, telling him that they
had a royal Commission under the broad Seal of England, signd, and sealed by
King, Prince, and Council, therefore he conceivd that a private Letter from any
other could not have power to suspend the Kings immediate command but his own
counter-command; he alledgd also that if when the Ratification came, they should
delay a moment of the time in point of proceeding, the Infanta would hold her
self disparagd in point of honor; He subjoynd that this Match tended to the
restitution of the Palatinat, and settling of an eternal peace in Christendom,
which he knew well the King their Master did desire with that vehemence, so he
brought Ashton to join with him in pursuance of the business, which was at so
fair a pass, that they both made of them a great number of rich Liveries
against the wedding day, the Infanta went by the name of Princess of Wales, and
the English Ambassadors would not be coverd before her, she had got some
extraordinary Masses to be sung for the Prince's safe return to England: She
had diverse new Suits made for the Prince of rich perfumd Cordovan, some
embroyderd with Perl, some with Gold, some with Silk; She studied the English
language, and wore Chapins or high shoos, which no young Ladies usd to do in
Spain, till they are either betr^thd or married: Moreover the King of Spain had
a purpose to make a Daughter of his a Christian, and his Sister a Wife the same
day, and to that end had commanded that the Baptism and the Marriage should be
solemnizd together; to which end a long Tarass was raysd from his Royal Palace
to the next Church, all coverd with rich Tapistry; All the Grandees were
summond to be then at Court, and the great Ordinance were ordered to be
discharged in all the Maritime Towns upon such a day: So the long wishd for
Ratification came at last complete and full, but (as the Stars would have it) as
the business was upon its last period there come four Posts from England within
the space of 24 hours with a new Commission from King James to the Earl of
Bristol, intimating that whereas he treated before singly of a match, he should
now join the Palatinat with it, and have a categoricall conclusive answer from
the King of Spain for the restitution of it; for he would not marry his son with
joy, and leave his daughter in tears; This struck a strange kind of
consternation in the hearts of all men at Madrid, who wishd that the
Postillions which brought the new Commission to Bristoll had all broke their
necks on the way: the Infanta retird her self, and wore a kind of mourning for
some days, and an universal sadness appeard in all faces.

Hereupon the Earl of Bristol going to the King of Spain to demand a surrender
of the Palatinat, He answered that it was not in his power to do it, for he
could not command an Emperor in whose hands it was, with whom if England would
entertain a Treaty, if the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria would not com to
terms of reason, the same arm which got the said Palatinat for his Oncle (the
Emperor) should join with the King of England to reconquer it for his son in
law; But this not satisfying, Bristol received Letters of Revocation, and so
going to take his leave of the King, he pulld off a ring of 1500 l. price off
his finger and gave it him, sending him afterward a Cup-board or old Plate
valued at 20000. ducats.

The Prince at his departure left a great rope of Pearl and many boxes of
Jewels more for the Infanta, valued at 400000. crowns; but she would not
receive any till the Nuptial day, so they were kept in the custody of one of
the Secretaries of State: But notwithstanding that intelligence was sent how
the two Treaties of Match and Palatinat were dissolved by act of Parliament in
England, and that they were preparing for a War, yet the Spaniard commanded the
said Jewels to be deliverd up to the English Ambassador, which after were sent
safely to England: Out of the premises it may be inferrd that the Spanyard did
really intend a match with England, which he says he has not broken to this
day: In Spain the King was young and his Favorit old, it was clean contrary in
England which made the world abroad to wonder that King James should be
transported by the Council of a young Favorit, as to suffer him to strain the
conscience of his son so far as to break the Match; now, most remarkable it is,
that as the Parliament served him for an Instrument to do it, so the Parliament
was the chief instrument afterward of his ruin.

Thus the Spanish Match which amused the world so long, and assorded such
matter of discourse was suddenly dashd, that Fabrique which was a rearing so
many years, and brought to such a point of perfection that it only wanted a
cover, fell down in a moment.

A little before these times the Duke of Ossuna a little man, but of a mighty
spirit, was Viceroy of Naples, where he had committed more extravagances then
any Viceroy ever did; He raisd a War against the Venetian for a property of
Dominion in some part of the Adriatic gulf, wherein he causd the Signory to
spend much treasure, but afterward it was found that this War was grounded
rather upon the Capricio of his brain, then any just reason: Thereupon the King
of Spain sent the Cardinal Borja to seize upon the government of Naples, and
send home the Duke prisoner if he found cause; The Cardinal carried the
business very privately, and being com to a little Island near Naples, the
sagacious Duke smelling something, sent a Bishop to entertain and wait upon him,
but it was indeed to serve as a Spy to observe his motions. The Cardinal made a
show to go a hunting one day in a Sedia, where he had appointed one to be
habited just like him in another Sed^a, the Bishop being in the Field all the
while, and seeing a man like him in the Sedia, he thought the Cardinal was
still there, but the Cardinal had privately got away to the Marine, where he had
a Soldiers habit for a disguise, and a Felucca ready for transporting him to
Naples, leaving the Bishop waiting still upon the counterfeit Cardinal in the
Field, and having diverse confidents in the Castle where the Duke was, he got
thither at the close of the day, over a small draw-bridg, and surprised the
Duke: so signal being given to the Town the Bells rung, and the great guns went
all suddenly off, so the Collateral Council came to salute the new Viceroy,
and Ossuna was sent prisoner to Spain, with these several accusations.

Accusations wherewith the most faithful City of Naples does charge the Duke
of Ossuna.
I. THat against his Majesty's will he entertained a great number of Soldiers,
who by their miscarriages have committed many outrages, rapes and robberies,
and if any complaind against them, the Plaintiffs were sent away with
threatenings and checks instead of satisfaction from the Duke.

II. He did put his Majesty's patrimony in distribution, as it appears by the
accounts of the Kings Chamber, besides he wasted much of the common treasury of
the Town, depriving her of many privileges.

III. When he sent Soldiers to be billeted in diverse parts of this Kingdom, the
poor people to rid themselves of the trouble and charge, used to resort to the
Marchiones of Campolataro, whom they were forced to bribe with presents to do
them good offices.

IV. He causd diverse of his Majesty's Subjects to be taxd with some enormous
offenses; which he did, because they should stand in the more awe of him: and
being convinced by subordination of false witnesses, they were used afterward
to compound the business by bribes.

V. He entertaind the said Marchioness de Campolataro publicly for his
Concubine, to which he used to send the Marquis out of the way upon remote
employments.

VI. When Gabriel Sanchez his chief Chaplain left him, he said that he would
have never gone from the Duke if he had gone duly to Mass, and observed other
divine Exercises, besides he never saw him confess, or come to the Communion.

VII. He took out of the Church of the Annunciation the box wherein the Holy
Sacrament was kept, and never restored it again.

VIII. He committed rapes upon many young Mayds, he committed with a woman
before the holy Alter, and with another in the Chancell of St. Mary's Church

IX. He frequented Nunneries to profane sacrilegious ends.

X. He made a Feast of Flesh for all the Courtisans in Naples upon Maundy
Thursday, and was never used to observe fasting days.

XI. He made another Feast to some of the principal Courtisan^ of Naples in Don
Pedro de Toledo's Garden, whom he made to confess with how many Churchmen they
had traded, commanding an Inventory of their names to be taken.

XII. He would often take Juana Maria a common Courtisan into his Coa^h and go
abroad with her.

XIII. He had always a Morisco Slave in his house, of whom he got a Bastard,
which he sufferd to be brought up in the Mahametan Religion, and being dead,
he was buried after the rites of Turkey.

XIV. He did his utmost endeavor to put debate between the Gentry and
Cominalty that they might both make their recours to him.

XV. As the holy Eucharist was a elevating, he took a piece of gold out of his
pocket, and stood adoring it.

XVI. The same time as Cardinal Borgia came to Naples, he attempted to make
himself Master of the two Castles, and intended to besiege them.

XVII. He procurd many blanck papers of the Gentlemen and Nobles with their
hands and seals underneath, whereby he made levies of great sums out of the
Duana by way of donation.

XVIII. He wastfully and unprofitably spent a mass of money against the
Republic of Venice, transported thereunto merely by an extravagant humor, to
revenge his particular quarrels.

XIX. He had suspectfull intelligence with the Grand Vizier, and some of the
Turks Bashas.

XX. He did many other acts of obscenity and wantonness, as inviting so many of
the fairest Concubines into his Garden, where he had provided a luscious
banquet for them; after which he commanded them to strip themselves stark
naked, while he with a hollow trunk shot Comfets at their naked bodies, which
they were to take up standing upon their high Chapins.

XXI. That he causd a Barber to strip himself stark naked, and shave his Duches
below being also naked, and he all the while standing with a great knife to cut
off his privy parts if he found any motion in them all the while. Moreover
having extraordinary Forces by Sea and Land, he grew so insolent that he began
to chop logic and capitulat with the King his Master, proposing unto him that
he should continue in this Government four years longer, that he should send him
Commission to pursue the War against the Venetian for dominion of some part of
the Gulf, with other extravagances.

The former accusations were sent to Madrid with the Duke of Ossuna, with
sundry more, yet was he admitted to kiss the Kings hand; but coming with his
Sword like a Cane in his han^, because he was troubled with the gout, the King
observing his posture, and turning his back upon him, went away to his private
Gallery, whereat the Duke was overheard to mutter Esto el tratar con
muchachos, This it is to treat with boys* A little after he was confind to a
Country House hard by, whence at last he was permitted to com prisoner to his
hou^e in Madrid, being grown so weak that he was carried in a Bed upon the
sholders of men: so he died a little after, and at his death he protested, That
the worst thing that ever he had done against Spain, was, when he made his
eldest son whom he could never ab^de.

The Duchess his Wife came one day and presented a printed memorial in a very
high language, to solicit the King for her Husbands release, and among other
motifs in her Petition one was, that some of her ancestors ha^ brought more
Lands and Lordships to the Crown of Spain, then some of his Majesty's
Progenitors were worth.

There were two Cardinals, Borgia and Sapata who consecutively succeeded the
Duke of Ossuna, but neither the taxes lessened, nor the times mended any thing
under their government, but the people were still pitifully peeld up and down,
which made one to drop down this Satyr in diverse Copies up and down the
streets.

Lamento de Napoli.
Pleta, pieta che ogni speranza e vana
Porgi remedio a i miei Christiani
Accio non sian strutati da Marani
Pater noster.
Questi son quei che sua dura Croce
Sempre to han fatto, ed anchor ti farcen guerra,
Et peggio ti furan se fosse in terra
Qui es in Caelis.
Quando son questi in nostre case intrati
Con le coron^ in mano humanamente
Ne van devoti, e pajan certamente
Sanctificetur
Dal primo giorno in poi si san patroni,
Ne pensan de acostarti a loro intorno
Perch renegan mill volte il giorno
Nomen tuum
La prima cosa che fa lo Spaguuolo
Per tutti lati latua casa squadra,
Et quando vede cosa che gli agrada
Adveniat
Dicendo ad patron traes a ca de todo
Co' l petto gonfio; and con il viso altiero
Che non gli bastarebbe un giorno intiero
Regnum tuum
Traes aca pollos, y de gallinas
Si non os matare con un cuchille,
Che convien dir a tal con basso ciglio
Fiat.
Credo che sia per nostri gran peccati
Che sotto posti siamo a tal gente,
E certamente ognun creed che sia
Voluntas tua
Signor ti prego per la tua passione
Che libera rarei voglia di questi cana
Et fa che non ne sia tra nostre mani
Sicut in caelo
Anchor ti prego per la tua bonta
Che questi che non credon nel vangelo
Maledetti si sian sempre in cielo
Si cet in terra
O Dio del Cielo e pur gran cosa questa.
Son tanto Rei, perfidi and prophani
Che vogliono ancho dar a lor cani
Panem nostrum
Un pover huomo che va a guadgnare
In caepo dell' anno non fa alcun profitto
Perch questi mangiano il suo vitto
Quotidianum.
Et se qual cosa habbiamo da mangiare,
Che servar vogliam per l' altro giorno
Subito si stan dicendo intorno
Da nobia* hodie.
Et se di questi noj ci lamentiamo
Vengono sopra noj con tanto ardire
Che senza dubbio siam forzati a dire
Dimitte nobis
Et se in tutto no li contentiamo
Metton tutta la casa in disbaratto
^^i^ando contra noi non haver ^att^
Debita nostra
Appresso a questo ogni male e poco
Per voler contentar tutte lor voglie
^oglion anchor dormir con nostre moglie
Sicut and nos.
Et se qual cosa noi gli diciamo
Voto a Dios os dare de cuchi lladas
Tal che por nollevar de bastonadas
Dimitti^^s
Un altra cosa mi manoava a dire,
Son tanto rei, perfidi ed avari
Che voglion anchor riscuoter j danari
Debitoribus nostris
Gran Dio dacci nostra libertade
Anticha, and da qui avanti
Sotto il jugo de usurpanti
Ne nos inducas
Sotto il Francese piu franchi vissimo,
Ma so questi remanemo tutti
Diventati pur schiavi, and per forza indutti
In tentationem
Che habbia haunto piu variabil fato
Che noi non e's nation nissuna
No vengi fra noi altro com Ossuna
Sed libera nos a malo
Mentre che di noi tenghin ^il governo
Questi maluaggi altieri popoli
Non possiamo dire que di Napoli
Nam tuum est Regnum.
The Lamentations of Naples.
Pity, O pity, for all hopes are vain,
Relieve my oppressed Christians
That they be not torn to pieces by Barbarians,
O our Father;
These are they who under the hard Cross
Have made and will make war against Thee
And they would use thee worse if thou were on Earth,
Which art in Heaven.
When these Scabbs enter our houses
Devoutly with their Beads in hand
They seem so holy as if their mouths were
Hallowed
They make themselves Masters the first day,
And look about what things are fit for Prey
Then they profane a thousand times a day
Thy name:
The first thing a Spaniard does
He skulking goes in every part of the house
And if there be any thing that like's, he says,
Let come
Bring hither Sirrah, he says unto the Master
With a swelling breast and such high looks,
As if with the Giants he would assault
Thy Kingdom
Sirrah, bring here those Hens and Capons
Or else I will hurl thee out of thy window,
So he obeys, saying with a trembling voice
Thy will be done.
O Lord I implore thee for thy passion
To free us from these ravenous Wolfs,
And grant that justice may be done
In Earth as it is in Heaven.
And if perchance we have any thing in store,
And reservd for another time
They presently cry out and bawl
Give us this day
A poor man who goes to gain a living,
At the years end can scarce put up a penny,
For these Spanish Dogs continually devour
Our daily bread
And if by chance they go upon the score,
Which they too often use to do,
With swelling words and threats they say
Forgive us our debts,
And we must do it with speed
Wiping off their Scores in their presence,
So that we must forgive them not
As we forgive our Debtors
Great God restore us our liberties,
With our ancient Laws and Customs,
Under the Iron yoke of Usurpators,
And lead us not
We livd far better under the French
But under this half-moorish people
We are become pure Slaves, and daily brought
Into temption.
There is no people has had and felt
More miseries and chances then we,
Lord let there not com among us another Ossuna,
But deliver us from evil,
While these Tyrants sit at the Healm
And grind our face ni this manner,
Lord, it cannot be said that Naples
For thine is the Kingdom.
IT has been formerly related how illfavoredly matters went betwixt England
and Spain after the return of the Prince of Wales, for the Treaties both of
Match and Palatinat were dissolvd by Act of Parliament, where the Puritan bore
the greatest sway, and the Duke of Buckingham made use both of Parli^ment and
Puritan to bring that work about, but there being at that time two Ambassadors
extraordinary in England, and finding that it was chiefly by the practices of
Buckingham that the Match was broken, they practisd also how they might break
his neck, and demolish him; likewise King James was old, and they knew the
least thing would make impressions of jealousy in him, therefore by a notable
way of plotting they gave him intelligence at a private audience, of a dangerous
conspiracy against his Royal Authority, by the Duke of Buckingham and his
Accomplices; The manner of which Conspiracy may be best understood out of the
following memorial or information that Sir Walter Aston, remaining still
Ambassador in Spain, did present unto that King, which was as follows, and
being so remarkable a passage, I thought it worthy to take place here.

To the King
SIR,
SIr Walter Aston Ambassador to the King of great, says, that the King his
Master has commanded him to represent unto your Majesty, that having declard
to your Majesty the reasons why he could receive no satisfaction by your
Majesty's answer of the fifth of January, and that thereby according to the
unanimous consent of his Parliament he came both to disolve the treaties of
Match and Palatinat, he has receivd another answer from your Majesty, wherein
he finds less grounds to build upon, and having understood that neither by the
Padr. Maestro, or your Majesty's Ambassadors, who have assisted these days
passd in his Court, there was something to be propounded, and declard touching
the business of the Palatinat, whereby he might receive contentment; The said
Ambassadors until now have not said any thing at all to any purpose, which
being compard with other circumstances of their ill carriage, he gathers and
doubts that according to the ill affection and depraved intentions wherewith
they have proceeded in all things, but specially in one particular, they have
labourd to hinder the good correspondence, and so necessary and desired
intelligence should be conservd with your Majesty.

Furthermore he says, that the King his Master had commanded him to give
account to your Majesty that in an Auaience which he gave to the Marquess of
Inoiosa, and Don Charlos Coloma, they under cloak and pretext of zeal, and
particular care of his person, pretended to discover unto him a very great
conjuration against his per^^n and Royal Dignity, which was that at the
beginning of this Parliament the Duke of Buckingham had consulted with certain
Lords and others of the arguments and means which were to be taken for the
breaking and dissolving of the treaties both of Match and Palatinat; and their
consultations passd so far, that if his Majesty would conform himself to their
counsels, they would give him a house of pleasure whither he might retire
himself to his sports, in regard that the Prince had now years sufficient, and
parts answerable for the government of the Kingdom. The information was of that
quality, that it was sufficient to put impression in him of an everlasting
jealousy, in regard that through the sides of Buckingham they wounded the
Prince his Son, together with the Nobility, for it is not probable that they
could bring to effect such a design without departing totally from the
Obligation of that faith and loyalty, which they owd to his person and Crown,
because the Lords made themselves culpable as Concealors, Nor is it likely that
the Duke would put himself upon such an enterprise, without communicating it
first to the Prince, and knowing of his pleasure.

But because this information might be made more clear, his Majesty did make
many instances unto the said Ambassadors that they would give him the Authors
of the said conjuration, this being the sole means whereby their own honor
might be preservd, and whereby the great zeal and care they pretended to have
of his person might appear: But the said Ambassadors in stead of confirming
the great zeal they made profession to bear him, all the answer they made him
consisted of arguments against the discovery of the Conspirators, so that for
confirmation of the said report, there r^maind no other means then the
examination of some of his Council of State, and principal Subjects, which was
put in execution accordingly, whom he causd to be put to their Oaths in his
own presence* commanding that such Interrogatories and Questions should be
propounded unto them that were most pertinent to the accusation* so that not
the least part, particle, or circumstance remaind which was not exactly exa^ind
and winnowed; And he found in the Duke, with the rest who were examind a ^^eer*
and sincere innocence, touching the accusations and imputations wherewith your
Majesty's Ambassadors had chargd them.

This being done, he r^turned to make new instances unto the said Ambassadors,
that they would not prefer the discovery of the names of the conspirators to the
security if his Royal person, to the truth and honor of themselves, and to run
the hazard of an opinion to ^e h^ld and judgd the Authors, and Betrayers of a
plot of such malice* sedition, and danger, but the said Ambassadors continued
still in a kn^tty kind of obstinacy, resolving to conceal the names of the
Conspirators, notwithstanding that he gave them audience afterward^, wherein the
Marquess of Inoiosa took his leave.

But a few days after they desird new Audience, pretending that they had
something to say that concernd the public good, and condu^d to the entire
restitution o^ the Palatinat, and thereby to the confirmation nnd conservation
of the friendship (...) your Majesty; but having suspended some few days to
give them audience, thinking that being thereby better advisd they would think on
better courses, and discov^r the Authors of s^p^rnitious a plot, and having
since made many instances to that effect, and attended the success of so long a
patience; he sent his Secretary Sir Edward Conway with Sir Francis Cotington
Secretary to the Prince, commanding them that they should signify unto the said
Ambassadors, that he desired nothing more then continuance of the friendship
betwixt the two Crowns, therefore if they had any thing to say, they should
communicate it unto the said Secretaries, as persons of so great trust which he
sent therefore expressly to that end, and if they made any difficulty of this
also* then they might choose amongst his Council of State those whom they likd
best, and he would command that they should presently repair unto them: And if
this also should then be inconvenient, they might send him what they had to say
in a Letter, by whom they thought fittest, and he would receive it with his own
hands.

But the Ambassadors misbehaving themselfs, and not conforming to any thing
that was thus propounded, the said Secretaries according to the instructions
which they had received, told them that they being the Authors of an
Information so dangerous and seditious, had made themselfs incapable to treat
further with the King their Master, and were it not for the respect he bore to
the Catholic King his dear and beloved brother their Master, and that they were
in quality of Ambassadors to such a Majesty, he would and could by the law of
Nations, and the right of his own Royal Justice proceed against them with
severity a^ their offense deserved, but for the reasons aforesaid, he would
leave the reparation thereof to the Justice of their King of whom he would
demand and require it.

In conformity to what has been said, the said Ambassador of the King of Great
Britain says, that the King his Master has commanded him to demand refaction
and satisfaction of your Majesty against the said Marquis of Inojos^ and Don
Carlos Coloma, making your Majesty the Judge of the great scandal and enormous
offense which they have committed against him, and against public Right,
expecting Justice from your Majesty in the demonstrations and chastisement
that your Majesty shall infli^t upon them, which for the manner of his
proceeding with your Majesty, and out of your Majesty's own integrity and
goodness ought to be expected.

Furthermore the said Ambassador says that the King his Master has commanded
him to assure your Majesty, that hitherto ^e has not intermingled the
correspondence and friendship he holds with your Majesty, with the faults and
offenses of your Ministers, but leaves, and restrains them to their own
persons, and that he still persever's with your Majesty in the true and ancient
friendship and brotherhood as formerly, to which purpose he is ready to give a
hearing to any thing that shall be reasonable, and give answer thereunto;
therefore when it shall please your Majesty to employ any Ambassador thither,
he will make them all good entreaty, and receive them with that love which is
fitting.

For conclusion the said Ambassador humbly beseeches your Majesty that you
would be pleased to observe and well weigh the car and tenderness wherewith the
King his Master has proceeded toward your Majesty's Ambassadors, not obliging
them to any precipitat resolutions; but allowing them time enough to prove, and
give light of that which they had spoken: And besides, by opening them many
ways whereby they might have complied with their Orders if they had any such,
which course if they had taken, they might will have given satisfaction to the
King his Master, and moderated the so grounded opinion of their (...)
proceedings against the peace, together with the good intelligence and
correspondence twixt the two Crowns.

Walter Ashton.


THis memorial kept some noise in the Court of Spain for the present, and the
world expected that the said Ambassadors at their return should receive some kind
of punishment* or at least some marks of the Kings displeasure, but clean
contrary, the one was promoted to be Governor of Milan, and Don Carlos Coloma
going to Flanders, continued still in employment, and increase of favor.

So there was a War menacd but not denouncd between England and Spain, which
lasted not long, being merely navall, for in the compass of a short time there
was a peace peecd up again twixt the two Crowns, insomuch that Trade after this
small in e^ruption did res^^rish mightily, specially in the Dominions of Naples.

The Duke of Medina de las Torres being Viceroy in that Kingdom, there happened an
extrao^dinary accident; the occasion was given at a Ball where there was a great
confluence of the principal Noblemen and Ladies. The Duke of Matalone the
chief of the Carassas and potentest Family in that Kingdom conceivd he had
receivd an affront from the Prince of Sanza at the Ball, whereupon he hird a
Valenton or Swashbuckler to d^y-beat and cane ^im. He^upon the Prince went and
raised Forces in Campania, and so thought to revenge a private injury in a
public way, the Viceroy having notice of it* raisd another considerable Army
which dispersed the other, so that the Prince of Sanza was forced to fly to
^ome when he took Sanctuary; The Dukes of Medina and Matalone devisd how they
might seize upon him, so there was a paction made with Iulio Puzzolo, a great
Bandito at such a price, who going disguisd to Rome about it, and understanding
who was Prince Sanzas Mistress, and where he usd to hear Mass, he sent a
Message to him into the Church, that his said Mistre^s was fallen very sick,
the^fore she desird to speak with him out of hand, so going up into the Coach,
which he thought had bin sent for him, that stood at the Church-door, the
Bandito with his Accomplices surprizd him, and hurried him away to Naples, where
a little after he was beheaded: The Pope sent six hundred Light Horse presently
after to redeem the Prince, but the Bandito was too nimble for them, and
wheeling about by infrequented ways, had got into the Territories of Naples
before, whence he carried him away clear, and so receivd his price of blood,
and they promised reward.

Philip the fourth entering young into his Government, took the Count of
Olivares for his Privado and chief Pilot for the conduct of all State affairs,
a man wonderful sedulous, but not so succesfull, for the King grew always to
be on the loosing hand, while he put him at the Helm. One of the first losses
he had was that of Ormus the chiefest Mart in the world for all sorts of
Jewels; so that if the Earth were compard to a Ring, Ormus might be called the
Gemm of that Ring: It was taken by the assistance of three English Merchants
Ships, who were then upon the Coasts of Persia; The Sophy Embargud and hired
them for the Service, promising them the spoils of the Church, and of the
Monasteries of Ormus, being encouragd hereby they fought notably, and helped to
finish the business, so accordingly they had the Plunder of all the Religious
houses in Ormus, which they carried aboard, and it was an incredible mass of
treasure they took, specially in Jewels, but it did not prosper, for the
English Ship Pearl being the Admiral and laden with that rich spoil, perished in
the Port with all her Cargazond, the other two making for England, one of them
was cast away in Alto Mari, in open Sea, the other being com into the narrow
Seas, as she set Sail upon a Sunday morning, a horrid tempest did rise, which
was so impetuous, that by the fury thereof she was carried away to the Coasts of
Holland, where she perished, but Captain Cartwright had preservd himself with a
Girdle of Jewels about him of six thousand pounds value, which did not peosper,
for going to Russia to push on his fortunes he grew to be extremely poor: A
little after Goa fell from the Spaniard, many Towns in Flanders were lost, the
Condado de Rossillon at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills, with the Kingdoms of
Catalonia and Portugal quite revolted from him; The first flew off because of
the free quarter the Castillian Soldiers took as they passd through Catalonia
toward Italy, and the Fry grew suddenly so furious, that the Viceroy himself
was murdered in his Coach with others; the Kings Seals were all broken, and
they put themselves under the protection of the French.

Touching Portugal they took the advantage of those comotions in Catalonia, and
likewise quite revolted from the Castillian, whom they hate above all other
Mortals. They Crowned John Duke of Braganza for their King, under whom the
Government in a very short time was so generally establishd, as if it had bin a
hundred years a doing.

It seems that after the revolt of Catalonia, there were some fears had of
Portugal, and jealousies of the Duke of Braganza, therefore to put him out of
the way he wa^ proferd to be the Governor of Milan, but he made a modest
excuse; Then it was given out cunningly that the King was going in person to
Catalonia, therefore notice was given, that the Duke of Braganza with the rest
of the Nobles should attend the Kings Standard, but he still excusd himself:
Hereupon the King of Spain to endear the Duke, or rather to secure him unto him
the more, sent him a Commission to be General of all the Militia of Portugal,
referring it to his free Election where to fix, and in what place he pleased
near Lisbon the Capital City: And withal he sent him for supply of his
private occasions, a royal Token of sixty thousand Ducats, but it seems it was a
Crown that he aimd at* not Ducats, (...) none of these proffers or real
favors could detain him from shaking off all allegiance to King Philip, near
whom he was bred most part of his years; The Duchess of Savoy King Philips Ant
then Governess in Lisbon, had formerly sent advices one upon the neck of
another, how she apprehended some fear of an Insurrection in Portugal, but
Olivares slighted her Avisos, giving out that she was a silly woman, fitter to
govern a Family then a Kingdom, therefore he sent her word, that if she did not
comprehend the services of State, at least she should not detect them.

Not long after some of the chief Nobility had a clan^ular close meeting at
Lisbon, where it was proposed that the Kingdom should be reduced into a
Commonwealth, but that design proud but an Embryon which dyed suddenly, before
it could receive any shape; Then the Archbishop of Sevill stood up, and
councelld them to cast their eyes upon the Duke of Braganza, the Native and
rightful Heir: The motion was approvd of, so one Gaston Cotigno a pragmaticall
man, and a nimble smoothd toungd Instrument for such a business, and one who
abhorrd the Castilians to the very death, was employed unto the Duke then at a
private house of his; he told him, that now there was a pregnant opprtunity
offered for him to recover his Ancestrall right to the Crown of Portugal, that
Fortune seldom proffers a man a Kingdom; He told him of the fair hope to bring
the business about, he told him of the general inclinations of the Nobility
and Clergy, specially of the Archbishop of Lisbon, the universal disgust, and
hatred of the people toward the Castillian: He bid him look upon the present
face of things, which seemd to smile upon and invite him, how that the house of
Austria was at a low ebb, distracted with Wars on every side, the Castillians
had work enough cut them by the Catelans, nor could he want succors and
auxiliaries from France, and others that did emulat the greatness of Spain,
therefore he advisd him to take time by the fore-top, for he is bald behind.

The Duke after a long pauze, thankd him and the Nobility for their good
affections toward him, but this was a business of that hazard and consequence
that it requird some deliberation; that he knew well there was no Medium betwixt
a Throne and a Scaffold, and so showed himself irresolute for the present. The
next night taking advise of his Pillow, and communicating the whole business to
his Wife, Sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia a Female of a Masculine courage,
and being anxious within himself whether he should hearken to the proposals of
the Nobility, or go to Madrid to prevent all hazards; His Lady told him, My
friend, if thou go to Madrid, thou do incur the danger of loosing thy
head, and if thou acceptest of the Crown thou do but run the same hazard,
therefore consider well whether it be not better to dye nobly at home then
basely abroad. Being incited by these words, he sent word presently to the
Nobility, that he would conform himself to their Councels, and was resolved to
live and die, and run the same adventures with them; so they securd all places
of fastnes in Lisbon, and though there were Spanish and Swisse guards there,
yet there was killd but one Swits in all the bustle, besides Vasconcellos the
Secretary of State, who managd all things before under the Lady Governes or
Vice-queen, but was extremely hated, so he was murtherd in a Cup-board within
his own Chamber, where he was usd to lock up all his Letters and Papers, among
whom he fell, being shot with a Pistol as he had shut himself among them.

Hereupon the cry went all over Lisbon, Viva El Roy Don Iuan el quarto, God
save King John the fourth; yet in all this hurly-burly the Vice-queen was dealt
civilly withal; and when some of the Nobility came to her, she made this
discreet Speech unto them, being nothing at all daunted, That if this
Insurrection had no other aim but to revenge themselves of Secretary
Vasconcellos, the business was done, therefore she assurd them upon returning to
their obedience to gain them a general pardon from the King her Lord and
Nephew: But they answered her in short, Madam, We have now no other King but
King John, whereof we com to give you notice, so they removd the Vice-queen from
the Royal Palace to another house, leaving a band of Soldiers for her security.

The Archbishop of Lisbon, who was the chiefest stikler in this desperate
business, to cover this Insurrection with some signal act of devotion, came
forth in a solemn procession, carrying in his hand the chiefest relic of
Lisbon, which is one of the Nails wherewith Christ was naild to the Cross:
Besides, it was delivered in a Sermon, that in the person of the Duke was
verified a certain apparition of Christ to King Alphonso, as he was upon point
of giving Battle to ^ive Moorish Kings, by which he was promised not only
Victory, but that he and his Successors should Reign to the sixteenth
Generation, at which time his Race should be thought extinct, but it should
flourish again when it should be least of all thought upon, which Prophecy fell
pat upon the motions of the present times.

There was then in Lisbon the Count de la Puebla Olivares Kinsman, with other
Castillians who were kept for Hostages for some Portugals that were in the
Spanish (...).

Upon Thursday after, the new King made his entrance into Lisbon where the
Clergy gave him 600. m. Crowns, the Nobility 400. m. and the Cominalty one
million of Gold, to hansell their new King.

The carriage and courage of the Vice Queen the Duchess of Savoy was very
commendable in these confusions, for whereas the new King sent her a complement
to ascertain her of such civilities that were suitable to a Princess of her
Rank, provided she would forbear all discourse and practices whereby to infuse
any opinion prejudicial to the now establishd Government, yet she
notwithstanding with much stoutnes (but with expressions of thankfulness to the
Duke, for she would not style him King) fell into a large and grave exhortation
to those Nobles that were sent to her to lay aside all vain hopes, and not to
cozen themselves, but to return to their old alleagance according as they were
obligd by oath, not doubting but they should all find pardon.

Thus what the Spaniard had possessd in so much peace for sixty years, was
snatchd away from him in less then six days; news hereof being brought to
Madrid, it struck a strange consternation in the thoughts of all people, but
Olivares came smiling to the King^ saying, Sir, I pray give me las albricias to
hansell the good news, for now you are more absolute King of Portugal then
ever, for the people have forfeited all their Privileges by this rebellion,
besides the Estate of the Duke of Braganza, with all his Accomplices are yours by
right of confiscation, so that you have enough to distribute among your old
Loyal Servants by way of reward: But herein Olivares did notably dissemble his
passion, for it was discoverd that these sad tidings sunk deeper into him th^n
any.

The new King John was married to a Castilian the Duke of Medinas Sister, who
was Governor in chief in Andaluzia, therfo^e upon some Ombrages of fear that he
might be seducd, he was by a plausible message sent for to Madrid, but as soon
as he came his person was securd, and another sent to succeed him.

Upon the first intelligence that came to Spain how Bragansa had bin proclaimd,
King Philip sent him a Letter to this effect.

Duke and Cosen, some odd news are brought me lately which I esteem but folly,
considering the proof I have had of the fidelity of your house, give me
advertisement accordingly, because I ought to expect it from you; Do not draw a
trouble upon your self, and hazard not the esteem I make of your life, to the
fury of a mutinous rabble, but let your wisdom comport you so, that your person
may escape the danger, my Council will advise you further: So God guard you,

your Cosen and King.


Unto this Letter answer was made as follows.

My Cosen, my Kingdom desiring its natural King, and my Subjects being
oppressd with Taxes, and new Impositions, have executed without oposition that
which they had oftentimes designd, by giving me the possession of a Kingdom
which appertains unto me, wherefore if any will go about to take it from me, I
will seek justice in my Arms; defense being allowable, God preserve your
Majesty,

DON JOHN the fourth, King of PORTVGALL.


THis huge loss and horrid disaster gave a shrewd alarm to the Spanish
Monarchy, for there fe^l from her by this revolt the East Indies, the Tercera,
Islands, the Kingdom of Algarve, Brasile, and all she had in Afric, except the
Town of Ceuta, which is the only appendix that remains to Spain of the large
Dominions of Portugal, but it is like a small crust left of a Christmas Loaf.

A little before this revolt there was a portentous strange accident happened
near the Tercera Islands which are subject to the Crown of Portugal, for in one
of them there was a Town built upon the Seaside under diverse Clifts and Rocks*
among which there was a great Lough, which suddenly one day broak out into a
fearful fire, proceeding it seems from some bituminous matter in the bottom,
the flakes of fire and smoke did so darken and obnubilat the whole Region of
the Cir^umambient air for many days, that they of the Town beneath thought
verily the day of Judg^ent was com, for they could go ankle deep in the ashes
which the fire drove to the streets, at last the huge Lake came tumbling down
the Hills, and carried many of them with part of the Town into the Sea: This
was held to be an ominous thing and to presage some great change; but the year
following there happened a stranger thing, for a new Island poppd out of the Sea
therabouts, and peed above water which was never seen before.

Now ^is worth the while considering what a mighty alteration it has made in
the Christian World, to set down the right of title, that both the King of
Spain, and the house of Bragansa has to the Crown of Portugal, therefore we
will plant here the Tree of their Genealogy, that the Reader may pass his
judgment accordingly.

The fortunat and famous Alphonso having in the year 1139. obtaind a mighty
battle against the Moors in Portugal, by the unanimous consent of the people
he was chosen King, and solemnly Crowned in Lamego, and his Posterity made
capable to succeed him to all perpetuity; all which was confirmd afterward by
the Pope* Among other Laws which the three Estates being assembled at Lamego
did enact, one was this; Let it be a Law for ever that the King of Portugals
eldest Daughter marry a Native of Portugal that so the Crown never descend to a
stranger; and in case she should marry to a Prince who is a stranger let her not
be Queen, for we will never have our Kingdom go out of the Race of the
Portugals, who have made us Kings by their own valor, and by the effusion of
their own blood without foreign assistance.

Now Don Emanuel was the fourteenth King of Portugal from Don Alphonso, and had
for his Issue six Sons and two Daughters, as follows.

1. The Prince Don John his eldest. 2. The Infanta Donna Beatrix, who was
married to the Emperor Charles the fifth, by whom he had Philip the second. 3.
The Infanta Dona, married to Emanuel Duke of Savoy. 4. The Infant Don Luis who
left behind Don Antonid an illegitimat Son. 5. The Infant Don Fernando dyed
without Issue. 6. The Infant Don Alfonso Archbishop of Lisbon, and Cardinal
never married. 7. The Infant Don Henry Cardinal and Archbishop of Dragon. ^.
The Infant Don Edward who left two Daughters, the eldest was Mary Wife out of
the Kingdom to Alexander Farnesse Duke of Panna, the younger was married to Don
John Duke of Bragansa.
After the death of Emanuel succeeded his eldest Son Don John who was named
before, and was called John the third, whose only Son called also John dying
before his Father, left behind him Don Sebastian who succeeded his
Grandfather, and was slain without Issue at that notable battle in Barbary
1578. where most of the Nobility and Flower of Portugal did also fall: Upon the
death of Sebastian the Crown returned to the eldest Survivor of his
Grandfathers Brothers, viz. Henry the Cardinal, whose old age as well as his
Function made him incapable of marriage, he raignd peaceably two ye^rs; After
his death there were no less then eight Pretenders to the Crown.

1. The People claimd right to elect their own King, jure Regni.

2. The Pope challengd Iure divino to be Arbiter herein, in regard that Alfonso
the first King made himself Feudetary to the Sea of Rome.

3. Don Antonio gave out he was no Bastard, but his Father Don Luis was
lawfully married.

4. Katherine de Medici Queen Regent of France, claimd a right as descending
from Don Alphonso the third, since whom al^ the Kings of Portugal have bin no
better then Usurpers.

5. Philibert Duke of Savoy, Son to one of King Emanuels Daughters.

6. Ranuccio Duke of Parma claimd the Crown in right of his Mother Mary,
Daughter to Don Duarte King Emanuels youngest Son.

7. Katherine Duchess of Braganza claimd the Crown as being born in Portugal,
whereas all the rest were Aliens, according to the Primitive Law made in Don
Alphonsos time.

8. Philip the second claimd the Crown by right of his Mother the Empress,
being Heir Male of Don Emanuels eldest Daughter.

Now touching the first Pretender, which was the people, it was answered, that
until the Royal Line of a Kingdom be quite extinct there can be no right of
Election in them.

Touching the Titles of the rest they were solemnly debated in many
Universities, but most concluded for King Philip, first in regard that the
Kingdom of Portugal had bin before Alphonsos time, An: 1138. under the
protection of the Crowns of Castile and Leon whereof he was King. Secondly,
because he could not properly be called an Alien, because he was born upon the
Continent of Spain, whereof Portugal is part, being called according to the old
division Hispania Lusitanica. Thirdly he might claim it, a digniori partu,
because he was the first Male of an Empress, who had bin also first Daughter of
Portugal.

Besides this fatal defection of the Kingdom of Portugal, with the sundry
Dominions far and near, that belongd unto it; there were many other cross
traverses besides that happend to the Spanish Monarchy; There was an illfavourd
fire kindled in Palermo in Sicily, which by a popular fury did so rage, and was
like to be so destructive that the Marquess de los Velez the then Viceroy, was
forcd to publish a Manifesto, wherein to content the rabble; he took off and
abolishd to perpetuity the Taxes that were laid upon Meat, Wine, Oil, and
Cheese: Moreover the people having in the said Mutiny broke open the Prisons
and let out the Prisoners, the Viceroy was constraind to publish another
Instrument wherein he pardond all such Prisoners, as also those who let them
out, and all this was don, sub verbo and fide Regia.

The Kingdom of Naples which is also Sicily (beyond the Phare a little arm of
the Sea, and thought at the Creation to be one entire continent) having
intelligence how well their Neighbors and Fellow Subjects had sped, the the other
side by that popular Insurrection, thought that they were as free born people
as the Sicilian, and did contribute more to the Spanish greatness, their
Donatives, therefore they might very well deserve and expect as good usage as
they: There had bin not long before a new Tax laid upon all Fruits green and
dry, which amounted to about eighty thousand Ducats yearly. The Duke of Arcos
then Viceroy was often told that there was an universal muttering at this
Tax, which might beget dangerous consequences: Hereupon some Commissioners were
appointed to consult how some other way might be taken to raise moneys for the
King, as also to repay those sums that had bin imprested, and already lent upon
the credit of the said Fruit Tax.

At that time there was in Naples a young fellow about four and twenty years
old, who got his living by retayling of Fish up and down, he was of a stirring
and spritfull humor, of a confident speech and utterance: This poor Retayler of
Fish called Thomas Anello and by contraction Masanello, observing what
discontents and mutterings raignd in every corner about this Tax upon fruit,
with diverse others; and the next day meeting with a great company of boys in
the Marketplace, he made them follow him up and down the streets, with sticks
and Canes in their hands, making them cry out, Let the Pope live, let the King
of Spain live, but let the ill Government perish. This and such like Doctrine
being infusd by Masanello into his young Scholars, the Shopkeepers laughed at
him as he went, asking him whether he were not frantic or foolish, but he told
them, ye laugh at me now, but you shall see shortly what Masanello can do, let
me alone, if I do not free you from the Slavery of so many Taxes let me be held
infamous for ever. At which Speech the laughter encreasd, but Masanello grew
more and more intentious about the work, so that he enrol^d the names of diverse
boys twixt 16, 17, and 18. years old, so that at last he made a Regiment of
two thousand, the next day being a Festival, he marchd with his brigade of
boys after him, and it chancd that being in the Marketplace the Fruiterers,
and Costermongers, or Shop-keers fell out about the paying of the new Tax, and
the baskets of Fruits were thrown down, and the boys fell a gathering and
eating of them in the streets, Masanello encouraging them all the while;
hereupon the Lord Anaclerio the elect of the people, threatening him with
whipping and the Galleys, not only the Fruiterers but other people threw Apples
and Pears into Lord Anaclerios face, and Masanello gave him a good thump upon
the breast with a stone; So with much ado the Lord Elect broke his way in a
Coach through the crowd* and leaping into a Boat or Feluca he scapd.

Upon these hope^ull beginnings the Rabble flockd together in many places
protesting to pay no more Gabell, and crying still let the King live and the
ill Government die; So now Masanello began to be attended with men as well as
boys, and leaping up upon a stall which was in the Marketplace among the
Fruiterers, he said with a loud voice to this effect, making this noble Speech
as if he had bin inspird. Rejoice my dear Companions, and Countrymen, give God
thanks and the glorious Virgin, the time of our redemption draws near. This
poor Fisherman barefooted whom you see, shall a^ another Moses who freed the
Israelites from Pharaohs Rod, free you in like manner from all Gabels and
Impositions; It was a Fisherman, I mean Saint Peter, who reducd Rome from
Satan's slavery to the liberty of Christ; Now another Fisherman who is
Masanello shall release Naples, and with the City of Naples a whole Kingdom
from the tyranny of Tolls. From henceforth ye shall shake off your necks the
intolerable yoke of so many grievances which have depressd your spirits
hitherto; To effect which I do not care a rush to be torn in pieces, and dragd
up and down the gutters of Naples: Let all the blood of my body spin out of my
veins, let this head skip off my sholders by a fatal steel, and be pearchd up
in this Marketplace upon a Pole, yet I shall die contented and glorious, it
will be an honor and a triumph unto me that my life and blood perishd in so
glorious a Conquest.

This Speech did wonderfully work upon the people, whose hearts were ready to
cooperat with him, so for a handsome beginning the Toll-house for Fruit with all
the books of accounts were burnt to the ground, with much of the Customers
goods which were showed there: Hereupon the Shops were shut up and down almost
through all the City, and the Keepers of them went to other quarters of the
City where the Toll-houses for Corn, Flesh, Fish, Salt, Wine, Oil, Cheese, and
Silk, stood, all which they burnt to the very earth, withal the writing and
Custom house books, as also all the Hangings and Household Stuff were hurld into
a great Straw-fire, together with some Chests of moneys and Plate, and all
burnt: And in this confusion there was this strickt point of Government
already, that it was death for any one to pourloin or take away any thing out
of the fire for his own use.

The people all this while having met with no opposition at all, grew to be
above ten thousand in number, and they made toward the Viceroys Palace, many
of them holding loafs of bread upon the tops of their Pikes, which was then
very deer, because of the Toll upon corn* There were some among the Brigads of
boys who carried black clowts upon the tops of their Canes, crying out in
dolorous notes as they passd, Have pity upon these poor Souls in Purgatory,
who not being able to endure so many grievances seek how they may escape away;
O brothers join with us, O sisters assist us in so just a cause: In such
doleful tones they went about, and coming to Saint James Prison they freed
there all the Prisoners and admitted them to their Society: At last they came
under the Viceroys window and made a hideous cry, that they would be freed not
only of the Fruit Gabell, but of all other, specially that of Corn; The
Viceroy out of his Balcone promisd them very fair to take off quite the Fruit
Tax, and half of that of Corn, but this not suffizing they rusht into the
Viceroys Palace, notwithstanding the German and Spanish Guards which were
there, and breaking through all the Rooms they came at last to that Room where
the Viceroy was shut up under lock, which they broke open, but the Vice-king
was fled, and thinking to go to the Castle where his Lady was retired, he found
the Draw-bridg up, and so came back and fled to a Franciscan Monastery; while
the Rabble was in his Palace they did much mischief, and pursuing him still,
and understanding that he was retired to the Monastery, he was forcd to com out
and to show himself. The people then though in the height of fury grew somewhat
more temperat, saying, Most excellent Sir, for the passion of God disburden us
of these Gabells who suck our blood, let us but breath and have no more
slavery. The Viceroy giving them the charmingst language he could, causd
little Cedules signed by himself and sealed with the Kings Seal affixed, to be
dispersd amongst them, wherein the said Tolls were taken off; afterward he
threw some pieces of gold and Rials of eight among them, so by that costly
cunning be got away from among the Rabble for that time, to a Church hard by
where they still pursued him, and would not be satisfied till they had a perfect
Instrument for the taking off the Tax upon Fruit and bread, the confusion grew
higher and higher till the Archbishop Filomarmi came, to whom they showed some
reverence being their Metropolitan and common Father, and he at last brought
them an Instrument signd by the Viceroy for abolishing the foresaid Tolls; so
that gave some contentment for the present, but the Torrent encreasd presently
with greater floods of water, for that Instrument of the Vice-kings being read
in the Marketplace, the cry was that it was imperfect, for they would be free
from all kinds of Tolls since the time of Charles the Emperor, Hereupon they
went to the Prince of Bisignano the chief of the Caraffas desiring him to be
their Leader and Advocat to the Viceroy; he went with them and being com to
the great Church de Carmine, he stood up in a high place with a Crucifix in his
hands, and conjurd the people for the love of God and the most blessed Virgin,
to be pacified a while, and he promisd them by oath, to procure for them from
the Viceroy whatsoever they desird: But this would not quiet them, but they
rushd into the Prisons and set loose the Prisoners; They went to the Dogana or
Toll-house for Corn, with Faggots on their backs, and pitch and fire in their
hands in a great fury: Prince Bisignano not being able to take them off though
he labourd earnestly, they put fire on all sides, and besides the houses, they
turned rich Household stuff, Sedias, and ready money all to ashes. The Prince
being but crazy in point of health, grew weary of heeding such an unruly
Rabble, therefore he rid himself of them at last by a Stratagem; The people
hearing that Bisignano was gone, and wanting a Head they cried out for
Masanello, who having accepted of it, he began more eagerly then ever to invite
the people, insomuch that he in lieu of water to quench this fire threw Oil
upont to make it burn more furious. The next day Masanello Captain-like divided
the people into Companies and Regiments, nothing but clashing of Arms within
the City, whether the Country Swains came with Pikeaxes Shovels and Spades;
Nay, the women appeard armd with Shovels, Spits, and Broaches, and the common
cry went Let the King live and the Toll perish, our Gabels our Tolls, let them
go to the Devil to maintain his Kingdom of darkness; let the Raisers of them
those Dogs die, who being transformd to Wolfs have devoured the flesh of
innocent Lambs, let them vomit the blood they have suckd into the Cinders of
their burnt Wealth, those domestic and insatiable Leeches of Naples, let these
Drones and Wasps be driven away who have suckd the sweet Honey of the Bees. With
such cries and screekings they stounded the very air in such pitteous accents,
which were enough to soften the hardest Marble, and draw tears from the Pumice
stone. Thus horror, blood and amazements raignd in every corner; so order was
sent by Masanello to all the thirty six Precincts of Naples to arm under an
irremissible penalty of having their houses burnt; Now there being some want of
Gunpowder they went to a house to buy some, but being refusd they threw fird
Matches into the house, which taking hold of the Powder-barrels blew up above
sixty Inhabitans, and it gave such a crack as the Galeon some days before did
in the Port which was blown up, being not known whether it was done by chance,
or by pure malice; Then they went to the Kings Magazin of Powder, but there was
a course taken with that before, for the Kings Laborers had put it in water,
by way of prevention; In the Interim the Viceroy fortifieth himself in Castle
nuovo having taken in a thousand Germans at the Gates, eight hundred Spaniards
with a thousand Italians, well armd with Pike and Musket; The Viceroy sent a
Note to Masanello (the Generalissimo of the Rabble) by some of the collateral
Council, wherein he promisd to take off all Gabels as was desird, but this would
not suffice, but Masanello would have have a ^estitution of the privileges
granted by Charles the Emperor, whose Statue he had over the door of his house;
he proposd also that the Clerk of the Market should be nominated for the future,
by the faithful people of Naples, that the old office of Capo popolo should be
revivd, and that he should be namd by the Citizens without any recourse to the
Viceroys.

Hereupon the Viceroy sent the Duke of Matalare, with diverse other popular
Lords to ride up and down the City and to assure them that his excellency was
ready to give all possible satisfaction: They answered, that they desird no more
but to have the privileges of Charles the Emperor restord, whereby it was
decreed that no new impositions should he laid upon the faithful people of
Naples without the consent of the holy Apostolic See; Now since all Gabels from
that time have bin imposd without his consent; some few of small consequence
excepted, it was just they should be abolishd; Moreover the people desird the
Original of those privileges of Charles quinto which was in the Archives of
Saint Laurence: The Lord chief Prior was employed to find out the said
Original which he showed the people, but some doubting whether it was a
counterfeit one, the good old Prior had met with death, had he not found a way
of escape.

There was appointed to be about the person of Masanello an old Priest by name
Genovino, a^ also a notable Bandito called Perrone, these two being Coadiutors
to Masanello gave out a list of sixty and odd Houses or Palaces rather, of them
who had farmd the Gabels from time to time, who having enrichd themselves, and
grown fat with the blood of the people, it was thought fit that they should be
made examples and a terror to others, so the said houses with abundance of most
costly household stuff, as also their Coaches and their Coach-horses were
pitifully burnt, and with so much order and neatnes of hand that he hazarded
his life who should embezel the least thing, thereupon one taking away but a
little Towell was killd, another for the Crouper of a horse had fifty lashes,
and diverse other after they had confessd to their Ghostly Fathers, were hanged
up by the sole command of Masanello; And it was very dangerous to show any
countenance of pity at the burning of the said houses; besides all kind of
rich Utensiles, there were Pictures, Bracelets, chains of Gold, with great
store of ready money thrown into the raging fire in the Marketplace, with huge
outcries of the people round about in such words, These Goods are our bloods,
and as they burn so the souls of th^se Dogs who own them deserve to fry in
Hellfire.

While the people were thus raging, the Viceroy by the advice of the great
Collateral Council, had causd an Instrument to be fairly printed, contianing
an abolition of all Gabels since Charles the fifth, and besides a general
pardon to all; This Instrument was sent to the Marketplace, and the Viceroy
finding that the Noblemen were out of request with the people, he employed two
Advocates to treat with them, but all would not do, for they found some flaw in
the said Instrument, therefore they demanded the Original of the grand
privilege given by Charles the fifth.

The people in this condition were like a huge River, which by an extraordinary
glut of Rain having broke her banks, and risen out of her wonted bed to ramble
abroad, can hardly be brought in again: The Viceroy and Council labourd to
make up the breaches, but all yet in vain; so they continued still burning the
houses of the Gabeliers or Customers, and finding in one of their houses the
Picture of the present King of Spain, they preservd it and carried it publicly
up and down the streets with this cry, Let our King live a thousand years, and
the ill Government ^ternally perish,

Among others which went armd there was a Regiment of women which went
strutting up and down the streets with Muskets on their sholders, and some with
Pikes, at last the grand Privilege of Carlos quinto was found, and as the last
remedy it was sent from the Viceroy by Filomarini the common Father of the
City, being Archbishop thereof, to the Marketplace, with a writing
underneath, wherein the Viceroy obligd himself to observe firmly for the future
every particular of the said Character which he desired should be published in
the great Church of Carmine, which Filomarini did accordingly in a most solemn
manner, and presently thereupon this Proclamation issued.

Philip by the grace of God King, etc. Don Rodrigo Pone de Leon Duke of Arcos,
We by an everlasting Privilege, do grant to the most faithful people of this
most faithful City of Naples, that all Gabels and Impositions be extinct and
abolishd which were laid upon the City of Naples and the Kingdom from the time
of the Emperor Charles the fifth of happy memory until this hour: Moreover we
grant a general pard^n for any offense whatsoever, committed since the
beginning of this present revolution to this point of time, as also for every
offense and inquisition passd that related to the said Revolution, Given in
Castle novo, 10th. July 1647. El Duca de Arcos,

Donato coppola Secretary to the Kingdom,


The sixth day after the Composition Masanello was made Generalissimo or
Tribune of the people, and by the advice of Cardinal Filomarini was inducd to
have a Parley with the Viceroy in the Castle, therefore he clad himself in
cloth of Silver, with a huge Plume of Feathers in his Hat, mounted upon a
gallant Courser, with a naked Sword in one hand, and in this Equipage he marchd
to the Castle attended by 50. M. armd men, the Cardinals Coach came next
Masanello, and upon the left side of the Coach Mareo d' Amalphi Masanellos
brother, did ride all in cloth of Gold being also well mounted and having
Sword and Dagger suitable: The Captain of the Viceroys Guard, but without Arms
came a horseback to meet Masanello saluting him in the name of his Master, and
welcoming him to the Castle, where being entered he made a Speech unto the
people, to this effect.

My dear and much beloved people, let us give God thanks with eternal sounds
of Iubile, that we have recov^rd our former liberties, but who would have
thought we should have com to so fair a pass; They may seem Dreams or Fables,
yet you see they are real Truths, let infinite thanks be given to Heaven, and
to the most blessed Virgin of Carmine, and to the paternall benignity of this
most Reverend Bishop our Shepherd; Then he took from his bosom the Charter of
Charles the fifth, with the new confirmation signd by the Viceroy and
Collateral Council, and with a loud voice, said, now are we exempted and
free from all Gabels, we are easd of so many weights, all Impositions are taken
off, now is restord the dear liberty in which rests the happy memory of King
Ferdinand and Charles the Emperor, I for my own particular desire not any
thing, I do not pretend any thing but public good as this most Reverend
Archbishop knows well; I told him often of my right intentions, I was offered
two hundred Crowns a month during life provided I should proceed no further, but
would be an Instrument to accomodate all things, I ever refusd the offer:
Moreover had it not bin to perform the promise I was tied in to his Eminence, I
would not have apparrelld my self as you see me, I would never have shaken of my
Mariners we^ds, for I was born such, such a one I livd, and such a one I mean
to live and die: After the fishing of public Liberty which I have made in the
tempestuous Sea of this afflicted City, I will return to my Hook and Line, not
reserving to my self as much as a nail for my own dwelling; I desire no more of
you but when I am dead you would every one say an Ave Maria for me, do you
promise me this? Yes, they cried out but a hundred years hence* he replied, I
thank you, desiring you not to lay down your Arms till a Confirmation com from
Spain, of all these Privileges from the King our Sovereign, trust not the
Nobility for they are Traitors* and our Enemies; I go to negotiat with the
Viceroy, and within an hour you shall see me again, or at least to morrow
morning, but if to morrow I be not with you, put to fire and sword the whole
City: Well, well though what has hitherto passd has not much pleased the
Viceroy, yet his Majesty will find that he has not lost any thing by it, only
some of the Nobility (our Enemies) have lost by it, who will return to their
former beggary, those ravenous Wolfs who bought and sold our bloods, never
regarding the glory of God, the service of his Majesty, or the common good of
City and Kingdom: Now the Temples of the Spanish Monarchy shall be adornd with
the most precious Crown that ever she bore upon her head; that which shall be
given by us hereafter shall be all the Kings, and not as in former times, for
when we gave him any treasure it vanished away, and was half drunk up by his
Officers. Having spoken thus, he turned to the Bishop, saying, most Eminent
Lord, bless this people, which he did; so thinking to go on with his
Calvalcata, the number of the people was so great that it filld all the Castle,
and so hindered the passage, therefore because going to treat of peace, it was
unseemly that such a confusd Rout should go along; he commanded upon pain of
life that no body should make one step further, which was observd with
mavelous obedience; so there went only with him Arpaia, Genovino, his brother
and the Archbishop whom the Viceroy came to meet to the top of the Stairs,
Masanello putting himself at his feet he kissd them in the name of the people,
thanking his Excellence for the grace he had done them touching the
Capitulations, saying, he was com thither, that his Excellence might do with
him whatsoever he pleased, either to hang him, to break him upon wheels, or tear
him with wild Horses; but the Viceroy made him rise up, saying, He never knew
him to be culpable, or that he had offended his Majesty in any thing, therefore
he may rejoice for he should always be well regarded by him: The Viceroy then
brought him to an open Balcone that the people might see him to avoid all
jealousies; so they fairly concluded the peace and parted, Masanello being
confirmd by the Viceroy to be Captain-generall of the people.

The next morning Masanello put off his Cloth of silver-sute, and took again
the Habit of a Mariner, yet was he obeyed and feared as much as formerly: He
would rise betimes and give audience in the Marketplace out of a window which
was in his house, whither they would reach him Petitions on the tops of Pikes,
he had always an Archibuz ready cockd hard by him, which was of some terror to
those who came to petition or solicit about any business.

By these furious Traverses and popular confusions matters at last came to that
point of perfection that the Original Charter of Charles the Emperor having
bin publicly producd, revivd, and ratified, the Viceroy issued forth this
general Indulgence in the Kings name and his own.

Philip, by the Grace of God King, etc.
Don Rodrigo ponce de Leon Duke of Arcos, We by an everlasting Privilege do
grant to the most faithful people of this most faithful City of Naples, that
all Gabels and Impositions be extinct and abolishd which were laid upon the
said City of Naples, and the Kingdom from the time of the Emperor Charles the
fifth of happy memory, until this hour: Moreover we grant a general Pardon
for any offense whatsoever committed, since the beginning of this present
Revolution to this point of time, as also for every ^ffence and inquisition
passd that related to the said Revolution.

Given in Castle N^ovo 10th. of July 1647. Subscribed the Duke of Arcos.

As this was to be publishd, there intervend an ill-favord Accident which much
puzzled the business, for there entered into the City 500. Banditi brought in by
Perrone, who had bin admitted to be a Confederat or Counselor to Masanello,
after their entrance there happened some difference twixt them and Masanello upon a
jealousy, that they had intelligence with the Duke of Mataloni (which was true
enough) thereupon some seven of those Banditi shot at one time at Masanello, but
none of the bullets could penetrat him, but to the astonishment of the world,
they only singd some part of his Shirt and so he dropd down; which preservation
was imputed to a Medail of the Lady of Carmine that he wore about his neck.
Perrone with most of those Banditi were killd and executed, and having found
that they had complotted with Mataloni against the people, Don ^^seppe Carasfa
brother to the Duke of Mataloni was found out and most miserably butcherd by
the fury of the people.

Masanello improvd every day in strength and the opinion of the people,
insomuch that Perrone being now dead he soly Raignd, and the Gran Signor was
never obeyed and feared in Constantinople as he was in Naples. His Warrant alone
was sufficient to fetch any ones head, to fire and plunder any Palace as diverse
were; he commanded that all men should go without Cloaks, Gowns, or wide
Cassocks, for fear any Arms might be hid under, and he was generally obeyed,
for Noblemen and Churchmen went up and down the streets en cuerpo; He
commanded also that all women should go without Fardingalls, and that they should
tuck up their Coats when they went to Church which was punctually observd; he
disarmd all the Nobility and Gentry, and sent for what sums he pleased from
Merchants and others, upon pain of fire and plunder.

Those interruptions which the treaty of peace receivd by the coming in of the
Banditi, were at l^st taken away by the prudent carriage of the Archbishop
Filomarini, so that at last there was a solemn meeting of the Viceroy and
Masanello in the great Church of Naples, where before the great Altar the
Charter of Charles the fifth was read and sworn unto by the Viceroy with a
general pardon Masanello standing all the while with a naked Sword in his hand
on one of the stairs of the Alter till all was don: Then Te Deum was sung,
which with the loud acclamations of the people made the very walls to ring
again, and re-echo with joy: After this Masanello did King it higher and higher,
and one day his Wife and Children went in a stately Coach, she in a Gown of
cloth of Gold, and her Children in Silver, to give the Duchess of Arcos a
visit in the Castle, where she had provided a sumptuous Banquet for them,
giving them Jewels and other rich Presents at their departure, and a little
before the end of the Banquet Masanello himself came very glorious, where it was
thought he took a Figg which wrought afterward upon his head-peece, that he
became to be twixt frantic and fool; he would as he went along cut, slash, and
killd some, he causd a Baker to be clapd in an Oven, and burnt alive for making
light-bread, one time he leapd into the Sea clothes and all to cool himself: He
had got a Catalog of all the rich Merchants and Citizens, and sending for
them, he made them under-write for payment of such a sum for the Service of his
Catholic Majesty, for whom he intended to raise five millions, as an
acknowledgment for taking down the Taxes; He commanded an order to be publishd
that none under pain of death should depart from Naples without his Warrant,
whereupon diverse Noblemen would com to wait upon him for Pass-ports, and a
Gentleman of quality of Aversa coming one day unto him for a Passport he gave
him a kick in the buttock. Thus he tyrannizd more, and more and, having
commanded some to be beheaded upon a Sunday morning, with much ado the
Archbishop prevaild with him to defer the execution, it being not sitting to
pollute the holy Sabbath with such Sacrifices of humane blood.

A little after he went from the Marketplace accompanied with a huge company
of the riff-raff of the people all the way a foot to the Castle, having one
stocking on and the other off without Band, Hat, or Sword, where being entered
the first word he spoke to the Viceroy was, That he must eat, for he was ready
to perish for hunger, that you shall, Signor Masanello, said the Viceroy, so,
as he was calling for something, no, my Lord said, let us go to take fresh air
at Posilipo, and there eat together, the Viceroy excusing himself he went
without him, and threw some pieces of gold into the Sea* making the Mariners
duck for them and find them again: so he feasted his body there very pl^^tifully
having drunk for his own share a dozen bottles of Lacrymae Christi; The
operation of this Wine, with the agitation of his body began the next day to
work upon his brain, which made him extravagant; He sent for that rare Artist
Fonseca, and commanded him to make some pieces in Marble and Brass with this
Inscription, Thomaso Anello of Amalphi* Prefect and Captain^generall of the
most faithful people of Naples. Thus his head having climd so high began to
turn more and more and to grow insolent, no Law could bound his commands for
life and death, he would be more then the Sea, who though a raging Element, yet
is contented to hold himself within his bounds; he would be more then the
Heavens, who though of such infinite vastnes yet keep themselves within their
due circumference: The glorious Sun confines it self to the Ecliptic, But
nothing could bound the vast desires of this Fisherman, in whom was truly
verified that Asperius nihil est Humili cum surgit in altum, He was so tossd
with odd fancies that they bereft him of his natural nocturnall repose, they
kept him from seeing that huge Precipice which was before him, the steps whereby
we mount to greatness are slippery, the top is an Earthquake, the Descent
perpendicular, the sight whereof does use to dis-compose the mind of man, and
alienat him from himself, specially when Honor falls upon a low Subject, and of
a base Carat, who being mounted high looks like a Munkey clad in Scarlet, now
Greatness serves some men to bring them to their ruin, as long ha^^ servd Absol^n
to destroy himself.

As he was domineering one day in the great Marketplace, Caesar Spano an
ancient Captain of very good respect came to him about some business, but he
struck and wounded the old Captain, giving him two cuts on the face, going on a
little further he met with one who he was told was thought to be a Spy,
thereupon suddenly before any process formd against him he causd his head
presently to be chopd off; He met another who told him his wise was subornd and
carried away by an old Bawd, thereupon he conducting Masanello to the house
where she was with another man, he presently commanded her to be hanged up, and
the man to be broken upon wheels. After Dinner he sent a menacing message to
the Duke Ferrante Caracciolo, that upon pain of death and the firing of his
Palace, he should com in person to the Marketplace, because that morning the
said Duke had not com out of his Coach to do him reverence*

The Vice-king was passive all this while, and extremely vexd with these
Deportments of Masanello, but he durst not apprehend him because he was still
backd by the besotted people, and while he was consulting of the means how to
redress matters, there came to the Castle old Gen^vino and Arpaia two of the
greatest Confidents Masanello had, who began to complain bitterly against the
extravagances of Masanello, and one of them had receivd a box on the Ear by
him, yet they knew not how to right themselves, he having at his beck 150. m.
Combatants well armd* yet they told the Vice roy that most people began to
dislike him for his cruelties, and if it would please him to publish another Ban
for the observance of their Privileges, it would be a means to make all the
people return to him, whereunto the Viceroy did readily condescend, and it was
done accordingly: It chancd that Masanello at that time was gone in the
Duchess the Vice-queens Coach to Posilipo to recreat himself, where he went to
the Office of the Galleys, and appointed other Commanders and Captains; At his
return to the Marketplace he met with Genovino and Arpaia, whom he threatened
because they had not attended him to Posilipo, nay* threatened to fire the whole
City, because he perceivd that they declined in their wonted respects to him,
and so he brandishd his Sword to and fro; Hereupon the Captains of the people
with some ado brought him to his own house, where they put an extraordinary Band
of Soldiers to guard him that night, the next day as the chief of the people
were consulting how to declare anew the Authority of the Viceroy, an unlookd
for accident happend, which did cooperat with their designs; For Marco Vitale
Masanellos chiefest Secretary (whereof he had seven in all) passing by the
Castle-gate, and meeting with some Soldiers that were banded together, he
proudly askd them why and by whose Authority they had taken up Arms, one of
the Captains gave a stout answer that it was by the Authority of the Viceroy;
well, well said Vitale, I am now going to the Marketplace and thy head shall
pay for it, thereupon the Captain drew his Sword and gave him a shrewd slash,
which being seconded by a Musqueteer, the Secretary fell down dead, and the
people hearing thereof as he was going to be buried, they tore his Coffin chopd
off his head and draggd his Carcass up and down the streets.

That day was one of the greatest Festivalls of Naples, for it was the Feast of
the glorious Virgin of Carmine, whose Church was situated in the great Market:
Masanello had got into the said Church, where he attended the Archbishop to
sing Mass, being com, Masanello told him, most Eminent Lord, I perceive now
that the people will abandon me, and go about to deprive me of my life,
therefore I beseech your Eminence to send this Letter from me to the Viceroy,
wherein there is a Resignation of all my Authority into his hands; So going up
the degrees of the Altar, and having a Crucifix in his hands, he re-commended
himself with much tenderness to the people, that they should not now shake him
off having venturd so much for them; Then a while after he fell a doting, and
accusing himself of his life past, and exhorting every one to make the like
confession before the feet of his Ghostly Father, that Gods anger might be
appeasd, so he went on in many ridiculous expressions, and some of them
savouring of Heresy, therefore his Guard forsook him, and the Archbishop got
him to be conducted to a Dormitory within the Cloister of the Church to be
dried for he was all in a sweat, having refreshd himself there and being leaning
over a Balcone, four resolute Gentlemen came to find him out, and seeing him in
so good a posture, dischargd four several Muskets at him, so he presently
fell, crying, Ah ungrateful Traitors, and so fell; hereupon a Butcher chopd
off his head, which being put upon a Lance they carried up and down the street:
the gross of the common people were so daunted hereat, that they lost their
former Spirits, and went all skulking away, nor did any dare to do any outrage
to those who killd their Captain-generall: So his body was draggd up and down
the Gutters and afterward hurld into a Ditch; Thereupon all the Nobility,
Gentry, and Officers got a horsback and went to the Castle to congratulat the
Viceroy, for the riddance of this popular Tyrant: An hour after the Viceroy
showed himself and came down from the Castle in a stately Cavalcata, to the
great Church where solemn thanks were given, and the head of Saint Germaro the
chief Protector of Naples was taken out and put upon the high Altar, where
extraordinary Jubiles were sung for the quietness re-obtained by the death of
so base a Rebel, who by the secret judgments of God had spilt so much blood,
consumd so many Palaces, reducd to ashes so much Wealth, and made himself so
formidable that he terrified both Town and Country, yet a fatal Instrument of
the indignation of Heaven, being offended with the sins of that luxurious
City, who as sometimes he punishd the Egyptians with small contemptible
Creatures, as flies, Lice, and Frogs, so he chastizd the Napolitans by so
despicable a person. From the great Church the Viceroy rid to the
Marketplace, where there ecchoed in the air this note, Let the King live, let
the Viceroy live, and let Filomarini live, the Restorer of his Countries
peace: It is reported and printed that a little before Masanellos death, San
Germaro was seen over the great Church with a Sword in his hand, and many
persons were examind upon oath about that Vision, besides a bright Star was
seen which presaged peace and happiness.

Thus finishd the life and Reign of Masanello, having prognosticated it himself
some days before, when going up the Marketplace, he said, that what he did
was for the universal good of the people, but he knew well that when he had
brought the business about he should be murtherd, and draggd up and down the
streets of Naples, yet he desird the people should remember what he had done,
and sing some Dirges for his Soul. As the Reign of this Ephemeran Monster was
violent, so it was but short, for from first to last it continued not to ten
complete days, insomuch that those Lyricall Verses may be truly applied to him.

Quem Dies vidit veniens superhum
Hunc dies vidit sugiens jacentem.
The Viceroy fearing some after-claps, fell a fortifying himself mainly,
insomuch that that very night there entered into the City six hundred horse with
wonderful secrecy, who went also to the Palace and tendered their Service, and
so betook themselves to diverse Posts: But the day following the bread which is
the staff of life fell to be eleven ounces lighter, whereupon the popular fire
burst out again, which took hold of the Bakers Furnaces and Goods: They went in
multitudes to find out the body of Masanello which was cast into a Ditch, they
took it out, washd and perfumd it, and so carried high upon a Bier to the gate
of the Holy Spirit, where they took down his head, and sowing it to the rest of
the carcass they brought it to the great Cathedral Church, with no less
solemnity then Lamentation, so he who was cursd and draggd up and down the
dirtty Channels the day before, is the next day following bewayld, missd, and
prayed for; so there was order taken for his Exequies which were celebrated in
marvailous Pomp, above a thousand Priests went before him with Torches in their
hands, the white boys of Loreto did attend the Hearse, Drums and Trumpets
sounded the doleful March, and as he lay lifted up very high upon his Funeral
Bed a Crown was put upon his head, and a Scepter in his hand, so he enjoyed
after his death those Ensigns, the Authority whereof he usurpd in his life. He
was carried about all the five Pr^cincts of Naples in this State, and passing
by the Viceroys there they made a halt under his very Balcone; At last two
hours within night they carried him back to the great Church where he was
buried in a particular Chapel, with this Inscription upon his Hearse.

Nobilium tyrannide inusitatis oppressi^nibus and angarijs in Regnum, Cives and
Exteros praeter Rerum and Naturae or^inem violenter extortis, Repressa;

Virgini Dei Matri Carmeli Die 7. Julij, 1647. gabellis publicis, facinorosis
Secretis Patriae hostibus, incensis, fugatis, prefligatis, sublatis; Inconcussa
fide servata: Ferdinandi primi, and Frederici Aragonensium Regum, Caroli Quinti
Imperatoris Caesaris confirmatis, renovatis Aureis privilegijs.

Philippo Quarto Rege Cath^lic^, Dom: Roderico Pons de Leon Duce d^ Arcos Regis
vicem gerente, Thoma Anello de Amalphi invicti populi Duce, pristina liberate
redemptus Fidelissimus populus Neapolitanus, Mausolaeum in reportatae victoriae
memoriam posteris Excitamentum p^suit.

The Tyranny of the Nobles being repressd, who beyond the order of Things, and
Rules of Nature did so violently extort unusual Taxes and Services from
Kingdom, Citizens, and Strangers.

An unshaken faith being kep^ to the blessed Virgin the Mother of God in the
Church of Carmine the seventh of July 1647. the Gabels being abolishd, the
public facinorous and secret enemies of our Country being subdued, banishd,
burnt, and extinguishd.

The golden Privileges of Ferdinand the first, of Fredric King of Aragon, and
of Charles the Emperor being confirmd and renewd.

Philip the fourth being Catholic King, and Don Rodrigo pons de Leon Duke of
Arcos being Viceroy, Thomas Anello of Amalphi being General, the most
faithful people of Naples, and public liberty being redeemd.

This Monument was erected in memory of the Victory obtaind, and for an
encouragement to all Posterity.

Thus the body of Masanello being redeemd from dust and dirt, together with his
memory was honored by the Neapolitan people; Nor did the Insurrection die with
him, but it revivd and gathering new strength it ragd again as furiously as
ever, not only in Naples it self but in all the Terri^ories, as Bitonto,
Nocera, Abruzzo, Cosenza, and other places in Apulia and Calabria.

The people of Naples chose for their Elect Don Francisco Turaldo Prince of
Massa, and the first thing he did was to command ten Spaniards heads to be fixd
on Poles, and carried in triumph up and down the City; he interdicted also
that nothing either for back or belly should be carried to the Castle where the
Viceroy was, he causd the whole City to be entrenchd, and Canons planted in
diverse places, now the people thought they had all the justice in the world to
continue in Arms till the confirmation of what the Viceroy had stipulated
before, were com from the King of Spain, as it was agreed it should be sent
three months after.

In the mean time Don John of Austria was com hard by with a Fleet of five and
forty Galeons, and sent word to the City that if they were desirous to have a
peace and general pardon, the people should lay down Arms and send them to the
Viceroy to the Castle; this they would not do, but offered to lay them up in
their houses until the Treaty should be concluded, so matters fell off the
hinges more then ever, the three Castles shot at the Town by Land, and Don John
by Sea with his great Guns from his Galeons and Galleys, which made such a
hideous noise as if Heaven and Earth would meet, and in the Town the huge Canons
from the Tower of Carmine played incessantly; so there grew a perfect War twixt
the City and the Castles, a great number of fair houses were burnt, heads
chopd off, and the great Bell of Saint Laurence rung out for signal of War;
The Spaniards on the one side put all to fire and Sword, the people on the
other side burnt the Goods, and destroyed the houses of any whom they
suspected: Many bloody Skirmiges happend in diverse places; Don John sent a
Cavalier of quality to the Captain-Generall of the people to know the ground of
this fury, and why they were so active in their own destruction with the ruin
of so many innocent Souls, and such a glorious City, but word was sent him
back that when the Confirmation was com from the Court of Spain they would send
him a civil answer, till then it was but just they should stand upon their Guard,
and repel any force by that power which God and Nature had given them for the
defense of themselves and their liberties, together with their Wives and
Children, yet with this resolution to continue in a constant obedience to his
Catholic Majesty, and not to listen to the enchantments of any foreign Prince,
who began to tamper with them already for a Revolt.

The Duke of Mataloni in these Confusions did many material Services to the
Spaniards, by sending them recruits of horse and foot from the Country; At last
the people grew jealous of their Elect and Captain-Generall Prince Turaldo, and
so gave him his passport to hasten to the other world without a head, so they
chose in his place one Gennaro Arnese, a man of a far inferior quality.

In this hurly-burly the French King sent the people a proffer of two millions
of gold, with twenty Galeons, eighteen Galleys, and forty Tartanas, which
message was sent by a person of quality from ^he French Ambassador resident at
Rome; The City embracd the proposal, and so employed an express to go to Rome
and treat; so a little after the cry up and down the streets of Naples was Viva
la Francia, let France live, and in some places let the Parliament of England
live, which continued diverse days.

Don John of Austria and the Viceroy having notice of these practices twixt
the City and France were much troubld thereat, thereupon they got the Pope to
us^ his Spiritual Arms, so this Nuncio in Naples desired to have audience in
his Holiness name, Gennaro Arnese gave it him all clad in cloth of Silver, the
Nuncio told him that he had receivd an express Mandamus from his Holiness,
brought by a person of quality to exhort the City to conform to a serious
treaty of peace, otherwise the holy Church must do her duty: Gennaro answered
that there could not be expected a sudden answer to so grave a message,
therefore the most faithful people desird some respit of time to consult of it;
so the Nuncio parted, and some did laugh in their sleeves at him, insomuch that
this message took no effect at all.

The next day after there was a Feluca discoverd chasd by two Galleys, but
narorwly scaping them she came safe to Port, and she brought in her the Duke of
Guise (with foru Servants only) who was all this while at Rome; he was receivd
into the Town with wonderful applause, he told them that his Christian Majesty
had an Army in a readiness to assist the most faithful people, so they resolvd
to make him their General, and the next day he went to the Arch^bishops Palace
to take an Oath of fidelity to the people, which he did upon the hearing of
Mass and receiving the holy Communion.

Now the Napolitan Nobles had a considerable Army in the Country about,
therefore the Duke of Guyse desired to have six thousand Foot and a thousand
Horse to go find them out, which he did at Aversa, but he was utterly routed,
with loss of above three hundred upon the place, and many more wounded, and so
returned to Naples.

The sixth of December there was a Truce concluded for three hours, during
which time, Don John sent notice to the City of a Letter sent from his
Catholic Majesty, wherein he ratified all the Capitulations of peace agreed on
by the Duke of Arcos, the Letter being sent to the Elect of the people, and
communicated to the Duke of Guise, the said Duke seemd to exhort the people to
accept of it, in regard their King had therein made concession unto them of so
many signal graces* Thereupon the Rabble of the people boiling with heat cried
out, that they would be cut to pieces rather then be slaves to the Spanish
Nation any longer, thereupon the Duke took a Medail from his breast, and told
them his Christian Majesty had given him that Medail for a pledge, that
whenever he sent to him for an Army, he should have one forthwith, and he told
them there was one already prepared, therefore he desired that some Felucas might
be dispatchd toward Tolon to hasten their coming, which was done accordingly:
So it was decreed that the Duke of Guise from that day forward should be treated
with Highness, others w^ld have him in imitation of Venice to be tearmd Doge of
the Napolitan Republic.

A few days after the French Fleet was discoverd which consisted of eight and
twenty Vessels, the arrival thereof did fill and affect the whole City with
such a tripudiant humor of joy, that people went dancing and singing up and
down the streets; The French Fleet appeard in form of a half Moon, but durst
not com in reach of the three Castles, or the Spanish Fleet then in Port, but
kept their distance, yet they landed diverse sorts of Provision for the use of
the City, they came up to the point of Pusilipo and got off clear again.

The first day of the year there came Letters from diverse places in Apulia,
that they had twenty thousand good Combatants in a readiness to assist the
Royal Republic of Naples: The Duke of Arcos began now to be disaffected by the
Royal party as well as by the people, insomuch that the high Collateral
Council in the Castle sent him word that he should forbear sitting among them
any longer, but that his Highness Don John should govern, who thereupon sent for
the Sicilian Fleet* to com for the succor of Naples, as also for three
Regiments from Milan; a little after the Duke of Arcos departed with his
Family, and Don John was heard to say Vayase en h^ra mala che ha hecho perder
este Reyno a mi padre, Let him go in an ill hour for he has lost my Father
this Kingdom.

Don John being sworn Viceroy, causd a general pardon to be publishd,
whereupon the grave Judge Onufrio made a pathetic Oration to the people, who had
a verend opinion of him, that since the Duke of Arcos with the chief
Incendiaries were gone, and that they had now a Kings Son so gallant a young
Prince to gorevern them, it was high time that they should return now to their
old obedience to their Monarch, and lawful King who had preservd them in peace
and plenty so many years, etc. but the people lent a deaf ear to his speech, so
that the next day there was new money stampd with the arms of the Royal
Republic.

The first of February 1648. the Castle of Saint Elmo erected the Royal
Standard upon the discovery of three Galleys wherein was embarkd the Conde d'
Ognate, who had receivd a Commission at Rome, where he was Ambassador to be
Viceroy of Naples, all the Castles saluted him, as also the great Bastion of
Carmine from the City, the first did it with powder only, but the last with
bullets, whereby some of the Gally-slaves that rowd him were slain: There arrivd
from Malaga a Vessel with five hundred fresh Spaniards, and thirty thousand
Ducats for the Service of the Viceroy, and this Galeon gave notice of eight
more that were coming: There arrivd likewise a great supply from Genoa, both of
men* money, and Ammunition; There came also an Ambassador from Malta with a
goodly Retinue of Cavaliers, which did much enhearten the Royal party.

The French Fleet having landed, as formerly was spoken, some Provision and
Commanders in Naples, was constraind by distress of weather to leave the Coasts
with the lo^s of diverse Ships and Mariners; now the Spaniards had securd and
strongly fortified the Port of Nisita, and there being a Fleet of Ships
expected from Province, with Provision of Corn which were to sail that way, the
Duke of Guise went with a considerable Army of Horse and Foot, with a Train of
Artillery for the reduction of that place to the Royal Republic, for it was a
place of great importance.

The Conde d' Ognate now that the Duke of Guise was gone with a good part of
the strength of the City, fell upon this design which proud as happy as it was
hazardous. About twelve a Clock at night, having with extraordinary acts of
Devotion implord the assistance of Heaven, young Don John of Austria and the
said Conde with a great number of Barons Cavaliers, and other ventrous Spirits
marchd silently down toward the City; they had a Train of choice Artillery,
with good store of Fireworks; Don John came first to the Cisterna d'oglio with
all his Brigade, and causd the Church of Jesus which was contiguous thereunto to
be gently opened, where having made ardent prayers to the Redeemer of Mankind,
he desird Father Gerunda to confess him, and administer him the holy Communion:
Thus he began to fall to work, and commanded a Wall to be batterd down which
joynd to San Sebastian, and so he passd without interruption to Porta Alba;
Being advancd so far, he got a horseback, and rid confidently toward
Constantinople street through a crowd of the City Arcabusiers, whereof some
shot, others being amazd at the suddennes of the thing stood astonishd, thence
he went on to Saint Aniellos street and the Virgins quarter where the most
civil sort of people dwelt, who were from the beginning the most Loyal to the
King: The Archbishop Filomarini was appointed to meet him, which he did with
other Lords; thence he pursued his way to the Duke of Guises Palace, and after
some Musket Shot the Palace yielded, for the great Canons which were there
planted would not go off though there was fire put to them, which was held
miraculous, and so much heightened his Spirits, finding that all things conjurd
to make this attempt prosperous; He marchd thence to the great Marketplace,
and being com near the great Bastion of Carmine where Gennaro Arnese was with a
choice guard of three hundred men, he sent him word it was fitting that Bastion
should be put into his hands for his Catholic Majesty's Service, and if he would
not conform to so just a proposal he left him to consider what a high act of
disloyalty it would prove; Arnese consulting with his best thoughts came forth
and prostrating his person before him, presented him with the Keys; hereupon
Don John inordred a Cavalier of Malta to publish a general pardon, with an
abolition to all Gabels new and old, provided that every one would return to his
former alleagance; The people with loud acclamations answered that they would be
well satisfied herewith, if Don John himself would declare this with his own
mouth, which was done accordingly.

So this Noble and Magnanimous Exp^oit took effect without any effusion of
blood, except the death only of two Spanish Captains, and one of the peoples,
which may be imputed first to a special Providence of God Almighty then to the
prowess of a young General, and lastly to the Prudence of a grave Viceroy:
Add hereunto that the absence of the Duke of Guise condued much for the
facilitating of this great Design.

The City of Naples being thus suddenly redued. Don John sent in quest of the
Duke of Guise to the Country hard by, who after some resistance was ta^en
Prisoner, and clapd up in the Castle of Capua, the high Collatterall Council
adjudgd him to die, but young Don John overruld the sentence, and so sent him
Captif to the Court of Spain, where having bin Prisoner a good while he made an
escape as far as Victoria, within a days journey of France, but notwithstanding
his disguise he was discoverd and so clapd up again in Prison, where he
continued till the Prince of Conde leaguring lately with the Spaniard got him
released.

There were Gibbets put up in diverse places of the City to execute the
chiefest Incendiaries, but at the cries of the women and Children to Don John
he commanded them to be taken down, yet after this his departure the Viceroy
dispatched many, and gave them Pass-ports for the other world, among others too
Gennaro Arnese who had bin Capo popolo with diverse others, and a long time
after the inquest and execution of some of the chief Ringleaders continued by
the noble sagacious proceeding of the foresaid new Viceroy the Conde d'
Ognate, a notable Minister of State, having bin traind up thereunto by sundry
Embassies abroad, as well to England as to other Countries.

Not long after young Don John of Austria weighs Anchor, and with a Royal Fleet
of Galeons and Galleys made sail for Sicily, having bin so wonderfully fortunat
as to extinguish that prodigious fire that had ragd so violently in Town and
Country, which, the Capital City being reducd, quickly conformd it self to
its old obedience: Nor was this youthful General succesfull only in Naples,
but also in composing the affairs of Sicily which also was in a dangerous
disorder; Add hereunto the reducing lately of Catalonia, by making himself
Master of that proud Metropolitan City of Barcelona, after a bloody stubborn
Siege of two and twenty months, where the Lord Goring his Lieutenant did
signal Services, no less heroik then hazardous.

During these hideous Combustions in Naples, there was a notable piece of
inhumane Villainy discoverd suitable to those times, which was this, One
Francisco Severino a public Notary had a Sister who was a young Widow, but
being to pay her six hundred Ducats toward her Dower, he clapped her up with a
little Daughter of hers in a dark Cave twixt four walls, where he fed them with
bread and water with some few Roots for seventeen years together; This Widow
had a Son under the Tutele of an Uncle all the while, who being com to years
demanded of the said Notary his Mothers Dowry, thinking she had bin dead; The
rumor hereof flying among the people, being in Arms, they rushd into the
Notaries house, the women in the Cave hearing an extraordinary noise began to
shriek, which being heard they broke down the Wall, where they found two women
like Savages or Furies, with long dischevelld hair dangling about their
sholders, hereupon the Villainy being discoverd the Notary was put to exemplary
punishment.

These Risings of the Napolitan people and those of Sicily, with other unlucky
Travers^s gave a shrewd shock to the Spanish Monarchy; It shook also Olivares
the great Favorit of the Catholic King, and that so ill favourdly, that his
utter downfall followd: Now in regard that this Favorit slept in the Kings
bosom, and swayd the Monachy of Spain so long, it will not be improper to
insert here a short Legend of his life. He was born in Rome during his Fathers
Embassy there in the (unlucky) Palace of Nero, and being a younger Brother, at
his coming to Spain, he became a Student in the Law in Salamanca, and then got
a Lay Prebendary in Sevill which was his first preferment; Having got some
subsistence and knowledge, he came to Court, and insinuated into the favor of
this King then Prince so dexterously that he came afterward to have an absolute
power over his inclinations, after the fall of the Duke of Lerma and Don
Balthazar de Zuniga, upon whose ruins he built his fortunes: In a short time
after the death of Philip the third, he was made Master of the Kings Wardrobe,
Master of the Horse, great Chancellor of the Indies, which Offices with some
Comanderies he got of the three Equestrall Orders of Saint Iago, Alcantara, and
Calatrava were worth him communibus annis 240000. Crowns But he had other
reaches to grow rich, for when the Galeons set forth from Sevill, and the
Caracks from Lisbon every year for the Indies, he usd to embark in them great
Cargazons of Corn, Wine, and Oil, Custom free, all which grew in his County of
Olivares, and with the proceed of those Commodeties there were Jewels, Silks,
and Spices, bought and sold afterward for his account, whereby he could not
choose but gain many millions; For engrossing the Kings Favor more entirely, he
had a way to restrain the Grandees, but whom he pleased, from being about the
Kings person, and for the Queen she was only Co-partner of the Kings Bed, but
he kept her from having any power at all in other things; He found diverse
inventions for inhancing the Royal Revenew, as that all Offices and Benefices
which were bestowd, should pay half a years in-com to the King, which was called
Mediannates: There were ways also found out to decry and raise the value of
Coin, and not long before his fall there was a project called Papell Sellado,
which was that no legal Instrument, not so much as a Bill Obligatory should be
of force, unless it were written in the Kings Paper with a particular Seal to
it, and all public Notaries with others were to buy these sealed Papers at the
rate the King imposd upon them, by these means there was a Computation made
that above two hundred millions of gold came extraordinary to the Kings Coffers
in his time: Now these new things being imposd upon Catalonia and Portugal,
which claim more privileges of enfranchisements then Castillia, it was among
other the ground of their Revolt.

Now there were many things conspird to demolish this Grand Minion of the
Catholic Kings.

First, A series or crowd of ill successes which tumbled one upon the neck of
another, both in the Indies as the loosing of Ormus and Goa, as also in Europe,
and in Spain her self by the revolt of Catalonia and Portugal, in Flanders by
the loosing of many Towns which Francis the first had paid for his ransom. Nor
was there any signal Exploit worth the speaking atchievd all his time, but
that of Spinolas when he took the Palatinat,

Secondly, The disaffection of the Queen whom he may be said to have kept to
her Needle and Distaff all the while, who one day broke out into such a passion
against him having done her some ill office a little before, that meeting him in
a Lobby she took off one of her Chapines and banging him ill favourdly about
the Pate, said, That she would have him know that she was Daughter to Henry the
Great, as well as wife to the King of Spain: But this breach was made up
presently, by the patience and humble protestations of the Conde, never to
offend her for the future. Awhile after the Kings affairs necessitating him to
go in person to Catalonia, he left the Queen Governesse of Madrid, during which
time she wonderfully gaind upon the affections of the people, by allaying the
austere humor of the Spaniard with the affability of the French: At the Kings
return she took heart then to speak of his affairs of state, of the interest of
his Monarchy, of the revolt of Kingdom, ruin of Armies, and how all things
went from bad to worse, and were like to continue so, if they whom his Majesty
entrusted most with the management of his affairs did not look better to
things: This discourse sunk somewhat deep into the Kings breast, which made his
thoughts to reflect upon Olivares his chief Minister; and now the Ice being
broken the next night after Donna Anna de Guevara the Kings Nurse, took heart
of grace to speak also to the King, having put her self in a convenient place
where the King was to pass, where falling on her knees she told him, That she
was not there to beg any grace at his Majesty's hands, but to render the Crown
of Spain the greatest Service it cold receive, therefore her Motherly affections
enforcd her to discover to his Majesty what perhaps others durst not adventure
to do for humane respects; So she presented unto him the general affliction of
his people, the sad condition of his Kingdom, the many unfortunat successes
which happend by Sea and Land, showing him that these evils were the judgments
of Heaven, for suffering the Government of his Kingdoms which God Almighty had
appointed only for himself, to continue in the hands of another; she said that
it was high time for his Majesty to be now out of his Nonage, and that he
should not incense the indignation of Heaven, by suffering his poor Subjects to
be longer abusd, at least that he would have compassion on the Prince his Son
who ran a hazard to be simple King of Castile or less, so she concluded that if
she had offended his Majesty she was ready to receive what punishment he
pleased, being well contented having given her milk for the good of his Majesty,
to sacrifice also her blood if need requird. The King hearkened unto her all the
while with much attention, and answered it is all truth that you have said: Add
hereunto that there was another thing happend that proud fatal to the Duke,
which was that the Infanta Margarita of Savoy who had bin Governess of
Portugal, having bin restraind some years from coming to the Court by the
practices of Olivares, at last venturd to com thither, and by the Queens favor
she was admitted to speak with the King, where with stout and pressing reasons
she made it appear that the loss of his Kingdom of Portugal was to be imputed
principally to the carelessness of the Conde, for she had often written to him
in what a hazardous discontented state that Country was, but to her Avisos and
Letters she receivd from him odd uncivil messages, telling her that she was
fitter to govern a Family then a Kingdom, and bidding her that if she
comprehended the mysteries of State, at least she should not discover them; This
Speech made deeper impressions on the Kings heart then any of the rest, for it
was most home and plain, insomuch that this was the mortal wound which was
given Olivares.

Thirdly, The designs he had to aggrandize his base Son who had gone many years
by the name of Julian Valeasar, and had married a common Strumpet, being of a
dissolute one himself, and under that name of Valeasar he had born Arms in
Flanders, Italy, and the Indies, where he was like to be hanged; Yet Olivares
having no Children of his own nor like to have any, sent for him, for Donna
Margarita Spinola a Merchants Daughter, (and sometimes a Concubine of Olivares)
took it upon her death that Olivares had got him by Her; So being com to Court
Olivares had his name changd to Don Henry Pbilip de Gusman, he procurd him also
to be divorcd from his first wife, and proposd a marriage for him with the high
Constable of Castiles Daughter, Donna Iuana de Velasso prime Lady of the Court,
which took effect; so having provided a great Palace for him, the Grandees and
Ambassadors came to give Don Henry the conjugall joy, treating by the Title of
Excellency, and sending him Presents, he was declard Gentleman of the Kings
Bedchamber, and to be president of the Indies: But Don Henry's carriage was so
ridiculous and so unsuitable to a Nobleman that there were Libells made of him
up and down; This strange design of Olivares got him much hatred, specially
from the Marquess of Carpio, who had married his sole Sister, by whom he had
Don Luis de Haro the Present, who was common Heir in Law to Olivares, and was
like to be deprivd of it by the foresaid Bastard; But upon the fall of the
Conde down fell also his Bastard, and the Constable of Castile sent home for
his Daughter, saying, that he had rather have his Daughter to be reputed a
Whore, then to continue Wife to such a Rascal.

Fourthly, The just hatred which the Grandees and Noblemen conceivd against
him did accelerat his ruin, specially the Marquess of Carpio his
Brother-in-law, whose Son though a very hopeful Gentleman he could not abide,
though his Nephew by his only Sister.

Lastly, the little Prince Don Balthazar helpd to push him down, who though he
was fourteen years of age yet by the practices of the Duke he had no Court, or
Servants settled for him, but was still left under the Government of women; Now
it was about the Prince that the King first discoverd his displeasure to
Olivares, for asking him what Lodgings in the Palace were fittest for him, and
he answering those of the Infant Cardinal, the King replied, and why not
yours? for they were my Fathers, and mine also while I was Prince: This struck
an Earthquake in the Dukes breast, so that evening the King writ a Note to him
with his own hand that he should intermeddle no more with his affairs, but
retire to Loches a place hard by Madrid until further order; The next day his
wife came weeping to the Queen to intercede for her husband, but the Queen
answered her very calmly Lo que hecho Dios, lo^ vassallos, y lot malos sucessos
no lo puede deshazer el Roy ni yo, Neither the King nor I can undo that which
God Almighty, the Subjects, and ill Successes have done. So a few days after
Olivares went to Loches in a close private Coach at the back-gate of the Court,
for fear of the fury of the people, and he was seated between two Jesuits as if
he had bin going to execution, which was a true moral one; but some two years
after Death the common Executioner of all Mankind took him away.

The next day the King called a Council of State where he made a Speech unto
them, that he had deprivd the Conde Duke of Olivares of his Service not for any
Crime that he had committed, but to give satisfaction to his Subjects, therefore
his desire was that the memory of the Conde Duke might be kept in esteem among
all men for the good Services which he had so faithfully rendered to the Crown
so many years, protesting for the future not to give the Title of Privado, or
Favorit to any Minister whatsoever, being resolvd that all weighty matters
should pass through his own hands.

This was the sad Catastrophe of Olivares his Greatness, a man nothing of so
candid and debonnair dispositions as his Predecessor, witness his disaffection
to his nearest Kindred, as also to the Duke of Lerma, against whom he discoverd
much malevolence to his death; Among others, one passage was, that when the
Prince of Wales was to pass by Valladolid where Lerma livd, he had a special
Mandat sent him to absent himself in the interim from the Town till the Prince
was gone; this went to the heart of the old Duke, who said thereupon, that
Olivares had done him from time to time many ill offices, but this carried more
malice then any of the rest, which he much resented in regard he had so earnest
a desire to see the Prince and to speak with him, he having bin the first who
put the Treaty of alliance on foot, therefore it was suspected that he would have
discoverd something unto him prejudicial to Spain.

But to give Don Gaspar de Olivares his due, he had solid and sufficient parts
for a great Minister of state, his passions were very high for the greatning of
his Master, to the transactions of whose affairs he indefatigably addicted
himself; He was a professd Enemy to all Presents, he never usd to give audience
to Ladies, or any women, but would receive their business by Letters. Lastly, the
greatest fault which I find he could be guilty of was, that he was not so
succesfull as he was sedulous. Thus fell that huge Swayer of the Spanish
Monarchy above thirty years, and it seems with the Kings favor, his spirits
quickly fayld him; for removing from Loches to Toro, he there met with his last
about sixteen months after. His body being opend there was found in his Skull
above two pounds of Brains, and at the day of his burial, there was a huge
Tempest fell with extraordinary fulgurations and cracks of Thunder, as we read,
that when Katherin de Medici was buried in France, there fell such a hidious
storm that fifty Sail of Merchantmen were cast away upon the Coasts of
Britany: The sorest Enemy Olivares had was the Queen, which made him say that
Muger hizo echar el primer hombre fuera de'l parayso; y muger hizo echar a mi
fuera del palacio, A Woman was the cause that the first man was thrust out of
Paradise, and a Woman was the cause that I also was thrust out of the Kings
Palace.

The Conde de Castrillo brother to the Marquess of Carpio, who was
brother-in-law to Olivares, was one of the chiefest Engines which helpd to pull
down this great Tree, being a sober and wise well weighd man: He is now
Viceroy of Naples having succeeded the little Conde d Ognate who had done such
signal supererogatory Services in suppressing those horrid tumults in Naples
where the power of Spain was upon point of sinking; and his wisdom was no less
discernd in settling peace, and stopping the wide breaches wherewith that
Kingdom had bin so miserably rent, as also in finding out and punishing the
chiefest Incendiaries, whereof there were diverse who felt the sharp Sword of
Nemesis; And lastly, for devising ways to raise sums countervaylable to those
Gabels and Taxes, which the King was enforcd to abolish by the fury of the
people.

And now will I take leave of the gentle Parthenope, that three Castled and
high crested City, but a few words further of her Pedigree before we part; she
was built presently after the Wars of Troy by a young Grecian Lady called
Parthenope, whose statue is to be seen there: She was Daughter of Eumelus Son
to Admetus King of Thessaly, after her Fathers death she consulted with the
Oracle at Delphos what her Fortunes should be, the Oracle told her that she was
designd for another Country, to be the Foundress of a noble City which should
be famous all the Earth over, therefore she embarkd her self with diverse more,
and sailing along the Tyrrhen Sea, she landed at last in the next Promontory to
Naples, whence as the Legend tells a white Dove conducted her to that palce,
where Naples now stands, where she began to build and trace a City, which she
called by her own name Parthenope, or the Virgin City, which appellation
continued till Octavianus the Emperor who first called her Neapolis, or the City
of Navigation, she being in rising postures like an Amphitheater on the
Seaside, and wonderful comodious for trafic, she abounds with Silks, Oils,
Flowers, Fruits, and a most generous Race of Horses, as any place upon the
earthly Globe: As her Horses are generous, so they are observd to be more
docile, and near to rational Creatures then any where else, for which this
instance shall be producd; Cardinal Bentivoglio sent Henry the Fourth of
France a choice Napolitan Courser with his Keeper; when the Horse was brought
before the King, he commanded one of his Riders to mount him, who neither with
Switch or Spur would scarce stir or show any feats of activity, the King herupon
and the Beholders began to disparage the Horse, taking him for some dull Jade,
hereupon the King desird an Italian Rider to mount him, the Horse when he saw
his own Rider ready to back him, fell a trembling all over, but the Rider being
got up he began to prance and flounce so nimbly as if he would have flown into
the Air, to the amazement of all the Spectators, so King Henry with the Present
beggd the Rider of the Cardinal, whom he entertaind all his lifetime.

The Napolitan being born in a luxurious Country is observd to be the greatest
Embracer of pleasure, the greatest Courtier of Ladies, and the most indulgent
of himself of any other Nation, insomuch that no command of the King can make a
Napolitan Gentleman to go upon any Service for three months in Summer till the
heats are over: They are full of Noble Friendship one to another, and sometime
they make their love to men control their lust to women; As there was a
notable example these late years in the person of the young Marquess Oliverio,
who being desperately in love with the Countess of Castlenovo, laid siege to her
a good while, and the Count going to a Country House of his, and taking his
Countess and Family with him, the Marquess being more and more enflamd, goes to
the Country hard by one day a Hawking and let flies his Hawk into the Count of
Castlenovos Gardens, where it chancd he and his Countes were walking, the
Marquess made bold to retreeve his Hawk, the Count with very high Civilities
did welcome him, and causd a Banquet to be presently provided, where he and his
Lady entertaind him; being gone the Count began to commend the Marquess,
telling his wife that he was one of the hopefullst young Noble men, and the
fullest of parts of any in the whole Kingdom; These praises made such
impressions in the Countess that a little after he gaind her, so the time and
place of pleasure being appointed, he was let in a private way to her Chamber,
where she being a bed as he was undressing himself to go to her, she told him
that he was beholden to the Count her Husband for this Favor, for she never
heard him speak so much in commendation of any; Is it so, said the Marquess?
then I should be the arrantst Villan in the world to abuse so noble a Friend, so
he put on his Dubblet again, and departed (but with much civillity) in the very
height and heat of lust, though he had so commodious conjuncture of time as his
heart could desire.

But as the Napolitan have a high noble method of Friendship amongst them, so
are they as revengfull as any other Italian: Among a world of examples that
could be producd, let this suffice; In the ancient City of Nocera there were
three young Noblemen called Conrado, Cesare, and Alexandro, the eldest was
Prince of the place (before Charles the Fifts time.) There was and is still in
Nocera a strong Castle where the Prince Conrado had a Garrison whereof he made a
Confident of his Captain, and Keeper of the Castle, the Prince most of his time
kept in his Country House and his Brothers also, but sometimes he would com and
ly some days in his Castle; It fortund that his Captain having a comely woman to
his wife the Prince fell in love with, and never left till he enjoyd her, which
he had done often to the knowledge of her husband, so beating his brains how to
be revengd he fell upon this way; The Prince being at his Country House* the
Captain sent him word that there were two wild Boares discoverd in the Forest
hard by, therefore if he and his two Brothers would com such a day with their
Dogs, he doubted not but they should find very Princely sport; So Conrado came
with his second brother Cesare, but Alexander could not com till two days
after, so the Captain had provided a fitting Supper for the Prince and his
brother, who had brought another Nobleman with him to have part of the Sport,
the Prince and the said Nobleman lodgd in the Castle, but Cesare lay in the
Town; The Captain was wonderful officious to attend the Prince to his Chamber,
but having confederated with the chiefest of the Garrison in the dead of night
they rushd into the Prince his Chamber, and the first thing they did they chopd
of his Genitories, then his Head, which they put to stand on a window, and
quarterd the rest of his body; This being done very silently, in the morning
betimes they sent in the Prince his name for his second brother to com in all
have* when Prince Cesare came, the Captain waited upon him to his brothers
Chamber, where the first Object he beheld was Conrados head upon a window and
his members quarterd and strewed up and down the Room; ah, said Cesare, is this
the wild Boar you writ of, yes, answered the Captain, but I writ to you of two,
so they fell upon Him also, and made the like Sacrifice of revenge upon him;
this being done the Captain barrd up the Gates, and going upon the walls of the
Castle he sent for the chief of the Town, and made a Speech unto them in what
slavery they livd in under Conrado, therefore if they ever desird liberty there
was a fair opportunity offerrd now, because he had Conrado in his Custody, and
he could do with him what he pleased; But the Citizens would hearken to no such
motion, so they sent speedy word to Alexander the younger brother, who coming
with some Country forces, the City joynd with them and beleagurd the Castle,
the Captain finding his case to be desperate, takes his wife first on a high
Turret and hurld her down amongst them, then his Children, and afterward
murtherd himself in the ey of all the City.

There is no Country swarms with Nobility more then the Kingdom of Naples, the
number whereof do daily increase, insomuch that the last account which was
taken, there were in Naples, Calabria, and Apulia, with the rest of the twelve
Provinces adjoynd, two thousand Barons, fifty Dukes, ninety Marquesses, seventy
Earls and five Princes; But some of these Nobles have but slender Estates, as
Aretin reports, who says, that three Marquesses in Lunigiana were found eating
of Figgs off one Tree to keep them from starving.

Now, though the Spaniard entitle himself King of both the Sicilies, yet he
holds the latter, I mean the Kingdom of Naples in Fee from the Pope, whom he
acknowledges to be Lord-Paramount thereof by right of Donation to the Church*
Therefore the Spanish Ambassador upon the Vigile of Saint Peter, or every Saint
Peter's Eve, presents the Pope in his Masters name with a Heriot, and a Rent;
viz. With a Mu^e and seven thousand Ducats in Gold, at the reception whereof
the Pope answers, Sufficiat pro hac vice, Let it suffice for this time, and
till this be done, the great Catholic King lies under an Excomunication, which
in a short compass of time is laid on him, and taken off every year.

I. H. Senesco non Segnesco.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Mr. Howells Works in several Volumes. Printed by M^ Humphrey
Mosely.
I. Mr. Howels History of Lewis the thirteenth King of France, with the life of
his Cardinal de Richelieu. Fol.

II. Mr. Howels Epistolae Hoelianae, familiar Letters, Domestic and Foreign, in
six Sections, partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the the first
Volume with Additions. 8o.

III. Mr. Howels new Volume of familiar Letters, partly Historical,
Political, Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions. 8o.

IV. Mr. Howels third Volume of additionall Letters of a fresher date, never
before published. 8o.

V. Mr. Howels Dodon as Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the first part in Fol. 4o.
12o. with many Additions.

VI. Mr. Howels Dodon'as Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the second part in 8o.
never printed before.

VII. Mr. Howels Englands Tears for the present Wars.

VIII. Mr. Howels Pre-eminence and Pedigree of Parliament, in 12o. in answer of
Mr. Pryn.

IX. Mr. Howels Instructions and Directions for Foreign Travels, in 12o. with
diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey, and the Levant parts.

X. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem-Royall presented to his Majesty, in 4o.

XI. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria and lachrymae, in 12o.

XII. Tumulus Thalamus two Counter-Poems, the first an Elegy upon Edward Earl
of Dorset, the second an Epithalamium to the Lord M. of Dorchester.

XIII. Parables reflecting on the times.

XIV. A German Diet, or the Balance of Europe, wherein the Power and Weakness,
Glory and Reproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages, and
Defects, Antiquity and Modernes of all the Kingdoms and States of Christendom
are Impartially poised by James Howell Esquire Fol.

XV. Parthenopoeia, or the History of the most noble and renowned Kingdom of
Naples, with the Lists of all their Kings; the first part translated out of the
Italian by Mr. Samson Lennard, the second Part continued to these present times
1654. by James Howell Esquire

More of Mr. Howels Works Printed by other Men.
XVI. THe great French Dictionary refind and augmented, in a large Fol.

XVII. A Survey of the Signory of Venice, in Fol.

XVIII. A Dialogue twixt the Soul and the Body.

XIX. The first Part of the late Revolutions in Naples.

XX. The second Part of the said Resolutions.

XXI. The War of the Jews epitomized.

XXII. Sir Robert Cottens Works which he was desird to publish.

XXIII. Saint Paul's Progress upon Earth.

XXIV. A Venetian Looking-glass

XXV. A Winter Dream.

XXVI. The Trance. or Mercurius Acherontious.

XXVII. A Dialogue twixt Patricius and Peregrin.

XXVIII. An Inquisition after blood.

XXIX. The Instruments of a King.

XXX. The late Kings Declaration in Latin, French, and English.

XXXI. Bella Scoto-Anglica, or the Traverses of War twixt England and Scotland.

XXXII. Mercurius Hybernicus

XXXIII. The Process and pleadings in the Court of Spain for the death of Mr.
Ascham, in Fol.

Three of all which Books are Translations, the rest his own Compositions.


