The Law of God Ratified, By the GOSPEL of CHRIST: OR, THE HARMONY OF THE
Doctrine of Faith, WITH THE Law of Righteousness.

Wherein, many of the Types and Rites of the Ceremonial Law are unfolded: And
the Moral Law adjusted a Rule of holy living to all, though justified by Faith.

As it was delivered in several Sermons, Preached to the Parochial Congregation
of Mayfield in Sussex, by Mr. Mainard late Rector thereof, published since his
Death.

Col. 1. 27, 28. -- (...). 2 Cor. 3. 14. and 18. -- (...) London, Printed for
Francis Tyton at the Sign of the three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1674.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To Mrs. Elizabeth Baker Widow: To Captain John Baker and his Wife: And to Mr.
John Baker and his Wife. To Mr. Clement Read: and to the rest of the
Inhabitants of Mayfield in Sussex, Auditors of these ensuing Sermons.
Much honored and well-beloved in our Lord,
THe high Opinion he has of you (who desired me to dedicate these Sermons to
you) commands me to make good my compellation, by bearing a particular respect
to that worth, and love for those Graces and Profession in you, which were
sufficient to determine the Publisher of these Sermons to the choice of you to
be Countenancers of them, now printed and exposed to public View, which you
first heard from your own privater Pulpit. The Publisher makes the Church
somewhat a debtor, but Mayfield very much a debtor to him for his care of your
spiritual profit and advantage: to which end these Discourses (delivered in
such plainness (as becomes the truth) and with such clearness as may capacitate
any amongst you to read, understand, and gain by them) are set before you. That
of your faithful Monitor, now dead, might be said (as is in somewhat different
sense said of Abel,) Being dead, he yet speaks, Instruction unfolding that
which many would else not discern, Caution, that you avoid what he knew was
dangerous and might prove deadly, And Exhortation, persuading you to weighty
instances of obedience and constancy. If it be, as doubtless it is, a Truth
that the Legal and Mosaic Rites were the Gospel veiled, this piece deserves
your serious perusal; for it takes the vail from off the face of Moses, and
does with plainness and brevity explicate many of those divine Riddles and
heavenly Hieroglyphics, on whose outside too many of the Jews (like
unexperienced Children gazing on Pictures,) determined their eye inapprehensive
of the import of them. I would give you some account of the Subjects handled in
this ensuing Treatise, but it is published that your reading might inform you.
Nor will I doubt your readiness to view that with your eye, which, I believe,
much pleased your ear. And I hope your desires to profit by it, wish my Epistle
brief, that you may be taken up with the seasonableness and pertinency of the
Subject. A piece which, I assure you, does very particularly express the temper
of its Author, who could have walked abroad (as easily as most) in a gorgeous
dress of rich learning; but he was as well versed in this part of self-denial,
and resolved to practice it, as he was versed in Authors, and knew how to use
them. He preached it to you, that you might understand it, and his Son-in-law
has taken care it should be printed, that you might read and remember it. I
wish that, among the many eagerly snatched occasions men take to publish their
own Conceptions More would take this course, and print, for the use of
particular places; some of the choice and profitable Sermons of their own
Ministers, as soon as might be after their death, when, in all likelihood, the
mourning remembrance of their dead Minister will enhance the value of his
living Sermons, whilst the sense of their loss, in the death of his person,
would increase the care (of some at least) that they lose not his Counsels,
Exhortations, Reproofs and Comforts which (by this means) do survive him. I
know many are so obstinate in their Unbelief, and so unperswadable to
Obedience, they will not promise to believe or obey, unless one arose from the
dead to witness to the Promises, and to require their Obedience. God show them
mercy, opening their blind eyes, and persuading their hard hearts! If there be
any such among your Inhabitants of Mayfield (and alas! in so great a Parish
there are too too many,) Behold here is that which of all courses seems to
come nearest to such a condescension. Though your Minister be not sent from the
dead, yet providence sends (as it were) from his Grave: And if you will not
obey Commands, nor follow Counsels, nor be warned by Cautions in his writings,
you would not be persuaded if he came from the dead. But of you in particular I
have no jealousy, to whom this Epistle and the Book is dedicated. Instead of
persuading you to read it (of which I am persuaded you are very forward of your
selves) I shall adventure (and, I hope, with no more boldness than success) to
move you to bestow many of these Books among your poorer Neighbors, who will
gladly read Mr. Maynard's Book, when perhaps they have as little mind to read
other men's Works as they have knowledge of their persons. Promote knowledge of
Christ, and saving Grace, by the means which are most likely to do it; hereby
you shall (through the blessing of the Lord) turn many to righteousness, and
shine as the brightness of the Firmament for ever, which is that great thing
that (with hope of success) is for you all, and for the rest of the Churchof
God, the prayer of

From my Study in the house of the Right Honorable the Countess of Manchester,
at Waltham-Abbey, April 3. 1674. Yours, in our Common Lord, both Servant to
your Souls, and Coheir of your Hopes, H. Hurst.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
Chap. I.
NO justification by works, to Gentile or Jew transgressors of the Law, and
how: yet the Jew had advantage by the Law, which is not voided by doctrine of
Faith. Corrupt nature dispute perversely against the truths of God, partly out
of ignorance and mistakes. Christ's righteousness the matter of our
justification. Prepossession of false opinions pervert the Scripture; this
ruined the Jews, obstructed the Gospel among the Greeks. Pride natural to us,
and opposite to the Gospel. Love of sin, of the world, pervert truths of the
Gospel: the danger of this as rejecting the remedy, or turning it to the
increase of the disease. Errors easily increased. How Errors found in godly
men, while sometime the carnal are free from them.
Chap. II.
Grace abhors the Perverting of truth: So Moses, Elijah, etc. St. Paul, etc.
For, hereby God is dishonored, the New Nature is thwarted. Errors broken out
are hardly limited, easily overgrow the truth: So the bulk of Popish Errors
did: So Arianisme did. Errors divide the Church: So the Error of the Necessity
of Circumcision, the Error about keeping Easter in Victor's time. Pope's
Supremacy now divides the Church. Such divisions occasioned by Preaching old
forgotten truths; but the fault in those that will not endure such doctrines.
Satan's malice, and some men's weakness: So the inundation of Popish
Superstitions broke in. How much we should resent these things: their danger:
Toleration of them discussed, in the Objections for Errors answered.
Chap. III.
Objections against truth many times are double falsehoods; this rises from
Ignorance, Credulity, malice, and want of Arguments to confirm errors. No
strange or new thing that men err and are slanderous. Protestant Ministers are
no promoters of Antichrist, but his great Adversaries: lessening them greatens
Antichrists interest. Seducing Sectaries expedite Antichrists affairs. Satan
has still hindered reformation by such ways.
Chap. IV.
A Threefold Law, first given to the Gentiles with the Jews: the other given
only to the Jew. Law of nature and its use. The Ceremonial cannot justify, nor
the Moral, yet neither made void by Faith. Faith confirms the Ceremonial Law:
what this is, it is of God, how long to last; abused or not understood by many
of the Jews, who precisely observed Ceremonial cleanness, palpably neglecting
moral purity. In what sense doctrine of Faith does not abolish the Ceremonial
Law. The dispute between Jews and Samaritans, and whence it arose; when, and
how long continued. Divine worship in spirit and truth, not limited to any
place. Law Ceremonial, a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, full of deep
mysteries and spiritual realities, cleared by the Gospel. These unfolded in
explication of Circumcision, seal of that promise, I will be their God, which
contains all grace and comfort, is made good to us in Christ: the Covenant
sealed by Circumcision, the same that is sealed by Baptism. Passover what,
its occasion, the circumstances of it; its meaning in each particular applied
to Christ. Actual faith in Christ delivers from Curse of the Law, should excite
to thanfulness, holiness, exercise faith, preparedness for our duties, godly
sorrow. Feast of first Fruits, when enjoined, excite to endeavor a rising to
newness of life.
Chap. V.
Few Creatures appointed for Sacrifices: three sorts of Beasts, two of Fowls,
all meek, resembling Christ, as we should. Korban whence derived, how applied
to Christ, through whom we are made nigh to God. Burnt offering, (...). Its
import to us, the rites in offering it, blindness of the Jews, and to be
pitied: deep slain of sin, it is deadly to the sinner or his surety: Christ's
Blood precious, shed that we should not live in sin. The continual
burntoffering Christians should offer morning and evening; as most likely the
Jews did pray and praise God in their Houses. (...) its signification:
Imputation of sin to Christ speaks Gods love of Compassion to sinners: sin base
and shameful. The blood of (...) sprinkled before the Lord on the Golden Altar;
the meaning hereof: Its inward fat burned, what meant: some other rites in the
offering it, and their import. (...) what it was, noted Christ and how, a
sufficient sacrifice therefore, fit to be trusted in. How the (...) notes the
Christians sacrifice, and applied. Oil used in the meat offering: its purport
with other rites of it explained. Salt with all Sacrifices, and its meaning.
The Covenant of Salt. The drink offering wherein it consisted. The Peace
offering, what, and on what occasion; means whole Christian duty in general,
to be offered to God through Christ. Peace Offering might be male or female,
part of it to be burnt, part for the Priest, part for the offerer; hence our
Communion with God inferred. How Sacrificers are partakers of the Altar.
Priests under the Law were sacred persons, especially the High Priest, type of
Christ, whose is an eternal Priesthood. The Garments of the High Priest and
their meaning, viz. the holiness, beauty, and glory of Christ in general. A
more particular view of each part of the Garments, their import, and our
instruction. Ordinary Priests were in a sort types of Christians who are to be
spiritual Priests and Sacrifices. Ministers of the Gospel no where called
Priests in the New Testament. Tabernacle and Temple agreed in some, differed in
other particulars: how each signified Christ to dwell with us, in much humility
and love, we ought therefore to unite our selves to him, estrange our selves
from sin: scandalous sins should not be cause of gladness in any who observe
them in others. Temple and Tabernacle signified each be liever.

Sin defiles the whole man, the heart first, the outward man next: sin begins
in the heart. Altar made of Shittim wood, the meaning; covered with brass, its
purport; the Godheadpreserving the humane nature under its sufferings. Where
the Altar was placed, its meaning.

The Altar of incense, its meaning. The Ark what in it, and their Import. The
mercy seat, the Cherubims looking down toward the Ark.

The fire used in Sacrifices, its meaning: Christ's love to us, undergoing such
sufferings for us, requires love from us to him.

This fire came from Heaven, never was to go out; such should Christian zeal be.


Chap. VI.
Sacred observances, as restraint from unclean beasts: so not in their own
nature; the meaning equalleth all mankind in their Original. Gods Sovereignty
in choosing Israel incomprehensible: His infinite goodness calling the Gentiles,
who should be thankful, and take heed of unbelief and all sin. Our liberty to
use all wholesome food: Blood whether now forbidden? Probably a Natural though
secret reason, why so many Creatures were forbidden to Israel? Prohibition of
eating blood, Acts 15. explained.

Festivals Religious among the Jews, noted our Christian joy. What feasts these
were. At the time of the feast of Harvest, Christ sent down the Spirit on his
Apostles, who were to gather in the Harvest of the Gentiles.

Feast of ingathering about our September. the meaning of it well applied in
three or four particulars.

The feast of Trumpets, the type of Preaching the Gospel, and calling to faith
and repentance: who are deaf to this, shall be astonished at the last Trumpets
sound.

The various washings in use among the Jews well unfolded, show Christ the
accomplishment of them, and our Christian duty of daily purging our selves in
the fountain of his blood.


Chap. VII.
St. Paul's design to deliver to us the doctrine of justification by grace. This
cleared by reducing all men under an examen: The Gentile examined and cast by
Law of nature transgressed: The Jew examined and cast by the written Law moral
transgressed. There is a Law of nature, this not nulled by Faith: What this Law
is, in the particular description of it? It Is engraven on the heart, given by
Christ, yet different from that he gives Believers who follow him. It was a
perfect rule before the fall, it is yet of great use, though much impaired. The
(...), that he was to be served, and worshipped, that he created all, being
himself eternal and omnipotent, wise and good. This Law declared what is good
and what evil, in some measure. Excellent discourses of Philosophers. Yet is it
an imperfect Rule now, cannot guide sinners to blessedness: discovers not the
great mystery of the Trinity, or the state of perfection man was Created in;
his fall, and recovery, etc. An additional imperfection from the heart on which
it is written, as from blurred paper the words or Letters are imperfectly read:
Yet useful it is to Gods glory, to humane Societies, as remote preparators to
receiving the Gospel; in which much above, nothing contrary to, the light of
Nature; it justifies God, leaves man without excuse, not increasing this light,
not acting up to it. This defect of theirs was sin against God, who as Lawgiver
to all, has given this Law, punished the breakers of it, before the Law given
on mount Sinai. Romans 5. 13, 14. illustrated. These punishments were just, as
severe, in every age, and ruin of several Monarchies. The sins of Christians
greater than of Heathens or Jews. What Christians are in name, in participation
with Christ, who is dishonored by their sins, which many Heathens abhor.
Seneca and Pliny abhorred Drunkenness, Tully decry'd Frauds in Contracts.


Chap. VIII.
Moral Law written, abridged in the ten Commandments, established by the
Doctrine of justification by faith, though it excludes the Righteousness of
works from our justification, not excluded from all other use. None justified
by works of the Law, because all are born in state of sin. Works of faith
follow justification as fruit, are imperfect examined by the rigor of the Law,
which bears not the least aberration, requires the whole of man's heart always,
in highest degree of love to God, and for his sake to man our neighbor,
nothing must be omitted, or wanting, or defective. Man's works cannot justify
before the infinite justice, holiness and Majesty of God our Lawgiver. Man to
be saved, was found in sin; is saved by grace: from which they fall, who would
be justified by the Law, being a Covenant of nature quite different from the
Gospel. Works justifying in St. James sense, Jam. 2. 24. explained. Justifying
faith is an Active principle, as prevalent habits are. They miserable who are
not in Christ, because condemned: no middle State: outward fairness
insufficient, inward change necessary. Historical faith does not justify.
Justifying faith has sense of its need of Christ, who is a complete Savior,
and wherein this compleatness is. How earnest we should be to be found in him,
careful to bring forth much fruit, but not to trust in it, keep the mean
between the dangerous extremes of a dead faith, and resting on the works of
Faith.

How Christ established the Law; by fulfilling it which he did without
destroying it, what occasion of that, Mat. 5. 17. how made under the Law though
he was the Lawgiver, bound therefore to fulfill the Law perfectly, so became a
perfect High Priest according to the type wherein every blemished person was
prohibited meddling with the Priestly function. Sinless perfection necessary to
the Sacrifice Christ offered in offering himself. Fulfilling the Righteousness
of the Law, is an establishing of the Law; to the exactness whereof man was at
first created, the Law of our Creation afterward exemplified in the decalogue:
Satan's design to obliterate this Law by our sin, to bring us under a Law of
sin, how this effected, hence God dishonored, man destroyed, both arising from
Satan's malice against the glory of God, and happiness of man: This work of
Satan Christ came to destroy, and has done it, which no mere creature could
have done, Angels could not, and why. This work is really a repairing man,
though expressed by destroying of Satan's work: so raising up the dead, is
called destruction of the Grave. 1 John 3. 8. at large unfolded, Christ God
impressed on our nature in himself, the absolute perfection of that holiness the
Law required of man's nature, Christ has fully satisfied the Law, and
accomplished the Prophecies concerning him, which was God, the coessential word,
who made all, supports all in heaven and earth, and does it as primary
efficient cause and final for his own glory, so was without robbery equal with
God, yet became man, uniting the humane nature to the Godhead, which supported
the humane nature, gave value to the sufferings of it, in which nature, he made
under the Law, was in capacity of suffering the Curse, which the Godhead,
fountain of life and blessedness was not liable to: Who come not to Christ, are
exposed to all that their sins deserve, and the Law threatens: Sin then is
bitter, and will be the shame of Sinners. Who are in Christ, have sound
foundation of comfort, Christ has satisfied the Law for them. To whom his
perfect righteousness is imputed: so the Law established, this enlarged and
illustrated, Debts paid by surety the debtor discharged the payment imputed,
God imputes it, and of Grace or freely to the Believer on his believing in
Christ. So faith justifies not meritoriously, nor efficiently, not materially
or formally, but objectively and instrumental^y, as apprehending Christ his
righteousness: Hence our blessedness, joined with our Sanctification. How
Christ established the Law, by perfectly fulfilling all the Righteousness which
it required: Contraiwise the doctrine of justification by our works makes void
the Law in great part, reducing its Commands to the scantling of that
obed^ence, which is pretended to justify us. The mystery of Christ's immense
love to us. Believers should be humble and will be^ Great sinners may be
encouraged to come to Christ, whose righteousness is the righteousness of
Jehovah. Look to the truth of your faith, the suitableness of your life:
justified ones are sanctified ones. The Law is made a rule of holiness in life,
to those that are justified without works of the Law, and this by the Authority
of Christ, who has for us satisfied it as a Covenant, and now ratified it as a
Rule to us; we cannot live justified by it, we must live sanctified to it. The
Law as Covenant of works, useful to Believers, to humble, awaken, and drive
them to seek a remedy: The Law a Rule useful to believers, keeping them poor in
spirit, in sight of what they once were, what they still are: It is useful to
quicken and stir them up to greater study of holiness. Our Redemption no
prejudice to the Law, rather an exalting of it. The peaceable comport of the
Law and Faith, which opposed to each other, is great error of Antinomians. High
Presumption to boast of justification by Faith, and yet be the servants of sin
against the holiness of the Commandment. He is out of Christ who continues in
sin, in contempt of the Law, and to the abuse of free grace, which imparteth
inherent Righteousness to sanctification, as it imputes Christ his
righteousness to justification.


ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 2. read these. p. 17. l. ult. add here. p. 18. for when, l. 18.
r. even. p. 21. for Circumcellions, r. Circumcellians. p. 32. l. 19. for
Corrupts, r. Corrupt. p. 33. l. 2. r. (...). l 13. r. Hymenaeus. p. 37. l. 16.
r. Consequents. p. 44. l. penult. r. exhort. p. 53. l. 12. r. tolerable. for
Chap. IV, r. V. p. 125. in the margin, for Officers, r. Offerer. p. 130. l. 33.
dele him. p. 153. l. 22. r. persons. p. 160. l. 1. for An, r. any. p. 212. l.
2. for no, r not. p. 239. l. 21. r. woman. p. 240. l. 17. for state, r. stead.
p. 243. l. 6. r. enduring. p. 263. l. 25. r. For.

Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we
establish the Law.
CHAP. I.
THe holy Apostle in this divine Epistle according to the wisdom given unto him
(as his fellow Apostle says of him) having laid down that great fundamental
truth of the Gospel, 2 Pet. 3. 15.
that righteousness and everlasting life is to be obtained by faith; Romans 1. 17.
that is, by the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed to Believers by God
the Father, and applied by Faith, proves it by showing that none are justified
any other way; and this he clears by making it evident that all sorts of men
Israelites and Gentiles are sinful and guilty before the Lord, and therefore
none of them justified by any works of their own in the fight of God. He
proves the Gentiles to have sinned against the law, and light of Nature and
Reason; the Israelites to have sinned against that Law, not only so, but
against the written Law, and that both Ceremonial and Moral; against the
Ceremonial Law, in that they rested in the outward observation of it, not
looking to the substance and end of it, and so their Circumcision was made
uncircumcision: The moral Law condemned them because their corrupt natures were
enmity against it, contrary unto it; they sinned against it in omissions,
commissions, their best performances fell far short of the full perfection of
it, and therefore they all stood condemned before the Lord, whose exact justice
allows of no righteousness but that which is every way perfect. These things
being cleared from the 17th verse of the first Chapter to the 20th verse of
this third Chapter: Then he declares another way of justification revealed in
the Gospel, even by the full satisfaction and perfect righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ, imputed by God the righteous Judge of all the world to Believers,
and applied by faith: And having proved this, in the latter part of this and in
the two next Chapters, he in^^rt^th th^se words in the end of the third*
Chapter, Do we then etc.? although he had not finished his discourse of free
justification by faith through the righteousness of Christ, yet he wou^d put in
a caveat against the licentious ^buse of this excel^ent Doctrine, though it
seems a little out of order, not tying himself so precisely to method as to
negl^ct the vindicating the honor of Christ, and the preventing, or removing
of such a mistake upon which poor souls are apt to make Shipwreck. Parts of the
words.
So that in these words we may note, first a Question or Objection, Do we make
void the Law through faith? secondly an Answer: 1. By way of detestation or
abhorrence, God forbid! or, let it not be, far be it from us. 2. By way of
denial implied in a contrary Assertion, and that with advantage, We are so far
from making void the Law through faith, that by this doctrine we establish the
Law. Do we make void the Law? Do we make the Law a vain, empty, useless thing,
of no force? Do we take away all authority and binding power from the Law?
through faith, through the Doctrine of the Gospel, teaching men another way of
obtaining justification and righteousness, by the perfect righteousness of
Christ, apprehended by faith without any respect unto or consideration of the
works of the Law? (...) Let it not be, far be it from us; Yea, we establish the
Law, we give more honor to the Law, we acknowledge more fully and truly the
perfection, purity, authority of the Law, than they do, which teach and seek
righteousness by the works of the Law. From this objection may be noted this
point: Doctr. 1.
That Ignorance and malice is apt to mistake, slander or pervert the most
precious Truths of the Gospel; or thus, The corrupt Nature of man is apt to
corrupt the most precious Truths of the Gospel. So in this present Chapter:
Romans 3. 1, 2.
For the Apostle having before proved the people of Israel had as much need of
the Righteousness of Christ to save them from condemnation, and to justify
them and present them as righteous before God, as the Heathen; their sins and
guilt being as great as that of the Heathens or rather greater. It seems
hereupon some were ready to argue: What advantage then has the Jew, and what
profit is there of Circumcision? As if they had said, this doctrine takes away
all difference betwixt Jew and Gentile; it gives unto Israel the peculiar
people of God no more privilege or dignity in things pertaining to God, than
to the worst of Heathen Idolaters; it was to no purpose that God distinguished
them from other Nations by the ordinance of Circumcision: Thus is corrupt
Nature apt to corrupt the precious Truths of the Gospel. But the Apostle shows
that the Jews had much advantage over the Gentiles, chiefly, because that unto
them were committed the Oracles of God: They had the word of God, the writings
of Moses and the Prophets given by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, directing
them to the Messiah to whom they were to seek for Righteousness, and in whom
they were to believe that they might be justified: They had Sacrifices
prescribed them by the wisdom of God, as special helps to strengthen their
faith in the perfect Sacrifice of Christ the Redeemer; and therefore they had
much advantage above the Heathens, if they improved it for their eternal good;
and yet notwithstanding all this, it was as impossible for them to be justified
by their own works and righteousness, as for the Heathens, and they had as much
need of Christ and his righteousness for justification as a^ese. In this the
Jews had the advantage above the Heathens, that they had far better means to
lead them unto Christ than the Heathens: Herein they were both alike, that
neither the one nor the other could be justified and saved by their own works,
but only by Christ and his righteousness. Again in this regard, the condition
of the obstinate and unbelieving Jews was worse than that of the profane
Gentiles, that they sinned against greater light and means, not improving their
privileges and advantages but receiving the grace of God in vain. To. 3. 5, 6,
7, 8.
Then follows another objection, If man's unrighteousness commends the
Righteousness of God, if Gods Righteousness in justifying sinners be the more
gloriously manifested by reason of men's wickedness, how then can it stand with
the righteousness of God to punish men for sin? and again, if the glory of God,
his rich Grace, do appear and shine forth so much the more admirably by the
heinousness of peoples sins, why should any flee from sin, and not rather add
sin to sin, doing evil that good may come, that Gods grace may be the more
manifested to his glory? The Apostle rejects these with detestation, showing
that notwithstanding all their perverse cavils, they shall find God a severe
judge, and that their damnation is just: for it does no way lessen the guilt of
sin that God gets glory by it; for sin in its own nature tends to the
darkning of Gods Glory, and men by sinning dishonor God; but such is the
infinite perfection of God, that as he commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, though darkness be contrary to the light, so he can work good, and
get himself glory out of the evil of sin, which in it self tends to rob him
of his glory. So in the sixth Chapter of this Epistle, shall we continue in sin
that grace may abound? Romans 6. 1. etc.
The Apostle had showed before that all had sinned in Adam, besides the guilt
of their own actual sins, yea, even such as lived before the Law was given by
Moses; and that by the publishing of the Law sin abounded, the guilt of sin
increased: but then withal, he added, that where sin abounded grace did much
more abound; the free love and favor of God was gloriously manifested in
pardoning sin, thus heightened and aggravated by the express Law, and in freely
justifying sinners condemned by the written Law. Hence this Question or
Objection, to which the Apostle answers with detestation (as before) and withal
shows that they who are justified by the righteousness of Christ, have
received the Spirit, and so dye to sin and live to righteousness, and are
engaged hereunto by their Baptism, and therefore it is in vain for any to hope
for justification, and pardon of sin through Christ, who yield themselves up to
the service of sin. So verse 14th, he says to Believers, ver. 14.
Ye are not under the Law but under Grace: Hence again a Question or Objection
of corrupt nature or carnal reason, What then? Shall we sin because we are not
under the Law but under Grace; May we not therefore sin securely if we be free
from the Law, if the Law have no power nor authority over us to condemn us? The
Apostle answers this after his usual manner with detestation, and then more
fully, Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness? They that are just^fied by Christ, and freed from the
curse, the condemnation and rigor of the Law, are the Members of Christ, and
servants of righteousness; but they that sin securely upon a conceit that they
are freed from the Law, are indeed the servants of sin, and this service of sin
tends to everlasting death. The General Reason of the point.
The Reason of this in general, is, the contrariety of man's nature unto God and
his Truth since the fall, since the Image of God was defaced, and the Nature of
man corrupted by sin; so that the powers of the soul thus degenerated are
become cross and opposite unto the counsel and truth of God. 1 John 4. 5, 6*
They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them: we are of God, he that knows God hears us, he that is not of
God hears not us; hereby know we the spirit of Truth and the spirit of Error:
all of us are naturally of the world, and all remain so, unless the Lord do
effectually by his grace call them out of the world, and so their worldly minds
and hearts are unsuitable and opposite unto the mind and truth of God.
Particular Reasons.
More particularly, 1. Ignorance is a great cause why men deprave the
Scriptures and pervert the Truths of God: the light shines in darkness, and
the darkness comprehends it not. All are naturally darkness, Joh. 1. 5.
and therefore full of contrariety to the light and truth of God; ye were
sometimes darkness, Ephesians. 7. 8.
says the Apostle, to those that then were light in the Lord; the best of
those whom God has savingly enlightened by his spirit, were sometimes darkness.
Col. 3. 9, 10.
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his
deeds, and have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the
Image of him that created him. They that are regenerated are renewed as in
other regards so in knowledge; This shows that the old man is possessed with
darkness; Corrupt Nature is void of saving knowledge, and therefore in that
condition men are apt to put light for darkness, and darkness for light. Mat.
22. 23, and 29. etc.
The Sadduces that denied that great Mystery of the Resurrection of the body, I
conceive, were much pleased with an Argument whereby they hoped to nonplus the
Lord Jesus Christ; they seemed not directly to deny the Resurrection, but only
to desire a Resolution in a difficult case, concerning ^a woman that had seven
husbands, and outlived them all: The Question was, which of those seven should
enjoy her for his wife at the Resurrection; but the Lord Christ tells them
they showed gross ignorance in that wherein they thought themselves very acute:
says he, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God: and first
shows them how by the Almighty power of God, the bodies of the Saints at the
Resurrection should be so wonderfully transformed and glorified, that they
should not need nor desire marriage or other things of the like natrue, no more
then the Angels do which are Spirits and have no bodies; then he proves by the
Scripture that the dead shall rise, Now this ignorance is more or less gross in
several persons; Ignorance greater or less and whence.
some that are not so grossly ignorant as others, yet being weak in knowledge
and judgment, are apt to miscarry in this kind: First by misunderstanding some
Texts or passages of holy Scripture, so it seems the Saints at Thessalonica
mistook what the Apostle had written to them in his former Epistle, when
speaking of the last day, 1 These. 4. 15, 16, 17.
he says, This we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep; the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall
rise first, then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with
them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air. Where twice he speaks of
himself (if we look on the bare words) as if he should live to the end of the
world, as if Christ should come in glory before Paul should leave this world: I
conceive, he spoke by way of supposition, that if he, and other Believers then
living, should remain to the last day, then they should be thus translated to
Glory; and as he says elsewhere, they should not dye, but should be changed
and this he might do to teach others by his example to live in a continual
expectation o^ Christ's gloriou^ appearing, especially considering that the day
of death was to them as the last day, not that he did peremtorily determine any
thing concerning the time which was unknown: now compare this with what he
writes to the same Church in the next Epistle, 2 These. 2. 1, 2, 3.
Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
our gathering together unto him, that ye be not shaken in mind or be troubled,
neither by spirit or word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ
is at hand: Let no man deceive you by any means for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the
son of Perdition etc. It seems some went about to deceive them under pretense
of Revelation implied in the word Spirit, some by word of Mouth, as if the day
of the Lord should come in that age, and these might abuse those words of the
Apostle in his former Epistle, therefore he says, by Letter (or Epistle) as
from us. Now Satan might have this policy, and set a certain day, and that
within a short time, that when they saw it did not come to pass at the time
foretold, they might doubt of the thing it self, whether ever it would come to
pass; but the Apostle shows them that there must be a great change before that
day, a general Apostasy or falling away, and the revealing that man of sin, the
Son of perdition.

Secondly, by drawing false inferences and conclusions from some places of
Scripture. So in the present Text, from that ^ound doctrine of the Apostle
concerning free justification of sinners through the righteousness of Christ,
without any respect at all to the works of the Law, it seems some drew this
inference or conclusion, that the Law was made void: and do not the Antinomians
the very same ^t this day? yea, do not many among us harbor the same conceits
in their minds, as if it were enough only to pray to God to pardon their sins
for Christ his sake; as if they ^eed not labor after conformity to the Law ^n
righteousness and holiness. On the other ^^de, Luke 13. 3.
whereas Christ says, Except ye repent ye shall likewise perish. Joh. 3. 3.
Except a man be born again, Heb. 12. 14.
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Follow Holiness without which no man shall
see the Lord. From these and the like Scriptures, some it seems draw false
conclusions, as if by repentance, by holiness, by prayers, and other duties,
they might in part satisfy for their former sins; and as if Repentance,
Regeneration, Holiness, were not only things accompanying justification and
salvation, but proper causes: But ye must consider,

First, that Christ his satisfaction and righteousness is the full, perfect,
and only cause of ^ustification and pardon of sin, and that no holiness, no
duties of the persons justified, do help any thing at all toward their
justification; it is the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, which makes
up the whole matter of their Righteousness in the sight of God, and covers
all their sins.

Secondly, on the other side, Regeneration, Repentance, Holiness, are
concomitants, things accompanying justification and salvation, and evidences of
it: So that although none can procure pardon of sin, nor justification in the
least degree, by any graces or duties of their own, yet none can have any ^ound
hope that their sins are forgiven, or their persons accepted of God as
righteous, without Repentance, Regeneration, and Holiness; because none have
their sins pardoned, and their persons justified, but such as receive Christ
into their hearts by Faith. Now Christ always comes by water and blood by his
holy graces to wash and sanctify the Soul, as by his blood and merit to
justify and procure forgiveness of sin. As the light of the fire gives no
heat, and the heat of the fire gives no light, yet the heat and light are
joined together in the fire; so righteousness imputed to the soul for
justification and forgiveness of sin do not sanctify, and on the other side,
Repentance, Regeneration, holiness in Believers do not justify, yet they are
joined together, and where one is, there is the other, and the latter is an
evidence of the former. I conceive it is a common case with many to mistake in
this kind, because they want judgment rightly to draw inferences from
Scripture gro^nds: so the Anabaptists, because they read of persons baptized
when they made profession of faith and repentance; hereupon they draw
conclusions against Infant Baptism: whereas the case is not alike, for those
examples are of converted Jews or Heathens, not of such as are born of
Christian-parents; whereas they should rather argue, that because Infants born
of Church Members under the old Testament, were circumcised as Church Members
by the Lord command; therefore Infants born of Church Members under the new
Testament are to be baptized as Church Members now.

Thirdly, Prejudicate opinion, the cause of perverting the truth through
Ignorance.
prejudicate opinions, false conceits, suitable to corrupt Nature and carnal
reason, forestalling the mind, and being entertained aforehand, make people
very apt to deprave or deny the Truth when it is presented to them. I conceive
this was the cause why the Jews were so obstinate in rejecting Christ and his
doctrine, not receiving and obeying him as Christ; because their carnal minds
were forestalled with conceits of a Messiah that should come in state as an
earthly Prince, and erect a glorious worldly Kingdom amongst them, and this
prejudice moved them to corrupt the Prophecies of the old Testament, and to
distaste the doctrines of the New; they liked not to hear of a crucified
Redeemer, the doctrine of the Cross was to them a stumbling block, they did not
close with a spiritual Kingdom of Christ, attended with persecution: yea,
Christ his Disciples were not free from this disease, and therefore when Christ
foretold his own sufferings, Peter presumed to rebuke him, and there was a
contention among them for the chief place, as if they expected great worldly
honors and dignities by following Christ: On the other side, the Grecians were
prepossessed with the rational principles of worldly wisdom and Philosophy, and
so despised the Gospel as foolishness, though indeed there were such heights
and depths of divine wisdom in the mysteries of the Gospel, as never came into
the head of the wisest men amongst them. The carnal Israelites were forestalled
with an opinion of their own righteousness, and so rejected the doctrine of
justification by the righteousness of Christ, Romans 10. 3.
For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God. Ignorance and prejudice, the fruit of ignorance caused them to disrelish
the Truth of the Gospel.

Secondly, 2. Reason of the Point.
the love of sin is a cause why men pervertor reject the Truths of the Gospel.
The Gospel and word of grac teaches to deny ungodliness, Tit. 2. 11, ^2.
and worldly lusts, etc. This is distastful to a soul wherein sin reigns. The
Gospel requires Christians to dye to sin, to mortify their members which are
upon the earth, to live to righteousness, to walk in newness of life.

Thirdly, 3. Reason of the Point.
the pride of corrupt Nature is very contrary to the Gospel which teaches to
be poor in spirit, to empty our selves of all self-sufficiency, to go out of
our selves, to become fools that we may be wise, to be less than nothing in our
own eyes, to receive all of mere grace, the free love and favor of God, to
present our selves in another garment before God in the righteousness of
Christ, for the covering of our shame, and clothing of our nakedness, to look
for no acceptance of any service but by another worthiness, the merit of
Christ.

Fourthly, 4th Reason of the Point.
corrupt and inordinate self-love may move men to reject or corrupt the Truths
of the Gospel, which teaches self denial, and the renouncing of all that is
dear unto us, so far as it stands in opposition against Christ, Then says
Jesus unto his Disciples, Mat. 16. 24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and
follow me. The Gospel strikes at the right eye, at the heart, and root of the
most beloved lusts; How then will self-love rise up against it?

Fifty, 5th, Reason of the Point.
inordinate love of the world, of things below, being deeply rooted in corrupt
Nature, raises rebellion against the Gospel, and moves men either to reject
or corrupt the Truths revealed in it. Felix trembled at Paul's discourse and
commanded him away: the young man went away sorrowful, when Christ required him
to fell all and give to the poor, and follow him, (...) 16. 14.
in hope of treasures in Heaven: The Pharisees who were covetous, when they
heard Christ speak against that sin de^ided him; Love not the world, (...)
neither the things that are in the world; if any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him; So if any man love the world inordinately, the
love of the Truth is not in him, for all that is in the world, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but is
of the world.

The Use of this may be,

First, to teach us to see and bewail the corruption of our nature, 1. Use of
the the first Doctr.
and withal, to make us sensible how dangerous it is to continue in our natural
estate, destitute of the spirit of Christ; Our corrupt nature is apt to corrupt
and deny the precious Truths of the Gospel* it were a dangerous and malignant
disease of the body, that should turn the best physic into poison, and either
cast it out of the stomach as soon as it is taken in, or grow worse by occasion
of the remedy: Our natures are wholly overspread with the deadly disease of sin
and corruption, and there is no part ^ound in them, as the Apostle says, Romans
7. 18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing: He had much
good in him through grace, a great measure of the spirit of Christ, but in his
flesh, so far as he was carnal, so far as he was not renewed by the holy Ghost,
^o far there was no good thing dwelling in him; which shows that in them
which are not regenerate, there is nothing spiritually good, nothing suitable
and pleasing to God: Whence these two great evils follow;

First, an inclination to reject the Remedy^; like a corrupt Stomach that gives
no entertainment to the Physic, leaves it no time to work the cure, but
presently casts it out. So do many in the state of corrupt Nature, they hear
the Truths of the Gospel which the Lord has appointed as pre^ious Remedies
against that disease, and reject them, cast them up again, either denying them
in the secret thoughts, not believing them, or not seriously minding or
regarding them. So the Apostle told the unbelieving Jews, Act. 13. 46*
it was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you,
but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life; Lo we turn to the Gentiles. He charged them for putting the word of God
from them. The Apostle had put the word of God home to them, and they put it
from them; thus it is with many: The Gospel is tendered to them as necessary
physic sent down from Heaven, and ministered to them by the Preachers of the
word, but they put it from them; either they do not take it down, or presently
cast it up again.

Secondly, there is an inclination in corrupt Nature, to corrupt the Truths of
the Gospel, and to make them occasions of increasing the disease, and so to
make the Gospel to become the servant of death unto death. 2 Cor. 2. 16.
Corrupt Nature is apt to make both the law and the Gospel occasions of
increasing these diseases of the soul concerning the Law, Romans 7. 5,
the Apostle says, when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by
the Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death: This
explaineth afterward as in other passages; wherefore the Law is holy, 1 Pet.
2. 8.
and the Commandment holy, and just and good; the Law is perfectly holy, and
just and good, and therefore cannot be properly the cause of any thing sinful
and unholy, Was that then which is good made death unto me? God forbid! But sin
that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good, that sin
by the commandment might become exceeding sinful; such is the malignity of
corrupt Nature, that it works evil out of good, and makes the pure and holy
Law of God an occasion of sin, the more sin is forbidden, reproved, threatened,
condemned by the Law; the more vehemently is the corruption of nature carried
after sin. So for the Gospel, the Apostle Peter says, that Christ preached in
the Gospel, is to them that are disobedient, ver. 12, 13.
a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense; when to them which stumble at the
word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. They stumble and
take offense because they like not those terms upon which Christ is offered to
them in the Gospel. How dangerous is it then to continue in this estate of
corrupt nature? How earnest should poor souls be with the Lord to deliver them?
The body is in a sad estate when all both food and physic increases some
deadly disease in it. The word and Gospel of God is both food and physic, and
corrupt Nature is apt to make it an occasion to increase sin, and aggravate
condemnation. Cry mightily to the Lord to work a through cure upon your souls,
to change and renew your natures, to send his spirit along with his word, that
it may overpower the diseases of your souls, and be unto you the favor of life
unto life.

Secondly, Use 2,
This may teach us not to think it strange, that so many precious Truths of the
Gospel are denied and rejected in these days, so many parts of Scripture abused
with false interpretations and corrupt glosses, so many errors and lies
maintained instead of Truths. Corrupt nature is a full fountain sufficient to
send forth a multitude of these poisoned streams. It is a fruitful womb to
conceive and bring forth abundantly, ignorance, mistaking the sense of
Scripture, drawing false conclusions from the word, filling the mind with mists
and clouds of prejudice against the Truth, Love of sin, Pride, Corrupt and
inordinate self-love, excessive love of the world and outward things. These and
the like distempers of corrupt Nature, What truths may they not corrupt or
deny? What errors and false opinions may they not breed and cherish?

Now when Satan the Father of Lies, either more immediately by himself, or
mediately by his instruments works upon corrupt nature, then follows strong
delusion or efficacy of error whereby people are brought to believe lies
tending to damnation. 2 These. 2. 12.
Yea, such is the power of Satan joining with corrupt nature in the producing
of false doctrines, that one error begets many, and one Seducer deceives
many; one blind guide draws a multitude into the ditch with himself: yea, one
Heresy may soon overrun a whole Country, and spread suddenly from one Nation
to another. How soon did the Heresies of Arius overcome the world, and how were
the Kings and Kingdoms of the earth made drunk with the cup of the Whore of
Babylon, lying drenched and drowned in Popish errors, Superstitions and
Idolatries; and like horns fastened to the head of the beast, employing their
power to maintain the tyranny of Antichrist, and to suppress and persecute the
truth, and them that were sincere and zealous in professing and promoting it.
And,

Thirdly, Use 3.
upon the same ground, we may see the cause of such wicked practices as are
used to advance and establish errors: Satan and man's corrupt nature join
together in the breeding of them. False doctrines have an hellish original, and
so are carried on by hellish means; What juglings were used by the Arians to
delude the Emperor Constantine, to bring the Champions of the Truth, especially
Athanasius into disgrace and suspicion with him? how importunate were they to
obtain a toleration, and to be received into Communion with the Church;
covering their wolvish natures under sheeps clothing, while they were weak and
kept under, but casting off the sheeps skin when once they grew numerous and
strong, and had Emperors for their turn, and appearing in their own colors,
devouring the sheep of Christ, making havoc of the Church, and exercising
outrageous persecution against them? Much is related also of the fury and
cruelty of the Circumcellions; As for the Papists, what Country in Europe
almost has not had experience more or less of their bloody butcheries? how
many thousands of Saints and Martyrs have they murdered with fire and sword,
and put to cruel torments in Italy, Germany, Spain, France, Netherlands,
England and Scotland? Among the rest the barbarous Massacres acted upon the
Protestants at Paris in France, under pretense of friendship, and a royal
wedding, and the like cruelty executed in other Cities of that Kingdom, and
the hellish Powder plot here in England, are sufficient evidences by what
spirit they are led: and this latter is on the one side, I conceive, matter of
perpetual infamy and reproach to the Whore of Babylon; and on the other side,
an everlasting monument of the goodness of God, and his watchful eye over his
Church, in discovering this work of darkness, laughing to scorn the counsels of
his Enemies, and commanding deliverance for his people in this Land, by which
means the Gospel and ordinances of God are continued among us to this day. But
by these and the like examples it may appear, that Satan and the corrupt nature
of man closing together, do both bring forth dangerous errors, and contrive
wicked means to maintain them. Hence it is that they have dealt perfidiously
with men to work their own ends, having first dealt falsely with God in denying
his Truth, and (as much as lies in them) falsifying his word, putting false
constructions upon it, and drawing false conclusions from it. And therefore
none ought to stumble at the multitude of errors and false opinions, so as to
question the Truth and certainty of Religion, but rather so much the more to
use means to be established in the Truth, by searching the Scriptures with
diligence, earnestly praying to the Lord to open their understandings, to lead
them into all Truth, and confirm them in it, to frame their hearts to receive
the love of the Truth, and to keep them from being led away with the error of
the wicked.

But some may question. Two Questions Answered.
If Satan and corrupt nature are the cause of errors, what is the reason then,
1. That some of the godly are drawn into Error? 2. What is the cause that many
carnal persons, and many notoriously wicked, are free from Errors, yea, at
such times and in such places where errors and sects abound. For answer to the
former I conceive.

First, Answ. to 1. Some of note for profession unsound at heart.
that many who have been of note for godliness were never sound; they were but
chafe in the Lords floor, and so easily blown away with every wind of false
Doctrine. Says the Apostle John, 1 John 2. 18, 19.
Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last time: These lesser Ant^^^ists were forerunners of the great Anti^hrist,
but whence came these petty Antichrists, even out of the bosom of the
primitive? apostolical Church; for says this Apostle, They went out from us,
but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us; but they went out, that they might be made manifest, that
they were not all of us. If these that were in communion with the Church of
Christ in those purest times, were unsound at the best* and afterward
discovered their unsoundness by departing from the faith and Church of Christ,
and becoming open enemies to the Truth, have we not cause to think that many,
who in these days embrace false opinions, were never upright when they seemed
most zealous for the Truth and ways of God? And therefore what need have all
to search their hearts, and while they seem to stand take heed least they fall,
by l^bouring to ground themselves upon the Lord Jesus Christ by faith unfeigned.

Secondly, 2. Answ. to 1. Query. Some err because their knowledge is but in
part.
I doubt not but sincere Christians may fall into some lesser errors, because
they do but know in part; There are degrees of ignorance in them and the
remainders of corrupt nature which may darken their minds, and expose them to
the danger of erring, partly through the weakness of their own judgments,
partly through the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, partly through the high esteem which they have of some men. So
it is thought that multitudes were carried away with Luthers Name, and the
eminency of his gifts, and the great service done by him to the Church of
Christ.

Lastly, 3. Answ. to 1. Quaere. God permits it to teach us how to esteem men.
I conceive that the Lord may in his wisdom suffer some eminent Saints of his
to err in some things, that men may learn not to think of men above that which
is meet, but to give that great prerogative of infallibility to the God of
truth alone, who has revealed his Truth in the holy Scriptures: and therefore
Christians should try all spirits and doctrines by this Rule, bring them all to
the Law and to the Testimony, concluding that if they speak not according to
this Rule, it is because there is no light in them, no light in their doctrine,
so far as it will not endure the trial of Scripture light; yea, the Apostle
speaks very high in this case, Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1. 8.
preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached, let him be
accursed. If it were possible for a blessed Angel to preach false doctrine, we
must reject and cleave to the Scripture against all contradiction.

For answer to the Second Question: In as much as Satan, Answ. to 2. Query.
Carnal persons may be constant to some truths, and whence.
and the corrupt nature of man, are the cause of Errors and Heresies, What is
the reason that many carnal persons both such as are of civil conversation, and
fair moral principles, and also such as are loose and licentious, yea openly
profane, are free from errors in such places and ages, where and when false
doctrines abound; whereas they are such in whom the corruption of nature
reigns, and such as are held captive by Satan according to his will?

For answer to this I conceive,

First, that some such persons being naturally quick of apprehension, 1. Answ.
From Natural quickness of judgment.
and judicious, may be so clearly convinced of some truths, that though many
deny them and oppose them yet they will stand to them, especially when there is
liberty for all sides to hold and profess what they list, and a man may stick
to the Truth without loss and danger: in such cases natural Conscience is a
strong tie upon men's spirits, to cause them not wilfully to deny a known Truth.

Secondly, 2. Answ. From affectation of a seeming constancy.
Some may affect the reputation of constancy, being loath to be noted for light
vain and fickle persons; and therefore in as much as it was their lot to be
trained up from their childhood in the truth, they will cleave to it, howsoever
others cast it off, so long as they see they may do it with safety. They
account it a childish thing to hearken to every novelty and vain fancy (as
indeed it is) and therefore not becoming their gravity. It may be they would
have been as obstinate in error had they happened to have been taught it in
their youth, as now they seem to be constant in the Truth. Is not this apparent
in diverse at this day, who stand firm in doctrinal truths, and remain
perversely stiff, in old Ceremonies and superstitious observances, which have
no footing in the holy Scriptures, because they have been trained up in both?
On the one side they were trained up under sound doctrine concerning the main
points of faith: On the other side, they received some superstitious
observances by tradition, and therefore they will part with neither,

Thirdly, I suppose Satan having possession of carnal persons another way, 3
Answ. Satan (...) sure of them another way.
does not much temp^ some of them to renounce the Truth and entertain errors,
because they are not such as are likely to do him any special service in
promoting false doctrines.

Fourthly, many carnal persons may be engaged to stand for the Truth against
errors because some whom they respect, 4. Ans Hoped advantage from those that
hold the truth.
or upon whom they depend, or of whom they look for some advantage, go that way.

Fifthly, many carnal persons seem to be indifferent in matter of Religion: 5.
Answ. From their indifferency to opinions in Religion which keeps them from New
ones.
They are serious, and hearty about things that bring in profit, in following
their business, or in pursuing their pleasures, in satisfying their lusts; they
think it no great matter what men hold or profess in matter of doctrine. When
the Jews accused the Apostle Paul for teaching false doctrine, says Gallio the
Roman deputy, If it be a question of words and names, Act. ^8. 15.
and of your law, look ye to it, for I will be no judge of such matters. See
how slightly he speaks of matters of Religion, as if they were but empty words,
whereas the Question between Paul and the Jews was one of the weigtiest that
ever was in controversy. scil. Whether the Lord Jesus were the Christ? And so
Festus another Roman Governor relating Paul's Case to King Agrippa, accused by
the Jews* said, When the Accusers stood up they brought none accusation of such
things as I supsed, and 25, 18, 19.
but had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one
Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. It seems he thought
these things to be frivolous queries not worthy of the cognizance of so great a
Magistrate as himself: whereas the R^surrection of Christ from the dead (which
was in question between Paul and his adversaries) was such a fundamental point,
as that man's salvation depended upon it. Thus it seems many are kept from
embracing errors, because they hold it a matter of no great weight, what men
profess in point of Religion. But let all that mind their salvation receive the
love of the Truth and walk in it, hating and shunning every false opinion, and
every false way, out of sincere love to the Lord Jesus Christ, and true zeal
for his Glory. So much of the Question or Objection.

CHAP. II.
THe Answer is, first by way of abhorrence or detestation (...) Let it not be,
or far be it from ^s; which our translaturs render, God Forbid: I suppose
because this English phrase is used in cases of like nature; howsoever the
Apostle by these words signified that he abhorred and detested such a
consequence, as to make void the Law by the doctrine of free justification
through the righteousness of Christ applied by Faith. Hence may be noted this
point: 2. Doct. Gracious hearts abhor opinions which oppose the truth of God.


That gracious hearts do exceedingly abhor those opinions which corrupt or
oppose the truth of God. Heresies and false doctrines are odious to the godly.

1. This may appear in many examples, Proof. 1. From examples. Of M^ses.
and first in the old Testament. Moses did exceedingly abhor the wicked
counsel of Balaam whereby he taught the Midianites to deceiv^ the people of
Israel, so as to draw many of them from the worship of God to Idolatry; and
therefore says he to the people, Number. 31. 3, 7, 8, 14, 15.
arm some of your selves to the war, and let them go against the Midianites and
avenge the Lord of Midian: which they did, and slew the Males, and five Kings
of Midian, and Balaam himself, who gave this wicked counsel: But Moses was not
satisfied with this execution, but was wroth with the officers of the Host, and
said unto them, have ye saved all the women alive? Behold, these caused the
Children of Israel through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against
the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the congregation
of the Lord; and then he commanded them to kill all except the women children
which were Virgins: And it seems that this was one of the last acts of Moses
his life, for the Lord said unto him, ver. 1, 2.
avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites, afterward shall thou be
gathered unto thy people: of Elijah.
it was a work fit for him to do when he was ready to leave the world. How
odious were those Prophets of Baal, to that zealous Prophet Elijah! Says he,
take the Prophets of Baal, let not one of them escape: 1 King 18. 40.
and they took them, and Elijah brought them down to the brook Chishon and slew
them there. of Micaiah.
Micaiah showed his detestation of those lies spoken by the false prophets,
when he told the King, and Chapter 22. 23.
now therefore behold the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all
these thy Prophets. The like may be showed of the Prophet Jeremiah, of
Jeremiah. Jer. 28. 15, 16. and 29. 21, 22. ver. 31, 32.
how he abhorred the lies of those false Prophets, Hananiah, Ahab, Zedekiah,
and Shemajah, but I come to the Examples of the New Testament. And first to
begin with John Baptist, of John Baptist. Mat. 3. 7.
who came to prepare the way of the Lord, with what zeal did he detest the
corruption of doctrine brought in by the Pharisees and Sadduces? When he saw
many of them come to his Baptism, he said unto them, O generation of Vipers,
and 15. 6, 7. of our blessed Lord.
Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? But above all, take the
blessed Example of the Lord Jesus Christ, with what heavenly zeal did he
manifest his detestation of the false doctrine taught by the Scribes and
Pharisees? Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none effect by your
tradition. Mat. 16. 12.
And he gave his Disciples this Caveat, Mat. 23.
Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces: which
is meant of their corrupt doctrine. How sharply does he reprove them, and how
many woes does he denounce against them? Joh. 10 8.
He calls such, Wolves, Thieves and Robbers. And the Apostles and servants of
the Lord Jesus Christ, being led by the spirit of Christ* did abundantly
discover how exceedingly they detested and abhorred Heresies and fals^
doctrines. of St. Peter. 2 Pet. 2.
The Apostle Peter inveigheth with much vehemence against false Teachers, and
calls their corrupt doctrines damnable heresies, whereby they denied the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. He terms their
ways pernicious, and shows how they make merchandise of souls. He calls them
pernicious, self-wil^ed, and such as are not afraid to speak evil of dignities,
wells without water, speaking great swelling words of vanity: with diverse other
expressions. of St. Jude. Jud. 11.
St. Jude agrees with St. Peter, and among other passages, compares false
Teachers to Cain, Balaam, Core. The Apostle John calls them Antichrists,
adversaries to Christ, 1 John 2. 19, and 4. 1.
and false Prophets. They are called deceivers; yea, it is said, ver. 10, 11.
If there come any unto you, 2 John 7. 10, 11.
and bring not thi^ doctrine, receive him not into your house, neithe^ bid him
God speed, for he that bids him Go^ speed is partaker of his evil deeds. In
the Revelations written by St. John, Rev. 2. 6.
the Angel o^ Minister of the Church at Ephesus is commended for hating the
deeds of the Nicolaitans. and 14, 15, 16.
Pergamus is threatened, because in that Church was found those that held the
doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicolaitans, and therefore it is added, ver. 20.
Repent, or else I will com^ unto thee quickly, and will fight against the^
with the sword of my mouth. Thiatira is blamed for suffering the woman Iezabel
which called her self a Prophetess to teach and seduce. A great part of this
book declares the wickedness of the Whore of Babylon, the Antichristian popish
faction, the mischief they do, the Judgments of God hanging over them, and how
odious their false doct^ines and false worship is to God and his people. The
Apostle St. Paul as he labored and wrote more than the rest, of St. Paul. Romans
16. 17, 18
so he is very plentiful in declaring his detestation of false doctrines and
false teachers: In his Epistle to the Romans, ^he earnestly exhorts the
Saints, I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: for they that
are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, and by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. He speaks of those that
cause divisions contrary to ^ound doctrine, not of those that oppose false
doctrine and corrupt customs, whereupon sometimes divisions may follow through
ob^tinacy of those that resist the truth. How largely does he declare against
that fundamental error of them that denied the resurrection: 1 Cor. 15. 2 Cor.
11. 13, 14, 15.
He calls them corrupt teachers, false apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, Ministers of Satan, and
imitating their Master, transforming themselves into the Ministers of
righteousness, as he being the Prince of darkness transformeth himself into an
Angel of light. How sharp and severe is he this way, in the Epistle to the
Galatians, Gal. 1. 8, 9
Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gos^el unto you than that
which ye have received, let him be accursed: As we said before, so say I now
again, if any man preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received,
let him be accursed. Yea, he spared not that great Apostle Peter, but withstood
him to the face, and gave him a public reproof, because he did but warpe a
little, and by withdrawing from the believing Gentiles, for fear of offending
the Jews, gave occasion to men to question the doctrine of free justific^t^on
through the righteousness of Christ alone, and to think that circumcision and
the ceremonies of the Law were necess^ry to justification. Gal. 3. 1.
Again, says he, O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that y^ should
not obey the truth? showing, that t^ be led by ^alse teachers, is to be
befooled and bewitched. Corrupts teachers bewitch and make fools of their
followers. Again, says he, and 5. 12.
I would they were even cut off that troubl^ you. He calls false teachers
dogs, evil workers, Phil. 3. 2.
the Concision; and shows that such are apt to beguile others with enticing
words, and to spoil them through Philosophy and vain deceit, Col. 2. 4. 8, 18.
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ, intruding into those things which they have not seen, vainly puffed up
by their fleshly minds. How notably does he set forth Antichrist and his
followers, speaking of a grand apostasy and general fal^ing away, 2 These. 2.
and calls the head of it, the man of sin, the Son of per^ition, who opposes
and exalts himself, etc. He calls the mystery of Antichrist, the mystery of
Iniquity. He calls him that wicked one ((...)) signifying the lawless one, a
term exactly agreeing to the Pope, who trampleth upon the laws of Christ at his
pleasure, and exalts his own Laws. He shows that his coming is after the
working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 20.
etc. He shows that to fall into Heresy, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
is to make shipwreck of faith, 2 Timothy 2. 17.
and that for this cause he delivered Himeneus and Alexander unto Satan. 2 Timothy
3. 1.
He shows that Heresies are doctrines of devils, and Lies spoken in
Hypocrisy; and foretelling the perilous times that should come in these last
days, that men should be lovers of their own selves, etc. then he adds, of
this sort are they which creep into houses, ver. 6.
and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts,
ever learning etc. He compares them to Iannes and Iambres that withstood
Moses, meaning I suppose, the Egyptian Sorcerers or Juglers: so do these also
resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith; and
afterward he shows the miserable progress that they shall make, scil. from
bad to worse; Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, ver. 13. and 43,
4.
deceiving, and being deceived. Yea, he shows the folly of those that hearken
to seducers. The time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but
after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, an^ shall be turned
unto fables. He calls fals^ teachers, Tit. 1. 10. 11. and 3. 10. 11.
unruly and vain talkers and deceivers whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert who^^ houses, teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucre
sake: And he gives this charg^ to Titus concerning such; a man that is a^
Heretic after the first and second admonition reject, knowing that he that is
such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself* It is conceived
that the Epistle to the Hebrew was written by this Apostle, Heb. 13. 9. 10.
and how largely does he there confute the corrupt doctrine of them that
maintained the necessary use (...) legal cremonies, and gives this admonition
Be not carried about with diverse and strang^ doctrines, and says, We have an
Altar where^ they have have no right to eat, which serv^ the Tabernacle;
showing they have no pa^ in Christ, which obstinately prefer the sh^dows of the
old Testament before Christ the^ substance.

Secondly, to these Examples may be add^ diverse Arguments or Reasons, 2. Proof
of the Doctr. by Argument.
whereby it m^^ appear why Heresies, false doctrines, opinnions that oppose or
corrupt the truths (...) Christ, are odious to the godly, and abho^red by them.

First, because the glory of God is exceedingly wronged by false doctrines and
Heresies, 1. Reason from the glory of God wronged, etc.
an^ the grosser any such Heresies are, the more (...) God dishonored by them.
God the Father is such as Christ witnesses of him, Joh. 7. 28.
he th^^ sent me is true, yea, he cannot lie. God the Son is Truth. God the
holy Ghost is the spirit of Truth. Tit. 1. 2.
Now what a high disho^our is it to the God of Truth, Joh. 14. 6. and ver. 17.
when lies are fathered npon him, and attributed to him? errors and false
opinions in matters of Religion are taught, professed, received as Truths of
God? What is this but to go about to derive darkness from light? lies from the
Fountain of Truth? The Apostle disputing against that great error of them that
denied the Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 15.
brings this Argument amongst others, that Christ is risen, and the
resurrection of the Head proves the Resurrection of the Members; and shows
that diverse absurdities would follow, if the resurrection of Saints should be
denied, among the rest this, We are found false witnesses of God, because we
have testified of God, that he raised up Christ, whom be raised not up, if so
be the dead rise not. They that maintain any falsehood in point of Religion as a
Truth, they bear false witness of God, as much as in them lies, they make him a
liar, the Author of falsehood: Which tends highly to the dishonor of his
great and glorious name; and therefore all that are born of God, all that love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity, abhor errors and Heresies.

Secondly, 2. Reason. Godly have an Antipathy to Heresies.
There is a contrariety in the hearts of the godly, against errors and
Heresies. They have in them a principle of opposition against false doctrine. A
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him, Joh. 10. 5.
for they know not the voice of strangers. There is something within them which
suiteth not with strange doctrine, but is averse from it. For,

1. They are begotten with the word of Truth* Of his own will begat he us with
the word of Truth. 1. From the New birth.
As they are new creatures, Jam. 1. 18.
they have their original from the word of truth; it i^ as it were one of the
ingredients of their new nature, and so in that regard there is a natural
antipathy and contrariety betwixt them and false doctrines. 1 John 3. 19.
The Apostle John says o^ the godly, we know that we are of the Truth They do
as it were derive their new being from the Truth; and therefore error and
fals^ doctrine is hateful and abominable in their sight.

2. They are the children of the God of Truth* they are united unto Jesus
Christ who is ful^ of grace and truth; 2. They are Children of the God of truth*
they are led by the spirit of Christ who is the spirit of truth: and therefore
abhor and detest lies spoken in Hypocrisy.

Thirdly, The godly have learned that errou^ tend to the destruction of poor
Souls, Reason 3. Errors destructive to Souls.
and therefore Peter calls them damnable Heresies Paul calls them doctrines
of Devils. It (...) said they eat like a canker or gangrene, which is such a
malignant disease, that it require^^ the cutting off of a limb, otherwise the
who^ body is in danger to be destroyed. Now (...) people of God being tender
and compassionate toward immortal Souls, How can the^ choose but abhor such
deadly poison when the^ find it offered by Seducers, and readily swallowed down
by the simple. Is it not strange that some would have protection and
encouragement given to all false doctrines, and to those that spread and
propagate them, and that under a pretense of tenderness? Is it not rather a
high degree of cruelty, to protect any in destroying Souls, to give them full
liberty to wander about with their Plague-sores running upon them, freely to
spread their contagious and pestilent Errors to the infecting of thousands.

Fourthly, 4. Reason. Spreading nature of Errors
one error begets many; one false principle may be the cursed root of many
rotten branches, and a spring of many streams. How many gross absurdities (as
the Apostle shows,) follow as conse^uents from that one grand error of
denying the Resurrection of the body; as that Christ is not risen, the
preaching of the Gospel is vain, the faith of believers vain, and they still in
their sins, under the guilt and power of them, and when they die they perish,
and that they have hope only in this life, and so are of all men most
miserable, because they expose themselves to the scorn and malice of the wicked
in hope of a better life. And does not experience show how people, when once
they depart from the truth, fall from error to error, and with giddy heads
run about in a maze of vain delusions. Satan the Father of lies having once
seduced and gotten them into his circle, leads them from one bypath to
another. Now how can a man be truly godly and not abhor false doctrines, which
are such a fruitful spawn of a venomous Issue: Many flying serpents being
hatched of one Cockatrice egg.

Fifthly, 5. Reason. Errors apt to overtop Truth and how.
Errors are apt to overgrow the Truth, as Tares and other weeds are ready to
overcome the corn. And that 1. by corrupting one doctrine of the Gospel after
another. And 2. by oppressing and persecuting the sincere professors and
Preachers of the Truth. It seems the errors and corruptions of Popery were
first winked at, being taken up by particular persons, not generally owned,
then they became more general and overbore the truth, then they were armed with
power, and so opposed and persecuted the sincere maintainers of the truth. The
Arian Heresy at first was kept under, at length prevailed so as to raise most
bloody persecutions against the Truth* The outrages of the Anabaptists, and
sue^^ as pretended to Revelations; how notoriou^ were they when once they got a
head at Munster in Germany? But our age seems to exceed former times in this
kind that errors and heresies among us have been armed almost at their first
appearance. It would appear a strange Monster, if a child should b^ born in
armor: such a monster, if I mistake not, I have read of, born in Germany about
the time of the late wars. Is it not prodigious to see armed monsters born
amongst us, errors and heresies with swords by their sides, Pistolls, Muskets,
Pikes ^n their hands at their first coming into the world almost? Who knows
the disma^ events and mischief such things presage, if the Lord Christ who is
the Truth, and whose name is the word of God, should for our unworthiness
forbear to ride forth on his white horse conquering and to conquer? But what
gracious heart does not both abhor and tremble at those things that tend to the
suppressing of the Truth, and rooting out of those that are of the Truth and
for the Truth?

Sixthly, 6. Reason. heresies spread speedily.
Errors and Heresies are apt to spread far and wide in a short time, from a
person to a family, from the family to a Neighborhood, then over a Province or
Country, then over a Nation, then from Nation to Nation, and so over the world.
Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles. The Arian Heresy being a
little spark at first in Egypt, in a short time did spread over Asia and
Africa, and took hold of diverse parts of Europe; Job 1. 7.
for the devil himself has declared it, that his business is to go to and fro
in the earth, and to walk up and down in it, and he is very swift in his
motion, and active in his work, and who that has any zeal for Christ does not
abhor such a growing evil, such a spreading mischief?

Seventhly, 7. Reason. Errors withdraw Souls from the means of grace
Errors and Heresies are apt to draw poor souls from the means of grace. They
are deadly diseases, and withal, of such a cursed nature, that they take off
the heart from the remedy. They cause people to withdraw from those assemblies
where the truths of God are taught, and the unsoundness of such errors is laid
open. And then it is as the Devil would have it, when he can so bewitch poor
souls, as to make them drink down deadly poison, and then refuse to take a
purge, But as this is pleasing to Satan, so how grievous is it to them that
tender the good of poor souls, to see them dangerously sick and altogether
unwilling to be healed, or come near the means of the cure?

Eighthly, Heresies and false doctrines make woeful rents and divisions in the
Church. 8. Reason. Errors devides the Church. 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ephesians. 5. 23. and
4. 3, 4, 5, 6.
The Church is one body under one head, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle
speaking to the Church, says, now ye are the body of Christ and members in
particular. Christ is the head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the
body; and therefore the Apostle exceedingly presses the members of the Church
to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: heaping up
arguments of unity. Says he, there is 1. one Body. 2. one Spirit. 3. one H^pe.
4. one Lord. 5. one Faith. 6. one Baptism. 7. one God and Father of all. Shall
the members of one body fight each against other? Is it not monstrous for them
that should be quickened with one spirit to strive against each other, as if
they were acted by contrary spirits? Shall they that (...) called to one hope
be at defiance among them^selves? Can the Servants of one Lord bea^ arms
against each other, and one party no^ fight against the Lord himself, by
contending with their fellow Servants? Shall those that are called to the
profession of one faith, embrace contrary beliefs? Is it not odious to see
those that were washed in one laver of Baptism cast dirt upon each other; or
stain their hands, yea their consciences with the blood of each other? Is it
not horrid to see the children of one heavenly Father, (or such as profess
themselves to be so,) to hate and destroy their brethren. Now how clearly does
Scripture witness, how sadly does experience prove, that errors and heresies
make woeful rents and divisions? In one of those places formerly mentioned, Romans
16. 17.
says the Apostle, I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause di^visions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which we have learned, and avoid them: by
teaching contrary to sound doctrine, dangerous divisions are caused and great
offenses given. What a grievous rent was likely to have been made in the
Primitive Church, by them which would have persuaded the believing Gentiles
that Circumcision was necessary to Salvation, had not the Apostles and Elders,
meeting together in a Synod at Jerusalem, carefully suppressed this error at
the first appearing of it? It is said Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension
and disputation with them that taught this false doctrine. In the Synod it self
there was much disputing. Act. 15. 1, 2.
In the Epistle directed by the Synod to the Churches of the Gentiles, it is
said, We have heard that certain which went out from us have troubled you with
words, ver. 7, 24.
subverting your Souls, saying ye must be circumcised, and keep the Law (scil.
of Ceremonies,) to whom we gave no such Commandment. And although this Error
was for the present much restrained, yet how did it break out again afterward
among the Galatians? And therefore the Apostle calls these false teachers the
Concision instead of the Circumcision, Cum ecclesiam conscinderent and
lacerarent, seeing they did as it were cut and tear in pieces the Church of
Christ with their false doctrine; or as another says, he called them the
Concision, Phil 3. 2. Beza.
tum quod ecclesiam pravo dogmate scinderent, tum quod simplciores a Christo
abscinderent, because by their corrupt opinion they did both cut asunder the
unity of the Church, and cut off the weaker sort from Christ. But if we should
speak of the Rents that were in the Church by Errors and Heresies mentioned in
the Ecclesiastical Histories, it would amount to a large Volumn. What a rent
was like to be made in the Churches by Victor Bishop of Rome, about the year
198, about a business of small moment, scil. the time of keeping Easter,
inclining to excommunicate many famous Churches of Asia dissenting from him,
had not some more moderate men, especially Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, restrained
his rashness, though agreeing with him about the thing in controversy? What
worse divisions were made by the abominable Heresy of the Maniche's in Judea,
Egypt, Greece, Thrace, Spain, and other places? But as the blasphemous Heresy
of Arius was raised in a time when the Church was free from heathen
persecutors, so what dismal Rents and divisions did it make in the Church, when
there were Bishops against Bishops, Churches against Churches, Councels against
Councels? So the Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Monothelites, and others,
how sadly did they tear the Church in pieces? That false and proud tenent of
the Papists, making the Pope the universal Bishop and head of the whole Church,
what a breach has it made between the Eastern and Western Churches for many
hundred years? and what is the reason that there is no reconciliation made all
this while between them and the Protestants, but because they remain so
obstinate in their errors, Heresies, and Idolatries, against the manifest
light of the holy Scriptures? The stiffeness of those that are called Lutherans
in adhering to their corrupt opinions, has made a miserable and lasting breach
amongst the Protestant Churches. But though we should not look either far back
or far off for examples in this kind, our own Land, and our present times, may
afford us more then enough. Have we not breach upon breach, divisions and
subdivisions, many rending themselves from our Churches, and then again making
new rents among themselves; and yet when there is an opportunity, to act
mischief against the truth and the Preachers and Professors of it, they can
make truce with each other for a time, and conspire together to carry on
wretched designs, as the Pharisees and Sadduces, as also Herod and Pilate did
against Christ. But here I think it needful to put in a caution or two.

First, Caution 1.
some are apt to lay the blame of these divisions upon those that maintain
sound doctrine; either when they labor to revive the truth after it has been
kept under by old errors and corrupt customs, or to defend it against new
heresies and attempts of Seducers. When men see them constant and inflexible,
that they will not suffer themselves to be bowed and biassed according to the
crooked fancies of those that are Seducers, or seduced, how ready are they to
condemn them for Schismatics, froward men, enemies of peace? But this is a
dangerous mistake and a very great injury to them that stand for the truth, and
to the truth it self. For,

1. The people and Ministers of Christ are bound to stand fast in the Truth
against all opposition and contradiction: So the Apostle shows that one end
why Christ ascending into Heaven gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4. 14. 15.
Ministers and ministerial abilities, was, that we henceforth be no more
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
Prove. 23. 23.
but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, who is the
head even Christ. Buy the Truth and sell it not. The peace of the Church is
greatly to be esteemed and endeavored, yet we must not sell the Truth to buy
peace. Jude accounted it needful for him, to write unto the people of God, Jude
3. 4.
and exhrrt them that thoy should earnesty contend for the faith (scil. the
truth or doctrine of faith) which was once delivered unto the Saints; for
(says he) there are certain men crept in unawares, etc. The Apostle Paul gives
a strict charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15.
hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in faith, and
Love which is in Christ Jesus. Hold it fast whatsoever means are used to wrest
it from thee, that good thing which was committed to thee, keep by the holy
Ghost which dwells in us. Then he adds this, thou know that all they
which are in Asia be carried away from me. I conceive the word all is not to be
taken universally here for all absolutely, but indefinitely, for the generality
of those in Asia the lesser; and therefore Timothy being left at Ephesus, a
chief City of Asia was likely to meet with many Adversaries, and much
contention, in holding fast the form of sound words; yet the Apostle would not
dispense with him in this case, he must stick close to the Truth. Tit. 1. 9,
10, 11, 13.
So he tells Titus, that a Minister must hold fast the faithful word as he
has been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and
convince the gainsayers, for there are many unruly and vain talkers and
deceivers, especially they of the Circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped,
etc. And then he adds, wherefore rebuke them sharply that they may be sound
in the faith. Is it not very likely that contentions and divisions would follow
hereupon?

Secondly, Therefore consider that when contentions and divisions follow upon
the faithful preaching, professing, maintaining of the Truth, or the right
administration of holy Ordinances, the fault is in those that will not endure
sound doctrine, but take offense when none is given, either because their
errors are confuted, or their sinful practices reproved. If divisions and
contentions follow upon the publishing and asserting the Counsel of God; they
are the cause of it who resist the Truth: for was not this the case of our Lord
Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles? Many of the people when they heard
Christ, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet: others said this is the Christ:
Joh. 7. 41, 42, 43. and 10. 19, 20, 21.
but some said shall Christ come out of Galilee, etc. so there was a division
among the people because of him. There was a division therefore again among the
Jews because of these sayings, and many of them said he has a Devil, and is
mad, Why hear ye him? Others said, these are not the words of him that has a
Devil; Can a Devil open the eyes of the blind? Yea, Mat. 10. 24, 25, 26.
the Lord Christ forewarned his Disciples, Think not that I am come to send
peace on the Earth, I am not come to send peace but a sword, or (as it is in
Luke) division: For I am come to set a man at variance against his Father, and
the Daughter against her Mother, Luk* 12. 51.
and the Daughter in Law against the Mother in Law, and a man's foes shall be
they of his own household. Christ is the Prince of peace, and his Gospel is the
Gospel of peace, and the proper end of his coming in the flesh, and the great
business that he undertook was to make peace between God and men, and so by
consequent, between men and men, and this design took effect accordingly in
those that savingly received Christ and his Gospel, and yielded up their hearts
to him; but divisions and stirs and contentions followed by accident, not from
the Nature of the doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles, But 1. From
the malice of Satan. 2. From the Corruption, Blindness, Perverseness of men's
Spirits.

First, Divisions from Satan's malice. Man's frowardness.
From the malice of Satan, who looked upon the powerful preaching of Christ his
Gospel, as an Engine of battery planted against his strongholds. He being the
Prince of darkness, extremely hates the Light; and therefore whereas he
possessed all in peace before, when the light of the Gospel breaks forth, he
betaketh himself to his arms, stands upon his guard, striveth to keep
possession of the hearts and souls of men. Yea, he is not content to make a
defensive War only, but rages and labors to put out the light, stirs up
his instruments to oppose and persecute those that receive the love of the
Truth, and give up their names and hearts to Christ.

Secondly, The Corruption of man's Nature, the blindness and perverseness of
their spirits is a cause of the^e divisions and commotions. Their ignorance,
errors, lusts, sinful courses are reproved by the word, yea, others receiving
and obeying it, is a condemning of their unbelief, impenitency, disobedience;
and therefore they are easily persuaded by Satan to oppose and persecute the
Truth, and them that embrace it. So that it is from the malignity of their
hearts that divisions follow. I may add yet a third cause,

Thirdly, Act. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
And that is the weakness of some who for the main do embrace and love the
Truth* but for want of more clear and solid judgments do differ and dissent in
things of les^ moment, whereupon follow estrangements, and too much alienation
of affection, And a^ Satan and the world took occasion to stir up contention
and cause division, upon occasion of Christ his coming and preaching: so also
upon the publishing of the Gospel by hi^ Apostles, and by consequent, by other
faithful Preachers of the Truth. Paul and Barnabas at Iconium, so spoke, that a
great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greek^ believed: Here was the
proper effect o^ Christ's spirit working in the Gospel preached; it made peace
between God and men, and united Jews and Gentiles together, who were odious to
each other. Now see also the effect of Satan's malice, and the perverseness o^
unbelievers, in taking occasion hence to cause divisions, But the unbelieving
Jews stirred u^ the Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the
Brethren. It seems these mischievous persons then began to kindle the fire of
contention in the breasts of ignorant persons, but it did not presently flame
out. And therefore in the third verse we find that these faithful servants of
Christ went on in their work without interruption: Long time therefore abode
they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony to the word of his
Grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands. But at length
this fire of Hell that lay smothered under the ashes brake forth, the multitude
of the City was divided, and part held with the Jews, and part with the
Apostles, and an assault was made both of the Gentiles and Jews, People and
Rulers, to use them despitefully and stone them, so that the Apostles fled and
preached the Gospel elsewhere. Here it is as clear as the Sun, that the
unbelievers and enemies of the Truth were the cause of this division. If we
should trace the Apostle Paul in his travels from place to place, where shall
we find a place free from divisions? not caused by his preaching, but following
occasionally from his preaching, Satan and his Agents kindling the coals of
contention. The Apostle could not bring men to Christ by his Ministry, but he
must of necessity wrest them out of the power of Satan, and call them from the
course of the world; and thereupon Satan and the world were enraged, and so
contentions and divisions followed.

Second Caution.

The use of this may be,

First, 1. Use.
To teach us more seriously to lay to heart and bewail the great and
lamentable inundation and overflowing of Errors and Heresies among us. Rev. 8.
13.
Says John, I beheld and heard an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven,
saying with a loud Voice, Woe, Woe, Woe to the inhabitants of the Earth by
reason of the other voices of the Trumpet of the three Angels which are yet to
sound. Before we may read of seven Angels with their seven Trumpets, now after
four of them had sounded and sad consequents followed, here is a solemn
preparation made against the sounding of the three last. It seems the reason
is because the calamities following, should be more grievous than the former,
and accordingly an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven denounces three
woes to the Inhabiters of the Earth. It is supposed this Angel was Gregory 1.
Bishop of Rome, said to fly through the midst of Heaven, or the middle space
between Heaven and Earth, because on the one side he came nearer the heavenly
purity of doctrine and worship than his Successors; but was yet far below that
heavenly purity of the primitive and Apostolical times, and so declining toward
the earth according to the corrupt times wherein he lived: who by foretelling
that the King of Pride was at hand, Antichrist was at hand with an army of
Priests follow-him, gave warning of these woes approaching. Soon after this
warning given, the fifth Angel sounded, which is the first of the three
woe-bringing Trumpets, (as they may be called) and the first consequent
following is thus expressed, And I saw a Star fall from Heaven unto the Earth,
and to him was given the key of the bottomless Pit. Rev. 9. 1.
It is conceived that this Star notes out both the Pope in the West, and that
false Prophet Mahomet in the East; who though they differed far from each other
in their particular way of acting, yet they both promoted the main design of
the Prince of darkness, and therefore may well be represented by one Star
falling from Heaven, and said to have the Key of the bottomless Pit. They fell
from Heaven, from the heavenly purity of the true Church often called Heaven in
this Book. About three years after the death of Gregory, his Successor Boniface
the third, received of Phocas the perfidious Emperor (who murdered his Master
Mauritius the Emperor with his children) the Title of Universal Bishop, and so
a vast power to work mischief in the Church, which accordingly was put in
execution as it follows, And he opened the bottomless-pit, and there arose a
smoke out of the Pit as a smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the Air
were darkened by reason of the smoke of the Pit: The smoke of errors and
superstitions like a most loathsome fogg, came out of the bottomless pit
darkning the light of the truth, and blinding the eyes of men, the efficacy of
error and strong delusion bewitching multitudes of poor souls. Besides this,
out of the smoke came locusts upon the earth, huge multitudes of Monks and
Friars like Locusts overspreading the earth, devouring the fruits of it. These
came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, the smoke of errors and
superstitions; for when such doctrines passed for current, that men might be
saved by observing vain humane traditions, that there was a Treasure in the
Church filled up with the merits of those that had an overplus besides what was
needful for themselves, and that they who were benefactors to the Monks should
be partakers of their merits, how mad was the world in building Monasteries,
and giving their Land and goods to the Friars, devoting their children to that
profession? Yea, it seems diverse noble persons, and some Kings and Queens
turning Monks and Nuns. And as the smoke of the pit did breed the Locusts, so
the Locusts increased the smoke, and made the mists of darkness greater and
thicker, multiplying errors and superstitions. If this were one of those
grievous woes, whereof the Angel flying through the midst of Heaven gave
warning to the world; how should we be humbled and ashamed in respect of the
great earthliness, dullness, senselesness of spirit that is among us, yea too
much in those that have some love to the Truth, that this great and woeful evil
does so abound with us, and is so little laid to heart? Should not the very
thought of it startle us, that such thick and dark vollies of smoke in our
days, should break out of the bottomless pit, and cover so great a part of our
Land, darkning the Air and Sun, eclipsing the Light of the truth, and putting
out the eyes of many, and so many Locusts, deceivers, and deceived, coming out
of the smoke of errors? This ought to be for a Lamentation. But how many that
profess themselves Christians set their hearts so much upon their own private
concernments, their business, wealth, ease, and pleasure, etc. and those that
have something of a public spirit, yet confine their serious thoughts to the
external good of the Commonwealth, that they little or nothing regard these
destructive evils that are of a spiritual nature. If Gallio his temper (who
when complaint was made to him about differences in Religion, slighted them as
words and names, and cared for none of these things) may be thought tolerably,
or at at least, not much to be marvailed at in an Heathen, yet doubtless it is
shameful and odious in a Christian. What! a Christian, and not moved that
Christ who is the Truth is so highly dishonored, by lies and falsehood taught
and received instead of Truths; that multitudes of poor souls are in a ready
way to be destroyed by damnable doctrines; that errors beget errors, and are
likely to overgrow the Truth, to spread far and wide; that so many are both
infected by them and alienated from the remedy, shunning the public Ordinances
where sound doctrine is taught; that such bleeding wounds and Rents are made in
the Church. Art thou a Christian, and so one that pretendest to be begotten
with the word of Truth, and have thou no such principle of contrariety planted
in thee against errors and false doctrines, as to make them bitter and
grievous to thee? Some may rail at those that are misled, and others may make
a sport of their folly; but how small is the number of those who like
Christians mourn for them as dishonorable to Christ, pernicious to souls? How
deeply was the holy Apostle affected with the obstinacy of the Jews in their
errors, in preferring the ceremonies of the Law above Christ the Substance;
and their own imaginary legal righteousness, above the perfect righteousness of
Christ applied by faith. I say the truth in Christ. Romans 9. 1, 2, 3.
I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I
have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart: for I could wish that I
my self were accursed from Christ for my Brethren, my kinsmen, according to the
flesh. How passionately did he express himself to the Galatians, Gal. 4. 19.
who had once embraced the pure doctrine of the Gospel, but afterward suffered
themselves to be so deluded by seducers, as to seek justification by the Law,
My little children of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be formed in
you. He felt such sorrow, such fear, such strong and compassionate workings of
heart toward them, as were answerable to the pangs of a woman in
childbearing. Says the Psalmist, I beheld the transgressors and was grieved,
Psalm. 119. 158.
because they kept not thy word: This I conceive does plainly concern both
transgressions in practice and in doctrine or belief. Both these forts of
transgressiours are guilty of not keeping Gods word. They that live in a course
of sin, they keep the word in their judgment and profession, but keep it not
in their lives and actions. They that go on in errors keep not the word so
much as in judgment and profession. Besides, how can a man forsake any truth of
God which he has once received, but he must ipso facto, in that very act
transgress in point of practice? He transgresses that precept, Prove. 23, buy
the truth and sell it not: that of the Apostle, be no more children tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, etc. and that, hold
fast the form of sound words, etc. Now the Psalmist beheld those with a
mournful eye, I beheld the transgressors and was grieved, etc. Is it not a
sign of a graceless heart to behold transgressors without grief? If we moan
not for these things out of spiritual respects; the Lord may justly make us
mourn for those outward evils that they may bring upon us. The Devil as he is
the Father of lies, so he is a murderer. Spiritus mendax est homicida; and they
that are led by a lying spirit, if they can establish their facton and party so
as to grow confident of their power, may soon discover a murtherous spirit; and
then those that are lukewarm and indifferent in matters of Religion, may feel
their fury as well as they that are most zealous.

Secondly, Use 2.
This truth may shame those who plead for a toleration of all sorts of errors,
Heretics, Seducers, false prophets. It seems the Apostle Paul accounted them
intolerable, when he pronounced them accursed, and wished them cut off.

But such pretend Christian charity, 1. Obj.
meekness mercy. I answer, 1. Will they boast of more love than Paul had, 1.
Plea for tolerating all etc. Answered.
who could have wished himself accursed that Israel might have been saved? Will
they pretend to more meekness than Moses, who was very meek above all the men
which were upon the face of the earth? and yet ye heard how he acted against
Balaam and the Midianites, ^um. 6. 12. 3. Ex. 22. 28, 29.
and we find also that he caused three thousand to be slain for Idolatry. If
men will approve themselves to be of such a spirit as Paul and Moses, let them
show meekness and love in ^earing and forgiving private and personal injuries
offered to themselves: and on the other side, manifest true zeal for the Truth
and glory of Christ. 2. Charity and mercy is to be showed to souls, 2. Answer.
especially that they may not be poisoned with damnable heresies. Is it not
gross hypocrisy to pretend much tenderness toward deceivers, and to have no
bowels of compassion toward poor weak creatures whose simplicity is abused,
and whose souls are daily ensnared by their mischievous subtilties. Is this
become a point of charity, to desire that ravening wolves may have free
liberty, without check or control, to make havoc of the flock of Christ? 3.
Answ.
3. I say that charity is to be showed to Heretics not by suffering them to
add sin to sin, and to give them protection and encouragement in acting
mischief, but by restraining them from their sin: Ministers and private
Christians doing their parts in discouraging their errrours, praying for them,
etc. Magistrates using their power to curb them. Answ. 4.
4. I grant a difference is to be made; as the Apostle Jude, having spoken very
sharply against Heretics toward the end of the Epistle says, Jud. 22, 23.
Of some have compassion, making a difference and others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire. Some may err in less matters, and out of
simplicity, and carry themselves humbly and modestly, not troubling the peace
of the Church: such are to be tenderly dealt with as Brethren, while they show
themselves willing to be informed. Some may agree with the Church in all main
and most substantial points, and differ in things that seem not clearly laid
down in Scripture: these if they do not proudly and obstinately reject the
truth, I suppose ought to have much moderation showed toward them. Again there
is a great difference between the simple and weak that are misled, and those
that are cunning seducers and deceivers of others. More severity is to be used
toward seducers, than those that are misled by them: Yet even these are to be
heard and means used to convince them out of the Scriptures, to be admonished
exhorted, patience and long suffering to be exercised toward them. If after all
such means used, they remain obstinate, neither forsaking their errors, nor
ceasing to draw others from the truth: How can it suit either with zeal for
Christ, or love to souls, to suffer them to go on?

It may be Objected that the weapons of this 2. Obj.
warfare are spiritual, and therefore no other are to be used. I answer, that
Ministers weapons are spiritual; but they according to their calling, may call
upon the Magistrate to use other weapons against those that despise spiritual
weapons, as against drunken^^^^ Adultery Murder, etc.

Some it may be will say that many Magi^^^^es are not able to judge of the
truth or falsehood of Doctrines. 3. Obj. Answ.
I answer, it is the duty of Christians in general to labor that the word of
God may dwell in them richly in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. This is
required of Christians whether private persons or Magistrates. Col. 3. 16. 25.
2. If some false doctrines be so artificially painted over, and have such fair
colors put upon them, that it is hard to discover their falsehood: a godly
Magistrate may have the assistance of such as are more exercised in this kind
than himself.

Fourtbly, 4. Obj. Answ.
it may be said, that conscience ought not to be compelled. I answer, I am
fully of that judgment, and therefore I conceive none ought by any violent
courses to be enforced to profess any doctrine contrary to their own
consciences, though their judgments be never so erroneous. But when any cannot
be content to err alone, but are restless and active in corrupting others, and
will not forbear though often admonished; in such a case, to remedy so great a
mischief, either by banishment or imprisonment of the offenders, is no violence
to their Consciences, but a just punishment upon the outward man. It may be
they will say, They are bound in conscience to teach others the same things
which they believe themselves. I answer, Then I conceive the Magistrate should
think himself bound in conscience to stop them in their course, and if nothing
else will do it, to shut them up as he would do one, who having the Pestilence,
offers to thrust himself into throngs of people to infect them.

Fifthly, Obj. 5.
Some it seems have found out a strange conceit, that the examples of those
godly Kings of Judah in punishing Idolaters, is no rule for Christian
Magistrates now; because they were ties of Christ, Luke 1. 32, 33.
who is called the Son of David according to the flesh, and of whom it is said,
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever. Answ.
I answer, 1. If this reason were of any force, it would as well take away from
the Magistrate all power of punishing other offenses as well as this, or at
least take away this proof. 2. As the reason is frivolous, so we find that
others are commended in Scripture that were not of the family of David nor
types of Christ. To pass by that execution of Moses and the Israelites upon
Balaam and the Midianites, for seducing the people, 1 King. 18. 40.
Observe the act of Elijah, in slaying the Prophets of Baal. Some may say
Elijah was a Prophet. I answer, This execution was no Prophetical act, but an
act of Magistracy, for which in this extraordinary case, Elijah was Authorized
immediately by the Lord himself, to whom all power and authority belongs. But
how clear is th^^ in the case of Iehu King of the ten Tribe^ who though he was
not upright, yet because he destroyed Baal out of Israel, brake down his Image
and house, 2 King 16. 24, 25, etc. 30.
and made it a draugh^-house, slew the Worshippers of Baal, and the Idolatrous
family of Ahab, he was both commended and rewarded by the Lord, in so much that
the Kingdom was settled upon him and his to the fourth Generation.

Sixthly, Obj. 6. Answ.
Some may say Christians should be very tender of shedding of blood. I answer,
1. I am clearly of the same mind, and I wish some of our Laws were mittigated,
and some other punishment were laid upon some offenses, which among us are made
Capital. But what shall we say to such that can be content to see men loose
their lives for sheep-stealing and horse-stealing, and yet cry out upon it as
an high degree of cruelty, if Blasphemers, and those that draw others from the
Ordinances of God into damnable Heresies, should be put to death? Have we not
had such among us, who have been very tender hearted Patrons of Heretics, not
only sparing their lives, but countenancing and preferring them; and yet when
any out of principles of Conscience have opposed their usurped power, their
feet have been swift to shed blood. 2. I conceive Magistrates in restraining
Heresies ought to be very wary in taking away life. I wish, 1. They would take
them from all public Offices of trust and power. 2. Discountenance them. 3.
Suppress their Meetings. And if any be obstinate and refractory, there be other
ways to curb them besides Capital punishments; as Fines, Banishment,
Imprisonment. But for Blasphemers, I know not what authority under Heaven, has
power to dispense with that Law so expressly delivered by the God of Heaven,
Lev. 24. 16.
He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death.

Seventhly, Ob. 7. out of Mat. 13* 22, 30.
Some I believe think they have a Protection for Heretics, to preserve them
from the hand of justice, in that Parable of the Tares, where the Householder
would not have the Tares rooted up, lest the Wheat should be plucked up with
them, but would have both grow together until the Harvest. I answer, Answ.
1. I see not how this can exempt Heretics from punishment, more than perjured
persons, Thieves, Traitors, Rebels, Adulterers, Murderers, or other
Malefactors, For what are Tares but all sorts of persons, that are not Wheat
to be gathered into the Barn. And therefore in the exposition of the Parable,
v. 41.
the Tares are declared to signify all things that offend, and them that do
Iniquity. And therefore I conceive these Servants are not the Magistrates, who
are not forbidden, but commanded to use their power for a Terror to evil
works: but the Angels whom the Lord will not have to pluck up all the Tares
before the Harvest day, scil. the end of the world. And in the exposition of
the Parable I find nothing either restraining civil Magistrates, or Church
Officers, in proceeding against notorious and scandalous offenders. 2. Parables
are not to be pressed and urged in every particular circumstance: but the Scope
is to be considered. And I conceive the Scope and design of this Parable is to
show that there shall be a mixture of good and bad in the world until the last
day, when the separation shall be made. And therefore in the third place, How
earnest should we be in praying to the Lord, Use 3.
to preserve our selves and others from being led away with the error of the
wicked, to reduce those that are led aside, to open their eyes, and humble
their hearts, that they may acknowledge their failings, and return to the
Truth, to frustrate the subtle devices and mischievous attempts of deceivers,
to fill the Magistrates with a spirit of wisdom, zeal, and courage to improve
their authority for the Lord Jesus Christ, in putting a restraint upon the
enemies of his Name and Truth, to stir up in them bowels of compassion toward
poor souls, who are daily in danger to be ensnared and bewitched by them.
Besides all the other mischiefs done by false Teachers, I conceive this one
were enough to stir up all that truly fear God, to desire their restraint, that
they draw many poor creatures from public ordinances, from the ordinary means
of knowledge, grace, and salvation: And how can they do the Devil a more
acceptable service, or open a readier way for Popery, Profaneness, Atheism,
and all manner of wickedness to break in upon us?

So much of the Apostles Answer by way of abhorrence or detestation.

CHAP. III.
NOw follows the other part of his Answer, by way of Negation o^ Denial.
Concerning which, I grant it to be an Affirmation in respect of the form of the
words, if they be considered as a sentence by themselves; but consider this
clause as an Answer to the former Question or Objection, and so it is a Denial,
and more than a Denial, in regard of the matter of it, it is a Denial with
advantage. The Question or Objection is, Do we make void the Law thro^gh Faith?
implying that the doctrine delivered by the Apostle concerning justification by
faith, does make void the Law, that is, that by maintaining this doctrine, that
they who receive Christ by a lively faith, applying his righteousness,
obedience, and satisfaction, to themselves, and relying wholly upon him for
justification and salvation, are accepted of God as truly righteous, without
any consideration at all of any works of theirs done in obedience to the Law;
that they hereby do make void the Law, or take away the use and authority of
it. This the Apostle does most strongly deny, by affirming the contrary, yea,
we establish the Law. If he had said no more but this, we do not make void the
Law through Faith, it had been a denial of that which was objected. But to add
strength to his denial, he affirms the contrary, that the doctrine of
justification by faith, is so far from making void the Law, that it confirms
and establishes the Law. So that the Apostle shows that there was a double
falsehood in this Objection: For if the doctrine objected against, had neither
made void the Law, nor established it, it had been false to say, it did make
void the the Law: but to say it made void the Law, when it was so far from
making it void, that it did establish it, was a double falsehood. Again, it
seems the objection was made both against the doctrine, and them that taught
it, Do we make void the Law through Faith? scil. the Apostle and other
Gospel-preachers? And the Answer clears both, Yea, we establish the Law: The
doctrine which we preach, and we in preaching this doctrine, are so far from
making void the Law, that both our doctrine, and we in teaching it, do
establish the Law.

Hence may be noted this Point, Doct. 3. Complicated falsehood charged sometimes
on truth and the preachers of it.
That such things have been Objected against the Truth, and them that stand for
the truth, as are doubly false. I conceive there is an Objection implied in the
speech of our Lord Christ, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the
Prophets; Mat. 5. 17.
I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. It seems some either did Object, or
were inclined to object against the Son of God, that he came to destroy the Law
and the Prophets. Now he shows that there was a double falsehood in this
surmize: for 1. He did not come to destroy them. 2. He came to fulfill them in
such an exact and perfect manner and measure, as the best of men that ever came
before him were never able to do. So when he had cast the Devil out of a dumb
man, that was possessed, so that the dumb spoke, and Mat. 9. 34.
and the multitude marveiled saying, it was never so seen in Israel, See Luke
23. 2. with Mat 22. 21
the Pharisees said, he casts out Devils through the Prince of Devils. There
was a double falsehood in this envious and Blasphemous cavil. They accused him
as a confederate of the Devil, who both by his doctrine and works made it
appear that he came to destroy the works of the Devil. The Lord Christ having
said, I am the light of the world: Joh. 8. 13.
he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. The Pharisees said unto him, Thou bear record of thy self, thy record
is not true. This was doubly false; for he is the truth it self, and neither
did nor could speak any untruth. So when the Lord Jesus had opened the eyes of
one that was born blind, on the Sabbath day, Some of the Pharisees said, This
man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day. This was doubly
false: If a man be accused for breaking the Sabbath, when he does some work of
necessity, which is permitted on the Sabbath day, though not commanded, it is a
false accusation: but when he is accused to break the Sabbath, for such a work
as is a work suitable to the Sabbath; there is a double falsehood in such a
charge. Now such was this, and other miraculous works wrought by the Lord
Christ on the Sabbath. They were not only things permitted to be done on that
day, but they were special and choice Sabbath day works; for they were divine
works, works of divine and almighty power, works tending to prove and confirm
his doctrine: yea, proofs and evidences of that great doctrine, that he was the
Son of God, the Christ, the Savior of the world. So those enemies of the
Gospel at Philippi fal^ly accused Paul and Silas, and slandered their doctrine,
Act. 16. 20, 21.
saying, these men being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our City, and teach
customs which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being
Romans. Here was a double falsehood. For,

1. It was lawful for them to receive and observe the things taught by Paul,
etc. 2. It was not only lawful but necessary. They were bound to receive them
as the counsels and commands of the Lord Jesus, exalted to the right hand of
God, as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to whom every knee mnst bow, etc. To
whose Sovereignty both the Romans, and all other nations of the world were
subject. So the unbelieving Jews of Thessalonica cried out against them, and
17. 6.
These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also. Now this
had been false, if Paul and Silas had done neither good nor harm in the world.
But it was doubly false; For they were so far from turning the world upside
down, that they labored mightily to set the world in order: They found the
world woefully disordered, full of confusion, and as it were turned upside down,
by the subtilty and malice of Satan, and the wickedness of men: the Devil the
worst and basest of all the creatures reigning over the World: man at first
made after the Image of God, and Lord of the rest of the creatures, so far
abased as to worship stocks and stones, yea, the Images of Birds and Beasts,
etc. and inslaved to diverse lusts and vile affections. Now Paul and Silas, and
other faithful Preachers of the Gospel, taught such a doctrine as tended to the
remedying and rectifying of these disorders and confusions, to put the world
into a right posture, to beat down the strong holds of Satan, to cast him out
of his usurped Throne, to deliver the people of the world out of his power, to
rescue them out of the slavery of sin, to reconcile them unto God by Christ, to
subject them to his authority, to restore them to his likeness. So there was
also a double untruth in their other accusation, These all do contrary to the
decrees of Caesar. This had been false if Paul, etc. had spoken nothing at all
either for or against Caesar's Authority: But it was a double untruth to lay
such a charge upon them, that taught obedience and subjection to Caesar. Let
every soul be subject, Romans 13.
etc. Yea, and Paul directed Titus to teach thus, Tit. 3. 1.
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates. This proceeds,

1. From Ignorance I suppose in some, who not having their senses exercised in
the word of God, 1. Reason of the Point.
do grossly mistake things that are delivered, and misunderstand the words and
meaning of those that bear witness to the truth. Such it may be was the case of
those unbelieving Jews, Act. 17. 18.
who complained of Paul and Silas, that they turned the world upside down: And
those Heathens at Athens who said of Paul, he seems to be a setter forth of
strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the Resurrection: Whereas
his endeavor was to persuade them to renounce all strange gods, and to turn to
the only true and living God. Others seem to have taken his speech for vain
babbling: Whereas I believe it was the most serious weighty discourse that ever
was uttered within their Walls since the foundation of their City was laid. But
they were trained up in heathenish blindness and ignorance, and therefore no
wonder if they were subject to such gross mistakes: For says the Apostle, we
preach Christ Crucified, 2 Cor. 1. 13.
unto the Greeks foolishness. The most excellent wisdom that ever was revealed
to the children of men, is accounted foolishness by ignorant and foolish men. I
conceive,

Secondly, This may proceed from misinformation in some, Reason 2. From
Credu^ity.
who being weak credulous persons do take things upon trust without judicious
trial and examination, giving credit to false reports, of such as speak evil of
that which they understand not, or of such as for base ends do slander the
truth, or those that profess and preach the truth. So when Demetrius minding
his trade and gain, had stirred up an uproar among the ignorant people of
Ephesus, Some cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly was confused,
and the most part knew not wherefore they were come together. And yet it
seems this rude and ignorant multitude joined together to make up the common
cry. All with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana
of the Epbesians. How many have made loud clamours against the truth, Act. 19.
32, 33.
and them that preach and profess it, upon the false suggestions of others,
themselves not being able to give a reason for what they say!

3. I conceive many do this out of malice against those that maintain the
truth. Reason 3. From malice.
The malignity of their Spirits is not satisfied with lesser calumnies than
those of a double dye. Act. 24. 5, 6.
Tertullus the Orator was not content to term the blessed Apostle Paul, a
pestilent fellow, (as our English has it,) but a Pest or Plague as in the
original: and then accused him for a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the world, and one that went about to profane the Temple: Whereas
he endeavored to prevent or suppress sedition or tumults, and endured great
afflictions, and was exposed to extreme dangers by the turbulent and seditious
adversaries of the truth, and instead of being a Plague, he was one of the
chiefest instruments of good to the world that ever was, and instead of going
about to Profane the Temple, he showed special regard of the supposed holiness
of the Temple even after the date of it was expired, that he might not give
offense to the weak: and yet the Jews assented to their Orator, in these most
false suggestions, saying that these things were so.

Fourthly, It seems many do this for want of Arguments to confirm their false
opinions, and overthrow the Truth: And therefore they lay on load, heaping up
railings instead of reasons, false and reproachful accusations, instead of
convincing demonstrations; thinking to disgrace those truths which they cannot
disprove, and to discredit those teachers the light of whose doctrine they
cannot resist. And how ready are the weaker sort to be scared from the truth,
and alienated from those assemblies where it is taught by such shifts as these?
A bold face and a rolling tongue pouring out store of opprobrious language
against the truth, goes a great way with the simple. What an outcry was made
by the Jews of Asia against Paul, Men of Israel help: This is the man that
teaches all men every where against the people, and the Law, and this place:
and farther, brought Greeks also into the Temple, and has polluted this holy
place. And all the City was moved, and the people ran together, and they took
Paul and drew him out of the Temple, and went about to kill him. How soon are
the multitude stirred up, and set in a rage by the mere clamours of those who
outragiously exclaim against the truth, and them that maintain it? Men of
Israel help; as if all were like to be lost, unless Paul and his doctrine were
suppressed. So when they that disputed with Stephen, were not able to resist
the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6: 9, 10, 11
Then they suborned men, which said, we have heard him speak blasphemous words
against Moses, and against God, and they stirred up the people. They were
beaten from their arguments, and then sought to over-bear him with false
accusations, and the ignorant people were ready to hearken to them.

First, Use 1.
This may teach us not to think it strange, if the Truth and those that profess
it be evil spoken of in these times; if things that are doubly false be
objected against it and them. Eccles. 1. 9.
Solomon says, There is no new thing under the Sun: Certainly this is no new
thing, as ye have heard by diverse examples out of Scripture; it is a practice
as ancient as the Apostles days. Paul and his Ministry did not escape these
envenomed tongues. Nay, the Lord Christ himself, together with his doctrine and
works, was thus traduced. Why should it be expected that the servants should be
above their Master, or the truth in their mouths be more free from false
reproaches than it was in his? If ye hear such things in these days, consider
that the Devil does but keep his old wont. If the doctrine of free
justification be slandered as licentious, and tending to carnal liberty, was it
not so in Paul's time? If the Ministers of the Gospel be called Antichristian,
Baals-Priests, and the like, by Heretics and Sectaries, it is no wonder; the
Devil sees them to stand in his way and hinder his work. I think it is easy
to prove that there is a double falsehood in this reproach. For first, they do
not promote the interest and Kingdom of Antichrist either in regard of
discipline, doctrine or worship. Not in regard of discipline; they are far from
seeking to bring men into subjection to him as the visible head of the Church,
or to exalt his authority above Kings and Princes, and above the Laws of
Christ. Nor in doctrine; they teach not Popish opinions. Nor in worship; they
are no Patrons of Idolatry and superstition. But secondly, They are so far from
being Antichristians, that I am persuaded that they are the greatest and most
considerable opposites and adversaries to Antichrist that are in the world. And
therefore there is a double falsehood in this charge. And I think it very
probable that the Jesuits were either the first instruments of Satan in
broaching this reproach, or else are very apt to promote it and set it on; that
by crying down the Ministers of the Gospel as Antichristian, they may make way
for Antichrist to get ground amongst us with the more ease and speed. How easy
were it to demonstrate, that Ministers of the same order and the same judgment
with those that now by foul-mouthed adversaries are branded for Antichristian,
have been principally instrumental under Christ to overthrow Popery, and to
prevent it for recovering its former strength? For the eminent instruments in
this work were, Luther, Melanchthon, and Bucer, and others of Germany. Calvin,
Beza, Iunius, Chamier of France. Zuinglius, Oe^olampadius, Bullinger, Grinaeus,
of Switzerland. Whitaker and Reinolds of England, and diverse others. Besides
the diligent and constant endeavors of Ministers in preaching, clearing,
confirming the Truth, and through the Lords blessing, grounding and
establishing the people in it against Popish errors and Antichristian
corruptions. As for Sectaries, who are so liberal in bestowing such Titles upon
the Ministers of the Gospel, have they not occasionally at least given much
advantage to Antichrist, and as it were opened a back door at which to let him
in again? 1. By seeking to discredit the Ministers of the word and their
Ministry. 2. By drawing many people from the Ordinances, and so preparing them
to take such impressions as Satan and his instruments are ready to put upon
them, and (if opportunity be) to receive the mark of the Beast. 3. By
multiplying divisions and factions, and setting up party against party, and
thereby taking a ready course to make Religion ridiculous in the eyes of
worldly Politicians, filling the minds of the simple with doubting and
amazement, as not knowing which way to take. And, 4. Hereupon ministering
occasion to the Jesuits and Friars to persuade the people that there will be
no certainty, no end of divisions, no remedy against sects and errors, but by
uniting themselves to one visible head the Pope, and returning to the bosom of
the Mother Church of Rome: yea, it is verily thought that many of the Popes
Agents and Emissaries are now very active among us, disguised under the
appearance of Sectaries, laboring to increase contention among us, for the
designs of Antichrist. I conceive it is very observable, that those Sectaries
which cry down the Preachers and Professors of the truth as Antichristian,
have usually come in the rear, and a day after the fight as it were; for when
they that are sound in their principles have set upon the work of reformation,
and through the good hand of God some hopeful beginings have been made, then
have crept in Anabaptists and other Sectaries: So in Germany, Switzerland,
Geneva, England. I conceive, the Devil finding that, upon the bre^king forth of
light, those old errors and corrupt customs will not be digested; he then
stirs up some to pretend to reformation, disguising himself that way, that
he may both hinder the work and blemish it. This it seems was his practice
about the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, to raise up false Christ's and
deceivers, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Romans 3. 31. I Conceive it is clear, that the Apostle, in the two first
Chapters of this Epistle, speaks of a threefold Law: one of which was given
to mankind in general, both Gentiles and Israelites; the other two were
peculiarly delivered to the people of Israel. The first of these, scil. that
which was given to mankind in general, is that which is called the Law of
Nature, consisting of those notions of good and evil, which were left or new
written by the Lord in the minds of men and women, after that the nature of
mankind was corrupted by sin; which Law, though it be now imperfect, yet in
many things it shows the difference between good and evil, and has power
over the Conscience to inform, convince, excuse, and accuse. The other two
delivered peculiarly to the people of Israel, are the Law of Ordinances of
Ceremonies, and the Law moral. And the Apostle proves that none of these Laws
can justify the strictest observers of them: all men and women being naturally
corrupt, and possessed with principles of opposition against the purity and
perfection of the moral Law: and those that are renewed by grace, being but
imperfectly conformed to the Law. As for the Law of Ceremonies: it is in its
own nature no perfect rule of righteousness, but consisting of figures and
shadows, and such earthly and carnal observances as had a mystical
signification of spiritual and heavenly things. The Law of nature is
comprehended in the moral Law, delivered in the Scriptures, first published to
Israel, and then communicated together with the Gospel to the Nations of the
world. So that that which is imperfectly written in the minds of men naturally,
is perfectly declared by the Law written by the finger of God in Tables of
stone, scil. the ten Commandments, and more fully opened in other parts of
Scripture. And therefore though it was expedient for the Apostle to speak
distinctly of them in the former part of his discourse, to convince both
Israelites and Heathens of their unrighteousness and g^ilt; yet in this place I
conceive, the Law of nature and the written Law, may well be comprehended under
one, and so I take the Apostles meaning to be, that by the doctrine of free
justification through the righteousness of Christ, both the Ceremonial and
moral Law are established.

To begin with the former, Doct. 4.
observe this point, That the Law of Ceremonies is established by the doctrine
of the Gospel. Faith establishes the Ceremonial Law. And how this is to be
understood.
Or thus, The doctrine of free justification through the righteousness of Christ
apprehended by faith, establishes the Ceremonial Law.

For the right understanding of this, we may consider,

First, Sect. 1.
In general, What these Ceremonial institutions were.

Secondly, Sect. 2.
How they were misunderstood or abused by ignorant and carnal Israelites.

Thirdly, Sect. 3.
How they are established by the Gospel, or doctrine of justification by faith.

First, 1. Law of Ceremonies instituted of God, and to what end.
These Ceremonial Ordinances were instituted by the Authority of God himself,
as parts of his outward worship and figures of heavenly and spiritual things,
to be observed until the death of Christ. 1. They were instituted by the
authority of God himself: Genesis 17: 9, 10:
So Circumcision was commanded immediately by God himself, to Abraham and his
posterity. So the Lord gave express directions to Moses and Aaron, Exodus, 12. 1,
etc. and 24, 25.
concerning the Ordinance of the Passover, and Moses being forty days and
forty nights in the Mount, received Ceremonial Laws from the Lord to be
observed by the people.

Secondly, Heb. 8. 5.
They were parts of Gods outward worship. Some of them more directly and
properly, as the Sacrifices which were to be offered to the Lord only; so also
the sweet Incense, and diverse others. Other of them, more improperly as things
subservient to the worship of God: as the Altar of burnt-offerings, the Ark,
the Golden Table, etc.

Thirdly, They were figures of Heavenly and spiritual things. Who serve unto
the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God, when
he was about to make the Tabernacle. For see (says he) that thou make all
things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount.

Fourthly, They were to be observed until the death of Christ. Above when he
said, Sacrifice and offerings and burnt-offerings, and offering for sin, thou
would not, neither had pleasure therein, which are offered by the Law. Th^^
said he (that is Christ,) Heb. 10. 8, 9, 10.
Lo, I come to do thy will O God. He takes away the first that he may
establish the second. By the which Will we are sanctified, by the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all. The Ceremonies of the Law were to
continue until Christ offered himself in sacrifice, and then they were to be
taken away, and to give place to his all-sufficient Sacrifice: and accordingly
the Lord Christ himself manifested in the flesh, and made under the Law, did in
his own person observe the Ceremonies of the Law. But at his death, Mat. 27.
the veil of the Temple wa^ rent in twain from the top to the bottom: which I
conceive signified both the abolishing of legal Ceremonies, and the opening of
the way into the heavenly sanctuary by the death of Christ. Now there being
great abundance and varieties of these Ceremonial institutions, I conceive they
may be reduced to four heads. Instituted Ceremonies are of four sorts.


1. Sacraments. 1. Sacraments.


2. Sacrifices.

3. Sacred persons and things subservient to holy uses.

4. Sacred observances.

1. Sacraments; and those ordinarily were two,

1. Circumcision, 1. Circumcision. Its use.
whereby they were solemnly admitted into the Church, and visibly sealed as
parties to the Covenant.

2. The passover, 2. Passover.
wherein they were admitted by faith to feed upon Christ the Lamb of God, who
takes away the sins of the world, slain in the eternal counsel of God before
the foundation of the world, and to be actually Sacrificed in the fullness of
time.

2. Sacrifices. 2. Sacrifices, which were of four kinds.
1. Whole burntofferings. 2. Meat Offerings. 3. Sin Offerings. 4.
Thank-offerings, Vid. Cap. 5*
or Peace Offerings, and among these especially the daily burnt-offering
presented to the Lord morning and evening every day in the year.

3. Sacred persons and things. 3. Sacred persons and things
Such were the Priests and Levites, especially the Highpriest. The holy places,
1. A Tabernacle. 2. A Temple, with the several parts. Consecrated days and
times; the feasts of the passover, of Pentecost, of Tabernacles, the new Moons,
the weekly Sabbaths as limited to the last day of the week, etc. The utensils
of the Sanctuary; the Altar of burntoffering, the golden Altar of Incense, the
Loaves, the Table of shewbread, the Ark, Mercy-seat, etc.

4. Sacred observances. 4. Sacred observances.
Their diverse washings and purifyings, absteining from diverse creatures as
unclean, with very many usages enjoined.

In the second place consider how these things were understood or abused by
ignorant or carnal Israelites. Sect. 2.
I conceive 1. Ceremonies misunderstood by the Jews.
That many of them had little or no knowledge of the mystical signification or
spiritual meaning of these types and shadows: 1. Many had very little knowledge
of their mystical signification.
they did not see Christ in them.

2. That they rested in the outward work. 2. They rested in the outward work
done.
If they were outwardly Circumcised, they looked not after the Circumcision of
the heart, mortification of sin, self-denial, regeneration: having fed upon the
Lamb with unlevened bread in the feast of the Passover, they minded not the
Lamb of God, nor sought after the unleavened bread of sincerity and Truth. When
they offered Sacrifice they looked no farther than the beast that was slain,
not minding the perfect all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ. It seems they
were so far from this, that when Christ according to the ancient Prophesies and
types, had offered up himself in Sacrifice for the sins of the world, they made
his death an occasion of stumbling, and took that to be an argument that he was
not the Christ, which was one of the main evidences that he was the Christ. In
their legal washings, how did they rest in the purifying of the flesh, without
any care to wash their hearts from wickedness? Did not they rest in the
High Priest of the order of Aaron, without minding an eternal High Priest after
the order of Melchisedeck? A multitude of such instances might be given.

Thirdly, 3. They had more care to observe these than the moral Law.
They seemed to have minded the outward observation of these ceremonial
ordinances more than the keeping of the moral Law. So the Lord complains by
the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1.
that they rebelled against him, knew him not, forsook him, provoked him to
anger, revolted from him, had hands full of blood: and yet it seems they were
very forward in the ceremonial observances, bringing a multitude of Sacrifices,
burnt offerings of Rams, fat of fed beasts, Bullocks, Lambs, He-Goats. Though
these were more costly, yet they were more forward in these services than in
moral duties, cleansing their hearts and hands from sin, etc. Is there not a
notable evidence of this in the actings of those Jews who killed the Lord of
life? Joh. 18. 28, 29, 38.
They seemed to be so scrupulous in point of Ceremony, chapter 19. 4.
that they would not enter into the Court or Judgement-Hall, least they should
be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover, ver. 13.
and therefore Pilate the Judge was fain to come out of the Court and wait upon
them to hear what they could say against him, and it seems being wearied with
going in and out, at last he removed and sat upon a Judgment Seat without
doors: in the mean time, these wicked murderers were so violently bent to shed
innocent blood, that they defiled themselves with the guilt of a most heinous
sin, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing of a Camel.

Fourthly, 4. They rested on it as Righteousness to Justification.
It seems they relied upon these Ceremonies, or the observation of them, as a
part of that righteousness whereby they hoped to be justified in the sight of
God. The Lord having planted a Church at Antioch, Act. 15. 1.
Certain men which came down from Judea, taught the Brethren, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be saved. Says the Apostle,
Gal. 5. 3, 4.
I testify again to every man that is Circumcised* that he is a debtor to do
the whole Law. Christ is become of none effect to you. Whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. Does not this intimate that
they relied on the Ceremony of Circumcision, in part for justification, and
under Circumcision I understand other Ceremonies of the Law.

Fifthly, I conceive it is very clear, that they thought these legal Ceremonies
were to be obserfor ever unto the end of the world. 5. They thought these
should be perpetuated to the ^^d of the world.
So in the place mentioned before, they said, Except ye be Circumcised, etc.
And so it seems they counted it blasphemy to say that the Lord Jesus should
change the customs delivered by Moses. Act. 6. 13, 14.


Thirdly, Sect. 3.
The Question is, How the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning free justification
through the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, How faith does
establish the Law of Ceremonies.
does establish this Law of Ceremonies. To this I Answer, 1. Negatively.

2. Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, 1. Negatively not continuing he^m.
This doctrine of the Gospel does not establish the Law of Ceremonies by
confirming and continuing the observation of it, but on the contrary, take it
away. So Stephen b^ing accused for saying that Jesus Christ Act. 7. 37.
should change the customs delivered by Moses, told the Jews, that Moses said
unto the children of Israel, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto
you of your Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear. The Lord Christ was the
great Propher, by whose spirit Moses and the rest of the Prophets were
inspired. And as he had directed Moses to deliver these Ceremonial ordinances
to Israel, to be observed until his manifestation in the flesh, and departure
out of the world again: so now he was to be heard as one of unquestionable
authority, declaring unto the Church his will and pleasure, concerning the
ceasing of these observances. That passage between the Lord Christ and the
woman of Samaria, is notable to this purpose: He by telling her of her sinful
course, had convinced her thus far, that she made this acknowledgement, Sir I
perceive thou art a Prophet, and therefore it seems thought that he might be
able to resolve a Question of great moment, Joh. 4. 19, 20. 21.
wherein she desired satisfaction, and that was this, Our Fathers worshipped in
this Mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place wherein men out to
worship the Father. I conceive, the occasion of this controversy between the
Jews and Samaritans, was this; The Samaritans were the posterity of those
Heathens whom Salmanasser King of Assyria had placed there instead of the
Israelites whom he carried away Captive, and embraced a corrupt Religion mixed
of Heathenisme and Judaisme. Toward the end of the Persian Monarchy, Manasses
the Brother of Iaddus the High Priest married the Daughter of Sanballat a prime
man of Samaria: whereupon he was required of his Brother to lay down his
office, his Marriage being condemned by the Law. Manasses acquainted Sanballat
with his loss, and let him know that though he loved his Daughter, yet he would
not for her sake lose so great a dignity as that of the Priesthood. Sanballat
answered him, that if he would keep his Daughter for his wife, he would make
him an High Priest, and with the license and consent of Darius King of Persia
build a Temple upon Mount Gerizim for that purpose. But Darius being overthrown
in battle soon after by Alexander of Macedon, he made this suit to him,
bringing him eight thousand Soldiers to serve him in the Wars, and readily
obtained his desire. So that this became a receptacle to diverse fugitive or
apostate Jews, who were guilty of breaking the Law by pro^aning the Sabbath,
eating meats forbidden, or the like crimes. This Temple having stood about 200
years, was ruined by Hircanus, about a hundred years before Christ his coming
in the flesh or more. Now as they that embrace errors and corrupt inventions
of men in things pertaining to Religion and religious worship, are obstinate in
cleaving to their fancies: so the Samaritans would make comparisons between
their Temple which was founded without warrant from God, yea, against his word,
and the Temple of Jerusalem which the Lord owned for the peculiar place of his
worship. Yea, and after their Temple was laid desolate, they seemed to please
themselves with the imagination of the holiness of the ground on which it once
stood; and therefore says the woman, our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain,
etc. as if Mount Gerizim were still an holy Mount, though the Temple was down:
and so there was great enmity between the Jews and Samaritans. But observe the
Answer which the Lord Christ gave her, Jesus says unto her, Woman believe me,
the hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship; for
salvation is of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and Truth, for the Father
seeks such to wrship him* God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and in Truth. ver. 25. 26.
The woman says unto him, I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ:
when he is come he will tell us all things. Jesus says unto her, I that speak
unto thee am he. I conceive in this Answer, the Lord Christ shows,

1. That both the Jews and Samaritans were in an error: for it seems both of
them thought that the Lord had confined his most solemn worship to one certain
place throughout all ages, as one party said at Mount Gerizim, the other at
Jerusalem; and that the Ceremonies and Sacrifices there used should be always
continued: Bus the Lord Christ told the woman, that God had not limited himself
to either of these places, and that the time was now at hand, when it should be
as free to worship God in any other place, as in either of these.

2. He passes sentence for the Jews against the Samaritans in this
Controversy. So far as concerned the present state of things, says he, ye
(scil. ye Samaritans) worship ye know not what: We (scil. we Jews) know what we
worship, for salvation is of the Jews. Ye Samaritans do ye know not what in
your worshipping, ye know not God aright, ye have no warrant from his word,
either for your Temple, once standing on this Mount, or for limiting the
worship of God to this place, or for the way of worship; Ye blindly follow the
groundless Traditions of your Fathers: But we know what we worship, we follow
the directions of God himself, delivered by Moses and the Prophets, both for
the place and manner of Gods worship, for salvation is of the Jews. They are
the Church of God to whom God has committed his oracles, teaching the way of
Salvation, and of whom as concerning the flesh, Christ the Savior of the world
was to come.

3. He confirms and amplifieth the first part of his Answer, showing that the
Lord in a short time would set up a more spiritual way of worship in his
Church, more suitable to his spiritual Nature, to which these carnal ordinances
and Ceremonial ordinances should give place.

Secondly, 2. Affirmatively.
I Answer affirmatively, that the doctrine of the Gospel, 1. showing how
Ceremonies attained their proper end.
and in particular, this Gospel-doctrine of free justification through the
righteousness of Christ, does establish the Ceremonial Law. For,

1. Then is a thing established, 1. Leading to Christ.
when it attaineth its proper end. Now by the Gospel, the Law of Ceremonies
attained its proper end: For,

1. The end of it was, to be a Schoolmaster to bring men to Christ.
Circumcision sealed the righteousness of faith, which Circumcision it self
could not give, but was to be found in Christ: it taught men to look after the
Circumcision of the heart which was to be had in Christ alone, by union with
him, by faith, and partaking of his spirit. The Passover pointed out unto them
Christ, the Lamb of God without spot, which takes away the sins of the world.
The Sacrifices directed them to Christ the perfect Sacrifice. The blood of the
Sacrifices led them to the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, which alone was
sufficient to take away sin. Now these and other Ceremonies attained their end
in Christ, and in the justification of sinners through the blood, death,
satisfaction, righteousness of Christ apprehended and applied by faith,
according to the doctrine of the Gospel, and so this Law of Ceremonies was
established, and the validity of it declared. But on the other side, they that
pretend so much zeal for Circumcision and other Ceremonies of the Law, making
it a part of the matter of their justification, and resting in the bare outward
observance as pleasing to the Lord in it self did cross the main end of the
Ceremonial Law, and propose such false ends as were impossible to be attained.

Secondly, 2. Showing that they were not empty appearances, but Types of great
things.
The doctrine of the Gospel, making Christ the end of the Law for
righteousness, in whom wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption and
salvation alone is to be had, shows that the Ceremonial Ordinances were no
empty shadows and vain appearances, like those of the Heathen, but significant
signs and Types full of deep Mysteries of exceeding great weight and
importance, pointing at the person of the Lord Jesus, his office, his actings,
his sufferings, and the fruits and benefits of these: whereas they that so
stiffely opposed the strict observation of the Ceremonies of the Law against
the doctrine of Christ delivered in the Gospel, what did they make of them but
begerly elements, empty appearances without fruit, use or profit? So that the
Preachers of the Gospel did honor the Ceremonial Law, though they took away
the observation of them, by declaring the substance whereof they were shadows;
and the observers of the Ceremonies in the times of the Gospel did greatly
disparage them.

Thirdly, 3. Illustrating by them it self, and the great Mystery of Christ.
The doctrine of the Gospel does still establish the Ceremonial Law, as an
illustration of the mystery of Christ in the Gospel, and shows that great use
may still be made of them that way: for the Ceremonies were as it were visible
Prophesies of Christ, and the things of Christ. And as Prophesies are dark
before they are fulfilled, but clear after they are accomplished, and do much
illustrate the events: so these Ceremonies were obscure resemblances of Christ;
but now since what they signified is fulfilled, the comparing the Types with
the Antitypes gives much light.

The Use which I intend to make of this point is, Use 1.
to compare some of the principal Ceremonies of the old Testament, with the
Mysteries of the Gospel, that so we may more clearly see how they are
established by Christ, and that we may improve them for our edification. And
first to begin with the Sacraments of the Ceremonial Law; and there in,

1. Circumcision. Sect. 1.
The institution of this Sacrament is laid down, 1. Circumcision instituted.
Genesis the sevententh: says the Lord to Abraham, This is my Covenant which
ye shall keep between me and you, Genesis 17. 10, 11.
and thy seed after thee: every man child among you shall be Circumcised, and
ye shall Circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the
Covenant betwixt me and you. Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and what it signified.
And elsewhere Moses says to the people of Israel, Circumcise the foreskin of
your heart and be no more stiff-necked. This shows that the Circumcision of
the flesh directed them to the inward Circumcision of the heart, the
mortification of sinful lusts, inordinate affections, Romans 2. 29*
and all sorts of corruptions. To which agrees that of the Apostle,
Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God. Romans 4. 11.
The same Apostle says that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision and seal
of the righteousness of faith. These Scriptures compared together, show that
Circumcision did seal the Covenant of Grace between God and his people: on the
one side confirming the promises of God to them, as a seal added to the blood
of his Covenant, on the other side engaging them to answer the ends of the
Covenant by Circumcising their hearts, mortifying their corruptions, and
forsaking their sins. The sum of Gods, promises sealed by the Sacrament of
Circumcision, is delivered in these words, I will establish my Covenant between
me and thee, Genesis 7. 17.
and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to
be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee. I conceive this contains as
much as all the promises of the Gospel: For what is there in all the promises
concerning pardon of sin, justification, adoption, the graces of
Sanctification, the comforts and joys of the holy Ghost, Communion with God,
strength against temptation, protection against the assaults of Satan and the
world, hearing and answering of prayers, support under afflictions, victory
over death, everlasting life and salvation, and other promises and privileges
granted to Believers in the Gospel, I say, what is there in all these which is
not comprehended in this promise, I will be their God? God is all sufficient,
he is all in all, and when he gives himself he gives all good things and
blessings; and this was sealed by Circumcision: Now this promise and Covenant
is fulfilled in Christ; for out of Christ, men and women are both strangers and
Enemies to God, and have no interest in him. The Lord is so far from being
their God, that he is their Enemy, says the Apostle, When we were Enemies we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Romans 5. 10.
The best of men and women are in a state of enmity with God until they are
reconciled by Christ. And that Covenant sealed by Circumcision wherein the Lord
promised to be the God of Abraham and of his seed was the same for substance
with that where he says, Genesis 12. 2, 3.
I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing, Genesis
22. 18.
and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee, and in
thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. I conceive the promise of
Christ is twice included here: when it is said, I will make thee a blessing;
and again, in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Abraham was
made a blessing, and the Nations and families of the Earth were blessed in him,
Romans 4. 3, 11.
in this regard, because Christ according to the flesh or humane nature was to
issue out of his loins; according to that, in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed, that is in Christ. So that Abraham found that in
Christ which was sealed to him by Circumcision, Abraham believed God, and it
was counted to him for righteousness, and he received the sign of Circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised.
Circumcision attained its end in Christ, and he was the substance of this
shadow: in him believers are reconciled to God, and he becomes their God, and
they are made his people being justified by his righteousness; and by his
spirit they are circumcised in heart, their corruptions are mortified, and
their body of sin destroyed, which is an evidence of their union with Christ,
and justification by him: and this may move us to labor to be found in Christ,
that we may be circumcised in heart, that the power of sin may be killed in us,
that we may be conformed unto his death, Cor. 4. 11.
our sinful lusts and affections being crucified by virtue of his death on the
Cross, that so as the Apostle says, we may be circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh by the Circumcision of Christ.

2. In as much as circumcision was a seal of that Covenant whereby God gave
himself to his people to be their God in Christ, and a seal of the
righteousness of says, and so of the pardon of sin and justification through
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, It is clear, that all the
Arguments of the Anabaptists fall to the ground, which they build either upon
the pretended difference of Baptism and circumcision, or of the Covenants
sealed by them, or upon the incapacitie of Infants: for it is evident that the
same Covenant which is confirmed by Baptism was also sealed by circumcision,
and if Infants under the old Testament were capable of circumcision, how are
they made incapable of Baptism under the Gospel? And accordingly you may
observe how the Apostle compares baptism and circumcision together, Col. 2.
10, 11, 12.
and shows how the latter comes in place of the former; for having warned
believers not to hearken to those who would bring them in bondage unto Jewish
Ceremonies, he tells them, ye are complete in hi, (scil. in Christ) and so
need not to observe those shadows of the Law, in whom also ye are circumcised
with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins
of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ. So that they have the same
circumcision in Christ which their Fathers had under the Law, and therefore
needed not the outward circumcision: But lest any should think thus, our faith
under the Gospel needs outward helps to confirm it, as well as theirs under
the old Testament, he adds these words, ver. 12, Buried with him in baptism,
wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God
who has raised him from the dead: as if he had said, instead of Circumcision
ye have the Sacrament of baptism, signifying the same thing, and sealing the
Covenant of grace and righteousness of faith.

Secondly, Sect. 2.
The other Sacrament was that of the Passover: 2. Passover instituted.
this was instituted by the Lord while Israel was in Egypt, Ex. 12. 3, etc.
and was first celebrated that same night that they came out of that house of
Bondage. The sum of the ordinance was this, that every family should choose a
Lamb, a male of the first year without blemish: they were to separate it from
the rest of the flock on the tenth day of the Month, setting apart four days
until the fourteenth day at even: when it was to be killed, they were to take
of the blood and strike it upon the two side-posts, and on the upper door-posts
of the houses wherein the Lambs was to be eaten, and the same night they were
commanded to eat the flesh of the Lamb roasted with fire, and with unleavened
bread, and bitter herbs: but if any family were too little for a Lamb, it was
to join with the next, and they were to eat it in have with their loins
girded, their shoes on their feet, and their staff in their hand, as men
prepared to travel. The reason that was given for it is this in effect, that
the Lord that night would pass through the Land o^ Egypt and smite all the
first born, ver. 12, 13.
both of man and beast among the Egyptians; but would spare those houses of the
Israelite^ when he saw the blood of the Lamb on the door-posts. This in it self
was a great deliverance, but there was a far greater mystery and deliverance
intended, The mystical signification of the Passover.
which was accomplished in Christ.

First then, 1. Purity and perfection of Christ.
The Lamb was a figure of Christ whom John Baptist according to his office
pointed out to the people, saying, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world: Joh. 1. 29, 30.
and another day, Behold the Lamb of God. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
And the Apostle says, Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us. 1 Pet. 1.
18, 19.
And the Apostle Peter says, Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
Silver and Gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your
Fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish
and without spot. As the Lamb appointed for the Passover was to be without
blemish, so Christ the Lamb of God was without all blemish or spot of sin
actual or original, being conceived by the divine power of the holy Ghost in
the womb of a pure Virgin. Humane Nature of Christ.
Again as the Lamb of the Passover was taken from the rest of the flock, so
Christ in regard of his humane Nature was taken from the rest of mankind, and
made one person with the Son of God, that he might be all-sufficient for this
great end, scil. to take away the sins of the world. The Lamb for the Passover
was set apart certain days before it was slain, Christ's being set apart for
this work.
Christ was set apart in the eternal counsel of God, foreordained before the
foundation of the world. ver. 20.
And as the blood of the Lamb was to be put upon the door posts of the
Israelites houses, that so the destroyer might pass over them, and not destroy
any of them; whereas the firstborn were slain in those houses that were not
marked with the blood of the Paschal Lamb: Sprinkling of the blood of Christ
for salvation.
So the most precious blood of Christ is to be sprinkled by faith upon the
souls of Believers; his blood, death, satisfaction, righteousness, is to be
applied to their souls by faith unfeigned, that so the destroying curse of the
Law, and wrath of God may not abide upon them, but pass over them; while others
who have no interest in this Lamb of God and his most precious blood, lie open
to the curse of the Law, and the wrath to come. So that we see also how this
Ceremony and Sacrament of the Passover attained its end in Christ, and is
accomplished in him, and in that sense established. And in particular, this is
declared in the doctrine of justification through the satisfaction and
righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith: For as the houses marked with the
blood of the Paschal Lamb escaped the destroyer: so those souls who by faith
unfeigned, apply the blood and righteousness of Christ to themselves, are
delivered from condemnation, and accepted of God as righteous. Let us labor to
improv^ this,

First, As the Israelites were never delivered out of Egyptian bondage until
they kept the Passover: 1. Use of the Mystical part of the Passover.
so let us assure our selves, that As it had been impossible for any men and
women to get out of the slavery of sin and Satan, Keep the spiritual Passover
with actual and lively faith.
unless the Lamb of God had been slain for th^^ Redemption: so none are
actually redeemed and delivered from this woeful bondage, until they keep the
Passover in a spiritual manner, until they embrace Christ the Lamb of God, and
feed upon him by the lively actings and exercisings of faith unfeined. Many may
be convinced of their misery, and sigh for hard bondage as the Israelites did
in Egypt, but they cannot be made free unless they keep this Passover. If the
Son shall make you free, Joh. 8. 36.
ye shall be free indeed: If ye be found in Christ, and feed upon this Lamb of
God, ye shall be free indeed, not otherwise.

Secondly, Use 2.
Admire with all Thankfulness the infinite goodness of God, Admire and be
thankful to God.
who before the foundation of the world, provided such a precious remedy for
poor sinners, even a Lamb without blemish and without spot, ^eparated from the
rest of the flock; one of the seed of the woman, set apart from among all the
rest of the children of men, and personally united to the eternal Son of God,
that so he might be a full and perfect propitiation for sin,

Thirdly, Use 3.
As Christ is a Lamb without spot, so let all that will be saved by him,
Imitate Christ in his spotless life and nature.
labor to be more conformed to him in holiness, purging themselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, 1 John 3. 3.
for every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure. What
is that but an unsound self-deceiving hope, which does not stir up the soul to
conform it self to Christ in purity and holiness?

Fourthly, Use 4.
Labor with all diligence for faith unfeigned, Get an unfeigned faith.
whereby ye may sprinkle the most precious blood of Christ upon your Souls,
applying his death, suffering, satisfaction, righteousness to your selves, that
ye may escape the destroying curse of the Law, and wrath of God, that being
justified by faith in the blood and righteousness of Christ, there may be no
condemnation unto you. What had it profited the Israelites that the Lamb for
the Passover was slain, if they had not followed the Lord his direction, in
putting the blood upon the door posts of their houses? What shall it profit any
that live under the Gospel that Christ the Lamb of God is slain, and in the
preaching of the word, set forth as it were crucified before their eyes, if
they do not sprinkle their souls in particular with his blood, rightly applying
his satisfaction and righteousness to themselves? Will not the Lord look upon
them rather as Egyptians then Israelites, and deal with them accordingly?

Fifthly, Use 5.
As they did eat the Lamb at the feast of the Passover: Keep the Passover
always but especially at the Lords Supper, with love and sincerity.
So let Christians endeavor every day to keep this feast unto the Lord, by
feeding upon this living bread, upon the body and blood of Christ, in lively
actings of faith upon him; and more especially in the use of his ordinances,
his word, and the holy Supper. As they kept the Passover with unleavened
bread, so let us keep the feast, not with old leven, neither with the leven of
malice and of wickedness, 1 Cor. 5. 8.
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Mat. 16. 6. 12.
The Lord Christ warned his Disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
and of the Sadduces; Luke 12. 1.
and though at the first they mistook his meaning, yet afterward they
understood it of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces; so he said unto his
Disciples, Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees which is Hypocrisy: So that
all manner of evil outward and inward, in heart, in opinion, in conversation,
may be comprehended under this Leaven; and they that will rightly feast with
Christ, and feed upon him, must strive to purge out this Leaven of sin and
error, and keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

Sixthly, Use 6.
This feast of unleavened bread which was joined with the Passover was to be
kept seven days, Keep it more and more toward perfection.
and seven in Scripture is noted for a number of perfection, and therefore let
Christians labor to purge out more and more the old Leaven of sin and
corruption, and to walk in sincerity and truth all the days of their life, even
till the seventh day; that is, until they come to keep an eternal feast and
Sabbath of Rest with Christ in his glorious Kingdom.

Seventhly, Use 7.
As they kept the feast with their loins girded: Be ever waiting ready for the
Lord.
So let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves
like unto men that wait for the Lord, when he will return from the Wedding,
that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately: Luke 22.
35, 36.
Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching.
They that wear long garments need to gird them up, when they are either to walk
or to work. They that would have communion with him need to call in, and gather
up their straggling thoughts, their wandering minds, their loose affections, to
unite the powers of their souls, to fix them upon Christ, and the things of
Christ, that they may be always ready for any way or work of Christ. Wherefore
gird up the loins of your mind, 1 Pet. 1. 13.
be sober and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at
the revelation of Jesus Christ.

As they were to eat the Passover with their shoes on their feet, and their
staff in their hand, as being ready for their departure out of Egypt: so let
those that will rightly keep the spiritual Passover, and feed upon Christ, be
affected as strangers and sojourners, expecting daily their departure out of
this world, laboring to be ready to enter into the heavenly Canaan: How should
they condemn that earthly mindedness, when they are of such a temper, as if
they had a continuing City here, not seriously seeking one to come?

Eighthly, Use 8.
They were to eat the Passover with bitter herbs; Feed on the Lamb of God with
godly sorrow.
let those then that would indeed feed upon Christ unto eternal life, feed upon
this Lamb of God with bitter herbs of Godly sorrow for sin, Zach. 10. 12.
holy anger and indignation against themselves, afflicting their souls, looking
upon him whom they have pierced by their sins, and mourning for him as one
mourns for his only Son, and being in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn. Let them feed upon Christ by faith with
self-denial (which is as it were a bitter herb to the flesh) denying themselves
in their dearest lusts and carnal affections, not sparing the right hand or the
right eye. Let them join repentance with faith, otherwise they can never keep
the feast according to the mind of Christ.

Lastly, Ye may read of the Law of the Passover and unleavened bread; Ult.
Improved as a pledge of our Redemption.
and presently after that the ordinance of the first fruits. Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, Lev. 23. 5. 6, etc. 10, 11.
when ye be come into Land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest
thereof, then ye shall bring a sheafe of the first fruits of your harvest unto
the Priest, and he shall wave this sheafe before the Lord to be accepted for
you, on the morrow after the Sabbath the Priest shall wave it. It is conceived
that this Sabbath, or day of rest, was the first day of unleavened bread, scil.
the fifteenth day of the first month, on whatsoever day of the week it fell,
but in the year wherein Christ suffered, it fell upon the last day of the week,
so that it was a double Sabbath; the paschal Sabbath and the weekly Sabbath
meeting together upon the same day. Now the sheaf of first fruits was to be
waved or offered before the Lord on the morrow after the Sabbath, which was the
day on which Christ rose from the dead. See how the Apostle applies this,
Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep.
1 Cor. 15. 20.
It seems there was such an exact agreement and correspondence between the
Type and the Antetype, the shadow and the substance, that the Lord Christ arose
from the dead, the very same day that the sheafe of first fruits was to be
offered; and he arose as the first fruits of them that slept, or of the dead. I
conceive the meaning is, that as the first fruits being offered to God, did
sanctify the whole increase of the fruits of the earth that year; so Christ as
the first fruits of the dead arose from death to eternal life and glory; and in
himself, and his resurrection, did as it were offer up to God the dead bodies
of all his members, not always to lie under the power of death and corruption,
but to be raised to immortality and everlasting glory. Let us labor then to
have part in the first resurrection, rising with Christ by virtue of his
quickening spirit to newness of life, that this may be an earnest and sure
evidence unto us of a second resurrection to everlasting life. So much for the
Sacraments of the Ceremonial Law.

CHAP. IV.
SEcondly, Of the second Sacrifices and their meaning.
in the next place follow the Sacrifices. It seems there were but few sorts
of creatures used for Sacrifices. Of sensible creatures such as have life and
sense, What kind of Beasts and used in Sacrices.
but five sorts: whereof three were of four-footed beasts scil. Bullocks,
Sheep, and Goats, old or young, and so comprehending under them Calves, Lambs
and Kids; Clean and Meek.
and two sorts of fowls, as turtle doves and young pigeons. Thief were
creatures that were meek and gentle above many others, and such as were in a
special manner subject and serviceable to men: so the Lord Christ who was
appointed to be a Sacrifice to the justice of God, Mat. 11. 29.
was meek and lowly in heart, Act. 8. 32.
He was lead as a sheep to the slaughter, Phil. 1. 2, 6, 7, 8.
and like a Lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth: who being
in the form of God thought it robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a se^vant and was made in the
likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. None that are unclean
or cruel, used.
Lions, Bears, Tigres, Leopards, wild-beasts, beasts of prey, fierce and cruel
creatures; Eagles, Hawks, Vultures, or other ravenous fouls were not appointed
for Sacrifice: These were not fit to represent the Lord Christ in his state of
humiliation, in his suffering condition, as he was appointed to be a Sacrifice
for sin: Rev. 5. 5.
It is true Christ is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, I conceive to
represent him in regard of his mighty powers, in protecting his Church, and
subduing his enemies, but not to resemble him as a Sacrifice, for so he was in
a state of suffering and of service; and therefore Christians according to his
command should learn of him who is meek and lowly of heart, and be content to
be conformed to him in sufferings, taking up his Cross and following him. They
should be useful and serviceable as Christ was, who was figured by such
creatures offered in Sacrifice.

2. Ye may note in general, that an offering presented to the Lord, was called
in the Hebrew Korban of (...) to draw near. (...)
This may teach us that none was fit to offer an offering to the Lord, but only
the Lord Jesus Christ, and those that come to God by him; for all mankind since
the fall were a far off at a great distance from God, but the Lord Jesus Christ
being God and Man, is nigh unto the Father. In regard of his Godhead, he is the
only begotten Son of God in the bosom of the Father, as he is man personally
united to the Son of God, he is one person with the Son of God, and being
without spot of sin, he came near to God to present himself an offering and a
Sacrifice unto him. Secondly, none can come nigh unto the Lord to offer any
spiritual Sacrifice to him, or to have any inward communion with him, but in
and by the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13.
But now in Christ Jesus, Ye, who sometime were afar off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ. Christ being nigh to God, drew nigh unto him actually with the
sacrifice and offering of himself, and so made way for sinners who were afar
off from God by their sin and guilt, to draw nigh to God by virtue of his
blood; that applying his blood, satisfaction, and righteousness to themselves,
they might be made nigh unto God in regard of their estate, being taken into
Covenant with him as his confederates, and so into Communion, and that they
might draw nigh unto him from time to time, in offering spiritual services and
sacrifices to him by Jesus Christ. Let us all see our great need of Christ,
there is no coming nigh unto God but by him, neither in respect of our estate,
nor of our services, but in Christ there is access to be had in both respects.
But more especially,

First, Sect. 1.
The burntoffering. This was called in Hebrew (...) which signifies ascending
or ascension, Special consideration of burntofferings.
because all the flesh of the beast being burned upon the Altar was to ascend
or go up toward heaven in fire: Lev. 1. (...) the meaning of it 1. in its
ascension.
so the Lord Jesus Christ when he was here on earth in the flesh, offered up
himself to his father in heaven; the infinite virtue of his Sacrifice ascending
to the Throne of God, for the appeasing of his wrath and satisfying of his
justice for sin. This may teach us also that we should present our whole
selves, souls and bodies, sacrifices living holy acceptable to God, and that
they which will thus present themselves to the Lord must be heavenly minded,
their souls and hearts must be raised and ascend upward: How many carnal,
outward, dead hearted services are dropped down before the Lord, that never
ascend upward, having nothing of heaven nor of Christ his spirit in them.

Secondly, 2. The offerer laid his hand on the head thereof. ver. 4.
He that offered the burntoffering was to lay his hand upon the head of the
creature that was to be slain: so he that will have benefit by the sacrifice of
Christ, must lay hold of him by the hand of faith.

Thirdly, 3. The Bullock to be killed and the blood poured out.
The Bullock for the burntoffering was to be killed, the blood of it to be
poured out: this, 1. was fulfilled in Christ, according as it was Prophesied of
him, Isa. 53. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12.
He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, He was cut off out of the land of
the living, ver. 9. His grave and death are expressly mentioned, thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, ver. 12. He has poured out his soul unto death.
And Daniel Prophesied that Messiah or Christ should be cut off or slain, Dan.
9. 26.
and without shedding of blood there is no remission.

1. This may move Christians to pity, Use 1.
and earnestly pray for the poor blinded Israelites, that the Lord would be
pleased to take the vail from their hearts: Heb. 9. 22.
Is it not lamentable to consider that they should make the Cross and death of
Christ a stumbling block, whereas his death and sufferings are so clearly
foretold in the Law and the Prophets which themselves acknowledge to be the
word of God? Yea, all those millions of sacrific^s slain and offered according
to the Lord his appointment, did clearly foreshew the death of Christ, and the
shedding of his most precious blood for the sins of the world. But how is man
left to the darkness of his own mind, and blinded by Satan?

Secondly, Use 2.
See here how odious sin is in the sight of God which nothing could wash away
but the blood of Christ, figured by the death and blood of these legal
Sacrifices: for it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should
take away sins, Heb. 10. 4.
these did signify the blood of the Son of God infinitely more precious, of
sufficient virtue to wash away the greatest and foulest sins. How should we
tremble at sin? Should we not look upon every sin as bloody, as murtherous,
either as slaying the sinner himself, or as killing his Savior? either thy sin
must be washed away with the blood of Christ, or it will cost thee more then
thy best blood is worth.

Thirdly, Use 3.
This is for comfort to souls burdened and oppressed with the guilt of sin,
that that one sacrifice even Christ himself, figured by so many millions o^
sacrifices is offered to satisfy for sin; Act. 20. 28.
that that blood figured by the blood of so many offerings is shed to take away
sin; and that God has purchased his Church with his own blood: it is the blood
of God because of him who is God and man in one person, 1 John 1. 7.
though not the blood of the Godhead. The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God
cleanses from all sin; it is of infinite value, it is of more virtue then all
the bloody sacrifices of the Law.

4. Woe unto those wretches that dare to swear profanely by this precious
blood, or by those bleeding wounds of the Son of God. Is not this to trample
under foor the blood of the Covenant?

4. Use 4.
The death of these sacrifices may teach us (...) kill our dearest sins, to
slay our lusts, to mortify our corruptions: Romans 12. 1.
Christ did not dye for sin that thou might live in sin, but that thou
might dye to sin, and live to him ye righteousness and holiness. I beseech
you therefore Brethren by the mercies of God, that (...) present your bodies a
Sacrifice living, holy and acceptable to God; a Sacrifice and therefore slain
and yet a living Sacrifice. Present your selves a sacrifice dying to sin, and a
sacrifice living quickened with grace, living in the spirit. Again, among all
the burnt offerings, ye may take particular note of the continual burnt
offerings sacrificed to the Lord every day, Numb. 28. 3.
one Lamb in the morning and another in the evening: so the people of God had
need every day morning and evening to flee to Christ, and to apply his
sacrifice and satisfaction to themselves, and through him to seek pardon of God
for their daily sins and infirmities, every day sprinkling the blood of Christ
the Lamb of God upon their souls.

2. This may stir up Christians daily to offer up a morning and evening
sacrifice to the Lord, in confession of sins, prayers, praises, thanksgivings.
We read of special blessings which the Lord vouchsafed at those times. 2 King.
3. 20.
The King of Judah, Israel, and Edom, with their Army, were in danger to perish
for want of water, and in this great distress they had recourse to the Prophet
Elisha: now it is said ver. 20, and it came to pass in the morning when the
meat offering was offered, that behold there came water by the way of Edom, and
the country was filled with water. So Dan^ul having prayed with much
importunity for the Church which was then in captivity, says, Dan. 9. 21.
the man Gabriel (to wit the Angel Gabriel in the likeness of a man) being
caused to fly swiftly, touched him about the time of the evening oblation, and
so (as it follows there) opened the counsels of God unto him according to his
request. I conceive it is very probable, that the people of Israel in their
several houses did use to pour out their prayers to God about the time of the
morning and evening sacrifices; and that Daniel and others of the godly, when
they were in captivity did observe those times though then the Temple was
destroyed, and the daily sacrifice interrupted.

A second sort of Sacrifices were sin offerings, Sect. 2. Sin offering
considered, opened and applied.
this kind of offering is called in the Hebrew expressly (...)
Sin, because in a typical or figurative way, the guilt or sin of him for whom
the sacrifice was offered, was laid upon the creature sacrificed. Lev. 4. 3.
Its name.
So the Apostle shows that God has made him (scil. Christ) to be ^in for us
who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. The sinoffering called
sin, figured the imputation of men's sin to Christ, who had no sin of his own,
bnt voluntarily took upon him the guilt of men's sins, as a surety takes upon
him another debt.

1. See here how exceedingly the Son of God abased himself for sinners, Use 1.
Condescension of Christ.
as to stand under the guilt of numberless sins. If we consider the infinite
holiness, glory and Majesty of Christ, is it not evident, that this degree of
humiliation and abasement passes all understanding; Admire therefore his
infinite love and unconceivable goodness which moved him hereunto: Learn highly
to exalt and honor him.

2. See here the baseness of sin, 2. Baseness of sin.
which the abased the Son of God, when he took the guil^ of it upon him, out of
compassion to sinner^ No outward estate, condition, calling, employment, does
so abase any, as the least sin does, in the Lord his account; and yet ho^ vain
is the corrupt heart of man, in being ashamed of many other things more the of
sin: yea, how many are there that ar^ ashamed of holi^ess, and ready to glory
i^ sin.

3. If Christ did thus abase himself for the sins of others, 3. Humiliation of
our selves.
as to be made a sin-offering or to be made sin by imputation: How should we
take shame to our selves, and be exceedingly humbled and abased for our own
sins As David, 2 Samuel 24. 12*
I have sinned greatly in that I ha^ done, I have done very foolishly. And
(...) I abhor my self, Job 42. 6.
and repent in dust (...) ashes.

2. The blood of the sin-offering was to sprinkled seven times before the Lord,
2. The manner of sprinkling the blood of it.
and se^ is noted for a number of perfection. The Sou^ and Consciences of
sinners are so deeply sla^ned and defiled with sin, Lev. 4. 6. Seven times
before the Lord,
that they nee^ much purging. How often should we labo^ by ^aith to sprinkle
the blood of Christ upon our souls, and to apply it to our selves This blood of
the sin-offering was to b^ sprinkled seven times before the vail of (...) holy
place: or before the Vail.
so it is the blood of Christ (...) makes way for believers to the mercy-seat
which their sins had shut up against the^ Having therefore Brethren boldness to
ente^ into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he
has consecrated for us through the vail, Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22.
that is to say, his flesh: and having an high priest over the house of God,
let us draw near with a true ^eart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water: with hearts and souls sprinkled with the blood of Christ by faith, and
so purged from the guilt of sin; and bodies washed with pure water, being
baptized outwardly and inwardly with water, and the sanctifying graces of the
holy spirit.

3. Some of the blood was to be put upon the horns of the sweet incense Altar,
3. Sprinkled on the horns of the Altar.
scil. the Golden Altar: so Christians are to ground their faith and confidence
in offering up the Incense of prayer upon the blood and Mediation of Christ,
Lev. 4. 7. its meaning.
having no hope of acceptance, but only through him and his satisfaction and
intercession. The Golden Altar being a type of Christ as he intercedeth for his
people. The blood of the sin-offering put upon this Altar may intimate unto us
that Christ intercedeth with his Father, and pleads for his people, by
presenting to him his blood, the merit of his death, and fullness of his
satisfaction, which he underwent, not for himself (who had no need) but for
them.

4. The fat of the Inwards, 4. Fat of etc. Sin-offering to be burnt. Its
meaning.
Kidneys, etc. were to be burned upon the Altar. The fat may signify carnal
security, senselessness, and sottishness, Lev. 4. 8, 9, 10, Isa. 6. 10.
in heavenly and spiritual things. Make the heart of this people sat, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: and the Kidneys and fat upon them may
signify fleshly lusts; and therefore as these things were consumed by fire
upon the Altar; so let Christians earnestly pray and labor for more and more
of the spirit of Christ, to consume and burn up their earthly and carnal
affections and sinful lusts. Isa. 4. 3, 4.
And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Sion, and he that remains
in Jerusalem shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the
living in Jerusalem, when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the
Daughters of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst
thereof by the Spirit of Judgment, 5. The sin-offering carried out of the
Camp, and its meaning.
and by the spirit of burning.

5. The skin of the Bullock for the sin-offering and all his flesh, Lev. 4. 11,
12.
with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, even the
whole Bullock was to be carried without the Camp, where the Ashes were poured,
without the City after they are settled.
and there to be burnt; and as this was to be done without the Camp while they
were in the Wilderness (as they were when these things were written) so it
seems after they were settled in Canaan, Heb. 13. 11, 12.
it was done without the City. The Apostle gives us the interpretation of this
Mystery, For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the
Sanctuary by the high priest for sin, Joh. 19. 17.
are burnt without the Camp: wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the Gate. And he bearing his Cross,
went forth unto a place called the place of a Skull, which is called in the
Hebrew Golgotha. It seems this was a loathsome place without the City, where
they executed the vilest offenders: and so at that time there were two
malefactors Crucified with the Lord Jesus Christ, one at each hand: A place of
a skul where there were (it is likely) many skuls and bones of such as had been
there put to death: even as the sin-offering was burnt at the place where the
ashes were poured out.

First, Use 1.
Here we have an other evidence of the wonderful abasement of the Lord of
glory; thrust out of the Camp, out of the City, as an outcast, as an unclean
and cursed thing: so extremely was he vilified, whom all the Angels of God
worship, and to whom every knee must bow of those in heaven, etc, And therefore
let us make the same use of it as was formerly hinted.

Secondly, Use 2.
In particular, let us make the use of it which the Apostle points us to; Heb.
13. 13.
Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach.
Both Jews and Gentiles conspired together in Crucifying the Lord Christ, and
therefore Believers must go out of the Jews Camp, and out of the worlds Camp,
bearing the reproach of Christ; they must not join with the obstinate Jews in
observing legal Ceremonies, nor be conformed to the world, but labor to be
conformed to a crucified Savior, and be content to endure scorn, reproach,
persecution, for Christ, following the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Many will
seem to close with Christ if they can find him in the Camp, if they can enjoy
their credit, their favor with the world, their earthly interests: But how few
will go forth to him out of the Camp, bearing his reproach, so as to be
rejected by the world, and dealt with as outcasts and the off scouring of all
things? For says the Apostle, here have we no continuing City, but we seek one
to come. ver. 14.
If Christ suffered without the Gate of the City, let us not be so affected as
if this world were the place of our rest; Let us not mind earthly things, let
us have our conversation in Heaven, laboring to make sure of our interest in
that everlasting inheritance; Let us therefore fear lest a promise being left
us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. The
Apostle urges from this Type of the sin-offering, that they which would still
rest in the observation of Jewish Ceremonies had no right in Christ, Heb. 4. 1.
We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle,
for the bodies, etc. as before. The bodies of the sin offerings were burnt
without the Camp, Heb. 13. 19.
and so the Priest did eat no part of their flesh, whereby was signified that
they who would feed upon Christ, and partake of the benefit of his sacrifice,
must leave the Tabernacle or Temple, Priesthood, Sacrifices, Ceremonies of the
Law, now that Christ has suffered; for thus are all established by Christ, not
so as to be observed much less to be rested in, but so as to attain their end
in Christ, in whom it appears that they are no empty shadows, but lively
types of great and weighty Mysteries whereof also they are useful illustrations.

Thirdly, Sect. 3. Meat Offerings considered. Their name, (...) Lev. 2. 1.
I proceed to somewhat of meat offerings. It seems these were sometimes
offered by themselves, and sometimes joined with other sacrifices, as they were
offered by themselves, we have them set down Lev. 2. The original word is taken
for a gift or present: so these meat offerings were to be given and presented
to the Lord, and this offering was to be fine flower of the purest part of the
wheat, Of what matter fine flower. Of the signification.
and so it is conceived to signify the perfect purity of Christ offering
himself to God for his people, resembled by pure flower without any mixture of
bran. The Lord Christ is brought in speaking to his Father, Sacrifice and
offering thou would not, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7.
but a body have thou prepared me, in burnt offerings and Sacrifices for sin
thou have had no pleasure. Then said I, Lo I come (in the volumn of the book
it is written of me) to do thy will O God. I conceive here those three sorts of
sacrifices are mentioned, burnt-offerings, sin offerings, and meat offerings,
none of these could satisfy the justice of God for the sins of men, and
therefore he prepared or fitted a body for his Son, an humane nature fitted to
suffer for the sins of men, a pure humane nature (as the pure flower of wheat)
by the miraculous operation of the holy Ghost. This humane nature united in one
person with the Son of God, was sufficient to make full satisfaction to the
infinite justice of God, which all the sacrifices of the Law could not do. In
respect of his body or humane nature, he was fitted for a sacrifice; in respect
of his Godhead, he was an all sufficient sacrifice of infinite value. Labor
then to lay hold on Christ by faith, and to turn to the Lord by repentance,
that ye may have interest in this most precious offering, this complete and
most perfect sacrifice, every way fitted for this use; for as Christ is the
only Son of God, he is most nigh unto the Father, the same God with the Father,
and infinitely beloved of the Father, of infinite worth and excellency, and so
able to make full satisfaction to his justice: As he is the Son of man, so he
is nigh unto men, their Brother, one of the seed of that woman who was the
Mother of all living, one of the same nature, and so of a nature fit to suffer,
and therefore he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him.

2. This meat offering of fine flower seems also to signify the offering up
of believers to Christ, Signification.
because the members are to be conformed to their head. They shall bring all
your Brethren for an offering to the Lord out of all Nations. Isa. 66. 20.
The word there translated offering, is the same that elsewhere is rendered
meat offering. Romans 15. 16.
Suitable whereunto is that of the Apostle: says he, that I should be the
Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God, that
the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the
holy Ghost. Although the Gentiles were profane Idolaters and defiled with
manifold abominations, and so fitly resembled by the beasts that were unclean
under the Law, yet the Apostle preaching the Gospel to them, and the holy
spirit of Christ working in and with his Ministry upon their souls, were
renewed, cleansed, sanctified, and so presented as an acceptable offering to
the Lord,

1. Let all Christians pray for the Success of the Gospel in all places, Use 1.
Pray for success of the Gospel.
particularly in the place where they live, that those that are unclean may
become an acceptable offering unto the Lord, being sanctified by the holy
Ghost. Is it not much to be lamented, that where there are many people living
under the Gospel, the Lord should have so few offerings? that so few shloud
give clear evidence that they are as fine flower sifted from the bran of their
natural corruption, and so fit to be presented as meat offerings to the Lord;
and how restless should each particular soul be, until it is thus sifted and
sanctified by the holy spirit, that it may be a holy offering unto the Lord.

2. Oil was to be poured upon the fine flower. This may signify the anointing
of Christ concerning whom it is said, Oil to be added, a Part of the meat
offering. Its meaning.
God even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness above thy
fellows. Those precious graces of the spirit poured forth abundantly upon
Christ, Heb. 1. 9.
were resembled by oil, Joh. 1. 14, 16.
and therefore it is said of him, He is full of grace and Truth, ^. 3. 34.
and of his fullness have all we received and grace for grace. He has an
overflowing fullness of this heavenly oil, of these spiritual graces enough for
all that are united to him, for God gives not the fpirit by measure unto him.
Let all be stirred up to come to Christ, and turn unto him that they may
receive of his fullness grace for grace. They that are wholly empty of saving
grace may receive from him, they that have some beginnings may receive increase
from him. Is it not want of exercising faith upon Christ, and keeping close to
him, that makes Christians so defective in grace? It is said the precious
ointment upon the head of Aaron the High Priest went down to the skirts of his
garment. The unconceivable fullness of grace poured upon Christ the eternal
High Priest, Psalm. 133. 2.
is ready to distill upon his members if they be not wanting to themselves.

3. There was also frankincense put upon this meat offering: 3. Frankincense.
so the Lord Christ gave himself for his people an offering and a sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling favor, Ephesians. 5. 2.
and God the Father proclaimed from heaven concerning him, Mat. 3. 17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased. The sweet odor and savor
of Christ's sacrifice is so pleasing unto the Father, that he is appealed toward
all that are truly united to Christ, and reconciled to him by Christ: and this
also makes the services of such well-pleasing to the Lord; the sweet savor of
Christ his Sacrifice perfumeth their offerings.

4. An handful of this meat offering was to be burnt upon the Altar as a
memorial, 1. Part burnt on the Altar.
and the rest belonged to the Priests, Lev. 2. 3.
the Sons of Aaron.

1. The memorial may signify that the Lord is moved to remember his Covenant
of grace by the merit of Christ his sacrifice. Not that the Lord is subject to
forgetfulness, or needs to be put in remembrance, but it is spoken after the
manner of men, and to help the weak faith of his people, and therefore they may
assure themselves that the Lord will ever be mindful of his Covenant and show
himself faithful in his promises.

Again in a Secondary way it may be a ground of much comfort to the people of
God in respect of their duties and services which they offer up to God by
Christ in sincerity. The Lord will have them in remembrance: the Lord hear thee
in the day of trouble remember all thine offerings. Psalm. 20. 1, 3.
So the Angel told Cornelius, Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up for a
memorial before the Lord. Act. 10. 4.


5. The remnant of the meat offering was to be Aarons and his Sons who were
Priests of the Lord. 5. Remainder was the Priests
The Apostle inspired and directed by the holy Spirit argues thus from hence,
Do ye not know that those which minister about holy things, Lev. 2. 3.
live of the things of the Temple, 1Cor. 9. 13, 14.
and they which wait on the Altar are partakers with the Altar? Even so has
the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.
They that did service at the Altar under the old Testament did partake with the
Altar, as here in the meat offerings the Altar had part, and they that waited
on the Altar had part. So the Apostle shows that it is the Lords own ordinance,
that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. They therefore that
oppose the ma^ntenance of the preachers of the Gospel, do resist the ordinance
of God, and presumptuously oppose his supreme authority.

6, The meat offering was to be seasoned with salt. 6. Salt added to the
meat offering and why.
Yea, it seems this was to be used, not only in this case, but also generally
in all Sacrifices, for so it is said, Every oblation of this meat offering
shall thou season with salt, Lev. 2. 13.
neither shall thou suffer the salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking
from thy meat offering, With all thy offerings thou shall offer salt.

1. Salt consumes crude and raw humors and preserves from putrefaction and
rottenness: 1. Preserves from putrefaction.
so Christ by his spirit seasoneth the souls of true believers, and works out
the natural corrupt distempers of their hearts, and where the spirit of Christ
is wanting, men are left to the bent of their own spirits: How woefully are they
filled with corruption, and rottenness, and therefore it is said, Have salt in
your selves, get the graces of the spirit to season your hearts. Mar. 9. 50.


2. Salt makes things savory and of good relish: 2. It gives a savor.
How unsavory and loathsome is a carnal unregenerate soul in Gods account, that
savoureth not the things of Christ his spirit, Romans 8. 5.
for they that are after the flesh do mind or savor the things of the flesh.
They are loathsome and unsavory unto the Lord, they have not salt in
themselves, But they that are after the spirit do mind or savor the things of
the spirit, they have salt in themselves though not of themselves, they have it
of Christ, yet they have it in themselves.

3. Salt when it meets with sores causes smart. 3. it causes sores to smart.
The grace of the spirit, and the word of grace in which the spirit works,
seems smarting to corrupt hearts, yea, to gracious hearts so far as they have
corruptions remaining in them; but they that will present themselves living,
holy, acceptable sacrifices to God through Christ, must be willing to be salted
with the grace of Christ his spirit, and with the word of grace though the
flesh smart, For every one shall be salted with fire, Mar. 9. 49.
and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt. Every one that will be
acceptable to God must be salted with fire, the power of Christ's spirit as a
fire from heaven to consume the dross of their lusts, and to refine their
souls. And every sacrifice, etc. Every one that will be a pleasing sacrifice to
God* must be salted with this salt of the sanctuary, He must have the graces of
Christ to mortify his corruptions, and to cause him to savor the things that
be of God; and the spiritual sacrifices which he offers, the duties which he
performs must have a tincture and favor of Christ's spirit in them.

4. Salt preserves things from perishing, 4. It seems to perpetuate the
Covenant.
and so may note unto us perpetuity; therefore it is called the salt of the
Covenant of God, and a sure and everlasting Covenant is called a Covenant of
salt: 2 Chronicles. 13. 5.
so Abijah pleading the right of David's posterity to the Kingdom of Israel,
said, Ought ye not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over
Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his Sons by a Covenant of salt?
This was imperfectly fulfilled in David and the Kings that sprang from his
loins before Christ his coming, but it was completely verified in Christ the
Son of David after the flesh, to whom God gave the throne of his Father David
that he should reign over the house of Jacob or Israel for ever. The Covenant
of grace established by Christ his sacrifice, is a covenant of salt that shall
never fail. How earnestly should we labor to break off all leagues with sin
and Satan, and turn to the Lord by unseigned repentance, and lay hold of Christ
by faith, that in him we may be reconciled to God, and made parties to this
unchangeable Covenant, Lev. 23. 13.
enjoying the everlasting blessings and privileges of it.

2^ To the meat offering was added a drink offering, a quantity of wine. The
meat offering consisting of fine flower, and the drink offering of Wine, how
fitly do they resemble the precious body and blood of Christ, which is meat and
drink indeed, upon which Christians are to feed by faith? And how exactly does
the bread and wine in the Sacramental supper of the new Testament answer to
this meat and drink offering consisting of the same materials?

Fourthly, Sect. 4.
Now follows the peace-offering^ conceive this was offered especially in a
way of thankfulness for mercies and deliverances, 4. Peace Offering considered.
^ometimes upon a conditional vow made before, Its occasion.
sometimes without a vow; Lev. 3. 1, etc.
and therefore may also be called thank-offering: 1. Its meaning, viz. whole
Christian duty in general.
and ^hese may signify the duties of Christians in general, their spiritual
sacrifices and services, which they are to offer unto God continually in
thankfulness for his saving mercies toward them in Christ. And therefore the
Apostle having largely showed that the sacrifices of the old Testament were not
to be observed in the times of the Gospel, Heb. 13. 15, 16.
since they are fully accomplished in Christ, toward the end of that Epistle he
calls upon believers to offer spiritual sacrifices by him (scil. by Christ;)
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name, but to do good and to communicate
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is wellpleased. All these and the like
spiritual sacrifices believers are to offer up by Christ their high priest in
his name, presenting them to the Father by his hand, that they may find
acceptance through him, and whatsoever we do in word or deed, do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3. 17.
giving thanks to God and the Father by him: all these sacrifices are to be
offered in his name, and to be presented to God by and through him.

2. For a peace offering and thank-offering, Its matter: whether male or female
at liberty.
liberty was given to sacrifice either male or female: so says the Apostle,
There is neither Jew nor Greek there is neither bond nor free, Gal. 3. 28.
there is neither male nor female, for y^ are all one in Christ Jesus. The Lord
makes no difference of persons now, either in respect of Nation, condition, or
sex, if they be in Christ, (whatsoever they are in other regards) the Lord
accepts them in his beloved Son, and they may present themselves as living
holy sacrifices unto him, assuring themselves that he will graciously receive
them; and by the same reason they may offer up their services and duties to him
by Christ as spiritual sacrifices.

3. The fat and the kidneys of the peac^-offerings were to be burnt upon the
Altar, 3. The fat to be burnt. The rest, Lev. 7. 34.
but what was to be done with the rest of the flesh, to the
Offerer. Priest.

that you may find in Lev. 7. the breast and the right shoulder were to be
given to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, whereof the former was to be waved
before the Lord, the latter to be heaved or lifted upwards, and then they were
to be given to the Priests. ver. 15. with
It seems the rest of (...) flesh of the peace offerings was to be eaten by
him that brought the sacrifice of the peace offering before the Lord, who
together with his family was to celebrate a holy feast with spiritual
rejoycings before the Lord.

1. The breast was to be given to God* for what was given to the Priests was
given to God, 1. 2 Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
because it was given to the Priest for the attending on the service of God.
The Priests part, breast.
This may teach us to give up our breasts, hearts, affections to God in
holiness and ob^dience, Prove. 23. 26.
My Son give me thine heart. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, Mat. 22. 37.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

2. The breast was to be waved before the Lord, or shaken to and fro. The
original word is taken for sifting with a five: so this waving of the breast
may teach us what stir^ings of heart, must be waved.
what lively workings of spirit and affections there should be in Christians in
performing services to the Lord. It is not a dead soul without spiritual, life
and motion, Isa. 30. 28.
which the Lord regards, but it is a wave-breast that he calls for, an
active heart and soul, a stirring spirit like that of David, Bless the Lord O
my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name. Psalm. 103. 1.


3. The right shoulder was to be heaved up before the Lord, 3. ^^^ht shoulder
Priests due
or to be lifted up. This may ^each Christians to lift up their souls to the
Lord as David, Psalm. 25. 1.
Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul: Col. 3. 1, 2.
to seek the things which are above where Christ sits on the right hand of
God, Phil. 3. 20.
^o set their affections on things above, Improved to prove Gospel maintenance
for Ministers.
not on things on the earth, to have their conversation in Heaven. These parts
being to (...) given to the Priests by the Lord his command, here we have
another ground esta^lishing the maintenance of Gospel Ministers ^ecording to
that of the Apostle mentioned be^. The Officers part.


The rest of the flesh of the peace offerings ^^ting to be eaten by him that
brought the ^^^rtices, with his household, rejoicing in the Lord, may teach
Christians that as Christ offered up himself in sacrifice to God to satisfy
his justice for the sins of his people, so he inviteth them to feed and feast
upon him by faith, with rejoicing, with joy of the holy Ghost: this they should
do in reading and hearing the Gospel, in meditating upon the word, upon Christ
and the things of Christ. Its signification.
And in the use of the Lords supper, I conceive this feasting upon the
remainder of the facrifice was a special act of Communion which the people of
Israel had with God, part of the beast being offered to God on the Altar, part
being given to God for the use of his Priests, and the remaining part being
eaten by him and his household who presented his sacrifice: so that in this
ordinance they had special fellowship with God, showing the great privilege of
true believers who have fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Says the Lord Christ, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man
hear my voice and open the door, 1 John 1. 3.
I will come in to him and sup with him and he with me: Rev. 3. 20*
How careful should Christians be to keep constant communion with God, that
their negligence may not deprive them of this blessed privilege? Says the
Apostle, Behold Israel after the flesh: 1 Cor. 10. 18.
are not they that eat of the sacrifices partakers of the Altar? I conceive the
Apos^le in this place shows the Christian Corinthians that it was not lawful
for them to feast with their Idolatrous neighbors in their Idol-Temples, upon
the remainders of their sacrifices offered to Idols, because their feasts were
Idolatrous and kept in honor of their IIdols: so the Israelites in eating of
their peace offering, were partakers of, or with the Altar: the Altar had part,
and they had part, then says he, the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to Devils and not to God, and I would not that ye should have
fellowship with Devils: ver. 20,
the Gentiles in scrificing to Idols sacrificed to Devils, and when they
offered part of the sacrifice upon the Idols Altar, and feasted and fed upon
the rest in honor of these Idols, they had fellowship with Devils: and on the
other side, the godly Israelitet in the time of the old Testament, offering
part of their peace offerings to God upon the Altar, and presenting part of it
to him for the use of his Priests by his command, and then feeding upon the
rest, had fellowship with God. The Lord Christ having offered up himself to God
for his people, does also now offer himself to his people, that they may feed
upon him, and in feeding upon him by faith, may have communion with the Father
and the Son. So much of Sacraments and sacrifices.

Now in the third place may be considered, sacred Persons, Sect. 5.
and things subservient to sacred or holy uses: Sacred Persons considered.
and first the Persons; and among these Priests, Priests, etc.
and principally the highpriests or Chief priests: this officer was an eminent
type of the Lord Jesus Christ, and, 1. In regard of his commission or calling
to the Office. No man takes this honor unto himself but he that is called of
God as was Aaron. Heb. 4. 5. 6.
So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest, but he that
said unto him thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. As he says also
in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.
The Lord Christ as he was man, was immediately called of God to his office: As
he is God, the act of calling was his as well as the Fathers, Mat. 12. 18.
their acts being the same. So God says of Christ as he is man, Behold my
servant whom I have chosen. and 8. 4.
He was called and chosen of God to be an eternal high priest; and how
wonderfully was his calling and commission ratified and evidenced by many
infallible signs and tokens! When he had cured a Leprous person, he said, Go
thy way* show thy self to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded
for a Testimony to them, that this work may witness that I am called and sent
of God: and when he had cast a Devil out of the Dumb man that was possessed, so
that the dumb spoke, the multudes marv^lled saying, It was never so seen in
Israel; since Israel was a Nation and a Church, Mat. 9. 32. 33.
there never was a man raised up among them gave such evidence that he was
called of God. Nicodemus though a young Scholar in the School of Christ, says
unto him, Joh. 3. 2.
We know that thou art a teacher come from God, for no ^an can do these
miracles that thou do except God be with him. Had he known Christ more
perfectly, he might have said, except God be in him, except he be personally
united to God; Mat. 21. 23.
for Christ did these things by his own authority, and by his own power had
declared so much, and yet such was the ignorance or insolence of the
chief-priests and Elders, that they took upon them to examine him saying, By
what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? Had
they not been grossly (if not wilfully) blind, they might have seen his
authority abundantly and most gloriously confirmed by his mighty works.

1. Here see the unspeakable goodness of God, Use 1.
instead of those imperfect Highpriests under the old Testament, See Gods
unspeakable goodness, etc.
to call one to the office who is most perfect every way, Heb: 7. 26.
even the man Christ Jesus, personally united to his only and eternal Son, even
one who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher
then the Heavens, ver. 24. 25.
one who continues ever, and has an unchangeable Priesthood, being able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them.

2. Therefore neglect not to come to him, and to God by him. 2. Come to Christ,
neither
And,

3. If ye come to him in truth, 3. Doubt in coming to him.
doubt not but he will save you to the uttermost, having a peculiar call from
God for this end above all other creatures in heaven and earth.

4. See the humility of the man Christ, 4. See Christ's humility, etc.
who did not usurp this high office and dignity, but took it upon him as called
of God: How great is their presumption who rashly thrust themselves into such
employments in the Church to which they were never called of God.

2. In respect of his anointing, but of that I have spoken in the
meat offering.

3. The garments and ornaments of the High Priest were expressly appointed by
the Lord, 3. Garments of high Priest significative.
who gave particular directions about them. These things might seem to be of
small moment considered in themselves, but the spiritual mysteries are to be
regarded which were shadowed by them.

1. In General, They are called holy Garments for glory and for beauty. 1. In
General, what they signified.
I conceive these may signify the perfect holiness, the incomparable beauty
and glory of the Lord Jesus. Ex. 28. 2.
His perfect holiness both in his state of humiliation and exaltation, his
beauty and glory chiefly in his state of exaltation, as he now sits on the
right hand of God. Labor for an eye of faith to behold the beauty and glory of
the Lord Jesus Christ, which if it were clearly discerned, would eclipse all
worldly glory, take off the gloss of the creatures and make them appear as dead
and withered things. The reason why we are so ensnared with earthly vanities
is, because we look upon things in a carnal manner with fleshly eyes, not with
a spiritual eye of faith, not with such an eye as Moses did, seeing him him who
is invisible, and so despising earthly things. Heb. 11. 27.
Labor for union with Christ, that partaking of his Spirit ye may partake of
his holiness and graces, and so of his beauty and glory. Holiness beautifieth
and adorneth the soul and ptepareth it for perfection of heavenly beauty and
glory, whereas sin does both defile and disfigure the soul, filling it with
deformity. This being noted in general I intend to mention some few of the
particulars. 2. What particular Garments, etc. and their Import.


First, The two precious stones upon the two shoulders of the Ephod, or
Priestly Robe, wherein were engraven the Names of the twelve tribes of Israel,
2. Stones.
six in one stone and six in the other, Ex. 28. 9. etc. on his shoulder.
so that the high priest bare their Names upon his two shoulders.

1. This may note unto us, 1. Support by him.
the support which the Lord gives unto his Church and to all the living
members of it. Mat 16. 18.
He bears them as it were upon his shoulders, Hence it is that his little
flock has been preserved in the midst of so many wolves from age to age, Upon
this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. What a blessed privilege have they that are in Christ, being built
upon him as a rock immovable, and upheld by him, born upon his shoulders who
is their eternal high priest.

2. See how precious the people of Christ are in his account, 2. The Price
Christ sets on his people.
as if their names were engraven in precious stones and set in ouches or bosses
of Gold.

2. The breast plate of Judgment, 2. Breast Plate of Judgment.
in which was to be set four rows of precious stones, three in a row, Ex. 28.
15. etc. ^
in all twelve stones of several kinds, and in these again were engraven the
twelve names of the twelve Tribes of Israel and so Aaron was to bear the Names
of the Children of Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon his heart, when
he went into the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.

1. See the tender love and affection which the Lord Christ has toward his
people, 1. Signification.
he bears them upon his breast, upon his heart continually; he shall feed his
flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm and carry them in
his bosom, Isa. 40. 11.
next his heart, and therefore it seems the Church prays to Christ, set me
as a seal upon thine heart: Cant. 8. 6.
that tender love which moved him to let out his heart blood for their
redemption is still so powerful and prevailing with him that he bears them
upon his heart in heaven.

2. Ought not Christians then to bear Christ upon their hearts, 2.
Signification.
to entertain him to dwell in their hearts by faith, to cleave unto him in
love, and walk in him following the guidance of his spirit?

3. Christ this eternal high priest bears the Names of his people upon his
breast plate or heart, 3. Signification.
now that he is in heaven, before his Father, for a memorial before his face
continually. I conceive this notes Christ his intercession for his people; He
presents their names before his Father in Heaven, as the High Priest did in
the holy place on the earth, which was a figure of Heaven. Blessed are they
whose Names God the Father reads engraven upon the breast plate written upon
the heart of his beloved Son, in whom he is well-pleased. What is there that
such may not obtain of the Father through the Son? And how should all labor to
give in their names, and to give up their hearts to Christ, that he may bear
their names upon his heart for a memorial before the face of God continually.

Thirdly, 3. Part of Garments of Highpriests.
Upon the hemme of the Highpriests Robe were placed golden Bells, and
Pomegranates, that his sound might be heard when he went in unto the holy place
before the Lord, Exodus 28. 33, 34, 35.
and when he came out: so the Lord Christ entering in to the most holy place in
heaven, Its Significaion.
after his death and resurrection, makes a most sweet and pleasing sound in
the ears of his Father far, beyond that of golden bells; his mediation and
intercession in behalf of his people, grounded upon the merit of his death,
sacrifice and satisfaction, makes heavenly melody before his Father; Heb. 12.
24.
Jesus the mediator of the new Covenant and the blood of sprinking, which
speaks better things than the blood of Abel. And these Pomegranates may well
resemble the sweet savor of Christ's sacrifice. Again, Aarons bells were heard
to sound, not only when he went in to the holy place, but also when he came
out. Now although the Lord Christ as he is man continues within the most holy
place not made with hands, and does not come out again, yet he sent down his
spirit upon his Apostles soon after, and caused these golden bells to give a
most pleasant sound throughout the several Quarters of the world, publishing
the glad tidings of pardon and salvation through Christ to the comfort and
refreshing of many thousand souls, and the precious promises of the Gospel
published in the name of Christ, were as Pomegranats that yielded a pleasant
smell to the reviving of many fainting hearts and drooping spirits. Had we
circumcised hearts and ears, gracious spirits, heavenly affections, how
pleasant would the sound of the Gospel preached, how sweet would the promises
of it be unto us?

Fourthly, 4. Ornaments of the High Priest.
The Lord gave this Command, Thou shall make a plate of pure Gold, and grave
upon it like the engravings of a fignet, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28. 36,
37, 38.
and this golden plate was put on the forefront of the Mitre, and so to be
worn on the forehead of the High Priest that he might bear the iniquity of the
holy things which the Children of Israel should hallow in all their holy gifts,
and it was to be always upon his forehead, that they might be accepted before
the Lord. The Inscription I suppose may be read, either Holiness to the Lord,
or, the Holiness of the Lord.

1. Here see how the Lord Christ whose holiness and righteousness is of
infinite worth and value, Its signification*
the holiness and righteousness of Jehovah, of him who is very God, takes away
the iniquities and pollutions of the duties, services, spiritual sacrifices
offered by his people. Aaron did bear these but in a figure and in a way of
representation, Christ did really bear them, and his holiness and righteousness
of Jehovah is imputed to them, and is alone sufficient to take away all their
uncleanness, and to procure acceptance for them. How should Christians be
humbled, that such is the corruption of their natures and imperfection of their
graces, that the best of their services, the holiest of their offerings, have
such iniquity cleaving to them, that they need the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to cover them. And again, this may comfort them that are in
Christ, and are sincere in their services, and stir them up to thankfulness,
that such a precious remedy is provided them in this case, even the Holiness of
Jehovah.

2. This golden plate with this Inscription on the forehead of the High Priest,
2. Signification:
may intimate unto us, that God the Father in the forehead and face of his
beloved Son, reads such an inscription of perfect holiness and righteousness
that beholding his people in him, he accepts them as perfectly righteous
through him: that as this golden plate with this inscription was placed so
eminently on Aarons forehead, that it was visible and obvious to the bodily
eyes and sight of the people of Israel: so the perfect righteousness and
holiness of the Lord Jesus Christ is eminently visible to the spiritual eye of
his peoples faith, that they may receive sweet comfort in the assurance that
their iniquities are taken away through him, and may behold the Fatherly love
and kindness of the Father toward them, and his gracious acceptance of their
sevices in the face of Jesus Christ. One thing more was to be added before, 5.
Ornaments, etc. Urim and Thummim.
as belonging to the breast plate of Judgment, scil. Exodus 28. 30.
Vrim and Thummim* concerning which there is a great question What it was?
Wherein it seems that neither Jewish nor Christian writers are yet agreed,
Whether it were these words engraven upon a golden plate and put upon a
breast plate, or whether the twelve precious stones upon the breast plate were
so called, or what other thing it might be? Howsoever the meaning of the words
is plain, which being both of the plural number, signify Lights and
Perfections. their meaning.
These may point out unto us the fullness of heavenly Light, wisdom* and
knowledge, and perfection of grace that is in the Lord Jesus Christ. Says he,
I am the light of the World: again, Joh. 8. 12* and 14. ^.
I am the Truth. And the Apostle says, In him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3, 9.
for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bedily. This may show that
all by nature are darkness and imperfection, and therefore needing such a
Savior who is fullness of Lights and Perfections, Ye were sometimes darkness*
but now are Light in the Lord. Ephesians. 5. 8. and 2. 4, 5.
God who is rich in mercy, for his great Love wherewith ^e loved us, even when
we were dead in trespasses and sins, Col. 2, 10.
has quickened us together with Christ. And ye are complete in him, who is the
head of all principality and power. They that are natur^lly full of spiritual
death, darkness, imperfection, receive spiritual life, light and grace from
Christ, when once they are truly united to him, and so are complete not in
themselves but in him, upon whose breast are Vrim and Thummim, in whom is
fullness of Lights and Perfections. And Malachy who seems to be one of the
last Prophets before Christ's coming, to raise up the hearts of the godly in
expectation of Christ's appearing in the flesh, told them, or rather God
speaking by him, assured them thus, But unto you that fear my Name shall the
sun of righteousness arise with healing under his wings, Mat. 4. 2.
with light to deliver you from darkness, and with healing graces; the
influences of his heavenly perfections to cure the diseases, defects,
distempers, of your souls.

Sixthly, 6. High Priest appointed, etc. for men, etc.
The High priest was appointed for men in things pertaining to God, to offer
gifts and Sacrifices for sins: Heb. 5. 1.
so the Lord Christ was ordained for men in things pertaining to God to offer
Sacrifice for sins. Ephesians. 5 2.
Christ has loved us and given himself for us, Heb. 9. 14.
an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor: How much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God? Where it is manifest that he is both the High Priest and the Sacrifice,
both the offerer and the offering; as he is the offering or sacrifice, so he
was figured by such sacrifices as those formerly spoken of. As he is the
offerer or High Priest, so he is figured by the High Priest of the old
Testament. None was worthy to offer this sacrifice of infinite value but Christ
himself; and the infinite worth of Christ, God and man, who as the High Priest
or Sacrificer presented this offering to God the Father, and the infinite worth
of the same Christ presented as an offering, may assure the greatest sinners
which truly turn to the Lord and come to him, that there is enough done to make
atonement and reconciliation between God and them; only take heed least by
neglecting so great salvation, the infinite worth of the High Priest and
sacrifice prove in the Issue an aggravation of your guilt and condemnation.

Seventhly, The High Priest having killed the Bullock of the sin-offering, 7.
What the High Priest did, etc. How it signified what Christ should do.
was to take a Censer full of burning coals of fire from off the Altar before
the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within
the Vail, Lev. 16 12.
scil. into the holy of holies, and then fire the Incense, that the cloud of
the Incense might cover the mercy-seat, and then to sprinkle of the blood of
the bullock upon the mercy-seat, and before the mercy-seat seven times^: ^eb.
9. 7, 11, 12
so first the Lord Christ having sacrificed himself entered with his own blood,
scil. with the merit and virtue of his blood, into the most holy place within
the vail, that is, into Heaven it self; into the second, sci. the most holy
place, went the High priest once every year, not without blood, which he
offered for himself, and for the errors of the people, but Christ being being
become an High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building, neither
by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he entered once into the
holy place having obtained eternal Redemption: so that the merit and virtue of
Christ his most precious blood is always presented before God in Heaven, in
behalf of those that truly lay hold on Christ. Also the sweet incense put upon
the fire in the Golden Censer, and resting as a cloud upon the mercy-seat, may
teach us that the sweet incense of Christ his sacrifice and offering make way
for the Persons, Prayers, and services of Gods people, that so they may
approach to the mercy-seat or gracious presence of God in Heaven. The blood
also sprinkled upon and before the Mercy-seat, may note unto us, that the blood
of Christ procures mercy with God for repenting and believing sinners, and
makes way for them to draw nigh unto God. And so much for this eminent Type of
Christ. The High Priest of the old Testament figuring Christ the eternal
High Priest.

In the next place, somewhat might be spoken of the inferior Priests which
were of the posterity of Aaron. These I take to have been Types of the Members
of Christ, of whom it is said, that Christ has loved them, Rev. 1. 5, 6.
and washed them from their sins in his own blood, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and made them Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: Romans 12. 1.
to whom also Peter says, Ye are are a chosen generation a royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation, a peculiar people. And these are first to offer themselves as
sacrifices to God; I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies, that is I conceive, taking a part for the whole, their
bodies and souls, their whole selves, a sacrifice living, holy, acceptable unto
God. And therefore all that will approve themselves unto God, must look upon
themselves as under a double consecration, as dedicated to God under a twofold
Notion and Respect, both as Priests and as Sacrifices; How then should they
study, labor, and follow after holiness? Both Priests and sacrifices under the
old Testament were consecrated to God as holy. He that was unclean was not fit
as a Priest to sacrifice. How should they strive to be holy as the Lord is
holy, who should be both Priests and Sacrifices? And therefore it is said, Be
not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind, ver. 2.
that ye may prove what is that good, that perfect and acceptable will of God.
As the Priests were chosen out and separated from other men, and consecrated as
holy to the Lord, and the sacrifices were chosen out and severed from the
common herds and flocks, to be offered up to God: so Christians must not be
conformed to this world, nor follow the common throngs and herds according to
the course of the world, but be transformed, new framed in conformity to
Christ, that they may be both Priests and sacrifices acceptable to the Lord.
Secondly, as Priests of the new Testament, they must offer holy services and
duties of obedience as spiritual sacrifices to the Lord. Psalm. 4. 5.
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord. The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17.
So the Apostle speaking of that contribution which the Philippians sent unto
him, being a Prisoner for the Gospel of Christ, said, I have all and abound,
Phil. 4. 18.
I am full having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you,
an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to the Lord.
It might also be noted how the Priests and Levites were teachers in Israel, as
Christ is the great Preacher and Prophet of the Church: but I know not whether
herein he be not more lively represented by the Prophets of the old Testament,
this belonging to his Prophetical office. But here by the way, I think it
seasonable to put you in mind that in all the new Testament, I am confident it
cannot be found that the Ministers of the Gospel are called Priests in respect
of their particular calling or office. The extraordinary Ministers are called
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists: the ordinary are termed Pastors, Teachers,
sometimes Bishops or Overseers, Elders or Presbyters, never Priests; for a
Priest by office is one that offers sacrifice for Propitiation, for appeasing
the wrath of God: and so there is no Priest of the new Testament but the Lord
Jesus Christ: and therefore when profane persons do in scorn call the
Preachers of the Gospel Priests, they commit a double sin, and show double
profaneness: 1. Attributing that name to them which i^ proper to Christ. 2.
Accounting that Title of Christ a word of reproach. And therefore I find not,
that Ministers of the new Testament are any where called Priests in Scripture,
but only as all other true believers are, which Christ has made Kings and
Priests to off^^ spiritual sacrifices. If the Popish shavelings will take upon
them that Title, as pretending to offer the very body of Christ to God i^ the
Mass, What is that to the Ministers of the Gospel who detest that abomina^^on?

Sixthly, Sect. 6. Sacred things etc.
Take notice of some sacred things that were subservient to sacred or holy
^ses. And,

First, As 1. Tabernacle and Temple.
The Tabernacle, which the Lord directed Moses to raise, instead whereof
afterward Solomon erected a Temple. In some things these two agreed, in some
they differed.

1. Both of them were framed by the Lords appointment: 1. Agreeing.
For the Tabernacle the Lord gave command to Moses, Exodus the 25 and the 26.
And David shows that the Lord made choice of Solomon his Son to build hi^ house
and his Courts, 1 Chronicles. 28. 6, 11, 12, 19.
and David gave to Solomon the pattern of the Temple, and the things belonging
to it by the spirit: all the said David the Lord made me to understand by his
hand upon me, even all the works (...) this pattern.

2. Both were dedicated to God as places designed for his special presence, 2.
In writing.
and therefore each of them was called his house, both were places appointed
for special ordinances of God, Yet they differed.
not to be used elsewhere. They differed in that the Tabernacle was a slight
frame of boards and Curtains, the Temple a substantial building. The Tabernacle
was a moveable Tent that might be carried from place to place: The Temple fixed
upon its foundation in one certain place. I conceive both of them did,

1. Primarily signify the precious body, 1. And chiefly signified Christ
dwelling in our nature.
the flesh, the humane nature of Christ: the word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us, (...), as in a Tabernacle, in a mortal weak body, Joh. 1. 14.
exposed to sufferings and death. Christ being come a High Priest of good
things to come, Heb. 9. 11.
by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, etc. So the Lord
Christ calls his body a Temple, Joh. 2. 19, 21.
destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up: The Jews seemed to
take it of the Temple of Jerusalem, but he spoke of the Temple of his body. As
God is said to dwell in the Tabernacle and Temple made with hands, because
there he vouchsafed his special presence, there he sets up his worship and
ordinances: so God dwells in a peculiar manner, in the humane nature of
Christ; in him dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily, or
substantially. The godhead is united personally to the humane nature of Christ,
for verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels, Col. 2. 9. Heb. 2. 16.
but he took on him the seed of Abraham. The Lord Christ made choice of the
Nature of Man for his Tabernacle, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
rather than of the Nature of glorious Angels. Hence that part of the great
mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh; the invisible God taking
the humane Nature into the unity of his person became not only visible but
actually seen and manifest in the flesh. This shows,

1. His wonderful condescension and voluntary abasement of himself, that he who
fills Heaven and Earth, was pleased to dwell as it were in a Cottage, in the
flesh, in the Nature of man. The Creator became a creature, yet still remaining
the Creator: The Son of God became also the Son of man. He who made all things
as he is God, was made of a woman as he is man.

2. Herein appears his unconceivable love to mankind, that he was pleased to
become bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, their kinsman of the same
blood; Aand. 17. 26.
for all Nations of men are made of one blood: so that there is a consanguinity
between Christ and other men; Heb. 2^ 11.
he was pleased to become their Brother, he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren.

3. Let all be stirred up to turn to the Lord and lay hold of Christ, that they
may be united to him, as he is united to their Nature, though not by the same
kind of union; but as he is personally joined to the nature of man, so they may
be spiritually united to him, receiving his spirit, embracing him, by faith
that through union with him, they may be united to God, for the Father is in
the Son. In as much as Christ has made so near an approach to us, as to become
one person with our Nature, let us take heed lest we become guilty of despising
his love, in suffering sin or the world to keep us at a distance from him, 2
Pet. 1. 4.
to withhold us from closing with him; for he partaking of our Nature, has
made way for us to partake of his divine Nature, by participation of his spirit
and graces: for by the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, men
may be partakers of the divine Nature, that is, by Christ partaking of the
humane Nature, who is the substance of the Promises, Heb. 1. 6.
and in whom they are all, Yea and Amen.

4. How should Christians abhor to defile themselves by sin, to pollute that
Nature of man in their own persons, which Christ in his person has exalted to
the right hand of God, far above Angels, Principalities and Powers. When he
brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels
of God worship him, all the holy Angels worship man in the person of Christ.
Take heed then of abaseing the Nature of man in your own persons to the service
of sin; and abase your selves exceedingly before the Lord, for abaseing your
Nature in this kind.

Again in a secondary consideration, I take the Tabernacle and Temple, 2. They
signified the Church of Christ.
for a representation of the Church of Christ, the multitude of Believers. John
saw the new Jerusalem, and heard a voice saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God
is with men, Romans 21. 2, 3.
and he will dwell with them. So the Church of God is called the house of God,
for (says the Apostle) Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said,
1 Timothy 3. 15.
I will dwell in them and walk in them. 2 Cor. 6. 16.


1. How should all that live within the Church, Use 1.
professing themselves Christians, take heed of defileing the Lords Tabernacle,
and polluting his Temple by sin? How highly is God dishonored when his Temple
is polluted; when any live in a course of sin, or commit gross acts of sin
where his Gospel is preached or professed? Lev. 16. 15, 16.
The Priest was commanded to bring the blood of the Goat of the sin-offering
within the Vail, and there to sprinkle it: then it follows, he shall make an
atonement for the holy place because of the uncleanness of the Children of
Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins; and so shall he
do for the Tabernacle of the congregation that remains among them in the
midst of their uncleanness. See the cursed ^ nature of sin, it defiles the
Tabernacle and Temple of the Lord it polluteth his Sanctuary, his Church, when
it is committed within his Church, that is among those that profess themselves
Christians, attend upon his Ordinances, believe his Gospel: Ye that harden your
hearts in any evil ways, and make light of continuing in sin, though ye live in
the visible Church, humble and judge your selves before the Lord, depart from
iniquity, otherwise assure your selves your sin will find you out.

Secondly, Use 2.
It is a great height of wickedness when any rejoice in scandalous sins
committed within the Church, and make a sport of them: Do not these show
themselves profane graceless wretches? If thou had any sincere love and
respect to his glory, thou would not take pleasure in such things as tend
highly to his dishonor, but rather bewail and lament them. I conceive the
Apostle in the 2. of Corinth. mentions his former Epistle written to the same
Church, and there he says, 2 Cor. 2* ^.
Out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears,
for in that Epistle he had reproved diverse disorders and scandalous sins
committed in that Primitive Church which was of his planting, and it was such a
matter of grief unto him, that he wrote about these things out of much
affliction and anguish of heart, with many tears: With what a spirit are they
led, who make a sport of such things? Scandalous sins i^ the Church are to be
reproved and lamented as things that defile the Sanctuary of Christ, and
dishonor him: but who can find in their hearts to rejoice in them but they
that are Enemies to Christ?

Again, 3. Tabernacle etc. noted particular believers,
The Tabernacle and Temple represented particular Christians, each true
believer being a spiritual Temple to the Lord. Know ye not that ye are the
Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. Flee fornication:
Every sin that a man does is without the body: chap. 6. 18, 19.
but he that commits fornication sins against his own body. What! know ye
not that the body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you? Both body
and soul is to be consecrated and dedicated to God as his Temple for him to
dwell in by his spirit. The body is as it were the outward Court; The inferior
faculties of the soul may be compared to the inner Court within the first Vail:
The superior faculties, the Understanding, Judgment, Conscience, Will, may be
likened to the inmost Court within the second Vail, the principal and most holy
place of the Temple. Now as all the Courts of the Temple and Tabernacle were
holy being consecrated and dedicated to the most holy God, and sanctified to
his holy services and ordinances, and were to be kept holy free from
profanations and defilements: so the souls and bodies of Christians are to be
consecrated and sanctified as holy Temples to the Lord, and to be kept from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to be cleansed daily; and when they are
defiled by sin, the Lord is dishonored and his wrath is provoked, he
accounts it a defiling of his Temple; whereas the Apostle s^emeth to say that
every sin except fornication is without the body, etc. I conceive it is to be
understood comparatively, that Fornication. Adultery, Whoredom, and sins of
that kind, do in more special manner defile the body than other sins; other
sins defile the body also, scil. outward acts of sin wherein the body or any of
the members of the body act sinfully. And when the body is defiled with sin,
the heart and soul is first defiled, for sin begins there, For out of the
heart proceed evil (...) murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, (...)
witness, Mat. 15. 18, 19.
blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man: these and all other sins
are the things which first defile the heart and soul, where they are conceived
and bred, and then so many of them as are brought forth into outward act defile
the body also, some of them more some less, according to their natures and
degrees. Now there is a severe threatening formerly mentioned, If any man defile
the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. As ye desire the salvation of your
souls and bodies, to prevent the destruction of both, take heed of defiling
these Temples of God, make a through search, and cast out all the filth which
ye find there, by sincere repentance and reformation; watch against all future
defilements: and as atonement was made for the Tabernacle by the blood of the
sin-offering, so seek to clear your selves from the guilt of your sins by the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus applied by faith.

Seventhly, S^ct. 7.
Next to the Tabernacle or Temple, Altar and its Import.
ye may take notice of the Altar of burnt-offering, Heb. 13. 10.
and as the sacrifices offered up on this Altar, and High Priest who was the
principal officer, were Types of Chirst, so it seems was the Altar, We have
an Altar whereof they have no right to eat that serve the Tabernacle.

1. It was commanded to be made of Shittim Wood which is thought to have been a
choice kind of wood that would not rot, Made of Shittim wood, what is meant.
and so fit to resemble the precious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom it
is said, He whom God raised again, Exodus 27. 1.
saw no corruption. The Lord Christ though he freely laid down his life for his
people, Act. 13. 37.
and suffered death, yet He rose again in so short a time as to prevent all
putrefaction and rottenness, He saw no corruption, and as he preserved his own
natural body from corruption, so he shall deliver his mystical body, his
Church, and the members of it out of corruption, and raise them incorruptible.
But,

2. The Altar was to be over-laid with Brass, 2. Over laid with Brass.
for though the wood might be free from rotting and corrupting, yet I conceive
it could not endure the force of that fire which was to burn upon it, and
therefore it was to have a brazen covering. Exodus 27. 2. Its import.
This seems to note unto us the Godhead of Christ united to his manhood, or
that strength which the Godhead thus united gave to the manhood, whereby it was
so mightily for^ified, that the wrath of God due to the Sons of men did not
consume it, as the wood of the Alta^ was not consumed by the fire wherewith the
Sacrifices were burnt.

3. This Altar was placed by the door of the Tabernacle, 3. The place of Altar,
and its meaning.
of the Tent of the congregation; it seems this was set in the open Court
that all the people might see it, Exodus 40. 29
and behold the Sacrifices offered upon it, that their hearts might be raised
in expectation of that great and all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ which alone
satisfies for sins: so now Christ in the preaching of the Gospel, is set forth
as it were crucified before the eyes of believers. The Altar upon which the
sacrifices were offered was set by the door of the Tabernacle at the entrance
into it: whosoever will have a place in the Courts of the Lord, and abide in
his house for ever, must get entrance by Christ and his sacrifice; sin shuts
the door against all, only Christ makes way for those that truly come to him
and by him to God. Says the Lord Christ, I am the door, Joh. 10. 9. 14. 6.
by me if any man enter in he shall be saved. And again, I am the way, etc. No
man comes unto the Father but by me: whosoever will come to God, enjoy his
favor, enter into Covenant, and have communion with him, must come to him by
Christ.

4. There was an Altar to burn Incense upon of the same wood with the former,
4. Altar of Incense.
but overlaid with pure Gold: Exodus 30. 3.
Christ is the Golden Altar upon whom the prayers and other services of his
people are offered up as sweet Incense unto God, by whose merit and
intercession they find acceptance. Exodus 30. 9.
2. No strange Incense was to be offered thereon: so no strange worship must be
offered to God in the Name of Christ of man's deviseing, only such services are
to be presented to him as the Lord himself has appointed in his word. In vain
do they worship me, Mat. 15. 9.
teaching for doctrine the traditions of men. The Lord allows not any strange
Incense to be offered up to him.

Eighthly, Sect. 8.
There was the Ark overlaid with pure Gold, Ark overlaid, etc.
into which was put the Testimony: by which I understand the Tables of stone
wherein the Law was written by the finger of God. Exodus 25. 10, 11, 16, 17, 21.
This Ark was a special token of God his presence with his people, and upon the
Ark was placed a mercy-seat of pure Gold, and the mercy seat was put above upon
the Ark. As the mercy seat was set above upon the Ark wherein the Law was, so
the Lord in dealing with repenting and believing sinners in Christ, exalts
and magnifieth his mercy, and covers their sins whereby they have
transgressed his holy Law: He sits upon a mercy-seat to receive poor sinners
that fly from the curse of the Law for refuge to the riches of his grace in
Christ. Let all poor souls without strive and hasten to escape from the
severity of Gods dreadful justice to his mercy-seat through Christ, whose blood
has opened a way unto it. They that are sincerely willing to renounce their
dearest sins, and to yield subjection unto Christ, may have free access to the
mercy-seat, and receive an answer of peace in Christ. This Ark wherein the
Tables of the Law were written, and the mercy-seat was of the same measure for
breadth and length: Ex. 25. 10, 17.
so they that will have their hearts assured of the saving mercy of God in
Christ, must have the Law of God written by the finger of God in their hearts;
they must be regenerate and renewed by the spirit of Christ, and conformed to
his holy Law. Poor souls pursued with the guilt of their Consciences and curse
of the Law, must flee to the mercy-seat of God in Christ; though as yet they do
not find any such work in themselves; but they cannot have their hearts
established in the assurance of this privilege that their sins are forgiven,
Heb. 8. 10, 12.
until they find this gracious work wrought in them, and therefore the Lord in
d^c^aring his Covenant joyneth these two together, This is the Covenant, etc. I
will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be
merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I
remember no more. The Lord promises to the same pr^sons to pardon their sins,
and to write his Laws in their hearts: As for those that go on securely in sin
and yet rely upon the mercy of God in Christ for pardon of sin, they deceive
themselves. The Ark wherein the Law was put and the mercy-seat were just of the
same size: Act. 5. 31.
and repentance which is a change of heart and life, is always joined with
forgiveness of sins. There were two Cherubims of beaten Gold at the two ends of
the mercy-seat with their faces one to another looking toward the mercy-seat:
Exodus 25. 18 19, 20.
so the holy Angels attend upon God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, for
the service of his Church ministering for them who shall be heirs of salvation.
Heb. 1. 14.
They are ready with their wings stretched out to execute the will of Christ,
and do his pleasure for the protection and good of his people. 2. The holy
Angels look into the mysteries of Christ in his Gospel, as the Cherubims toward
the Ark and mercy-seat, which thing the Angels defire to look into. 1 Pet. 1.
12.
And the Apostle having spoken of the glorious Mysteries of Christ in the
Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 10.
made known to him by revelation, and made known by him in his Ministry, who
preached among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, adds this, to
the intent that now unto the Principalities and powers in heavenly places might
be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. How inexcusable is the
negligence of those that will not take pains to be acquainted with the
mysteries of Christ which the glorious Angels did search into.

Ninthly, Sect. 9.
The fire that was used in the sacrifices of the Law, The fire on the Altar,
Its meaning.
may be considered,

1. As the fire burned the Sacrifices which were offered to the Lord: 1. It
consumed the Sacrifice.
so the fire of Gods wrath fell upon Christ for the sins of the world, when he
offered himself in sacrifice to his Father to satisfy his justice; and
therefore he was in a grievous agony, Luke ^2. 44.
and his sweat was it as were great drops of blood falling down to the ground,
Mat. 26. 38.
and he complained my soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. And when he
was upon the Cross, he cried out with a loud voice saying, chapter 27. 46.
My God My God why have thou forsaken me?

1. See here the Love of Christ toward sinners, Use of this. 1.
interposing himself between the burning wrath of God and them; that which was
of such a scorching heat to him, would have been a consuming fire to them.

2. How should the hearts of believers be inflamed with love to Christ, who
endured the flames of divine wrath to save them from everlasting burnings?

3. How restless should all be until they are sound in Christ, that his
righteousness may shelter them from the fire of Gods wrath? How unsufferable
will that be to them which was so grievous to him.

Secondly, 2. Came from Heaven.
This fire came from Heaven, there came a fire out from before the Lord and
consumed upon the Altar the burnt-offering, Lev. 9. 24.
etc. And so in the Temple built by Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1.
fire came down from Heaven and consumed the burnt-offering and sacrifices: so
the Lord sends down that heavenly fire of his spirit upon his people to consume
their dross, warm their hearts with holy flames of love and zeal, Mat. 3. 11.
refine their spirits. So Christ is said to Baptize his people with the holy
Ghost and fire.

Thirdly, 3. Kept always burning.
This fire was to be kept burning upon the Altar continually and never to go
out: Lev. 6. 13.
Christians having once the heavenly fire of grace and holy affections kindled
in their hearts by the spirit of Christ should labor to keep it continually
burning, take heed of quenching the Spirit.

Tenthly, Sect. 10.
The Vail may be taken notice of: Exodus 26. 31.
The Apostle intimates a twofold va^l, Heb. 9. 3.
for he speaks of a second Vail: Exodus 26. 36.
I conceive then this second and inward Vail was that which was hanged before
the most holy place, and the first was that hanging mentioned; there being
three Courts in the Tabernacle, the first and outermost where the people were:
the second where the Priests were, between the which two was the first Vail:
the third which was the most holy place, into which went none but the
High Priest, and this was divided from the middle Court by the second Vail. So
the Mysteries of the Gospel were hidden in a great measure before Christ his
coming in the flesh, by a Vail of Ceremonies which are now revealed in Christ,
at whose death the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to th^^
bottom. Mat. 27. 51.


CHAP. VI.
Something may be spoken also of Sacred Observances, which were required of
Israel under the Ceremonial Law, these being (...) many and of great variety, I
intend to touch some of them and pass by the (...). And,

1. Consider that restraint that was laid upon them in the use of the
Creatures; Sect. 1.
many of these they were forbidden to eat, Lev. 11.
as being unclean, Deuteronomy. 1. 4.
not in their own Nature, but by the ordinance of God, in this Law of
Ceremonies.

1. This shows whereas Israel and other Nations were all alike by Creation,
being all ^ade of one blood in the first man and wo^^n, from whom they all
descended as so many branches of one common root or stock, and were all alike
corrupted by sin unclean in the sight of God, and children of wrath: yet the
Lord according to the Counsel of his own will, was pleased to make a diffe^^nce
or distinction, separating the Nation (...) Israel from the rest of mankind,
conse^rating the people of Israel as a peculiar people to himself, and
rejecting the rest as ^nclean. So it is said to Israel, Thou art an ^oly people
to the Lord thy God, ver. 2.
and the Lord ^ath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself above all
the Nations that are upon the Earth. Then follows this prohibition,
restraining them from eating diverse Creatures, Psalm. 135. 4.
The Lord has chosen Jacob for himself, Psa. 147. 19, 20.
and Israel for his peculiar Treasure. He shows his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and his Judgments to Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation,
and for his Judgments they have not known them. Number. 23.
Balaam extolling the privileges of Israel, among other passages says, For
from the top of the Rocks I see him, and from the Hills I behold him. ver. 5.
Lo the people that dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the Nations,
although Balaam spoke it, yet the Lord put the word in his mouth. The people of
Israel dwelt alone, being separated by the Lord from the rest of the world, as
a peculiar people and Church of God, and was not reckoned among the Nations;
they were not put into the common account, and therefore the Hebrew (...) and
the Greek (...) translated Gentiles and Heathen signifying properly Nations,
and being used in Scripture for all people except the people of Israel, agree
exactly with this passage, and shewe^^^ that Israel was not reckoned among the
Nations.

1. This shows that the Lord as a Sovereign, a supreme and absolute Lord
deals with his creatures according to his pleasure. What man is able to give
a reason why this people should be preferred above all others? That for so many
hundred years the rest of the world should be excluded as aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, etc. and Israel alone taken into Covenant with God? It
was not for any Righteousness the Lord sound in them, as Moses told them,
understand that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good land to possess it
for thy righteousness, Deuteronomy. 9. 6.
for thou art a stiff-necked people: Ph. 7. 7.
it was not because of the greatness of thy Nation, or the multitude of thy
people. The Lord did not set his love upon, and choose you because you were more
in number then any people (for ye were the fewest of all people) but because
the Lord loved you, etc. It was a pure act of grace, and work of Gods free love
toward Israel; and therefore the Apostle as one transported with admiration of
that which he could not comprehend, breaks out into this exclamation, O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God, Kom. 11. 33.
how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out!

2. Let us magnify the goodness of God toward the Nations of the world in
these latter days, that he has sent his only begotten Son into the world,
manifested in the flesh, to break down the partition wall that was between Jew
and Gentile; that as now that difference between several sorts of beasts, etc.
is taken away, so that they are not opposed to each other as legally clean and
unclean, as they were under the Law of Ceremonies: so the difference between
Israel and other Nations is now also abolished, and it is as free for an people
as for the posterity of Abraham to partake of the Covenant of grace in
Church Priviledges, both was declared to Peter by a vision and a voice from
Heaven; for Cornelius an Heathen Captain being directed by an Angel to send for
Peter, Act. 10. 10, 11, etc.
the Lord prepared this Apostle for the journey, by casting him into a trance,
and causing him to see Heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him
as it had been a great sheet, ver. 28.
wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts, and wild-beasts, and creeping
things, and Fowls of the Air; and there came a voice to him, Rise Peter, kill
and eat, but Peter said, not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing common
or unclean. And the voice spoke unto him again the second time^ what God has
cleansed, that call not thou common. Now when Peter came to Cornelius and his
company, He said unto them, ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man
that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another Nation, but God has
showed me that I should not call any common or unclean. The Lord spoke of
beasts, etc. Peter rightly applies it to men: so that the Lord Christ took
away the difference of clean and unclean that was under the Ceremonial Law,
both between men of several Nations, and between other Creatures. How should we
in particular stir up our selves to be thankful to the Lord, that he has
reserved us for these times, wherein it is as free for us descended from
Heathen Ancestors, to partake of the Privileges of God his Covenant, as for
the people of Israel; yea, when the Israelites being natural branches are cut
off through unbelief, we may be grafted in by faith. Let us take heed then
least our unbelief, impenitency, security, deprive us of this blessed
privilege; for though none now are unclean, in respect of the Nation whereof
they are, more then others, yet all are unclean in the sight of God, who remain
dead in trespasses and sins, out of Christ, whose Natures are not renewed and
cleansed from their filthiness.

3. Observe with thankfulness the liberal use of the Creatures which God has
given to his people now under the new Testament through Christ, above that
which he allowed the people of Israel under the old Testament, for now every
Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused if it be received with
thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4. 4.
Nothing that is wholesome for man's body is to be refused as unlawful: 1 Cor.
10. 23.
and so the same Apostle says, All things are lawful for me, viz. all sorts of
meats, for of such things he speaks in that place; and therefore whereas
blood in particular was forbidden under the old Testament, it is now lawful.

But it has been objected that blood was forbidden upon a moral reason, Obj.
taken from the Nature of the the thing forbidden, because the blood is called
the life of the Creature. Answ.
For answer I conceive, Genesis 9. 4.
this is no moral reason, but a natural reason, implying a mystery, scil. to
show that men should abhor cruelty and bloodshed: and so I suppose if we did
thoroughly understand the Natures of all the Creatures which the Israelites were
forbidden to eat; there might be some natural reason given for it comprehending
the Mystery. Again, it seems there was also a farther Mystery in the
prohibition of blood; Lev. 3. 17.
for eating of blood and fat are both forbidden together; scil. such fat as
used to be sacrificed, because the blood and fat were both in a peculiar manner
to be offered unto God. The blood poured forth signified the taking away the
guilt of sin by the death of Christ and shedding of his blood. The burning of
the fat (it seems) signified the mortification of sin by the spirit of
Christ; and so they might be forbidden both the eating the blood and fat, to
teach all not to take to themselves the honor either of their justification or
of their sanctification, but to ascribe it wholly unto Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 30.


But it may be said, Obj.
that blood was forbidden after Christ his death and resurrection, by the
Apostles and Elders in the Synod of Jerusalem. Act. 15.
I Answer,

It was but a temporary decree imposed upon the believing Gentiles, Answ. 1.
that they might not give offense to weak believers among the Jews who were not
yet clearly satisfied about the abolishing of legal Ceremonies, and the extent
of that Christian liberty which Christ had given them.

Secondly, Sect. 2.
An other Ceremonial observance, was the keeping of their solemn festivals.
Observance of Feasts.


1. In general. These feasts may intimate unto Christians that gound and matter
of joy which true believers have through Christ, 1. In general.
and accordingly that duty of holy rejoicing in Christ which they are called
unto: so the Angels said unto the Shepherds, Luke 2. 10.
Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be
unto all people, for unto you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior
which is Christ the Lord. Phil. 3. 3.
And the Apostle says, We are the Circumcision which worship God in the
spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus. This is that spiritual feast which the
Lord promised. Isa. 25. 6.
In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people, a feast of fat
things, a feast of wines on the lees of fat things full of marrow, of wines on
the lees well refined.

2. In special, In particular, Three Feasts* Exodus 23. 14, 15, 16. chapter 34. 22.
there were three solemn feasts which they were commanded to observe every
year.

1. The Feast of unleavened bread, which was annexed to the Passover: of this
somewhat has been formerly spoken.

2. The feast of Harvest, which was called the feast of weeks, it seems
because it was as it were a week of weeks, after that other feast of the
Passover and unleavened bread; scil* seven weeks, the same that is called
Pentecost, it is called the feast of Harvest, their Harvest being much earlier
then ours in that hot Country. This may teach Christians to stir up their
hearts to sincere thankfulness unto the Lord for all his blessings,
particularly for the increase of the fruits of the earth, that they may serve
the Lord with joyfulness and gladness of heart for the abundance of all things.
Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
At this Feast of Harvest, of weeks, or Pentecost, the Lord Christ having
ascended into Heaven about ten days before, did in a more glorious manner send
down the holy Ghost upon his Apostles, that so he might furnish them abundantly
with gifts, Act. 2.
graces, abilities to gather in his Harvest, to bring in the Nations of the
earth into his barn, into his Church, which before were in the open field of
ahe world, being strangers to Christ, and subject to Satan the God of the world
and Prince of darkness, He had said unto them, Lift up your eyes and look on
the fields, for they are white already to Harvest. Joh. 4. 35, 37, 38.
And herein is that saying true, One sows and another reapeth: I sent you to
reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor, other men labored and ye are entered
into their labors. The ancient Prop^ets that foretold of Christ his coming,
death, resurrection and ascension into Heaven, and that great and glorious
Harvest wherein the Nations of the world should be gathered into Christ, were
^eedsmen that did not live to see this rich crop brought into the barn: they
died long before the Son of God was manifested in the flesh, and the Gentiles
converted, but the Apostles were called to Harvest-work, to reap what the
Prophets had ^own, to gather in the Nations of the earth unto Christ; and here
the Lord Christ told them it was Harvest-time, the fields looked white^, the
fullness of time was come, and they were the reapers that must bring in his
Harvest, which he had so dearly paid for, even with the price of his most
precious blood; but it was needful that that they should be furnished in an
extraordinary measure and manner for such a work, and therefore the Lord Christ
said unto them, Luke 24. 49.
Behold I send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of
Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on high: do not fall rashly upon
the work until I have fitted you for it; and so he told them, Ye shall receive
power after the holy Ghost is come upon you, Act. 1. 8.
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth: after ye are thus fitted
and enabled for so great a work, ye shall go over the large field of the world
to bring in mine Harvest; and accordingly at this feast of Harvest, the day of
Pentecost, the Lord Christ sent down his spirit upon them, wonderfully enabling
them for this service.

Thirdly, 3. Feast.
There was a third feast, scil. the Feast of Ingathering, Exodus 23. 16.
at the end of the year, when they had gathered in their labors out of the
field; Lev. 23. 34, 39. 40.
I conceive when the last of their fruits, their vintage or Grapes, etc. were
gathered in: This I take to be the same which is called the feast of
Tabernacles: This was to begin on the fifteenth of the seventh month which
seems to answer to our September, and continued seven days; and again, it is
said to be at the time when they had gathered in the fruit of the Land; and
they were commanded to take boughs of goodly trees, branches of Palm Trees, and
the boughs of thick trees, ver. 42, 43.
and willows of the Brook, and to rejoice before the Lord their God seven days;
they were also commanded to dwell in Boothes seven days, that their Generations
might know that the Lord made the Children of Israel to dwell in Booths when he
brought them out of the land of Egypt. Neh. 8. 15, 16.
This feast was solemnly kept after the peoples return from Captivity.

1. This again may stir up Christians to thankfulness unto the Lord for all his
blessings, and particularly for the fruits of the earth as before.

2. This dwelling in Booths and slight Tents or Tabernacles made of green
boughs in memory of their condition when they came out of the Land of Egypt,
the house of bondage, may teach Christians often to call to mind their
afflictions and low condition out of which the Lord has at any time delivered
them; especially they that are in Christ should often and seriously remember
that woeful bondage and misery under sin and satan, and the danger of
condemnation, out of which the Lord Christ has delivered them, and labor to
be exceedingly thankful for it.

3. They were to go out of their dwelling houses to dwell in booths when they
had gathered in their fruits, least when their barns and storehouses were
plentifully filled they might forget God who gave them all these things, and
set their hearts upon the Creatures, resting in their outward enjoyments,
giving themselves up to voluptuousness, like him spoken of, Luke 12. Soul thou
have goods laid up for many years, eat, drink and be merry: but God said unto
him, Luke 12. 19, 20.
thou fool this night shall thy soul be required of thee; then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? Learn then in the midst of the
greatest abundance, to raise up your hearts above all earthly things, to make
God your portion, to walk with him in the light of his Countenance.

4. This dwelling in Booths or Tabernacles may teach Christians to be affected
as strangers here on earth, having no continuing City in this world, their
bodies being slight and weak frames easily dissolved, like summerhouses made of
green boughs that will suddenly wither; labor then to make sure of a building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, purchased by the
blood of Christ for all those that are sound in him: in as much as ye have no
continuing City here, seek one to come, and labor for sound evidence to clear
your title to it.

Fourthly, Besides these three great feasts, there was to be a memorial of
blowing the Trumpets upon the first of the same seventh month; Lev. 23. 24, 27.
and then upon the tenth day of that month, a day of Atonement, solemn
humiliation, repentance, and afflicting the soul: so the silver Trumpet being
sounded in the preaching of the word, summons the hearers to repentance, to
afflict their souls, to abase and humble themselves, to turn to the Lord with
all their hearts, Isa. 58. 1.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet and show my people
their transgressions and the house of Jacob their sins. This silver Trumpet was
sounded by John Baptist preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and saying, Mat.
3. 1. 2, 3.
Repent ye for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, for this is he that was spoken
of by the Prophet Isaiah saying; The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths strait. Yea, the Lord Christ
himself in his own person sounded this Silver Trumpet, From that time Jesus
began to preach and to say Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. He who
gave himself for a sacrifice, and poured forth his blood to make atonement and
reconciliation between God and sinners, did preach repentance to them to
prepare them for atonement and reconciliation. It is very lamentable to
consider how many live under the sound of the Silver Trumpet many years, and
yet are not prepared for atonement and reconciliation to God through Christ,
nor brought to the beginnings of sound and saving repentance; but either are
secure, careless, deadhearted, minding earthly things, or resting in outward
performances, or openly profane and wicked. Oh how dreadful will the sound of
that Trumpet be at the last day? for the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God. 2
These. 4. 16.
I say how dreadful shall the sound of that Trumpet be to such who go on
hardening their hearts in security and impenitency against the sound of the
Silver Trumpet of the Gospel.

2. The day of atonement and humiliation was about four or five days before the
feast of Tabernacles wherein they were to rejoice before the Lord: so sincere
humiliation and repentance make way for sound spiritual joy; Matthew. 5. 4.
Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted; godly sorrow makes
way for heavenly rejoicing: But when a man goes on to glut himself with the
pleasures of sins or earthly contents, not afflicting his soul for sin, he has
no part in this spiritual feast: to such belongs that sad threatening, Woe unto
you that laugh now, Luke 6. 23.
for ye shall mourn and weep.

Fifthly, Consider their manifold washings with water in diverse Cases, to
purify themselves from legal uncleanness, Lev. 14. 6, 7, 9. and 15. 13.
Ceremonial pollutions; as when any was cleansed from the Leprosy he was to be
sprinkled with water mingled with blood seven times, and afterward to wash
both his clothes and his body in water; so they that had running issues when
they were cleansed from them, were commanded to wash their clothes and their
bodies in water, and so in diverse other Cases. Now the Apostle John proves that
the Lord Jesus is The Christ, 1 John, 5. 6, 8. 10.
thus, This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, n^^ by water
only, but by water and blood, and i^ is the spirit that bears witness,
because the spirit is Truth: whereas there was great use of water and blood in
the Law of Ceremonies, the blood of the (...) and the water many ways used for
cleansing and purifying, it shows that all these things were accomplished in
Christ, and attained their end in him, he performed and fulfilled what was
signified and typified both by water and blood. His blood was shed as the blood
of the most perfect sacrifice to take away the guilt of sin, and to justify
sinners and save them from condemnation; and the sanctifying spirit and grace
of Christ, cleansing his people from the filth of sin, washing their hearts
from wickedness, and making them holy as he is holy, and therefore he adds,
ver. 8, there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, the water, and
the blood. And ver. 10, He that believes has the witness in himself; He that
savingly believes in Christ, being united to him by faith, has this threefold
witness in himself: the spirit of Christ witnessing with his spirit that he is
in Christ, reconciled to God by Christ, an adopted child and Heir of God
through Christ the only begotten Son of God, and Heir of all things: the blood
of Christ cleansing his Conscience from the guilt of sin; the grace of Christ
resembled by water, sanctifying him and conforming him to Christ in holiness;
so that such an one has an evidence in his own soul, both that Jesus is the
very Christ, and that he is his Christ; for he finds that Christ has
fulfilled that in and upon his soul which was figured by the blood and water
under the Law of Ceremonies. This is a blessed and most precious privilege
which all that are under the Gospel should labor with all diligence to make
their own. Oh, what an happiness is it for Christians to have this threefold
witness in themselves! In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word
be established. 2 Cor. 13. 1.
Here are three witnesses beyond exception. A Christian having this threesold
witness in himself, in the poorest outward estate, is richer and happier, then
all the treasures of the earth and all the Kingdoms of the world can make him;
but how few are they that have any other witness of their interest in Christ
but their own fancy? how few do seriously and diligently seek for any other? In
that great and last day, how will ye stand in the presence of God when
numberless sins are charged upon you? Will ye say Christ has satisfied for
your sins, what shall this profit you unless ye be united unto Christ? Will ye
plead that ye believe in Christ, and so are made one with him, where is your
witness? Oh take heed of appearing before the all-seeing God without a witness?
And therefore I beseech you consider seriously of your condition, and rest not
till ye are in Christ, and until he come into your souls both by water and
blood, and give you the witness of his spirit.

2. Those frequent washings under the Law of Ceremonies, may stir up Christians
to frequent endeavors daily to purify themselves as Christ is pure, 2 John 3.
3.
to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, Zach. 13. 1.
to draw cleansing and sanctifying virtue from Christ more and more by faith.
They were to wash their bodies and clothes, to be sprinkled with water seven
times. There is a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, a fountain of
most precious blood, and water of most Sovereign virtue: the sufferings of
Christ and the grace of God are to wash away the guilt of sin, and the
uncleanness and pollution of sin. Do not forsake your own mercies and neglect
so great salvation. It is sad that when such a precious fountain is opened, so
few are washed and cleansed. Thus much concerning the Ceremonial Law, to show
how and in what respects it is established by the doctrine of the Gospel.

CHAP. VII.
THere are two other Laws mentioned by the Apostle in the former part of this
Epistle, by neither of which men can be justified in the sight of God: One is
the Law of Nature, the other is the Moral Law, written and delivered in the
Scriptures. It was needful for the Apostle to speak distinctly of both these:
For,

1. His great design was to make known the only way whereby men might be
justified and accepted as righteous in the sight of God, the righteous judge of
all the world, that so they might be everlastingly blessed and saved; whether
by their own works and performances, or by the grace and free favor of God,
imputing to them the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and working faith
in their hearts by his spirit, thereby enabling them to receive Christ and
apply his righteousness to themselves.

2. For the deciding of this question, or the determining this controversy:
the hearts, lives, and actions of men were to be tried and examined by a rule
of righteousness which the supreme Lawgiver had given unto men.

3. The Apostle in this dispute having to do with two sorts of people: 1. The
Gentiles, or such as were strangers to the commonwealth or Church of Israel,
who had no written Law of divine Authority among them, he deals with them
another way, and goes about to convince them of their guiltiness and
unrighteousness and sinning against the Law of Nature. 2. The people of Israel
who for many hundred years had been the peculiar Vovenant People or Church of
God, and who had the moral Law of God written briefly with the finger of God in
Tables of stone, and more largely opened in other parts of Scripture, by holy
men inspired and moved by the holy Ghost. These he tries by this more full and
perfect Law, and proves them guilty of sin against the Law; and so concludes
that both Israelites and Gentiles were guilty before God, and there was none of
them righteous by his own works, no not one: and therefore all of them were to
go out of themselves and to flee to Christ by faith, that being found in him
they might be freely justified by his righteousness. I conceive therefore that
the Question or Objection in this Text being occasioned by the Apostles former
discourse, does concern all those Laws which he mentioned before, by which he
proves that men could not be justified, scil. the Ceremonial Law, the Law of
Nature, and the moral Law written; and accordingly the Answer takes in all,
Yea we establish the Law. But because these two do concern the same things,
forbidding the same sins and commanding the same duties; and what is more
imperfectly contained in the Law of Nature, is far more perfectly declared in
the Moral Law written. I do not hold it so necessary to show how these two are
severally established by the doctrine of the Gospel; for if this be made
evident concerning the moral Law written, which being more large and full
comprehends the Law of Nature in it, it will follow that the Law of Nature is
established also. Notwithstanding in as much as the Apostle has showed that
none can be justified by the light and Law of Nature, I think fit to speak
something briefly of that also, as conceiving it to be included in this
Objection, and the Apostles Answer to it. The point then which I observe is
this,

That God has given to men a light and Law of Nature: Doct. 5. God has given
men a Law of Nature.
This I take to be plainly expressed in diverse passages of the first and second
Chapters of this Epistle, and twice employed in this verse:

1. In the Objection, Do we then make void the Law through faith? Does the
doctrine of justification through the righteousness of Christ applied by faith,
excluding all other ways of justification, make the Law of Ceremonies, the Law
moral, the Light and Law of Nature (as formerly mentioned) of no effect,
altogether void, of no force or use?

2. In the Answer, We establish the Law; and as the Law of Ceremonies, and the
Law moral, so the Law and light of Nature: so that the Apostle shows
according to the point, that God has given unto men a light and Law of Nature.
Romans 1. 19, 20, 21.
That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it
unto them; for the invisible things of God are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they
are without excuse^, because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, etc. Where it is manifest the Apostle speaks of the Law and light of
Nature common to men in general, even to those that had no light of Scripture,
nor written Law of God, Rom, 2. 14, 15.
For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves:
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts; their Conscience also
hearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while (or between themselves)
accusing or excusing one another. For the underderstanding of this point let us
consider,

1. What this Light or Law of Nature is? It may be described thus, It is the
knowledge which God has given unto man in their natural estate since the fall
of men, 1. What this Law is.
whereby he has in some degree made known unto them himself, Description.
and the good they ought to do, and the evils they ought to shun.

1. It is given of God: so in both those places of Scripture mentioned before,
in the one (...) is said, God has showed it unto them: It is given of God.
in the other, they show the work of the Law written in their hearts. Now who
can write immediately upon the heart and soul, but God who is the Father of
spirits, who forms the spirit of man within him, and therefore I do not call
it the Law of Nature in this sense, as if it were propagated from Adam by
natural generation, but because it is given of God to men as generally, as if
it were born with them. The Prophet shows that God gives to the Husbandman
his skill and knowledge, for his God does instruct him unto discretion, and
does teach him; this also comes forth from the Lord who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working. So the Lord says of Bezaleel, I have filled
him with the spirit of God in wisdom and in understanding and in knowledge,
Isa. 28. 24. and 26. 28.
and in all manner of workmanship, to devise cunning works, to work in Gold and
in Silver, and in Brass, etc. So that if God be the giver of skill and ability
for arts and handy-crafts, we need not doubt but he is the Author of the light
and Law of Nature given unto man, whereby they see a difference between truth
and falsehood, good and evil; and the Lord may give excellent gifts of this kind
to such men, to whom he gives no sanctifying and saving graces.

2. It is a knowledge. So it is said, they knew God: they have a knowledge. So
it is said of Christ, Romans 1. 21.
that was the true light which lights every man that comes into the world.
Joh. 1. 9.
The Son of God gives this common light generally to men. This light differs
much from that light of life which Christ gives to them that follow him,
whereof he speaks, Chap. 8. I am the light of the world, he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, Joh. 8. 12.
but shall have the light of life. This is meant of a spiritual saving light
leading men to everlasting life, which is given to none but them that follow
Christ: but there is a common light and knowledge which Christ gives to them
that are strangers to him; yea, to such as are his enemies.

3. This Light and Law of Nature, 3. In their natural state.
is given unto men in their natural estate since the fall, since their nature
was corrupted by sin. Before the fall, while man was in the state of primitive
integrity, as God had created him in his own likeness after his Image, that is
in wisdom righteousness and true holiness, the light and Law which God
implanted in man was clear and perfect, man had an exact Rule imprinted upon
his soul to walk by. But this Rule being defaced by the sin of man, the Lord
gave men some degree of light and knowledge in this state of corrupt Nature,
which in many things might restrain their corruptions from breaking out into
such extremities as Satan and their own lusts might stir them up to, and
whereby they might be reduced into a more orderly course of life: and manifest
effects of this have been found, not only in natural persons living under the
Gospel which were strangers to the life of grace, but also in many Heathens who
never heard the doctrine of salvation; yea, in some heathen Persecutors of the
Church, as Trajan, Antoninus Philosophus, and Julian the Apostate.

4. It was said in the description that by this light of Nature God has in
some degree made known himself unto them. 4. Hereby they do somewhat know God.
So the Apostle says, that which may be known of God is manifest in them, Romans
1. 19.
for God has showed it unto them, I conceive by this (...), that which may be
known of God, the Apostle means that which may be known of God without
special Revelation, such as is declared in Scripture; this was manifest in them
by that common general light of Nature which God had given them: For,

1. They had inward principles of Natural light. And,

2. They had the works of God,

1. His works of Creation; For the invisible things of him from the beginning
of the world are clearly seen, ver. 20.
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiwork; their line is gone out into all the earth, and their words unto the
end of the world. The creatures do as it were speak out the excellency and
glory of their Creator to all the Nations of the world.

2. His works of Providence: God has made of one blood all Nations of men for
to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined the times before
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the Lord,
if happily they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far from
every one of us, for in him we live, move, and have our being. So the same
Apostle told the Heathens that God in times past suffered all Nations to walk
in their own ways, not giving them the light of his word to guide them in the
way of salvation, nevertheless (says he) He left not himself without witness
in that he did good and gave us rain from Heaven, Act. 14. 16, 17,
and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness: by his works
of Providence he made some discovery of himself unto them. I conceive by this
light of Nature within them, and the light which was held forth unto them by
the works of God from without, they might know that there was a God, and that
this God was of infinite perfection, eternal, almighty, most wise, good,
righteous, that he was to be served and worshipped iu such a way as was
pleasing to him, that as the world was made by him, so both it and all the
creatures in it were under his government, that as a righteous judge he would
punish evil doers, and reward the righteous. They might by the light of reason,
conclude that none of the creatures could make themselves; for nothing can act
before it has a being, and therefore all the creatures must receive their
beings from a cause that was before them: hereupon they might assuredly gather,
that there is a first universal cause of all things, who is eternal without
beginning, of infinite perfection. The orderly and perpetual motion of the
Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars: the continual succession of day and night: the
Spring, Summer, Harvest, Winter: the correspondency and Harmony that is between
the Creatures, being fitted and suited to each other; the sun drawing of
vapors from the earth, and waters into the air, there to be botled up in the
Clouds, the Clouds sending down showers upon the earth, the earth bringing
forth grass, herbs, corn, and other fruits for the use of men, beasts and
fowls; and the beasts and fowls themselves, fitted for the use of men; the
senses of the body and their objects fitted and suited to each other: there are
sounds and voices, and an ear to receive them, there are colors, and there is
the eye fitted to behold them, so of the rest; yea, how exactly are the several
parts of the same body fitted and suited to each other? These and many other
things discernable by the light of Nature, might clearly convince men that
there is a God of infinite power and wisdom who is the cause and Author of all.

Fifthly, 5. By that light they know somewhat of good and evil.
It was said that by this light and Law of Nature, God has given unto men in
some degree to discern the good which they ought to do, and the evil which they
ought to shun. So ye heard before, the Apostle says, The Gentiles having not
the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law; they do some things
contained in the written Law of God, though they have not this Law: How? by
Nature, by the Light and Law of Nature; and in so doing they show the work of
the Law written in their hearts. The Heathen Philosophers have written much in
commendation of moral virtues, and set forth the odiousness of many vices and
dishonest practices. Abimelech King of Gerar blamed Abraham, when out of
weakness calling his Wife his Sister, he seemed to lay a snare before him, and
give him occasion to commit adultery unawares: What have thou done unto us? and
what have I offended thee that thou have brought on me and on my Kingdom a
great sin? Thou have done deeds unto me that ought not to be done. So he said
to Sarah concerning her Husband Abraham, Behold he is to thee a covering of the
eyes, Genesis 20. 9, 16.
unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved. Thus
much of the description.

Secondly, This Law of Nature is imperfect.
We may consider the imperfection of this Law and Light of Nature.

1. In general, 1. Not able to bring to bliss.
It is not sufficient to bring men to blessedness and salvation. The Lord
Christ says, Joh. 14. 6.
I am the way the truth and the Life, Act. 4. 12.
no man comes unto the Father but by me, neither is there salvation in any
other, for there is none other Name under Heaven given among men whereby we
must be saved. Romans 10. 13, etc
Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved: How then shall
they call on him on whom they have not believed? It must be a prayer of faith,
and where sound faith is there are other saving graces. And how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? so that the light of Nature was not sufficient unto salvation.

2. In special, 2. Particularly defective in,
I conceive the Law and light of Nature was defective and imperfect,

1. In it self: 1. It self.
I suppose it did not make known unto men the great Mystery of Trinity in
unity, three persons in one God, nor the state of perfection wherein man was
created, nor his woeful fall and revolt from God. Their own experience taught
them that the Nature of man was inclined to evil, the powers of the soul
disordered, the senses misleading the affections, the affections leading reason
captive; but they had no light to discover to them the first cause of all this
mischief: they were as far to seek concerning the Remedy. That great depth of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, of God manifest in the flesh for man's
Redemption, was hidden from them: their own Consciences accused them and
condemned them as guilty, but they had no light to show them how divine justice
might be satisfied; they knew not of the blood, righteousness, sacrifice,
satisfaction of Jesus Christ God and man, that is sufficient to take away sin
and to make peace between God and sinners. The light of Nature could not enable
them to see into the mystical union between Christ and believers by his spirit
and their faith. The doctrines of free justification by the righteousness of
Christ imputed, of Regeneration, Adoption, Sanctification, Communion with God,
Resnrrection unto glory, are not revealed by the light of Nature. This light
did nor show them how to walk before God, unto all pleasing; it did not teach
them the right way of mortifying their lusts, of walking in the spirit; it did
not discover to them the special institutions of God, and ordinances of his
worship.

Secondly, 2. In the subject in which it was.
It was defective and imperfect by reason of the subject, the soul of man in
which it was: This light and Law of Nature being given to men in their corrupt
natural estate is much darkened by the Natural blindness, errors, vanities,
lusts that are in the minds and hearts of men; as if a man write upon fowl and
blurred Paper, how much is lost of that which is written? and how hardly is it
read, sometimes a sentence broken off in the midst, here and there half words,
one letter mistaken for another: so the light and Law of Nature being put into
the defiled hearts and souls of men, has many defects in it.

Thirdly, Sect. 3.
It may be considered of what use this light and Law of Nature was, since* it
was defective, The use of this Law of Nature.
and not sufficient to lead men to salvation. It might be useful,

1. For the glory of God, 1. For Gods glory.
who by this means had a witness in the hearts and Consciences of men, of
natural men, yea* of Heathens, that he loved righteousness and hated
wickedness, their own Consciences pleading for God against them.

2. It was of use for the preservation of humane societies, 2. For preservation
of humane societies.
in families and Commonwealths, keeping men within some limits of common
honesty, and preventing those outrages which the violence of men's lusts, and
the power of Satan might hurry them into.

3. I conceive it might be useful as a remote preparative for the receiving of
the Gospel in some to whom the word of salvation was tendered, 3. A remote
preparatory for receiving the Gospel.
for though the pride and prejudice of men's natural spirits might cause them to
resist the holy Ghost, speaking in the Gospel preached: yet the light of nature
well improved, finding nothing in the doctrine of the Gospel contrary to it,
but far above it, might incline the minds of many to attend to a far higher and
more glorious light, shining in the doctrine of salvation. I speak of this but
as a remote preparative whereby ingenuous spirits might be moved to give heed
to the Gospel, but it must be a far higher cause even the mighty power of
Christ his spirit, that can bring them to receive the Gospel in an effectual
and saving way.

Fourthly, Sect. 4.
How does this light and Law of Nature leave men without excuse? How does it
leave men without excuse.
I conceive,

First, Because they did in many things shut their eyes against the light, not
seeking to increase that light received, by improving their reason and
understandings: as one Candle lights another, so one degree of light improved
begets another, and so there is lumen de lumine, light (as it were)
springing from light, whereas light smothered ends in darkness.

2. Because they did not act according to that light received, nor walk
according to those natural abilities which they had. The Heathens lived in
gross Idolatry against the light of Nature, whereby they might have learned
that dead Images were utterly unfit to represent the living God. Carnal
Christians sin against the light of Nature: as in many other things, so I
conceive in not submitting to that higher light of spiritual Mysteries, so as
to receive the love of the Truth that they may be saved. The use of this may be,

1. To inform us, that Acts againt the Law of Nature are sings against God, not
only as they are against his written Law, Use 1.
but also as they are against the Law of Nature, because (as the point shows)
God has given unto men this light and Law of Nature: the impression of this
Law of Nature upon the hearts and souls of men, is one of the acts of his
legislative power. I conceive when the Prophet says, The Lord is our Judge,
the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us, Isa. 33. 22.
he speaks of God in reference to his Church, to whom he has a more peculiar
Relation of this kind: He gave them his Law written in the Scripture, and he
reigns over them as a King in a special manner, Psalm. 33. 62.
Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own Inheritance: the Church is the Lords Inheritance. A King may
have an hereditary* Kingdom which he makes greatest account of, and he may
have other tributary Kingdoms subject to him to which he gives Law also. So
David was King of Israel in a peculiar manner, but he had also the Kingdoms of
Edom, Moa^, Ammon, Syria, etc. under him. The Lord looks upon the Church as
his peculiar Kingdom, and to them he has given a perfect Law in writing in the
holy Scirptures; but besides that, he has a universal sovereignty and
Dominion, the Authority of a Lawgiver over all the Nations of the world, Psalm.
47. 2, 7.
Jews, Turks, Indians, etc. The Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King
over all the Earth. And again, God is King of all the Earth. And so he is a
Lawgiver to all the Nations of the Earth: If he gives not the light of his
word and his Law written in the Scriptures to many Nations, yet he gives to
them all the light and Law of Nature; and therefore the transgressions of the
Law of Nature are sins against God. The Apostle says, until the Law sin was in
the world, Romans 5. 13, 14
but sin is not imputed where there is no Law: nevertheless death reigned from
Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after tbe similitude of Adams
transgression. Sin was in the world before the Law was given on mount Sinai,
But how can it be just to charge sin upon them who had no Law against which to
sin? Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression: Who are they? Some seem to
understand Infants only, who sinned not actually in their own persons as Adam
did, yet dying in their infancy, were guilty of original sin. Others take it
for all that lived between the time of Adam and Moses who sinned not after the
similitude of Adams transgression, because they sinned not against an express
Law, given by revelation from Heaven, as Adam did, who sinned against that
express prohibition of God, forbidding him to eat of the fruit of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, under the pain of certain death and destruction. I
conceive this latter sense more probable, because of that special limitation of
time from Adam to Moses; for the case of those that dye in their Infancy, for
ought I know, is the same, whether before or after the time of Moses, before
and after the Law written; but the condition of those that lived between Adams
time and that of Moses differed from those that lived after. Now the Apostle
shows that death the punishment of sin fell upon them, so did many other
judgments, the flood destroying the old world, the shower of fire and brimstone
upon Sodom fell within the compass of that time; and therefore certainly they
were guilty of sin, and justly punished, because these calamities* were the
just judgments of God, who is the righteous judge of all the world; and
therefore although these sinned not against any positive Law of God delivered
to them either by word or writing, yet they sinned against the light and Law of
Nature which God had given them.

Secondly, Use 8.
This may show us the reason and the justice of those severe executions of God
upon Heathen Nations, who had no Scripture nor written Law to sin against. They
sinned against the Light and Law of Nature, Romans 1. 18, etc.
for the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, because that
which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
them, etc. The Judgments and Calamities public, national, private, personal,
brought upon any of mankind in several ages, are evidences of Gods wrath and
displeasure against them, and therefore proofs of their sin and guiltiness
against God; otherwise the Lord who is perfectly righteous would not bring
these evils upon them: and among the rest, the death of the body is a universal
declaration of the wrath of God against mankind for sin. If any should be free
from all other evils, yet this alone would be a sufficient proof of their
sinfulness; and therefore the Lord said unto Adam, and in him to each
particular person of his posterity, soon after he had sinned, and they had
sinned in him, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. By one man sin
entered into the world, Genesis 3. 19.
and death by sin, Romans 5. 12.
and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Every dead Corpse,
every Funeral that ye see or hear of, all the persons that have died from the
beginning of the world unto this day, have by their death manifested the wrath
of God against sin, and men's guiltiness before the Lord: for though through the
grace and mercy of God in Christ, the death of a true believer is turned into a
blessing and made an inlet or entrance into everlasting life, yet in its own
Nature it is a consequent of sin, and sin was the original of it. In special,
the Heathens who had not the mind of God so fully revealed to them as those
within the Church, yet had the Light and Law of Nature, and in sinning against
that Light and Law were justly punished; for they held the Truth in
unrighteousness. This common Light and Law of Nature was the Truth of God, und
they by opposing their wills and lusts against it, and so not following the
guidance of it, were found guilty of fighting against God and crossing that
Light which the Lord had given them, and therefore the Lord dealt with them as
Enemies. So the Lord punished Sodom and the Cities adjoynning with fire and
brimstone. So the Canaanites and Amorites were destroyed for their sins against
the Light and Law of Nature, Genesis 15. 13. 16.
and Israel was planted in their Land. The Lord told Abraham that his seed
should possess it, but not until after four hundred years, Why? Because the
iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full: so that it was the fullness of their
iniquity which was the cause of their destruction; it was because their sin was
come to its full height, that they were rooted out. So the Lord having
forbidden Israel the practice of diverse great sins says, Defile not your
selves in any of these things, for in all these things the Nations are defiled
which I cast out before you. Lev. 18. 24. 25.
And the Land is defiled, therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it,
and the Land it self vomiteth out the Inhabitants. The Lord threatened diverse
grievous Judgments by the Prophet Amos against many Heathen Nations, Amos 1.
and 2.
Syria, the Philistines, Tyrus, Edom, Ammon, Moab. All the miseries of war
brought upon Heathen Nations, what were they but revelations and real
demonstrations of the wrath of God from Heaven for their sins against the Law
and Light of Nature? The ruining of the Babylonish Monarchy by the Medes and
Persians, of the Persian by the Macedonians and Grecians; the Macedonians by
the Romans; of the Roman by the Saracens and Turks on the one side and diverse
Northern Nations on the other; these and the like were just Judgments of God
upon Heathens for sins against the Light and Law of Nature. So I conceive the
cruel Spaniards were unjust executioners of the righteous Judgments of God
upon the poor Indians or Americans for their sins against the same common Light
and Law of Nature: for the Lord executes just Judgments by wicked men, yea by
Devils, who aim not at all at the Lords end, but either delight to exercise
their malice and cruelty, or act thus to make a full conquest, and utterly
disable a people to make head again.

Thirdly, Use 3.
This may clearly convince us that the sins of Christians are far more heinous
then the sins of Infidels and Heathens, because they sin against the same Law
and Light of Nature which Heathens did, and beside against a far clearer Light
and more perfect Law delivered to them in the holy Scriptures of the old and
new Testament; for the Light and Law of Nature though it was given to the
Heathen, yet it was not peculiar to them, it was not limited to them alone, but
was common to them with others: it is given also to Jews who have the old
Testament also; it is given to Christians who have both old and new Testament,
and therefore their sins are highly aggravated. So the the Lord by the Prophet
Amos, having threatened heavy Judgments against those Heathen Nations mentioned
before, then turns his speech to the people of Judah, Thus says the Lord,
Am. 2. 4, 5.
for three transgressions of Judah and for four I will not turn away the
punishment thereof, because they have defiled the Law of the Lord, and have not
kept his Commandment, and their lies caused them to err, after the which their
Fathers have walked; but I will send a fire upon Judah and it shall devour the
Palaces of Jerusalem: they had the written Law and Commandments of God which
the other had not, and therefore they despised and kept not; they had the Truth
of God revealed from Heaven, and delivered to them by Moses and the Prophets
immediately inspired by the holy spirit of God, but they rather chose to walk
in lies after the example of their Fathers, Amos 2. 4, 5.
and therefore their sins were much more sinful than those of the Heathens.
Then he threatens Israel, scil. the rest of Israel, the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes who followed the sin of Jeroboam; charging them first with barbarous
cruelty and oppression contrary to common humanity, because they sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes. I conceive he speaks
especially against that great sin of Judges and Magistrates, in perverting
justice for Bribes, and withal against them which hired such corrupt officers
to act unjustly by giving them rewards; They sold the righteous for Silver,
they exposed the innocent to the lust and will of their Adversaries for money,
and the poor for a pair of shoes. ver. 6, etc.
either because being once corrupted with some considerable gains, they
afterward were so hardened in their sins, that they would pervert justice for a
pair of shoes, for a triflle; or else because they could not get much for
giving sentence against a poor man in his Cause, because their Adversaries
would not offer much to have their will of them who had little to loose: these
corrupt judges would transgress for a petty-bribe where no more was to be had.
That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, ver. 7.
or as one reads it, that pant or breath after the head of the poor, that
they may cast it down to the dust of the earth: If we take it the former way,
the sense may seem to be this, when they have overthrown the poor and laid him
in the dust, such is there inhumane cruelty, that they are not satisfied with
his misery, but desire his utter ruin and destruction. 2. An other sin was
abominable uncleannness, that Father and Son would lie with the same woman;
which is set forth and heightened with this aggravation, they profaned the holy
Name of God, pretending to be the people of God, and yet committing such
lewdness: this highly redounded to the Lords dishonor above the sins of mere
Heathens. 3. Their wicked glorying and triumphing in their oppression and
profaning that worship which themselves had embraced as religious, laying
themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, keeping the
garments of the poor which they had taken to pledge, and being so far from
restoring them according to the Law, that they durst lie upon them by the very
Altars, and drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God, feasting
themselves in the Temple of their God with the very spoils taken from those
whom they had unjustly condemned, these sins of Israel are aggravated diverse
ways in the words following: There Israel and Judah are both joined together,
Hear this word that the Lord has spoken against you O Children of Israel,
Chap. 3. 1, 2.
against the whole family which I brought up from the Land of Egypt, saying,
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish
you for all your iniquities: The Lord had owned them above others, and made
himself known to them above all other people, and therefore their sin was
greater than others, and they might expect more gievous punishments: How much
more are sins of professed Christians more heinous than those of the Heathens?
who have greater light then the people of Israel had, having the new Testament
added to the old; who have the Lord Jesus Christ set forth before them in the
Gospel, not under Types and shadows, but clearly, not as to come, but as
already come, actually crucified for sin, buried, risen again, ascended into
Heaven? The Lord Christ shows that the sins of Corazin and Bethsaida were
more heinous than those of Tire and Sidon, and their condemnation would be more
intolerable in the day of Judgment, Mat. 11. 22.
because they sinned against greater light. The like comparison he makes
between Capernaum and Sodom. And the very Name of Christian is an aggravation
of the sins of those who profess themselves Christians. This Name was first
given to them that professed the faith of Christ at Antioch, because of the
great success of the Gospel there. Barnabas and Saul or Paul, a whole year
assembled themselves with the Church and taught much people, Act. 11. 26.
and the Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch. The denomination of
a Christian is derived from the blessed and glorious Name of Christ himself as
he is anointed of God the Father with the spirit above measure: What
signifies a Christian then, but 1. A member of Christ united to him as the
head of the whole mystical body of the Church? How great is the sin of those
that can themselves Christians, and suffer themselves to be led by Satan the
enemy of (...), readily entertaining his suggestions and temptations, serving
this Prince of darkness in the work of darkness? Says the Apostle, Shall I
take the members of Christ and make them the members of an Harlot? 1 Cor. 6. 15.
God forbid, or let it not be: What, know ye not that he which is joined to an
Harlot is one body? for two says he, shall be one flesh. It is a fearful thing
for a man professing himself a Christian, that is, a member of Christ, to make
himself a member of an Harlot: or for a woman making the same profession, to
make her self the member of a fornicatour or Adulterer.

2. The name of a Christian signifies one that partaketh of the anointing of
Christ, of the same spirit and the same graces, in some measure wherewith
Christ was anointed above his fellows, 1 Cor. 1. 21.
yea above measure: He which stablisheth us with you and anointeth us is God.
The graces of Christ derived from him to Christians, Ex. 30. 23, 24.
are compared to that precious ointment under the Ceremonial Law, that was made
of principal spices, pure Myrrh, sweet Cynamon, sweet Calamus and Cassia,
sweet Aromatical choice ingredients, which being artificially compounded
together, what a sweet and fragrant smell did it yield? But how far does the
sweet savor of that spiritual ointment, the graces of the spirit derived from
Christ to true Christians, excel this material ointment? How great is their
guilt in the sight of God that profess themselves Christians, that is, anointed
of God, and yet cherish in their hearts noisome and unsavory lusts, and wallow
in the mire, and in the stinking sinks of abominable sins? who profess
themselves Christians, i. e. anointed with heavenly gragrac^s, and yet remain
graceless and profane.

3. The Name Christian signifies a Disciple, a Scholar, a follower of Christ.
How great is thy sin? 1. If under this name thou live in ignorance, do thou
not herein cast a great reproach upon the Lord Jesus Christ? Have thou been 20,
30, 40 years his Disciple, his Scholar, and have thou learned little or nothing
all this while? Had thou any sincere love to Christ and his doctrine, how is
it that thou have profited no more? 2. Will thou call thy self a Christian,
that is, a Disciple or follower of Christ, and do thou not cease to act and
walk contrary to him, in drunkenness, in riot, revellings, chamberings,
wantonness, etc. Do thou not herein highly dishonor Christ in calling thy
self a Christian or follower of Christ? Is not this as if thou should say
Christ taught thee these things, and walked before thee in such ways as these?
Oh take heed lest thou be found guilty of a kind of real and implicit
blasphemy! Is it not either a mocking of Christ, or an implicit blaspheming of
Christ for people to call themselves Christians, that is, followers and
scholars of Christ, and to go on from time to time in lewd and wicked courses?
How grievous is the sin of them that live under the Gospel and are more
obstinate, more stubborn, Mat. 11. 2^.
more hardened in their sins than diverse of the Heathens! Mat. 12. 41.
So the Lord Christ shows that the Heathens of Tire and Sidon would have
repented in sackcloth and ashes, if the same means had been afforded them which
Corazin and Bethsaida had. The men of Nineve shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it because they repented at the preaching of
Jonas, and behold a greater then Jonas is here. If the Ninevites abounding in
wealth and pleasure, their City being the head of the Assyrian Monarchy, an
Heathenish people, did so far relent at the preaching of Jonas who came among
them from a strange Nation; Oh tremb^e to think of your account if ye continue
to harden your hearts against so many sermons, so many messages brought unto
you in the name of Christ and confirmed by his Authority. Will ye be able to
hold up your faces before the men of Nineve in the day of Judgment? How
grievous is the sin of professed Christians living under the light of the word
and Gospel of Christ, who on the one side having nothing in them better then
the wiser sort of Heathens. And 2. Live in such practices as the better sort of
Heathens abhorred and scorned? 1. How many living under the Gospel have nothing
in them better then some of the Heathens; nothing practically better, no better
frame of soul, no better resolutions and affections, nothing of Christ his
regenerating spirit, nothing of his renewing grace, nothing of the new
creature. It may be they have some more knowledge of Christ and his Gospel then
Heathens; so have the Devils: but they have no better hearts than Heathens. 2.
How many such live in the ordinary practice of such sins which the wiser sort
of Heathens abhorred and scorned? How disgraceful was drunkenness by the light
of Nature to sober Heathens, and how did they despise drunkards? What
discourses have Seneca and Pliny against drunkenness, setting it forth not only
as odious but as ridiculous, showing the baseness and sillyness of such
courses: Yea, Are there not many Turks at this day who would scorn to make
themselves such sotts as many professed Christians do? What notable passages
has Tully against chearing and indirect dealing in matter of Contracts,
Bargains, etc. The like may be said of many other Cases. Let us then lay to
heart the abounding of sin and wickedness among us against the light and Law of
Nature, aggravated by the light of the written Law, the everlasting Gospel of
Christ, and yet humble our selves and cry mightily unto the Lord, if it be
possible that his wrath may be turned away from us; and let us every one in
particular exceedingly tremble to be found Christians in name, and Heathens in
heart and life, and therefore worse than mere Heathens.

CHAP. VIII.
I Proceed now to the Moral Law, concerning which the Apostle says it is
established by the doctrine of Justification through the Righteousness of
Christ apprehended by faith without any consideration of the works of the Law
performed by the person justified. By the the Moral Law I understand, the Law
written in the Scripture, whereof we have a brief sum or Abridgment in the ten
Commandments, which again is contracted into a narrower compass, Mat. 22. 37,
38, 39.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all soul, and
with all thy mind. This is the first and greatest Commandment, and the second
is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The Law thus
abridged, is largely unfolded in other parts of Scripture, with the additions
of many threatenings against disobedience, and promises to obedience. 1. then I
intend to propose a general point of doctrine, and then to point at the
particulars comprehended in it. The general doctrine is this,

That the Gospel teaching the free justification of Believers without
consideration of any works of theirs done in obedience to the Law, 6. Doct. In
general propounded.
but through the Righteousness of Christ alone, applied by faith, does
establish the moral Law. So it is showed in this Text, Through faith the Law is
established. That which I desire to clear unto you is, How the Moral Law
stablisht by faith.
how or wherein the moral Law is established by faith: this may be showed.

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.
And so we may come to the several branches or special doctrines comprised in
this general.

1. Negatively, Sect. 1. Negat.
thus, The moral Law is not established, but declared to be of no use for the
justification of sinners in the sight of God, by the doctrine of justification
through the Righteousness of Christ imputed of God and applied by faith: Or,
more briefly for help of Memory thus,

Justification by faith in Christ, 1. Particular Doct.
excludes justification by the works of the Law. This ye may take as a point
of doctrine implied in the Text, if it be compared with the Apostles foregoing
discourse, to which it has relation. For the Apostle speaks of it as of a
thing strongly proved and concluded as clear and certain, that it being
declared and demonstrated that none have fulfilled the Law but all are found
guilty of sin against the Law, therefore none can be justified in the sight of
God by the works of the Law; hence it follows that there is no way remaining
for any of mankind to be justified and approved righteous before God, but only
through the righteousness of Christ imputed to them of God and applied by
faith: Hereupon arises the Q^estion or Objection in the Text, Do we then, etc.
and the Answer is, Yea, we establish the Law, that is, it is established in
other respects, and for other ends and uses, but is declared to be void and of
no use at all for the justifying of sinners by any works which they can perform
in obedience to the Law. So that as the Ceremonial Law is declared by the
doctrine of the Gospel to be of no use either for justification of sinners or
for outward observation, and yet established in other respects as has been
showed: so the moral Law by the same doctrine of the Gospel, is declared to be
of no force for justification of sinners, and yet established in other
respects. For the present the Negative is to be considered. So the Apostle
having spoken of the privileges of the people of Israel above the Gentiles, as
in other regards, so chiefly because unto them were committed the oracles of
God, then moves a Q^estion, What then? Are we better than they? No in no wise:
for, we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles that they are all under sin,
Romans 3. 9, 10.
as it is written, there is none righteous no not one. The Israelites though
they had outward Church Priviledges above the Gentiles, yet were no better by
Nature than they; they were children of wrath by Nature as well as others, and
it was as impossible for them to be justified by their own righteousness or
works of obedience to the Law, as it was for the Heathen. Therefore by the
deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Two things may
be considered here for the opening and confirming this point. ver. 20. The
point cleared by, 1. General grounds.


The first is this, What grounds there are in general to prove that none can be
justified by their own works p^rformed in obedience to the Law.

2. How this is declared by the doctrine of the Gospel. 2. Particular
declaration of the Doctrine of the Gospel.
Of the former, the general grounds may be three, The first taken from the
consideration of the state of man, as he is in and of himself. Three general
grounds- 1. From man's state, 2. From the nature of the Law. 3. From God.
The second from the Law. The third from God who is both the Lawgiver and Judge.

1. From Man. He is from his birth a lump of flesh filled with carnal lusts and
fleshly corruptions. That which is born of the flesh is flesh* and in this
flesh dwells no good thing, Joh. 3. 6.
and this carnal and fleshly mind is enmity against God* Romans 7. 18.
it is not subservient to the Law of God, Chapter 8. 7. 8.
neither indeed can be; so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God,
they are all dead in trespasses and sins* inclined to walk according to the
course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
and are by Nature the children of wrath; Genesis 6. 5.
and therefore every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart by Nature is
only evil continually: and therefore the Apostle counted all things which he
had of himself out of Christ loss and dung, Phil. 3. 7, 8.
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus: all his own righteousness
and best performances out of Christ were as loss and dung, and therefore of no
weight nor worth toward his justification, of no value at all towardrs the
satisfying of Gods justice.

If any say that after he was in Christ renewed by his spirit his works were of
some value, Obj.


I Answer, 1. That is nothing to the business in hand; Answ. 1.
for when once the soul is united to Christ it is already justified upon
another account, scil* through the perfect righteousness of Christ, and none
can find acceptance with God for their persons or services until they are in
Christ and justified; and therefore these services and duties make nothing
toward their justification, but follow upon their justification.

2. The best duties of the best saints of God in this life are not answerable
to the perfect purity and exactness of the Law: 2. From the Law's exactness.
and that is the second ground whereby it may appear that none can be
justified, or approve themselves righteous before the Lord by any works of
obedience to the Law, scil.

1. The consideration of the purity and perfection of the Law.

2. The severity of the Law, not bearing with the least aberration or swerving
from it or transgression against it.

1. The perfection of the Law. The Law is holy and the Commandment holy and
just and good. Romans 7. 12. 14.
The Law is spiritual, it is a complete and perfect rule of righteousness, and
it is not for the imperfection of the Law that it does not make men righteous,
but it is because of the imperfection and corruption of men who cannot answer
the perfection of the Law.

1. The Law requires a full and perfect conformity of the whole man, of all
the powers of the soul and affections of the heart, and so of all the senses
and parts of the body, to the strait and pure rule of the Law, that there
should be nothing contrary to the Law, nothing defective or wanting. This is
the voice of the Law, Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 56.
Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, This perfect love includes
perfect knowledge, faith, etc*
and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,
and with all thy migbt, and these words which I command thee this day shall be
in thine heart. The Law requires a perfect conformity unto its self, that the
whole heart and soul should be filled with the love of God, that the whole
strength of the heart and soul, all the might of the inner man should be bent
upon God, and carried after God in love, and so by consequent that there should
be nothing in the heart or soul in the least degree contrary to the love of
God, not the least love of any sin, nor the least inclination toward it; for
the least declining of the heart or soul toward sin is contrary to the Law,
which requires the whole heart or soul to be given up to God in love, and that
with all its strength or might: yea, the least remission of love, the want of
love in the full perfection of it, is an (...), it is against the Law, and
condemned by the Law: the want of the perfection of holiness and righteousness
in the ^rame of the heart and soul is against the Law. I am the Lord your God,
ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, Lev. 11. 44. and 19. 18.
and ye shall be holy, for I am holy. The Lord in his Law proposes himself,
his own perfect holiness as a pattern of holiness to men and women. So the Lord
in his Law says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. So that the least
want of love unto our neighbor, the least defect in love is condemned, the
least inclination contrary to love is forbidden. Then again whatsoever is
contrary to the right order of the affections in relation to God and our
neighbor is against the Law, for the Law commands to love God with all the
mind, etc. And this is the first and greatest Commandment, that of love to our
Neighbor is the second, and therefore love to God is to hold the chiefest
place: and so the weighty and principal duties of the first Table, scil. those
toward God are to be looked at as the principal, and love to our Neighbor is
to be subordinate unto this love to God. God is to be loved for himself: Men
are to be loved in the Lord and for the Lord. Now every inordinate affection,
every disorder of the affections this way, is against ^he Law. When the first
and greatest Commandment is (as it were) turned into the second, when any man
has an higher place or greater share in thine affections then God.

The Law forbids and condemns whatsoever in the heart or soul is contrary
to any Commandment of the Law: not only ^ctual thoughts, but the inherent
corruption, every inclination to evil, whatsoever distemper there is in the
heart and soul contrary to any branch of any Command either of the first or
second Table. 1 John 3. 4*
All sin is (...) whatsoever is contrary to the Law. Now the very inclination
to sin is contrary to the Law and therefore sinful. Every inclination to
distrust, to Idolatry, superstition, to the dishonor of God, etc. is condemned
by the Law. This is the sin that naturally dwells in every one, the
corruption of Nature propagated from Adam, the body of sin cross and contrary
to the body of the Law in every point, in every iota or title. 3. All omissions
of duties toward God and men are condemned by the Law. 4. All commissions of
sin in thought, word, and deed, are condemned by the Law, every evil thought,
every vain thought, every profane, ^ngodly, obscene, unchaste, malicious speech,
every idle word, every action contrary to the Law, grosser actions, looks,
gestures. And as we are to consider the perfection of the Law: so on the the
other side take notice of the severity of the Law. 2. Laws severity.
The Law spares not the least sin, but denounces a curse against every one,
Cursed is every one that confirms not all the words of the Law to do them,
Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
and as the Apostle has it, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed i^ every one that continues not in all things written in the book of
the Law to do them. Nothing contrary to the Law can escape the curse o^ the
Law. The word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, Heb. 2. 2:
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward.
This word was the Law, in the delivering whereof, the Lord was pleased to use
the ministry of Angels. Gal. 3. 19.
Such is the severity of the Law, that it spares no transgression or
disobedience, but lays a penalty upon every one.

3. Consider the perfect, 3. From the infinite purity of God.
the infinite justice, holiness, purity, majesty of God, who is both the Law
giver and the Judge, who gave his pure and perfect Law, and who will judge
impartially by the Law, Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man be
more pure than his Maker? Joh. 4. 17, 18, 19.
Behold he put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly.
How much less on them which dwell in houses of clay whose foundation is in the
dust. Says the Psalmist, O Lord my God thou art very great, Psalm. 104. 1. etc.
thou art clothed with honor and majesty, who coverest thy self with light as
with a garment: behold the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted
as the small dust of the balance: Isa. 40. 15, 16.
behold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. chapter 6. 1, 2, 3.
All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing and vanity, The Prophet Isaiah in a glorious vision beheld a
representation of the divine Majesty, says he, I saw the Lord sitting upon a
Throne high and lifted up, and his train filled the Temple: about it stood the
Seraphims, each one had six wings, with twain he covered his face, and with
twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly, and one cried unto
another and said, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is
full of his glory. With what terror, glory and majesty did the Lord appear on
Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 16. 10. 18.
when he published the Law to the people of Israel? There were Thunders and
Lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the Mount, and the voice of a Trum^et
exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the Camp trembled, and Mount
Sinai was altogether on a smoke because the Lord decended upon it in fire, etc.
And Moses told the people, Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
The Lord thy God is a consuming ^re, Rev. 1. 14.
even a jealous God. Now lay these things together, His eyes were as a flame of
fire.
the woeful corruption of man's Nature every way contrary to the holy Law of God
as darkness is to light, having nothing in it conformable to the Law, the
^umberless sins of omission and commission ^f each person against the Law, the
just ^igour and severity of the Law denouncing ^curse against every
transgression and dis^bedience, the unspeakable, unconceivable, ^^finite
purity, justice, majesty of God, who (...) both Lawgiver and judge: And then
^ow clear is it that none can be justified in the sight of God by any works of
theirs performed in obedience to the Law?

Secondly, 2. The doctrine of the Gospel declares this.
But there was a second thing proposed, scil. to show how it appears by the
doctrine of the Gospel, that none can be justified by any works performed by
themselves in obedience to the Law. The Angel said to Joseph concerning Christ,
Thou shall call his name Jesus, Mat. 1. 21.
for he shall save his people from their sins. He shall save them, and
therefore their own works shall not save them. He shall save them from their
sins, and therefore he found them in their sins, poor, guilty, condemned
creatures, and such as could not be saved or justified by their own works or
righteousness. The Lord Christ the night before he died said, This is my blood
of the new Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Mat. 26.
28.
The Lord Christ did shed his most precious blood for the remission or
forgiveness of sins: He by his death and obedience satisfied the justice of
God, for the sins of those who could not satisfy for themselves by any works
of righteousness of their own: compare this with that of the Apostle, I do not
frustrate the grace of God, for if righteousness come by the Law, Gal. 2. 21.
then Christ is dead in vain. This shows clearly that justification by the
righteousness of Christ and justification by a man's own works performed in
obedience to the Law cannot stand together. Christ died to purchase forgiveness
of sins, and justification for his people; but if any would be justified by the
Law, they go about to frustrate the grace of God, as if Christ had died in
vain. Christ is become of none effect to you, Gal. 5. 4.
whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace: when he
says, Whosoever, etc. he does not grant that any are or can be justified by
the Law, Heb. 7. 25.
but whosoever rely upon the works of the Law for justification, hoping to be
justified by the Law, they loose the benefit of Christ's death and satisfaction.
The Lord Christ is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, and therefore none of them do save themselves, or justify themselves in
any part. Gal. 3. 11, 12.
There is a most clear place to show that justification by works, and
justification by faith cannot stand together, that no man is justified by the
Law in the sight of God is evident, for the just shall live by faith, or, the
just by faith shall live, and the Law is not of faith, but the man that does
them shall live in them. Justification, righteousness, everlasting life and
salvation, is obtained by faith in Christ, applying his righteousness to the
soul; but the Law is not of faith, but the man that does them shall live in
them. The Law is a Covenant of another Nature, the man that does the works of
the Law shall live in them. There is no possibility of being justified by the
Law, unless a man could perfectly fulfill it: this is impossible for any man to
do. 1. Because of the corruption of his Nature which is every way contrary to
the Law. 2. Because all, and far more than all that he can do for the time to
come is due debt to the justice of God, and cannot make the least satisfaction
for his sins past, no not for any one of those numberless sins whereof he was
formerly guilty. 3. Because the best man's righteousness is imperfect, and
falls short of the perfection of the Law, and no righteousness can satisfy
the justice of God, but that which is complete and perfect; and therefore the
righteousness and performances of the holiest men are of no account at all in
the sight of God toward their justification.

But it may be said, Ohj.
that the Apostle James says, Jam. 2. 24.
Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, Answ.
and not by faith only. For Answer to this, I conceive, That this Apostle James
here directs his speech to this end, s^il. to show the vanity and folly of
those who deceive themselves with a shadow of faith, presumptuously fancying to
themselves an interest in Christ, imagining that their sins are forgiven, and
their persons justified by his death, satisfaction, and righteousness, but
their faith is not sound, it is not such a faith as truly receives Christ into
the heart, whereby Believers are made one with Christ, possessing him,
partaking of his spirit which stirs them up to conform themselves to Christ,
to follow him, to bring forth the fruits of the spirit; and therefore he says,
ver. 20. Faith without works is dead. So it is a working faith which
justifies, because such a faith alone does truly lay hold of Christ and his
righteousness: On the other side, holiness and good works do not at all
justify believers in a proper sense, but evidence the persons to be justified,
because they show that such by faith unfeigned are united unto Christ, whose
righteousness alone does justify, and therefore he says, ver. 14.
What does it profit my Brethren, if a man say he has faith and have not
works? Can faith save him? He speaks of such as say they have faith, not of
those that have a lively saving faith indeed. So ver. 19. he speaks to such,
Thou believe that there is one God; thou do well, the Devils also believe
and tremble. So that he shows that a dead faith is but such a faith as the
Devils have, which is far from justifying and saving those that have it.

2. I conceive his meaning is, Answ. 2.
that holiness and the fruits of faith do declare and manifest true believers
to be justified before men. A man will say thou have faith and I have works;
show me thy faith without thy works, ver. 18.
and I will show thee my faith by my works: as if he had said, Natural life
shows it self by the motions and actings of life: so does spiritual life
evidence it self by the motions and actings of spiritual life. True faith
embracing Christ and his righteousness for justification, is a principle of
spiritual life: Thou therefore who pretendest to have this faith, how can
thou make it appear, how can thou show or declare it, when thou put forth
no motions or actings of spiritual life?

The use of this may be,

1. To show us the miserable and woeful estat of all that are not in Christ. 1.
Use.
They are no justified, The misery of all out of Christ.
they cannot be justified in that condition, for there is no way for men to be
justified in the fight of God by any works of their own performed in obedience
to the Law, and if they be not justified, then they are condemned, there is no
middle estate between these two. So the Apostle implies, where speaking of
those that are in Christ, he faith, Romans 8. 33, 34.
It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? This shows that they
that are justified and accepted as righteous in the sight of God are not
condemned, and so on the contrary, they that are not justified are condemned:
All then that are not in Christ are in the state of condemnation, so it is
implied, ver. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. So on the
other side, there is no justification, no salvation to them that are not in
Christ Jesus, He that believes not is condemned already, Joh. 3. 18.
he is condemned for his sin, the sentence of condemnation is passed upon him
by the Lord, and he wants a sound saving faith to lay hold on Christ, and his
righteousness, whereby alone he might be justified and freed from the sentence
of condemnation, and therefore while poor souls remain in this condition, what
can they do, but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation
of the righteous judgment of God? People may attend upon ordinances, Romans 2. 5.
perform diverse duties in public and in private, and yet still lie under the
sentence of condemnation: They may make some kind of reformation, refraining
from some outward gross acts of sin, they may be civil and orderly in their
conversations above many other, and yet the wrath of God may still abide upon
them. In this case it is not enough to alter your course in some things, but
your state and condition must be altered: nothing can help you while you are
out of Christ and stand upon your own bottoms. Romans 9. 31, 32.
Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness has not attained to the
Law of righteousness: Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law. Those Israelites that were zealous of the Law,
and sought to be justified by it, while they were not in Christ their zeal was
not according to knowledge, and they might take a great deal of pains, and use
earnest endeavors to attain Righteousness, to approve themselves just in the
sight of God, but all was in vain: they attained not to such a Righteousness as
could bear them out in the sight of God, the righteous Judge of all the world.
They were like men that run very swiftly, but run quite out of the way and
never come near the mark.

But some may say Our case is not like that of the unbelieving Israelites, Obj.
for we look for justification, forgiveness of sin and salvation by Jesus
Christ.

I Answer; Answ.
It is not the hearing of Christ preached nor an historical faith, believing
that none can be justified but by the righteousness of Christ, no nor a
conceit that we are justified by him, that makes your case differ in the main
from that of unbelieving Israelites: ye have some Notions which they had not,
but ye are in the same state wherein they were, i. e. ye are out of Christ, and
therefore while ye content your selves with this condition, your endeavors
after righteousness are like those that run out of the way.

And therefore in the second place, See your extreme need of the Lord Jesus,
and go out of your selves, flee to him, and give your souls no rest until ye
are found in him. Consider, as ye cannot be justified by your own righteousness
or works done in obedience to the Law, whether ye look upon your selves as ye
are in your selves, or upon the purity, perfection, and severity of the Law, or
upon the infinite justice, holiness or majesty of God; so on the contrary,
Christ and none but Christ is able to justify you by his righteousness in all
these respects.

1. He is a Lamb without spot and blemish, and that from the first moment of
his conception. Mat. 1. 20.
So the Angel said to Joseph, Thou Son of David fear not to take unto thee Mary
thy Wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost, the blessed
Spirit framing a body for Christ in the womb of a Virgin, Job. 14. 30.
free from all stain of sin. There was never any thing in him contrary to the
perfect purity of the Law, no inclination to evil. Says he, The Prince of this
world comes, and has nothing in me. Satan could find nothing of his in Christ
to fasten upon, no sinful infirmities or Corruption in the least degree; and
therefore in respect of Christ himself, he could have no power by his
instruments to take away his life: but in regard of the sins of others which he
took upon himself, and for which he voluntarily gave himself an offering and a
sacrifice.

2. If we look to the Law, Christ has that in him which is wanting in us, he
answers the exactest Purity and highest perfection of the Law. He was perfect
in Love. That which we have, Psalm. 40. is applied to Christ by the Apostle,
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened: burnt
offering and sin-offering have thou not required: Psa 40. 6, 7, 8
then said I, Lo I come, Heb. 10.
in the volumn of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will O my
God, yea thy Law is within my heart: his heart was filled with the love of God,
and full of the Law of God, he was freely ready to do or suffer any thing for
his Fathers glory. As the Law is holy, so he is the holy and the just one. As
the Law is spiritual, so he was anointed with the holy Ghost. He received the
spirit not by measure. He is a quickening spirit. As the Law is a perfect rule
of Righteousness: Mat. 3. 15.
so Christ fulfilled all Righteousness.

3. He endured the uttermost rigor and severity of the Law. He bare the
penalty of it, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them: Then it follows, Christ has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, Gal* 3. 10. 13.
being made a Curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree. The Curse of the Law is enough to swallow up all the guilty souls in
the world, and to keep them under for ever, but Christ bare this Curse and
overcame it, he paid the uttermost farthing that was due to the justice of God
for the sins of his people: he fully discharged all those vast sums wherein
they were indebted. Says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 2.
Christ has loved us and given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling savor. Heb. 9. 14.
Christ through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God. What
tongues of men or Angels are able to declare the weight and worth of that which
is noted in this expression, That Christ gave himself an offering and sacrifice
for sins; What could the extremest severity of the Law require more than this,
when the Son of God gave himself to satisfy it.

4. He is every way able and fit to stand before the infinite justice, purity,
holiness, Majesty of God; he is the express Image of his Fathers person, and
the brightness of his glory; and he is able to bear the brightness of his
glory. Of him the Father witnessed, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased: Mat. 3. 17.
He being in the form of God, Phil. 2. 6.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God. He being God and man, as he was
man did undergo the penalty and Curse of the Law, and by the power of his
Godhead overcame it, and being God and man, he is able to bear the brightness
of his Fathers glorious Majesty, and to stand before his perfect justice: says
the Scripture, When he had by himself purged our sin, Heb. 1. 3.
he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Now then in as much as
the Lord Christ is every way a complete and most perfect Savior, Labor out of
a deep sense of your lost condition in your selves, and your extreme need of
him, his satisfaction and righteousness, to go out of your selves, to break off
your sins by repentance, to flee to Christ, to close with him by faith
unfeigned; that being found in him, his righteousness may be imputed to you of
God, and accounted yours, and ye may be accepted through him: Be exceedingly
earnest with the Lord to work in you that precious faith of his elect: Cry unto
him to stretch out his hand, to put forth the divine power of his spirit and
grace, to draw you effectually that you may come to Christ, and being clothed
with his righteousness, ye may not be found naked, but the shame of your sins
may be covered, and ye may have holy boldness and confidence before the Lord.
What a blessed privilege has the soul which can say with the Apostle, I am
crucified with Christ, Gal. 2. 20.
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God* who loved me and
gave himself for me. How happy shall thou be, if finding thy self in Christ,
and finding Christ dwelling in thine heart, thou can assure thy self that
thou art washed in his blood from all thy sins, that he has crossed all thy
sins out of the Debt Book of Gods justice, that he is thine Advocate with the
Father, and the propitiation for thy sins, pleading thy cause at the right hand
of God, and bearing thy name among the rest of the Israel of God, upon his
breast plate for a memorial continually: Bend thy care and endeavor to the
uttermost toward this one thing necessary, to make sure of Christ, and his most
perfect Righteousness.

5. Renounce all trust, abhor any degree of confidence in thine own Graces,
duties, services. Grow in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ,
watch always, fear always, bring forth much fruit, labor to do holy duties
in sincerity with servency of spirit, strive after perfection more and more,
that thou may fill thy mouth with arguments, abundance of evidence, that thou
art truly united unto Christ by a lively principle of faith unfeigned, and so
justified by his Righteousness; but do not entertain the least thought that
way, as if all that thou have done or can do should make the least
satisfaction to the justice of God for any of thy sins, or any way help toward
thy justification: In a word, Take heed of splitting thy soul against either of
these two Rocks, either on the one side deceiving thy self with a dead faith
without holiness and fruits of faith, and so thinking thy sins to be pardoned,
and thy person justified, when it is nothing so: Or on the other side resting
with any confidence upon any graces or duties. Labor after these, and look
upon them as evidences of the soundness of thy faith, but lean not upon them as
grounds to support thy faith. So much for the Negative.

Let us now consider the Affirmative, Affirmatively. Sect. 2.
whereby it may appear how and in what regard the moral Law is declared to be
established by the doctrine of Faith. I conceive the Law is established in five
respects:

First, By that full obedience performed to the Law by the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, By that full satisfaction which he made to the Law in bearing the
penalty of it.

Thirdly, In the imputation of his perfect Righteousness to Believers.

Fourthly, In that he establishes the Law as a Rule of obedience for his
people.

Fifthly, In that he conformeth his people to the Law: and these may be so many
branches of the general point, and therefore so many special points of doctrine.

1. Then observe this point, That the Lord Jesus Christ did establish the Law
by fulfilling it: or, He did perform full and perfect obedience to the Law, and
so establish the Law: Wherein you may note two particulars,

First, That Christ did fulfill the Law.

Secondly, That in fulfilling it he did establish it,

1. Of the former; So he said, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and
the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. Mat. 5. 17.
I conceive this speech was delivered soon after the Lord Christ began
publicly to preach, and this was seasonable to prevent or remove dangerous
prejudices or mistakes. For besides that general expectation of the Messiah
about that time, the Scepter being departed from Judah, and they being subject
to a Foreign yoke, there were many extraordinary things which happened at the
Birth of Christ; Then the Testimony which John Baptist gave him, Mat. 3. 16, 17.
the Heavens opening, the holy Ghost descending upon him in the visible form of
a Dove, God the Father by an audible voice from Heaven, proclaiming this is my
beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased; His fasting forty days and forty nights
when he was led of the spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil;
Mat. 4.
His wonderful diligence in preaching in diverse places; His glorious miracles
in healing all manner of sickness and diseases, especially in delivering those
that were possessed with Devils; The great multitudes of people following him
from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond Jordan, in so much
that his fame was spread abroad suddenly beyond the borders of the Land of
Israel throughout all Syria: These and the like things might well raise the
peoples expectation, and give them occasion to look for some notable change to
be wrought by him: and as men are lead by diverse principles, are upon such
occasions apt to fancy some one thing some another; so it is likely the most
did expect that he should set up an earthly Kingdom; some might think that he
would take away the Law, which God delivered to their Fathers by Moses, and the
doctrine of the Prophets, and hereupon some might seek advantage to disparage
his person and his doctrine; others might hope that he would open a door for
carnal liberty, as in our days upon occasion of far lesser changes, some have
embraced strange fancies, as if the time were come to cast off those
ordinances, which Christ has appointed to be used until the end of the world,
as if an universal liberty must be granted to all corrupt opinions, Heresies,
Blasphemies, under color of favoring tender Consciences. Now the Lord to
remedy these things, tells plainly that He came not to destroy, but fulfill
the Law and the Prophets.

1. He fulfilled the Ceremonial Law, by exhibiting the substance of those
Types, and accomplishing those things which were signified and represented by
them.

2. He fulfilled the Prophets, verifying their prophesies, teaching, doing, and
suffering that which they foretold.

3. He fulfilled the Moral Law. 1. Doctrinally rejecting the ^orrupt
interpretations then received, and giving the true and full sense of the Law.
2. He fulfilled the Law practically, by performing full and perfect obedience
to the Law, Mat. 3. 15.
which is the thing in hand: Gal. 4. 4.
So he said before, It becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness. God sent forth
his Son made of a woman under the Law, He was made under the Law by his own
voluntary act, taking upon him the Nature of man, and the office of a Mediator
between God and men (though as God he was the Lawgiver;) and therefore having
put himself into this estate, he was bound to obey the Law fully in every
particular, and could not have failed in one jot or tittle without being guilty
of sin; and therefore all those Texts which declare his perfect Righteousness
being compared with this, do prove that he performed perfect obedience to the
Law: Act. 7. 12.
So where Stephen calls him the just one, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
and Paul says, He knew no sin, 1 Per. 1. 19.
scil. no sin either original or actual, 1 Pet. 2. 22, 3, 18.
either of commission or omission, in thought word or deed: and Peter says, He
was a Lamb without blemish and without spot, who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth: and that he suffered for sins the just for the unjust:
these and the like passages compared with that place, prove that he performed
perfect obedience to the Law, for being as was said made under the Law, it was
absolutely necessary that he should fulfill it, that he might approve himself
to be the just one, knowing no sin, a Lamb without blemish and without spot,
etc. because every (...) whatsoever is against the Law is sin, whatsoever is
contrary to the R^le of the Law, whatsoever is defective and falls short of
the perfect purity of the Law is sin; and therefore in as much as the Lord was
made under the Law, and yet was found to be without all spot of sin, when he
offered up himself in sacrifice, and poured forth his blood for the sins of the
world: It is most clear, that he performed full and perfect obedience to the
Law, and this was necessary:

1. That he might be a perfect High Priest. The Priest in the old Testament
being a Type of Christ, was to be without outward blemish in his person or
body, Lev. 21. 21.
No man that has a blemish of the seed of Aaron the Priest, shall come nigh to
offer the offering of the Lord made by fire: and in the next Chapter, there is
a severe threatening against any of Aarons posterity, Chap. 22. 3.
if having any legal uncleanness upon them, they should presume to meddle with
the holy things of the Tabernacle: suppose they were polluted with Leprosy, or
a running Issue, or by touching an other that was unclean, etc. This figured
the perfect purity and holiness of Christ, the true and eternal High Priest,
who was to offer up himself in sacrifice to God, for such an High Priest became
us, Heb. 7. 26, 27.
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher than the
Heavens, who needs not daily as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice,
first for his own sin, and then for the sins of the people, for this he did
once, when he offered up himself. He is an High Priest, holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and whereas the Highpriests of the old
Testament were subject to sin, and therefore needed to offer sacrifice for
their own sins, as well as for the peoples; He being free from sin offered not,
needed not to offer for any sins of his own: They offered daily, often renewing
their offerings, because they were imperfect, and had respect to the perfect
offering of Christ, but he offered himself once for all for the sins of his
people; His sacrifice being most perfect and complete, never to be renewed.

2. It was necessary that the Lord Christ should perform full and perfect
obedience to the Law, that he might be a pure offering, a spotless sacrifice to
take away the sins of his people. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit, Heb. 9. 14.
offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works to
serve the living God? That the virtue and efficacy of Christ's blood might
reach to the inward man, and purge the soul and Conscience from sin: it was
necessary that he should offer up himself a sacrifice without spot, as one whom
the Law could not charge with the least aberration or swerving from the perfect
purity of it.

The second particular noted was, that the Lord Christ by fulfilling the Law,
did establish it. Here we may consider,

First, That God gave man his Law in the Creation, writing a perfect Law of
Righteousness and true holiness in the mind and heart of the first man and
woman, God created man in his own Image, Genesis ^. 27.
in the Image of God created he him, male and female created he them. Now what
was this framing of man in the image of God, but the fashioning of his heart
and soul according to the wisdom, purity, holiness and righteousness of God,
which was the writing and imprinting his Law upon the sold of man, as he gave
to other creatures natural properties, See Ephesians. 4. 24. and Col. 3. 10.
and natural instincts according to their several kinds, each of which was a
Law unto them, scil. the Law of their Creation. So he imprinted the likeness of
his own wisdom, Righteousness and holiness upon the first man and woman, as the
Law of their Creation. Now this likeness of God, his holiness and Righteousness
imprinted upon the souls of our first parents, was the same for substance with
that moral Law written in the Scriptures; for as the moral Law written in the
Scriptures is a declaration of the wisdom, Righteousness and holiness of God,
and a rule of Righteousness and holiness to men: So was that Image and likeness
of God imprinted upon the souls of the first man and woman: It was the moral
Law written in their hearts and minds.

Secondly, Consider that the great mischeivous design of the Devil,

1. Was to destroy this Law of God written in the heart of man, to deface the
likeness of God, his wisdom, holiness and Righteousness, in their souls, to
make void and abolish the Law of man's Creation for ever; that none of mankind
should ever have either knowledge or ability or will to do any thing pleasing
unto God; and therefore the Apostle declaring the woeful ruins of mankind
brought upon them by sin and Satan, and showing what all are by nature, says,
Romans 3. 10, 11.
There is none Righteous, no not one, there is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after God, none Righteous, none able to please God, none
that understands, none that know how to do it, none that seek after God, none
that have a will truly bent and resolved upon it.

2. To subject and enslave the souls of men and women to a contrary Law, Romans
8. 2.
to the Law of sin and death, called a Law of sin in regard of the nature of
it, and a Law of death and destruction in respect of the end toward which it
leads: His design was to fill the souls of men with darkness, error, false
conceits about things that concern salvation, with rebellion against God, and
his Law, with lusts and corruptions, inclining him to all manner of sins
against the Law, and therefore it is said, they are all gone out of the way,
Romans 3. 12.
they have a Law of sin in their hearts and souls, that has turned them quite
out of the way, to which the Law of God directed them, and set them in a course
derectly contrary to it.

3. I conceive the Devil herein aimed at two things: 1. The dishonor of God.
2. The destruction of mankind, excercising his malice both against God and man.
1. The Devils being cast down by the justice of God from their glorious estate
and habitation for their Apostasy from God, and reserved under chains in
darkness, acted an high degree of rebellion against God, opposing him in his
Sovereignty, in h^s legislative power and Authority, striving to abolish the
Law, and to deface the likeness of God's holiness out of the minds of all
mankind for ever, that God should have none amongst the children of men, to
serve, obey, and honor him, but all of them should become slaves and vassals
to the Devils, being led captive by them at their will. 2. They aimed at the
destruction of mankind, to bring them into the same condemnation with
themselves, by blotting out the Law written in their minds according to which
they should have walked, and according to which they shall be judged, and
bringing them under a contrary Law of sin and death: so then God having written
this Law in the soul, and the Devil having blotted it out, and brought mankind
under a contrary Law of sin.

In the third place let us consider the work of the Lord Jesus Christ that was
to destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8.
Says the Apostle John, He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil
sins from the beginning; for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that
he might destroy the works of the Devil. He that commits sin, he that makes
sin his business, sinning with the full bent of his will, is of the Devil; He
remains in that condition into which the Devil brought mankind at the first,
subject to the Law and power of sin, which is quite contrary to that Law of
righteousness and holiness which God imprinted upon the soul of man in the
Creation; for the Devil sins from the beginning, he sinned and fell from
God, and he drew men into sin, and still leads them on in a course of sin and
disobedience against God. Now (says the Apostle) for this purpose the Son of
God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil: He does not
say barely that the Son of God destroyed the works of the Devil; but for this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that etc. one great work of the Devil,
as ye heard, was to deface the likeness of God in the soul of man, and to bring
him under a Law of sin. This work among others, Christ came to destroy, where
note, 1. That no mere Creature was able to destroy this work of the Devil.

It may be some may think that good and holy Angels might be as able to undo
this evil work, Obj.
as Devils or evil Angels were to do it.

But it is not so, the reason is not because the good Angels have less power
than the Devils, Answ.
but because of the nature of that work of the Devil, for the work of the Devil
was a destroying work, as has been showed; it was the destroying of the Law of
man's Creation which was written in his soul, the defacing and blotting out of
Gods handwriting, the likeness of Gods holiness, and the subjecting of man to
the destroying Law of sin; it was the taking away of man's spiritual life, by
dividing him from God the fountain of life. Now to destroy or undo this
destructive work of Satan, is to abolish that Law of sin and death in man, and
to write that contrary Law in the soul of man, which Satan had blotted out,
that is to restore man to the likeness of God, to fashion him again after the
Image of God, in knowledge, Righteousness, and holiness, to raise man, whom
Satan had murdered, to spiritual life. Now it requires a far greater power to
repair and restore, then to destroy, one Murderer may take away life, all the
Angels in Heaven, nor all the men on earth cannot restore life to the dead:
None but the living God can do it, who is the fountain of life: So the Devil,
and man yiedling to the Devils suggestion, could destroy spiritual life. The
Law written in the heart of man, that primitive perfection and integrity of
man's Nature framed after the Image of God, in knowledge, righteousness and
holiness, but no mere Creatures, none but the Prince of life, the supreme
Lawgiver, by whom all things were made, could restore spiritual life, write
this primitive Law in the soul of man.

But it may be Objected, Obj.
That this work which the Apostle John says Christ came into the world to do,
is a work of destroying.

I Answ. Awsw.
We are to consider the object of this destroying work of Christ, what it was
that Christ destroyed; that was a destructive work wrought by the Devil that
great destroyer and Murderer: Christ came to destroy that destruction which
Satan had wrought; and to destroy destruction is to repair and restore that
which was destroyed, to destroy death is to restore life: So the Apostle
speaking of the Resurrection of Believers to glory, says When this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
and this mortal shall have put on immortality; then shall be brought to pass
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. Death had slain
thousands of Saints, and Christ by restoring them to life, raising them to
immortality and everlasting life, shall swallow up death in victory: So in the
Prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 13. 14.
I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from
Death, O death I will be thy Plague, O Grave I will be thy destruction. The
Lord may be said as it were to kill death, and to destroy or bury the grave,
when he ransometh his people from death and the grave, and raises them up to
everlasting life: So in this case, when Christ is said to destroy the
destructive works of Satan, ye must understand that he was to restore that
which Satan had ruined. This no mere Creature in Heaven and Earth was able to
do; and therefore in the second place, the Son of God undertook it, it was a
work of Almighty power to restore the Law of man's Creation, spiritual life, the
Likeness of God, his Righteousness and Holiness to any of Adams posterity, to
any of the seed of the woman, and to enable any of them to perform ^ull and
perfect obedience to the Law: None but God could do it, and therefore the Son
of God, who is very God performed it. The Devil seemed for ever to have
deprived mankind of the Image of God, and for ever to have disabled all the
Sons of men from fulfilling the Law, but the Son of God confounded Satan
herein, and destroyed this destroying work of the Devil, by restoring that
which he had destroyed, by framing one of Adams posterity, one of the seed of
the woman, after the Image of God in righteousness and holiness, and inabling
him perfectly in every point to fulfill the Law.

Thirdly, The Apostle shows how the Son of God performed this great work, it
was by the manifestation of himself; For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, etc. His manifestation was his incarnation, his being made flesh,
taking the nature of man into the unity of his person, for the Son of God in
his divine nature is invisible, not manifested, but when he became Man he was
manifested and made visible, and so framed this humane nature thus united to
his Godhead after the image of God in perfect Righteousness and holiness, and
enabled it to perform full and complete obedience to the Law. And thus the work
of Satan was destroyed, one of the Sons of Adam, one of the seed of the woman
after the fall of mankind, being enabled to fulfill the Righteousness of the
Law.

Fourthly, Ye may note by the way, that I do not speak of this as the full
sense of this Text, as it this were all that Christ did in destroying the works
of the Devil, and in restoring what he had ruined, but I speak of it as a part
of the Apostles meaning, and a part of that work of Christ concerning the point
in hand.

Fifthly, Observe that by this work Christ established the Law: For first, As
the Law was given to man, so the Son of God took upon him the nature of man,
and subjected it to the Law, as it is said, he was made under the Law. 2. He
wrote this Law of perfect holiness and Righteousness upon this humane Soul,
thus united to his Godhead. 3. In this nature of man, He perfectly fulfilled
the Law, by all which he acknowledged the Law to be a perfect Rule of
Righteousness, which as man, he was bound to obey, and so did really confirm
and ratify the Authority of it, whereas on the contrary, they that taught m^n
to seek justification, and to approve themselves as Righteous in the sight of
God, by their own personal works of obedience to the Law, though they pretended
to magnify the Law, they did make void the Law, because their Righteousness
was far short of what the Law required; and therefore to profess that they
looked to be justified or found Righteous in the sight of God by their own
imperfect works done in obedience to the Law, was to accuse the Law of
imperfection, and so to make void the Law. Says David, The Law of the Lord is
perfect, Psalm. 19. 7.
and therefore none can be justified by the Law, unless their Righteousness be
perfect. Now for sinful men whose natures are contrary to the Law, whose sinful
omissions and commissions are numberless, whose best works are exceedingly
imperfect and defective, to profess themselves justified by the Law, is to deny
the perfection of the Law, and so to abolish or make void the Law.

So much for the first particular point comprehended in the general doctrine.
The second is this:

That the Lord Jesus Christ established the Law by making full satisfaction to
the Law: Sect. 2.
where note two particulars:

1. That Christ did make full satisfaction to the Law.

2. That hereby he did establish it.

1. For the former, When Christ was gloriously transfigured upon a certain
mountain in the sight of three of his Disciples, Luke ^9. 30, 31.
Behold there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias, who appeared
in glory and spoke of his decease, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem.
These two holy men of God, who many ages before had been taken out of this
world, by an extraordinary dispensation of God, were sent to meet the Lord
Christ upon this Mount; and why these two? Moses was the Lawgiver, I mean the
ministerial Lawgiver, the Minister, Servant, or Instrument of the Lord, by
whom God who is the only authentical, the supreme Lawgiver, delivered, and as
it were handed over his Law to the people of Israel; Elias was one of the most
eminent among all the Prophets, and exceeding zealous of the Law, 1 King. 18.
40. and 19. 14, 15, 16, 17.
and by an extraordinary warrant from God, slew diverse hundreds of false
Prophets for Idolatary, and for teaching the people to transgress the Law, and
when he complained against Israel for their heinous sins against the Law, the
Lord directed him to anoint Hazael to be King over Syria, Iehu to be King over
Israel, and Elisha to be Prophet in his stead, as so many executioners of Gods
justice upon backsliding Israel for their horrible sins against the Law. It
seems then that these two were sent to show that the Lord Jesus Christ was he
of whom the Law and the Prophets spoke, whom the Ceremonial Law shadowed out by
Types and Figures, who was to perform full obedience to the Moral Law, and make
full satisfaction for the transgressions of men against the Law, and to
accomplish what was foretold by the Prophets; and it is said expressly, that
they spoke of his decease, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. They spoke
of his death and sufferings, whereby he should make full satisfaction for the
sins and transgressions of men against the Law, and fulfill the sayings of the
Prophets. It is not barely said he should dye or suffer death, but that he
should (...) accomplish his decease, He should fully and completely suffer such
a death as should make full satisfaction to the Law: He should undergo the full
penalty of the Law, and make full payment of all the debts which the Law could
charge upon his people. To make this appear more clearly, consider these
particulars:

1. That the Lord Jesus Christ was very God, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3.
in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God, the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. The Son of God is called the
word, God the Father manifesting himself by the Son, as a man makes known his
mind by his words or speech. There is the coessential word of God, and there is
the declarative word of God; the Son of God is the coessential word of God, of
the same essence with God the Father. The declarative word of God is that which
we have in the holy Scriptures: So Christ prayed to his Father for his people,
Sanctify them through thy Truth, Joh. 17. 17.
thy word is truth. For this cause, 1 These. 2. 13.
says the Apostle, thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the
word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but
(as it is in truth) the word of God which works effectually in you that
believe. These and the like places show the folly of those who seem to hold,
that there is no other word of God but Christ, whereas it is plain, that the
holy Ghost calls the word written in the Scriptures, and the word preached
and taught according to the Scriptures, the Word of God, scil. his declarative
word, but Christ is the coessential or co substantial word of God: and here it
i^ said, He was in the beginning, declaring his eternity, when the world and
the creatures in it were made, He was not made, but he was from eternity,
before all things; and accordingly he says to his Father, Joh. 17. 5.
O Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was, that is, from all eternity. And the word was with
God, that shows the personal distinction betwixt the Father and the Son, who
are one God and two distinct persons, then his Godhead is expressly asserted.
And the word was God, the same God with the Father, all things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, all the Creatures
were made by Christ of nothing, and therefore he is very God, Col. 1. 16.
for by him were all things created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities
or Powers, all things were Created by him and for him, and he is before all
things, and by him all things consist, not only all visible Creatures on Earth,
but also all the glorious Angels of Heaven were created by him, and his
eternity is declared, He is before all things, his Almighty power is asserted,
by him all things consist. The frame of the world would fall in pieces, the
Beings of the Creatures would be disjoynted, dissolved, did not his Almighty
Arm hold all together: He upholdeth all things by the word of power, and least
any blasphemous adversary of Christ his Godhead should object that Christ
might create the world as a^ instrument and inferior Agent under the Father.
The Apostle tells us, All things were created, Heb. 1. 3.
not only by him, but also for him; He is the principal Agent, and he is the
chief end of the Creation: They were made for his glory, a clear evidence to
prove him to be very God, the same God with the Father, for it is the peculiar
Prerogative of God to be the highest of the whole Creation, for whom all things
were made; Romans 11. 36.
for of him, and through him, Phil. 2. 6.
and to him are all things; to him in this place, and for him in the other,
have the same sense, and the original is the same in both, (...). The Apostle
shows, That Christ being in the form of God, thought or judged it to be no
Robbery to be equal with God, in all eternity he was in the form of God, he was
really, properly, essentially God, and therefore judged it to be no robbery to
be equal with God. This cutteth off all cavils, for how could it have been less
then an high degree of robbery or Sacrilege, for any one that was not as truly
and properly God as the Father, even the same God with the Father, to judge
himself equal with God, in as much as God the Creator is infinitely above the
most excellent of the Creatures.

Secondly, He took upon him the Nature of man, Joh. 1. 14.
the word was made flesh. The eternal word or Son of God who was before all
time, without beginning of days, was pleased in the fullness of time to be made
flesh, not by transmutation, but by assumption, not by turning his unchangeable
Godhead into flesh, but by taking flesh, that is, a true humane Nature, soul
and body, into the unity of his person, so uniting the nature of man to his
Godhead, as to make it properly his own; to become one person with himself,
the Godhead being never separated again from the manhood, nor confounded with
it, both natures remaining distinct, but never divided from each other, the
same Christ remaining perfect God and perfect man: so where it is showed that
being in the form of God, etc. it follows, But made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men,
and found in fashion as a man, Phil. 2. 7, 8.
etc. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh. This is indeed a great mystery, of such an height and
depth, and far exceeds the reach of men's understandings, yet a most certain
and infallible truth to be received by faith, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
and it was necessary the Redeemer of manking should be both God and man, that
he might satisfy the justice of God, and bear the penalty of the Law due to
the sins of the world. First, It was necessary that he should be God.

1. That he might enable the humane nature to bear the weight of Gods wrath and
revenging justice to support the manhood from sinking under it, and being
swallowed up of it, whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it; Act. 2. 24.
death had taken a prisoner whom it was no way able to hold, Jesus Christ as he
was man, suffered death, and lay dead in the grave, but as he was God, he
raised his humane nature from the dead. Secondly, That the infinite worth and
excellency of his Godhead might make his sufferings of sufficient value to
satisfy the justice of God, and the severity of the Law for the numberless
sins of the world, the same man that suffered being one person with God, and so
his sufferings, being, though not the sufferings of the Godhead, yet the
sufferings of God, that is, the sufferings of him who is God, and therefore it
is said, Act. 20. 28.
that God has purchased a Church with his own blood. And what is there, which
the blood of God was not sufficient to purchase? Secondly, It was necessary
Christ should be man, that he might satisfy the Law, and bear the penalty.

1. That he might be subject to the Law; for it was impossible that the
Godhead should be made under the Law, because the Law received its Authority
from God, and therefore could have no Authority over him; therefore he was made
of a womnn, and so made under the Law.

2. That he might be in a capacity to suffer the full penalty of the Law; for
it is impossible for the Godhead which is the fountain of life to dye, or to
bear the Curse, being the fullness of blessedness: and therefore says the
Apostle, Heb. 2. 9.
We see Jesus who was made a little lower then the Angels for the suffering of
death. He that being very God, was infinitely higher then the Angels, took into
the unity of his person, a nature a little lower then the Angels, scil. the
nature of man, and that for the suffering of death, and so for the satisfying
of the Law.

3. That He might make Satisfaction to the Law, and bear the punishment of it
in the some nature of man, Heb. 2. 16, 17.
in which the Law was transgressed and broken; for verily, He took not on him
the nature of Angels, but He took on him the seed of Abraham* wherefore in all
things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, to make satisfaction for the
transgressions of the people against the Law, and to reconcile them to God the
Lawgiver.

3. He took upon him the guilt of men's sins, putting himself into the state,
and standing in the state of guilty sinners, as it were putting his Name into
their Bond, and voluntarily taking their debts upon himself; all we, like sheep
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all. If the whole Congregation sinned, Isa. 53.
6.
they were to bring a young Bullock to be offered for their sin, Lev. 4. 15.
and before it was killed, the Elders of the Congregation representing all the
people under the Government, were to lay their hands on the head of the Bullock
before the Lord: It seems b^ this Ceremony, they did as it were put off the
sins of all the people from the guilty sinners, upon the Sacrifice: So the Lord
Christ, before he suffered for the sins of his people, first took upon himself
the guilt of all their sins, for he has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
the guilt of men's sins was imputed unto him, and put upon his account, as his
righteousness is imputed to Believers, and accounted theirs.

4. He subjected himself to the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 10, 13.
due to men for their sins against the Law; for it is written, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law
to do them: then it follows, ver. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse
of the Law, being made a Curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every on
that hangs on a tree. Thus he exposed himself to the flames of divine wrath,
which would have been a consuming fire to a mere Creature: but as the wood of
the Altar for burnt offering was overlaid with Brass that it might not be
devoured by the fire: so his humane nature being united to the Godhead, was so
fortified to endure the burning heat of the wrath and Curse of God, that it was
not consumed by it, but although the Godhead was inseparably united to the
manhood, and did not leave it for a moment, yet it did so withhold its divine
influence from the Manhood for a time, that it suffered extreme and
unconceivable torments in body, but especially in soul, as appears in the
holy story; for though God the Father loved him infinitely as his Son, and as
one that was perfectly holy and righteous in his own person, yet he executed
his justice upon him to the full, as he presented himself before him, burdened
with the guilt of man's sins against the Law. It pleased the Lord to bruise him,
Isa. 53. 10.
he has put him to grief. Romans 8. 33.
Says the Apostle, He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us. He
spared not his own Son; He found him engaged to satisfy the Law for the sins
of men, and therefore he executed the severity of the Law upon him, and spared
him not, but delivered him up for us all, says the Text. He did as it were
deliver him up with his own hand for sinners, delivering him up by the hand of
his love, toward sinners, to the hand of his justice, to be punished for their
sins: so that I conceive it may be said that Christ had judgment without
mercy, that through him mercy might glory over judgment toward repenting and
believing sinners.

Fifthly, He actually suffered death; He did shed his most precious blood,
Phil. 2. 8.
He humbled himself and became obedient unto death, Isa. 53. 12.
even the death of the Cross. Matthew. 27. 50.
He poured out his soul unto death. Joh. 19. 33, 34.
Jesus when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. When
they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs,
but one of the Soldiers with his Spear pierced his side, ver. 41, 42.
and forthwith came thereout blood and water.

Lastly, That it might be manifest that the Prince of life was really dead for
the satisfaction of the Law, He suffered his body to be carried to Prison, to be
shut up in the grave, and held under the power of death until the third day.
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the Garden a
new Sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid, there laid they Jesus. Thus ye
see the Lord Jesus Christ satisfied the Law to the full, endured the rigor,
and bare the penalty of it. Secondly, by satisfying the Law, and endruing the
severity of it, he established the Law. I suppose it is not necessary to speak
much of this particular, because the opening of the former gives light unto
it, briefly thus: 1. The Law required perfect obedience, as ye heard, the full
performance of every branch and tittle of it. 2. In case of disobedience,
transgression, defect, and failing in obedience, the Law denounced a grievous
penalty, a Curse, Genesis 2. 17.
death and destruction, as was noted also, yea the Law given to mankind in
Adam, had the sentence of death annexed, In the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely die. 3. Hence it follows, that if neither the Law be fulfilled
in a way of obedience, nor satisfied by the inflicting of the punishment, then
it is made void, and declared to be of no force, to have lost its authority,
its vigor, and to be frustrated of its end. 4. Thereupon we may infer by the
rule of contraries, that the Lord Jesus Christ having in the nature of man born
the full penalty, severity, and Curse of the Law, due to the sins of men
against the Law, and by his Godhead, to which his humane nature wherein he
suffered is personally united, gave sufficient value and worth to his
sufferings, to make full satisfaction to the Law, to the uttermost, that the
Law in its greatest rigor could require: hence it clearly follows, that
Christ established the Law. This was a real and full acknowledgement of the
Authority of the Law; the wonderful abasement, the grievous sufferings of the
Son of God, were signal evidences, infallible demonstrations of the force and
authority of the Law; the Lord of glory appearing in the form of a Servant, to
make way for satisfying the Law: he that is the brightness of the Fathers
glory, enduring the shame of the Cross, did abundantly witness to the world the
Authority of the Law. The Lord Jesus Christ spared not his most precious blood,
but freely poured it forth to satisfy the Law, for the sins of his people, and
thereby ratified and sealed the Authority of the Law.

How should this be improved to stir up poor souls without delay to turn to the
Lord, Use 1.
and flee to Christ? For in as much as the Lord Jesus did both perform perfect
obedience to the Law, and bear the full penalty and curse of the Law, and by
both these establish the Law; it shows clearly that the Law stands in full
force against all that are out of Christ, they being guilty of sin against the
Law, are subject to the Curse of the Law; for being not found in Christ, they
have no part in his perfect righteousness and full satisfaction, and therefore
are every moment in danger of the sentence of condemnation denounced by the the
Law. It is true that Christ has fully satisfied the Law: But what does this
help them that remain in their natural estate of impenitency and unbelief? That
full satisfaction which Christ made to the Law, ratifieth the Authority of the
Law, and proclaims to the world, that the Law spares none that are under the
Law, and so are all that are not in Christ, and so under grace; and therefore
rest not one day in this condition; sin lies at the door, he avenger of blood
is at thy back, the voice of the Law is, pay that thou owe: It is a
groundless plea to say, Christ has paid all, if thou remainest out of Christ.

Secondly, Use 2.
If sin were so exceeding grievous and bitter unto Christ, Oh let it not be
sweet and delightful unto thee! It sin imputed were such an unspeakable torment
to the Lord Jesus Christ, What a shame is it for any that pretend to be members
of Christ, to make it the matter of their contentment? Do thou call thy self
a Christian, and can thou see the Son of God abased for sin, put to an open
shame, buffetted, spit upon, crowned with thorns, and sweating drops of blood,
exceedingly afflicted in soul, bleeding and dying upon the Cross for sin, and
yet can thou hold up thy head, take a pride in sin, glory in it, despise
reproof, gain by it, thrive by it, rise by it, get preferment by it, sport and
solace thy se^f with it, and still own the name of a Christian? What is this
but to be an Enemy to the Cross of Christ, harboring in thy bosom, that Enemy
which fastened and nailed him to the Cross?

Thirdly, Use 3.
Here'is ground of sound comfort for them that are in Christ, He has made full
satisfaction to the Law, he has paid the debts of his people, cancelled the
bond of the Law, redeemed them from the Curse, the Law can exact no
satisfaction from them, he has fully cleared all accounts, There is therefore
now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.
who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit: But of this somewhat may be
spoken upon the next point.

The third particular follows. Sect 3.
viz. That the Lord Jesus Christ established the Law by communicating his
perfect righteousness to Believers: where, as in the former points there are
two Branches.

1. That the perfect righteousness of Christ is communicated to Believers. 1.
Branch.


2. That hereby the Law is established. Concerning the former, ye heard before
of the perfect Righteousness of Christ, who both was a Lamb without spot, knew
no sin, and performed complete obedience to the Law, and also did undergo the
punishment and Curse of the Law due to the sins of men and women, and so made
full satisfaction to the Law. Now that which is to be cleared is this, That
this perfect Righteousness of Christ is communicated to Believers.

2. How it is received by Believers.

3. What are the effects and consequents of the righteousness of Christ thus
communicated and received.

For the first, 1. The righteousness of Christ is communicated to Believers,
not by infusion, but by imputation, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
not so as to be inherent in them, but so as to be imputed to them; so as to be
accounted theirs; for he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him. As the sins of men were not
infused into Christ, so as to be inherent in him, but imputed to him: so the
Righteousness of Christ is not infused into Believers, so as to be inherent in
them, but is imputed to them and accounted theirs. The satisfaction which
Christ has made to the Law is imputed to them, that is, reckoned to belong
unto them, as if they had satisfied the Law in their own persons. Romans 4. 22,
23, 24.
So it is said of Abraham, it was imputed unto him for Righteousness. Now it
was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him: but for us also
to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him who raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead. As if a King should pardon a great Malefactor for his Fathers
sake, who had done some eminent service to the State, his Fathers deservings
might be said to be imputed to him, accounted his, as if they had been his own;
and when a surety pays another debt, the payment is imputed to the debtour,
and accounted as done by him, and he is as fully discharged and esteemed out of
debt, as if he had paid it with his own money: so Believers have no
Righteousness of their own to satisfy the justice of God, but the
Righteousness of Christ is imputed to them, that is accounted theirs; as if
they had been perf^ctly righteous by performing perfect obedience, and making
full satisfaction in their own persons to the Law; and here ye may observe who
it is that imputes the Righteousness of Christ to Believers 2. Of what nature
this act of imputation is.

1. It is God that imputes the Righteousness of Christ to Believers, says the
Apostle. David describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without works; Romans 4. 6.
it is God who imputes Righteousness unto justification, and it properly
belongs to him as the supreme Judge; Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, Who is he that condemns, it is Christ
that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us. Romans 8. 33, 34.
Here the Apostle seems to set before us a representation of the highest
Tribunal or Court of Judicature, intimating or supposing the persons indicted,
the Accuser, the Judge, the Advocate; the Persons indicted or arraigned, the
Elect of God, true believers: the Accuser, implied in those words Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? the Judge, God; it is God that
justifies, the Advocate* Christ who, first died, and so made satisfaction for
the sins of his people. 2. Rose again, and by this his deliverance, out of the
grave the prison of Death, made it evident that their debts were fully
discharged. 3. He is at the right hand of God, which is a sure argument that he
is highly in the Judges favor. 4. He improveth his interest in the Judge, by
making intercession for his people, presenting his merit and Righteousness to
his Father, to be imputed to them, and accounted theirs, and therein pleading
his satisfaction, made in their stead, for their pardon and justification. But
the thing for which I bring this place at the present is, to show that it is
God who imputes the righteousness of Christ to Believers, it is he that
justifies, God is the efficient cause, the Author of the imputation of Christ
his righteousness to his people, and so of their justification, It is one God
which shall justify the circumcision by faith, Romans 3. 30.
and the uncircumcision through faith, scil. all sincere Believers, whether
Israelites or Gentiles. Now the works of God toward the Creatures, are the
works of all the three persons of the Godhead, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
and therefore Christ, as he is Mediator between God and man, presented his
righteousness unto God, to be imputed to his people for their justification; as
he is God, he imputes his righteousness, merit and satisfaction to them, and
justifies them. 2. Consider of what nature this act of imputation is, whether
it be an act of Justice or of Grace. I conceive this Act of God, imputing the
Righteousness of Christ to his people, is an act of grace or free favor, and
undeserved love; Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 24.
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood. It is
said Believers are justified freely: and then again, by his grace, the latter
explaining the former; freely, that is, by his grace and free favor: for
though the Righteousness and satisfaction of Christ is of infinite merit and
worth; yet 1. God the Father by a pure Act of Grace, gave his Son to dye for
sinners: so it is said here, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood: 1 John 4. 18.
herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. 2. Christ, as he was man, was freely
chosen of God for this purpose; so God says concerning him, Behold my servant
whom I have chosen: The man Christ Jesus was freely chosen of God to become one
person with the Son of God; Mat: 12. 18.
the Son of Mary did not merit to be personally united to the Son of God, but
was freely chosen of God, to be exalted to this incomprehensible dignity, glory
and Majesty, far above all other creatures, Angels and men, and from this
personal union to which he was freely chosen, proceeds the greatness and
all sufficiency of his merit. 3. God in his Law has denounced the penalty of
death, the Curse, everlasting destruction, against every one that was guilty of
sin against the Law, and he was not bound to accept of satisfaction at the hand
of another in their stead, nor to hold them discharged of the guilt of their
sins, upon the account of another sufferings for sin, and therefore it was an
Act of mere grace in God, to accept of Christ his satisfaction in behalf of
sinners, and to impute his righteousness to them, and to account it theirs for
their justification. And so it was according to the Covenant and Agreement
which God the Father freely made with Christ, according to which agreement,
Believers are given to Christ: so he says to his Father, I pray for them which
thou have given me, Joh. 17. 9.
for they are thine: Behold I and the children which God has given me, Heb. 2.
13.
those lost sinners whom God gave to Christ, as Mediator and Redeemer, to save
them by his death and satisfaction: to them God the Father, by his grace, that
is, freely imputes the Righteousness of Christ, and accounts it theirs,
accepting them as righteous through him.

Secondly, Observe how the Righteousness of Christ is received by believers,
that is, by faith unfeigned: the Righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, Romans 3. 21, 22:
even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all that believe the Righteousness whereby Believers are justified, is the
Righteousness of God; it is such a Righteousness as God has revealed; as he
has appointed for this end; as he approves and accepts; such a
Righteousness as he gives to Believers, this Righteousness is received and
applied by the faith of Jesus Christ: not by the faith which Christ has, but
by the faith which Believers have in Christ, not by the faith whereby Christ
believes, but by the faith whereby men believe in Christ. Believers being
united to Christ by the spirit on the one side, and by faith on the other. God
imputes the Righteousness of Christ unto them, and they receive and apply it
to themselves by faith: ver. 28.
So in that conclusion of the Apostle, Therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the works of the Law. In these and many other
places, where faith is said to justify, Divines understand it to be meant not
meritoriously; for so Christ justifies by his merit, procuring justification
for sinners: not by way of efficiency, for so God justifies, as the Author of
justification, as the Judge, imputing Christ his righteousness to Believers,
and so justifying them: not materially, for so the righteousness of Christ
justifies, as the matter of justification: not formally, for that is by way of
imputation, but faith justifies. 1. Objective, not by force of its own Act of
believing, but by virtue of its Object, which it apprehends, scil. Christ his
righteousness.

2. Instrumentally, Faith justifies by applying the righteousness of Christ to
the Believing soul, whereby it is justified.

3. Observe the effects, or Consequents of the righteousness of Christ thus
imputed of God, and received by faith, they are delivered from the guilt of
sin, Romans 4. 7, 8. and 8. 1.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Christ his
righteousness is accounted theirs, and so their own sins are no longer
accounted theirs, and so they are free from condemnation. There is now
therefore no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh but after the spirit. They are accepted as righteous in the sight of
God, because the perfect righteousness of Christ is imputed to them, who
perfectly obeyed the Law* and fully suffered the penalty of the Law, hereby
also they have an interest in everlasting life and salvation, Romans 8. 30.
Whom he justifies, them he also glorified. Again, a constant consequent of
the righteousness of Christ communicated and imputed to Believers, for their
justification is regeneration, conversion, sanctification; for the same faith
which applies the Righteousness of Christ to Believers for the forgiveness of
sin, and for their justification, does unite them to Christ, so that they
partake of his spirit and sanctifying graces.

The second Branch of the point is, 2. Branch.
That the Lord Jesus Christ by communicating his perfect Righteousness to
Believers does establish the Law. This clearly follows upon those things
which have been spoken, for in as much as the Lord Jesus Christ performed
obedience to the Law, and suffered the full penalty of the Law, and then
communicated his perfect Righteousness to Believers, making them one with
himself, uniting himself to them by his spirit, and uniting them to himself by
faith, that so himself and his perfect Righteousness might become theirs, and
that hereby they might be justified and accepted as righteous in the sight of
God. This was an effectual declaration, a real acknowledgment of the force and
Authority of the Law: for hereby he witnessed that the Law was such an
authentical and indispensable rule of righteousness, that none could be
justified and accepted as righteous in the sight of God the supreme Lawgiver
and Judge, but by such a Righteousness as was fully answerable to the Rule of
the Law, and therefore because in this corrupt state of Nature, wherein all
mankind are, since the fall, no man could have performed perfect obedience to
the Law in his own person, but all must have lain under the sentence of
condemnation, and utterly perished. The Lord Christ having taken upon him the
Name of Jesus, and the office of a Savior and Redeemer, to save his people
from their sins, yet would not save them in an illegal and irregular way, not
by his royal prerogative without respect to the Law, but by fulfilling the
Righteousness of the Law in his own person, and then communicating his perfect
righteousness to them, investing them with it, clothing them with this
spotless and glorious robe of his Righteousness. On the other side, the
contrary doctrine of justification by the works of the Law, teaching that men
might be delivered from Condemnation, and approve themselves as righteous in
the sight of God, by their own inherent holiness and works performed by them in
obedience to the Law, did deny the force, the vigor and Authority of the Law,
because the holiness and performances of the best of them did fall far short of
the perfection of the Law. Now to say that men may be justified by the works of
the Law, whose works did not answer the righteousness required in the Law, was
to declare the Law to be void, to have lost its power, to condemn the
transgressors, of the Law. But Christ having fulfilled the righteousness of
the Law, and born the full punishment of it, and communicated his righteousness
to Believers; has dearly and abundantly ratified the Authority of the Law, and
so as the Apostle says, Romans 10. 4.
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.
The Law attaineth its end in Christ, because He has fully answered and
satisfied the Law, and communicates his perfect righteousness to his people,
that they might be justified and saved without the least prejudice to the
Authority of the Law.

The use of this may be, Use 1.
to stir up Believers exceedingly to admire and magnify the Lord Jesus Christ,
who being very God, the supreme Lawgiver, from whom the Law received all its
force and Authority, was pleased by a voluntary Act of his love to become man
and so to be made under the Law; to subject himself to the Authority and power
of the Law, to perform perfect obedience to the Law, and to bear the Curse of
it, and then as it were to make over, and communicate to poor guilty condemned
sinners, this his perfect righteousness for their justification and salvation;
and therefore the Apostle prayed thus for Believers that Christ may dwell in
their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19.
That ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge. It is an height and depth which
Creatures cannot reach, a breadth and length which they cannot measure, but
those that have interest in Christ, Jer. 23. 6.
and his perfect righteousness, should labor to view and surveigh it
diligently, that they may see into it more and more, and advance and magnify
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is Jehovah their Righteousness.

Secondly, Use 2.
This may take down the natural pride of men's hearts, the best of Adams
posterity except Christ alone, would have been accursed and condemned wretches,
had they not been justified and saved by a borrowed Righteousness, by the
Righteousness of another, even of Christ, communicated and imputed to them, and
accounted theirs, Where is boasting then? it is excluded: Romans 3. 27.
By what Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of faith, that is, by the doctrine
of the Gospel, which declares that the only way for men to escape
condemnation, and to appear righteous before God, is to become poor in spirit,
and as wretched, guilty, lost creatures, to go out of themselves, and renounce
all hope and confidence in themselves, and all their own abilities, duties, and
performances, and to flee to Christ alone, that they may be justified by his
righteousness, and accepted of God in him, to come as poor naked wretches, that
have never a rag of their own to cover their shame, and to beg of Christ white
raiment, the spotless covering of his righteousness: this doctrine excludes
boasting, and confounds pride, if there be any thing for which thy heart is
apt to be lifted up, either to think highly of thy self, or to despise others,
remember that if thou art an unbeliever, thou stand guilty, and condemned
before the Lord, and so have cause instead of exalting thy self to be
exceedingly abased, and to be restless, until thou be delivered from
condemnation, and have obtained pardon and justification through the
righteousness of Christ: If thou art a true believer, remember thou art
justified by a righteousness which was never wrought by thee in any part, but
wholly and only by the Lord Jesus Christ, and out of the riches of grace and
mercy, communicated and imputed to thee, whereof thou wast as unworthy as any
of them that lie under the sentence of condemnation; Have thou not then a
double cause of humiliation? 1. Because of thine own guiltiness and
unworthiness in thy self. 2. Because so rich a favor was freely bestowed upon
thee; for the greater the gift is which is bestowed upon unworthy persons, the
more cause have they to be low in their own eyes, the bounty of the giver, and
greatness of the gift, casts shame upon the unworthiness of the receiver.

Thirdly, Use 3.
This may encourage the worst of men and women, the chief of sinners, to come
to Christ, and to turn to the Lord. Here is a perfect Righteousness, a full
Satisfaction, here is a Savior and Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, who has performed perfect obedience to the Law, and suffered the
punishment of the Law due to the greatest sinners, for the greatest sins: and
therefore as was noted before, he is called Jehovah our Righteousness; for
though Believers are not justified by the essential Righteousness of Christ, as
God; yet I conceive the infinite worth of the infinite Jehovah, God the Son,
raises that righteousness which he has wrought for sinners, to such an
unspeakable value, as is sufficient for the sins of the whole world: How
inexcusable then is their neglect, who rather lie in their sins, then seek to
Christ? And on the other side, what a door of hope is opened to them who are
discouraged through the greatness of their sins; What can hinder thee from
receiving pardon and obtaining full forgiveness? Not the greatness of sin, for
Christ has done and suffered that which is abundantly sufficient to answer
all, nothing can hinder thee but an impenitent and unbelieving heart.

Fourthly, Use 4.
Let Christians be stirred up exceedingly to labor after truth of faith, and
strength of faith; for as the Righteousness of Christ is that for which
Believers are accepted as righteous with God: so says is that grace whereby it
is applied to the soul, the Father of the distressed child cried out and said
with tears, Mark 9. 24.
Lord I believe, help mine unbelief: and the Apostles said unto the Lord, Luke
17. 5.
Increase our Faith. Pray earnestly for faith, and for strength and increase of
Faith, that ye may be established in the faith, and confirmed in the assurance
of your interest in Christ, and his perfect righteousness: this is the Shield
which quenched the fiery darts of the Devil. What may Christians expect, that
the Devil should rather aim at, than the destroying or weakening of their faith,
to divide them from Christ, to dissolve the marriage bond between him and them,
to strip them of their wedding garment, the robe of Christ's Righteousness? And
what should Christians endeavor more than the strengthening of their faith?

Fifthly, Use 5.
Let all that are in Christ, justified by the Righteousness of Christ, labor
to walk as becomes those that are partakers of so rich a blessing. This was
one great end of Christ his coming into the world, and performing this glorious
work of Redemption, that he would grant unto us, Luke 1. 74, 75.
That we being delivered out of the hand of our Enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life: and therefore the Apostle having spoken at large of this doctrine of
justification by faith in Christ his Righteousness, Romans 12. 1^.
exhorts Believers thus, I beseech you therefore Brethren by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies as a Sacrifice, living, holy, acceptable unto
God, etc. of him are ye in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption: those to whom Christ is made righteousness for their justification,
to them he is made sanctification, conforming them to himself in holiness.
Justification and Sanctification are, 1. Distinct. 2. Unseparable, neither to
be confounded together, nor separated from each other: They are distinct,
Sanctification is no cause nor part of justification. No man is justified for
his holiness, but only for the righteousness of Christ. On the other side,
sanctification and holiness is unseparably joined with justification; whosoever
is justified is also sanctified, when sin is forgiven, it is also mortified.

Do not flatter your selves with a persuasion of the pardon of your sins, and
the justification of your persons, while ye want the beginning of
sanctification. Says the Apostle, Ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. All that are washed from the guilt of sin in the name of
Christ, and by the virtue of his blood, being made partakers of righteousness
unto justification, are also washed by his sanctifying spirit and grace, from
the filth and pollution of sin, and made partakers of his holiness.

In the next place, we have the fourth particular, Sect. 4. Doct.
That the Lord Jesus Christ established the Law, by making it a rule of
obedience to his people. 1. Christ made the Law a rule of obedience to his
people. 2. Hereby he established the Law*

1. Concerning the former, Mat. 5. 17, 18.
the Lord Christ says, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill; for verily I say unto you,
till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from
the Law till all be fulfilled, the Law is established as a perpetual rule to
direct Christians in the ordering of themselves, all the powers of their souls,
affections of their hearts, their thoughts, words, and actions; and therefore
Christ himself in diverse passages following, presses, not only the outward but
also the inward observation of the Law, a certain man asked Christ this
question, Mat. 22. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. 40.
Which is the great Commandment in the Law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind: This is the first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto
it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: on these two Commandments hang
all the Law and the Prophets. I conceive the Lord Christ in this answer does
clearly confirm the Law, as a Rule of obedience by his Authority. 1. He does as
it were open the bowels of the Law, and discover the soul and spirit of it,
showing that it consists in two things, 1. Entire, and perfect love to God.
2. As subordinate hereunto, sincere love to our Neighbor. 1. Because all
things commanded in the Law are, either love to God and man, or such things as
love supposes, as the knowledge of God, or such affections, thoughts, words,
actions* as accompany or flow from love. 2. All sins of omission or commission
toward God or man, are either want of love, or such as proceed from the want
of love. Now in that Christ does so highly extol these two Commandments which
comprehend the substance of the Law, he established the Law as a rule of
obedience for his people.

Secondly, In this speech, he had respect, not only to the ten Commandments
delivered Exodus 20. but also to the doctrine of the Prophets throughout the old
Testament, saying, On these two, etc. The Prophets opening and enlarging in
particulars, what is generally comprised in the ten Commandments: and if we
compare this with what we had before, where he says, he came to fulfill the
Law and the Prophets; we may gather, that he established the Law delivered by
Moses, and expounded by the Prophets, as a Rule of obedience to his people.
Again, how frequently does the spirit of Christ in his Apostles establish the
Law, as a rule of obedience for his people. What are those things which the
Apostles by the Authority of Christ and his Name, require of Christians but
things commanded in the Law? And what are those sins which they call upon
Christians to shun, but sins forbidden in the Law? Let Love be without
dissimulation: Romans 12. 9.
abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good, etc. What multitudes
of instances might be given in this kind, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
and therefore says the Apostle, The end of the Commandments is Charity out of
a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of faith unfeigned. These are
things required in the Law. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
The grace of God which brings salvation to all men, has appeared, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world. The Gospel and word of grace which
Christ has revealed to the world, and confirmed by his death, teaches those
things which are the substance of the Law; and therefore Christ has
established the Law, for a Rule by which his people are to act and walk, As he
which has called you is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; Lev. 11. 44.
because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy. The spirit of Christ in the
Apostle, alleges the very word of the Law as ratified by the Authority of
Christ, as a rule of holiness to which his people must conform their hearts and
lives. But it may be Objected, Obj.
that diverse passages of the new Testament make against this, such as these, 1 Timothy 1: 9.
The Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient.
And the Apostle says to them that are in Christ, Ye are not under the Law,
Romans 6. 14.
but under grace. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
made under the Law, to redeem them that are under the Law. Answ.
Fo Answer to these things, consider, That the Law may be considered two ways.
1. As a Covenant of works, severely requiring full and exact obedience and
perfect righteousness upon pain of the Curse: and so Believers being in Christ,
are not under the Law but under grace. The Lord has reconciled them to himself
in Christ, received them into a Covenant of grace, discharged them of the curse
of the Law, and sentence of condemnation, justified and accepted them as
righteous through the righteousness of Christ, given them access to his mercy
seat, so that the Law is not made for a righteous man, as a covenant of works.
Believers are not to be judged according to the rigor and severity of the Law,
nor subject to the curse or condemnation of the Law, and therefore the Apostle
says, Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse
for us: but the lawless and disobedient natural persons, being out of Christ,
and standing upon their own bottom, and so being to answer the justice of God
upon their own account, are under the Law as a Covenant of works, and subject
to the malediction, Curse and condemnation of the Law. Gal. 3. 13.
Secondly, The Law may be considered as a Rule of life, as a direction to true
Believers, guiding them in the ways of God, teaching them how they ought to
walk and to please God, how to walk answerably to his saving mercies, and
spiritual blessings communicated to them in Christ: and in this regard the Law
is established by Christ, for the use of his people; and so I conceive in this
sense, the Law is so far from being a Covenant of works, that it becomes a
part of the Covenant of grace, or a Rule subservient to the Gospel. 1 These. 4.
2, 3.
So the Apostle tells the believing Thessalonians, Ye know what Commandments
we gave you by the Lord Jesus, the Commandments which he delivered to them were
given by the Lord Jesus, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by virtue of his
Authority and Commission received from him? Now what Commandments were these?
Even the same that are delivered in the Law, in some of which the Apostle
gives instance: First in general, This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that ye should be sanctified, and so conformed to the Law of
God in all things.

Then in special, That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in sanctification and honor, not in the lusts of Concupiscence, etc. In a
word, the Law is of use both unto them that are out of Christ, and to them that
are in Christ: To the former it discovers the contrariety of their Natures,
hearts, and lives, to the mind and will of God, their utter disability to
fulfill the Law, and thereupon makes known unto them their woeful estate, that
they lie open to the wrath and Curse of God, and the danger of everlasting
condemnation: and so the Law may be of use: 1. To take down the natural pride
that is in men and women, to cause them to see their own vileness and lost
condition, to renounce all confidence in their own imaginary righteousness, to
abase themselves to the dust before the Lord, Romans 3. 20.
For by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Secondly, The Law may be of use to
such, to drive them out of themselves, to seek after the remedy, to cause them
to flee to Christ, that they may be washed in his blood from all their sins,
justified by his perfect righteousness, and so redeemed from the Curse of the
Law, and delivered from the wrath to come. 2. To true Believers the Law may be
useful.

1. To humble them, and make them poor in spirit, and low in their own eyes.
And that, 1. In respect of their state by Nature. 2. In respect of their
present condition, now that they are renewed by grace. In the former respect,
they may see in the glass of the pure and holy Law of God, the woeful
deformities and blemishes of their souls, as they were of themselves, their
numberless omissions and commissions, and being enlightened by the spirit of
Christ, these things are the more manifest to them. Secondly, In respect of
their present condition, as they are renewed by grace though they have the
spirit of Christ conforming them in some degree to the Law, yet by comparing
both the frame of their souls, and their thoughts, words, actings,
conversations, with the pure and spiritual Law of God; they find themselves far
short of the mark, and that they need daily renewed acts of grace and free
pardon from the mercy seat.

Secondly, The Law is of use to direct them, to show them what frame of spirit,
what ways are pleasing to the Lord, who is the Lawgiver, and Author of the
Law.

3. The Law is useful to Believers, to quicken them and stir them up more and
more, to purge themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, to cleanse
their hearts from those corruptions which are contrary to the Law, and to
labor after an increase and growth in all holy and sanctifying graces, and to
strive after farther perfection, says the Apostle, Brethren, Phil. 3. 13, 14*
I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. It seems the Apostle, notwithstanding that great measure of the
spirit of Christ, which he had received, and the great improvement made of his
Talents, the eminent services done to the Church, yet looked upon the mark, as
being far before him, a great way beyond him, that is, that he was far short of
the perfection of holiness and righteousness which the Law required, and
therefore he did reach forth and press forward with all his might. When the
best Christians find how far they fall short of that height of perfection which
the Law calls for, scil. to love the Lord their God with all the heart, and
all the mind, and all the soul, and all the might, etc. May not this be a
powerful motive to quicken them, to use all holy endeavors for the perfecting
of holiness in the fear of God?

Secondly, The Lord Christ, by making the Law a rule of life and holy obedience
for his people has established the Law. It is true he has redeemed sincere
Believers from the Curse of the Law, but that was done without the least
prejudice to the force and authority of the Law, because himself did bear the
Curse in his own person, and so he did both save his people from the Curse of
the Law, and yet fully satisfy the Law, but herein did Christ put an high
degree of honor upon the Law, that though he had made full satisfaction to the
Law, in behalf of his people, yet he will have the Law to remain as a Directory
and Rule of holiness and righteousness for those that are appointed hei^s of
salvation. He has made the Law a Rule for the ordering of his Royal family, of
his spiritual Kingdom. The Lord Christ has exalted the Law to a great height
of dignity, in that himself being the Lawgiver, and having united Believers to
himself by his spirit, and ruling in their hearts by his grace, yet requires
them to attend to the Law as the Rule by which they should regulate and order
their hearts and ways.

The use of this may be, first to show the error of those who seem to deny the
use of the Law for Believers in any kind, as if they were to bring them in
Bondage under a Covenant of works. How usual is it with men to mistake the
meaning of the holy Scripture, and in special to take those things as
absolutely meant, which are to be understood only in some respect. So in this
case, because the Scripture shows that Christians are not under the Law,
therefore they seem to say, they have nothing to do with the Law, and that the
Law has not any thing to do with them: but though they are free from the Curse
of the Law, yet the Law is still of great use to them, to guide them in such a
course of holy obedience wherein they are to glorify God, 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19,
and to walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing. The Apostle I conceive
speaks of such licentious libertines, and Antinomian teachers, who when they
speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the
flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them that
live in error, while they promise them liberty, they themselves are yet
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is
brought in bondage. Is it not common with many to complain of bondage under the
Law, who on the other side remain in a miserable bondage under their lusts?

Secondly, 2. Use.
This may open the eyes of those self-deceivers, who pretend faith in Christ,
as if their sins were pardoned through his satisfaction, and their persons
justified by his righteousness without the works of the Law, and thereupon sin
securely, not caring to order their hearts and waye^ according to the Law, nor
to make it the rule of their lives: The Apostle notably shows the folly of
such, for having proved that Believers are freely pardoned and justified by the
righteousness of Christ, without any consideration of their own works done in
obedience to the Law, insomuch that he says, Where sin abounded, grace did
much more abound: Romans 5. 20.
whereas sin abounded in men, Chap. 6. 1, 2.
the grace and free love of God did much more abound, and gloriously manifest
it self through Christ toward Believers, in pardoning their sins, and
accepting them as righteous; thereupon he proposes a question or Objection,
What shall I say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? as if
some licentious person turning the grace of God into laciviousness, should say,
if our best works be of no force or weight at all toward our justification on
the one side, and the grace of God on the other side, be gloriously illustrated
by occasion of our sins, why should we fear to sin against the Law, or be
careful to walk according to that Rule. The Apostle answers by way of
detestation, God forbid; or, let it not be: Let not so vile a thought enter
into the heart of any Christian.

Secondly, By way of confutation, How shall we that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein? know we not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were Baptized into his death; therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the de^d by the
glory of the Father; even so we also should walk in newness of life, as if he
had said, they that are justified by the righteousness of Christ applied by
faith, are by the same faith united unto Christ, and therefore dead to sin, as
Christ died for sin; and raised to newness of life, as Christ rose from the
dead; the spirit of Christ thus manifesting the virtue of Christ his death, and
the power of his Resurrection in them, and so leading them in the way of holy
obedience according to the rule of the Law. They therefore that fancy to
themselves pardon of sin, justification, and salvation through faith in Christ,
and give up themselves to walk according to their own lusts, and not according
to the Law of God, do highly dishonor Christ, and delude their own souls; for
the Apostle Peter speaking of him, And him has God exalted with his right
hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins. The Lord Jesus Christ is exalted to be both a Prince and a
Savior, to rule and to save as a Prince, to give repentance whereby men and
women are subjected to his government, and to his holy Law; and as a Savior to
procure for them forgiveness of sin and justification. They then who would have
their sins pardoned through Christ, but not their souls subjected to the will
and Law of Christ, they would have but an half Christ; they would have Christ
the Savior, but not Christ the Prince; and this is the way to have no Christ
at all, no portion nor interest in Christ. I beseech you therefore as you love
your souls, take heed of this soul deceiving fancy; and as you desire Christ
for your Savior, so obey Him as your Prince, according to his holy Law, which
He has established as a Rule of life for his People.

FINIS.
Texts of Scripture Explained occasionally.
2 These. 2. 1, 2, 3. page 10. Romans 7. 18. p. 16. Revel. 8. 13. p. 50. 1 King.
18. 40. p. 59. Mat. 13. 22, 30. p. 61. Acts 7. 37. p. 83. Joh. 4. 19, 20, 21.
p. 83. Genesis 22. 18. p. 91. Lev. 1. 4. p. 105. 2 King. 3. 20. p. 108. Dan. 9.
21. p. 108. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. p. 115. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. p. 119. 1 Cor. 10. 18.
p. 126. 2 Cor. 2. 4. p. 147. 1 Cor. 6. 18, 19. p. 148. Number. 23. 5. p. 158. Romans
1. 19. p. 179. Romans 5. 13, 14. p. 188. Amos 2. 4, 5. p. 191, 192, 193. Gal. 5.
4. p. 209. James 2. 24. p. 210. 1 John 3. 8. p. 227, etc. Luke 9. 30, 31. p.
233, 234. John. 1. 1, 2, 3. p. 234, 235. Mat. 22. 35, to 40. p. 261, 262.

