A Brief ACCOUNT Of the MOST Material Passages Between those called QUAKERS And
BAPTISTS At the Barbican-Meeting, London, the 9th of the 8th Month, 1674.

Published for Information, by W. Mead, J. Osgood, W. Shown, E. Man, S.
Newton, J. Claypool, W. Welsh.

Citizens there present, from the best Collection they could make by Writing
and Memory.

Also a Copy of the Charges against Thomas Hicks:

With a Letter from a sober Baptist-Preacher to Jeremy Ives upon the Account of
that Meeting.

The Names of the Persons chiefly concerned being On the one side, George
Whitehead, George Keith, William Penn, Stephen Crisp.
On the other William Kiffin, Thomas Hicks, Thomas Plant, Jeremiah Ives. Robert
Forguson a Presb.


A Brief Account Of the most Material Things which passed at the last
Barhican-Meeting, being the 9th of this Instant, between the People called
Quakers, and Anabaptists.
ALthough we could rather have chosen to suspend any Publication of that days
Procedure, until we should have received a more complete Account of the whole
Matter depending; yet since we find three false and imperfect Relations abroad,
our Care to prevent the Peoples Misinformation has prevailed with us to
publish this Narrative.

OUr Friends being conducted by one T. Plant, a Baptist-Preacher, to the Place
by them designed for us (which we must needs say, did greatly fr^strate our
Expectation (founded upon an accepted Article of Equal Place) there being
scarce Breathing-room allotted in all that great Assembly for much above Twenty
of us: And there after some Difficulty settled, W. K. stood up in the Pulpit on
the contrary side* and by way of Introduction to the Matter, told the Auditory,
That the Occasion of the Meeting was to Answer the Call of the Quakers upon
them for Justice against T. H. his Proceedings in his late Dialogues; and
desired, that their Charge exhibited against T. H. might be publicly read for
the Information of the People.

Whereunto G. W. replied, That there had been a great Report of his and W. P's
knowing the Appointment of the former Barbican-Meeting, and designedly
declining it, as being Fearful or Unable to make good their Charges against T.
H. which was an absolute Wrong done them, they being ignorant of any such
Meeting, wherein they were concerned; and that they were now come to make good
what they had exhibited against T. H.

W. K. If you were so refl^cted on, it came from non^ of Us that we know of.


W. P. Where is that ( Us) limited?


W. K. To those concerned in that Meeting.


W. P. If T. H. had been but as careful in not extending the Fault of any one
called a Quaker against the whole People, as W. K. is in restraining the Word
Us, he had behaved himself more honestly, then he has done. But W. K. if those
called Anabaptists belong to any part of that ( Us) we can prove several of
them guilty in that Particular.


W. K. If ye will produce them, we shall endeavor to do you Justice.


W. P. That is fairly said.


W. K. We think it convenient, that the Charge you sent us be read.


W. P. It will not be so proper that the Paper we sent to you be read, being
but a mere Index of the Matter charged, and therefore not readily to be
apprehended by the Auditory; but we have prepared another Paper, containing the
same Matter at large, as in the Pages, referred to in the former, which Liberty
we expressly provided for in the first Article by you accepted, as will appear
by our Letter, which we desire may be read.


W. K. and T. P. Then let our Letter be also read.


W. P. That Is but Reasonable.

[And here both Letters were read, which are omitted for Brevity sake; that
done our Charge at length was produced and read up to the Auditory.]
W. K. I desire that T. H. may have Liberty to make his general Defense,
without Interruption, to the Charge.


W. P. We are contented.


T. H. As to the first Particular, it contains two Parts; The first, the Manner
of Writing; the second, the Matter.

First, As to the Manner; that is, by way of Dialogue; which has not only been
used by Ancient and Modern Christian.-Writers, but also by some of the Quakers
themselves; witness W. Smith's Book, called, A Primmer betwixt a Father and a
Child.

2. The Matter, which relates to my Opposing the Christian to the Quaker. I
have Five Reasons to offer why I did so. First, They deny the Christ of God.
[The rest are omitted for brevity ^ake, and because they came not under any
Consideration.]

By Quakers I mean such as G. F. E. B. G. W. W. P. G. K. S. C. etc.

1. They deny the Christ of God; and this I prove out the Quakers own Writings.

E. B. denies that Christ was ever visible to Men of thy Generation, meaning
the Wicked: But the Christ of God was seen by wicked Men, etc.

2. From G. W 's Appendix to Reas. against Rail. Where he says, That Jesus
Christ, a distinct Person without us, is no Scripture Language.


W. P. Friendly Auditors, T. H. endeavors to justify the Manner and Matter of
his Writing against us: To the first, and what he says in Defense of it, I
must tell him, that he mistakes the Case; for Will. Smith's Book was written
Catechistically, in a familiar Way, to the Capacity of a Child; but T. H 's
Controversially, wherein he undertakes both to represent our Principles, and
Way of defending them; a^firming, that he had given nothing under the Name of a
Quaker, but what was the Language and Practice of a real Quaker. And I shall
prove that Discourse fictitious by several Instances, having never been, as we
have Cause to believe, the Sayings or Practices of a real Quaker, which are as
follow:


Anab. May I not conclude, that the Reason why you so freely rail against, and
reproach your Opposers, is only to secure your Credit with your Proselytes?


Quak. I cannot deny but that there may be something of that in it, Dial. 1. p.
72.


A. Does the Darkness obey this Light, or does the Light obey it self?


Q. It obeys it self, Dial. 1. p. 66.


A. But did Christ-without redeem Christ within?


Q. We say, it is the Seed to which the Promise of Redemption is, and which
ONLY wants Redemption, Dial. 1. p. 69.


A. Is not this Seed within God?


Q. Yea, Ibid.


A. But was not Christ without a mere Creature?


Q. Yea, Ibid.


A. You said before, Christ is but one, and now ye speak as if there were two,
the one God, and the other a Creature: How shall I understand thee?


Q. Indeed thou can no^ ^nderstand, Dial. 1. p. 69.


A. Is it not incredible th^^ a Creature should redeem God?


Q. Indeed thou can not believe, thy Mind being in the Darkness and Enmity.
p. 70,


A. But can thou give a rational Account hereof?


Q. Why demandest thou a rational Account? I deny thy Reason; we witness THIS
Redemption, p. 70.


A. Do thou not give Ground to suspect ^ecei^?


Q. Nay, there is that in thee that would witness to me, it thou would heed
it, Ibid.


A. I confess there is that in me that does believe thou art full of Pride,
Heresy and Hypocrisy: Is it this thou meanest bears witness to thee?


Q. I see thou art a Wicked Creature, and have NOTHING of God in thee, p. 70.

Again, A. Since you own not the Scriptures as A Rule; of what Use are they?


Q. They are a Declaration of the Saints Conditions, p. 79, 80.


A. Are they of no further Use?


Q. Not to us, p. 68.

Again, A. The Apostle says, Let Woman be silent in the Church; why suffer ye
Women to declare?


Q. The Women to be silenced is the Flesh, p. 71.


A. Has the Flesh a Husband?


Q. Yea, Ibid.


A. Who is it?


Q. The Devil, p. 71.


A. The Text says, Let a Woman ask h^ Husband at home; must the Flesh be
instr^cted by the Devil in the Things of Religion.


Q. Alas for thee, I comprehend thee, an^ see thy Subtilty, p. 71.

Again, A. Are you then as perfectly happ^ as ever you expect to be?


Q. We witness Perfection, p. 72.


A. What Proof is this to another Man?


Q. We say we witness it; is not the Proof sufficient?


A. But what if I believe otherwise?


Q. We shall not spare to stigmatize the Person that questions the Truth of our
Sayings, p. 72.


A. Will this convince me or any other^ your Perfection?


Q. Though it do not, yet thereby w^ shall render you so odious to our Fiends,
the they will believe nothing that is spoken b^ you against us, p. 72.


A. Does not this signify a very dishone^ and malicious Mind?


Q. We care not what you think, prov^ded our Friends think not so, p. 73. -- We
will give it out, that we have both an^swered and confuted our Adversaries, an^
^r Friends will believe us, which is enough us, Ibid. in fin.

Again, A. But since it is not the Good of (...) Promises that shall be
fulfilled to Persons ^ter Death, it must be some other Thing; ^ay what is it?


Q. We say, there is a Seed shall be sa^d Dial. 1. p. 74. Dial. 3. p. 37.


A. But if this Seed only be God and Christ; that is that to you?


Q. Is not this sufficient? p. 74, 75.

Again, A. What is the Soul?


Q. It is a Part of God, and of God's ^^eing, p. 65.


A. Is not this as much as to say, the Soul^ God?


Q. Yea, Ibid.


A. If the Light be God, and the Soul be ^d; how say you, God sets up a Light
in the ^ul? Does he set up a Light in himself?


Q. We are dead to Distinctions, p. 65, 66.

Again, A. But do thou indeed believe, ^at those Quotations set down in the
former ^ialogues are Forgeries?


Q. I do so, Dial. 3. p. 2.


[These are some of his Fictions.] T. H. I can prove it all; I cannot bate them
a Word; some I will prove by their own Words, and others by Consequence.


W. P. He has shut out himself from all Consequences by affirming that they
are no other then what the Quakers give both in Words and Practice; and if the
Quakers Expressions, then not T. H 's Consequences; but if Consequences of T.H
's Drawing, then not the Quakers Expressions: And though we might allow W.
Kiffin, or any sobe^ Man to draw Natural and Genuine Consequences upon us, from
our Principles; yet we cannot give that Liberty to T. H. he having already
excluded himself.

[Note Reader, that upon the great Crack that was in the Meeting (which caused
a Consternation at that Time upon many of the People) they descended the Pulpit
to a more secure Place; at what Time J. I. thus spoke to W. P.]
J. I. Mr. Penn, Inasmuch as you see the House has shown it self so infirm,
and that the People are so tumultuous, and that it may be dangerous not to
break up the Meeting, we desire that you would consent to the Dissolving of it.


W. P. Ah Jeremy! had T. Hicks Heen but half so careful of not giving Occasion
for all this Bussle, there had been no Need of thy Desire or our Grant: But the
People begin to be settled (crying out, there is no Danger) and there are Places
secure enough for you (pointing to another Gallery) and we are so deeply
concerned in Defense of our Religion, that we are not willing to give away this
Opportunity: Therefore Friends and People, I do beseech you to be still;
doubtless you are come to hear, and you are the present Obstructors of your own
Hearing: We are denied to be Christians, and are rendered unfit to live amongst
Men; to some of you we may be Relations; to others Neighbors or Acquaintance;
howbeit, we are your Country Men: Give us a Hearing for our Religion; Our
Souls, Bodies, and all what is near and dear to us, is concerned in this
Matter: Therefore once more I entreat your Silence, that we may proceed.


R. F. a Scottish Priest undertook to speak on the behalf of T. H. excusing him
for writing Dialogue-wise.


G. K. It is one Thing to write Dialogue-wise, and another Thing to write a
Dialogue; for many in England did take it for a real Dialogue.


[Of which several present bore Witness.] R. F. George, You know that Minutius
Felix and several Ancients, Learned Men, have writ Dialogue-wise, as Lucian and
Cicero.


W. P. Do thou mention Lucian and Cicero, Heathens?


R. F. Cicero was a wiser Man, Mr. Penn, then you or I; he proved one God
admirably well.


W. P. It seems then our Light is good for somewhat, seeing a Heathen by that
Light, could so admirably prove a God. Besides, their Manner of Dialogueing was
not like T. H's, who so unfairly and unjustly misrepresented our Expressions,
Principles and Religion.


R. F. The Matter we charge upon you, is, that the Quaker is no Christian.


W. P. We, what We? who art thou?


R. F. I am a Christian.


W. P. So say we; that is but a begging of the Question.


[Here some answered, He is a Presbyterian Minister.] VV. P. A Presbyterian?
what! a confederacy?


[Then Jeremy Ives, called an Arminian-Baptist, stood up.] J. I. You say right,
Mr. Penn; I must acknowledge, the writing Controversy in Dialogue is a very
unfair Way, unless the greatest Care be taken in expressing the Principles of
the Adversary in his own words, and according to the best sense they will
carry: But let us come to the Matter of his Dialogues, wherein he opposes the
Christian to the Quaker.

-- Well, J. I. it seems thou do grant the first.


W. P. I am willing to come to the Matter, if you would but hear, and not thus
frequently interrupt me one after another.

The second thing we object, as he tells us, is the Opposing the Christian to
the Quaker: His first Reason for so doing, is Our Denying the Christ of God.
His Proof, as he calls it, was out of my Book, called Reas. ag. Rail. page 54.
The words are these: Let it suffice to the sober Reader, that we do believe
That Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever, did come of Abraham's Seed
according to the Flesh; that the Body prepared of that Line was his Body; that
what Sufferings befell it, were the Sufferings of Christ; just as the Body is
called the Body of Christ.

This makes very well for us; for we are so far from denying him, that we
acknowledge him to be God over all, blessed forever.


R. F. But you deny him to be a distinct Being without you.


W. P. No such matter; for we acknowledge him to be a distinct Being without
us, yet not divided from his People.


[Here T. H. whispered, R. F. saying, A distinct Person without them, or to
that purpose.] R. F. But you deny him to be a distinct Person without you.


W. P. Thou did just now charge us with denying Christ to be a distinct Being
without us: This alters the Case; acknowledge thy Mistake, and I shall answer.


[About this time they returned to the Pulpit again.] T. H. I will prove the
Quakers deny the Christ of God, from G. W. his Appendix to Reas. ag. Rail. page
27. And must conclude that it is a Design of Satan, to keep some Men in Carnal
Imaginations, and Dark Thoughts of an Human, Personal Christ


G. W. Here T. H. has dealt unfairly, as they have done in their Barbican
Relation, by leaving out the last part of the Sentence, which is explanatory of
the first part, where I further explain it in these words, viz. consisting
either of Flesh, Blood and Bones like theirs; or of Flesh and Bones without
Blood, and so of God's right hand, as limited to that Remoteness, that they
neglect to wait for Christ's Inward and Spiritual Appearance, and the Knowledge
of God's Right Hand near them, to save and preserve them from Sin and Death.

Are not those carnal Imaginations, causing this Neglect, Sinful?


J. I. T. Hicks will prove his Charges.


T. H. I w^ll prove them All, at least Most of them.


[Here the People hooted them, as if he cried Guilty to some of them.] W. P. T.
H. had Liberty to make his general Answer without Interruption; and will ye not
give me leave to make my general Reply? Let me proceed to end this second Head,
and I shall hear ^illingly T. H. of the whole Matter: But it cannot be fairly
done to overlook my Answer to the first Part, and thus unhandsomly interrupt
in the second; This is not to act the Christian: If you will be but patient to
hear my Reply, I do engage to hear T. H's; and if this day will not serve, he
shall have to morrow; and if that will not do, he shall have the day called
Monday, and so on, till the Matter be thoroughly debated.

[Here Reader, a great Number of indifferent People cried, Go on, go on: But J,
Ives, etc. refused to hear any thing further, unless our Friends would give way
to them to insist upon the Proof of our denying the Lord's Christ; which was
only therefore withsto^d by us, because it was out of that Order and Method T.
H. himself had laid down to proceed upon.]
W. P. If you will not hear my general Reply, and thus unhandsomly overrun the
first Part of the Charge, promise us that after we have discussed this
particular Head, that you will go upon the Charges by us exhibited, and we
shall condescend to answer you.


J. I. T. H. and several promised, Yes, yes, yes.


W. P. Then go on; and let T. H. make good his Charge if he can.


[Here J. I. put forward to speak for T. H. upon which W. P. called out.] W. P.
Tho. Hicks speak out for thy self: thou art the Man I have to do withal.


T. P. Mr. Penn, you promised to hear another speak for T. H. because of the
Impediment of his Voice.


W. P. What aileth him! His Voice is loud enough to Charge, but it feems it is
not loud enough to Prove; But if T. H. pleads that Infirmity, I am content
another should go on.


[The People cried, Hicks, Hicks, Hicks; whereupon T. Hicks advanced. T. H.
They that deny the Lord's Christ are no Christians; But the Quakers deny the
Lord's Christ, etc.


W. P. I deny the Minor, viz. That the Quakers deny the Lord's Christ.


T. H. They that deny Christ to be a distinct Person without them, deny the
Lord's Christ; But the Quakers deny Christ to be a distinct Person without
them, etc.


J. I. W. P. answer directly.


W. P. I desire that T. H. may explain what he means by the term Person.


T. H. I mean, the Man Christ Jesus


W. P. Then I deny the Minor, viz. That we deny the Man Christ Jesus.


T. H. I prove ye deny the Man Christ Jesus H. W. says; That Christ was never
seen with Carnal Eyes, nor heard with Carnal Ears, etc.


J. I. He that denies that Christ was ever ^en with Carnal Eyes, etc. denies
the Man Christ; But the Quakers deny that Christ ^as ever seen with Carnal
Eyes, etc. --


G. K. I answer by Distinguishing: Christ ^ God, was never seen with Carnal
Eyes; ^ut as Man he was seen with Carnal Eyes.


J. I. But he was Christ as he was Man How then was not Christ seen with Carn^
Eyes?


G. K. We are to consider, that the Term or Names Jesus Christ are sometimes
applied to him as God, and sometimes to him ^ Man; yea, sometimes to the very
Body ^ Jesus: But the Question is, Whether ^ those Names more properly,
immediate and originally belong to him as God, or ^ he was before he took that
Manhood upon him, or to the Manhood? We affirm, Tho^^ Names are given to him
most properly a^^ eminently as God, and less properly, y^^ truly, as Man; and
least properly to his B^^dy, yet to his Dead Body.


J. I. Where do ye read, that the Care^ was called the Christ?


[VVhereupon several grieved at such reverent Expressions, cried out, Where d^^
thou ever read that Christ's Dead Body ^ called a Carcass?] W. P. I beseech you
for the Lord's sa^ that we may treat of these things as becom^ Christians, with
an holy Fear and Reveren^


G. K. I prove that the Dead Body of ^^sus was called Christ from the Words of
M^^ry, Where have ye laid him?


[With this J. I. broak forth into a Laugh^er, with the Confederates.] C. H.
Are you not ashamed to laugh at ^lain Scripture-Words.


G. K. But I prove that he was Jesus Christ before he took Flesh, Ephesians. 3. 9.
who cre^ted all things by Jesus Christ.


J. I. George Keith, Is this to be a Respondent? Are you a Scholar, and do not
know better the Rules of a Respondent?


G. K. Yes, I will justify is, that it is lawful for me to give the Reason of
my Distinction.


T. H. I will prove the Quakers to be no Christians.


C. H. There are two VVayes of proving a Man no Christian; the one by
Principle, the other by PRACTICE Jeremy.


J. I. They that say, That Christ cannot be seen with Carnal Eyes, and was
never visible to wicked Men, do deny the Lord's Christ; for he was seen with
Carnal Eyes, and by wicked Men.


W. P. I distinguish upon the word Seen:

Wicked Men might see him in that Bodily Appearance, and yet not see him to be
the Christ of God; they saw his Manhood, but did not see his Christsh^p.


[Here Reader, J. I. T. Hicks, etc. fell a laughing, and set many of their own
Party into an indecent Noise; at which W. P. thus reflected:] W. P. Are you not
ashamed? Will you pretend to prove us no Christians, and yet behave your
selves so like Unchristian Men, to laugh about matters of the greatest Moment.
I will prove to you, that not all who saw his Manhood did see him as Christ.

First, From Christ's Words to Peter, when Peter confessed, that he was
Christ, the Son of the Living God, viz. Flesh and Blood has not revealed this
unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; Therefore Peter with a Carnal Eye
could not have seen the Lord's Christ, much less Wicked Men.

My second Proof is from the Apostles Words, 1 Cor. 2. Whom none of the
Princes of this World knew; for had they known him, they would not have
crucified him. Now Seeing and Knowing in Scripture are sometimes equivalent;
consequently, Christ as to his outward Appearance might be seen by Wicked Men,
yet not seen or known to be the Christ. And that was the seeing plainly
intended by E. B's Words.


G. K. Christ said, He that has seen me, has seen the Father; but no Wicked
Man has seen the Father; therefore no Wicked Man has seen Christ, as such.


[Upon this J. I. according to his usual Practice flung up his Hand to the
Company, bespeaking them for a Noise, expressing himself to this Purpose.] J.
I. This is a Distinction indeed; just as if I should say when I see W. P 's.
Body, I do not see W. P. because I do not see his ^oul, or that which is more
excellent in him.


[A mere Shuffle! The Comparison being altogether unequal, as many replied; for
it no way lessens the Distinction, nor the Weight of those Scriptures
abovementioned; As also, they that saw him as the Carpenter's Son, did not see
him as the Christ of God.] J. I. Is the Manhood a part of the Lord's Christ?


W. P. Is this to prove the Charge of our denying the Lord's Christ? It seems
we must be here to be catechized, and ye will not answer us one Question.


[VVhereupon J. I. lifted up his Hands and Voice, as if he had sound out the
Secret, crying to the People.] J. I. Now ye see after what Manner they own the
Lords Christ.


[Here some of their own Party gave him an Acclamation.] W. P. Friends, I
desire you to hear me: I shall answer J. I. his Question, if he will promise to
answer mine.


J. I. I will answer it.


W. P. Then I here declare, that we do faithfully believe that Holy Manhood to
be a Member of the Christ of God.


[Upon which the People cried, Very well; and W. P. directed his Question to J.
Ives.] W. P. Was he the Christ of God before he was manifested in the Flesh?


J. I. He was the Son of God.


W. P. But was he the Lord's Christ? I will prove him to have been the Lord's
Christ, as well before as after. 1. From the Apostle Paul's Words to the
Corinthians: That Rock was Christ. Next, From Jude, where some Greek Copies
have it thus, That Jesus brought the People of Israel out of Egypt.


[To which we received no Answer, though we often called upon him for it] G. K.
If they own him not to be the Christ, before he took Flesh, they take Part with
the And there is some Cause for Suspicion; for a professed Socinian confederated
with them, and sat very near the Pulpit.
Socinians.


[Here J. I. being manifestly at a loss, fell into a heavy Repetition of some
former Passages, impertinent to the present Matter, with his so and so; and
what if I should say, etc. to the nauseating of the Minds of the People, which
he perceiving, ^etook himself to this Question, as his last Stratagem.] J. I.
But do ye believe that Christ in his Human Nature is in Heaven.


[After the Discourse between VV. P. G. K. on the one part, and J. I. and T. H.
^n the other, about seeing the Lord's Christ; ^. VV. in this wise opened and
referred the Matter to the Peoples serious Considerations.] G. W. You have
heard the Charge against ^s, and the Distinction that has been made between
Seeing and Seeing of Christ; as na^ely, between the Spiritual, Saving Sight^
the Lord's Christ; and the Seeing of his ^tward Man, Person or Body: In this
last ^ense, it could never be intended that it was ^t visible to the outward
Eye; But as he was ^e Spiritual Rock which all Israel drunk of, ^d as he was
before Abraham was, and as ^^rified with the Father before the World be^n, and
as Christ himself says to Philip, He ^^t sees me, sees my Father also: And
it ^ere only Saints or Children of Light, who could truly say, We have seen his
Glory as the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth; In all which
Considerations or Sense of Seeing, the Lord's Christ was only seen spiritually,
and not with Carnal Eyes; therefore we may leave this Matter with the People,
seriously to consider of.


[To which J. Ives granted that it might be so left; yet presently after,
instead of proving us No Christians, he urged that Unscriptural Question
aforesaid upon us.] J. I. Do ye believe or own that Christ is in Heaven with
his Human Nature?


W. P. We do believe the Man. Christ Jesus to be glorified in Heaven.


[VVhich Answer J. I. refused to accept, because they were not the Terms of his
Question.] W. P. What difference do thou make between the Manhood and Human
Nature of Christ?


J. I. None, if you mean heartily.


W. P. Then I do mean and speak heartily; we do believe that Holy Manhood to be
in Heavenly Glory.


J. I. Why did not you say so before?


[The People said, It is enough.] [ J. Ives immediately withdrew, and went his
Way.] [It being dark, we called for Candles to be ^^ght'd, in order to
prosecure our Charges; but some of them cried out, Away, away, away; no Candles
to be lighted: At length we got some; But Th. Plant appeared in the Pulpit,
desiring to be heard a few Words, which were to this Purpose, directed to G. VV
and VV. P.] T. P. The Doors are broken, and several Things necessary to be
repared, which, if the Meeting should not be broke up, the Carpenter cannot
have Time to do it before our First Day Meeting: And inasmuch as such great
Meetings are attended with Inconveniences; we desire that five of your Friends
may meet five of our Friends, in order to consider about an other Meeting.


W. P. It is your House; we are not willing to be Trespassers, and must thus
far acquiesce in your Requests, to withdraw at present; only, inasmuch as we
have been publicly wronged, it is but Reasonable we should be publicly
righted.


T. P. That is but reaso^able.


VV. P. Then we accept the Offer of five of Side, to consider of a further
Meeting.


T. P. We take it kindly from you.


W. P. Friendly Auditors; Before ye de^art, I desire that you would be pleased
to ^^ke notice, that whereas it has been ob^^cted against us, we deny the
Lord's Christ, in order to make good T. H's Dialogue, in opposing the Christian
to the Quaker, as if the Quaker were no Christian: We do here solemnly declare,
that with Reverence we believe and confess to Christ, both as he is the Man
Jesus, and God over all, blessed forever. And this further I would leave with
you, that though we are jealous of expressing our Faith in unscriptural Terms,
as, God-Man, a distinct Person without us (which limits and confines him to a
Remoteness) Human Nature of Christ in Heaven, etc. yet you see we have declared
that to be our Belief, which they acknowledge to be the true Sense and Meaning,
signified by that Explanation they put upon their own Terms. Now do but weigh,
how unreasonable it is, that for rejecting certain Terms, and those
Unscriptural too, we should so publicly, and with such Severity be
Vnchristian'd to the World by T. H. etc.


G. W. I also desire to be heard a little. Here has been a great deal of words
about Christianity; But while the Name of Christ has been often mentioned,
there is not that Reverence to him shown among you, that ought to be in
Discoursing about Christ and Christianity: It does ill become Professors
thereof to show themselves in this Rudeness, Clamours and Confusion, as many
here have done; But since Christianity is so much talked of, it is necessary to
know, What Christianity is. It is not a Profession or mere Notion of Christ
(how true soever) but it is a being like Christ; He was Patient, Meek, Humble,
Low in Heart, etc. in all which true-Christians are Conformable unto him, and
Bear his Image. -- We have been by these Interruptions diverted from pursuing
our Charge againt T. H. who has most grossly abused Us, our Religion and
Sufferings; insinuating that they were for Carnal Interest, and Satisfaction of
our Wills and Lusts, as if on this account our Friends offered up their Lives,
and all that was Near and Dear to them in this World; (many Dying in Prison in
Newgate in the time of the Infection, and at other times, for bearing an open
Testimony in their public Meetings in this City of London) Let All who are
Serious and Impartial, judge concerning this manner, and how this man has
abused Us and our Sufferings, etc.

And, seeing that a Dismission of the Meeting is desired by them, the Place
being theirs, that they may have no occasion against us, I entreat that all our
Friends may peaceably withdraw: And T. Plant, desire the same of them that
belong to them.


T. P. I desire that all may quietly depart.


G. W. I desire also that those in the Galleries take time to go down gently
that none be harmed. Further, That since we have mutually agreed to dismiss the
Meeting, T. Plant, I desire that none of you, the Baptists, would stay after
us, to render us Odious; but depart with us.


T. P. We will.


[And accordingly the Multitude peaceably withdrew, and dispersed themselves.]
A Catalogue of some of those Things charged against T. H. either Wholely
Omitted or ^^airly Examined in your ^^te Relation of the Barbican Meeting;
pointing you to the Particulars in the Books.
General Charges.
1. A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker [yet made by T. H.] viz.
wherein, says he, is faithfully represented some of the chief and most
Concerning Opinions of the Quakers; Together with their Method and Manner of
Reasoning in the Defense thereof; published for Common Benefit, Dial. 1. Title
Page.

2. His Abuse of our Sufferings. His Discourse runs thus, viz.

Q. Why will you not be free, and plainly tell me, what it is that does
influence and prevail with you to do and suffer as you do?


A. What do thou think it should be? Dial. 1. p.75.


Q. May not the Satisfaction of your WILLS and LUSTS, the promoting your Carnal
Interest, be your chief Motive and Inducement?


A. We deny the Flesh, and the Lusts: This is thy own dark Imagination.


Q. May not you live in, and fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, whilst you deny it
in words? I am serious with you, since your Opinion denies any Eternal
Advantage to be reaped by Persons after Death, in denying the Resurrection of
this Body; Must you not then have respect Only to something to be enjoyed here,
as your Encouragement?


A. We are above the World and all its Encouragement.


Q. This is no other to me then a Vai^ Boast, because I am assured no sort of
Peo^ple whatever, do more eagerly grasp af^ter the World then you do, insomuch
tha^ (I believe) your Carnal Advantages is o^ great thing in your ^ye in your
sedulou^ Endeavors to augment your Numbers; ^ I mistake you, inform me what it
is that do^ animate you?


A. Thou see we suffer in our worldly concerns for our Principles; How then
can this be our Encouragement?


Q. Though you may sustain some outward Losses; yet, whether ye have not a way
to augment your outward Gains by Loosing?

3. Are you then as perfectly happy as ever you expect to be?


A. We witness Perfection, 1 Dial. p. 72, 73.


Q. What Proof is this to another Man?


A. We say we witness it: Is not this Proof sufficient?


Q. But what if I believe otherwise?


A. We shall not spare to stigmatize and condemn that Person that questions
the Truth of our Sayings.


Q Will this convince me or any other of your Perfection?


A. Though it does not, yet thereby we shall render you so odious to our
Friends, that they will believe nothing that is spoken by you against us.


Q. Then may I not conclude, that the Reason why you so freely rail against,
and reproach your Opposers is only to secure your Credit with your own
Proselytes?


A. I cannot deny but that there may be something of that in it.


Q. Will you be so liberal of your Revilings, whether your Adversaries give
Occasion or no?


A. It concerns us to render them as ridiculous as we can, and to make our
Friends believe they do nothing but contradict themselves; And if this fail, we
will insinuate by way of Question something that may be reproachful to them,
etc.


Q. But does not this signify a very dishonest and malicious Mind in you?


A. We care not what you think, provided our Friends think not so.


Q. One of your Friends meeting with a Person that had writ against you, tells
him, That if he did write any more against them, that they would print any
thing against him that any Person would report, be it what it would. Is such a
Practice a Proof of your Perfection?


A. Now thou slanderest us.


Q. Do you believe the Scriptures to be the true Sayings of God?


A. Yea, so far as they agree to the Light in me, Dial. 1. p. 66. Q. Ap. Ans.
p. 29.


5. Q. When we make use of the Scriptures, it is only to quiet and stop their
Clamours that plead for it as their Rule, Dial. ^ page 24, 25.

6. That they (viz. the Quakers) render the holy-Scriptures to be of no more
Authority then the Fables of Esop; and esteem them inferior to their own
Pamphlets, 2 Dial. Epist. p. 5. Q. Ap. Ans. p. 29

7. That the Blood of Christ in their Esteem is worse then the Blood of a
common Thief, Dial. 1. p. 9. and 38. Contin. p. 4. Q. Ap. Ans. p. 31.

8. That the Quakers have discovered themselves to be no other but the Spawn of
that wicked Brood the Ranters, having licked up their Vomit, Dial. 3. p. 80.

9. That the Quakers owning Jesus Christ is indeed no other then a mere
mystical Romance, 1 Dial. p. 10. Contin. p. 9.

10. That the Tendency of all the Quakers Reasoning about Instituted Religion
is to debauch Mankind, Dial. 3. p. 65

11. That the Quakers appoint their Ministers aforehand to speak in such a
Place at such a Time: That their Meetings are only and principally to decoy,
trapan and inveigle others, Contin. p. 66. Q. Ap. Ans. p. 27.

12. That our Principles improved, are destructive to all humane Society,
Contin, p. 59, 62, 69.

13. His kind of treating us with reviling Language, viz. Cheats and Impostors,
Liars Malignant Errors, Hypocrisy, Deceit, Equivocations; The Way they
arrived to that Degree of Perfection, was by Quaking, Foaming at the Mouth,
with dreadful Roarings and Howlings; and this, he says, the Devil influenced
us into. Again, Delusions, impertinent Cantings, Nonsense, Blasphemy, the
Devil's Slaves, Paganism, Satan's Snares, Pernicious and Perilous Errors; they
are inspired and influenced by that grand Impostor the Devil; Blasphemous and
Ridiculous Canting; Enthusiastical; they Decoy and Trapan; your Idle,
Non-sensical and Blasphemous Prating; Inspired by Satan; You are as Vile
Impostors as ever were. Thus much of us and our Way in general, besides his
Knaves, Coxcomb, Impudent and Audacious Fellows, that he has called our Friends
on Religious Conferences: Madmen, Absolutely Infatuated, Distracted, Monsters
in Religion, Dissemblers, Knave, Impudent Fellow, little Respect to
Magistrates, Willful Lying, the most implacable Enemies to the
Christian-Religion, as vile Impostors as ever were, etc. to which is added
Dial. 1. p. 76. Romish Emissaries: See Reas. against Rail. p. 170, 171. Append.
ibid. p. 7, 8. C^u^t. Chr. p. 120. Q. Ap. Ans. p. 24, 25.

14. He proclaims to the World, that our Religion is a mere Cheat, calculated
only to the service of the Devil, and their own Lusts, Dial. 1. page 62.

15. If a Merchant sell you his Goods, he must stay for his Money till you
(says he) be moved to pay it; till which time you are under no Obligation in
point of Duty. You say, it is necessary to have things revealed to you, with
respect to your Conversation in the World, which are not to be found in the
Scriptures, no not by Consequence: How then may your Creditors be assured it
will be revealed to you, to pay what you ow them? Scripture and Reason would,
and do teach you herein, but these you must be dead unto; who knows then what
may, or may not be revealed to you? It Is not unknown that a Revelation has
been pretended to excuse the Payment of a just Debt. And why may not that which
has been (even amongst you) be again? But is it reasonable that Men should be
baffled out of their just Rights by such unjust and wicked Pretenses?
Continuat. page 69, 70.

Charges against Particulars.
1. That Jesus Christ came to seek and save a lost God; and that the Seed of
God in Man only, and nothing else is taught, etc. Contin. p. 49 and 66.

2. That Nich. Lucas, a real Quaker, was moved to declare his mind thus, (to
one I know very well) Thou may burn thy Bible, and when that is done thou
may serve God as well without it; And if thou have a mind to have a
Scripture, thou may write as good a one thy self, Cont. p. 5. and 60, 71.
Dial. 3. p. 3. and 86.

3. Chr. I have formerly detected you of several pernicious Opinions concerning
the Scriptures, the Light within, the Person of Christ, and the Resurrection of
the Dead, etc. which I presume by this time you have considered; What say, you
thereunto?

Quak. I say, the Plagues and Judgments of God will follow thee, G. W. Contin.
p. 1. Dial. 3. p. 85. Q. Ap. Ans. p. 30.

4. His false Reflections upon Stephen Crisp, Dial. 1. p. 44, 45.

5. His several Abuses of W. Pen, cited in his Book, called, Reas. against
Rail. Cont. p. 52. Dial. 3. p. 1, 2, 4, 10, 13, 41, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 80,
and Epist.

The Contradictions charged upon T. Hicks, Counterf. Christ. detect. p. 3. 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.

Further we have several Exceptions against your Manner of Appointment, and
Management of the Meeting at Barbican.

We also Except against your late Book, called, The Quakers Appeal Answered,
as not making good the Title thereof; And because many Things are overlooked,
for which you say the Appeal was made, and several Things unfairly cited.

Which are but some of those many things we have further to object against T.
Hicks and his Abettors, when the^e are particularly and fully considered and
determined in public. And we having thus far condescended, we expect a public
Meeting without delay fairly to examine and discourse Matters; which when done,
we are willing to come to the Doctrinal Points (which are chiefly in
Controversy) concerned in T. H's three Dialogues; our very Aim and End being
for Truth and Righteousness, and that things may be managed in Good Order.

George Whitehead, George Keith, William Penn, Stephen Crisp,


Brother IVES,
I Was sorry to see Thee appear in the Pulpit (I will not say Cockpit) as an
Assistant to one that would prove the Quaker No Christian We saw him foiled in
his first Attempt, to prove his Way of Writing; For, as Mr. Penn truly said,
There is a vast Difference betwixt a Dialogue composed for Information, and one
for Disputation; In the first I only write my own Judgment, in the other an
Adversary's. But moreover, I wonder thou would put that Ensnaring Question to
them (which was best answered with Silence) viz. Whether the Humanity was a
part of Christ: For what if they had turned another upon thee to the same
Purpose, thus, Whether that which was crucified, and satisfied for Sin, was a
Part of Christ, or whole Christ? Would not the same or more Absurdities have
fallen upon thee, if thou had directly answered? Brother, let us leave
dividing of Christ; and put not such Queries, which bring Inconveniences upon
both Parties. Again, Thy Way to prove them will as easily prove us all No
Christians; for I suppose thou wast running to this, That he that denies a Part
of Christ denies the Whole; but the Quakers deny a part, Ergo. Then why may not
another reason thus? He that loves not Christ, denis him; he that keeps not his
Commands, loves him not, and so forward to this, That Nonconformity to every
Command of Christ is a Denying of Christ, then must the Presbyter. and
Independents be No Christians for denying Baptism; and some Baptized Churches
must be Antichristian for denying Laying on of Hands on all, and others for not
keeping Saturday-Sabbath; But God forbid that we should thus proceed to Heat
henize one another for Diversities of Apprehensions concerning the Nature,
Offices or Ordinances of Christ. T H. has Dialogued so long, till he has filled
the Quakers Meetings in these Parts: And for ought I see, the more We Strive,
the more They Thrive. Its strange we cannot observe the Counsel of our own
Bible, to let them alone; for if they be not (...) God, they shall not stand.
Let us contend against all Faith that leads to^ an Unholy Life, which doubtless
the Apostle intended, when he bids us Contend for Gospel-Faith, and not
Doubtful Disputation.

One Thing more I noted, which was not fair, viz to set Women at the Door of
the Disputation, to sell a Pamphlet to exasperate the People against the
Quakers; verily, he that did it, acted too much like a Poch^r, which if he can,
will wound the Hare before he courses her: I was so troubled at it, that I
desired the Woman to remove, or forbear showing till the Dispute was past; but
she was so Zea^ous in her Business, that I fear, she was hired: Whatever the
Design was I know not; but truly the Substance of the Pamphlet was very Weak;
for by the very same Argument he may prove all our Pedigree from the Pope, as
well as the Quakers; but the Sheet it self smelt of the Spirit of Persecution,
which is the very worst Part of Popery: But no more at present, only this, If
thou hear of a Disputation again, do thy Endeavor to have it out of the City;
three or four Miles Distance had freed you from that Rabble, which I perceive
will always disturb and make utterly unprofitable all Meetings of that Nature.
From

October. 12. 74. Thy Loving Friend and Brother W. L.

Postscript.
FOrasmuch as the Baptists, etc. h^^^ publicly (though falsely) accused a^^
charged us with Denying the Christ of G(...) the Worth and Authority of the
holy Scr^^tures, and other things of the like Nature we do (for the stopping of
the Mouth (...) Slander, and informing the Simple) decl^^^ in the Presence of
God, That we do high Honor and truly Own the Lord Jes^^ Christ, as he is born
witness of in the ho^^ Scriptures, both as he is God, and as he too^ upon him
Flesh, and fulfilled the Law in the very Body prepared for him above Sixte^^
Hundred Years ago, in which he resist^^ and overcame the Devil, and became a
complete Sacrifice for Mankind in general.

And further, In Simplicity and Plainne^^ of Heart we own him in all his
Offices reco^ded in the holy Scriptures. And concernin^ the Scriptures, we
Esteem them and Ow^ them as the Words of God, spoken by the Spirit of God,
moving in Holy Men, Prophets, Christ, his Apostles and Ministers and that they
are profitable for Doctrine Reproof, Correction, etc. yea, we truly value them
above all the Books extant in the World, and do hold it our Duty to live that
Holy Life they call for and exhort to; and they were written for our learning,
that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope: And we
wish with all our Hearts, That whole Christendom, who Honor them with their
Lips, might come to live that Holy Life which they exhort to; For it is not the
bare Profession of God, Christ and Scriptures, and other Heavenly Things in
Words, that availes any thing; but a living a Godly Christ-like Life, is the
Sum of Christian Religion.

W. S.

THE END.

