THE AMOROVS WAR. A Tragi-Comoedy.

Ovid Lib: 1. Amor: Militat omnis Amans; Et habet sua Castra Cupido. Printed in
the Year 1648.

The PERSONS.
Archidamus. King of Bithynia. Barsene. His sister. Lyncestes Polydamas
Two old Lords. Theagines. Meleager.
Two young Lords, their sons. Orythia. Wife to Theagenes. Thalaestris. Wife
to Meleager. Menalippe Ma^thesia
Their women. Callias. Neander. Artops.
Three young Courtiers. Eurymedon. King of Thrace. Roxane. His sister. Clytus.
Hippocles.
Two of his Lords. Macrinus. Lacero. Serpix.
Three common soldiers. Pistoclerus. A News spreader. Two men Two women
Citizens. Two Priests. A Drummer.
The Scoene, BITHYNIA. THE AMOROVS WAR. A Tragi-Comoedy.
ACT. I.
SCEN. I.
Afier a Warlike sound of Dru^^es and Trumpets within; Enter Calli^s, Neander,
Artops. Call. Here Is a sweet change of Times; I, who had wont
To have my boy sing me asleep between
My Mistress Arms, and charm me every Night
In^ a soft Ely^ium with his voice.
Have been this week kept waking with this (...):
If this hold four days more, I shall be fit,
Like Blackbirds, to be whistled to, and taught,
Out of mere ^amenesse, to learn Tu^es. Neand: I do
Observe a certain kind of Copulation
Twixt sound and sound. This noise has sexes in it.
The Drummers, and the Trumpetters, and Fifes,
Make the Male noise o^ch Streets; The Women's cries,
Loud shriekcs, and howlings, make the Female. Between them
A strange, ambiguous, confused roare's begot,
Much like the fall of Nilus, where the waters
Make All that dwell near deaf.

Art. My lodging stands
In The Middle Region, Gentlemen; I lie
Every Night in a Storm* and every Morning
Do rise in perfect Thunder; Then my sleep^*
Are but my days fears; which do walk; and then
Present themselves in Visions. Two Armies usually
Join Battle in my Dreams; where I behold
Thine, His, My Brains knocked out. And when I wake,
Wonder to find my self with all my Limbs;
Feel for my other Legg^; suspect my eyes
When they in form me I have both my Arms.

Neand: I Have slept but twice e're since the news came that
Eurym^don was landed; And then I had
The strangest Dreams too. My Man found me scaling
My Curtains for a Fort; Killing my Pillow;
And entering Duel with my Breeches. Last night
Me thought we Three (pray Heaven avert the Omen)
Were shut up here in the City, and besieged
By the Hangings of my Chamber.

Call: How?

Neand: Me thought
The Tr^jan faces were all turned to Thracians.
And in this Siege, I dreamed, that You, and He,
Forced by the Famine, were resolved to be
My Cannibals and eat me.

Art: I do feel
One of my Surloynes going.

Call: Well, what followed?

Neand: At last you cast Dice on my Body, which
Part should be eaten first; And after all
Concluded on my Head, and Purtenance.

Call: These are the fruits of Theevery; Thus it is Gentlemen,
When Kings cannot Love the common way, but must
Needs couple without Friends consent, and draw
A Hue and Cry of forty thousand after 'em.

Neand: True,

Callias* I do maintain, that Armies
Plundering of Towns, and ravishing of Virgins,
As naturally follow a good Face
Stolen, as this was, as Aches do your Wenching.
Or as your Tailor, Artops, follows you
With an old Bill unclear'd*

Art: There surely is
An unknown pleasure in all Matrimony
Which carries danger with it. Else, why should Men
So itch to steal their Wives? Our Neighbor Troy
Is, Gentlemen, a sad example. If
This prove a Smock. War of some ten years long;
Or if Roxane be the Comet, and
The burning of Bithynia the bright blaze
Which she draws after her, we cannot help it.
How stand you two affected to the War?

Call: Troth, I should like the Camp well, if the Fields
Did bring forth Featherbeds* Or if the Streams,
Like those oth' Golden age, did run pure Wine.
Or if Court Meals would every twelve, and seven,
Observe due hours. But; Gentlemen, to lie
Half starved* with cold, in the Air on scarce fresh Greensword*
Just so match earth to earth; And then to live
The Life of Nature; or, as some do call it,
The life oth' Hardy; Quench my thirst at the
Next Spring, or Fountain; Coffin up my self
Each night in Turfe; and thence come forth like one
Of Cadmus Soldiers, sown of Serponts Teeth,
And start forth armed from a furrow, is
A course, I fear, I shall leave to the valiant.

Nean: And then the dangers.

Art: True*

Nean: Here comes a troop on,
And you in honor cannot but loose an eye.
A^ Engine there goes off, and you will show
Your self a Coward unless you loose an Arm.
Here you are surrounded, and then 'twerc base to bring
More then one shoulder off. Gentlemen* Consider
What a Discredit it is to have a Nose
After a Battle; Or to walk the Streets
On your own legs.

Art: I ^eele my self, already*
Partly composed of Flesh, partly of Wood.
Methinkes I swing between two Crutches, like
One hanged in Chains, and tossed by the Wind; I look
Within this week, to be but half the Thing
You see me Now; The rest lopt off; And I
Sliced into Reputation.

Call: I do perceive
Your disc eet Disaff^ction to the War.

Neand: It Is but a wise care of our safety; Nature
Bids us preserve out selves.

Art: But how, Neander,
How, without loss of fame, can we avoid
To accompany the King?

Neand: Why, briefly thus.
The King intends to send the Princesses
Over to the Island as the safer place.
And will assign a thousand for their Guard.
Let Us get our selves enrolled in the Number; so,
Besides security, we shall enjoy
The Company o'th Ladies.

Art: Right; And in
The absence of their Lords.

Call: Peace, here they come.

SCAENA II.
To the^ Archidamus, Roxane, B^rsene, Orithya, T^al^. stris, Polydamas,
Lynce^tes, Theagines, Meleager. Arch: You see your Nuptials, Bright Roxane, and
What choice you have made. I thought to have brought you to
A Cour^ and Palace, where your entertainment
Would have been only Songs of Virgins; Posts
Crowned and adorned with Gy^lands; Sacrifices
Striving to make our Streets but one perfume;
And taking from our sight our Temples, with
The numerous Clouds of Incense which they scatter,
And send forth from their breathing Altars; And
No other sounds heard but my peoples shouts,
And acclamations for your wished arrival.
But you perceive you are landed in a Camp;
And your first step upon the shore proves to you
A most unnatural Seige. If for a Brother
Thus to pursue a Sister be unnatural.

Roxan: Had you had his Consent, Sir, and no storm
Followed your transportation of me from
His Court to yours, but ^ad you, undisturbed,
Untroubled* in the progress of your Love,
Proceeded to the Temple, There joined hands,
And matched the common way of Princes where
All that is required to make the wedding Day
Solemn, are Tapers, Banquets, Revels, Music,
'T had been a Dream, no Marriage; our soft Joys
Would have lost both their edge and appetite.
That which you call unna^urall in my Brother,
I look on as a favor; Thank him for
The Argument he lends me to express
How much more Dear your Dangers make you to me.
Believe me, Great Archydamus, the fire
You kindled in my heart, when in those still,
Quiet, silent nights you first did woo me, was
But a weak Spark, compared to the large Flame
Which this War kindles in me. I behold
Now a new amiablenesse in You; And
Look on you through this Tempest, which is raised
For my sake, as one made more Lovely to me.
And with the same content do take delight
To mingle Sufferings, as Nuptials with you.
Nor should I think my self your Queen, unless
With the same equal Mind, I could go half
In perils, as in Kingdoms with you

Arch: Still
You do speak like your self, Roxa^e, Still
Breath words, which sweeten Dangers, and provoke me
To court them in their worst and dreadfull'st shape;
As things, without which, I should want fit Matter
To merit by, or some way make my self
Worthy of her for whom I undertake them.
Nor will I doubt of victory, where I
Have such a ^rave Inspirer. Had I been
Borne cold, or sent into the World a Coward,
Such a fair second, such a beauteous Cause,
Would strike a valiant Heat into me; And
Were my Sea covered with as many Ships,
As anchored before Troy; or should an Army,
As vast, and numerous as his, who drank
Up Rivers in his passage, and join^d Europe
To Asi^ with his fleet invade me, I
Assisted with your Virtues, should not doubt
But to return with Conquest. Who are these?

Enter Eurim. Clit. Hipp. Lyncest The Ambassadors sent from the Prince of
Thrace*
To demand restitution of their Princess.

Ar: Admit 'em to our presence.

Pol: The King expects you.

SCAENA III.
To them E^rymedon, disguised like ^n E^bassadour* Clyt^^, Hyppocles. Archid:
We are now prepared to hear your Embassy*
Your Prince's pleasure?

Clyt: By us, Archidamus,
With all the freedom which an injured Prince
Can use toward Him that wronged Him, He lets you know,
That it is no thirst, or coveto^s Ambition,
T'enlarge his Territories, or to seek conquest there,
Where it is as easy for him to o'rcome
Almost as say so, which has provoked him
Thus to invade your Kingdom; But a just sense,
And apprehension of the blot, and stain,
Which Annals and posterity (Besides
The scorn oth' present Age) must stick upon
His ^luggish memory, it He coldly should
Sleep over his Infamy; or let you break
The Laws of Hospitality; and abuse
His Court, in carrying away a Prize
More dear to him then his Kingdom, unrevenged.
For though you may pretend Love for your boldness,
Or say the Princess was an Actor in
Her Amorous stealth, (which yet He much suspects,
And she must blush t'acknwoledge) He says, Herein
You do but guild your Crime; For what you call
Affection He calls Rape; And says, He hopes,
You Will pardon Him, if He do look upon You,
Not as a Guest, but Robber; One that came not
To fetch a Queen, but to transport a prey.

Archid: Is this all?

Eurym: He adds farther, that though He
Confess Himself inferior to the loud
Fame of your Sisters Beauty; To which naught
Can be a Match but her own virtues; yet,
When He^ looks on the Story of his Ancestors,
From which He thinks He has not yet degenerated;
When he considers (without boasting) that
He Is borne to a Kingdom, to which yours has been
(Be It spoke without contempt) a Tributary;
But chiefly, when he searches his own mind,
And finds naught Hostile there; but a pure fire,
Kindled from the report of the admired,
Inflaming, rays, diffused from her bright eyes,
He thinks you trespass against love, Sir, to
Obey an angry, conque^'d, old man's Will*
Made in the passion of his Overthrow,
Although your Father, and to refuse a suite
More noble, and open, then your own; And whil'^^
You Are pious, show your self revengefull too*

Hippoc: Briefly Sir, therefore whither it were force,
Or Combination, (For which to call it
He says he knows not) unless you will restore
His Sister, or repair him with your own,
He says, he is resolved, either to fall
A willing sacrifice ^to his wronged Honor,
Or build his unglad satisfaction on
The Ruins of your Country. And to this
He does require your Answer,

Archid: Were Roxan^
A Hellen, (as she is not in ^ught I know
But her great Beauty) Or were I a Paris;
(Who find my self none but in the numerous fleet
Brought after me) Had I been entertained
A Prince, by a Prince, Sir, at your Masters Court,
And, in his absence, had first loosely tempted
To my unlawf^ll bed, then stolen his Wife;
I do confess 'twere just for him to cite
The breach of Hospitality, and to invoke
The Gods of Weddings, and Marriages against me.
And I, till I restored the unlawful prey,
Should look upon my self, not as a Guest,
But Ravisher. But if I came a Suitor,
And brought a flame as pure, as holy, as
That which burns on his Altars; If the Princess,
Her own free Empress did vouchsafe to meet
Mine with the like pure, amorous, equal fire:
If I have since preserved her honor; kept
Her white, and spotless as a Vest all; still
Approach't her presence with the same religion
As I would places consecrate, or Temples,
Whilst ^hus He does pursue my harmless Love,
With Words far more injurious then his Armie^,
With the like freedom You may tell Him, I Am
The injured Prince. And though I grant his Father
Once conquered mine, and we paid Tribute, (which
He does not nobly to upbrayd) It may be
My turn to conquer next. Nor is the Bay
Planted so fi^mely on his head, but that
A good cause may remove it, and mak'^ mine.
As for our close departure from his Court,
Which he brands with the style of Rape and The^^,
You must assist me, Madam; was I your pyrate,
Or Servant? Did I lead you away Captive,
Or conspire with you?

Rox: Sir, 'twere one wrong more
Offered to your Virtues, And I should transgress
Against my clear Affections, not to say,
The Plot was half mine, you did reveal your thoughts,
With so much generous heat, so worthy of me,
That I had noe way le^t to express my self
As generous too, but to mixflame with flam;
And to requi^e you with this poor return,
To make your Country mine; And there to think
My self a Princess only, where I might
Call you my Prince^

Arch: Then, for my Sister*
I am no Tyrant like your Master, Sir,
To claim a sway over her Affections; Nor
Doc count her Will in the number of my Subjects:
She has free Liberty to make her choice;
And can best answer you. Only she will,
I hope remember, if there be a reverence
Due to the words of dying Parents; Or if
The last, short, breath were sacred, which be qu^ath'd her
To the Prince of Thessaly, she cannot consent
Unto your Masters Suite, and not disturb
Her Fathers Shade, to call him from his Vr^e,
To be a greiv'd Spectatour of her Nuptials.

Barsen. Besides Sir, as a stranger to a stranger,
Pray bear a Pri^cesse message to your Prince.
Tell Him He comes not nobly, thus t'invade
Her whom he loves; or strive to make Her Hi^
By a fore't Conquest. He Is the first l've read of
Who Wooed a Lady with an Army by;
Or put a po^yard to his Mistrisse breast,
And then desired t'appeare gracious.
We look for softer Courtships; Humble pray^^^*
Sighs which confess the Breather is our Captiv^.
I have no Beauty to entice him to
Lay down his forces. But if he come unarmed*
In Person, (For I do not like State Love,
Or to be wooed by an Ambassador,)
If He bring with Him noble purposes,
Such as my Brothers were, tell him, perhap^,
I shall as nobly hear him. Mean time, his Sister,
And I expect some pen^nce from him, for
Thus Troubling of our Peace.

Eur: Do you enjoyne
The Chain, or Fetters, 'twil be his glory Madam,
To wear them as your prisoner,

Exe^nt E^rym. Clit. Hyp. SCAENA IV.
Archidamus, Roxane, Barsene, Polydama^, Lyncestes, Th^^gines, Meleager,
Orithya, Thalaestris. Archid: -- Have you prepared
The Ships, Lync^stes, to convey the Ladies
Over to the Island?

Lyn^: They are ready Sir,
And only do expect their beauteous fraught.
The Ladies Sir, will look like Goddesses
Borne of the Sea.

Archid: And have you made, Polydamas,
The Castle fit to entertain them?

Polyd: Sir,
The Ladies locked up in a Brazen Tower
Were not more sat? It Is now a place where pleasure
Dwells joined with Strength. It only wants their presence,
To be a Fort without, within a Palace.

Arch: You are turned young again, My Lords; you speak
So amorously I do begin to doubt
Whether you may be trusted wi^h a charge
So dangerously inflaming.

Polyd: Sir, our sonne^
Can promise for us, we intend no sieges
Against their Beauties, in your absence; All
O^r Batteries to good faces were long since
Spent on their mothers.

Arch: We dare venture you.
Your sons, Theagines and Meleager,
Shall go with us to the Field.

Rox: And will you then,
Deprive me of the Glory Sir, of being
A sharer in your dangers? I endured
The Sea with you; Why should you think I am
More timorous to endure the Land?

Arch: Because
The Land's now more tempestuous then the Sea.
For that smiled on your passage; And the Wav^s,
As if they had teemed with a second Venus,
Or understood the sweetness of their burden*
Grew calm, serene, and Hal^yon. But here
You will expose your self to Night Alarmes,
Day Battles; and run hazards where the blind
Sword cannot distinguish 'twixt the fair and foul;
See men act Wolves parts, and behold a spectacle,
Not fit for your soft Sex, Men fallen, and dying,
Striving to kill their killers and depart
With mu^uall slaughter.

Rox: What difference is there
Betwixt the eye, and fancy, bu^ only this
Tha^ dangers to the Absent still show greater?
When I make these descriptions to my self,
And think you in the midst, though no Spectatour,
I shall as truly suffer. My own Thoughts
Of you will pass for Battles; And my fears,
Where e're you place me, will be fights and sieges.
You could not deal more cruelly, should you
Restore me to my Brother, then thus divorce
Me from your Company. Besides, It is
My Cause you fight for; I Have an interest
Going in the War; And will you, Sir, deny me
The poor content of binding up your Wounds
Received for me?

Bars: Madam, you will give me leave,
Here to strive with you; I Have a Cause going too.
Let me Sir, join in the request, that you
Will take us with you. If there be noe other
Use of us, We Will help to put on your Arms,
And take them off.

Meleag: If our two Wives do join
In the Petition, with their Chambermaids,
They Will make a Female Regiment.

Theag: I look
My Wife within these three days shall be Knighted.

Meleag: And I that mine be made a Colonel.

Arch: Alas you know not what you ask; pray tell me,
How would a Spear show in your hand Roxane?
Or Sister* How do you think it would become you
To weild a Pike? or wear a sword? Or how
Could I look on my self but as a guilty
Betrayer of you, if the chance of War
Should snatch you from me? Or you two be made
Part of the Conquerours Triumph? Come; I have
Provided gentle^ entertainments for you.
Your wishes will su^ply your presence; and
Put Wings unto my Victory.

Rox: It Is part
Of my love Sir, to be obedient.

Exeunt. SCAENA V.
Theagines, Meleager, Orithya, Thalaestris. Theag: What? You expect we should
be solemn now.
And take a ceremonious farewell of you?

Oryth. We should not else think we have civil husbands;
To leave us bluntly; or as Soldiers court
Their Mistrisses; who scarce do ask consent
But fall to the business.

Mel: Well, look you show your selves
Our true Wives in our abscence. If you should,
To easeretirement, and divert the Melanch^ly
Of Solitude, weave us a fine Court Laurel
To Crown our Victories at our return --
You understand Thalaestris?

Thal: Sir, we hope
You are not jealous; you will place no Spies,
To register who visits us.

Theag: No Lady;
But Stories speak of certain strange things done,
By Ladies in the absence of their Lords.

Thal: They speak Sir, of as strange things done by Lords
In the absence of their Ladies.

Mel: If we should
Slip from the Camp sometimes, and steal a night,
I hope you would not shut your Castle gates
Against us* wo^ld you?

Orith: It Is as we hear report
Whither you are valiant. I disdain a Coward
Though It be my Husband.

Thal: And I.

Theag: And in these
Stout, generous thoughts we leave you.

Orith: Look I do
Win reputation by you.

Mel: Farewell Thalaestris.

Thal: Remember, Sir, You do things worthy of me.

Exe^nt Theag: Meleag: SCAENA VI.
To them Callias, Neander, Artops. Call: Ladies, we have a small suite to you,
which
Concerns your selves.

Orith: 'Twill the more easily
Be granted, Sir, what is it?

Ne^^d: It Is, that you will speak
To the King, we may ^tay, and be listed Guards
Unto your persons, in these times of Danger.

Art: It Is no plot Ladies, to decline the War;
But to do service to you here at home;
And to defend you against Assaults.

Thal: That, Sir*
The Fortwill do, and the strong Walls oth' Castle.

Call. Troth, Madam, we beg this in pity to you.
How will you spend your Days, Ladies* with Ladies,
And but two reverend old Males among you?

Neand: Either you must betake your selves to your needles.
And work the Seige of Troy over; or the Tragoedy
Of Hero and Leander, in sad Stitches;
Or else betake your selves to your spindle, like
Penelope, and sing the adventures of
Your absent Husbands to a distaffe, and
Beguile the Hours in flax.

Call. Or else you mus^
Hire some old, frosty, cold Philosopher,
To read on flowers t'you, every time you walk
Into the Garden, and convert their Colors
Into Your Lectures. Show You why the Primr^s^
Is pale, and why the Marygold is red.

Art: Then for your Nights --

Call. True, Ladies, Do but consider,
How you will spend your Nights?

Art: Watch how your lone,
Forsaken, Taper wastes it self, and pines
Away, out oth' mere sense it has to burn
So fruitlesly, till it consume it self
Into its own Darkness?

N^a^d* Or shall your Women keep you*
Awake with amorous Tales? Troth, Ladies, Story
Is a dead Thing, if not reduced to practice.
Say, to delude the tediousness oth' Night,
You should share in the same bed. Two oth' same Sex,
Make but one in the affairs of Love,

Thal. We see
You Have studied our case for us. Truth is, Gentlemen,
The lists are ^ull already.

Orith. Besides, 'twou^d breed
Saspicions in our Husbands. So we leave you.

Exeunt^. Call. We are defeated, Gentlemen;

Neand: what remedy?

Art: By that time they have layne fallow but three Nights
They will send after, and petition us.

Call: Come let us prepare to go with The King.

Neand. Lead on;
Necessity breed's resolution.

ACTVS. II.
SCAENA I.
Enter severally two old Citizens frighted. 1 Cit. Oh Neighbor --

2 Cit. What Is the news. Sir?

1 Cit. Heavy news, Oh Sir --

2 Cit. Out with it.

1 Cit. Neighbor, I do look
Within this hour not to be worth a Spit,
Brasle pot, or a Child's whistle; or to be able,
To call this aged Satin doublet mine,
In which I Have borne five praetorships. The enemy
Has taken the Island, burnt the Castle, and
The Ladies in it.

2 Cit. How?

1 Cit. One of their Guard who scap'te,
Heard ^ix of 'em cry out for water. And
They are sailing toward the City.

2 Cit. I Will home presently,
And hide my money. It came from the Earth,
And shall a while thither return again.

1 Cit. That will not serve the turn.

2 Cit. Noe?

1 Cit. Noe; They say,
There is one ship laden with naught but Engines,
To totture those who do refuse to tell
Where they have hid their Wealth. I feel my fingers
Already squeez^d '^wixt pincers; Irons hissing
At the soles of my feet; My body caught
Up into the Air by the Strapado. Tricks
Shown on my Limbs; My bones tossed out of joint,
And finely tossed, and rackt in joint again.

2 Cit. To prevent this, and to defeat their tortures,
I Will choose my own death, and e^ne hang my self,

SCAENA. II.
To them enter two Women Citizens* 1 Wom* What pity it is that such fine Ladies
should
Have such untimely ends.

1 Cit. Do You hear? The news
Is certain* They are burnt.

2 Cit. I do perceive it.
^ray He^rk*

2 W^m* They say Great people have their Destinies,
As well as Meaner. And they that are borne
Under a Watery Planet, to be drowned,
Shall never dye in their beds.

2 Cit: Are then, the Ladies
Drowned, Gentlewoman?

2 Wom: Not cast away by wrack, ^ir.
It seems the Enemy way laid the Ships
That carried 'em, and sunk 'em.

1 Cit: But is this certain?

1 Wom: Most certain Sir, my Husbands Journey man
Came just now from the Port, and saw ten of
Their bodies swim down with the Tide.

2 Cit: And what
Do You hear oth' E^emies coming?

1 Wom: They have sent
A most strange Message to the City, Sir.

1 Cit: What is it, I pray?

1 Wom: Why, Sir, that all rich Burgesses
Must put themselves in Tribes; And in their Chaine^,
And scarlet Gowns, some three hours hence, must, in
A solemn, grave, procession, two, and two,
Your Officers before you, with their Maces,
To Enrich the entertainment* meet them at
Their Landing; where together with your Chains,
You Are to resign the Keys to all your Chests,

2 Wom: And, then, for us; They do demand that all
Who are not rich, but yet have handsome Wives,
Shall yield them up. How do you think, Sir, will
The Soldiers deal with us, like Women?

1 Wom: I do
So fear their boistero^^nesse. Will they, think you,
Strip us and leave us naked? Or be content
To ravish us, and let us go?

2 Wom: Look, here
Does come my servant Pistoclerus; he
Enter Pistoc: Can tell us more. What news dear servant?

Pist: Fly, fly,
The Prince is overthrown; The Ladies are
All taken Prisoners; The Enemy is entered
Half way into the City; Your two Houses
By this are ransack't; I saw diverse loads
Of Jewels, Plate, and Hangings, ca^ryed out.

1 Cit: But good, but good Sir, is this true?

Pist: Is my
Name Pistoclerus?

1 Cit: Yes, Sir.

Pist: Then it is true.
Make haste and save your Daughters, or they will else
Be put to ransomes for their Maide^head^.

1 Cit: We thank you Sir. Come Neighbor.

2 Cit: Oh that ever
I did live to be rich, or see these Days.

Exeunt. Cit: Pist: Your husbands too are seized on, And are th^^atned
To be put to the Rack, unless they will
Produce their Wiv^^.

1 Wom: We Will make haste to releeve them

2 Wom: I take my leave; And shall be glad to see you
Sometimes in the Suburbs Sir,

Pist: IN le follow you.

Exeunt Women. Pist: This is called Comoedy, raised from Tragoedy.
Never was City in such ^umult, as
I have put this into. The women want
Nothing but spears* circled with Ivy, to hold
A perfect feast to Bacchu^. And to bea^e
Their Pans, and Kettles, up and down the streets,
Instead of Drums, and Cymbals. The men have all
Armed themselves with what came next to hand.
I saw a Troop of Butchers marching down
Their Shambles wi^h their Cleavers. After them
Followed a Regiment of Tailors with
Their Yeards, and Bodkins. In the rear, a Company
Of Shoomakers with Awles. Each Trade takes Arms
Within its own profession. Now will I follow
My Suburb Mistrisse; whose husband is content
To make one oth' fifteen of us; And does
Connive by turns. The ^amest fellow, and
So little owner of his own Wife, that
He verily believes he Cuckolds us
When he lies with her. Amongst us there is One
Maimed Soldier* with one leg, who still pays doub^^*
And goes to bed to her with a stirrope? It Is
The common'st, and the prating'st Varlet, she
Calls me her Chaerilus, I her my Lycoris.
She makes me tell her news whole days together:
Which I, her sponge, do suck up in my travels
From Company to Company, and do
Enlarge with my Additio^s, and Notes politic;
And then as severally disperse; And so
Draw Custom to he^ House; which she cal's pay.

SCAENA III.
Lyncestes, Polydamas* Lync: This must needs be conspiracy; There is
A Riddle in it my Lord, which you and I
Cannot unfold. It must be Time, the Mother
Of Truth, which must expound this Mystery,
How should they draw their Fleet up else? By what
Instinct, or mark, should they know so exactly
The Ship the Ladies were in, As if they
Had hung their Petticoats for sails up, or
Had turned their Gowns to streamers? Single it out
From all the rest, and take'em? As if one
Oth' Princesses had been a sign oth' Vessel*
And stood forth the Roxane, or Barsen^*
Instead oth' Centa^re, Andro^eda, or Cast^r?

Polyd: They did not bring a Thracian Prophet with them*
Or call Tyre^ias from the Ely^ian Groves,
To be their Oracle, to tell them justly
The Critical Point, and Min^^e of our passage.
It Is now just stealth for stealth; our King transported
One pair of black eyes, And they have seized a Carricke*
And Ship ^ull of them.

Lync: I will straight put to Sea,
In their pursuit. If they be not transformed
Into Sea-Nimphs; Or hide their watery Deities
Amongst Eeles, and Dolphins, I will rescue them.

Polyd: 'Twill concern me to stay here, and compos^
Those Frights oth' City; which this news has put
Into a posture of Confusion.
At your return we will to the King; And let
Him know the Accident. Mean time, In hope
You Will bring them home true Ladies, as they went.
That Is humane Ladies, purely made of Flesh;
Or else true Mermaides, that is, Ladies made
Half Fish, half Flesh, I Will stop all Messengers.
The news will but disturb his Victories.

Exeunt SCAENA IV.
Enter Cly^us and Hyp^ocles with Orithya, Thalaestris, Menalippe and Marthesa
like Amazon Captives, shackled with Golden Fetters, and pinnion'd with silken
cords, two and two as in a Wood. Clyt: Could you imagine you could carry your
Design in Clouds, and change your shapes, like Spirits,
And take what forms you please, and we not know it?

Hypp: Alas we had our plot going too; Our spies
Gave us intelligence, where, when to seize you.
It Is not unknown to us you called a Council
Of War; In which, without your husbands knowledge,
You did resolve to put your selves in Arms,
And fight against us. We can tell you that
Roxan^ was to be your General;
Barsene Cap^aine of the Engines; You,
Lady Ulysses, were to command the Horse,
This Lady Hector the foot; And these two, ^ere,
Were to be Scouts by Night, by Day your Squires,
To bear your Targets after you.

Orith: You Have had
A noble Conquest of it, to surprise
A Company of poor weak Women. Is this
The valor of your Nation, to proceed
By plot and stratagem against such as us?

Clyt: These are War Arts.

Thal: Or is this noble usage,
To Fetter us, and cast us into Chains?
You could but Manicle your slaves thus.

Clyt. We
Do but observe the Law of Arms toward those
Whom we do take in Arms.

Orith: Does then the Law
Bid you keep no distinction between Sexes?

Hypp* Yes, where the Persons whom we conque^ do.
But you have lost your privilege; And put off
Your Sex for ours.

Clit: We look not on you now*
As vanquished Ladies, but as vanquished Captains;
And so must use you.

Orith: Alas, what is your Intent?
Is It to enrich your selves with our poor spoils?

Thal: If Plunder be your aim, pray take our Jewels;
Bestow them on your Mistresses, at your
Return; And tell them how generously, how stoutly,
You purch^st them; Say you betrayed the Wearers
First, and then rifled 'em.

Orith: Pray strip us; And
Let us redeem our Liberty with the
Poor ransom of our Clothes.

Clyt: You are deceived;
Our purposes are much more high, and noble,
Then to raise booty from you, Thieves conquer ^o.
Our Custom is, when we take Prisoners, to
Lead them i^ Triumph through our Thracian streets;
Your Beauties, thus adorned, will save the charge
Of gilded Pageants, to entertain the People.

Thal: Must we be made a show, then, to delight
Your Wives and children?

Clyt: How should they make us welcome
At our return else?

Hipp: Could we take your fields,
And Towns, and Cities, and Rivers Prisoners too,
And could transport them with us, these we should
Make part oth' Triumph; But because we cannot,
What Nature makes impossible, we do
Supply with Art, And lead them painted; And
The Pencill does present in Colors, what
The Truth of Things denies.

Clyt: Then for your persons,
Being ou^ lawful Captives; It Is our Custom
To give you to our Ladies, to be their slaves
In ordinary; To starch, and to belong
Unto their Laundries, And so we do divide
Our Conquests with them. But because we will
Deal honorably with you* we intend
To use yo^ as our other Wives; you shall
Be seconds in the pleasures of our Beds.

Hipp: I do presume such Warlike Ladies, as
Your selves, must have read Homer; you shall be
My Briseis, I your Agamemnon.

Clyt: You
My Chrysis, I your stout Achilles; These
Two white she Myrmidons will serve to raise
A Breed between them and our Pages.

Orith: Sir,
Have you a sense of Nobleness?

Clyt. Yes Lady,
And you shall find it.

Orith: Finish your Conquest, then,
And take a ^ife I Am weary of. I am
Your Prisoner, Let me be your sl^ughter too.

Thal: Show your selves equally as valiant in
Our Death, as our Surprise. Take a frail breath*
Which, to enjoy, with these conditions, will
Add new weights to our Thraldom; And you will
A^flict us with our preservation.

Orith: By your own Lady, Sir, if you have one,
Let me beseech you, kill me; Twill be far
More noble then to Love me.

Thal: Every hour
We live your Captives, thus, will seem an Age
Of Infamy.

Menal: Madam, Let Us stand upon
Our Natural Defense; They are but two
Against us four.

Marth: Let Us Mutiny, and by
Our own swords free our selves. They Have only
A Heart to take us treacherously like Thieves;
But dare not fight with us.

Clyt: What would you do
Pretty Serjant Major Damsel were you loose,
Who are thus Valiant in your Shackles?

Hypp: Now
You Will know your Doomes. Here comes our Prince with his
Fair brace of Prisoners.

SCAENA V.
To them Eurymedon, Roxane, B^rsen^, like Amazons, as in a Wood. Eurym: --
You Are the first Lady, Madam,
That e're yet bore such Arms against her Lover.
I thought to find your Quiver in your Looks,
Not hanging at your back; And to encounter
No Shafts or Arrows, but those bright ones shot
From your fair eyes. Thus doubly armed you have
Taken a Course to make me twice your Captive.

Bars: You show, Sir, how you love me thus to style
Your self the prisoner, of your prisoner.
You Are the first Prince I Have read of, (If I may
Call you a Prince, who by this act have shown
Your self s'unlike one) who first did surprise
His Mistrisse* and then Wooed her* Or bound her first,
Then told her that he loved her. Wild Salvag^s,
And lustful Satyrs court thus; who do know
No difference betwixt their Loves, and Rapes;
But call a rude force Kindness; Think they are amorous
^th' midst of violence; And call'^ Loves fire,
And flame, which is a foul intemperate heat,
Kindled from every thing that is fair; on which
They look not as it is fair, or amiable,
But as it may be sullyed and contribute
Unto their beastly fatisfaction.

E^rym: I hope you think not, Madam, I Will make use
Of this advantage so barbarously, as
T'attempt your person? --

-- Bars: That were a crime, which would
Provoke the Gods, which do inhabit these
Quiet, hallowed shades, to take revenge upon you.
And you would trespass against the place, as well
As against your honor.

Eurym: I do confess you are,
To an irregular eye, wholly composed
Of sweet enticements. A thousand Beauties fly
From you, at every look in soft Temptations.
And from a mind which knows no holyer use
Of such a heavenly form, but first to covet,
And then to enjoy, there might be danger; And
The Assailer might excuse hi^ fault from that
Which left him not himself, but snatched him to
Forbidden pleasures. But I do look upon you
With other eyes. As you are to me a Venus,
And strike a warm flame in me, so you are
Diana too, and do infuse a chaste,
Religious coldness. You do not only stand
Before me safe as in a Circle, made
By your own charms; But do inci^cle me
With the same Vertuou^ sp^ls.

Bars: I yet scarce think
My self secure, when I think you my Pyrate.

Eurym: You Will find the enterprise deserves a name
More gentle, when you know my Sister went
Half Pyrate with me. I had no other way
To gain a free, and Innocent Access.
To enter your Castle had been impossible;
Unless, like Jove, I had transformed my self
Into a Shower, and rained my self down from
The Skies into your presence.

Bars: Had you a hand
In my betraying, then?

Rox: If for one Lady
To con^rive Se^vice for another; Or if
T'assist a Brother in his Virtuous Love
Be to betray, I do confess Barsene,
I Am a Conspiratour. Or if he break
Conditions, and make this ignoble use
Of such a favor, having had his Audience,
Not to restore us to our Liberty,
I am betrayed too. They were first my Letters
Which drew him from his Country with a Flee^e,
In show for my pursuit, but in reality,
To Enjoy this Interveiw, and make his eyes
The Judges of the picture I made of you;
Or whether I e^'d not in my discriptions, or
Presented you by a false partial light,
When I deciphered you just such another
As he does now behold you.

Bars: Is this true, Sir?

Eurym: Witness ye Gods, if among all your Worshippers,
There be one who contemplates your Divine,
Invisible, Shapelesse, substances with a
More awful reverence, or paies Devotion
I^o Powers he sees not with a stronger fervor,
Then I did to you* Madam: whom I did
Adore before I saw; And you had then
A perfect Shrine, and Temple in me; where
I did fr^me such Idaeas of you, so pure,
S^ free from these gross figures, which do stir
The vulgar admiration, that* if I said,
A Mind was worshipped by a Mi^de, And that
My thoughts supplied the place of Sacrifices,
Which flew between us; And, like winged prayers,
Maintained a sacred Intercourse, and traffic,
With the Original of what I fancied,
I do but rudely* but half express my self.

Bars. You make me blush.

Eur. But when in the disguise
Of my Ambassador, I saw before me
The Queen of Love, veiled in your beauteous shape;
With all he^ Graces, and winged Cupids about her.
When I beheld all those celestial Images,
Which I framed of your Absence, and adored
Abstracted from you, clothed in your fair face,
If I projected for this hour, or used
The Invention of one struck, to purchase this
Short Audience from you, you are t'impu^e the offense,
Or boldness, not to me, but unto Nature,
Who did not make me blind, But sent me in
To the world with eyes.

Bars: If you proceed, I must
Accuse her, that she gave me ears to hear
Such praises so misplaced.

Eur: Mad^m, then briefly*
I claim an interest in you, Love for Love;
Which that you may grant as a Princess, and I
Receive it as a Prince, here I do banish
All shows and signs of Hostile force, and do
Release you, and your fair Train. You Hippocles,
And Clytus, First ask pardon for your cruelty,
Although but acted, and then unbinde the Ladies.

Clyt: Madam, I hope you can forgive; If not,
Please you to take me prisoner, so you will
Promise my thraldom shall be only such
As yours should have been, had we in earnest kept you
They unbind'em. Outright our Captives, I will be content
To exchange shackles with you.

Hipp: Pray hold your leg^
A little fairelier, Madam. Methinkes we two
Make the Emblem of the Jealous husband, and
The Handsome wife.

Orith: How Is that Sir?

Hipp: Why there was
One, who by day still locked his wife in chains,
And gave her ease by night.

Clyt: You two would feign
Have your two legs at large too.

Hipp. Now your Arms
Are set at liberty, look you employ not
Your natural weapons against us.

Men. What are those Sir?

Hipp. Your Nails.

Men. We scorn to scratch.

Eur. Next, after this
Rude Interruption of it, For when you
Have pardoned it, I still must look upon
It as an amorous Crime) I will my self
Continue your safe passage to your Island;
And see you received in your Castle.

Bar. That
Will only alter our Captivity,
Not take it away. We must still think our selves
Your prisoners there, if you bear Arms against us.

Eurym. Here, then, To let you see, my purpose is not
To be an Enemy to your Brother, and
A Supplicant to you; But that I came
To carry a Queen, not conquest home with me,
I do resign my Forces, and lay down
My self, and Armies at your Feet, Bright princess;
Say, what peace would you have? I will refuse
No Articles, so you be one of them.

Barsen. You have expressed your self so Nobly, shown
Such generous Signs of your Intentions, and
Gayn'd such a Conquest over me by your free,
And Princely Carriage, That as an earnest of
Greater returns, We Will make you partner in
A harmless plot we have, which shall conclude
With all that all we wish.

Rox. Wee've a Design
To try how our surprise takes with our Camp*
O^r Habits and the Art we will put to 'em,
Will keep us from being known.

Bars. I will defer
Your farther satisfaction, or confess
How much I am engaged, Sir, to requite
Your pure Affections with my own, 'till our
Next Conference. And left you should bel^ive,
(How (...) you have changed a Tempest to a calm,
And m^k^ me now in Love with my own fright)
You not deserve to undergo some penance
For making us afraid, your punishment,
Shall be to fetch m^ Answer at my Tent,

Eurym. And I sh^l^ think it an Age 'till I receive it.

Exeunt. SCAENA. VI.
Callias, Neander, Artops. Call. Did we three ere look to be Captains?

Nean. Troth*
I thought my Marches only would have been
To lead ^ Company of Ladies in
Court Ra^ke* and (...), unto a Mask, and Play,
And back again.

Art. And as for skirmishes,
I thought all mine wou^d have proov'd Chamber ones,
Ton^ue-Fights Or if they had proceeded farther
To the Drawing of Blood, at most, Naile-Combates.

Call. I Have
The strangest Company of Volunteers;
All Gentlemen of Hedg^s* and Highwayes.
I do command an Hospital. Of Fifty
But two have Shi^s among 'em; And those worn
Not as sh^^t, or Things at first ordained to be
Made clean, and washed; but as perpetual Garments;
Not to be put of 'till They do forsake
Their Wearers, Voluntarily, and creep from them.
That which was linen once, Time turns to Troops.
I Will unde^take could all Quick Things which are
Bithynian in our Regiment bear Arms,
We need not fear the Persian. Every Soldier
Would be a moving Legion. Neand. My Company,
Is much like yours. Last Muster, when I recko^'d
By th'poll* They were Threescore, But when by doublets,
Scarce Thirty; And these fit for summer Wars.
A fine, warm, intercourse does pass between
Their Skin, and Sun. Far off They show dir^ctly
Like soldiers of the first Ages, before such Things
As Clothes, or Garments were invented; N^are hand
You Would think They had held civil conflict, and
Torn one another thus ragged* If we fight
With the Enemy; their first great Enterprise
Will be for Breeches; The next for Conquest.

Art. Troth,
Mine are not altogether so completely
Ragged and torn, as yours are. But for Courages
And Looks, I do perceive a kind of quiet,
Yet understood Conspiracy among them,
How not to fight; And can observe a speaking,
Sly Combination pass 'twixt face and face,
How to escape. Their Marches are divided
Between a certain provident care to fly,
And fear of hanging.

Call: And yet these thin-sould Rascals
Dare mutiny for pay. This Morning I
Consumed in hearing greivances. One told me
He was this Week preserved by Miracle;
Lived on one bunch of Radishes, which sure
He thinks did multiply from one to many,
He had been famisht else. Another told me,
A Cheese had like to have raised Commotion
'Twixt him and four Camerades; which had sufficed them
Four Days. A Third does verily believe
He shall in time reduce his Body to
A perfect Habit of eating nothing; For
He does protest He has not tasted food
These eight and forty hours.

Neand: Here comes the King*

SCAENA VII.
To them Archidamus, Theagines, Meleager. Arch. How do your Works go on
Theagines?
Are they of Height and Strength enough to keep
Us from the Assaults oth' Enemy, until
Our other Forces come?

Theag: Unless we should
Like the Ancient Gyan^s, who invaded Heaven,
Pile Hills on Hills, or compass^ in our selves
With Mountains heap't on Mountains, Sir, we cannot
Immure our selves with more Defenses, or
Raise Guards more strong, or more Impregnable.
That which was er'st a Champion Field is now
A perfect Fort. If they have winged Horses,
Or feathered Breed of Pegasus, and can
Be a flying Army in the Air* or give
Us battle from the Clouds, there is some fear
They may surprise us; But by the common way
Of Battery by Rams, or Engines, They
As well may beseige Rocks, or strive to make
Their Soldiers scale Towers.

Arch. And have you Meleager
Made true Discovery of their Camp?

Mel. It seems
They mean to make the plain beyond next Hill,
The Scene oth' Fight. I have observed from thence
Their several Quarters; Tents cast into Streets,
Painted Pavillions in the midst, and Heart
Oth' Leag^er. which show like moveable palaces;
And vye a kind of bravery with the Sun,
Which shall cast, or reflect the brightest Glory.
About these in a decent order stand
A Numerous Town of Tabernacles, of
Less Glitterings, which do end in a large Suburbs
Of common soldiers Cabbins. Had they brought
Their Wives, and Temples with them, it would be
A perfect warlike City.

Arch. You describe
The preparations of a Wedding; This
Trim show cannot be intended for a fight.
Have they secured all this with Trenches too?
Have they Walls to their painted City?

Mel: It seems
They mean their number shall supply those, Sir,
Unless it were the P^rsian Army, which
Was overcome by Alexander, where
The Grcekes once fought, and beheld a Masque,
Performed by Ladies in gilt Chariots; And where
The Soldiers took Directions how to fight
From Harpes and Lutes, which played between the battles,
As between Acts and Entrances, I never read
Of any expedition which consisted
Of so much Spectacle and Number too.

Arch. Surely Euimedon has raised these forces
To make an Entertainment for my sister,
And make his Conquest of the Ladies show
More sweet, and Courtly. H^^ke; what means this shout?
A shout within. Go one of you, and see.

Call: T^oth, Sir, if I
Exit Neand. May take the humble leave to speak, methi^ke^
You might compose this War by Treaty. A Priest,
In my poor judgment, Sir, might save much blood,
And join hands, which divided will join battles.

Arch: You ^aine would give up your Commission, Callias,
And beat Co^^t again.

Call: Troth, Sir, I had
Much ^a^her tire my self wi^h dancing at
Your, and your Sisters Nuptials, the^ here venture
Ma^ts on my transitory Life. Which if
It have a lease of three w^ek^s longer, or
If providence do spi^ it ^ut a Mo^^th,
It Is more then I expect. Your Father, Sir,
Mu^t thank you in the Elisyan Shades hereafter,
For being so pious to prefer his will
^^fore you^ Subjects safety. If Eury^ed^n
Enter Neand. E^d^w your Sister with your Kingdom, say
Your Court once bred a Prophet.

Arch. Called a Coward.

N^and: The Queen oth' Amazons, Sir, hearing of
Your Wars* is newly landed, and has brought
An Army of She Archers in your Succ^ur.
She has before her sent tw^ Cap^aines of
Her Guard* who call Themselves Embassado^rs; But look
Like Nymphs sent of an Errand from the Goddess
Of Woods and Huntings, who would have your leave,
To make War on your Stags, Wild Boares* and Panthers*
Look here they come, Sir*

SCAENA VIII.
To them Menalippe, Marthesia, like Amazons. Men. -- Pray which is the King?

Neand. He, Lady, in the purple scarf.

Men. Our Queen,
The famed Hippolyta, having achieved
Her conquest on the Scythians, and returning
Home, with Antiope, her sister, to offer
Their Laurels up to those Assisting Gods
Which cast them on their Victorie^, as she sailed
Along your Coasts, hearing you are engaged
In a War something like the Trojan, where
She lost an Ancestour, offers her self,
And whole Fleet to your service. Her reward,
She says will be the Acceptance, nor expects
More thanks, then to be Known to your brave Self,
And the fair Cause you fight for.

Mar. She adds farther,
That she desires (Because she will not, Sir,
Unshippe her Forces, without your consent,
Which might raise terror in your people, And
Appear no Visit, but Invasion)
You Will send a Conduct to meet her on the way
Now to wards your Camp; So, to secure the passage
Of these few Ladies she brings with her.

Arch. Ladies,
Pray tell your Queen, she has by your brave Message,
Purchased one Laurel more; And added Me,
And my whole Kingdom to her other Conquests.
The honor she vouchsafes me is so great,
That I Will my self be of her conduct.

Men. Sir?
She Is proud to be your soldier.

Call. Ladies?

Men. Sir?

Call. You have no Message from the other Ladies,
To us Three, have you?

Men. How do you mean^?

Call, If
Your Queen come here to propogate; or if
You, and your sister Warriors bring a purpose
To carry home Bithynian Issue, pray tell em
We are their Servants.

Men. We shall Sir,

Call. And so
^Diana speed you, Ladies.

Arch: You two prepare
Ex: Men: Marth: Camp Entertainment for her. You three put
Your Troops in order to attend us.

Neand: We shall Sir:
'Twill be the strangest sight to see naked men
Arch. Ex. Theag, Mel. March before Arn^ed Women.

Art: Gentlemen,
What think you of this Embassy?

Nea. Why that
The Revolutions come, In which we shall,
Be conquered of our Maidenheads.

Art* Methinks
I see my self already a Father to
A fine, smart Amazon; I look she should
Come into the World with Bow and Arrows, And
Be borne with a short sword.

Call: If our fights prove
Night Skirmishes, I Will sacrifice to Love.

Exeunt. ACTVS III.
SCAENA I.
Callias, Neander, Artops. Call. Two weeks of this, conceive me, Gentlemen,
We cannot escape a famine, but shall frolic
Our selves into a Dearth, Then live by the Ounce*
And dine and suppe in weight and measure, to
Permit things to increase again. We have
At once exhausted three Elements, the Earth,
Water, and Sky, for Rarities; If the fourth
Bred ought but Salamanders, or afforded
Ought strange, or edible, I do believe
We should have ransackt that too.

Neand: I have read
Of feasting* and heard Philosophers dispute
It for a vice, but never saw it practiced but
In this large entertainment. Sure the Lords
Who had the ordering on it first read the works
Of some old studied Epicure, who placed
Felicity in the palate, and then brought
His rules and precepts into chee^e. There wanted
Only Pearls to be mel^ed, Gems dissolved,
And Jewels drunk to the Queens health, to make it
A perfect Sacrifice to Luxury.

Art: If this hold, Gentlemen, I do forefee
We shall within this Month forget our selves
To be Bithinyans, that is, Soldiers, who
Can live on Camp fare, and turn Persians,
Where our whole business, will be only these
Two fine, soft, exercises, to eat, and wench.

Call: How do you like the Queen?

Nean. Me thinks her cheeks,
Speak through their Amorous brown, as if she came
For something else then fighting. There Is a story
Of a Greek Prince, and of a Queen, her Country woman,
Who joined Sex thirteen days together, to
Raise Progeny between them. If this should
Claim Copulation by the Law of Nations,
And challenge a short use, for a month, or so,
Of the Kings body, for procreation sake,
I cannot see how, in humanity,
Having so good a Title as the Want
Of Men, and Males, in her own Country; she
Can be denied.

Art: Or if her Sister should
Claim the short use of one of us, and plead
Her natural Right unto our Bodies, 'twere
A National Wrong, not to endeavor to
Dismiss her with posterity.

Neand: You speak
As if you had hopes, Artops.

Art: I profess
To me she is Lightning, Gentlemen; she melts
My sword in the scabberd; I stand before her like
Stubble before a burning Glass, Her eyes
At every glance do turn me into flame.

Call: Will not one of the other Ladies please
Your high taste, Artops? Me thinks those faces are
Most fair, which are most easy of fruition.

Neand: I am resolved to sound the true depth of
Their errand.

Call: And I.

Arr: I think I shall submit,
And make a Third*

Neand. Peace, here they come; Me thinks
Yon'd two by Sympathy already do
Send Tickets to invite us to their Tents.

SCAENA II.
To them Archidamus, Theagines, Meleager, Roxane, Barsene, Orithya,
Thalaestris, Menalippe, Marthesia, like Amazons: Their faces discolored to a
comely Brown. Arch. You truly show, Gracious Hippolyta,
How much you are a Soldier, who can be
Content with such rude Entertainment; where
The most I could express, was, that you were
Received into a Seige. Where my Di^tresses,
And poverty, are fame to call Themselves
Magnificent from what I lack, but would
Feign furnish out with Words, and say My Intent
Was large, though my expression was but small.
If ought hereafter make this place or Army
Deserving of your stay, it must be your
Own self sufficient Goodness, which can put
Splendid Names on Defects, And the fair Train
You Have brought along with you. Whose Company,
Transformes a Wild Camp into your own Court;
And makes you at home in my poor Country.

Rox. Sir,
We hope you do not think we came to feast,
Or revell with You; For that you have expressed
Even to a trespass against our Discipline;
Whilst taking us for Women, you forget
We Are Soldiers too; And turn your Camp into
A soft Receipt of Ladies. It Is against
Our Country Custom to spend our Days in Bancuets,
Or Nights in Maskes; Our Times are more virile,
And different from the rest of our soft Sex,
Who do divide Themselves between their Beds,
Glass, Tyres, Dressings, and Discourse of Servants.
We count our Hours oth' Night by several Watches,
And Releifes of our Sentinells; And reckon
Our Hours oth' Day, not by our Feasts, but Marches.
We know no Glass but our own Armor; Nor
E're see our selves but in the clear Brightness of
Our Sheilds, and Helmets; And then our D^essings are,
Such as you See, a Sword, Bow, Shafts, and Quiver.

Barsen. We came to help you fight, Sir, And to carry
Deeds worthy of our Name home with us. 'Twill
Be our reproach in History, if it be known
We did naught in Bithynia, after all
Our other great Atcheivements, but see plays;
Pass the loose Hou^es in feasting; Know no fights
But such as are Dramaticke, and proceed
From the Invention of your Poets; who
Kill only on the Stage, and then revive
Their slaughtered persons in the Tiring-House.

Orith: If with my Queens leave, I may speak, Sir, I^
We vanquish not the Thracians, who are now
Your Enemies, or give them battle: We
Shall seem a fleet of Gossips, who took shore,
Only to see, and to be seen; And so
Return Inglorious.

Thal. Besides, Our Citizens
Will count us Cowards; And weary to be governed
By such faint, sluggish Princesses; will mutiny,
Shake off the yoke of Subjects, and endanger
To turn our Monarchy into a Many.
He^ded Democracy; And then you know
What must needs follow where the State consists
All of Plebeians; where that Beast the Rude
Multitude rules, and none obey.

Arch: You show
Valors so much beyond your Sex, and stir
S^ just a shame, and blushing in us of
Our own unequal Courages, that I
Must needs look on you, not as you are Ladies,
But warlike Goddesses stepped down from heaven;
Each of you an Armed Pallas, to assist
The just Cause of th'a^flicted. Or if this
Express you not; In each of you, Methinkes,
I once more see Achilles like a Girl.
And 'twill be Honor to me, when hereafter
Posterity in Chronicle shall rank me
A sharer in your Actions; And my Conquests
Shall run in story bound with yours. Not to
Offend you therefore with ought effoeminate,
Or what befits not you to see, or this
Place to present, as one addition more
To your entertainment l've provided
A warlike Dance performed by Warlike Moors;
Just in such postures as they adore their Gods,
Before they go to battle. Bid 'em enter.
Here six Moors dance after the ancient Ethiopian manner. Erect Arrows
stuck round their heads, in their curled hair, instead of Quivers. Their
Bows in their hands, Their upper parts naked; Their nether from the w^st, to
their knee^ cov^r'd with basos of blew Satin, edged with a deep silver
fringe. Their legs also naked, i^circled with rings of gold; the like their
Arms. Great pendants of Pearl at their ears. At every close, expressing a
cheere^full Adoration of their Gods. My next care, Madam, shall be to make these
follies
Pass into better spectacles. I will
Send for the Ladies from their Castle. Your presence
Will mak't a new delight to enjoy the sounds,
And roughness of the Camp.

SCAENA III.
To them Lyncestes, Polydamas^ Archid: -- My Lord Lyncestes,

Polydamas, How do the Ladies brook
Their Solitude? Have they not yet created
One of themselves Priest to the Company,
To say prayers twice a day for their releasement?

Lync: Sure Sir, They were not Ladies, but a Crew
Of Spirits; who appeared like women, and
A while wore humane faces made of lips,
And eyes, and cheeks, and dimples, to delude
The easy sight of the beholders, and
Then vanished back into themselves again.

Arch: They are not grown invisible. I hope;
They Have no enchanted Rings among 'em?

Lync: Sir,
I have sailed round your Coast, as far as Water
Would give me leaze; Have ransackt every Creek,
Examined every hole which would but lodge
A Conger, or a Poore-Iohn; And can find
No more print of them then Ships leave in the Sea.
Uulesse I should have hired your Negro's, Sir,
Which I met here at door to dive for 'em,
As Indians do for pearl, in hope to find 'em,
Some forty Fathom deep in Oyste^ shells,
I know not where to seek 'em.

Arch: Are they lost then?

Lync: Eurymedon in person with his Fleet
Concealed, Sir, seized them in their passage over
Into the Island; And whether he have sent 'em
Home to Bizanti^m, or keep them here
His pri^oners, is uncertain.

Polyd: The Report
Had like to have put Chalcedon, Sir, into
A Civil War. The People of both Sexes,
'Till I allayed them, were up in a Commotion.

Arch: O my propheticke soul! which whispered me
I should not trust 'em to an Element
So false and treacherous.

Theag: Are our two Ladi^s
Vapour'd a way in the mist too, Sir, and seized on?

Lync: Yes, and their women; They have not left a beauty
In The City; or ought which you can call handsome
To breed upon, or to continue a
Succession of good faces.

Theag: I expect
I^ time to see my wife return then, with
A race of little Thracians all noble by
The bearers side.

Meleag: And I that my Wife save me
The future labout of begetting, and
Without my help return me a fine Troop
And Squadron, which will call her Mother, and
Me Captain.

Arch: Had he seized my Crown; or taken
Me prisoner, and with me my Kingdom, It
Had been a loss I could have borne; And thought it
One of the Chances which prove Princes subject
To Men's Misfortunes. But to deprive me of
Her, who to me was Empire, Kingdom, Crown,
And all Things else, which make men happy; She
Whose two eyes were the Suns that ruled my Day,
And to whom only her Absence did make Night;
She who smiled virtue, and whose beauteous Looks
Were a soft, visible, Music, which entranced
The lo^kers on, and struck harmonious raptures
Into every chaste soul, and instilled pure fires
Int' every unchaste; She who had the power
To charm feirce Tigers, and make Panthers tame,
And civilize the wildest Salvage, but
He who surpised Her, and made his Sister, and
My destined Queen part of his pyracy; --
Thus to deprive me of my Joys in the porch,
And entrance to them, is a wrong like that,
Where the fair Bride is ravish^ from the Bridegroom,
Upon the Nuptial Day; or where their Hands
Are rudely sunder'd whilst the Priest is tying
The hol^ Knot. But why do I turn Woman,
And add to the loss by my Complaints. You two
Straight back to the City; Raise new Forces; Add
Wings to your expedition, I shall think
Time moves not with its own have, 'till we give
The Robbers Battle, and redeem the prey.

Ex: Lync: Polyd. Rox: Come, Sir, you shall divert the Thought of your
Recoverable loosse at our Tent; where
We will divide greifes with you, or find ways
To make them wholly ours.

Arch: Your Company
Re^eives me, Madam; And I shall not think
My self unfortunate in such a presence.

Exeunt. SCAENA. IV.
Callias, Neander, Artops, Orithya, Thalaestris, Menalippe, Marthesia. Call.
Ladies?

Orith. Sir?

Call. You don't train this afternoon,
Or muster, do you?

Orith. Your reason Sir?

Call: Because,
If no Affair of Discipline call on you
To leave us, we would feign change some Camp Air with you,

Thal: We Are at full leisure, Sir.

Call. Pray, Ladies, let us
Be bold to ask you then, what places hold you
In your Queens Army? Do you command the Foot,
And Infantery? Or are you Cavaliers
And Regents of the Horse?

Orith: Why do you ask?

Call. Not out of curiosity, to inform
Our selves in your Arts Military; But only
Out of a free desire we have Commanders
To be admitted servants to Commanders.

Orith. How do you mean?

Nean. Troth, Ladies, to divert
The Melancholy and Sadness which this Acciden^
Will raise among us; we would gladly join
Soldiers with Soldiers, and make both Armies one.

Thal: That Is done already Sir.

Art. Our meaning is,
We would feign do you civil Right, and pay you
The debts of nature which you come for. Officers
Mingling with Officers will raise a Race
Of stout young Alexanders between them, who will
Once more subdue the world.

Thal: Now you speak
Without Clouds, we conceive you. Do you think then,
We come to seek men to get children on us?

Call. We hope you are like your Mothers. We know, Ladies
Without our Help you are but barren Things;
And cannot propagate between your selves.

Orith. Well, say this be our Errand, since you speak
So understandingly; what would you do
To help us in Necessity?

Neand: Do? Why,
What should we do? Do service to your Country;
And strive to keep you still a People, by
A new succession of Amazons.

Orith: But say
They should prove males, Sir.

Nean. Then breed them up to save you
The trouble of such journies; and employ 'em,
As you do us their Fathers, to the public good.

Thal: B^t it is against our Laws to Foster, Sir,
Male births.

Neand: What do you with 'em? drown 'em then?

Thal: Restore 'em to their getters. Would you receive 'em,
If we should send 'em home?

Neand: So they be borne
Perfect; not half male, and half female; I Will
Nurse no Hermaphrodites.

Orith: Besides, you have
Been used to the Ladies of your own Court; you will
Never like our Company. We are not fair
And beautiful enough to stir your Loves
To serve us in our needs.

Art. By this hand, Ladies,
I Am more inflamed to see a certain true,
And Genuine smile creep ^'re your N^tbrowne faces,
And make a kind of Day-breake there, then all
The Artificial whites and reds, laid on
By our Court painters, who called Beauty ^o
Create their own looks.

Thal. Are there such Arts, then?

Call. You saw the two Lords here?

Thol. Yes Sir,

Call. They
Have two young Ladies, whom I do question, whether
They may call Wives, or Pictures.

Neand. Their wedding day
Saw them, perhaps, in their own blushes; And
They lay the first night in their unbought Roses;
But ever since have varied shapes; scarce worn
The same face twice. Who'd lie with such she Proteusses?
Who change form in the embrac; And do lie down
One Mistress, and in the morning rise another?

Orith. Our looks are course, but native, Sir.

Nean. You Are like
The Times which Love delights in; we behold
A fair night in your faces stuck with Stars.

Call. Me thinks ye exceed the Queen of Love; she had
But one black Mole, you are all but one fair Spot.

Art. Believe it Ladies, were he not a boy,
I Would say you had brought each of you in those lovely,
Dark, shady cheeks, a Cupid, who from thence,
As from an amiable twilight, shootes
His golden arrows.

Orith. You do express your selves
So affectionate, so like lovers --

Thal. So comply
With our own wishes, which are to requi^e
Your love with love --

Orith. And do so nobly know
The wants of Ladies, and can as nobly pardon
All their defects, that henceforth we will expect
Some enter course of visit from you.

Thal. We
Shall long to see you at our poor Tents, choose
Your own times; We lock not our curtains.

Exeu^t Ladies. SCAENA V.
To them Theagines and Meleager. Theag. What, laying siege to the Ladies,
Gentlemen?

Call. Trying, my Lord, what Forts They wear; or where
They are most easy to be Scaled; We have yet
But made an Attempt upon their Outworkes, and
Held parley with them.

Mel. And how, and how, in Troth,
Do You find em? Tractable? Will They surrender
On easy Compositian, without a long
And tedious Battery?

Neand. We find em made,
As other Ladies are, of flesh and blood:
I do perceive no difference, My Lords,
Twixt Airs, and Clymates; But where men meet women,
Nature will have'ts Effects, for the preservation
Oth' Universe: unless there should be some
To ask, others to grant; some to beget,
Others to bring forth, the World would have an end
In the short Circle of one Age.

Theag. ^ hope
It is not come to that already; you have
Had a quick victory, to see and conquer.

Mel. They Are very Waxen, sure, who take Impression
At the first chafing.

Art. W^xen? Why I Will tell you,
I never yet saw Things so yielding* So
Obedient to the Touc^. I do believe,
Should we dissemble coyness, or stand out,
They would put Questions to us; And upon
Refusal, take Arms, and invade ^ur Lodgings.
And what would be the fruits of such a War,
Backed with so good a Cause, your Lordships judge.

Neand: Alas you must consider, Good my Lords,
Necessity's a Tyrant. Had they Men
In their own Country to supply their Wants,
Or were their State composed so, that without
Danger to the Commonwealth, there might be some
Kept at the p^blique charge to lie with them,
At the Age of procreation, and so be
The Fathers of their Country, whilst they mingled
Natives with Natives, It perhaps would seem
Immodest to seek foreign Help. But where
Males are against the Law; And where to Marry
Is worse then to commit; And where a Husband
(...) a Crime worse then Fornication; what
In this Case would you have them do?

Call: Unless
Nature had made them double, and enabled 'em
To be both Sexes to themselves; Or else,
Unless they could bear children, as we see,
Ou^ feilds bear flowers; Where one and the same Soyl^,
Watered by a (...) shower, or breathed upon
By a Warm Air, is Father, Mother, All,
To its own (...), How do you think they should
Produce posterity? Troth, My Lords, I feel
A certain generous pity in me to
Their ^easonable Longings.

Theag. Well, Gentlemen,
Y^u have convinced us. But do you think the Two
Princesses came for the same purpose?

Art: As sure
As we have leave, Sir, to make visits, or
Choose our own Nights with these departed Ladies.

Mol: And have you?

Art: Ask them, Neand Troth my Lords,
Work enough with your own two Ladies, when (you will have
You next recover'em; and therefore will not,
We hope, disturb us, who are single, in
Our amorous courses. We are promised all*
The pleasures which their Tents can yield: And told
There shall be no locks 'twixt us and our Joys.

SCAENA. VI.
To them Macrinus, Lacero, Serpix; Three tottered common Soldiers, with a
Drummer before them; And Cock-feathers in their Hats. Call. How now? What have
we here? The Sign oth'Battle
'Twixt Time and Ragged Breeches? And whither now
Tends your most tottered March? What make your four
Half Doublets from your Colors?

Macr. Sir, we are
Employed as public persons, by our Companies,
To tell the King our Greivances. Beat on
To the Kings Pavilion.

Neand: Public: It Is true, you are;
Your Elbowes witness for you; There Is not one
Bare part about you that is not public. But
Pray stay, pray stay a little, Gentlemen;
What Greivances have your most lousy valors
To present now?

Lac: Such, Sir, as we have often
Complained to you of, and you will not redress us.

Serp: The King is Just, Sir, and allows us pay,
Which you melt up by the way. You may make sport,
And laugh at our poor Ruins; But it is our Rags,
And bareness, which does make you glitter.

Mac: If
We had our Right, your large Scarfes, every one
Of which displayed, would make the Colors to
A Compa^y, should be our Shirts.

Art. How, Sir?

Lac: Sir, it is true; And your large Feathers, each
Of which, waved by the Wind, does make you walk
In perfect flourish; And present you like
Three winged Dedalus's, prepared to fly,
Should be our Coats, and plume us.

Ser. And that shine
And blaze of plate about you, which puts out
Our eyes, when we march' against the Sun, and arms you
Completely with your own ^^ld Lace, which is
Laid on so thick, that your own Trimmings do
Render you Engine proof, without more Arms,
Should go to buy us bread.

Art. This is most rare
With reference to the Feathers in your Hats,
Most pilfring Gentlemen, which show you have
Skirmished with Neighboring poultry, larely, and having
Eaten part of your Conquest, wear the rest
As Emblems of your wandering from the Camp,
And Inrodes on Backsides. If I may ask you,
Where have you learnt this Eloquence? I do not
Read that Demosthenes declaym'd with Toes
Looking through leather Casements. Or that He was
Sent in an Embassy with half a Stockin,
Or such decayed Caparisons, as I
Observe in your retinue.

Macr. Sir, we need
No Teacher but our wants to find us words.

Lacer. Had you Three reckoned The Age oth'Warre by fasting
As we have done; who by our hunger know
'T^^ now a month since it began; or did you
Know only these two poor Relee^es, Warm days
For Clothes, Warm Air for food.

S^rp. Or had you
Been Three Camerades like us, Three days to one.
Dried Biscuit, and ^orne Stock^fish, both which might
Be shot for Battery, And for hardness be
Reckoned into the Arti^^ery, we do
Believe you would not starve in silence; Or
Depart this life without some Testimony
That you were famisht hence.

Call. Why hark you, you
Rascals, who think the life of man consists
In eating; And that you were sent into the world
To dev^ure Flocks and Herds* what are you made for?
Resolve me, if you can; What is the End
O^ your Creation, but to fight, Go naked,
And starve in Sun shine?

Neand. True; other use
Can there be of you in a State, but either
To be hanged if you steal, if you do not
To suffer hunger, and be lousy in
Your Countries Cause? And if you escape the Sword,
And do survive, to be a Burden to
The Common wealth, to be dispatched by famine^
for the public ease?

Art. Besi^es, why do you trouble
Us with your meager visages? what are
Your torn necessities to us?

Mac. Does not
Our pay pass through your hands? Are not you our Captains?

Art. And are there no ways, Sir, to live, besides
Your four and eight pence weekly?

Lac: We Would be glad
To learn them, Sir*

Art: Pray let me ask you, then,
And answer with discretion. What is
The natural use of Capons, Hens, and Geese?
For what serve Turkies?

Mac: To be eaten.

Art: Right;
You and I jumpe. And what is the use of Sheep?
I do not mean with fleeces; (That falls under
Another question:) But as they are Mutton?

Lac: Why to be eaten too.

Art: Still right. And lastly,
What is the use of Wool made into Cloth?
Is It not to cover?

Serp^ It Is so, Sir,

Art: And what is
The use of Plate and Money? Is It not to
Supply Men's Wants, and buy the things they need?

Serp: Most true Sir,

Art: And are these times which do make
The stealth of all these lawful, And reach out
All these unto yo^ for the venturing: And
Are you so cowardly, or rather so
In love with your own Lice, that you must ask
Us for relei^e? Or think of such a base,
Poor, contemp^ible thing as Pay?

Mac: Is this
The answer you will give us?

Art: This is all.
Plundering's a large Revenue; (...) is your own
Fault if Towns cloth you not; Ori^ the Fields
Afford you ^ot provision.

Mac: We must then
Here let you know, we will Mutiny. Beat back.

Call: You Mutiny, you ill faced Rascals; Have you
A mind to cheat the Hangman with your Wardro^es?
Or an itch to disgrace the Gibbet with
Your Goblin Carkaffes before your times?

Lac: Wee'^ raise the Camp against you^

Serp: Come, l^^'s r^^se
Let Us raise the Camp.

Neand: Away you heaps of ver^^^.
Earth your selves in your Trenches: And there live
The quiet life of Moles; Feed on the Roots
Ex: Mac^ Of wholesome herbs which grow about you Go.

Lac: Ser:

Call. My L^rds, we must take leave.

Art: You see the peace
Oth' Army lies on it.

Neand: We kiss your Lordships hands.

Exeunt. SCAENA VII.
Theagines, Mele^ger, To them Menalippe, Marthesia. Theag: Why here be three
new Captains now, who make
The Right use of the War. Spend their Assaults
On such soft, harmless, yiedling Things, as Ladies,
And keep Themselves in Spangles, with the pay
Of their poor Soldiers.

Mel: It appear^s to me
Strange what Design should cast these Amazons
Upon our shore. I hope they have no Aim
To take Advantage of our fight* or keep
Themselves Spectatours 'till both Armies have
Weakened Themselves, and then ore'come the Victours.
I would be loath to have it said in story,
We were subdued by Women with one Breast.
And it would trouble me to see my self
Led Captive; And transported to a Land
Where I must propagate at the mercy of
Those who did take me prisoner; And get Children
By th'night, and task, upon my Conquerours.

Theag. Beleiv't their project is le^^e politic.
You hear the Errand they come for is to
Lie with us in our Land.

Mel: Still it is strange
They should so quickly open, And reveal
Themse^ves so easy, so prepared, as these
Three make 'em.

Theag: Pray Heaven, my Lord, our Ladies
Show not ^^emselves as easy, and as pliant,
^th' other Camp^. It Is true indeed, their case
Is (...) had no Dea^th of Husbands,
Which sh^u'd invite (...) to require Releife
Fr^^ (...) Enemy. But if they should conclude
A peace for us; And it one of the Articles
B^, to give something they can spare, and we
N^^ m^ss^, we cannot help it if they show
Themselves good pat^iots; And prefer their Countr^^
Before our private Interests; or their
More private Honesties.

Mel: True; It Is but loosing
A little Honor for the public Good;
And Honors but a Word; We shall not be
Impoverisht by the loss. All parts in Women
Are like their lips; And lips you know are Springs.
If a whole Army quench their Thirst there, still
As much is left as taken; The first stock

Ent. Menal.
Remains entire.

Theag. My Lord, Behold; what say

Marth^ You to a Message now?

Mel: l'me now confirmed.

Men: Are you my Lord Theagines?

Theag: Yes Lady.

Marth: And you my Lord Meleager?

Mel: It Is my name^

Men: You Are oth' Bedchamber to the King?

Mel: We are so^
They have had good Intelligence.

Marth: Our Ladies
Hearing you are noble, and delighting much
In persons valiant, and of great Action, (as
They are informed you are) will take it for
An honor, if you will vouchsafe to be
Oth' Bedchamber to them too, for the space
Of a short visit.

Men. They say they do long,
Long, very much t'impart a business to you.

Thea: You do not know what it is?

Men. Sir, it requires
The secrecy of their Tents to know it.

Mel: When
Pray, is the time they would be at leisure, Ladies,
For us to wait upon'em?

Marth: At all times, Sir,
They say you cannot err. Only they will
Take It as the greater favor, If to beguile
The tedious hours with discourse of the Ancients,
And the Comp^riso^ of Women's deeds,
With those of Men, you will divide your Nights,
Sometimes wi^^ them.

Men: But chiefly, they desire
You would now come along with us.

Thea. My Lord,
What would come on it if we Two should suppose
Our selves unma^ried? Our Wives when we next meet,
If before hand they not requite us) will
Find us whole H^sbands.

Mel: I am resolved to make
Use of the Opportunity. The worst
That can befall us, if our Ladies know it,
Is to seal m^tuall pardons.

Theag: Come, Ladies, you
Shall be ou^ Clue to guide us.

Men: We will lead you
Into a pleasing Labarynth.

Mel: 'I will be
Our wish to be lost in such Company.

ACTVS IV.
SCAENA I.
Archidamus, Roxane, Barsene, O^ithya, Thelastris. Rox: Come, Sir, we are
resolved, if it b^ith' power
Of Ladies to effect it, to cure you of
Your sadness, you no longer shall aff^ict
Us and your self with melancholy. It does not
Show princely in you, thus to enthrall your self
To the (...) of a Woman. We thought to find you
A (...); One in whose stout breast ^o poor
So effoemina^e a thing as Love, or the
Loss of a Mistress, would have past among
Those ordi^^^y Cares, which are at once
Considered and forgotten*

Bars: It Is for subjects
To affect Constancy, or melt and pine,
And breath themselves away in the Contemplation
Of those they Love; Or to affect Lone walks,
There raise an Idol to themselves, And then
Fall down and worship it. You Have turned your Camp
Into a Cloister, Sir. And are re^ir'd
^th' midst of Legion^. Nor can we imagine
We have your Company, when present with us,
Your thoughts are so away.

Arch: Had you e're seen
The wondrous object that attracts them, or
Di^^^n'd the secret influences, which
Pass from her soul to mine, and mingled there,
In one strict union, at this distance make us
So much each others as to have no power
T'untwist ourselves, or have the leisure to
Look toward ought which wears not her fair shape
To me, or mine to her, you might as well
Condition with the passive Iron not
To turn to the Loadstone; Or chide the Needle for
Moving toward the bright pole, as accuse me
For thinking on Roxane. I confess,
Bright Princesses, It Is Love that makes me rude;
And but I hope you have brought pardons with you,
And can forgive one robbed of his free self,
Nor left to his own Carriage; I should count
Those Hours which I have stolen from you, to pay
Devotion unto Her, a Sac^iledge
Committed against your Beauties; Or a Theft,
Which does take Worship from (...) Goddess to
Consume it on Another.

Rox. We Will allow
Roxane, Sir, (For so I do perceive
You call your Princess) To be all that a Prince
In Love can fancy fair, or amiable;
(Yet I must tell you too, Love's a false glass,
Which still shows things much fairer then they are.)
We Will grant all your Descriptions true, that to
Her Fairness she has Virtues, which do add
A Beauty to her Beauty, and render her
One, pure, through, rich Gemme* which entirely is
Nothing but Worth and Luster; yet if this Gemme
Be dropped into the Sea, or lost in the vast
Chaos of Waves, will you make war with Nature,
O^ force the Ocean to restore your Jewel
Made Irrecoverable?

Arch. Do you then look
Upon my loss no otherwise?

Rox: Not, when
I weigh her Brothers power; Th'uncertaine Chances
Of Wars like this; The many Subjects lives,
Which must be sacrificed to her recovery.
The most you can expect if you prevail,
Is that your Nuptials should be mixed with slaughters;
And that your Marriage Tapers should be kindled
From funeral piles; And so Roxanes Wedding,
Thus ravished to and fro, like Proserpines,
In The under World, be kept amongst Ghosts and shades*

Bars: Besides, how are you sure your constancy
Is answered, Sir, with constancy? Our hearts
Are changeable^ nor do I see why Princes
Should be less frail then others, who confine
Affection to the sight, since Love's a fire
Which does not only languish, and go out,
Where fuel is subtracted, But is kept burning
Only in the presence of another fire.

Arch: I Will rather think nat^re can change her Courts
Rivers run backwards from the Ocean,
Things heavy can fly up, and light fall down;
Or that the Heav^nly Orbs can vary, and
By shuffling of themselves, the higher with lower,
Loose their first Order, and in this confusion
Wheel round in Discord, as before in Music,
Then she can cease to Love me. Roxane is
To me a Vestall, and I one to her;
There Is but one holy flame between us, which
Cannot expire but with our selves.

R^x: But you will
Allow there may, Sir, be degrees in Love;
And that a lesser fire ought to give way
In justice to a greater; And though not quench^^,
Yield it self swallowed by it.

Arch: Madam, pray
Explain your self.

Rox: Say, then, Archidamus,
(For now I will be free) there should be those,
Who though they bring no bright Stars in their eyes,
Or such charm^s in their faces, as Roxane,
(Which to affect, were to take fire from looks,
And love by th'sense, and outside, not by the mind.)
Yet being of equal birth, of as great virtues,
Of greater Dowries, (For those I speak of
Do with a Kingdom bring their Conquests too)
But above all (for they dare strive here, and
Account themselves superior) say they should bring
Greater Affection, And to show they do,
No longer able to conceal their Flames,
Should lay aside their Sex, and Act your part,
And tell you that they love you; Would such deserve
A repu^^e from you? Or could you, Sir, to gain
The name and ^tile of Constant unto one,
Be unjust to two? And not repay their flame
With such another?

Arch: There can be no such, Madam.

Bars: Without more Clouds, say, Sir, we be those two?

Arch: You, Ladies? You are fit to conquer Princes;
And to have the Gods steal down in varied shapes,
To beget Hero's on you and half Gods;
Not to betray such weak affections as
To sue to those who do adore you. Besides,
You two admit no choice, where both are equal,
Both Twins in their perfections, as in birth,
Unless I could divide my self, and ^e
Two to you Two. (for here is no election
O^ one without wrong to the other) And
Could multiply my self into a number,
How can I answer both?

Rox: By choosing one.
We are agreed between our selves; she that is
Refused, shall home, and wear the Crown, the other
Stay here and be your Queen.

Arch: O Love^ why as
Thon do weave knots, do thou not teach a way
How to unty them too? I do confess
My self lost in a sweet perplexity.
I'^e now the Prince' fore whom three Goddesses
St^ove for the Golden Ball, or which should be
Preferred for Beauty. When I do consider
Your several shapes, I am snatched several ways;
And am at once three Lovers. If I therefore,
Amidst such equal merits, cannot make choice
Of one before the other, It Is because
I (...) not blind. Where Objects are alike
Fai^e, and distracting, He must want his eyes
W^ does prefer.

Rox: We Will give you this nights respite
To think upon election. Mean time, Sir,
T^e^e's a sho^t Banquet waits you at our Tent.

Arch: You Will be the Music to it.

Orith: Madam,
Now your Play's done, ours will begin; we do
Only w^^t stage room.

Bars. Look y^u play your parts well.

Thal: As well as our Hypocrisy and false faces
Will give us leave.
-- Orithya, what do you think
Oath Prince's Constancy? should he be tempted
To leave Roxane for Roxane, and make
Choice of the Disguised for the true, 'twould prove
A fine Ginne laid to prove men frail, and subject
To our Infirmities.

Orith. I know not how
This tedious Scoene of Love has wrought on him;
But it to me was Opium, and raised slumber.
A Gentle murmr did glide by my ears
Like the soft fall of Streams. A little more
Of such slight, aerie stuff, had bound my senses
Up in a perfect sleep.

Thal. I did observe
The Onse^s, and Replies too; Methought they ran
In Artops and Neanders candid style,
When they do court our Women in Milke-verse,
Or tell them News or Stories in Sonnet prose.
I should never be thus cruel to him I love,
To show him shades in stead of substance; It Is,
Methinkes, embracing Clouds.

SCAENA. II.
To them Menalippe, Marthesia. Lights, and a Ba^quet follow. Men. -- Madam,
your great Design
Goes rarely on, Your Lords are come, and are
Disposing of their Ambush.

Orith: And have you, Menalippe,
Bespoke the false Alarm at the just hour?

Men: Clockes strike not dulier after Quarters, Madam,
Then our she Drumme^ will observe her Cue,
And make things dreadful.

Thal: Marthesia, stand you Sent^nell
Against they come.

Mar. Troth, Madam, it is to me
A Comoedy before hand to imagine
How they will bear th'affright.

Men. Methinkes I see 'em
Rolling themselves up in their own gold Lace,
Like Urchines in their prickles* Or wishing to
Exchange place with their swords, and case themselves
In their own scabberds.

Mar. Stand, who comes there?

Thal: There they are; Go Menalippe bid the Lords
With their stout Squadron, observe their Entrances.
Exit Menal.
SCAENA III.
To them at door first, afterward entered Call: Neand: Art: Call. You Will not
exact the Word of us, I hope,
My pretty Perdue Virgin; if you do,
Pray call your Corporal.

Neand: We do not come
As Spies; If you suspect, commit us to
Your Ladies.

Art. Or else keep us prisoners in
Your Corpse of Guard, till they release us.

Marth. Now,
I know you are friends, you may pass. I was set
Here to attend your coming; To p^event
Your danger of mistaking the right Tent.

Call. We should have found that by Instinct. Neand. Bright Ladies,
We have made bold to use the Liberty
You gave us; And try what camp hours you keep.

Art: I hope we are not unseasonable; we
Came, Ladies, to keep watch wi^h you.

Orith. The time
Oth' night adds to our visit; Had you come
By day, you had brought but half your selves, and only
Made visit to our eyes; where all that could
Have past, had been to see, and to be seen.

Art: True, Ladies, whereas now you have us all;
And other Senses may be pleased too; And
Go sharers with the sight.

Thal. Besides, The Day
Turns all Things into Crystal, Sir; Our Tents
Had been transparent, like their Silks; And we
Had not been private in ou^ Closets.

Neand. Right;
Whereas the Night turns all Things into Shade;
And draws Iet curtains 'bout our pleasures; And
Makes a fair Lady invisible in ones Arms.

Orith: Will you vouchsa^e to sit and taste of this
Slight Banquet, Ge^t^emen.

Ca^^: You make it Three.

Thal. You do not reckon us'mon^st Marmalade,
Quinses, and Apricots^ o^ take us for
Ladies preserved?

Call: No Ladies; yet I hope
It Is no ^ff^nce to say you are each of you
A various Banquet, where a breathing sweetness
Feasts the Spectatours; And diverts all thought
Of eating to behol^ing; And from beholding
^'enjoying.

Neand: All these do take value,
Not from the Art, which joined to nature, made 'em,
But from you who bestow'em. These Cherries do
Take Color from your Lips; This Amber casts
A perfume from your Breath; what ere's delightful
In them refiects from you.

Art: And least there should
Be Musi^ke wanti^g to this Ba^quet, when
You speak, the Sirens si^g

Or^th* You Have brought, we see,
The art to fl^^ter and ^is^^mble with you.

Thal: I now begin to fe^re you. It cannot be
Y^u should thus feign and love us.

Neand: Not love you, Ladies?
Why what signs would ^ou have? What is required
To Love which we would not perform?

Thal: Would you
Fight foru^, if need were?

Orith: O^enter duel
In Defense of our Honors?

Neand: Would we? By
This hand, should you command, we would, our selves
Alone, now venture on the Thracian Camp.

Call: O^ presentl^ send (...) to Nine
O^the^ be^^ Captains, (...) fight Three to O^e.

Art: We will do more then figh^; with your fair leaves,
We ^ill get Fighters on you

Orith. Is that your erran^?

Art: That and to ^elpe away the Soli^ude
And (...) oth' night.

Thal: Well, since we do
(...) you (...), and worthy of our favors,
How will you (...) things? Three to two Women
Is one to much:

Orith. One must stand out; unless
You'^ take the Centinell in for a Third.
To men of your indifferent purposes
It should be all one; she is of the right Sex.

Neand: We Will draw cuts who shall have her. What say you
My pretty Diomed oth' Cawdles. will you
For one night lay aside your contemplations
They draw Lots. How to take Town in Marchpane; or express
The Siege of Thebes, or Travels of Ulysses
In sweet meats, And make one of us?

Mar: I Will take
My fortune Sir,

Neand: Artops, She Is yours; I did
Praesage thy melting Hymns, and S^raines, would end
In a Corne-Cutter.

Art. She is not fifty Sir,
Nor I the fifteenth in succession, to
A Flavia, who brings manchet to the Camp;
This is no Sutlers wife.

Thal: Go wench prepare
The Beds.

Orith: But should you, now, reveal, or rumor
Your Entertainment.

Call: Do you think us ill-bred Rascals?
Fellows that cannot conceal?

Thal: Or should you tell
How kind, how free you found us how we used you --

An Alarm within. Ne. We Will rather cut our tongues our and live speechles.

Ori: Hark, what means this?

Tha: The Camp is up in Arms

SCAENA. IV.
To them Menalippe, and Marthesia, in show frighted, Afterward Theagines, and
Meleager, as one Door; Macrinus, Lacero, Serpix at another; all disguised.
Men: Fly, Madams fly, we are betrayed.

Mar: The enemy
Has seized upon the Works; taken the King;
Burnt our Queens Tent; flaine all the Captains; and is
Now marching hither.

Orith: Now show your valo^rs, And
Help to defend those whom you Love.

Call. Alas, Ladies;
You can fight for your selves. This is the first
Time we e're saw the Field.

Neand: Alas what can
Three do against an Army?

Thal: Will you not
Then draw your weapons, But stand like wor^ted Captains
In Arras?

Orith: Will you let us and your selves
Be taken and make no resistance? or will you
Be killed like people in their sleep?

Neard: 'Lasse, Ladies,
What would you have us do? we have been borne
And bred in peace, and were never (...) to fighting.

Orith. O more then Women Cowards! And will you dye
Clashing of Swords within. Like men oth'peace to?

Ar. Hark, swords, swords; they come.

Thal. Why do you quake? why do you look about yo^?
Would you feign hide your selves?

Art. Hark swords again.

Orith. If you will, There Is an old Drum yonder, with
One head, wee'^ whelm it over you.

Art. Thank you, Ladies.

Thal. Or pack you up in one oth' Wagons, with
A bare Hide over you, where you may pass
For Cheese, or Ammunition.

Call. 'Twill do well.

Men. O^ Madam, what if we pulled down our Tents,
And wrapped them up in the Curtains?

Neand: Twill do better.
Theag. within. You Three take that way, we will take this; slay all
Enter The: Mel: Mac: Lac: Serp: That will not yield.

Art. Oh^here they come The what? flying?
Taking wing? Seize these Captains; And di^a^me 'em.

Mel. Ladies, we do intend no war against you.
Our Quarrels are with men.

Theag: Do they refuse?
They disarme'^m. Show them Camp Law.

Call. We do not, Sir, there F^eind,
There is my Sword.

Neand. And there is mine; pray use
Me ^ike a Gentleman.

Serp Come, Sir, you part
As slowly with your sword, as that with the Scabberd.

Macr. You Have no Artillery in your pocket, have you,
That will overtake men at a Distance, and
Arrest'em at Fivescore?

Nea. Sure Friend there is all.

The. Next b^nd their eyes with their own scarfs.

Mac (...) Ge^tlemen.
H^ld your heads fair, and shut your eyes, that we
They blind 'em. May close '^m double.

Lac. Stir not as you desire
To kee^e'^m in your Head, and not put out.

Call. We do not, Sir.

Serp. So; There Is one Darkness more
Then that we caught you in.

Theag. Now lead'em bound
To the other Ca^tives, And attend the Council
O^ War with them in the morning.

Mac. Come Gentlemen.

Exeunt. SCAENA. V.
Theagines, Meleager, Orithya, Thal^ftris, Menalippe, Marthesia. Theag: Ladies,
you see we have kept our Words; The Hours
Did fly with leaden Wings 'till we did earne
The sweet Rewards you have promised.

Mel: Next unto
The thought of this nights Raptures, which you will
Inspire into our souls, we do take pleasure
To be thought worthy to be Actours in
Your just revenge.

Orith: My Lords, we look on you
As those we dare trust; such as understand
What Ladies favors are, How merited;
And withal, how to be concealed. Love has
His Mysteries, as well as shrines, and Temples;
To which a Secrecy is due; And they are
Profaned when published.

Thal: Besides, you are our Equals;
And though we cannot call you Husbands, yet
To reap the fruit of Husbands from you, will be
No stain, or blemish to us. But could you think us,
So vulgar, so indifferent, so hard driven,
In making our Elections, to defile
The Honors of our Beds with those who next
Would find us Bodies?

Orith: Especially, with those
Who'd make our Nights the Discourse of Their Days.
And so they might gain credit by our favors,
Would prostitute our Fames; And when They did not
E^joy our persons, would called new pleasures to
Lie with our Reputations.

Thal: What would These Three
Parcell-guilt silken-Gentlemen have said
Had They possessed us, who so freely boasted
The leave we gave them to make visits to us?
As if to show good breeding were a Crime;
Or to be Civil in a strange place.

Th^ag: True Ladies;
They said you were the most strange easy Things;
So inclining to Mankind, as if you had
A purpose to disperse Bills through the Camp,
TO invite Men to your Lodgings; And would propose
Rewards to them who best performed.

Thal. They said
You had two Ladies too, which did use painting;
And never wore their own faces; But did vary
Shapes every Morning; And go forth of their Closets
Things of their own Creation.

Orith. They left it
Doubtful too, and to be suspected, as if
Your Ladies loved Plurality; And that they
At Court did go half Husbands with you.

Mel. Well,
Half our Revenge is past; The other Half
We will contrive between your Melting Arms.

Orith. You two sing us asleep; And when you have done,
Go walk the Round, and see the Watch releived.

Exeunt. The first Song, sung by Two Amazons.
(1)
Time is a feathered Thing;
And whilst I praise
The sparklings of thy Looks, and call them Rays,
Takes Wing;
Leaving behind him as He flies,
An unperceived Dimnesse in thine eyes,
His Minutes whilst they are told,
Do make us old;
And every Sand of his fleet Glass,
Increasing Age as it does pass,
Insensibly sowes wrinkles there,
Where Flowers and Roses do appear,
Whilst we do s^eake our fire
Does into Ice expire.
Flames turn to Frost;
And e've we can
Know how our Crow turns Swan,
Or how a Silver Snow
Springs there where Iet did grow,
Our fading Spring is in dull Winter lost.
(2)
Since, then, the Night has hurled
Darkness, Loves shade,
Over its Enemy the Day, and made
The World,
Just such a blind and shapelesse Thing,
As 'twas before Light did from Darkness spring;
Let us impl^y its treasure,
And make shade pleasure;
Let Us number out the Hours by Blisses,
And count the Minutes by our Kisses^
Let the Heavens new Motions feel;
And by our Embraces wheel.
And whilst we try the Way.
By which Love does convey
Soul into Soul;
And mingling so,
Makes them such Raptures know,
As makes them entranced lie
In mutual Ecstasy:
Let the Harmonious Spheres in Music roll.


Ex: Men: and^ Marth: SCAENA. VI.
Having changed Clothes to their Double^s, Enter Callias, Neander, Artops.
Their eyes blinded with black patches; led by Macrinus, Lacero, Serpix. Macr:
Come Gentlemen, Without Resistance now
Disrobe your upper parts. What Is wanting in
Good Clothes, your patience must supply.

Lac: Good Troth
Your Doublets ^uite not with your Breeches; Rents
To Rents, And Rags to Rags is fashionable.
But as you are now you look like Men of Gold
Creeping forth of your

Oar; And are the Emblems
Of that State which does know no middle Subjects,
But is composed wholly of Lords and Beggars.

Call: Well, Sir, Necessity which made you feed
The Numerous Thraeians, which now feed on me
They chang^ Doublets. In these your Breeches, And draw blood, which is
Against Camp Law, does here persuade me to
Resign my Doublet; pray shake yours, Sir.

Neand: There,
My Friend, who e're you are, There is whole plunder.
Pray, if you can, spare me a Doublet which
Has Linings in it, and no Glasse-Windowes. For, if
My feeling do not fail me with my ^ight,
Your Nether Garment is half Net, half Breeches;
And Statutably will catch Greater Fish,
And let small pass, as well as cloth.

Lac: Troth, Sir,
You shall even have 'em as I wore'em, fellows;
They were New once; It was not in my power
To keep them at a stand, by Miracle.
Time which devoured his Children, will eat Holes, Sir.

Art: Stay, stay, stay, stay Friend: Sure you must release
My eyes, to see to put your Ve^ture on right.

Serp: I warrant you, Sir.

Art: So; There is one Arm^
Past through a Labyrinth^ I do expect
The Other should be lost by the way. This Ierkin
Is wholly made of Doors; And had need have
A Thread belong to it.

Serp: Now it is on, Sir.

Art. Thank you.
You Are sure you have not mistaken?

Serp. How do you mean?

Art: I mean your Breeches for your Doublet; As being
Indifferent in their use; which should be worn
Above, and which below?

Serp. All Is right, Believe it, Sir.

Mac: Next, Gentlemen, you must once more submit
Your Arms to these Hemp prisons. No striving; You
Know where you are*

Call. Sir, we are tame; you have made us
So by the Imprisonment of our Legs already.
But if our ^loowes do break prison, pray
They p^^ion them. Impute it to the looseness of your buildings.

Lac: So; Now you are All Complete; you looked before
Like Him who first invented Coaches, to hide
His double Making; Who was downwards Serpent,
Upwards a well shaped Man.

Serp. Good troth, Me thought,
Your Nether parts looked as They would petition
Your Upper for an Alms; Or else, as if
You had ^bove Girdle been the Founders, and
Below, the Hospital.

Call: Well, Friends, you may
Laugh at our Miseries, and raise sport from
Your torn Exchanges. But is this noble usage
Of Soldiers unto Soldiers, thus to strippe us?

Mac: When we take sheep with golden Flecees, It Is
Our Custom to return Wool for their Plate.

Lac: We do not strippe you, but change Cases: Clothes
For Cloth^s was still held honorable.

Neand: And now,
In troth, most Worthy Captains, (For we have
Created you) what is your Intent? what will you
Do with us thus reduced to Totters?

Mac: That
Is as the Council shall determine. Perhaps,
Employ you in our Works to dig: And there
Work out your Ransomes, 'till the War be ended,
As pioners.

Neand: Must we roll Wheele-barrowes?
Or manage Spades, and Mattockes then? And earne
Our bread and water with the Picke-Axe?

Serp: Perhaps,
We shall obtain you outright for our Slaves.
Then having marked you, to be known our Bondmen,
We will transport you home to Thrace, and there
Make sale of you in some public Market: you will
Be vendible Commodities. Perhaps,
Some who have store of Wives will buy you to
Make Eunushes of, and geld you.

Mac: Or perhaps
Some Ancient Widows, long past bearing, will
Buy you for their own private use.

Las: Or else,
Perhaps, to make short work, The Counceil will
Condemn you to the Galleys, There to row
Your Days out against the Pers^an; or fetch Corn
Monthly from Egypt: Sugar from Cr^et: or Spunges
From Samos.

Art: And our Wages be to feel
The scourge about our shoulders if the Wind
Sit opposite, and we cannot row.

Lac: There must
Be such corrections, to quicken Diligence.

Call. Pray as you are noble, and know how to pity
Humane Misfortunes, let us ask one Question.

Mac: As many as you please.

Call. If by Starre-light
You can discern so far, How far are we
From a Tall Oak, which may be clymb'd by such
Ivyes as we? Or a straight Elm, which may
Support th'Imbraces of such Vines?

Mac: Why ask you?

Call: Because if any such kind natural plant
Be near, we would entreat you not t'omit
The Opportunity; But to prevent
Our Greater by less sufferings, would employ
Those Cords which bind our Arms, about our Necks,
And hang us up by Mooneshine.

Mac: Alas, such favors
Are not in our powers. If it be your fate
So to be sentenced, we will do you all
The freindly Offices we can.

Call: We thank you.

Lac: Mean time, perhaps to you it is Midnight, Gentlemen;
No Sun appears to you: But to us Day breaks.
We will conduct you to the place where you
Shall know your Doomes. Pray follow leisurely.
And do not stumble.

Neand: If It be our Destiny
To dye by the string, the comfort is we are Three.

ACTVS V.
SCAENA I.
Enter Theagines and Meleager buttoning themselves. After a while followed by
Ori^hya and Thalaestris. Theag: In my opinion, my Lord, these are
The strangest Amazons that ever left
Their female Country for the use of Men.
How did you find yours? Mine had Breasts.

Mel. Troth mine,
I think hatl. sea^'t the rasour too; I had
No le^sure to examine parts. I found
No defects in her; But methought she was
To me a whole and perfect Woman; I Am sure
She found me an entire and perfect Man.

Theag: There Is a strange sweetness in them; how they melt
Between one Arms, and call one Husband?

Mel: I
Thought mine would have fullfill'd the Fable, where
The Nymph dissolved into a Fountain.

Theag: But
How will our Ladies brook this if they know it?

Mel: How? Thank us for being Civil unto Ladies.
Would they be willing these should report us Clownes?
O^ Men void of Humanity, at their
Return home to their Country.

Theag: It Is true; had we
Dismissed them as they came, both to our shame,
And shame of our posterity, they might
Record us Impotent in Chronicle;
Or say they were received Women by Women.

Mel. Here they come. Ladies, you appear to us^
Enter Orish. Thal^ Like Two Sun risings breaking from your Curtains.

Theag: The Day 'till now was not begun; you make
The Morning, which enables us to see
Those Beauties by their own light, which did turn
The Darkness of the Night into such pleasure,
As happy Lovers do enjoy below,
In their Elysian Feilds.

Orith: Fie, fie, my Lords,
Is this your recompense to mock us for
Having bad faces?

Thal*' Cause Nature played the Stepdame,
And made us not of the same Orient matter
Of which she framed your Ladies; Must you add
Your flouts to her hard Workmanship?

Theag: Before Heaven
I could for ever gaze on your fair eyes.
It Is Heaven, where e're I may behold your faces;
You Are wholly made of charm.

Mel: You are two Circes,
Two amiable Conjurers; Once gotten
Into your Circle, there is no getting out:
A Thousand Graces play upon your lips,
And every Kiss is a new Siren, which
Invites us to take more, and there to fix,
Till they grow Infinite.

Theag: Then for your beds,
They are two Phoenix Nests which breath perfumes;
You rose from us, to Day, as Spice from Altars,
Two perfect Sacrifices

Orith. Well, since you will
Needs put great value on slight favors, we
Shall know how you esteem us by your visits
In this kind often.

Thal. Next, That you may perceive
What Confidence we dare put in you; And
How ill it would become us to admit
You to our Beds, and shut you from our Counsels:
Kn^w that this Day, if you do not prevent it,
Your Camp will be betrayed to th'E^emy.

Theag: How Ladies? It Is not possible; pray who
Should be the Traitors?

Orith: Our Princess, and her Sister.
You stand amazed now.

Theag. Troth it stirs my wonder,
Treason should lodge in such fair Looks.

Thal. These Looks
Are, Sir, the Cause, and Ground of what we tell you.
Your King ignobly did refuse them, when
They fell below Themselves, and wooed Him.

Orith. Which
Being known to the Prince of Thrace, he joining Love
To their Revenge, has frequently stolen hither
In a Disguise, and courted, and prevailed.
This Morning is appointed as the last
Time of their Interveiwes, before the Nuptials.

Thal. It Is too concluded, Sir, He shall restore
Your Princess, (For He says, To force Affection,
Were to wedde ^alfe a Queen, and match her Body
Without her Soul; Nor can the Marriage be
Perfect where Minds join not as well as hands,
And have their Knot too) And in her stead shall
M^ke choice of one of ours.

Orith. Then for
R^xa^e, He Will transport her back, as scorning
To match there where Himself has been refused.
And for the Carriage of all this, It Is Ordered
That when the Battles join, we, on the Word,
And Sign given, shall revolt, and turn to that side.

Mel. You have m^de great Discoveries.

Theag. Who is this?

Eurymedon p^sseth by. Orith. Now trust your own eyes; That Is Eurymedon,
G^ing to our Queens Tent. Make what wise use
Of this you please. And say you have not lost
By th'Company of Ladies.

Theag. We look upon you
As the preservers of our Country.

Mel. We
Will erect Sacred Statues to you, as
Ent. Menalippe and Marthesia. To the Tutel^ Deities that saved us.

Men. Madam,
Here is the second part oth' Comoedy.
The So ^ldiers are come with their prisoners:
The strangest spectacle --

Orith. Why, what is the Matter?

Mar. Unless it were the Farse, where the Decays
Of Time are acted, I never saw three men
So made of Rags. The Soldiers have changed Clothes,
And plundered 'em.

Thal. Go bid 'em enter.

Mel. Come Ladies
We Will make two in your Council, And then to The King.

SCAENA II.
To them Callias, Neander, Artops: (Led by Macrinus, Lacer^, Serpix. Macr. Come
Gentlemen, now stand in Rank, and keep
Due Distance from the Lords; Lest there pass from you
A creeping Intercourse, which may disturb
The sitting of the Court.

Theag. Are these the Captains
You took last Night?

Mac: These are the Three Commanders
An^t please your Lordships; who have since changed shapes
With us their Conquerours.

Mel. Indeed They look
As if They lately had been in a Fight;
Their Garments do want Surge^ns. What Is your name?

Call. Callias Me. What Is yours?

Ne: Neander. Me. What Is yours?

Theag. I do remember you; you were employed
(Art: Artops. In our late Civil Wars, by the factious Members
Of our Synedrium, when they armed their slaves,
And made their Bondmen Curiasseirs against
The Equestrall Order; And did enact it lawful
In The Kings Name to take Arms against Him; And
Out of Obedience to Him to rebel.
And amongst their other Wild and surious Votes,
Dec^eed it lawful, for the Good oth' Subject,
To rifle their Estates; slaughter their persons;
Ravish their Wives, and to defloure their Daughters.

Mel. Are these the Three, who helped to make war against
Our Gods? And to reform their Temples, did
Deface their Altars? And called it sacrifice
To rob Them of their Incense, And pull down
Their Images? And did erect strange Priests,
Taken from Awles and Anvills, to deliver
False Oracles unto the people?

Theag: These
Sir, are the Three.

Mel: Apply the Rack to them,
To force true Answers from them to our Questions.

Call. Pray hold, pray hold, Friends. Alas, My Lords, we are not
The men you mean. We never saw Wars before,
Civil, or Foreign; Nor ever were beyond
Our own Coasts yet.

Neand. N^r do we understand
What your Synedrium is, unless it be
Your Mayor and Senate of Bizantium.
Who, as we hear, once in an age run mad;
And then talk Idly, of naught but Liberty;
Changing of Government; The fatal periods
Of States and Kingdoms; How They may coin new Gods,
And new Religi^ns.

Art: They may vote twice two Thirty:
Or their own Scarlet's gray; Or Thracians, Scythians;
Or that They not rebel against your King,
When in a popular fury They cast off
The yoke of Subjects, For any aid They e're
Received from us.

Theag. Well, since you have cleared your selves
Of that great Doubt; Resolve us then, what makes
The Queen of Amazons among you?

Call: What made
Her Grandmother in Alexanders Army?
She comes to show Her ^el^e her N^ece, To fight,
And to have Amazons begot upon her.

Neand. Had these not interrupted us, we should
By this have known whither her Ladies came
For the same business.

Mel. That Sir is presumed;
Subjects are bound to imitate their Princes.

Theag: Next, what are your Designs? we hear you mean
This Day to give us Battle. Call. For our Designs,
Some say you have tame pigeons, taught to fly
With News and Letters, betwixt Camp and Camp;
Whereby our Counsels are no sooner hatched,
But They take Wing to you.

Neand. Others affirm,
You have your Multiplying Instruments,
Which take our Truths at one end, and, like Glasses,
Show Them in various shapes to the people; And
Return your Monsters to us at the Other,
In shapes more various and prodigious,
To fright us, as the Barbarous did of old,
With Elephants, and Castles in the Air;
And such like Expeditions; which once known,
Look big, and are despised.

Art. Then for the battle,
This is the Day for our New Legions
To be brought in; which when They come; Our King
Intends to stake his Kingdome' against your Princess:
The Conqueror take both.

Mel. This is a playnesse,
Which does show generous in you. Lastly, therefore
As you will avoid the Tortures of the Wheel,
Or Rack, in Questions of this moment; Tell us,
What Officers have you that may be bought,
To let us have good penny-worths, if we
Should have occasion to join Art to Arms,
And chaffer for a Castle, Fort, or Town,
Or a Defeat, or so? How Is your Prince guarded?

Call. As a Prince should be, by Gentlemen; whose Lives
Are cheaper to them then their Honors; And
More cheaply to be purchased from Them. Men
Who'd look on Tempters, as New Enemies;
And think it New Justice added to their Cause,
To fight against those who would corrupt 'em, Briefly,
T^^ are Men who do propose only these two
Brave Ends unto Themselves, to dye, and to
Be Loyal to their Prince; About whose person
Their Valors make one Guard, their Loves another.

Art. Some under Officers perhaps there may be,
Whose Trade and Occupation it is to Kill,
And to grow rich by Slaughters; Vile Market Spirits,
Who do not fight for Fame, or Cause. but think
That side is most in the Right which gives most pay,
And these Wars justest where there is most plunder:
Whom you may buy over to your side, and we
Upon a New Sale, may buy back again.
You I believe have some in your Camp too,
Who are like Victory; Hover a while
With doubtful Wings between both Armies, and
At last forsake the weakest.

Theag: Since you have made
A free Confession, we will now proceed unto
As free a Censure of you. My Lords, pronounce
Each in your order.

Orith. My sentence is, that since
They were caught in a Ladies Tent, at Hours
When all good Soldiers should be on their Watches;
And since They were surprised, and no swords drawn:
(Which renders them incapable of a
More Manly punishment) They be attired
In Women's Clothes, and so led through the Camp
In triumph, then left to their Ransomes.

Thal. I
Concur with you; But do add farther, that
In stead of Ransom, in that Dress They be
Returned to be Another show of scorn
To their own Army.

Theag. What say you two?

Men. We
Do both agree in one breife Vote; which is,
That since we hear they boast of Ladies favors,
To which a grateful speechlessenesse is due,
That first They have their Tongues cut out, and so
Made Mutes; Next, that they be gelt, and made Eu^uches;
And thus disabled from all what concerns
The Company of Women, but to keep 'em;
That they be fold to the Persian; who will employ 'em
With these Capacities in their Seraglio's.

Serp. You see we told you true.

Call. Pray, pray my Lords,
Reverse this cruel sentence. Rather let us
Be dressed like Women, then be made not Men.

Neand. Rather cut off our Heads, then Tongues; and make us
Mutes that way.

Mel. To which of us do you speak?

Neand: To the Lords with the treble voices.

Mel. Well,
Though we might show our rights of Conquest on you,
And yet proceed to harder Doomes; since victours
Cannot be cruel, where the worst is lawful;
Yet if you will swear never hereafter to
Bear Arms against us, with your eyes we will
Restore you to your Liberty.

Art: Let Us swear;
'T will be a fine excuse to keepe's from fighting.

Call: We swear.

Mel: By our Gods or your own?

Call: By all
Our Country Gods we will near bear ar^es against you.

Mel: You take the same oath?

Nean: Yes.

Art: If you will have me
I Will swear by all your Gods too, you shall never
Take me in arms against you.

The. Perhaps you will
Outrun your followers. Now unbinde 'em; next
They unbind 'em, They unblinde 'em. Give'em their sight.

Orith. Ha, ha, ha, Look how meekely,
And peaceably they look?

Thal: what a Tranquillity,
And harmless Calm is in their Countenances?

Men. How undisturbed they beat this? How serenely?
As if they were at Truce with all the world.

Mar^ who would not be a Coward, to be endu'd
with such a gift of Patience?

Theag: Gentlemen,
Having so amply testified your valors
To us, and these fair Ladies, We Will report
Your Chievalry to The King. Mean time we leave you
To you stout Resolutions, and Chronicle,
To be set forth in Epicke Meeter on you.

Mel: Farewell brave Champions; Take heed your examples
Do not infect your Companions.

Orith: Pray, when
You have spare hours, and are returned unto
Your Courages, let us once more partake
Of your defenses at our Tent.

Thal: And as
You find us free, and yiedling, pray for our
Sakes, and your own, conceal your Entertainment.

Exeunt. Men. Pray keep your selves whole men.

Mar: And safe from danger^

Mac: Captains we have our pay a month before hand.
We Will take leave too, and return to our postures.

Call: Pray stay pray stay; Is not your name Macrinus?

Mac: Yes Sir.

Nean: Yours Lacer^ I take it?

Lac: True Sir.

Call. And you are Lants^esado Serpix?

Serp. Sir,
I should deny my self else.

Neand. And '^S thought
These are your Breeches?

Lac. We confess it; And
These yours, and Doublets.

Mac: Troth we know you scorn
To wear 'em after us; or to put on
Clothes which you once cast off.

Serp. Adieu sweet Captains;
We will report your B^unty to the Camp.

Lacer. And show how you have gilded us, and made us
Three Complete Gentlemen of your Companies.

Exeunt. SCAENA III.
Callias, Neander, Artops. Call. Neander?

Neand. Hum.

Call. Was this a Dream, and did
All these appear to us in our sleep? or wast
A real vision?

Neand. Why do you ask?

Call. Because, if it were real, I expect
That passages so fit for History,
Shall not escape Mercuries or Scout. Gazetes;
But shortly be recorded with the Deeds
Of Democraticke John, or the Red-nos'd Burgess,
Who enacts Ordinances in Sack; Or with
The Life and Death of preaching Nol and Rowland.

Neand* If we escape rascal poetry I care not.
All my fear is, lest He who carved the Emblem
Of the Ox with four Horns, spitting fire, like one
O^h' Bulls which Jason conquered, should cut us
With Wings, in most vile libell figure, flying,
Like Owls by Twilight, and moultring these our feathers,
Before two she Kites, following us with Quivers.

Call: True; And then Pistoolerus, who lives by
His yearly Gi^ts in scraping verse, and pictures,
T'expound this to the Multitude in Ballad,
Sung to the direful Tune of Orpheus torn
By Oyster Wives.

Neand. Artops, Suppose this should
Arrive to th'Knowledge of your brown Lycoris
In The Suburbs?

Art: Pray don't trouble me, I^me in
A serious Contemplation.

Neand. What is it?

Art. Why*
If you will needs know, It Is whither it be not fit
(To prove our selves no Cowards, and to show
How much we can slight Death in any shape)
That we should call our Regiments together;
Erect a handsome T^averse; Then desire
The Company They Would join with us in one
Of Homers Odes, and after a short Confession,
Turn our selves off in Packthread.

Call: Come, we must
Do something to redeem our Credits: The Boys
Will else tie Squibbes behind us, as we pass,
And make us walk the Streets in Fireworkes.

Exeunt. SCAENA. IV.
Eurymedon, Roxane, Barsene. Eurym. Madam, you put too great names on my Visits,
To style them meritorious Dangers. It Is
So little I have done, thus to adventure
To your fair presence, secured only by
The weak veil and cloud which I wear about me,
That this but ranks me yet amongst vulgar Lovers;
Who would do much more for one fading Kiss,
Which dies in the fruition, and perishes
Whilst it is received, from her they love.

Bars. But Sir,
So often to descend from your great Self,
Where once had been enough to gain a Princess;
And to submit your self to this dark shade,
Which might betray you, and at best conceales you
But as Eclipses do conceal the Sun;
Which when They hide, do rob him too, and take
His bright rays from him; And all this to enjoy
The frail Sight of a Woman, who returns
You naught but Task for Visit, and whose presence
Might it securely be possessed, and you
Not venture a Captivity as often
As you pass to and fro* at most can make
But this poor, short requital, To be seen
Such as She is, one only rich in promises,
Where She wants Trea^ures more Sub^tantiall;
And those performed so much below the Receiver,
So apt to breed Repentance, as to deserve
Only to pass amongst the Injuries of Love,
Is such a Nobleness, which first esteems
And values Mean Things, whose Worth is Opinion,
And then finds Arguments to prize them, and
T'account them amiable* you have added This
To my Releasement when I was your prisoner,
Still to proceed in the same generous error;
Still to believe me worthy to be loved,
As then to be surprised, and to be told so.

E^rym. You are the first, Most Gracious Barsene*
Who robbed Her self to make Another rich;
Or stripped her self of her own praises to
Adorn Another Wants, and then look on him
As a Thing Worthy to be valued, The Gods
When They return a large and plenteous vintage
For a few Drops of Wine poured on their Altars:
Or do repay a Grain or Two consumed
In Sacrifice, with a whole field of Incense;
Or when They do requite a pilgrimage
M^de to their Shrines, with Answers which do promise
More then the Supplicant or asks, or hopes for,
Are not more Bounteous, more free and liberal,
Then you; who thus do glorify what You
In Justice might despise; And call your own
Perfections, which attract me to your presence,
Des^rt in me; Or think I merit, when
You make me happy. Nor can I count my visits
Among my Dangers, which are so much ^wee^ned
By your Allowance of Them. If they be Dangers,
'T^s a felicity I cove^ to
Be (...) ways near my Thraldom. To be taken
Coming or Going, and held Captive, Will
Be such a suffering as will endeare it self;
And be one of my pleasures, when I think
For whose sake I Am a Bondsman.

Bar: But, Great Sir,
What can you see in me, besides a Mind
Willing to understand it self beloved*
And to return Affection for Affection,
Which should expose you to these perils; And
Make It an Adventure every time you see me;
And your return back an Escape?

Eur: I see
A form more beautiful, more attracting, then
All those for which the King of Gods left Heaven.
And which to enjoy, he rather chose to be
Transformed into a Flame, or spangled shower,
Then to remain the Thunderer; And thought it
A happier shape to be a Swan^e, then to
Be clothed with his own Lightning. Should you set me
The taskes of Hercules, or bid me turn
Fable into story, and make his Labors mine;
Or should enjoyne me fights where the enemy
Grows numerous from my Conquests. And multiplies
From every wound I give him; And having finished
One Labor, should you straight prescribe another;
And make me so divide my life between
My Love and Conflicts; Such a reward as you,
Would be a greater recompense, then to
Be placed among the Stars, and there to shine
A Co^stellation, wreathed about with my
Own Victories; and glittering with the spoils
I took from Lions.

Rox: Well, Sir, Barsen^ has
Received so true, so full a Testimony
Both of your Love, and forti^ude, that now
Nothing is wanting to put both you and us
In full possession of our wishes, but
The opportunity to reveal our selves
After the noblest manner.

Bar: Your Task is only
To set your Army in Array, to join
Battle with ours, that, from this show of War,
We may at our Re^urne unto our selves,
The better raise a peace: And make an Olive
Spring from our Mirtles. Mean time I am your Conquest.

Eur. And I, who came a Prince, return your Captive.

Exeunt. SCAENA V.
Archidamus, Lyncestes, Polydamas, Theagines, Meleager. Archid. My Lords,
Lyncestes and Polydamas,
You Two stop all the passages by which
The Prince of Thrace is to return; That done,
Put the new forces you have brought in posture,
And fit Array, if need be, to supp^esse
All Camp Commotions. We are not safe amongst Women.

Lync. It shall be done.

Arch. And let the old Forces be
In Readi^esse, if th'Adverse Army do
Invite us to join Battle, to entertain it,
And meet them in the Field.

Polyd. It shall be Ordered.

Arch But is it credible Eurymedon
Should have the Confidence to trust Himself
To a thin weak Dis^^ise, and in a Cloud
So open and transparent, should pass through
My Camp, on such a treacherous Enterprise?

Theag. He Is now Sir at the Queens Tent, where they hold
A secret Consult^^ion*

Mel. We saw him enter
J^st at the (...) when two of her Ladies,
The O^e (...) General of the Army,
The Other Lady Marshall of the Field,
Were telling us plot.

Arch. That it is concluded,
Roxane shall be carried back to Th^ace,
Barsene ^e restored (perhaps de^^our'd)
And He to choose Hyppolyta, or her Sister,
Instead of Mine to be ^is Queen?

Theag. Yes, Sir,
They are indifferent, and are resolved,
Since you refused 'em, to wedde by Lottery,
Of which refusal they are so sensible,
That when both armies join, it is too contrived,
(Which I do wonder they should, yet, discover)
The Amazons, upon the sign given, shall
Turn to the other side; And sacrifice
Your overthrow to their Revenge; Or what is
More to be feared, your Kingdom to their Nuptials.

Mel: Antiope, the sister, wants a portion;
And if she bring your Crown, and Scepter with her;
Or, if t'enlarge her Husbands Territories,
She add yours to 'em, the Match will be more Princely,
And she appear so much the more her self, Sir,
If she can raise a Dowry from your Conquest.

Arch: Oh the deceitfullnesse of Women! whose
Affection's like the Rainbow, can show painted,
And Court us with a thousand Beauteous Colors,
Yet all this only serve to guild a Storm;
And make a Tempest look more flattering.
We must use Plot against P^ot. To seize upon
The Ladies were dishonorable; And
To take these Captive who are now our Guests,
(Though they deserve it, having forfeited
The S^ile of Friends they brought, for Enemies)
Would be our blot in History. You two, therefore,
Seize on the Prince at his return, His Ransom
Shall be the Resti^ution of our Ladies.
A Battle beaten within* Enter Macrinus. Hark, what means this?

Ma^r. Arm, arm your selves, ^oth Camps
Are joined; And the Amazons have put themselves
In Arms against us, It Is rumor'd through the Field,
To charge us in the R^are, The Thracians
In Front: and so t'encircle us i^ a
Parenthesis of Enemies, composed
Of Men before us, and Women, Sir, Behind.

Arch: We Will to the field stra^ght^ O false Sex! The Wind
May be made constant, but not Womankinde.

Ex^unt. SCAENA VI.
After a Battle beaten within, enter at one door, in fighting postures,
Archidamus, 'Theagines, Meleager. At the other Eurymedon, Clytus, Hippocles.
Arch: I Am glad I have met you out of Clouds, in your
Own shape, and like your self. You Have hitherto
Obscured your self, in Mistes, of your own raising
To play the These in, since you landed false Prince!
Was It not enough you did pursue my Queen
With your unnecessary expedition;
And when our Nuptial Torch was placed, and kindled
Upon the Altar. must then quench (...), And
Like those who do rob Temples (For to take her
Thus from me was plain Sacrilege) must snatch her
Then back again, just when the sacred Cake
Was breaking 'twixt the Flamens hands, And all
The Gods of Weddings in their Saffron Robes,
But as part of your pyracy, and stealth,
(If yet the treacherous surprise of a
Weak Company of Ladies do deserve
A name not yet more Infamous) must join
My sister, and the beauteous part of my
Whole Court, and Kingdom in the Rape? As if
You meant ^'erect a new Seraglio, or
T'enlarge your old* And take them prisoners first,
Then use them amongst your other prostitutes?

Eurym: Is this all?

Arch: There is one thing more. To show
Your power upon that Sex, (which you, I ^ee,
Have strived by all ways to make yours, And, where
By force you could not, have conquered by Petition)
Was It not enough you did begin the War
In the suprize of Ladies, but that since
You must continue it by Stratagem,
More treacherous then the first? And in your false
And bo^^owed shapes, (In which you nightly have
Appeared to the Queen of Amazons) must tempt
Her, and her Ladies from their pure Affections,
Which made them first resolve, won by the Justice,
And Goodness of my Cause, to fight for me,
Until ^educ'd they grew Conspiratours,
And did resolve to fight for you? Had you
First taken, and then matched Barsene, yet,
To be your Queen, thus, had not been a Wedding,
But a Captivity; And to be forced
Unto your bed with shackles on, is not
To be your Princess, but your slave. But first
To take her prisoner, And, (For ought I know)
To use your power of Conquest on her, And
To make her first unworthy of your Nuptials,
And then despise her, for one more entire,
More free, and more unto^cht, (For your new Loves
Made to Hippolyta, and her sister Prince,
Have not been so disguis', like you the Lover,
As to escape my knowledge) is such a wrong,
(Besides my other Interest of having
My Queen kept from me) as I stand here to punish;
Or else to add my fall unto my sufferings.

Eurym: Have you, Sir, finished your Oration?

Arch: This
Only remains. To save the expense of blood,
Which may be shed on both ^ides, since the Quarrel
Is purely ours, Let Us not engage our Armies
But here conclude the war, The injured with
The Injurer, in one fair, single Combat.

Theag: Sir, we have a Cause going too; And have two Ladies.
Who well might think us two Indiffereut Cowards,
And very cold in their Revenge, should we
Stand peaceable Spectatours, whilst you fight.

Mel: We do beseech you, Sir, Let us join our
Poor Interest with yours; And since the number,
And quality of the Combatants is equal,
To Express the like sense of our wrongs, let it
Be Three to Three.

Clyt: We do accept the c^allenge;
And will maintain, your Ladies are our Prisoners,
More Nobly then they were at (...) Wi^es;
And that we took them fa^re (...)
Then you first married'em. (...) Pray stay a little.
To show Archidamus, ((...),
Although I j^stly might, call you (...) Prince,
B^ing gui^ty (...) those ^cc^^sations, which
You stick on me) that we being (...) causes,
As well as equal Val^urs, to d^f^nd them,
Since you observ'^ a Method in your Wrongs,
And those suspicions (...), and imagin^ry,
I Will use one in my Answe^s? It Is con^est
I did use Art to gain by ^^ot what was
By plot taken from me, Roxane, my best sister.
And if in her surprise I di^ recover
But what you first ^ole, and redeemed my Loss
With some inforcement, this deserves the name
Of a Retrive not of a Pyracy.
Next that I took your Sister with my own,
'Twas part of my Affection to her; Love
Prompted me to the Action; which does not
Cease to be Love. because it once put on
The shape of Force* And that force but made use of,
To let her know that he who took her was
The greater prisoner, and was first surpised.
How I have used her since, the Gods, and she,
Her ow^e Historian, when you see her next
Will wi^nesse for me. Lastly, if refused
By you, (I will (...) say by her, for her
Consen^ takes flame from yours) ^'ve been a Suitor,
Where I Have been freely heard, and entertained,
Ask't an^ preva^^'^, For you to claim a Sovereignty,
Over The Affections of Hippolyta.
Or her ^^i^e Sist^r, or call me Thief, or treacherous,
(...) nights to my disguises,
(...) to them might be more
(...), is such a Wrong
To me and (...); That in their Absence. I
Scand her^ to make good with my sword, my stealths,
Have been more noble then your open Visits.
And that I am more Constant to Barsene
In the new purchase of their Loves, Then you
Are to Roxane in refusing them.
Now, Sir, I am prepared to meet your strokes.

Clyt: Your Challenge holds too?

Th^ag: Yes; you shall perceive,
You fight not now with Women.

Hipp: We see you are Men,
And you shall find us such.

Mel: It Is nobly promised.

SCAENA. VII.
As they prepare to fight ^nter to them, Their faces undiscolour'd, and to be
known, Roxane, who takes hold of Archidamus, Barsene of Eurymedon. Rox: Hold
as you are Princes; And respect the Cries,
Of your own Ladies, who in your wounds bleed.
And, if you fall must here expire with you;
Since neither of you can fall singly, and
We not be slain too.

Bar: Great Archidamus, --
My royal Lord Eurymedon, -- (For now
I dare profess you) what mean you to contract,
And thus remove the War into a Duel?
O sheath you* swords; See your Barsene begs.

Rox: Once more hear your Roxane, Sir; And here
Cast do wne your weapon. Or if we be the cause
Of this your strife, be reconciled by turning
Your swords on us. See here two Sacrifices
Ready to buy your peace with their own slaughters.

Arch: How Is this? Roxane and Barsene? Sure
My eyes are not themselves; Or else my Joys
Make (...) Visions for Realities.

Theag: B^leeve us, Sir, These are no empty shades
Which will appear and vanish.

Mel: There have bodies,
Composed of Flesh and Blood.

Eur: Now, Sir, you see,
If you will proceed ith'Combate, I want not
A ^oble cause to fight for. If you will now
Call my surprise of these a pyracy,
Or my stolen visits since made to their Tents
A Treason, in which these went Conspiratours,
I hope you'^ think it a Treason, in which I
Had only this one honorable aim,
To render my self worthy to be owned
by this fair Princess; and to be^ray you to
A league and freindship with me by th'Excharge
O^ Queens and Sisters.

Arch: Is this true?

Rox: Our plot
Was in thse borrowed shapes only to try
How you would bear our Loss; Or whither we
Might tempt you from your Constancy. Which, Sir,
Has been so firm, so settled, four shaken,
So much beyond her Merits who made trial,
That ^'me now twice yours; And the second time
Takes her in his Ar^es. Here ca^t my self into your arms.

Arc. You Are here,
Once more my bright star fixed in your own sphaere,

Bar: Then, for you, Great Eurymedon, To leave
Your Kingdom for the sight, and spectacle
Of one, whose Beauty can at most aspire
But to be seen, and pardoned; After that,
To turn that which at first showed boisterous force,
Into a generous Courtship; And to change
That which I first took for a rude surprise,
Into the noblest way of Love; And there
To be a Suplicant* and to spend sighs,
Prayers, and Petitions, where you might command
Affection as your Conquest, Adds so pure,
So clear, so bright a Luster to your flame,
And calls forth such a just, and vertu^us heat
From me, to meet with yours, that from the time
You did release, I became your Captive;
And you gained this by set^ing of me free,
Only to change one Thraldom for another;
And from that time to make me wear your Fetters,
And to be wholly yours.

Eur: If these be Fetters,
I shall for ever wish to be your prison;
Takes her in his Arms. And thus to hold you chain^d. I hope. Sir, you
Will not unlinke us now.

Arch Such a Separation
Were such a si^ne, as would be punished with
The Anger of the Gods; And would deserve
To have another added to it; And I
Be once more in the number of the Divorced.
To make the knot more firm, here, Sir, In sign
You Have had two conquests of me, I lay down
My self, and Weapon at your feet.

Eur. And I
First Conquered by your Sister, next, your self,
Make this confession of it.

Theag: My Lords
They lay dow^^ their Sword^ You see the Wars are ended; If It please you
Let us put up our swords.

Clyt: We Will show the way, Sir.

Arch: Next since there is nothing wanting to Combine us,
In one strickt Union, but the Priest, and Temple,
Please you, we will to the Altar, and there first.
Conclude a lasting peace, And then our Nuptials.

Exe^nt. Eurym: Lead on; I follow you.

Theag: I mar'le, my Lord.
Our Amazons appear not, with their Brace
Of Posset-makers.

Mel: They are but shifting faces;
Enter Orith. Thal. That they may laugh at us in their own shapes.
See where they come.

Thea: How Is this^ How Is this? ^'le pawn
My life another Comoedy; Let Us stand,
And over-heare'em.

Mel: Look how they show in Helmets.

SCAENA. VIII.
Enter Callias, Neander, Artops. Leading Orithya, Thalastris, Menalippe and
Marthesia; with Helmets on, plumed as taken prisoners by them. Call: Come, come
along. Nay you shall know most stout*
Most stern Bellona's, what it is to be Traitors
Against a State, Was this your errand? This
Your ^aire pretense of having Children by us,
To betray those that should beget em? Now
We know how you or'ecome the Scythian^;
You did invite them to your Tents, And there
Conquered the Men by night, by day their Country.

Neand. What could you see in us to think us of
A feebler Fabric, or not so well built,
Nor of such tough Chines as the Thracians, that
You should so itch to sell us to 'em, for
Nights Lodgings, And the transitory pleasure
Of keeping of you waking?

Orith: To the wrong
You offer to our Innocence, and Hon^^rs,
You Are scurrilous and that is one wrong more
Offered to our chaste ears. Your mouths need washing;
Or rather gelding. We project to betray you?

Art: Why, I beseech you, Lady Telam^n,
If I should ask you, And this Lady Ajax,
Together with your two Sarpedons here,
Was It not contrived you in our absence should
Se^ze on our Magazine? Then crested thus
In your bright Helmets, (To which nothing lackes
But a shield with a Gorgons Head, to turn
Us into a stone, and Conquer us with ill looks*)
That you should sally forth upon us; And
Then join, almost had said couple, with
The E^emy? You will deny this?

Thal: Yes*
And having had experience of your Valors,
Dare here maintain the contrary with our swords,
Two Women against three Me^, without our second^*
We seize upon your Magazine?

Call: so you will
Deny you did receive us at your Tabernacle,
Your amorous pavilion; And that these two
Sweet ^ymball-beaters, otherwise called Drummers,
Did strike a false Alarm?

Nea^d: Or that you hired
Three Meager-halfe-pin'd-Rascals, having first
Dep^iv'd us of our eyes, To lead us thrice
Round 'bout the Works, to lengthen out our progress
Toward the Enemies Camp; And there to be
Arraigned before a Council, which consisted
Of two she C^ll^nels, two she Clerks of
Your Comfits, and Suckets; two yo^ng Lords; who no doubt
Enjoyed all that we came for.

Orith: It Is confessed, Sir.
Had you enjoyed us, ^ur Children only had
Been va^iant by the Mothers side.

Art: We Will have
Our Coun^ell too; where we expect you shall
Confess your Treason too, Against the King.
March on before there.

Theag: Pray stay Gentlemen;
Where do you lead these Ladies, thus three deep
In File, without a Drumm^? You are not going
To teach 'em postures, are you? Or make a Mu^ter
Of four commanded by three?

Mel: If you mean
To lead 'em against the Enemy, to show
Your Fortitudes before 'em, once more; surely
The Wars are ended.

Call: Sir, we are leading 'em
To The King; we have discovered a foul Treason.

Theag: How?

Neand: Yes, Sir, such a Treason, and these the plotters
As does show Women make but the other Twinne
With Mischeife; And that Falsehood, when it would
Betray men, still assumes their shape.

Art: These Sir,
Who can lodge Serpents amongst their Roses, and
Smile over their Treacheries, But that we did
Timely prevent 'em, would have put the Camp
Into a Muteny. We did take these
Two Lady-Rhetoricks mounting heaps of Turfe,
Provided to make speeches to the Soldiers;
T'inflame them to Rebellion.

Mel: It Is not possible.

Neand: Yes, Sir, And these two Yeomen of the Gally pots*
Were employed, as we hear, to offer the
Free use both of Themselves, and Ladies, to
All those who with them would forsake our side,
And turn to the Thracians.

Orith: We will endure't no longer.
These iron Veyles cast off, thus we confute you.

They take off their helmets Call: How Is this? Orithya and Thalaestris? with
Their Women Menalippe and Marthesia?

Art: Amazon-fighters turned to our own Court peace-wormes.
And my two Troilus's transfor'd to Knitsters?

Theag: They are our Wives. Was ever such a plot
Laid by two Women to keep their Husbands honest?

Mel: They Have turned what I thought Fornication
Into the acts of Wedlock. How I love
Such projects, where men are betrayed unto
Their lawful pleasure, and tempted to commit
Adultery with Innocence, and no sin follow?

Thal: Pray view us well; And now our paintings off,
(As you once pleasantly did style us) pray,
Officious Gentlemen; what other plot
Can you discern in us, but to laugh at you?

Neand: This comes of policy; Our wisdoms have
Made us three sage, discreet, d^epe, most rare Coxcombes.

Men: Ha, ha, ha; Sure they did expect the King
Should Knight 'em for their rare Discovery.

Mar: Or
Prefer 'em to the Council Board, and make 'em
Spies General of the State.

Orith: Troth, Gentlemen,
If you intend to seape Plays, and at your
Return home to Chalcedon, not to see
Your Deeds brought on the Stage, take our advice;
Travel 'till this be over.

Thal: And be sure,
You keep your selves from Duels; Least your Country
Do suffer in your Valors.

Theag: You see there is
No meddling with these Women; I Will undertake,
They can change shapes, as often as shift Linen.
The Book of Transformations, which reports
Of Women turned to Baytrees, and of Men
Turned into Women, has not more various forms,
Then these can practice.

Mel* Alas it is not your case
To be deceived. They did deceive us too.

Orith: We have two constant Lords of you. So't had been
Had we been Amazons in earnest.

Theag. you are
The Two f^^st Ladies that ere made their Husbands
Cuckold themselves with their own Wives.

Thal. By this
Good light 'twould be but justice now to put
A Cour^^tricke on you.

Mel. Alas Thalaestris; I
Discerned you by your breasts.

Th. Be sure you say
Enter Arch* Eurym. etc With your own Wife.

Mel. Look, Gentlemen,
Do You know these Shape^? Here comes the second part
Oth' Metamorphofis.

SCAENA IX.
Enter two Priests carrying two hallowed Torch* Followed by Archidam^ leading
Roxane, and Eurymedon leading Barsene waited on by Clyt^s and Hippocles. Arch:
-- Thus having made
Our Realms one people, by the League and Knot
We Have tied before the Gods, you two proceed
In the last ^ites of this our Union,
And sing the Nuptial Song.

The second Song, sung by two Priest^* holding two marriage Tapers.
(1)
Behold these hallowed Tapers; And here see,
What Wells, and Springs of fire they be.
How their two Lusters twining
Make ^^tuall shining.
Whilst one from the other kindled, does requite
I's borrowed, with as great a Light for Light,
And kindles back again.
And thus combining Rays with Rays,
And joining fla^es, like Marriage Daye^,
A holy Nuptial 'twixt them do maintain.
(2)
Yet these but the dark signs, and embl^ms be
Of those concealed fires, which none see
But Gods, and such whose eyes
Love Glorifies,
Between these breasts a sacred flame does spring,
Which intermingling Rites, whilst we do sing,
Is to it self the Priest.
Whilst Heart with Heart, thus intermoved,
And paires made one, The Loved with Loved,
Themselves between themselves in Hymen's twist.


The Song is second^d with a sho^t within. -- Hark, hark, what is
The meaning of this shout and Ac^lamation?
Enter Lync: Polyd* Lync: Sir, the two Armies hearing that their Princes
Have struck a Peace, have first exchanged their Arms,
And next, in Imitation of your Nuptiall^,
Which with this shout they celebrate, have cast
Themselves into new postures of Embraces.

Polyd: Did you behold 'em, you would believe there past
A mutual wedding between Troop^ and Troop,
And Regiment and Regiment. They want
Only one of your Priests here to perform
The holy Ceremony between 'em, To
Make it a perfect Day of Hyme^aeals.

Arch: And so't shall be. Naught now remains, but that
We do add Tri^^ph^ to our I^yes* and mingle,
Our Feasts, and Daunees with our Sacrifices,
In thankfulness to the Gods. Then Princes do
Match truly, when their Kingdoms marry too.

FINIS.

