KPYPTEYOLOGIA: Or, A Plain ANSWER To this Practical Question, What course may
a Christian take to have his Heart quickened and enlarged in the Duty of Secret
Prayer?

By RICHARD MAYO. late of Kingston upon Thames.

Psalm 80.18. Quicken us, O Lord, and we will call upon thy Name. LONDON,
Printed by D. Maxwel for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the Three Crowns at
the lower end of Cheapside. 1664.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Was the more willing to print this Letter (though penned at first for the
closet of a particular friend, and not in a fit dress to come abroad) because
it contains an Answer to a Question that every Christian is ready to ask, and
none (so far as I can learn) did ever yet undertake to resolve; or if any have
obliquely touched it, never any did directly handle it.

A small Structure must not have a great Porch: I shall only suggest these two
praeliminary Exhortations.

1. Be much in the duty of secret Prayer; be as constant at it as at your
Morning, evening, and noon-daye So David.

Joachim the father of the Virgin Mary used to say, That Prayer was his meat
and drink. See Daniels practice, Dan. 6.10.


meals. Amongst many motives, this is one, It Is a Duty wherein God does
ordinarily make the greatest discoveries of himself. Joseph and his brethren
were alone when he made himself known to them. The secrets of the Lord are
usually revealed unto his people when they are seeking him in secret; then
it is, that he gives them his O anima sancta sola esto, anne nescis verecundum
te habere sponsum?
loves, when they fall down upon their knees unto him, he falls upon their
necks and kisseth them. Nunquam (...) solus, quam (...) solus.
They are never less alone then when alone.

2. Be warm and lively in the Duty. A dead Prayer is no more accepted with God,
then of old the offering up of a beast that was found dead in a ditch. The Ass
under the Law was not to be offered unto God, but his neck must be broke; not
that God was angry with that creature which was the workmanship of his hands,
but to show how distasteful a dull and a dead heart is to him in his service.
Sometimes Christians go to Prayer as sick persons to their meals, because they
must eat, and it is dinnertime, and the like; not that they desire or delight
in their food, or find any refreshment thereby. If it be thus with thee in
reference to Prayer, thou art greatly distempered, thy condition is very
dangerous, therefore look out speedily for help. May this following Letter
contribute something thereunto: the Lord set in with it for that end.

A Plain ANSWER To this Practical Question, What course may a Christian take to
have his heart quickened and enlarged in the Duty of Secret Prayer?
Christian Friend,
YOur Question savours of a Spirit truly gracious. It supposes you already
convinced of, and persuaded to the practice of that necessary, though
neglected, Duty of Secret Prayer. It shows you do not take up with a bare
performance of Duty, as too many do, not caring how or in what manner it be
performed. It argues you would present God with the male of your flock, and not
put him off with a corrupt thing. These are good signs of sincerity.

I could heartily wish that all Christians would follow your example, to
propose such profitable questions as may promote piety, and to avoid such (...).
foolish questions as do engender strifes.

I would not be wanting to you in so pious a request, as this is: And oh that I
could say, that 1 John c. 3.
What I here declare unto you I have seen and felt my self; that what is here
expressed, is the same which I my self have experienced.

It is besides your desire and my design to write concerning the duty of secret
Prayer at large; to open the nature of it, to show the necessity of it, to lay
down Arguments to move you to it, to advise in what manner you should manage
it, namely, with faith, with servency, with humility, with sincerity, with
constancy, with watchfulness, in the Spirit, and the like: this work is done to
my hand in many Treatises, and those extant, some of them, Cobbet his practical
discourse of Prayer. Philip Goodwin his Family Religion revived. from page 149
to p ^15.
in our own Language. I shall therefore strictly keep to the Question
propounded, which I acknowledge is of greatest concernment. God is a living
God, and they that worship him must worship him with warmth and Ejusmodi cultum
probat Deus qui ejus naturae congruit. Call. in Joh. 4 23.
life; such supplaints he seeks after.

Meet helps then in this case are such as follow,

1. Remember to observe the fittest seasons for the performance of this duty.
Though a Christian is to pray at all times, yet at all times he is not alike
sit for Prayer. This you find by experience^ As many a fair Child is lost by an
untimely birth, so many a good duty is marred by an undue timing of it.

Of many apt seasons, I shall mention these three.

1. When you meet with any new occurrence of Providence. Every fresh
dispensation of Providence is a provocation unto Prayer. When any affliction
befalls thee, then fall down before God, and humble thy self under his
afflicting hand. Jam. 5.13 Praes^^tim cu^andum est quoties al^qua rerum
an^ustia, aut ipsi premimur, aut premi alio^ videmus, ut ad D^um citatis, non
pedibus, sed animis recurr^mus. D^inde, ae quam aut nostram aut aliorum
prospcritatem praeterire simamus; quin laud, ac gratiarum action^, manum ejus
agnoscere nos testemur. Call. Instit. lib. 3.
Is any amongst you afflicted? let him pray, says the Apostle; that is, let him
then do it more especially, then there is a fit opportunity for it.

Again, when any fresh mercy is conferred upon thee, then it is a fit season to
go aside and to acknowledge thine unworthiness, and to express thy
thankfulness. See an excellent instance for this in 2 Samuel 7.18. the words are
these, Then went King David in, and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O
Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? Mark that
particle, then. Why when was it? See the foregoing Verse, When God by Nathan
had made many promises, and that of great mercies to him, then he went in, and
sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I? etc.

The Reader may dilate his thoughts upon this, and the following particulars: I
intend only brief hints.

2. When you find the Spirit of God moving upon your Soul, and exciting you to
the duty; then it is a fit season for it: Now God calls upon you to come and
converse with him, he invites you now to communion with himself. Think at such
a time, that the Lord bespeaks you in such a manner as he does the Spouse,
Cant. 2.10. Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away. Or as it is Verse. 14.
Come, let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet. To pray at such a season is to
hoise up sail before the wind; it is like rowing both with wind and tide. Being
thus excited by the Spirit, you may expect the assistance of it: if Prayer be
now neglected, the Spirit of God is quenched; and I Will pronounce him a novice
in Religion, or rather a stranger to it altogether, that does not confess it
necessary to the lively performance of this Duty, that the Spirit of God does
act and quicken him therein. Our motions are exceeding dull and heavy in holy
Duties, when the Spirit of God does not help our infirmities. Whenever
therefore God says by the secret whisperings of his Spirit, Ps. 27 6.
Seek ye my face, our hearts should answer and echo back as David's did, Thy
face, O Lord, we will seek.

Yet here I would have it remembered, I do not say a Christian should never
pray, but when he finds the Spirit of God egging him forward; this has been
the gross mistake of some, who hereupon have discontinued the duty for several
days together, because they have not perceived the Spirit moving them
thereunto: No; let this be thy practice, to wait upon God in his way, and it
may be the Spirit of God will meet thee therein. Know this, though the Spirit
of God should not put forth his hand to lead thee, yet the Word of God holds
forth a precept to command thee, and set thou about the Duty out of pure
obedience to the command of God. It may be ere thou art aware, thou will, find
Him whom thy soul desires. Though the Spirits assistance be never unwelcome to
a Child of God, yet many times it comes unexpected. Abraham saw not the Ram for
the sacrifice till he was in the Mount: Often in the Mount in the time of
Prayer, the Spirit of the Lord is seen and felt. Mariners have put forth to sea
in a calm, when they have made but little way, and anon they have met with
fresh and unexpected gales of wind, that have brought them with full sail to
their desired haven. I leave you to apply it.

Again, I do not deny but the evil spirit who is Gods Ape, may sometimes
transform himself into the likeness of Gods Spirit, and may excite a Christian
to this duty: but then his motions are irregular, and unseasonable; they tend
to the hindering of him from another, and (for that time) a more seasonable
duty; suppose it a work of mercy to himself, or others, or such like. Christian
exercises must be wisely subordinated one to another; whereas the Devil desires
to make them interfere, and to set them at variance.

3. When we find our hearts in a settled and composed frame, then also it is a
sit season for secret Prayer, when ( Ps. 57.7.
as David's) our hearts are fixed, and not pre-occupied with any secular
matters. To pray at another time is like playing upon an Instrument that is out
of tune; what harsh and unpleasing melody does it make? Many when they go to
seek God, they have their heart to seek. Few can say with David that 2 Samuel
7.27. In the Hebrew it is only, the found to pray.
they have sound their hearts to pray. We render it he found in his heart, but
it may be read, he found his heart to pray a prayer unto God.

It was the custom of the Heathens to address themselves in the morning early
to their Idols vid. Herod. l. 10. The Primitive Christians were wont to be
early at their devotions. Vid. Pl. ep. 57. ad Trajan. Tertul. Apol. c. 2. See
Christ's practice Marc. 1.35. Qui mean surgit precandi causa dicit manicare
Deum. Drus.
Usually in the morning the mind is most composed; then a man meets with least
diversions in duty; the evenings repose has in great part discharged the mind
of all that did distract it: and it were well if we would be with God as soon
as we awake: if we did offer up to him the first fruits of every day; if as
soon as we lift our bodies off our beds, we did in Prayer lift up our souls to
God. This was David's manner, Psalm. 5.3.

Under this Head I will suggest these three cautionary Rules.

1. Do not take Prayer in hand when you have any other matter in hand: if so,
you attendance upon God must needs be with distraction, and your heart will be
stolen from you do what you can. Set by all worldly occasions when you set
about this duty: say to them as Genesis 22 5
Abraham did to his young men, Stay you here while I go aside to worship God.

2. Do not ordinarily go to prayer when your anger is stirred, and your mind
full of perturbations; if you do, it is ten to one but you will offer up the
sacrifice of a fool, and speak unadvisedly with your lips. The 1 Timothy 2.8.
Apostles advice is, that we lifts up to God holy hands without wrath. 1 King.
19.11.12.
God was not in the Wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the fire that passed by
Elijah, but in the still small voice. And you must be of still and quiet
spirits, if you will see, or find him.

3. Do not usually engage in Prayer when you are inclined to sleep and
drowsinesse; if so, you are like to make but dull and drowsy work of it. Mat.
26.40.41.
The rebukes of Christ could not awaken his Disciples to Prayer when there
hearts were heavy and asleep. You must be wakefull when you pray, if you would
watch unto Prayer.

2. A second Help is this. Allot and set out a due proportion of time for this
Duty. It is not enough to choose a sit time for Prayer, but you must allow
sufficient time to Prayer. No service whether secular, or spiritual can be done
well, unless you allow a due proportion of time for the doing of it. How is
Prayer huddled and slubbered over many times, for want of this? you think of
making an end as soon as you begin, you are straightned in your prayers,
because you are straightned in your time.

Qu. If you should ask, How much time must a Christian set apart in a day for
secret Prayer?

Ans. In my answer, I must have respect to the callings, and conditions of
Christians; that time is sufficient for one, which is not sufficient for
another. It Is observable that under the Law there were different sacrifices for
the rich, and for the poor: God required that men's sacrifices, should hold some
proportion with their abilities. And by parity of reason, God looks that the
rich, and those that have little else to do, should double the time of the
poor in Prayer, and of those whose callings call for their continual
attendance.

And yet I must add this too, let a man's condition be never so mean, and let
his employment be never so urgent, it it will not be a sufficient Apology for
his neglecting, or curtailing the duty of Prayer. Col. 4.2. comp. with 5.
Time must be redeemed, and that for this very end, to hold communion with God
in this Duty.

This premised I come to the Question, wherein I may not be positive, that
would be an unwarrantable presumption. I have often thought that one hour in
four and twenty, is as little as any one can set apart for secret Prayer.
Luther spent 3 hours in Prayer every day. see Vitus Theod. in vita ejus. Judge
Coo^ advised to 4 in a day Sex horas somno, totidem des legibus aequis; quatuer
orabis, des Epulisque duas. Quod superest sacris ultro largire camoenis. K.
Alfred divided every day into three parts; he allowed eight hours to his
devotion-eight to his employment, and eight to his sleep and refection.
And if this should seem to any a hard saying, I desire they would consider,
whether they don't spend two every day about things less necessary. Let them
cast up the time they cast away (more then they need) in sleeping, eating, and
drinking; then let them add thereunto the time they spend in sports, or
recreations, in idle visits, in unprofitable studies or musings, and in empty
chat, or conference with friends, and neighbors; and see if the product will
not be so much or more: and will any that name the name of Christ, grudge an
hour in a day for Prayer, when they can spend two, or, it may be, more in the
mere pleasing of the flesh? is this consistent with Christianity? Will Not such be
filled with horror (as many One dreadfully schriecht out on her deathbed these
words, A world of wealth for an inch of time. Another when friends comforted
her as she lay a dying, said, Call time again; no comfort unless you can call
time again. Chrysorius prayed, Inducias Domine usque ad mane.
others for the same reason have been) at the hour of death? Can they answer it
at that day when God will reckon with them for every talent he has entrusted
them with, and for that of time in particular?

If this letter should fall into the hands of any person, who has resolved, or
does resolve to redeem an hour, or more every day for secret Prayer; let him
consider, whether it would not help to quicken and enlarge his heart, if he did
morning, or evening, or when he finds himself best disposed thereto, enter into
his Closet and turn up an hour-glasse and purpose within himself, to see the
last sand run out, before he gave out or left Praying. I do not propose this as
an every days practice, but at some certain seasons only. It has I confess
its inconveniences, but withal, it has its advantages: hereby the heart is
engaged more firmly to the work. Now it will not put by the present
opportunity by propounding another. If thy heart be as mine, it is apt to say
to thee when at Prayer, as Felix said to Paul, Go thy way for this time, and
come again at a more convenient season. And further, thou will fall to the duty
with the more servency; for thus thou will reason with thy self, So much time
I am resolved to spend in this service, and I were better spend it in wrestling
with God, then in trifling with God and with Prayer: I were better do the
business in hand with all my might, and stir up my self to call upon God, for
during such a space of time I resolve to do nothing else.

I know it is the opinion of Dicuntur sratres in Egypto crebras orationes habere
and eas brevissimas, ne illa vigilantia erecta, quae oranti plurimum necessaria
est, per productiores moras evanescat, atque hebetetur intentio. Aug. ad Prob.
Cassian makes mention of some in his time, qui utilius censebant, breves quidem
orationes, sed creberrimas, fieri.
many, that, as some persons do by their meals, they eat little and often, so
Christians should do by their Prayers. And in case of great indisposition I
judge it advisable; when they have toiled a while, and can catch nothing they
may take up their nets, and mend them against another season, and yet I will
not discommend such a one that resolves he will catch something or he will
toil all night; that purposes in his heart (as Nunquam abs te absque te
discedam. Paulus Aimilius, being to fight with the M^cedonians, would never
give over sacrificing to his God Hercules, till he had some sign of Victory.
one once did) that he will not go from God without God.

3 Another Help to this Duty is, to take pains with your heart beforehand, to
prepare it thereunto, it is usually from the neglect of preparation, that we
find such deadness and indisposition in secret Prayer. Alas the heart is not
all on a sudden lifted up into heaven, many times the Prayer is almost ended,
before we begin to pray. There is no Religious Duty but it must have some
praevious preparation: this is evident both by the light of Ps. 26.6. Exodus
19.10.11.12. The Books of Levit. and Number. are full of Scriptures to the same
purpose.
Scripture, and of Tu Genitor cape sacra manu patriosque penates; me bello e
tanto digressum, and caede recenti, attractare nefas, donec me flumine vivo,
abluero. Virg Aenead. 2. Procul binc, precul esse prophani, conclamat vates,
totoque absistite luco,
Nature, but Prayer requires it in a more especial manner: see how those two,
Preparation, and Prayer, are conjoined Job. 11.13.

This is a trite Theme, and often inculcated, therefore I shall pass it: only
let me advise you, when ever you go to Prayer (if your leisure will permit) to
read first one or more Chapters in the Bible; and do not gallop over the
Scripture when you read it, as the most do; but pause a little at the end of
every verse or sentence, and whilst you pause, Lecttionem frequenter
interrumpat oration, and animum jugiter adhaerentem. Deo grata vicissitudo
sanctae oporationis accendat Hieron. in Ep.
Pray; the Scripture as you read it, will put words into your mouth, and
suggest meditations which are fit matter for Prayer unto your minds, though
some parts of Scripture especially the Psalms, are more apt for this purpose
then others; and if any passage be obscure, put a mark upon it, and propose it
to the next able Minister, or Christian thou meetest with to be resolved; and
for the present, pray in David's language, or to that purpose, that Psalm. 119.18.
God would open thine eyes to see and to understand the wondrous things of his
Law. A good course to prevent idle and unprofitable discourse.


4. A fourth and further Help is this, to have right conceptions of God all
along the Duty; to conceive of him as he is, and as he has revealed himself in
his Word to be. This will greatly conduce to the quickening of you. Conceive of
him,

1. As of an Omnipresent God; that he is really, though not visibly present in
all places, and in that place where thou art a Praying more particularly; that
he sees thy heart as plainly as thou can see thine own hands, that he
observes thee as narrowly, as if thou only were alive in all the world, or as
if thou alone of all the children of men were making thy supplication to him.
When ever thou set about this duty, How would you Pray if men were present
to see and hear you? Sic loquere cum Deo quasi Homines ad starent. Seneca.
set God before thine eyes (as David did) and represent him to thy self under
this notion of an Omnipresent allseeing God.

2. Conceive of God as one that is full of Majesty, and Greatness. That
passage in Mich. 6.6. (Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and bow my
self before the High God,) does intimate what apprehensions we should have of
God, when we come into his presence, viz. that he is a High God, infinitely
above any of his creatures; betwixt him and the Holy Angels, or the highest of
the children of men, there is a wider difference then betwixt the Potter and
his Clay. Oh how would this apprehension both quicken and awe us in Prayer.

3. Conceive of God as one that is exceeding gracious, and plenteous in mercy
to all that call upon him. That known Scripture Heb. 11.6. (He that comes to
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently
seek him) does hint what conceptions we should have of God in Prayer, as of one
that is exceeding bountiful: we must believe not only his being, but his
bounty: he gives not only what we ask, but more, yea Ephesians. 3.20. (...) Supra
quam redundanter.
abundantly more then we can ask. Oh what quickening and confidence does this
notion of God afford! To apprehend God in his greatness does Vitus T^cod. says
of Luther, that he Prayed with such reverence is became one that pake to he
great God, and with confidence as became one that spoke to his Father or Friend.
stir up fear and godly reverence. To apprehend God in his goodness, does
stir up Faith and holy boldness. God who is our father, likes that we his
children should come before him in this manner; he gives us leave (so we do it
awfully) to Ephesians 3.12. (...). Proprie est libertas dicendi, ex (...) omne, and
(...) dictio.
speak all our minds to him. It Is said of Flavius the Emperor, that he would
not that any man should present a petition to him (as if he were offering meat
to a Lion or Elephant) with a trembling hand: God likes that we should lift up
our hands to him, as without wrath, so also 1 Timothy 2.8.
without doubting.

4. Conceive of God in Prayer as one God, ^id Dr. Hall Deca. 3 Ep. 7.
not divided, and yet distinguished into three Persons, the Father, Son, and
Spirit. This is a great mystery, fitter for admiration, then humane conception;
and yet all along this duty God must be thus apprehended, as one substance in
three subsistances; as one essence in three relations: all which do concur to
the Prayers of Believers, and have a different office about them; there is the
Father hearing, the Son interceding, and the Spirit helping their infirmities.

Lastly conceive of God not Luther was wont to say, Nolo ^^um absolutum Heb.
12. ult
absolutely, but in Christ: God in himself is a consuming fire, but in Christ
he is a merciful Father. Heb. 7.25. Themistocl. understanding that ^. Admettus
was angry with him took his young son in his arms, and treated with the father
holding that his darling in his bosom, and thereby he appeased the Kings wrath.
There is no coming to God but by him. I might enlarge upon this head, but I
forbear; only remember this, you will never pray to any purpose unless you
carry along with you in your minds, a right notion, and conception of that God
to whom you pray.

5. Entertain and maintain very honorable thoughts of the Duty of Prayer it
self: this will both move you to the Duty, and marvellously quicken you in it.
What the Ps. 87.3.
Psalmist says of the City of God, that may I say of the Duty of Prayer, Great
and glorious things are spoken of it. If any should ask me as that King did the
Prophets servant, 1 Kin. 8.4.
What great things has thy Master done? So what great things has Prayer done?
it would require more lines, then I intend in all, to return a full answer. I
might easily write a large history of the great exploits that Prayer has done
in the world. You read Heb. 11. of many wonderful effects of faith, the
effects and fruits of Prayer are as many, and as great. It has Dan. 9.2, 3, 4.
Isa. 37.15, 16, etc. Ion. 2.1, 2, etc. Josh. 10.12, 14. Act. 12.5. Dan. 2.18. 2 Samuel 15.31. Est. 4.16.
Obtained promises, subdued Kingdoms, turned to flight the armies of aliens; it
has raised the dead, stopped the Suns course, yea made it to go back. It has
opened prison doors, and unlockt such secrets as have puzzled the Devil
himself; it has disappointed the plots of adversaries, and rumbled those into
the pit themselves which they have maliciously dug for others. What shall I
say more? it has Jam. 5.17.18. (...) i. c. (...) affectionibus obnoxious.
opened Heaven, and shut it again. These and such like memorable things have
been brought to pass, by the Prayers of such sinful and infirm creatures as
we our selves are.

Let me add this, it has said hold on God himself; and put him (as one says)
to a merciful retreat, when he has been marching in his anger against persons
or people. Jacob by Prayer Hos. 12.3.
had power with God, and by wrestling with him Caelum tundimus (...)
miserecordiam extorquemus. Tertull.
wrested mercy from him. God speaks as if his hands were held and tied up by
Prayer; Let me go, says he to Jacob; and to Moses, Au^ on Exodus 32.10. thus
glosseth Domine quis tenet te? etc.
Let me alone. Manton on James 5.86.
One observes that God in Exodus 32.10. does indent as it were with Moses and
offer him composition, if he would hold his peace; Let me alone (says he) and
I will make of thee a great people; Wonderful is that passage ( Some read it
interrogatively thus, Concerning the works of my hands command ye me?
if we read it right) in Isa. 45.11. there God says, Concerning the works of
my hands command ye me. These and the like expressions are to be admired (says
the same Author) not strained, lest our thoughts degenerate into rude
blasphemy: certainly they are mighty condescensions, wherein the Lord would
signify to us the great power and efficacy of Prayer.

I might bring many Scriptures and arguments to evince the prevalency of
Prayer: but this is a common argument, and therefore I shall decline it. Only
consult Mat. 21.22. where Christ says that all things, whatsoever we ask in
Prayer, believing, we shall receive. This one promise is enough of it self to
quicken the deadest soul that is, in Prayer, and Christ's manner of speaking
here, is observable; it had been (one would have thought) enough to have said,
All things ye ask in Prayer ye shall receive; but here he adds, all things
whatsoever. It seems to be a tautology; we don't speak in our ordinary
discourse, I will give you all things whatsoever you ask. But this is not
without its signification; All things It Is Mr Buroughs his gloss in one of
his Books.
(says one) is a promise of generals, and whatsoever rela^es to particulars.
It Is as if he had said, Not only all things in general, but every particular
thing that you ask you shall receive; for though it be true, that generals
include particulars, yet such is the unbelief of our hearts, that though we
assent to promises in the general, yet when it comes to particulars, we hold
off, and fear they will not be made good to us. Hereto I might add that speech
of Christ to the woman of Canaan; It was said of Luther, Is^e vir apud Deum,
potuit quod voluit. (...) P^^^se that full Scripture ^ John 5. 1 ^ 15.
Be it unto thee as thou will, he seems to give her a blank, and bids her
write down what she pleases.

But enough of this: My advice is, That you digest this notion well, and carry
it along with you all the while you are at prayer, and it cannot but quicken
you. As he must needs pray heartlesly, who thinks it is a bootless exercise, who
is ready to say in his heart, What profit is it that I pray unto God? so he
must necessarily (...). Jam. 5.17.
pray in Prayer as it is said Elias did, who thinks that Prayer, like Jonathans
bow, does (...) Menander.
never return empty; but oftentimes as the Echo doubleth the voice, so does
Gods answer our prayers. Rest assured of this, That every petition a believer
puts up on Earth is read and filled in Heaven: So was Solomon's, 1 K^n 8.59. and
so is every believers.
It Is nigh God, and in his view night and day; he gives the thing desired, Nemo
parvi pendat onationem suam, dico enim v^bis, quod ipse ad qu^m oramus, non
parvi pendit came. Postqu^m egressa est ab ore n^stro, ipse scribit eam in libro
suo, and unum in ^uobus indubitanter expectemus, aut dabi^ quod petimus, aut
quod novit utilius. Greg. in Hom. super Evang.
or something that is better.

6. Be much in the use of ejaculatory Prayer. Reader, if thou should not
understand the word, I will suppose thee acquainted with the thing: it is a
short, yet serious lifting up thy soul in desires unto God, upon any occasion
whatsoever. These ejaculatory Prayers are either vocal, or mental only. If you
read the Scripture, Genesis 43.14. and 49.18. Nch 2.4.5. Judge. 16.28. 2 Samuel
15.31. L^ke 23.42. J^h 12.26.27. Luke 20.21. and 23.34, 36. (...) if this be
not intend^d by D^vid, when he says, Psalm. 119.164 Seven times a day do I
praise th^e
you shall find this way of praying very familiar with the best of men, yea
with Christ himself.

I could offer many things to commend it you; as thus.

1. It Is very acceptable to God: he has testified his accepting by his
answering such ejaculations as these. David's vocal ejacul^tion, Turn (O Lord) I
pray thee, the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness. And Nehemiah's mental
ejaculation, Neh. 2.4, 5. had present audience.

2. It Is very easily performed; all times and places are alike to it: whether
you are alone, or in company, at home, or abroad, you may in this way make
known your requells unto God.

3. It Is an excellent means to keep the heart always in a heavenly frame: It
helps you also to improve every Ordinance and Providence of God.

But lastly, which makes to our purpose, it is of special use to dispose us for
solemn and Vid. Mr. Gurnal^ 3 Part of (...) C^mpleat Christian Armor, p. 387.

It was a speech of a dying Saint, that he was going to change his place, but
not his company. A Christian that is frequent in these ejaculations, when he
goes to Pray more solemnly, he goes from God to God. from a more transient view
of him to a more fixed etc.


continued Prayer. They that often in the day are thus lifting up their hearts
to God, have them in tune when they betake themselves to that more solemn
service. Praying thoughts and desires are with them in a readiness: these short
breathings do prepare them for a longer race. They that are good (says one) at
these running pulls and trips, must needs wrestle well with God. A candle that
is just now put out, is soon lighted again: whilst the heart still glows, and
is warm with these short ejaculations, it is readily kindled and quickened in
solemn secret Prayer.

My advice is, That you would accustom your self to these holy Apostrophe's,
to these heavenly ejaculations. And yet I would caution you against doing this
in a customary way. Formality (if you have not a care) will fly-blow and
corrupt this and every other good duty,

7. Another Help is this: Keep your heart close to the Duty, and suffer it not
to stray or wander. A straying beart must needs be a straightned and a dead
heart in Prayer. How can a Christian have a lively and enlarged heart in a
Duty, when he has no heart at all there? but that is Qu^si nobis (...) se^mo
cum homine ^ulgari inter orandum, omisso Deo, huc vel illuc transvolamus. Calv.
Instit. l 4.
straggling in this and that corner of the earth: whilst he is speaking to God,
his heart is conversing with the world, insomuch that he forgets many times in
Prayer what he spoke last. Magna^ injuriam Deo sacio, cum precont mtas preces
exaudiat quas ego qui fundo non exaudio. Deprecor (...) ut mi (...) ^go vero
(...) mihi nec illi in^^^do.
Oh what an indignity is offered unto God, and how is he mocked by such praying
as this! We would have him attend to our prayers, when we do not attend to them
our selves.

Vain thoughts in Prayer are occasioned partly by the desperate wickedness and
deceitfulness of our own hearts; thence they do proceed as Christ shows, and
that as freely as water from a sountain; and partly by the subtilty and malice
of Satan; he being a Spirit has ready access to thy spirit, and thou never
go aside to pray, but he follows thee at the heels; and seeing he cannot
divert thee from, his desire is to distract thee in the duty. Sometimes he
injects such thoughts as are directly sinful, or if he finds that these
affright thee (as many times a Christian starts at these as at some ghostly
apparition) then he casts in such as are at other times allowable and lawful;
or if he sees that these are unwelcome, then he injects such thoughts as are in
themselves good and useful, only they are impertinent: these he steals our of
the heart again for the most part before the Prayer is ended: though at other
times he would oppose them, yet now he puts them forward, as those that are
most likely to find entertainment in thy soul. I suppose thy experience will
let thee set thy seal to this as true.

Now if thou would have thy heart enlivened and enlarged in Prayer, remember
to repel every vain or impertinent thought that comes in to thy disturbance:
resist it; rise upon it; call in help from Heaven against it: This is one sense
we are to put upon the Apostles Ephesians. 6.18.
watching unto Prayer. If at other times, then much more in Prayer, we must
keep our hearts with all keeping, or else, do what we can, they will give us
the slip. It Is Mr. Gurnals comparison in Lib. praedict.
As you do with your Children, so you had need to do with your Childish minds;
happily they go along with you to Church, but when you are set (if not awed by
your eye) they steal sorth, and are gone; and it may be are playing all Sermon
time, or a good part of it, and you miss them not; To prevent this, you set
them before you, and have an eye to them. You can apply it.

Remember this advice whenever you go to Prayer; renew your resolution to watch
against vain thoughts; think how many Prayers they have S^ v^ge^^^ men's nostra
null^m (...) pre^^^^^s util^tatem ^^rcipi^^^s, imo potius ma^^^m dam (...).
Vel. Ma^l.
marred already; resolve, that through grace, they shall not spoil this also.

8. Let the guilt of no one sin ly upon thy Conscience; that will so clog,
disquiet, and check thy spirit in Prayer, that thou will never be able to
proceed with any life or enlargement. Guilt makes a Christian shy of coming
into the presence of God, as a faulty Child plays least in sight, and steals
away to bed before the time, being loath to come where his Father is. So it is
with a Christian, that is conscious to himself of any fault or sin that he has
knowingly committed against God; and as he is listless to come to Prayer, so he
is lifeless in the duty; his sin flies in his face, so that he cannot lift it
up with any Tunc eor siduciam in oratione occipit q^um sibi vitae nulla pran it
as contradiert. Greg. in mor.
confidence: his heart upbraids him, and falls a quarrelling with him, and
says, What have thou to do to take Gods Name into thy mouth, etc? If therefore
thou would pray as thou desire, preserve thy Conscience pure and
peaceable: Take heed of known sins; Psalm. 18.^1.
of departing wilfully or wickedly (as David's phrase is) from God. There is
Peccata quotidianae incu simis, and vastantia conscientiam.
a sinning weakly, or through weakness; this does not ordinarily interrupt a
Christians peace; and there is a sinning wickedly, or through wickedness; (so
Jude 15.
Jude speaks of committing ungodly deeds ungodlily) this lays waste the
Conscience; this destroys a Christians peace, and deadens his heart in duty; Oh
beware of sinning after this manner! if thou must abstain from every appearance
of evil, then much more from every apparent evil! Oh fly from it when it comes
near thee in a temptation, as thou would do from a venomous Serpent; shake
it off as thou would do an ugly Toad that is cravvling up upon thee: Observe
Job 23.22. with 26 27.
Eliphaz his advice to Job, which is, to put iniquity far from him; not to come
near it; and then says he, thou shall lift up thy face to God, and make thy
prayer unto him: Thou shall make many and mighty Prayers; (as the (...)
multiplicavit, proprie verba fortia in oratione (...) multae cogia fudit
word there signifies) thou shall not only use words in Prayer, but words
clothed with power; thou shall be able to pray, and to pour strong Prayers in
abundance unto God.

Quest. But if sin has already wounded my Conscience, and broken my Peace; am
I now to refrain Prayer till it be healed again?

Ans. No: for this is not to mend the matter, but to make it worse. You cannot
heal the wound of one sin by another: you must to Christ by Faith, and to God
by Prayer; and though there be a present deadness, yet ply the Throne of Grace,
till the Lord speak peace to thy soul: and remember to do this presently; the
sooner, the better; let not the Sun go down upon the breach betwixt God and
thee: New breaches, are made up better then long quarrels; and green wounds are
healed easier than old sores.

9. It will not a little help in this case, if you are provided beforehand both
with matter, and a method in Prayer. I observe that Christians are straightened
in this duty, not only from the naughtiness of their hearts, but from the
emptiness of their heads; as sometimes (like Zebedees Children) they ask they
know not what; so at other times they know not what to ask: They are often
word-bound, (if I may so speak) and at a loss; they cannot tell how to go
forwards, and therefore they go backwards, and vent themselves in vain
repetitions. Now this great evil will be in part prevented, if they be stored
beforehand with matter for Prayer, and if they do observe a method in the duty.

Possibly upon the first reading of this direction, you may reject it, as that
which shuts out the immediate suggestions of the Spirit, and tends to
formality; but weigh it well, and you will be of another mind: Take it upon the
word of one that has proved it; it is of admirable use to quicken and enlarge
the heart in Prayer; because from hence there is a continual supply of fresh
matter, for want of which (your experience tells you, that) you are exceedingly
dulled and straightned. It Is true, sometimes (and oh that it were so always!) we
have such abundant assistance, such ravishing incomes from the Spirit of God,
that we stand in no need of any such help as this here offered; our spirits are
so raised, our affections are so up, we are carried out so beyond our selves,
that we cannot be bounded by any premeditated matter or method; but our hearts
are not always like the Chariots of Aminadab, but too often like the Chariots
of Pharaoh; we drive on, but heavily, for the most part, in this duty; and at
such times this direction may have its use.

In order to storing our selves with matter and method for Prayer, it would not
be amiss, if you had heads, and common places in your mind, (or rather in
writing) to which you might refer such Scriptures and consideratious, as do
occurr in meditation by your selves, in conference with others, in reading or
hearing the Word of God. Hitherto also you might refer the sins you have
committed, the mercies you have received, the wants you would have supplied,
the lusts you would have subdued, etc. It should be some part of every days
work to collect fit matter for Prayer: This is another way of watching
thereunto; what Ministers do to fit themselves for Preaching, that all
Christians should do to fit themselves for Praying. They put all things they
meet with (which may be of use) under their proper heads, in books which they
have for that purpose, that they may readily have recourse thereto, whenever
they have occasion. And so your collections must not be set down confusedly,
but methodically, and in order; else you will be to seek when you should make
use thereof.

It would do well also if Christians would observe a method in their Prayers
throughout; this is of singular use to those who pray with others; because
confused repetitions, and disorderly digressions, cannot but dislike and deaden
those that join with them; and it is not altogether useless in secret Prayer;
for now a man can never be at a stand, but still there will be an orderly
succession of matter which serves greatly to quicken and excite the heart and
affections, as I have already hinted. Dr. Gouge his guide to go to God.
Lambertus Danaeus de oratione d^minica etc. Consult Dr. Wilkins his discourse
concerning the Gift of Prayer there you will meet with an exact method to be
observed in Prayer. Prayer by him is divided into two parts: 1. Less principal,
viz. A Preface, apt transitions, and the conclusion. 2. More principal: 1.
Confession, 2. Petition, 3. Thanksgiving. There you will find also scheams of
these three more principal parts of Prayer.
The Lords Prayer, which is the standard, or standing pattern of Prayer, is
very excellent (as many have observed) for method as well as matter; and hereby
doubtless Christ would intimate to us, that the one is useful as well as the
other.

Obj. You Will say, This advice cannot be put in practice without great pains and
care, and to me there seems no such need of it; for doubtless God is not taken
with method or words in Prayer, his eye is upon the heart, and he observes its
motion more then the motion of the tongue.

Answ. This is most true; and therefore it is not propounded as that which will
affect or take with God, but as a means to quicken and enlarge our selves. And
yet I must tell you too, that though the words we speak and the method we use
do not affect God; yet to bespeak him in a consused, careless, empty manner,
cannot but offend him. I am sure it is very unbecoming the solemnity of the
Duty, and contrary to that reverence we owe unto the Divine Majesty. He that
requires us to take heed how we hear when he speaks to us, does look that we
should take as Nescit poenitendae loqui qui proferendae prius suo tradidit
examini. Cassiodor. l. 10. ^p. 4.
great heed what we say when we speak unto him. Weigh Solomon's caution Eccl.
5.2. Let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before the Lord. It Is you
know the tongues office to utter, and the heart's is to conceive, why is it
then said, Let not thy heart be hasty to utter? Because the heart should not
suffer the tongue to utter what it had not first conceived and concocted. The
reason of this caution is taken from the consideration of that infinite
distance betwixt God and us: He is an High and holy God that inhabiteth
Eternity, and thou (as E^palude sud proced^ns, and repens vilis ranuncula.
Bernard expresses it) a vile Toad creeping and crawling out of its ditch; He
is in heaven, and thou upon the earth, therefore thy words should be few. Why
should our words be few? what! is God against long Praying? No, surely, he is
not tired with the length, nor taken with the shortness of our Prayers; but the
reason of the clause is this, Because they who speak but little, do ponder what
they say. Our tongues when we speak to men (much less when we speak to God)
should not run before our wit. We should choose out words to reason with God
(as Job 9.14.
Job speaks.) As we must beware of curiosity, so also of careleslness in those
words which we utter before God in Prayer. God ponders our words, and therefore
we have reason to do it our selves.

10. The tenth Direction shall consist of three or four particulars, which are
prudential only, and may seem (till proved) little profitable.

1. Choose and use that gesture of body which may serve best to quicken and
excite thy Spirit in this service. And here I must premise, that there is no
bodily gesture in secret Prayer commanded by God, he has left that to the
prudence and piety of his people: therefore if you read the Scripture, you
shall find the Saints of God to have used all the postures of the body in this
duty: indeed, Kneeling has been most in practice, that is a posture of great
reverence, and it is put Psalm. 95.6. Ephesians 3.14. A si^ no rem denotat, non quod
oration semper requi^at genuflexioaem, sed q^oa^am hoc reverentiae signum
communiter adhibeatur praesertim ubi non perfunctoria est sed seria oration.
Call. in lo^u^.
sometimes for the duty of Prayer it self: not that it is essential to it, for
you shall see the people of God in other postures at Prayer; sometimes you read
of their Mat. 26.39. Josh. 7.6. 2 Samuel 12.16.
prostrating themselves, or lying with their faces upon the ground; sometimes
again you read of their 2 Samuel 7.18.
sitting; sometimes of their 1 Kin. 8.22. 2 Chronicles. 20.9.
standing, and sometimes of their Genesis 24.63. Heb. (...) which signifies, as to
medltate, so to pray. Vid. Chald. and Genev. Translat. and Tremell.
walking. This last gesture, though least in use, yet some have found it
useful. Kneeling does often dispose to sleep and drowsiness, which standing or
walking does prevent: and surely that gesture is most eligible, which is found
most effectual to keep off indisposition, or to dispose and fit a person for
duty.

Nay, my opinion is, that variety of gestures, may be both lawful and useful
at sometimes in this exercise. Surely Christians may take that liberty when
alone, which would be unseemly in the presence of others: They may now kneel,
and anon stand, (...) 6 and (...) and 41.11.14.
and then walk; and so turn from one gesture to another, as they find it will
be more helpful to them for the end already mentioned. Yea, I doubt not, but
in case of great straitness upon their spirits, they may make a stand or pause,
till they have by meditation recovered some new matter to continue the Duty:
They may turn from Prayer to Reading, and from Reading again to Prayer; from
Prayer to Meditation, and from Meditation again to Prayer, as they see good.
Jerome does somewhere relate, how that finding himself sluggish and dead in
Prayer, he left speaking to God, and fell a speaking to his own heart: Think, O
my soul, (says he) did Daniel thus pray when he was in the Lions den? or Jonah
when he was in the Whales belly? Did the penitent Thief thus pray when he was
upon the Cross? etc. And then he tells us that he went to Prayer afresh, when
he had first roused up himself by these and such like considerations.

2. Choose such a place to pray in as is most convenient for this Duty. Find
out such a place (if thou can) where thou may not be disturbed by any
noise in thine ears, nor be diverted by any object before thine eyes. When thou
prayest (says Christ) enter into thy Closet. This counsel of Christ does
intimate, That Christians when they pray should have respect to the place in
which they pray; the more close the more convenient. He advises further, to
shut the door: lest the wind of Vainglory should come in thereat. Our secret
seeking of God should not be open or visible to any else but God. It Is true,
when Daniel prayed, he see his window open, but it was to show his Faith (as
one observes) not his pride.

Some may say, This Rule does not reach us; we have no variety of Rooms to
retire into; poor people and servants, and such like, will be ready to say, as
it is in the Proverb, We have Hobsons choice.

But to such I would reply, Is there no garden, nor grove, nor field, near you,
into which you may withdraw? Why cannot you with Isaac, go forth at eventide,
or in the morning to meditate and to pray? V. Lu^. 5.16 and 6.12. and 22.41.
Matt. 14.23.
Read what Christ did, Mark. 1.35. and surely it is recorded for our imitation,
it is said, That in the morning a great while before day he arose and departed
into a solitary place to pray.

3 It may conduce to the quickening of thee to use thy voice in secret Prayer.
Not that God is taken with words, a few sincere sighs from the heart do more
affect him then the most Rhetorical expressions of the tongue. But though
words do not move God in Prayer, yet experience teaches, they sometime move
him that prays. The Church says in the Lamentations, that her eye did affect
her heart: the same can many a Christian say of his Verbis ^^us est in^^r
orandum ad excitaudos nos alioquin Deus verbis non indiget. Aretius.

Vox interdum non absque fructu 'adhibetur quoniam in precibus nonnunquam
langue cimus, and animus ipse desatigatur; unde vor interposita nos excitat,
and quodammodo resicit. Pet. Mart. loci communes. Clas. 3. cap. 13.


tongue; that it serves to affect and quicken his heart in this duty.

Here I had need to give this caution; That as Christians should not pray to be
seen of men, so they should not speak in Prayer to be heard of men: If such are
not Hypocrites, yet they will hardly escape the censure of Hypocrifie.

These ten are the principal helps and directions (according to the knowledge
and experience that I have) for the lively performance of this great duty of
secret Prayer: I might offer more, but that I have already exceeded the
ordinary limits of a Letter. Only remember this, to be thoroughly senfible of
those things for which thou make thy prayer unto God. This alone may quicken
thee. How affectionately do they ask an alms, who see they must starve without
it? Deadness in Prayer arises from want of a deep sense of thy wants.

Remember also to set their examples before your eyes, who have performed this
duty with life, enlargement, and importunity. Think you saw Jacob G^n 32.24.
Hos. 12.3.
wrestling with God, and putting forth all his strength in Prayer. Think you
saw Elias praying earnestly, and 1 King 18.42.
putting his face between his knees. Imagine you saw Christ grovelling upon the
ground in the garden, H^b. 5.1.
offering up supplications, with strong cries and tears; repeating that request
again and again, Mat. 26.34.
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: Call to mind the poor
Widows importunity or impudency, (as the word signifies) who would have no
nay. Magis ducimue exempl^s quam praeceptis.
Examples sway with us more sometimes, then any rules or precepts.

If none of all this will help thee, then fall down before God, bewailing thy
deadness, confessing thy sluggishness: say (as they in Isiah) Isa. 64.7
I have not called upon God, nor stirred up my self to take hold of him. O how
like a dead Dog am I before the Lord! Will the living God accept of such dead
duties as mine are? On how justly may God be angry with, and shut out my
Prayers! ^^ui fri^ide roga^ docet ne gare.
by my coldness in asking, I even prompt God to deny me.

Yea, not only bemoan, but chide thy self: say, Why art thou so dead O my
Soul, and why art thou so sottish within me? Rowse up thy self Judge. 5.^^.
as 'Deborah did: Say, Awake, awake, O my soul, awake, awake: Bespeak thy self,
as the Shipmaster did the Prophet Jonah; Jonah. 1.6.
What meanest thou? O sluggard, arise, call upon thy God.

Lastly, Lift up strong cries (mingled with tears, if thou can) unto God,
that he would lend his helping hand, as David did, Psalm. 80.18. Quicken me, O
Lord, to call upon thy Name. Send thy quickening Spirit unto my heart. How Ten
times
often does David make this request in the 119 Psalm? ever now and then this
request comes in; Quicken me, O Lord: Quicken me according to thy Word: Quicken
me according to thy righteousness: Quicken me for thy names sa^e, etc. It Is not
a vain repetition, but a plain manifestation, both of his great need, and of
his earnest desire of this blessing.

Thus you see how large a Letter I have written to you with mine own hand: If
by these hints you are any way helped to pray, you are the more obliged to
remember him in your Prayers,

who is Yours in any Christian Office R. M.

Books Princed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Growns at the
lower end of Cheapside, over against the great Conduit.
THe Christian man's Calling; or, a Treatise of making Religion ones Business,
wherein the Nature and Necessity of it is discovered; as also the Christian
directed how he may perform it, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his
Particular Vocation, his Family Directions, and h^^ own Recreation; to be read
in Families for their Instruction and Edification. The first Part. Likewise the
second Part of the Christian man's Calling; directing Christians how to make
Religion their Business in the Relations of Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children,
Masters, Servants, in Prosperity, in Adversity. The Door of Salvation opened by
the Key of Regeneration; or a Treatise containing the Nature, Necessity, Marks,
and Means of Regeneration, as also the Duty of the Regenerate. The Beauty of
Magistracy, in an Exposition of the 82 Psalm; where is see forth the Necessity,
Vtility, Dignity, Duty and Mirality of Magistrates. The Fading of the Flesh,
and the Flontishing of Faith; or, one Cast for Eternity, with the only way to
throw it well. Heaven and Hell Epitomized, or the true Christian Characterized.
There is coming to the Press, the Third and last Part of the Christian-mans
Calling, wherein the Christian is directed how to make Relig on his Business,
in his dealings with all men, in the Choice of his Companions, in his carriage
in Good Company, in Bad Company, in Solitariness or when he is alone, on a
Weekday, from morning to night, in visiting the Sick, on a dying Bed, as also
the Means how a Christian may do this, and some Motives to it.
All written by George Swinnock M. A. late of Great Kimbol in Buckingham-shire.


