A MEMENTO TO Young and Old: OR, The Young Man's REMEMBRANCER, AND The Old
Man's MONITOR.

By that Eminent and Judicious Divine, Mr. John Maynard, late of Mayfield in
Sussex. Published by William Gearing, Minister of the Gospel.

Quis integram vocet aetatem* cui multum deest, and quantulum sit, quod restat,
incertum est?

Petrarc. de remed. utr. fort. dial. 1. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst,
living at the Sign of the Bible upon London Bridge. 1669.

Unto the Right Worshipful,

SIR Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in the County of Chester, Baronet: and to the
virtuous Ladies; The Lady Elizabeth Wilbraham the Elder, and the Lady Elizabeth
Wilbraham the Younger.

To the Lady Meredith of Leeds in Kent' and to Mrs. Elizabeth Baker, of
Mayfield in the County of Sussex.

William Gearing humbly Dedicateth these ensuing Treatises, Entitled, A
Memento to Young and Old, etc. And Pious Fathers the Glory of Children, etc.

To the Reader.
THE outward ornaments of Youth are Beauty, Tallness, and Strength of the Body,
but Grace and Wisdom are the ornaments of the Soul and Mind: But Beauty without
Grace, is but like a fair sign that hangs at the door of a foul house; and
Wit without Grace, is but like meat that tastes sweet in the mouth, and
breeds ill blood in the Veins: and bodily strength, and comeliness of Stature
without Grace, it is but like so much Moss upon the body of a Tree, when there
is no fruit upon the boughs. Absalom had a fair body, and a defiled Conscience,
St. Augustine receiving a witty Epistle from Licentius, a young Noble Man,
August. Epist. ad Licent.
and perceiving he had abused it too loosely, returns this answer to him. If
thou had found a Golden Cup, would thou not have given it to some Public
use? God has given thee a Golden Wit, a Soul of Gold, and yet thou usest it
an Instrument of Sensuality; take heed of making it a vessel of abomination,
and of presenting thy Soul as a Sacrifice to Satan, Diabolus cupit a te ornari,
the Devil desires to make thee an ornament to him, and thy wit and parts, the
credit of his Court and Cause: Young Men many times have sharp Wits, but as
the fire, in green wood is smothered by the vapors, that it cannot shine
brightly; so holy Wisdom in youth is often smothered by Temptations and
Concupisences.

Naturalists say, That the Butterfly spends the most part of her Life in
painting of her Wings, so do many young men in guilding of their Brains. Youth
is, (as the Hebrew word signifies) the choice age of a Man's Life: (...)
and a young Man is called, a choice or chosen one. 1. Because a Young man was
rather chosen than an Old, chosen to most employments of action, and Youth is
the time which a man would chose to live in. 2. Because youth is a time wherein
a Man is to choose what course to take, and it is the choicest time for the
service of God. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, or of thy
choice, says Solomon. That is, in such days, as either thou would choose,
or else, such days wherein thou art best able to make thy choice; then are we
called upon to remember God. Take it in that double variation. 1. In such
days, as a man would choose, whilst things yet go well with him, before the
evil days come, etc. Flourishing Youth and true Devotion, are seldom
companions: Youth, (unless sanctified) is full of vanity, serious in trifles,
and trifling in serious things. Or, 2. In such days as we are yet able to make
our choice, Death bed Devotion proves but little worth; then do we rather
dream of God, than indeed do remember him.

Good reason it is that the Young Man should remember his Creatous. 1. Because
uncertain of the future of his own life, uncertain whether he shall ever live
to old age; a Soul should not be hazarded upon such uncertainties. 2. Because
the young man commonly forgets God, is most tempted by Satan, most violently
hurried away with Passions. Youth is full of folly, falsehood, frowardness, of
high conceits of their own worth and sufficiency; full of inordinate and
excessive love of liberty; full of wantonness, it is carried with strong
affections upon weak grounds; it is stubborn, impatient of counsels, and just
reproofs, Jerem. 31. 18, 19. It is given to Prodigallity, Luke 15. 12, 13. It
is impudent and shameless, addicted to sensuality. It is the Emblem of a Young
Man, to have a wing on one Arm, as if he had a desire to fly up to Heaven: but
a clog on the other arm, to show how the vanities and pleasures of the World do
clog his desires of Heaven. 3. Or it may be Young Menare called upon to
remember God, because riper age is furnished with most abilities; a strong
body, a pliable mind, a riper judgment, affections free: Religion is not of so
easy a performance, but it will ask a man his best. Or 4. it may be, what is
gotten in Youth, sticks fastest by us, as a Vessel retains a long time, that
odor where^with at first it was seasoned. God's service should never be given
over, and therefore learned betimes. Nebuchadnezzar would have young Men stand
before him, the King of Heaven much more. Thy Creator will not highly value
thee, unless thou have been bred up in his presence even from thy youth.

It is a most commendable thing for Young Men to be courageous, and resolute in
resisting Sin. Some Heathens and Infidels have been not able in this kind. S^.
Augustine brings in Polemon thus speaking concerning himself.

I was an Infidel, a young Man, deprived of the Knowledge of the True God
resigned over to all sorts of Intemperance, St. Augustine says of this, Non
human^ operi tribuerim, sed divino. Epist. 130.
Wine, Love, Play, Rashness, were the Chariot, which drew my Youth to downfall.
I was no sooner entered into the School of an Heathen Philosopher, But beh^ld I
was wholly changed. He upon the Words of a man, lays down his flowery Crowns
which he bare on his head, his Riots and Drunkenness.

How unseemly then is it, for Young Men that are called Christians to go on in
Riot, and Wantonness, after so many enlightnings, so many forcible
instructions, and so many powerful convictions and inspirations? St. Ambrose
likewise brings in one Spurin^ thus speaking. I was a Gentile, (says she) bred
in the corruption of an age, where virtue was declining, and vice on the top of
the Wheel: I was endowed with an excellent Beauty, which by right of natural
force gave me the key of Hearts; and I seeing it was too much affected, courted
by wanton eyes, and served for a stumbling block to chastity; I purposely made
scars in my face, extinguishing with my Blood the flames of those that sought
me; for I loved better to seal my innocence, as, with the seal of voluntary
deformity, than to possess a Beauty that served only as a bait for another
Lust. How may this give a check to the vanity of those women among us, who in
their youth paint themselves with an ill intention, seeking to gain that by
Imposture, which they cannot gain by truth? and not satisfying themselves by
adulterating their Beauty, spare not to discover in their Breasts and Faces the
Impudence of their Foreheads. Oh! what will such with all their curiosity,
answer to this Paynim, when her Blood and Scars, her Beauty disfigured, which
served as a Sacrifice to her Chastity, shall accuse them before the Tribunal of
Christ!

Cassian commends a Christian young Man, who having renounced worldly
vanities, and betaken himself to an austere kind of Life, having received a
packet of Letters from his Father, and diverse of his dear Friends, Cassian
Instit. Lib. 5. ca. 32.
he durst not look upon them but threw them into the fire with these words: Be
gone ye thoughts of my Country, and burn for company, for fear lest ye tempt
me to look again toward the things which I have forsaken: He feared (as the
story says,) that by the reading of their lines, and the sight of their Names,
he should have been persuaded, to warp toward their Company, and the vanities
of the world again.

Oh how ought all young men, that have had good education, to take heed how
they abuse it, and the many instrumental means which God has granted them for
the exercise of virtue; otherwise they shall pay the loss thereof in the length
of a corrupt and miserable Life, and their bones in old age, shall be filled
with the follies of youth, which shall rest with them even in their ^Tombs, and
drag their Souls into the bottomless Precipice, from whence there is no
recovery. Many young people run on in much evil in the time of youth, adding
sin to sin: but (as one says) youthful sins may prove ages terrors. Many
profane young men that drink and quaffe, play and make sport, and further one
another in sin, what do they therein, but as Abner said to Joab, 2 Samuel 14. Let
the young men arise, and play before us? Observe what play this was. Then there
arose and went over Twelve Men of Benjamin, which pertained to Ishbosheth, the
Son of Saul; and Twelve of the Servants of David, and they caught every one his
fellow by the head, and thrust his Sword into his fellows side; so they fell
down together. This was their play. So it is with young men many-times, when
they come into company, by their licentiousness, and drawing one another to
sin, what do they but take the Sword, and thrust into one another bowels? and
Labor (what in them lies) to destroy each other for ever?

Oh how careful should Parents be, in the well nutring and educating of their
Children, who are not only the living goods, but also pieces of their Parents?
In Athens it was a custom, never to pole their Children till they were taught,
and then to burn their hair, as a Sacrifice to Apollo. How should Parents take
heed of cockering their Children in sinful ways: Indulgence of Parents, is the
refuge of Vanity, the bawd of Wickedness, and the bane of Children. Look well
to it ye Parents, (says St. Hierome) That your Children carouse not in the
cups of Babylon. The Sin and evil examples of Parents, is like rust which
cleaves close to their Children, and the greater they are upon Earth, so much
the more malice and precipitation it has; such children will one day complain
at the Tribunal of God, Cyprian de ^apsis.
of the persidiousness of their Parents, saying, our Fathers and Mothers have
been our parricides, says Cyprian.

Ye fond Parents, behold Eli the Priest, from whose lips passed so many brave
Oracles, who shined in the Tabernacle of God, and in the mean time for
permitting youthful follies, and ^nbridled liberty in his Children, to become
the Object of God's just displeasure: behold him cast from the Priesthood, as
a rotten Member, and his House deprived of that honorable dignity, and all his
Posterity Condemned to die in the flower of their age: His two Sons Hophn and
Phinehas, slain in one day, his Daughter in Law dead in Child^bed, and the Ark
of God taken by the Philistines, and dishonored by Infidels: And lastly,
himself buried as it were, under the ruins of his Country, as the last Victim
of God^s Justice.

Eleazar is a fit pattern for all aged persons to follow, of whom mention is
made in the Book of Macchabees, That being assaulted with all sorts of
Batteries, Banishments, and Torments, to make him counterfeit but one sole Sin
against his own Law, he said to himself, ^ut alas! The whiteness of that
venerable Hair with which thy head is covered, after (...) has grown hoary in
the exercise of thy Religion, has it not yet taught thee, where the point of
honor lies? It is not enough for Eleazar not to counterfeit impiety, but to
profess virtue even at the price of his Blood. Now God grant, I may not serve
as a stumbling block to the youth of this City: since God will make this day, a
Theater of my constancy; I will not be-lye the Law of my Master, nor dishonor
the School in which I was bred^nd brought up.

Memorable is that story of Polycarp, that constant Martyr of Christ, and
Disciple of John the Evangelist, as he was brought to the fire to be burnt, the
Proconsul having most earnestly solicited him to recant, and renounce his Faith
with promise of liberty, I have (said he) these Fourscore and six years served
Jesus Christ, and I ever found him a good Master; therefore, I will not now
Blaspheme my King and Lord; I will never do it. Many other words of admirable
constancy and fortitude were uttered, then by this old Disciple, and faithful
Martyr of Jesus Christ, which made him regardless of his Life, and resolutely
to suffer Death for his Name.

Let none of us then offer the blind and the lame in sacrifice to God, nor
offer that to him, which we would not offer to our Prince, Mal. 1. 7. 8. This
were to make God's Service a Spittle-House or Hospital, to maintain us in our
age, when we have spent our strength in the service of Sin and Satan. This is
not to leave sin, till sin leve us. What Noble Man would be willing to give
entertainment to an old serving man, that has spent his strength in the
service of his Enemy? Why then should we think, that having given the flower of
our youth to the Devil, that God will accept of the bran of our old age?
Therefore every one like young Timothies, and Josia's should begin to serve God
betimes: and all parents should present their Children to God betimes, even as
Samuel, whom his Mother offered to the Lord very young, who ministered before
the Lord in his side-coates. Youth is not only more capable, but more curable
than old age, If sin get hold of youth, it is more easily cured in youth, than
in men that are old; as a green wound is more easily healed, than an old
festered sore, which has dead flesh in it. A man may almost as well give Physic
to a dead man, as counsel to many an old man. If sin grow to an habit and
custom, custom being another nature, makes it as ordinary to men as to eat and
drink. But if any of us have spent the flower of our youth in vice and vanity;
Let the fruit of our age only savor of virtue. Indeed an old man of youthful
behavior, is more ridiculous than a wanton toying young man: Let every man
then (especially old men) put their houses in order and prepare for Death: when
Death is between their teeth, it is too late to provide remedies for the
Terrors thereof.

A MEMENTO To Young and Old,
Sermon I.
Ecclesiastes 12. verse 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them.
CHAP. I.
THe wise man having first run through the vanities of Life by his own bitter
experience, now also has taken a review of them (as it seems) with a
penitent heart, and an amazed spirit; and drawing toward a Conclusion of this
work, as a principle Master of the assemblies, desires to leave on nail
driven to the head, and well fixed in the hard heart of the younger sort; who
are so possessed with those vanities of mind, which he had all this while
labored to purge, that they think themselves privileged in youthful
wantonness; and conceive that all restraints of their unbridled Lust, are but
the froward or envious cavills of discontented old Age, or sullen Melancholy.
Therefore it was expedient, that this (...) prejudice, whereby they hurt none
so (...) as themselves, should be removed by a contrary Exhortation; strongly
enforced (...) Penman beyond exception, a man of gr^^test sufficiency every
way among the Son of Adam, excepting that only Immanuel. But let them not
think, that the force of this exhortation is dead with the writer, or worn out
of date with age; but let them know for a certainty, that a greater than
Solomon is here, that the Spirit of Truth, who lives for ever, breaths most
Manifestly in this holy Text, who must be heard and obeyed by all that would
not be found to fight against God: Let every one then, whose ears God has
opened, hear what the Spirit speaks unto the Church in this place, and
especially to the younger sort within the Church. Remember now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth, etc.

In which words we have first, an Exhortation, and then an enforcement of it,
pressed and amplified at large in many verses following.

In the Exhortation there is 1. The Duty, what, 2. The Object, whom, 3. The
Time, when.
all laid down in words of special weight

1. The word [Remember] 1. implies much danger of, and inclination to
forgetfulness. 2. It includes Heart as well as Head, Affection as well as
Memory.

2. The second thing, The Object [Thy Creator,] a Word, that adds much force
to the Exhortation: Taken either absolutely, as implying the Creator of all
things whom all Creatures, at all times, must glorify in their kinds, or with
special relation to those, to who the Exhortation is more particularly
directed: [Thy Creator.] Remember him whom Created Thee, and has right to thy
whole Self, thy whole Life, and especially, to the best of thy Life and
Strength.

3. The Third thus, In the days of thy youth. In the days, rather than years;
for they are but a few May-daies, soon gone and vanished [of thy youth.] The
word in the Original, is derived from a word which signifies to choose, and
thence issues a word signifying, a young man: and thence again, this in the
Text signifying, Youth; both showing, that younger men are the choycest of men,
or should be so; and that youth is the principal and choicest part of our Life:
So some render these words, [In the days of thy youth,] in the days of thy
choice.

The sense therefore, ye may take in these few words. O ye young men, who are
of all others exceeding apt to forget him, of whom you ought to be most
mindful: Let me persuade you, to know, to love, to delight in, to fear, to
remember, to cleave unto, and obey, even in the best of your time and strength,
your young vigourous and flourishing days: Him, who is the great Creator of
all things: Him, who gave you in particular, that breath which is in your
nostrills: Him, who gave you this heat, this strength, these Spirits, this
lively temper of youth: Him, in whom you live, move, and have your being.

CHAP. II.
THese things being briefly and plainly opened, the observations which I shall
make, I shall refer to two heads.

Observe. 1. That young men are especially apt to forget their Creator.

2. That young men ought especially to remember their Creator.

The first of these is certainly employed; the second plainly expressed in the
words of the Text.

Of the first; the wise man seems of purpose, to have deferred this Memento
until the latter end of his discourse, as knowing how apt the younger sort are
to fail in this art of memory, concerning the best things; and hoping that of
all others, a speech of farewell, would make some notable impression.

In this point I will show. 1. Wherein this forgetfulness consists. 2. I will
prove it to be, especially incident to youth. 3. I will show the reasons or
causes of it.

I. Now for the first, that I may show wherein forgetfulness consists; both
reason and our own experience in the working of the powers of our Souls, show
us, That memory is properly seated in the brain; and therefore that
forgetfulness, is a kind of emptiness in the same place. But we must attend to
those Idiomes of the Holy Ghost, who by reason of that, near knitting of all
the faculties of the Soul in one single root of a Spiritual and Intellectual
Being, does promiscuously translate the name of the one to the other, and
oftentimes include all in one. Thou shall love the Lord thy God (says our
Savior) with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, etc. Math. 22. 37. Why?
All the powers of the Soul are not love: There is knowledge, memory,
imagination, will, fear, joy, sorrow, hatred, courage, etc. which are all
distinguished both in their Beings, and Effects from Love. But He, in whom all
the Treasures of Wisdom were hid, knew well, that when the heart by love did
truly close with God, and cleave unto him, it could not leave any of its
effections behind it, but all must be given up unto him.

The Lord complains, Isa. 1. 3. Israel does not know, my people do not
consider. Ignorance was not the only sin, whereof the Lord held them guilty:
but in this was included, as well want of love, of fear, of delight in God, as
of knowledge of him. Not to go too far about; This forgetfulness which now we
have in hand, you shall find to have the same force in the Scripture. Psalm.
137. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. ver.
6. If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
etc. The course of the words show manifestly, that it was not simply to
remember this City and Temple which he undertook, but to be deeply affected
with its calamity; for he preferred Jerusalem above his chiefest joy.

But most plainly does Moses expound this word unto us, Deuteronomy. 8. ver. 11.
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments,
and his Judgments, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day. Where to
forget, is as well not to embrace in affection, and not to observe in practice,
as not to keep in memory. Many other examples we have of like nature, in Psalm.
119. besides many other Texts of Scripture. So that in a word, Forgetfulness of
God, is a withdrawing, declining, and turning aside of the Heart and Soul from
God, upon Earthly things, manifested in a course of neglecting God's Service
and his Commandments, and running after the vanities of this life.

CHAP. III.
II. NOw that this is especially incident to the younger sort, I wish the
lamentable experience of all times, and of this especially, did not too much
ease me of the labor in proving; yet something must be said for it according
to promise. The wise man in setting forth the impudency of a graceless
Strumphet, shows, that young men are especially apt to forget God, and to be
ensnared by her, Prove. 7. 6, 7. At the window of my house I looked through my
casement, and behold among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a
young man void of understanding, passing through the street near her corner,
and he went the way to her house, etc. These are the men, who in the pride of
their youth, and heath of their Blood, value their own wits at an high rate,
and think themselves the wisest in the Country, despise the dullness of elder
years, and more settled spirits; as if wisdom were born, and should dye with
them: Yet here ye may see, how the wisest of men does censure them for fools,
simple ones, void of understanding; men especially forgetful of God, of his
Word, and Will: such a one was seen going toward the house of a strange Woman,
toward a Whore-house: and such are some Alehouses frequented so much by young
men; for I know none so fit to keep a Stews, as those who professedly without
regard of Magistracy, Ministry, Credit, etc. do keep common shops for
Drunkenness. But mark the Wisdom of our young man, 21. 22, 23. With much fair
speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him:
he goes after her straight way, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool
to the correction of the stocks: till a dart strike through his liver, as a
bird hastes to the snare, and knows not, that it is for his life. She filled
his head with her prateing and enticeing speeches, and put better things out of
his mind: She caused him to forget God, and cast his fear behind his back, so
she carried him captive in the bonds of lust, and drives him as an Ox to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the stocks, etc. So the wise man
in Eccles. 11. 9. Shows, the solly and forgetfulness of young men, where by
way of Irony, and in an holy scorn, he bideth them do that which they will do,
though never so much forbidden and threatened. Rejoice O young man in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth.] put God the Judge of
all the World out of thy thoughts, lay aside all sad remembrance of the last
Judgment, let none of these Melancholic passions any whit interrupt thy
youthful delights; walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes.] Follow thy lusts, and senses like the bruit beasts, and forget all that
will follow, even as if thy Soul should vanish away in the air at the hour of
thy Death, like the breath of a Beast, without hope of Joy, or fear of Vengence
in another World. By this irronical concession he gives us an excellent
description of the brutish and sensual forgetfulness of the younger sort,
minding present things with the full bent of their Souls, and never seriously
looking toward the things that are above. But what is the issue? but know
thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment]

Even these things which thou make nothing off, as pardonable Errors of
youth; shall be scanned in the impartial judgment of God, and he will bring
thee to Judgment for them all.

CHAP. IV.
III. IN the next place I am to show the causes of this forgetfulness in the
younger sort, and here it were but an idle piece of Philosophy to ascribe it to
the natural moisture and fluid temper of their brains, whereby the impressions
of things are presently dissolved, like letters written in the water. No; this
forgetfulness is as well in the heart as in the brain, and requires a further
search into it is causes.

1. In the first place then, one special cause is, a fleshly confidence in the
natural strength of body, and hope of long life. They look at Death as a thing
afar off, even out of sight; and therefore suffer not the apprehension of it to
make any such impression upon them, as in any degree to lessen that carnal,
sensual content, which they take in the glut of earthly Vanities. The blind
Worldling, when his barnes were full, blessed himself in his own conceited
happiness; Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years. But
these persons think they have the advantage of him; for whereas his Soul that
night was to be taken from his goods; they think they have life in store for
many years, an so with the unfaithful servant conclude, that their Master will
defer his coming, and they may safely delay their Repentance, and put him out
of their remembrance. As Gaal, and the men of Shechem, could eat and drink, and
curse Abimilech, because they thought he was not near them, though he was
nearer than they were aware: so the younger sort can satisfy their lusts, and
please themselves, and do what they will, scorning all admonitions or
threatenings of Death; because they think it not near unto them: Whereas perhaps
Death (as the punishment of Sin) lies at their door, and will be found to have
waylaid them in the midst of their vanities; and to cut them off in the midst
of their strength and sins. Strength, Health, abundance of Spirits, freedom
from aches, pains, and bodily distempers, do put Death out of their thoughts,
and they will leave crooked and way-ward old age to vex it self with pensive
remembrances of the Grave.

2. The lively vigor of youth, fills them with a kind of carnal
self-content, and makes them please themselves in themselves, and so to feel
no need they have of happiness, and of delighting themselves in the Lord; and
therefore to neglect and forget their Creator. Oh they think they are absolute
men, they are as they desire to be, and cannot wish to be better; their blood
has free passage in their veins, their Spirits in their Arteries without
obstructions, they are lively, amiable, merry, jovial, free from wants, fears,
sorrows, troubles: and (as Job describes the young galgallant) His Breasts are
full of milk, and his Bones are mositned with marrow: thy are wholly at ease
and quiet, and therefore God is not in all their thoughts.

3. This lusty youthful temper makes them every way more sensible, and capable
of earthly delights, and pleasures, and so more apt to forget their Creator
and his service. Old Barzillai knew not what to do at Court, 2 Samuel 19. 35. I
am this day Four score years old, and can I discorn between good and evil? Can
thy servant (says he to King David) Taste what I eat or what I drink? can I
hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should
thy servant be yet a burden unto my Lord the King? Old Age is not sensible,
nor capable of many delights, which younger persons take in with greediness. No
carnal pleasure but it suiteth with their dispositions, they have a temper
fitted to all fleshly delights, and so can please their wanton appetites with
variety of dishes; that is, their diverse lusts with variety of fleshly
delights, and in this case, no wonder though they forget their Creator, when
by reason of the constitution of their bodies peculiar to that age, they can so
many ways please themselves in the Creature. Men naturally forget God, until
they need him: But the young man in his prime, finding so much below in the
earth, which ministers matter of contentment to him, apprehends no present
need of him that made him, and so minds him not, unless the Lord open his
eyes, and cause him to see the emptiness and vanity of these things, and his
own miserable folly in resting his Soul upon them.

4. A Fourth cause is, want of experience in the uncertain condition of earthly
things. Young Men are in the Spring of their lives and pleasures, and know not
yet what a Winter means. They have not yet (for the most part) been beaten
off from their pleasing folly by any notable change of estate; they know not
what sorrow means, and so they securely promise themselves a continuance of
this seeming happiness, and forget God; as not perceiving any special need of
him. They hope to speed as well as they have done, and so long they care not.
Those crosses which sometime befall the younger sort, may for the present make
them exceeding passionate, but they are soon vanished, and no print of their
footsteps remains behind them; their delights are after a while, never awhit
embittered by them: and thus forgetting their crosses, they become forgetful of
their God, and that account which must be rendered to him: you see how easy it
is for youth, to spin a snare wherein to entangle it self, even out of its own
bowels,

CHAP. V.
BUt left this should not hold them fast enough, Satan has other instruments
to help twist the threads; many wicked wretches there are in the world, who help
them forward in their misery.

1. Want of care, and conscience in Parents, not obeying the charge of the
Apostle, which is to bring up their Children in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Not imitating the Father of the Faithful in the fruits
of his Faith, Genesis 18. 19. In commanding their Children, and household after
them, that they may keep the way of the Lord, to do Judgment and Justice: Not
taking advice of Solomon, who counsels them to teach their Children in the
trade wherein they should go, and gives an hopeful promise for encouragement,
That they will not depart from it when they are old, Prove. 22, 6. Not looking
with a single eye, at the glory of God, nor with a tender eye, on the poor
souls of their Children; to whom deriving misery from their own Loins, they
take no care to cure them of it.

2. The evil examples which even Parents themselves give unto their Children,
many of them in their ripest, yea in their rotten years, returning to the sins
of youth, or (at least) glorifying in them, even in the hearing of their
Children. How many young men are Drunkards, Swearers, Unclean Persons, Scoffers
at Holiness, Contemners of the Word even by Succession and Inheritance? The Son
hears his Father Swear, he hears him use filthy communication; he sees the
old Beast come home Drunken, and who can wonder, though he forgeteth his
Creator, whom he has not seen, whiles he finds such wickedness in his
Father whom he daily sees? or if they scorn such boys-play, yet many times by
that aged Sin of Covetousness, they showing themselves dead-hearted toward
God, cold, careless in his services, not feelingly and zealously mindful of his
glory, teach their Children to forget him that made them, though they differ in
those things, which they embrace. The very example of a coveous Father, may
make a Son riotous, by teaching him to fall off from God; and then his heart
will cleave to that which is most suitable to it. The Father's example sets
him out of the right way; and his own peculiar lusts, and distempered passions
carrying him in such a by-path, as best fiteth his own foot; whereas, many
times the Father is displeased, not because it is a wrong way, but because it
is not his own; not because it is contrary to the ways of God, but because it
crosses his ways: no because it is more sinful, but more chargeable than his
own course, which is most pleasing to him.

3. The neglect of Religious duties in the Fathers Family, is the ready way to
make the Son unmindful of him that made him. When Christ has no Church, but
Mammon has his Chapel in the house; when there is no serious remembrance of
God from one end of the year to the other in effectual prayers, in constant
reading of the Word, in whetting it on (as Moses speaks) by repetitions,
pious and seasonable admonitions, when the Lord has no entertainment there, it
is no marvel to find the younger sort forgetful of God.

CHAP. 6.
BUt besides these faults in Parents, many others will help to build up Satan's
Kingdom, upon the ruins of the younger sort, As,

1. Their own equals in years, by whom they shall be drawn into the same
excess of riot, which the others have followed. For as Satan himself being
fallen, could not endure to lie alone, but sought companions in wickedness and
wretchedness, so he instilleth the same disposition into those who are caught
in his nects. These therefore partly by hellish scoffs at those, who even out
of ingenuity, or good education, loath their courses at the first; partly by
pleasing insinuations, smooth language, especially by that (...) name of good
fellow-ship, wherewith the Father of lies has sought to grace one of his own
occupations, do hale others with them in the same ways of Destruction; and
being joined together in a wretched society, by lewd and lustful songs, scurril
jests, abusive speeches, loud laughter; ruffian-like outfaceing better and
wiser men than themselves, they encourage each others, they harden their
hearts, they drown the voice of Conscience, they contemn the Word of God they
fight against Heaven with profane and horrible Oaths, and (as it were) seal
al^ their leagues of pretended good-fellow-ship even with a resolved (...), a
decreed forgetfulness of God, and so of godliness, o^ Death and of Judgment to
come, wherewith St. Paul made even his Heathen Judge to shake, as he sat upon
the Bench.

2. Secondly, and especially, a company o^ grounded Drunkards, that are up and
down i^ the Country, old Sotts that are settled upon their lees, who know
almost every corner in every common or blind Alehouse, as well as the rooms in
their own houses and never think themselves so well at home, as in a Tap-house.
Oh, how do these work about to poison the youth of our age, and to make them
(like themselves) the children of hell! who by the assistance of the Devil
abuse their old crafty pates, to ensnare young heedless Souls, and to bring in
Captives to the Prince of Darkness. Does not the same doom belong unto these,
which was due to Elymas the Sorcerer, for seeking to turn away the deputy from
the truth? to whom St. Paul himself used this language, Thou Child of the
Devil, and enemy of all goodness, will thou not cease to perven^^ the straight
ways of the Lord? Do not these by the enchantment of their fawning tongues
bewitch green years, and cast them into a dead sleep of security and
forgetfulness of God? Oh that miserable experience did not prove my words too
mild! which yet some, that in their own causes can be merciles, perhaps will
accuse me of too much roughness. But who can forbear, when he sees them to be
the very Emissaries of Hell, and (as I may so speak) Ipsius ebrietatis leannes,
the very Panders or Bawds for Drunkenness, an inferior sort of Tempters or
Devils, Satan's Underofficers, and Factors for the Land of Darkness, who are
not content to go to Hell without a Troop at their heels, as if it were not
sufficient for them to be guilty of destroying their own Souls, unless they
have many more Murders of the same kind, to be put into the same Indictment. I
tell you, whosoever ye are, your society is more to be shunned, than his that
has a Plague Sore upon his body; ye are to be poynted at, and accounted by all
that know you, as the very Mothes that fret the newest and the strongest Cloth,
Juventutis pestes The very bane of youth, and the corrupters of the next age,
which shall then arise, when your bodies are rotten under ground: yea, the sins
you now set in a course, may stream down unto the end o^ the World, whilst they
that are infected b^ you, shall infect others, and so again successively; so
that by this means ye may b^ guilty of those sins which shall be committed many
hundred years hence, if the World so long continue.

3. Those Ale-house-keepers, who giv^ way to all manner of excess in their
houses whose Motto may be Lucri bonus odor, etc. In whose ears Swearing is good
Music* in whose eyes beastly vomits are a pleasing spectacle, and the Lords
day, a fit time for tippling and swilling with greediness, so that they may take
money, feed higher, go braver, and look bigger than men of more worth, and
better employment: These have their trains to draw on the younger sort, who
know not that their houses go down to the chamber of Death.

4 Those Magistrates and Officers cannot by any means be excused, under whom
these youthful sins grows^ fast, whiles they hold the Sword (that is put in to
their hands) rusting in the sheath, where is the Spirit and courage that should
be in these, that are the very Triarii in the armies of the Lord of Hosts, the
stoutest and choicest Soldiers? Are ye afraid of those who are but Lixae and
calones, Scullions and Tapsters under Satan's Banner? should such Men as ye fly
or fear, and not dare to face those, who at the most are but Milites levis
armaturae, Soldiers lightly armed, as I may so speak? What can they do against
a Justice of the Peace, a Constable, or an Head-borough, more than let fly
their Arrows, even bitter words? I know not what policy is in this connivance,
unless it be to leave the envy and burden upon us of the Ministry, whiles we
alone fight against these things with the Sword of the Spirit. But if ye refuse
utterly to join with us in bearing your part of the burden, you must not look
to share in the reward. I desire above all, that you would let the honor of
God prevail with you, your Charge, your Oaths; but if these things move not,
take heed lest the Lord repay you in your own Coin; and whiles you tender not
the Glory of God, nor the good of the younger sort in general by restraining
their licentious meetings, by informing against or punishing those that
entertain them, he may justly leave your own Children to be thus corrupted, or
at least your Childrens Children of the third or fourth Generation. The Lord
give you zeal and courage, that you may not have your portion without among the
fearful.

CHAP. VII.
Use. LEt me speak a few words to you that are of the younger sort. When soever
you see a young Man or Maid carried to their graves, that spectacle of
Mortality forbids you to be forgetful of your Creator in any Age or part of
your Life. Look upon that Coffin that holds a body young, and very lately
strong in constitution, and let it be unto thee, O young Man, an use of
instruction, not to trust to long life in the heat of thy youth, or the best of
thy strength; not to please thy self in a self-content arising out of thine own
form, youthful, lively temper, not to magnify thine happiness, in regard of a
seeming advantage which thou think thou have of old age, in being more
capable of carnal delights than it; that thou art able to take in more of the
Devils baits, which he never casts forth without an hook. Let it teach thee
not to hearken to the enticements of Sinners, old or young, nor to think that
house of all others the best adorned, that has a Sign-post.

Let it reprove thy great forgetfulness of thy Creator, in the days of thy
youth; Let it strike a deep apprehension into thine heart of the necessity of
present repentance without all delay; and let this so work upon thee, and stick
by thee, that no potts may wash it off, nor no loud Alehouse clamours may
drown the voice of thy Conscience, when it shall bring this to thy remembrance.
Oh let not Satan bewitch thee! Weart thou as certain of a long life, as thou
art uncertain, yet can thou not possible be certain of the grace of
Repentance, which is a rare gift; and (I am persuaded) seldom bestowed in
decrepit years, where it has been rejected in the more able age; especially by
such, as all their time have lived under a faithful and convincing Ministry.
Does the Apostle say, That the Gentiles were given up to a reprobate sense,
because they did withold the truth in unrighteousness, going on in those
unrighteous courses, which the Light of Truth Manifested to them by the works
of Creation, did discover and Condemn? How much more may ^hou tremble at this
dreadful Judgment, who continuest in the pride of thy youth to sin with
greediness, against that Light of the Word, which shines unto thee far more
brightly, than that twilight of Nature. The Lord make you wise unto Salvation,
and suffer you not with blind eyes, and obstinate Spirits, to run upon your own
Destruction, forgeting him that made you; putting off the remembrance of your
latter end, pass^^^ (...) in a dead sleep of present impen^^er (...) self
dream of future (...) very flashes of Hellfire (...) which the Lord preserve
you, (...) of your Consciences, through (...) and Grace, that ye may not sleep
(...) of everlasting Death.

SERMON. II.
Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator, etc.
CHAP. 1.
HAving spoken of the former point, I proceed unto the Second.

Observe. That young men ought especially, to Remember their Creator in the
days of their youth. What it is to remember, (in the language of the holy
Ghost) you may gather by that which I spoke of the contrary, in opening the
former point; where I showed you, That this remembrance is not only of the
brain, but of the heart, together with the head, implying affections as well as
memory, and such as are powerful, Manifesting themselves in answerable
Practices. So that, as to forget God, is a withdrawing, declining, and turning
the heart aside from God; so to remember God, is a cleaving of the heart to him
in love, whereby all the Powers of the Soul are given up to him, waiting upon
his Will in an holy attendance upon the directions of his Word, readily
practicing whatsoever he commands, and carefully shuning whatsoever he
forbideth. We read Number. 15. 38, 39, 40. That the Lord would have the people of
Israel to have fringes on their Garments, that they might remember his
Commandments: but not barely to keep them in their memories, but (says he).
That ye may remember, and do all my Commandments, and be holy unto your God.
An effectual remembrance that should work upon the affections, and make them
holy, that should shape them out an holy course of Life, and make them do all
that the Lord had Commanded. This does the Scripture in special manner require
of young men. Psalm. 119. 9. Where-withal shall a young man cleanse his way? by
taking heed thereto, according to thy Word.

CHAP. II.
THis Point may be made more plain by Reasons.

Reason 1. The former Point shall be a Reason of this: Young Men are especially
apt to forget their Maker; and therefore, young Men ought to be especially
careful to remember him. The greater defect there is in any, the greater care
is required in supplying that defect. The stronger inclination there is to any
sin, the greater watchfulness there ought to be in resisting and subduing that
sin. The more unapt and sluggish we are toward any duty, the more careful
should we be to quicken and encourage our selves to that duty. The weakest
parts of a City have special need of guarding. Men that have but weak memories,
and have much dealings in the World, are so much the more careful to use their
Pens, and commit such things to books and memorials; with which, if they should
trust their memories, they would deceive them. So especially in heavenly
things; the more apt young Men are to forget their Creator, the more careful
should they be to remember their Maker, because their affections are violent;
because they are apt to be blinded with a fleshly confidence in youth and
strength of body: because they are apt to doat with a carnal complacency upon
the natural vigor of their youthful temper; because they are more capable of
carnal pleasures, than the elder sort: because there are so many snares laid
for them, above others; by all which means, they are apt to lose the best and
happiest use of their memories, and to live in a sensual forgetfulness of, and
neglect of their God, and Creator: therefore, should they with a double care
and watchfulness, endeavor to stir up their hearts to a conscionable, and
affectionate remembrance of their Maker.

2. We may also gather a reason from the second word in my Text.

[Now] Remember now etc. which noreth a special excellency of this time above
others. As if he had said; Now is the chief time wherein thou may do God best
Service, So then young men ought especially, to remember their Creator,
because, Now in their young days, is the chiefest and choyceest time, wherein
they may glorify their God, and do him acceptable Service. Remember now, while
sin is but budding, whiles corruptions are but twiggs, while lust is but
conceiving; while passion and anger is but a green wound, not festered and
turned into a settled and cankered malice, and revengeful disposition. Now,
whiles thy senses are quick, thy spirits lively, thy temper healthy, thy body
strong; while thy blood is warm, and every part is fit for that employment, for
which it was ordained. Now, show they self mindful of thy Creator, careful of
his service, respectful of his Glory. Now, thou can do something for him,
Now, is the time wherein thou art able, and therefore Now especially thou must
remember him.

3. This word [Now] may seem to imply somewhat more, viz. That this which is
here required must be done, now or never. True it is, some few may be converted
in their elder years, who in their youth, were forgetful of their Maker; but ye
must observe, that here the Lord requires of every one, that he should give up
the strength, the morning, the freshest and principal part of his life unto
him, and his service. Now, this can never be done but in youth; and he that
spends his youth in sin and impenitency, can never perform this work; he can
never give up his strength, and the best of his time to God. The Lord says,
Remember ye keep holy the Sabbath day; this should be presently done without
delay; but yet, some who have been careless prophaners of the Lords day, have
afterward been conscionable observers of it. But when the Lord says, Remember
your Creator in youth, this cannot be done but in youth. He that spends his
youth in impenitency and ungodliness, can never afterward give up his youth,
and the strength thereof unto God. Under the Law, the Lord required the best of
the Flock for Sacrifice; Now, he that should sell or kill all the best, and
leave none but the old, the starveling, the blind, the lame, etc. That man
could never obey the Commandment; so when the Lord bids us to remember to
give up our youth to him; if we spend this and our strength in sin, we can
never obey this Commandment, for that time and strength is gone, and our
importent time, crazy, drowsy old age is left.

4. From this Word [Creatour] God made all things for his glory, and the more
excellent any Creature is, either in regard of its specifical nature or kind,
or in regard of its particular qualities and excellencies, the more is it tied
to glorify God that made it such. So among all earthly Creatures, Man being
made of the most excellent nature, is most straightly tied to glorify God the
Creator. And among Men, such as are in their youth and strength, being endowed
with the most excellent abilities, ought more especially to remember him.

5. Consider these Words, [Thy Creatour] God is the Creator of young Men, as
young Men. He did nor only give thee the being of a Man, but the years, the
life, the health, the strength, the vigor of a young Man. He is the Author of
thy youth, the Creator of thy strength, he is thy Creator in special; he has
now Created that strength, and ability in thee, which he has not yet Created
in Children, that which he has taken from old Men. Thou have that work of his
now wrought upon, and she^ing it self in thee, which is not in others; and
therefore, Remember thy Creator, that has Created that hot Blood, that
warmeth thy heart, that quickness of apprehension, and those lively Spirits
that are within thee.

6. Consider these Words [In the days of thy youth,] days and not years,
days and not nights. Thy youth is but a few May-daies, it will presently be
gone; and therefore in those few days, that short time, thou should give up
thy self to thy Creator. Could not ye Watch with me one hour? a just reproof
of our Savior to his sleepy Disciples. Could ye not afford me a few days? a
just reproof of all silly souls, who are not wise unto Salvation, and think
their youth too good, too much to be given up to God. It is not three hundred
years that the Lord asks at thy hands, as at Henoch's; nor Nine hundred and
upwards, as he required of other Patriaches, but a few days of youth. Dai^s,
and not Nights.] The times of youth, consist of Days; then is the Sunshine,
the Night follow, dark times of old age; aches, weakness, sickness, sleepiness.
Now because these are Days, they must be given up to God, who is Light; and
not to the Devil, who is the Prince of Darkness: not to sins, which are works
of Darkness. This is gross folly to give the Days of youth to Satan, and to
leave the dim evening of our old declining age to God; to give the good, the
best days to Satan, and the evil days (as they are called afterward) yea the
worst to God.

CHAP. III.
Use. 1. THis shows the great folly of young Men, who think (of all others in
a Congregation) that they have least reason to give any special heed, and yield
obedience unto the Word Preached. Old Men (they think) had need to look about
them, they smell of the Winding Sheet, the Grave groaneth for them, an earthy
cold benumeth their Limbs, the beginnings of death are already upon them, and
have taken deep possession of them: but as for themselves, they are full of
Life, and feel no messengers of Death: Life abounds in their Blood, in their
Spirits, it is strongly seated in their Bones, it beats in their pulses, it
looks out at their eyes, and shines in their faces: there is no sign, no
show of Death. Alas, poor souls! Death does not always give any long time of
warning, it makes many sudden surprizals, as well as tedious and lingering
seiges. It hangs up young Absalom environed with his Warlike troops; it
sheddeth young Amnon's blood in the midst of his Cups; while Jobs Sons and his
Daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest Brothers house, there
came a great wind from the Wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house,
and f^ll upon the young Men, and they dyed, Job 1. 18, 19. In one night Death
sl^yeth the Sons and Heirs of Pharaoh, and of all the Egyptians; so that there
was scarce one house, where there was not one young Man dead.

How often has the supreme Lord of Life and Death taught us by evident
examples, that no age is priv^ledged, no years are exempted; that the youngest
cannot promise himself another year, another day, or hour? ye that sit here old
and young, who knows when, or where the next blow will light? Sin has
perverted the order of Nature, and put it out of course; and therefore ye must
not look, that the same order should be kept in passing out, which was in
coming into the World; and that those who came first, should always leave
those behind them, which were born after them. The Son dies before the Father,
the Nephew before the Grandfather, the Young before the Old, the Heir before
him that is in possession. Sin has let in Death into the World, and that
comes in as an Enemy, not upon parley and conditions, b^^ as a Conqueror by a
forcible entry, and (...) sacketh this City of the World, and makes no
difference of Sex or Age, but kille^ and strikes on the right han^, and on the
left, It hearkneth to no such plea: The^^ is an elder man, There is a Woman
that (...) old when I was a Child; let me alone, I am content to yield when
mine Auntients a^^ gone before me: No, if I will that he (...) what is that to
thee? follow thou m^ Some days in the year, are not near so lo^^ as some
others. Some men's lives will b^ reach the middle of some others, their (...)
sets at noon, and the night is come upon them before they have begun their
da^^^ work. Therefore let young men learn wi^dom from the wise man; yea, from
the Spirit speaking in this Text, Remembering the Creator, in the days of
their Youth. And (...) thou, O young Man! whatsoever thou hea^^est, concerning
the ways of God; thin^ that whatsoever remembrances, are delive^ed from the
Word, to put thee in mind of (...) Creator, that they concern thee in
especial. (...) there were none but young Men in a Parist that place should
have special need of the Word of God. If there were no gray-he^^ in a
Congregation, yet there is need of sp^cial Exhortations from the Word, to mind
such of their Creator. If thou hear of present Repentance, conceive that it
is spoken to thee. If the danger of continuing in sin, and delaying conversion
be set for^h in the Ministry of the Word, know that this belongs to thee in
special manner, who art in the days of thy youth. If thou hear the charge
of our Savior, Watch therefore, left at any time your hearts be overcome with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day come upon
you unawares, Luke 21. 34. Know, that this is spoken unto thee, and that thou
in thy youth, must not at any time give way to these things; no, not when
friends meet, nor when thou art urged, and haled to it. When Solomon says, My
Son, when sinners entice thee, consent thou not Prove. 1. 10. Think that he
speaks to thee. Whom does the Compellation [My Son] better befit than the
young Man? when St. Paul says, God has not called us unto uncle anness, but
unto holiness; that every one of us should possess his vessel in sanctification
and in honor, not in the lust of Concupisence, etc. 1. These 4. 4, 5. Believe
(...), that he speaks unto thee, who art in thy youth; wherein he speaks
most plainly. 2 Timothy 2. 22. Fly also youthful Lusts.

CHAP. IV.
Use 2. THis also shows another not able Error of young Men, who think they
may freely take that liberty which other^ may not, and walk more at large, than
thos^ of elder years. Ye see the holy Ghost cross this conceit, and calls
upon young Me^ more especially, to Remember their Creatou^ Know therefore, That
when our Savior says Enter in at the strait Gate, He speake^ unto you that
are young, and requires the of you in your youth as well as any other He
directs both old and young to com^ this way to Heaven; for broad is the way,
an^ wide is the Gate that leads to Destruction and many there be which go in
thereat: becau^^ strait is the Gate, and narrow is the wa^ which leads unto
Life, and few there be the find it, Mat. 7. 13, Our Savior charge^ all to
leave the broad way, that will not (...) into Destruction; and therefore for
youn^ Men to think, that they may walk at large, an^ follow their Lusts, is to
imagine, that the^ have liberty, to run into Damnation. Ther^ is but one way,
(and that is a narrow one but one Gate, (and that is a strait one) tha^ leads
unto Life; and they that would liv^ for ever, must enter into Life by this
strai^ Gate, and narrow way, whether young or old. If ye would know what
allowance ye have in this kind, it is no more than that which Solomon gives in
Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth. Take thy pleasure; but so, that thou make sure
account for all these vanities and sicentiousness of youth, to give a most
strict account at the day of Judgment. If thou wi^t tipple, if thou will swear,
if thou w^lt ^^le away thy time, etc. know for a certain, that God will bring
thee to Judgment for all these things.

Was it not to a young M^n that our Savior spoke, when he said, Go and sell
all that thou have, give to the poor, and follow me? Mar. 19. 21, 22. Here was
a narrow way, and yet this was required of a young Man, if he would be saved.
And though h^ were young, yet could he get no release of our Savior, but he
goes away with a sad and sorrowful heart. The like in effect, says our
Savior to every young Man; sell all that thou have: do away thy Lusts, put
away thy Drunkenness, cast off Lying, Swearing, Idleness, Pride, Vanities, and
follow me. The way of Christ is the strictest (...), the narrowest path that
ever Man went. Now Christ will have young Men follow him, and keep their feet
in the narrow way which he has gone before, and tread in his steps. I hope
none will be so Blasphemous, as to say, that Christ did take this licentious
course, which young Men think they may take. Well then if thou will enter into
life, thou must follow him, and go in that narrow path wherein he walked. It is
to be observed, that Christ was young, and dyed young; therefore if ye that are
young, look for Salvation by him, ye must follow him, in those ways of his
youth. All those good works, all that hol^ness, whereby he fulfilled all
righteousness, these were the practices of his youth; if then ye will have him
for your Savior, who walked thus in his youth, ye must follow him in your
youth. Christ went about doing good, and think thou, that thou may go
about doing evil, that thou may run about hunting after idle meetings, and
ill company because thou art young, and in the flower of thy youth? No, Christ
was young, when he went about doing good, Act. 10. 38. And therefore if thou
take liberty to go about doing evil, because thou art young, thou art no
Disciple of Christ.

CHAP. V.
Use 3. LEt me exhort you that are young, That ye would effectually lay to
heart these words of the Holy Ghost. Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth.] Oh that you would now enter into a Covenant with the Lord, and bind
your selves resolvedly to seek your Creator! To you that are young the Spirit
of God here speaks: Oh take heed of despising him that speaks from heaven,
because of your youth; but hear him so much the rather, because he speaks to
young Men, and for this end let me urge you with some Motives.

1. Consider, what wrong it is to God, to give Satan the best of thy time?
Under the Law, the First Fruits were to be given to God. Levit. 23. 10. -- 14.
And they might eat no bread until the Lord had the First Fruits offered unto
him. So that he who should presume to eat any of his Corn, before the Lord had
his portion, even a sheaf of the first fruits, he was no better than a
Sacrilegious intruder upon the Lord's Possession. So the Lord requires of
thee, O young Man! the First Fruits of thy Life, even thy youth and strength;
and if thou do not offer and consecrate thy young years to the Lord, thou
dealest Sacrilegiously, thou do ^lienate the Lord's Portion; thou deliverest
Possessi^n unto Satan, of that which God has committed to thy trust, to
reserve wholly for him; sike some unfaithful Tennant, yielding up the
possession to him that has but ap^^tended Tirle, to the prejudi^^ of the right
owner. Oh do not give the First Fruits unto the Dev^l! and think that God will
be pleased with the Gleanings, the refuse, and scattered ears, the dreggs of
old age, Offer it now to thy Prince, see if he will accep^ thee, Malac. 1. 8.
As if he had said; Serve thy Princes Enemy in thy youth and strength, and then
come to the Court^ in thine old age, limping with thy stilts, a^^ crutches, and
say, Mine old Master has cast me off, and now I will serve thee; see then if
he will entertain thee. So it is in this case.

2. Consider that God loves cheerfulness in his services; so many places of
Scripture show. Rejoice in the Lord, etc. I will run the ways of thy
Commandments; says David, Quicken me O Lord, etc. Now youth is the most
cheerful part of a man's Life, then the heart is in the liveliest temper, then
the spirits are freshest, and quickest; and natural cheerfulness being
Sanctified, is a furtherance of spiritual joy. The quickness of the natural
temper (which is in youth most vigorous,) is a good servant to quickening grace.
Think not, that God is best pleased with the lumpish old age, which many times
is little more than a dead piece of Earth, with a little portion, a small
remainder of life abiding in it. God is the living God, and he requires living
Sacrifices Romans 12. 1. Now thy youth has more life in it than thine old age:
There is (as it were) a close union between the Soul and Body in youth. The
Soul imparteth a more plentiful ^nfluence of Life unto the Body in you^h, than
^n old age, by the quickness and plenty of the Spirits, which in youth are more
abundent than in age. Give up therefore this most living part of thy life, thy
young days unto God; and not only that part of life which partaketh more of
Death than of life; th^ne old decrepit and disabled age. The hoary head is a
Crown of Glory, if it be found in a way of Righteousness, Prove. 16. 31.
[Found,] He does not say, if it enter into the way of Righteousness, but if it
be Found there. If a Man has turned to God in his youth, and persevered in
upright walking before him, until gray hairs come upon him; that Man needs
no Crown of Gold to adorn his head, his hoary head is a Crown of Glory to him.
If under the Law a Man did burn the prime of his Beast in Sacrifice, it was
accepted: yea, when it was almost consumed, even the remainders that were half
burnt, did yield a sweet savor to the Lord: because the best was burnt also
upon the Altar of the Lord. So let a Man consecrate the prime of his days, his
youth to the Lord; offer up this as a living Sacrifice, and then, even his worn
old age, which is like a Sacrifice half burnt and spent, shall be exceeding
sweet and pleasing to the Lord, because the best was given up unto him: whereas
on the other side, should any of the Priests have burned a Sacrifice upon the
Altar of Baal, and then when it was half burnt should have brought the
gleanings and laid them upon the Altar of the Lord, this would have been a
grievous abomination in the sight of the Lord. So in this case, etc. Oh then,
Remember thy Creator in thy youth, lest he forget or despise thee in thine
age. Remember him in thy youth, that thy hoar head may be found in the way of
Righteousness, and so may be a Crown of Glory, and not a Spectacle of Reproach
and Contempt unto thee.

3. Consider especially, the unspeakable danger of Sin, confirmed and rooted
with time; wrought and wreathed into the heart, and clasped in the affections,
by long custom in sin. Oh when sin has been thirty or forty years in growing,
and taking root, it cleaves like the skin to the bones; like the Leprosy that
was rooted in a wall, which could not be taken away, until the wall were
pulled down. That sin which is in growing the whole time of a Man's youth,
during the best of his strength, it is even a Wonder, if it does not accompany
that Man to his Deathbed; yea, to the Judgment Seat of God. I know, the mercy
of God is infinite, and he calls at the Eleventh hour: but I am persuaded,
those are very few which are so called: and especially very few, (if any) of
those who have had the means of Grace in their youth, and regarded them not. Oh
this willful hardening of the heart is dreadful. This continuing in sin against
knowledge; this withholding the truth in unrighteousness, moves the Lord to
give men over to a Reprobate sense; Romans 1. 21, 24, 25, 28. Into such a state,
that he becomes incapable, unteachable; that neither blessings, nor crosses;
neither the Rod, nor the Word; neither sickness, nor health; neither gray
haris, nor the approach of Death, can work him to to sound Conversion. Ah poor
forsaken Soul! such a one may come to say with Saul, God has forsaken me! A
speech, that might rend a render heart to hear it. I speak not this to bring
you to despair, but to stir you up to speedy Repentance, that ye may prevent
this desperate and woeful condition.

CHAP. I.
IN the last place, let me speak a few words to Parents, and old People.

1. To Parents: Ye that are Parents, labor ye to season the very Childhood of
your Sons and Daughters with the true knowledge and fear of God; pray over them
daily, instruct, exhort, rebuke, and use all good means, that the prime of
their days may be given up to God: Teach them to Remember their Creator in
their Childhood, that they may neither forget him in their youth, nor forsake
him in their old age. I fear that most Parents among us, by neglecting their
Duty herein; are guilty of their Childrens Destruction.

2. To the Aged: Ye that are grown old, and have not remembered your Creator in
your younger days, whose bones are full of the sins of your youth; Oh know
that your case is exceeding dangerous! therefore bewail your lives, whereby ye
have so much dishonored your Maker: humble and judge your selves in the
bitterness of your Souls; cry continually, and importunately in the ears of the
Lord, that (if it be possible) the sins of your youth, and the long continued
wickedness of your Lives, may be forgiven you, that the often resistance which
ye have made against the spirit of God may be pardoned, if it be possible, that
the frequent casting of the Word of God behind thy back may be forgiven. Oh how
odious and contemptible is the hoary head, found in the way of wickedness, in a
state of impenitency? What is an old Drunkard, or Adulterer, a gray headed
Swearer, an old Covetous Worldling, an hoary headed impenitent person, but even
a monster among Men? What do thou not yet remember thy Creator? not in old
age, not at fifty, at sixty, or seventy years? Oh wreched security! Awake!
awake unto Righteousness, unto Repentance, ye old ones that sleep in sin, lest
ye sleep the sleep of everlasting Death, and never behold the face of God in
Righteousness!

SERMON III.
Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, etc.
CHAP. I.
BEsides what has been already observed, something yet may be further noted,
Viz.

Observe. That Grace and Holiness are exceeding fit, and no way unseemly for the
younger sort. Man's Life has in some regards been compared to a Comedy, or
Interlude Acted upon the Theater, or Sage of this World; and the truth is, many
a Man's life is but a Play; and many in their courses do but act other men's
parts, not in sincerity express their own inward dispositions. And therefore
that decorum, which they suppose may grace them in the eyes of Men, is the
thing they most of all affect and aim at. But this is Man's misery, that his
Eye is now not single, nor can he rightly discern what becomes him; so that
many times he shunneth those things as unseemly, which would be his greatest
ornaments, and goes about to deck himself with such things as do but lay open
his nakedness, and discover his shame. The Apostle says, that long hair (which
is a Woman's ornament,) is a Man's shame, If a man wear long hair, it is folly
and shame to him, 1 Cor. 11. And yet many men account this a special ornament;
whereas indeed, it does as ill become them, as a Distaff does; almost as ill as
a woman's Garment. Thus it is in many other things, disguised fashions, etc. But
besides these, there seems to be a conceit among Men, that a licentious
liberty, an unlimited looseness of Conversation, becomes the younger sort in
the days of their youth; and that nothing is more unseemly for that age, than
an humble, holy subjection and obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. But
here ye see the wise Man, who was a Man that did much affect decorum, whilst he
continued in his integrity, (as appears by that which the Queen of Sheba,
observed even to an ecstasy, I Kings 10. 4, 5. And when the Queen of Sheba had
seen all Solomon 's Wisdom, and the House that he had built, and the Meat of
his Table, and the sitting of his Servants, and the attendance of his
Ministers, and their Apparel, and his Cup-bearers, and his Assent by which he
went up to the House of the Lord, there was no more Spirit in her. And so ye
may gather by many passages of his story, how exact he was in observing
decorum, and showing forth his Royal Magnificence according to his place.) He I
say, that best knew, what was comely, and seemly for young Men: Shows here,
that it is not only good, but seemly for them, even in the days of youth, to
be seriously mindful of their Creator, and so in all things to show themselves
as Men, that have him, and his fear before their Eyes.

For (to omit this, that whatsoever is good is also comely, being suitable to
the holiness and purity of God, who is most glorious and beautiful) it is plain
here by the opposition that is made between the days of youth, and old age;
that he commends it to them in special, as a thing exceeding fit, and seemly
for the younger sort. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whilst
the evil days come not. As if he had said, It is a most absurd and unseemly
thing, not to be truly mindful of him that made us in our best days, but then
to begin, when the evil days come. And (if you mark,) it is plain by those
passages that follow, That he still fastens a notorious absurdity, and
unseemliness upon this carriage of Men who defer till the last. The years draw
nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. How absurd and unseemly
then to give up thy self to God, when thou art weary of thy self; and not
before? while the Sun, or the Moon, or the Stars be not Darkened, and the
Clouds return after the Rain. A most absurd thing, to give all the clear
Sun-shiny days of youth to sin, to lose all thy good days, wasting and
wearing them out in vanity; and then in the dull, cloudy, rainy times of old
age, which are most unfit for employment, to begin to serve the Lord; and so in
the verses following. So that it is (...) an absurd thing, or a thing out of
place; an unseemly and uncomely thing for young men to live unmindful of their
Creator, and of the end of their Creation, whilst they are young; and to leave
him nothing but the Lame and Blind Sacrifices of their decrepit age, which the
Psalmist shows plainly. Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse
his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word, That which is cleanly,
ye know is comely: Now the Psalmist shows, that if they that be young will
walk in clean waves, they must take heed to the Word of God, and follow the
light of it. Ye know that a fair clean way is more pleasant and comely by far,
than a foul, deep, miry way: and it is more comely for a man to walk in such a
way, if he can, than to be mired with dirt in a foul way. So the Psalmist
shows, That then a young Man walks in a clean way, and so in a comely
manner, when he follows and obeys the Word of God, i^ an holy and gracious
Conversation. On the other side, when he casts the Word behind his back, and
walks in the Lusts of his own heart, follows his own will, and seeks to
please himself in all things, he walks in a foul dirty way, and is bemired
((...) it were) with Drunkenness, or Whore do^^ or Idleness, or Profaneness,
etc. And h^ carriage has no more true comeliness in i^ than his clothes have,
when he falls in the mire.

CHAP. II.
THis we might see plainly, if we did b^ consider the nature and temper^^
youth, and then think what corresponde^cy and suitableness there is between it,
(...) true grace and holiness. He that will ma^^ a comely garment for another,
must not only make one part of it proportionable to another, but must take
measure of him that (...) to wear it, that it may be comely and fit i^ him. A
Man's garment, though never (...) comely and proportionable in it self, will
never be comely and fit for a Child. Here then let us take measure of youth,
and see how well it will become him to put on the new Man, to put on the Lord
Jesus.

1. Has the young man a special quickness of wit and apprehension? what can
become him better than to search into the glorious Mysteries of Christ's holy
Gospel, and not content himself with a few answers committed to Memory, which
he is able to fit to some questions of Chatechism, but seriously and with most
earnest endeavors to study the Doctrine of Godliness, and carefully to learn
that wisdom which is from above. There is no knowledge can so well become the
best wit and understanding, as the best and most excellent knowledge, and that
is the true saving knowledge of God, of Christ Crucified, which St. Paul
esteemed incomparably better than all his other learning. This will beautify
the freshest, and most sparkling wit, it will make the very Spirit of a Man
shine within him. This was young Timothy's ornament. 2 Timothy 3. 15. From a child
thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. That wisdom must needs
beautify a young Man's mind, which makes him wise unto Salvation, wise for
Heaven, which puts such a light into him, as is suitable to Heaven and
Everlasting light, which is like the wisdom of the Saints and Angels above; of
which knowledge St. Paul. says, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The Sunbeams do as
it were guild things whereon it shines, and make them look bright and
pleasant, whereas they looked dull before without any such luster or
comeliness. This Heavenly Knowledge is a shining knowledge, it bright^ ens and
beautifies the Mind and Soul: and the more fresh and nimble the wit and
understanding is, the more it is adorned by it: no skill, no knowledge; no
learning is so comely for a young Man, as this true saving knowledge of God in
Christ.

II. Has the young man some strength of memory? what can become this Treasury
or Storehouse so well as Gold, Silver, Pretious-Stones (as the Apostle calls
holy Truths:) what should hay and stubble, trash and dirt do in so precious a
Cabinet? what is more unseemly, than to have it filled with wanton idle Songs,
with scurrilous jests, with airy vain conceits, foolish balla^s, legendary
tales, or the like? that which is fit for the Dung-hil is not seemly for a
Cabinet.

III. Is youth full of lively and stirring affections? what is more seemly than
for the quickest affections, and for the most lively motions of the Heart and
Spirit to be exercised about Heavenly, and Spiritual things. The World is said
to be (...), because of its comeliness which God gave it in the Creation. Now
God has thus ordered the World in its several parts, that the quickest and
nimblest, should be highest in their rank, and the slowest and dullest, should
be lowest. So the Heavens which are of a most strange and wonderful swiftness,
are highest; and of other things the quickest in motion are nearest Heaven; so
the Air, and in the Air the Birds: whereas the Earth being slow, and without
Motion, lies below all the rest, and is farthest from Heaven. So what is more
seemly, than for those winged affections of young Men and Women to mount up to
Heaven, and the quicker and swifter they are in their Motions, the higher it
becomes them to fly; what should they do creeping on the Earth like Snailes,
or earthing themselves in the Earth like Moles, or mudding these lively
affections in sinful fleshly pleasures? Why rather should they not in their
days of youth cast their Souls upon the wing, earnestly desiring God to draw
them, that they may run after him. Is it a seemly thing to see a Lark or an
Eagle to make her self a burrow or nest under ground, or to plunge her self in
the Mud? No, it becomes her to be aloft: so it becomes not the winged
affections of the younger sort to bemudd themselves with sinful pleasures, but
to be lifted up in the power of Gods Spirit, and to converse with him who is
invisible. The dullness of age has more affinity with Earth, than the vigor
of youth: which yet must not persuade old Men to follow the inclination of age,
and because their backs are bowed with years, to think themselves warranted to
debase their Souls to earthly affections, but rather to conceive themselves
directed to look themselves out a burying place; entering into a serious
Meditation of the Grave, whiles their bodies by the decaies of age, are daily
preparing for their last dissolution, into those first earthly Principles of
which they were compounded.

IV. And as the quickness of young Men's affections should thus set them in a
course of holiness; so the quickness of their Spirits (which is one cause of
the quickness of their affections) does exceeding well suit with true grace and
holiness. The Activity, and (as the Country-word is) the Mettle that is in the
younger sort is very suitable to an holy Conversation. This is one thing which
makes many men falsely to think, that Religion is not seemly for youth; but
these are such as know not the power of godliness, and therefore think it to be
a lumpish dulling thing. But what blindness is this to imagine, that the
blessed Spirit of God is a duller to the Spirit of a Man, when he works upon
it by his sanctifying power and virtue! No, it is enough indeed to put life
into a dead heart, when the blessed Spirit affords his gracious Influence
unto it. If the Sun does dull and dead the Earth, the Trees, the Herbs in the
Springtime, then may ye imagine, that the Spirit of God does dull the Spirits
of Men by Sanctifying and Quickening them. It takes away indeed their wildness
and madness, that is to say, their untowardness, unseemliness, and
uncomeliness; but it rather increases and purifieth their kindly vigor, and
gives them yet a greater and an higher life, and makes them more lively than
before; but with a sweet, spiritual, and heavenly kind of Life. It is true,
that in the beginnings of grace there is some drooping and dejectedness, but
that is but in the turn when they are coming out of their natural estate from
under the Curse and Wrath of God. But if once they be indeed set in a course of
holiness, and find the comfort of Gods love in Christ, they shall find
themselves more enlivened and quickened by the Spirit of God than they can be
by nature only. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, says the
Apostle. The Spirit of Christ enlarges the heart, strikes off the fetters of
Corruptions, and makes it more free and full of Life. Therefore David often
calls upon God to quicken him. He was a man naturally of a quick temper, of a
fresh lively Spirit, as appears by that Description given of him. 1 Samuel 16.
12. He was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to.
But he knew, that grace would quicken him more, and give him a heavenly
activity of Spirit, and therefore desired to be more and more quickened by it.
And how can the vigor and quickness of youth be better employed than in the
work and service of God? Is not the Service of God a race? And who are so fit
to run, as those who are young, and of nimble Spirits? Let us run with patience
the race that is set before us: and elsewhere; so run that ye may obtain.
Which as it implies, a winged swiftness, and quickness of stirring affections
in the service of God; so also a ready diligence, and active chearfullness in
any work of his, to which the heaviness of old age is a clogging hinderance;
and which does exceeding well become the liveliness of youthful Spirits.

V. Are young Men strong, and of able Bodies? What is more comely for them,
than to serve the Lord with all their Strength? The weakness of the Body, does
even make the Spirit fail and faint, and hinders it many times in the Service
of God. Strength is an help in the worship of God; and the Spirit in a strong
Body, is like a workman standing upon firm ground; which is an help and
furtherance in the work.

VI. Are they full of courage, and valiant as well as strong? They can never
with so much honor follow any other Captain, as they may fight under the
Banner of Jesus Christ, the Prince and Captain of their Salvation. No Victory
so honorable for a young Man as to kill pride, and lust in himself, and to get
the old red Dragon under his feet. To shed an enemies blood, is no way so
honorable, as to Triumph over Satan's malice. One Mastiff can tear out
another's Throat: one Bull can goar another's side: one desperate person can
shed another's Blood: but where is that glorious valor in a young Man, that
(like Josuah's followers) sets his feet on the necks of five Kings of Canaan
at once, that subdueth his five Senses, and overcomes all Temptations that
enter in at these? He that can strongly guard these Cinque Ports, and stands
out against all approaches in his youth, he is an honorable Soldier of Jesus
Christ. And if he go on, and overcome, He shall sit down with him in his
Throne, as he overcame and sat down with his Father in his Throne, Rev. 3. 21.
They that fight this good Fight, may assure themselves, that (...) Crown of
Glory is laid up for them, which they shall wear, when many renowned Captains
of the World, who have been Triumphant over their Enemies, Shall lie down in
sorrow and confusion. But as the Apostle says concerning Marriage, If any man
thinks that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his Virgin, if she pass the
flower of her age, and need so require, let him do what he will he sins not,
let them Marry. 1 Cor. 7. 36. So if any man thinks that he behaveth himself
unseemly toward the courage, strength, and valor of his Body and Mind; if he
wear out his youth in Peace, and do not show himself in the Field, let him
know, that Religion does not disarme him, if the Cause be good, and the War
necessary; otherwise to fight in Public Wars, is no more honorable, than it
is to assault men on the highways side. And when a Christian has a just Call
to fight the Lords Battles, Religion does not daunt, but double his courage.
True it is; Religion takes from him the Sword of Revenge, and commands him to
put it up into its place: it allows him not to answer every desperate
Ruffians Challenge, which is as uncomely for a wise young man, as it is to
fight with every Dog that barketh at him.

VII. Is youth accompanied many times with health? what is more seemly for him
that is well, than to do well, and to serve him faithfully who gives him every
hour of health which he enjoys? The sickness and craziness of old age is many
times a great distraction and discouragement to the Service of God: therefore
they are much deceived, who make Repentance the work of the Sickbed, and think
that the fittest time for that work.

VIII. Is youth inclined to love? Christ commands nothing but love, and that
which love, supposes and infers: only it requires a more noble, divine,
and excellent kind of love, and turns it upon a more excellent object, upon
which it is better bestowed than upon the common objects of natural love, Viz.
upon God the chiefest good, and upon such things as are subordinate to him.

IX. Is youth disposed to Mirth? Grace is so far from depriving it of this,
that he which never felt true Grace, never came where sound joy was. The heart
is filled with peace and joy in Believing; and the peace of God passes
understanding. Yea, the Word of God calls for joy. Rejoice in the Lord; again
I say rejoice. It bettereth and increases our mirth, it does not take it from
us.

X. Consider the young man in Relation to others, and you shall find nothing so
seemly for him as grace and holiness, and a conformity to the Word of God.
Nothing more comely for a young man than so to carry himself toward his
Superiors as the word of God directs him. What more seemly for the younger
sort, than to give that honor, reverence, respect to Parents, Masters, Aged
People, which the word enjoyneth them? A proud, undutiful, contemptuous
carriage in the younger sort toward their betters, does worse become them than
any deformity or blemish in the body. A young man is never more out of fashion,
than when he is careless of his duty in this behalf: and again, never more
comely, than when he adorneth his life with that modesty and dutiful respect to
which true grace directs younger years. It is a singular ornament to a young
man to be one of those few which find out, and constantly walk in the narrow
way in their youthful days.

CHAP. III.
Use. 1. THis may show, that nothing does worse become the younger sort than
sin; A licentious, ungodly, a loose unbridled conversation is a young man's
greatest blemish, weakness of natural parts, shallowness of capacity, blemishes
of the body, are not so unseemly in a young Man, as profaneness, and want of
true holiness. Nothing can worse become such an one, than to forget or disobey
him that made him. No blemish in the face is so unseemly, as an unruly tongue,
full of vain and idle oaths, full of profane swearing, full of cursing and
bitterness, full of wanton, rotten communication, full of rai^ing, of scoffs
against godliness, against old Age; or as a loose lustful eye which is roveing
and wandering after vanity, or an ear listening after idle tales, and greedily
taking in false reports, such as tend to the undeserved disgrace of others. A
violent hand, a straggling foot, they are the blemishes and reproaches of the
younger sort. And what is Drunkenness, but the shame and stain of that green
and flourishing age? when the wit in its prime and best time shall be
besotted, and brought to a brutish dotage by the abuse of Gods good Creatures,
and excess of drink, what is more unnatural and unseemly? The stupifying of the
senses, the faultring of the feet, are they not the symptoms of old age? yes.
What then is more unseemly for youth, than to over-burthen it self so with
drink, as to lose for the time its wits and legs? Oh do not count this a
matter of credit thus to keep company! this is your shame. The sin of Whoredom,
which is the young Man's Zoar, he counts it a little one, and hither he would
fly for contentment, when the Word threatens Fire and Brimstone, against this
sin from Heaven. It is his Dalilah, in the lap of which sinful pleasure he
thinks he may sleep securely by the privilege of youth. But the Scripture
says, It is a deep ditch Prove. 23. 27. And therefore most dangerous. And as it
is dangerous, so most shameful and unseemly. It is the defilement, the blasting
of the flower of youth: it is the very snare of the Devil, whereby many young
ones are held Captive by him at his will.

The sin of stubbornness, and contemptuous carriage toward Superiors in
years, or otherwise, it is most unseemly for those of the younger sort; it
lays open the shame of their folly; and when they think highly of their own
wits, and (perhaps) scorn the advice of their Ancients, they make it known to
the World, that through the greatness of their folly, they know not themselves,
nor their places aright, nor what becomes them. Idleness, and Vanity are most
unseemly for them; the loss of these precious days of youth; to sleep away
these best days, or to triffle them away, whiles the Sun shines upon them, it
is most unseemly.

Finally, to live in impenitency and security, not to seek the love and favor
of God in Christ; to put off Repentance till old Age is most unseemly and
uncomely. To sleep all the day and put off a man's main business until night,
is most foolish and uncomely. Conversion to God, it is thy main work, and the
beginning of all the work and service, which thou do for him that made thee,
and gave thee thy life, and continues it to thee every hour. Thou do never
truly put thy self into his Service, until thou art truly converted and turned
unto him. All that thou do in the Worship of God before, is no true Service,
no work of a faithful Servant, acceptable unto God: therefore to give him that
gave thee all thy days, no part of these best days of youth: to give him that
gave thee all thy strength, no part of thy strength: to give him that gave thee
all thy wit and understanding, nothing but the ruins and decays of wit,
memory and understanding in old age, or sickness, is most unseemly; and such as
cannot any way become any one that would be called a Christian: especially, if
thou considerest, that when thou deniest thy best time to God, he may justly
deny thee the rest of thy time which thou hopest to enjoy, and cut thee off in
thy sins.

CHAP. IV.
Use. 2. THis should teach Parents and Masters, that have any of the younger
sort under their charge, to be very careful and diligent to teach them what
does most of all become them, even the fear of God, and Faith unfeigned.
Instead of teaching them vain fashions which they are too apt to learn of them,
to teach them that it will best become them not to fashion themselves according
to this evil world, but to be transformed in the renewing of their mind: to
teach them, that the words of heavenly wisdom, the word of God laid up in the
heart, and showed forth in the life, will be their richest ornament. Let them
know, how well Humility, Modesty, Temperance, Chastity, Sobriety, Holiness and
the knowledge of God will become them. Let them not only be taught how good
these things are, but how seasonable, how fit they are; how seemly for them at
those years, how necessary. Let them understand how ill it becomes them at
this age to want these Jewels, and what deformity the contrary sins do put upon
them. As it becomes them of younger years to be thus qualified, so it becomes
you that are elder, by all means, both in word and conversation, to show them
what becomes them.

CHAP. IV.
Use 3. IF Grace and Holiness are comely ornaments of Youth; then how unseemly
is it for those that have passed the days of Youth, to continue yet without
it? have thou outlived thy Youth, and have thou not yet done that which thou
should have done in thy Youth? Not yet so remembered thy Creator as to turn
unto him, and to seek him with thy whole heart? Oh blame thy self for this
before the Lord! and if thou have lost the first season, take heed thou do
not foreslow the latter. Art thou now past the Spring of Youth? It is more than
time thou had sown in Tears! The Harvest draws on, and then as a man has
sown, so shall he reap. He that has sown to the Flesh, following his lusts
and his will, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but He that sows to the
Spirit, being led by the Spirit in the ways of holy obedience, shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting. Think then with thy self, if it be a shame for
young men to be without Grace; it is a double shame for me that am past the
days of Youth! I^ God has showed thee patience in not cutting thee off in the
sins of Youth, oh take hee^ of abusing that patience any longer! Will thou sin
because thou have escaped hitherto^ God forbid! The longer thou have sinned*
the more have thou provoked the eyes of Gods glory, the more dangerous is it to
continue any longer in sin. The longer the Fig Tree had cumbred the ground, the
neare^^ it was to the cutting down; the more it was in danger of the Axe.
Therefore repent heartily and speedily of the sins of Youth; and yet whiles
thou may do somewhat for the Lord, have some strength and abilities for his
service, let him have thy heart and hand, thy body, thy soul: sacrifice thy
self to him, consecrate thy whole man to his worship and service even in thy
middle-age.

CHAP. V.
Use 4. IF Grace be the ornament of Youth, then doubtless Sin must be the shame
of Old Age. What, an old man, an old woman, and yet a graceless sinner? A
gray-head found in the ways of unrighteousness, the ways of folly? What is this
but to be a spectacle of reproach among men? How many years have thou lived an
enemy to God? Could thou find no time for reconciliation in thy Youth, nor
in thy middle age, nor yet now thou art thus far gone in years? What is an
impenitent old man, but a kind of monster among men? What a shame is it to see
a gray-head quaffing by the fireside in an Alehouse; a man of fifty or sixty
years haunting the Ase-house, and wanton dallyance. A profane Oath in an old
man's mouth, how odious and shameful is it? Is it not a double shame for old
men to be more and more covetous the elder they are, to cleave more and more
close to the world? As one that is to be executed, if he has his hands at
liberty when he is turned off the Ladder, will catch hold again, and cling fast
unto it, being loath to let go his hold: so such a one being summoned by death
to leave the world, catches hold again, fastening his very heart unto it, and
cleaving more strongly and more closely thereunto. How much better were it to
have loosened the heart from the world by unfeigned repentance, that the world
and it may part with ease? For part ye must, though thy heart should be pulled
in pieces in parting. How ill does it become an old man, that all this while he
has not learned to see into the vanity of the world, which a wise man in a
little time of experience may easily discern? O thou old sinner, learn greatly
then to bewail the sins of thy Youth, that length of time wherein thou have
gone on in sin, wherein thou have hardened thy heart, and resisted the spirit
of God: and now be very earnest with the Father of mercies, to pass by the
multitudes of thy sins, whch in these many years of thy life, thou have made
thy self and others guilty of.

CHAP. VI.
Use 5. LAstly, yea that are young, let this enter into your hearts, and be ye
persuaded that nothing does so well fit you, nothing so well become your years,
as to remember your Creator, as to know, to love, to fear, to serve and obey
him that made you. Now is the Spring, now is the time of sowing in tears, even
in your Youth: and if ye sow so, ye shall in Youth reap the first fruits of
comfort. Now is the day, and therefore work now; the night comes, darkness
comes; yea the night of spiritual darkness and blindness of mind may come, a
dreadful gloomy night may shade your Souls, the spirit of God withdrawing his
light, against which you have so long sinned in the pride of Youth, and Satan
drawing a black vail over your Souls: then there is a woeful night within; the
night of an hardened heart that cannot repent, and of a ^eared conscience, and
a reprobate sense may come, when none can rightly work the works of God. Oh
then! what an extreme folly is it for you now to sleep in Sin whiles it is day,
and whiles mercy is offered, and the way of life is showed, and the works which
God has ordained for his people to walk in, are laid before you? Now then it
becomes you to flee youthful lusts, and not to stay till they flee you: Now
learn to hate all sin, (and especially the sins to which your age enclineth
you) even as Death, as Hell. Do not think that the sins of Youth will become
you, because Youth is enclinable to them, but rather think they are so much the
more unseemly, because nature corrupted, enclineth Youth unto them. Sin is so
contray unto that (...), and right order of things whch God has made, that it
enclineth men to those things whch are most unseemly for them. And this must
needs be so, for Sin is most contrary unto God; now God by his work enclineth
every Creature to that which becomes it: and so by his work upon man in the
Creation, he did frame in him a propension and inclination to that which did
every way become him best. Now Sin being quite contrary unto God, and seizing
upon man's nature, did so corrupt it, as to incline it to that which is most
unseemly for it. So man in general is inclined to earthly, to bodily, and
sensible things, suitable to the body, and to neglect heavenly and spiritual
things, which are suitable to his Soul and inner man, which (considering the
nature and creation of man) is most absurd and unseemly; as if a man should be
more careful of his foot than of his Head. What comparison is there between
the Soul and the Body? Is not that of far greater excellency than this? How
unseemly a thing is it to seek the satisfying and contenting of the body,
rather than of the spiritual and better part of a man's self? So Sin enclineth
old men in age to become more earthly and covetous than before; Now this is
most unseemly. So the Heathen could observe, counting it as foolish and absurd
for an old man to grow more covetous, and eager after the world, as for a
Traveller to provide himself so much the more carefully for his Journey, the
nearer he comes to his Inn, or Journey's end. Were it not an unseemly folly,
when a man is even at home, and sees the smoke of his own Chimney, to seek
about carefully for a fresh Horse, and other necessaries fit for a Journey of
many hundred miles? So what more foolish and unseemly than for an old man,
traveling to his last home, to be the more careful of earthly things, the
nearer he comes to his grave, which are useful to him only by the way? And as
sin enclineth old age to that whch is most unseemly; so also it does younger
years. Oh do not think these things seemly for thee, to which Nature, corrupted
by sin enclineth thee; no more than that is wholesome for a sick man, to which
his Stomach, vitiated by a disease does move him. Esteem Grace of all things,
to be the richest ornament: put on Christ Jesus, that thou may partake of the
beauty of his Grace and Spirit, who is the fairest of ten thousand, that thou
may be one of those in whom God himself through Christ Jesus is delighted.

SERMON IV.
Eccles. 12. 1. In the days of thy youth.
CHAP. I.
IN the next place we may observe, under what terms the days of Old Age are
opposed to the days of Youth: it is under the notion of evil days. They are
opposed to the days of Youth, as evil to good; therefore, hence I observe,

Obs. That the days of Youth, are good days. So the opposition teaches us to
infer; for they are such days as men enjoy, while the evil days come nor.
The Hebrews call young men by such a name as imployeth choice: and a young man
in that Language, is as much as a chosen or selected man, a man picked out of
the multitude for special use: and so the time of Youth is expressed as a
chosen selected time. So in this very place; for as he had said before, Eccles.
11. 9. Rejoice O young man, (...)
Or O thou chosen selected one. So here; Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy Youth. (...), or thy choicest days. So that ye see the ordinary expression
used in primitive significant Tongue, which is (as it were) the fountain of all
Languages, notes out of time of Youth unto us, as a good, yea, as a choice
selected time. So much (I think) the Psalmist implies too. Psalm. 71. 17, 18. O
God thou have taught me from my youth; and hitherto have I declared thy*
wondrous works. Now also when I am old, and gray headed, O God forsake me not,
etc, where he seems to set the days of Old Age against the days of Youth,
as evil against good. O thou have taught me from my Youth: Thou have vouchsafed
me thy presence, thy Spirit to teach and guide me in those good and pleasant
days of Youth; those good days, when I in confidence of thy presence and
assistance encountered the Bear and Lion, and rescued my Lambs; T^ose days when
I assaulted the Philistine, and took away the reproach from Israel; Those
days, when with a lively and ravished Spirit, I leaped and daunced before the
Ark: But now the evil days of Old Age, the winter of my life is growing upon
me: the times are coming when I shall see no pleasure in them; when Clothes
shall scarce suffice to warm me: and therefore now, O my God! forsake me not;
withdraw not thy presence: now in special I find need of thee, that thou may
make those days good unto me through thy love and Spirit, which otherwise sin
would make exceeding evil and woeful to me.

CHAP. II.
WHerefore, that this may be made more clear unto us, let us consider how, and
in what respects the days of Youth are called good days. They are good days,

1. Because they are the first days of a man's life. Childhood is but (as it
were) a preparative to the life of man: Children, while they are Children, have
but some imperfect beginnings of the life of reason, which is the proper and
peculiar life of man: therefore we may reckon the days of Youth, as the first
days of man's life, when he first begins to live as a man, and to live the
life of reason in some degree of perfection. Now ye know, that the first in
every kind has the pre-eminence; the firstborn of men, the firstlings of
beasts; the first fruits of the earth; the morning of the day; the first age of
the world; the spring of the year. So there is a kind of preheminency in the
first days of man's life, which are the days of Youth; they are a man's prime
and his good days.

2. The days of Youth are good days, because ordinarily they are the days of
best health and strength: days wherein we are of able bodies for any special
service. For although it be true, that in the worship of God, bodily exercise
profits but little, in comparison of the inward power of godliness; yet
strength and health, when they are made serviceable to a sanctified upright
heart, are of special use, both in the immediate worship of God, and in the
performance of many offices of love, which we ought to do toward our Brethren
in the Lord. Men's sana in corpore sano (as they say) a sound mind, and an
heavenly spirit, furthered in the worship and service of God, by a strong,
healthy, well-tempered body, has a great advantage in it is work; and in that
case, the days of health and strength are good days. In Prayer; although the
strength and force of Prayer does not lie in the strength of the sides, or
loudnes of the voice; yet it is no small advantage to the Spirit, when in it is
fervor and strength of affection, it gathers up and puts forth all it is
powers in earnest supplication before the throne of Grace; if then it has a
sound healthy body, able to bear the intention of a fervent spirit, without
fainting or distraction. You know that if the arrow be long, and drawn to the
head, it is needful that the bow and the string should be of sufficient
strength to hold drawing. And a Christian, that will not content himself to
shoot those fools bolts, mentioned Eccles. 5. 1. but desires to send forth
winged shafts of fervent Prayer that shall pierce the Clouds, and enter the
Heavens, finds it an help not to be despised, when the strength and health of
his body is suitable to the vigor of his spirit. This holds (as ye may
easily conceive) in those exercises of hearing, reading, meditation, etc.

3. Days of Youth are times wherein the powers of the Soul are also quick,
lively and able by the communion with the body. The Soul by reason of it is near
conjunction of the body has it is Childhood, Youth and decaying time. In
younger years it has those golden days, wherein the understanding is quick in
apprehension, teachable, and apt to receive impression; the Memory faithful,
the Judgment good and sound; the Affections strong and stirring: Therefore
these are the good days wherein it is fit to be used in the work and service
of God. And as in the Spring, all these concurring together, the Trees in their
fresh clothing; the face of the Earth renewed, the beauty of Herbs and Flowers,
together with the Sun's shining brightly in his strength and glory, make up
good days; whereas in the Winter, the brightness of the Sun makes but an
imperfect good day, whiles the Trees and Fields are stripped, dead and
withered; the ground covered with mire and dirt: so the meeting of these
together, the birthright of Youth, the strength and health of the Body, the
quickness of the Senses, the activeness and abundance of the Spirits, the
perfections of the Soul, etc. make the days of Youth good days: whereas,
although in the winter of Old Age the Sun may shine; the principles of wisdom
stored up in Youth may be preserved; yet there are those defects naturally
clogging that dying age, which do eclipse the brightness, and lessen the
goodness of those days.

CHAP. III.
Use ^. THis may serve to reprove those, who do allow some fleshly liberty to
the days of Youth. Many, who themselves are aged, out of a kind of fatherly
experienced gravity (as they would have men think) and out of a kind of
moderation, to which their years have brought them (as they will have us
believe) do give liberty to a kind of latitude in the ways of Youth; and young
men must be born with. Who doubts but that there is a Christian moderation
and compassion to be exercised toward such infirmities of the flesh, which the
Spirit wrestleth and labors against either in young or old; when the heart
being given up to Christ, and brought under the sovereign command of his
glorious Gospel and blessed Spirit, cannot yet wholly free it self from the law
of Rebellion, nor utterly shake off the body of Death? But out of a pretense of
levity to flatter the enormities of Youth, and to excuse those vicious
unbridled courses, which stain the glory of those best days; what is it but to
say, that hard Frosts, deep Snows, Inundations, thick mire and dirt, are not to
be accounted strange in May, nor to be wondered at in the prime and spring of
the year. Is it to be endured, when the best days of a man's life are wasted
away in such courses as are contrary to the end for which a man lives; most
contrary to the glory of that great God, who has given them these choice days
of Youth. To speak plainly; when are you more careful to fence your Copses,
Pastures, Meadows, than in the Spring: and will ye say the spring of our life
(which is the time of Youth) may be laid open to the invasion of lusts, to the
assaults of Satan, to the pleasures of Sin? Let other men applaud their own
gravity, and condemn the rashness of others; I cannot believe that Solomon
wanted either years, gravity, wisdom or due moderation, when he checked the
folly of Youth in an holy Irony, Eccles. 11. and sets before all vain young
men the Judgment of the great day, showing that for all these things, even
these excesses of Youth, they shall be made to give account: nor when he did
put down this serious admonition in the words of this Text, backed with so many
pressing motives, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, etc. and had there been any defect in the penman, yet I
am sure the Holy Ghost which held his hand, would not have suffered him to
write one syllable amiss. Neither does the Psalmist return an answer suitable to
these men's conceits when the question is moved, Wherewithal shall a young man
cleanse his way? but quite contrary, By taking heed thereto according to thy
word. Where ye see both the Rule by which, and the manner how they are to frame
their Courses, requires a special strictness. The very Word of God, that pure
and holy Rule of Righteousness, and not the customs of the time, nor the
ordinary practice, nor lusts of youth must guide them, and this Rule they must
heed with much attention and watchfulness, having one eye upon their ways,
another upon the word: taking heed thereto according to the word, ever marking
the steps they tread, and observing how it suiteth with the precious truth of
God. This is the wisdom of the Ancient of days, and whatsoever is contrary to
it, gray hairs cannot exempt from folly.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
II. THis should persuade the younger sort, not to make those days evil which
God has made good: Oh do not abuse your choycest days to the basest
employments. Think the spring of your age too good for Satan, too precious for
Lust, for Drunkenness, for Vanity, too good to be so spent, that in old age ye
shall not be able to remember it without shame, without a sting. Ye know what
the Lord spoke long since to Israel, If ye walk contrary unto me, I also will
walk contrary unto you. How can ye walk more contrary unto God, than to make
those the worst days which he has made the best? To have abused any of God's
good Creatures under the Law had been sin, to have profaned the first fruits a
double sin, to give any of our time to the service of sin, is unworthy of a
Christian; but to abase the prime of Youth, and the crown of our years, the
choicest of our days to this slavery, what is it but to set our selves to
cross the Lord in the wisdom of his ways, and to make these days evil because
he has made them good? Regard not those who scoff in their carnal folly at the
uniting of these two together, Youth and Holiness, as at an unequal match: as
if a young man and an old woman were joined together in marriage. Assure thy
self, that nothng can so well become the best days as the best affections and
the best conversation: that nothing is more seemly for a vessel of honor, than
to be seasoned with true grace and sanctification, even while it is now, in the
days of Youth, 1 John 2. 13, 14. I write unto you young men, because ye have
overcome the wicked one. Again, I have written unto you young men, because ye
are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one. Here is the excellency of young men, not that they have so much strength
o^ body, or daring Spirits to challenge or lay others on the ground; as that
they have strength of grace, and power of the Spirit to wrestle with Satan in
all his temptation^ and tread them under their feet; when the^ have the word of
God abiding in them, an^ powerfully enabling them to wrestle wit^
Principalities and Powers, and so to wrestl^ as to overcome, These are young
men to whom the beloved Apostle of Christ vouchsafes to write in a peculiar
manner: a^ indeed such are young men, whose Youth^ man ought to despise.

SECT. II.
TAke heed then of making these go^^ days of Youth to be evil days, whi^^ God
has made good days.

Quest. But some will say perhaps, ho^ are they made evil days?

Sol. I. I answer in general: The days of Youth (good in themselves) are made
evil, when they are spent in unregeneration, spent in a state of impenitency,
without sound conversion to God, without holy communion with him. Every young
man, who is not brought home to God by unfeigned repentance in his Youth,
makes the days of his Youth to be evil days, Romans 6. 20, 21. When ye were
the servants of Sin, ye were free from righteousness: what fruit had ye then in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed; for the end of those things is death.
Whiles a man is an unregenerate person, he is a servant of Sin, and all that
while he makes his days evil days, his life an evil life; for he is not able
to show any fruit that he has reaped of all his works and ways; no true
benefit, no sound comfort arises out of all his courses. So it is with old men
that live in the service of sin without true regeneration. In like manner it is
in young men that are unregenerate, let them do what they will, or can, let
them fill themselves with all manner of earthly pleasures; let them please
themselves every way, and do what they can to enjoy these days of Youth,
walking in the ways of their own Heart, and in the sight of their Eyes, please
their Senses of all sorts, etc. Nay, let them spend their days of Youth better
than so, even in Wars, in Study and Learning, in getting some useful and
commendable Trade; yet so long as they are unregenerate, and do not seriously
remember and turn to their Creator now in these days of their Youth, they have
no true fruit (worth the having) of all their endeavors, of all their days of
Youth. Now does not a man make his days evil days, when he spends them so,
that no true good comes of them? when they bring forth more evil than good; so
much evil, as that the good that might come of them is not good unto them: for
the end of these things is death. When a man is still hastening to his
destruction, running o^ toward his death (as every one unconverte^ is) what
fruit can there come of any thing he goes about? All ye that are young, who
put off repentance and are not regenerate, nor labor to be so, ye make the
days of your Youth, which ye so rejoice in, evil days, cursed days, ye walk
under the wrath and curse of God, and are not freed from the sentence of
condemnation. Whiles ye are merry and jocund, whiles your Hearts cheer you, ye
do but sport your selves in the midst of your own misery and dangers. Can
thou enjoy one good day whiles thou have no assurance for an hour to be free
from the fire that never goes out; whiles thou stand accursed, and have the
sentence of condemnation written upon thy conscience, and not washed off by the
blood of Christ spinkled by faith: oh these are evil bitter days, if thou
could discern them rightly, wherein Heaven frowneth upon thee, God is angry
with thee; and all thy sins remain unpardoned! Therefore repent and make thy
peace with God, that so the days of thy Youth may be good days; days wherein
thou may be assured that God is appeased with thee; days wherein thou may
walk in the bright Sunshine and light of his countenance; days wherein thou
may have thy fruit in holiness for the present, and be assured that the end
will be everlasting life: then shall the days of thy Youth be good and blessed
days un o thee.

SECT. III.
II. More especially these good days of Youth are made evil days, when they
are spent in any, or diverse of those sins to which on the one side You his
commonly accustomed; and which on the other side in a right consideration of
things, are most unseemly and unfit for Youth.

I. One sin is whoredom: if any thing can make the days of Youth, of good to
become evil days, this will do it; when the body, which is as a Temple of the
Holy Ghost, and should be consecrated and dedicated to him from the first
building or framing of it as it were, shall be made a cage of unclean lusts,
how great is this profanation? If the Temple at Jerusalem, when it was new
built, should have been made a Stews (as one of the Popes is said to have made
his Palace) and then have been left to be employed as a Temple for God when it
grew old and ruinous; would not the earth have opened her mouth to swallow up
those who should have thus profaned it? O young men! how dangerous is it then,
whilst your bodies are young, and should be esteemed and used as new-built
Temples, wholly dedicated unto God, his glory and service, to defile them with
those sins, intending when they are old, decayed, and ruinous buildings (and
not till then) to use them as Temples of the Holy Ghost. St. Paul says, If any
man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor. 3. 17. Therefore if
any one has not kept his Garments clean in this regard, let him without delay
wash and be clean, wash away his guilt by the blood of Christ; wash away these
lusts and sinful inclinations by the Spirit of Christ, by unfeigned repentance
and amendment of Heart and Life: and for the time to come (according to David's
counsel, Psalm. 119. 9.) Let them make clean their ways from this foul sin, by
taking heed unto them, according to such parts of the word as these: Flee
youthful lusts, but follow after righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with
them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2. 22. And that
Whore-mongers and Adulterers, God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. And that of St. Paul,
1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, 5. This is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honor: not in the lust of
concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which knew not God.

2. Drunkenness; which, as it is enough to make any part of a man's life evil,
so it is a great blemish to a young man, and makes the days of his Youth,
evil and wretched days. The wise man shows, that the ruins of Old Age do
make the Keepers of the House tremble, and the strong ones to bow themselves;
the Hands and Legs to shake. But how shameful is it for young men of firm and
strong bodies, to bring a drunken Palsy upon themselves, whereby they are
staggering in the streets, their Legs even failing them? or a brutish
Lethargy, whereby they are not able to arise from the place where they sit or
lie? ye that are Parents look to it, that your Children come not into such
infectious company, as many entice them. Take heed ye that are young, of
besotting your Brains and Understandings, which now are naturally fresh and
quick (if ever) wi^h this swinish sin: Consider that weighty Charge of our
Savior, Luke 21. 34. Take heed, lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged
with Surfeiting and Drunkenness.

3. Pride is another sin, that is enough to make the days of Youth to be evil
days. That which made good Angels wicked Devils, is enough to make the best
days of a man's life evil and miserable: What is more seemly for the younger
sort, than true modesty and humility, which God accepts, blesses and
crowns with graces here, and glory hereafter? What worse than Pride and a
disdainful Carriage? want of farther experience should make them in many things
to suspend their Judgments, unless it be in such as are clear and evident.
Contempt, and scornful behavior toward the Antien^: Self-conceit; as if
Wisdom should die with them: Self-will and stubbornness; an unmovable
Stiffness in their own groundless opinions, and unwarrantable purposes, with
other fruits of Pride; they do even deface the good days of Youth, and make
them evil.

4. Idleness is another sin which marreth these good days, which brings not
only a rust upon them, but lets loose the lusts of Youth, and makes it
exceeding sinful. If any should flee this sin (as all should) then especially
the younger sort ought to observe it above others. It is not a misery of
miseries, that those golden days should be worn out in sluggishness? that
those abilities of body and mind, which are at their best, should want
employment? and want they cannot, work they must; they are made of such a
temper, that they cannot be without motion. If the Heavens cannot stand still,
nor the Air fix it self in one place, and abide without stirring, no more can
the minds of young men, nor the thoughts of their hearts abide without inward
workings of spirit. O young man! thou can not keep thine eyelids from
stirring; thy Lungs from moving; thy Heart and Pulse from beating; and can
thou keep thy Soul and the affections of thy Heart from stirring, which are
more active than any part of thy body? No, they will have their course: and if
in any idle, sluggish carelessness, thou let them go as a Ship without a
Rudder or Pilot, the event is like to be woeful, and thou art running upon the
Rocks; Satan filling the Sails of thy affections with contrary winds and
hellish suggestions, which drive thee from the Haven of Peace to the gulf of
everlasting destruction. What a world of snares has the Devil ready for thee,
whiles he finds thee idle? How many enticing objects, and dangerous
temptations? When should thou provide against the winter of thy life, but
now in the spring of thy days? Old Age is almost unteachable; and if thou
learnest not in thy Youth, but spendest it in lazy ignorance, it will be very
hard (if not impossible) to learn in thine old age, when thou art more ready to
forget than to learn. It is a most miserable spectacle to see an ignorant old
man or woman, which has lost the best time of Youth in idleness, and not
treasured up the principles of heavenly truths: Oh how incapable are they of
the things of God! how likely to perish for want of knowledge, how incapable of
Knowledge it self? Rest and ease is fitter for Old Age, than for Youth: Labor,
Diligence, Watchfulness, I^dustry, are things which become those good days. In
a word! when any sin abounds, and any lust prevails, it is enough to make
the days of Youth evil days. Therefore ye that are young, and yet enjoy the
good days of your life, do not ye make them evil. Remember your Creator in the
days of your Youth, take heed to your ways according to the word of God, so
shall these days indeed be good days to you, and you shall prepare your
selves either for an honorable Old Age, or for a blessed end, and an happy
death; preventing the evils of Old Age, and putting you in possession of
everlasting life, which never seeleth the decays of Age.

Finally, let me in a word beseech those who have already outlived their best
days, to look back seriously and speedily upon the times and courses of their
Youth, and see how those days have been spent, observing what matter of joy
and thanksgiving, or what causes of grief and humiliation they may find, and
accordingly to be affected. If you have made them evil days, how should you
mourn for this? How should you seek God now that it draws toward the
eleventh hour, before the night comes when no man can work; which burieth all
secure loiterers and unprepared ones in an everlasting night of utter darkness,
where is weeping and gn^shing of teeth. The night comes, the darkness is
coming; yet before it comes, do ye that great work, that your Soul may live
and not die eternally!

CHAP. V.
Eccles. 12. 1 -- before the evil days come.
OF the next point I shall speak very briefly, and that is this.

Observe. That the days of Old Age are evil days. So the Spirit of God here
calls them. This the Holy Ghost here, and in other Verses of this Chapter
shows in diverse circumstances. Here he says, They are days wherein there is
no pleasure; days wherein there is much matter of grief and vexation, little
contentment: when a man's life is like gloomy days, such as St. Paul met with
in his Sea-voyage, when neither Sun nor Stars for many days appeared; to such
days Old Age is here compared; days of darkness, wherein Sun, Moon and Stars
have their light hidden and darkened; and the Clouds return after the Rain.
Though the showers fall, yet it does not clear up, but the Clouds grow up, and
gather together again: so it is in Old Age, the end of one trouble is but the
begnning of another affliction like to that. In the words following these evils
of Old Age are more particularly expressed and numbered up. The keepers of the
house do tremble; the arms which are to guard and defend the body, shake with
the Palsy: the strong men, the Legs which are the pillars to bear up this
house of clay, begin to fail with weakness, and to double under their burden
like posts worn and weakened with age. The Grinders, the Teeth cease, because
they are few, and the Windows shall be darkened, etc. In a word! we may sum up
the evils of these Aged days in these two heads: Evils of Loss, and Evils of
Sense. The loss of Contentments in God's good blessings: the loss of ability
for many good Offices: on the other side, the suffering of many inconveniences
in body and mind, which makes a man a burden to himself, being burdened with
such an heap of years.

CHAP. VI.
Use. THe use of this is to renew the former Exhortation to the younger sort,
that they may prevent these evil days, and remove the evil of them by timely
repentance, and sincere obedience in their Youth. Impenitency and ungodliness
makes the good days of Youth to become evil days; repentance and an holy
conversation make the evil days of Old Age to be good. Godliness is profitable
to all things, says the Apostle, and so it is profitable for all times, for
times of Youth as well as times of Old Age; for health, for sickness, for life,
for death: it shall do thee good, and not evil all thy days. If Old Age bring
so many inconveniences with it, how careful should thou be to remove the
guilt of thy sins before the burden of Old Age comes upon thee? If these
wounds of thy conscience be truly healed by the blood of Christ aforehand,
sprinkled on by the hand of faith, then shall thy Spirit be enabled to bear the
infirmities of Old Age; yea, thou shall be able to do all things through the
Spirit of Christ, strengthening and supporting thee. Oh how miserably is that
poor Soul burdened, that has an heap of years, and an heap of sins
unpardoned, lying upon it? but how blessed, how honorable is the gray hoary
head found in the way of righteousness, whose unrighteousness is forgiven,
whose sin is covered? Such shall be Trees planted in the house of the Lord,
which in their Old Age shall be more and more far and flourishing; and their
last works (as it is said of the Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2, 19.) shall be
more than the first: their last days better than the first. Such a good old
age they shall have, as diverse of the Saints are said to have had. Labor then
so to live now, that the evils of your Age may be mitigated and removed.

But on the other side, how evil and wretched must those days of Old Age be,
which are accompanied with the guilt of many sins? when years increase, and
wickedness increases; when a man will not be admonished, but as he has been
rebellious in his Youth, so he will be obstinate in his Old Age? Oh take heed
of this! if these evil days have overtaken thee before thou have put away thy
sins, before thou have sought the Lord with all thy heart, repent now in the
anguish and bitterness of thy soul.

SERMON. V.
Eccles. 12. 1. -- before the evil days come, etc.
CHAP. I.
THus ye have heard, how Old Age is said to consist of evil days: now here we
see how the Holy Ghost does call away the thoughts of young men from the
pleasures and vanities of Youth, wherein they are usually drowned and
overwhelmed, and gives them a foresight of a change: lets them know, that
it will not always be thus with them; they must look for other times hereafter
to pass over them; now they have their good days, their days of Youth, but
they must persuade themselves there be other days coming; these good days
will not last always. Hence I observe,

Observe. That it is Christian wisdom to foresee and provide for changes ere
they come: it is a brutish and sensual folly to have the Heart so possessed and
taken up with present prosperity and earthly contentments of any kind, as not
to have any serious and effectual regard of such changes as may be brought upon
us. Therefore the Spirit of God having to do with young men in this place, who
did please themselves in themselves, and in their present youthful ways,
delights and contentments, he sets before their eyes a lively image of Old
Age; with the many evils, grievances, and blemishes of it: yea, he leads them
along to the deathbed, and hangs out their winding sheet before their eyes;
and by the way presents them with many objects unpleasing to sensuality, and
vain youthful affections. First, evils in general, and then the loss of all
earthly pleasures; then dimness and darkness, weeping, cloudy weather, Ver. 2.
and so he goes on in the words following. Thus does St. James deal with secure
and carnal rich men, whose hearts did rest with a kind of muddy contentment in
their abundance of worldly things, not seriously thinking of sad alterations
that might follow, Jam. 5. 1, 2. Go to now ye rich men; weep and howl for the
miseries that shall come upon you: your riches are corrupted, and your garments
moth-eaten, etc. and ver. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been
wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter. As the beast
that is full fed and fatted, is wanton and frollick, feeding without fear or
foresight of the Butchers Axe, even in the same morning when he is to die
before night, even in the day of Slaughter: so do ye please your selves, and
satisfy your own lusts without any serious consideration aforehand of the Axe
of God's wrath, that lies at the root of all such unfruitful Trees, and is
ready to give an irrecoverable stroke: ye do not carefully forethink of the
evils that shall come upon you, and therefore I present these unto your
thoughts. We have a notable example in this kind, both of wisdom in Noah, and
of folly in the men of that Generation living together with him, Heb. 11. 7 By
faith Noah being warned of God of things (...) seen as yet, moved with fear
prepared an Ark (...) the saving of his House, by the which he c^^demned the
world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. Here wa^ his
notable faith and heavenly wisdom. H^ was warned of God of things not seen as
(...) not only of such things as at that time (...) not to be seen in present
being, when he received this warning, but of things, the (...) whereof were
never seen in the world before of such things as neither he, nor any of (...)
Forefathers from Adam to his own (...) ever had any experience of, viz. Th^^
things mentioned Genes. 6. 17. Behold (...) even I do bring a flood of waters
upon (...) earth to destroy all flesh, wherein is the br^^ of life from under
Heaven; and every (...) that is in the earth shall die. These (...) strange
things not seen as yet, no^ (...) heard of since man was created, that (...)
Lord at one stroke should destroy so (...) millions of his creatures, not only
men, ^^men, and children, but all other things (...) breathed. It was now a
great work of (...) to believe this, beyond the experience of the world, and
against the mocks and (...) of the whole world; and great wisdom to provide so
carefully against it, preparing an Ark for the saving of his House: Herein he
condemned the unbelief and folly of the world, whose sensuality,
earthly-mindedness, and deep security, our Savior declares, Matthew. 24. 38. in
the days that were before the flood, They were eating and drinking, marrying
and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew
not until the flood came, and took them all away. Noah did foresee, and
prepare for this notable change before it came; but the world of the ungodly
continued in deep and dead security: They would not believe that the
floodgates of Heaven should be opened so wide, as to pour down an universal
deluge upon the earth; they knew not, they considered not of this woeful
change, until the flood came, and took them all away.

CHAP. II.
NOw the reasons why this is to be accounted a point of wisdom, necessary for
every Christian, are,

1. Because a change will certainly come, Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities
(says the Preacher) all is vanity. All is vanity and uncertainty: There is no
pepetuity, nothing changeable in man, or in the outward condition of man here
on earth; yea, many changes and strange alterations may befall those that seem
to be in a most settled condition; many may come, some must come. Thou that art
in prosperity, may fall into adversity; Thou that art rich, may become
poor: Thou that have Children, may become childless: Thou that have Friends,
may become friendless Thou that have health, may have sickness* Thou that
art young and strong, may become old and impotent: Thou that art a liberty,
may be a prisoner. These things may come; but there is another change that
must come, namely, Death. Thou that art living man or woman must be turned into
a dead carkase: Thou that art now reckoned among the living, must be accounted
among the dead. Thou that now see, hear, speak, walk, etc. must
become blind, speechless, senseless, not able to move or stir: a corpse without
life, breath or motion. Thou that now conversest with men, must be forgotten,
and become a dead man out of mind: yea, thou that now sit here at this
time, must stand before the Lord's Judgment Seat, Oh then it is wisdom to be
aforehand with these changes and alterations, that they may not surprise and
overtake thee unprovided.

2. It is uncertain how, and when these changes shall come, Jam. 4. 13, 14. Go
to now ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and
continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain; whereas ye know not what
shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? It is even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away: For that ye ought to say,
if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this and that. Our life is so
uncertain, that in that respect it may rather be said to appear then to be: and
it appears but for a very little time, the date of it is soon expised. It is
even a vapor, and a vapor does quickly vanish, rises in the morning, and is
dissolved before noon: we may promise our selves years, but are not sure of the
next day. So it proved in that rich man's case, Soul, thou have goods laid up
for many years. He had a short answer, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
taken from thee. It is therefore a ^ecessary point of wisdom to foresee and
provide for this change.

3. Great miseries and inconveniences follow upon such alterations, when they
are not foreseen and provided for: many opportunities are lost, which never can
be recovered; such changes happen as deprive men of all ability of doing that
which they might have done at ease, if they had foreseen these things, and
taken their time: and men may look back with many sad thoughts, and much
bitterness of spirit upon their neglects and losses this way, when it is too
late. Some few days, weeks, months, wilfully lost and wasted before, will seem
more worth unto them than all the world; and the treasures and glory of the
world, when once these changes have overtaken them, and come upon them
unawares, and disabled them for ever.

Much discomfort comes upon this improvidence: when changes happen which are
grievous in themselves; they become more grievous to us for want of
preparation. That which in its own nature is a misery, is made a double misery
to us, when we are not prepared for it. What discomfort will sickness bring,
when it comes unlooked for; and when we have not prepared for it by searching
our hearts; casting up our accounts; getting assured pardon of our sins at the
hands of God? when a sick body and a guilty conscience meet together, there is
a woeful condition: when a man shall lie down in his death bed with the guilt of
all his sins lying upon him, and pressing upon his Soul, there is a grievous
burden; and especially when death comes, and finds him not regenerate;
finds in him no other life, but that which flows from the union between the
Soul and Body; no new spiritual life issuing from an inseparable communion
between Christ and him. Oh how will death insult over such a one? how will the
name, the thought, the visage of death dismay him? when it meets him alone,
not joined to Christ, and enters into a single combat with him; not
strengthened by an happy union with the Lord of life; will it not tear him in
pieces as a Lion might do a little Dog? It is a double misery not to be
aforehand with death, not to be provided for this change.

4. on the other side, much ease, much good, much comfort follows upon a
timely foresight, and wise preparation for such changes. When a sad and sudden
change was brought upon Hezekiah; a sharp fit of sickness (supposed to have
been the Plague) and a peremptory message from the Lord by the Prophet; Set
thine House in order, for thou shall die and not live. Did it not wonderfully
ease his burden, that he was so well prepared for this change, and able to say
(his conscience bearing him witness) 2 Kings 20. 3. I beseech thee O Lord,
remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart;
and have done that which is good in thy sight. What a comfort will it be, when
thy health is turned into sickness, thy strength into weakness; when thou art
fastened to thy bed, and have received in thy self the sentence of death; if
then thou find thy self provided for this change. A sweet comfort it shall
be in old age (when the Grasshopper is a burden, even the lightest thing) it
shall then ease that burden of years that makes thee stoop; if thou did in
time foresee and provide for it, turning to the Lord aforehand; that so thy
gray hairs may be found in the way of righteousness.

CHAP. III.
Use 1. 1. THis may serve to reprove the great sensuality and security that is
naturally among us; that we look at things present, and do not seriously take
to heart such changes as may befall us. A Comment upon Psalm. 49. would be a fit
enlargement of this use, where the Psalmist discourses excellently of this
point; both showing the folly of men trusting to outward things as to
certainties, and declaring his own spiritual wisdom which God had taught him in
preparing for any changes that might befall him. First, he calls for
attention for all sorts of men throughout the world. Hear this all ye people,
give ear all ye Inhabitants of the world, both low and high, rich and poor
together. It concerns all sorts nearly, and all sorts are faulty therein, and
need to be stirred up by way of remembrance. Then he does very effectually seek
to win attention by the excellency of the things which he is about to deliver.
My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding; such wisdom as many worldly wise men never learned: yea, he
shows in the next verse, that it is an hidden wisdom; and as a parable to
natural men for the most part. Then he enters upon his discourse, and in the
first place begins with himself, ver. 5. Wherefore should I fear in the
days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? as if he
had said; I do foresee changes and afflictions, I look for assaults from Satan;
but I am armed against them through the mercy of God, who has pardoned my
sins, and therefore when such evils come, and Satan shall seek to entangle my
Conscience, as in a snare, as if these were sure arguments of God's hatred
against me: I will not fear, I am prepared for these things. Then on the other
side in the next verse unto the fifteenth, he goes on at large, declaring the
folly and blindness of worldly-minded men, etc secure sinners in this case.
They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
Riches, none of them can by any means redeem his Brother, nor give to God a
ransom for him: They trust in outward things, as if they were enduring
substance, and their hearts are lifted up with thoughts of their Wealth and
Riches; they think not seriously of changes to come; they trust in their
strength and healthy tempers in their Youth, they rest their hearts in their
present carnal contentments, sinful pleasures, etc. as if these things should
always continue; whereas they can neither rescue or ransom themselves or
dearest friends from the power of death, that he should live for ever, and not
see corruption: For he sees that wise men die, likewise the f^ol and the
brutish person shall perish, and leave their wealth to others. This shows
their great sensuality and sottishnes, that though they have daily experience
of divorces and separations made by death between men and their wealth, their
honors, their pleasures, and that they are forced to leave all, and go naked
out of the world; yet they do not apply this, and make it their own case; but
they go on even like to the brute beasts, which when they see one of their own
herd led away to the slaughterhouse, regard it not; but delight as much as
before in their fat pastures, sitting themselves daily more and more for the
same end. So these, though they see those that were framed of the same clay
with themselves, drop away, and return to their dust; yet they mind it not,
unless it be for a short fit, but set their hearts upon these things, as much
as if they had never heard of any that had been taken away by death. For their
inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, etc. The Spirit
of God here looks into the inside, and rippeth open the bosoms of these
earthly-minded persons, and shows what thoughts and hopes they have even of
perpetuities here on earth: and so they love and strive for these things, as if
there were eternity in them, as if they were everlasting things. Nevertheless
man being in honor abides not, he is like the beasts that perish. Let him
enjoy never so much of these things, yet he abides not; there shall come a
change, all shall be turned upside down, and he shall become like the beasts
that perish. As he is sottishly and sensually affected with things present like
the beast, so he shall return to the earth like it, and be turned out of all,
ver. 13. This their way is their folly, yet their posterity approve their
sayings. It is a sad thing, that when experience has taught the world so often
the vanity of such thoughts, yet that those that come after should be of the
same mind too, think as they thought, do as they did, live as they lived. The
Psalmist adds, Selah!] and it is well worthy even of a note of wonder and
astonishment. Children see their Parents sins, and see how they are taken away;
and all their pride and covetousness, etc. does them no good; the pleasure of
all is vanished and gone; it is no more: yet will they run blindly on in the
same way; so will others that come after them: Neighbors and acquaintance
though they see this, yet they will follow them, and tread in their steps; this
is their folly, Selah! it is remarkable folly. Ver. 14. Like sheep they are
laid in their grave, Death shall feed on them, etc. As sheep dying in the
field, are devoured and fed upon by Ravens, and other birds of prey and beasts
of the field; so death shall not only slay them, but feed upon them, it shall
consume them, and turn them into rottenness and dust. Then says he, The
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning. After this long night
wherein death shall feed on them in the grave, the morning light of that great
day shall arise upon them, when all shall rise again; and then the
Righteousness shall have dominion over them, and sit in Judgment upon them. Oh
how many changes are here which they do not effectually foresee and provide
for! Friends are taken from them; they are taken from their wealth; Death
kills them, Death feeds on them: and if here were an end, it were nothing:
but then comes that great day after this long night, when they must be
awakened by the last Trumpet, and see the Righteous whom despised, sit as
Judges over them. But Ver. 15. The Psalmist shows, how he had taken into
consideration aforehand all these things, and was prepared for them. But God
will redeem my Soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive me,
Selah! David did not settle his heart upon any things of the world, but he
looked for death, and prepared for it, made account of being Death's prisoner
in the grave; but then withal he had overcome death, and the grave before hand
by the power of faith, laying hold of the promise of God, knowing that he
should be ransomed and redeemed from it; not as the wicked, whose hearts were
set upon the things of the world, to be carried from the prison of the grave to
execution: but he knew, that the Lord would receive him to glory, and upon this
he sets a special note again, Selah! Then he shows what little cause any
child of God has to be troubled at the outward prosperity of the wicked, and
in the end concludes all with this speech, Man that is in honor, and
understands not, is like the beasts that perish. Let him be never so highly
advanced and enriched; yet if he does not understandingly consider of changes
likely to come upon him, but glut himself with the things of this present life,
he is more like a beast than a man, and makes no use of that reasonable soul
which God has given him above a beast, whereby he has an ability to look
beyond these things that lie before his eyes for the present, and to make use
of his experience in those changes which he has seen in others; applying to
himself, and reasoning from one thing to another, and so to provide for the
like to come upon himself. You see here the very picture of a caranal secure
heart, settled upon its lees, embracing this present world, and doting upon it;
not foreseeing nor providing for those many changes and turnings of things that
are likely to happen, and especially that great change that shall certainly
come, death, the grave, and resurrection unto Judgment. Which were they
thoroughly sensible of, they should have a low esteem of these perishing
vanities, and uncertainties under the Sun, and not hazard their dear Souls by
too much affecting, and too eager seeking after them.

CHAP. IV.
Use 2. WE are all here to be exhorted in a more serious manner to set before
our eyes and hearts a more deep consideration of those changes that may befall
us, and especially of that which must certainly come, and to provide against
them. The Prophet Habakkuk says, I will stand upon my Watch, and set me upon
the Tower, and will watch to see what the Lord will say unto me, and what I
shall answer when I (...) reproved. He was before like one standing upon the
lower ground, looking upon things present, things that lay before him, viz. The
present prosperity of the wicked prevailing over the Church, and was troubled
at it in his thoughts to see the wicked devour the man that was more righteous
than he; Chap. 1. 13. Hereupon he is tempted to complain of the Lords ways of
Providence, and his manner of governing the world. But now being sensible of
his error, he would get upon the higher ground, upon a watchtower, that he
might see into changes that should come afterward, and discern things afar
off; when the wicked should be most severely punished for all their cruelty in
oppressing the people of God. So Christians, when they stand upon the lower
ground, and consult with flesh and blood, and look upon things with fleshy
eyes, their thoughts are bent upon things that are at hand, even present
things: but they must get upon the watchtower, raise up their hearts in holy
meditations upon the word, so that they may see afar off what is coming, and
what shall be hereafter; what changes of things shall happen in time to come.
When Jehu had the Kingdom of Israel bestowed upon him with a charge to execute
Justice on the wicked house of Ahab, he rode in his Charet with other Captains
and Soldiers to Jezreel, 2 Kings Chap. 9.
where Joram the King, and his confederate Abaziah King of Judah were together,
in Verse. 17. it is said, There stood a Watch upon the Tower in Jezreel, and he
espied the Company of Jehu as he came; and when a Messenger was sent out and
detained, he could see this too, and give the King knowledge of it: yea, and a
second time he could see who it was too ere the King saw him at all (as it
seems) standing upon the lower ground. And the driving (says he) is like the
driving of Jehu the Son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously. Then says Joram,
make ready, when he was even upon his back; But then it was too late, he was
now within the reach of Jehu's Bow. So whiles the wicked are secure, and
content themselves with present things, they foresee not dangers, miseries,
death, destruction marching furiously toward them, until it be too late, the
poisoned shafts of death piercing through their hearts, and cleaving the body
and soul asunder. But a Christian must be a watchman, and still stand upon his
watchtower, that he may descry changes and dangers afar off; that he may see
death riding post toward him on his pa^e horse, Revel. 6. 8. and Hell
following, that he may betimes provide against it, and may escape the sting of
death, laying hold on Christ, and may escape the damnation of Hell. Death has
many thousands by the throat ere ever they see it coming, and arm themselves
against it. They use to say of such, who when they first ^ell sick had the
symptoms of death upon them, that they were taken with death. Beloved, every
one that death surpriseth before he be provided for it, may well be said to be
taken with death. Death has taken hold of all such, and has them within it is
power. But he that is aforehand with death, and is a partaker of life in
Christ, cannot be taken with it, but he has death rather in his power, and is
a conqueror over death by the power of Christ. Others are taken unprovided;
they are taken sleeping in their sins, when death drives it is nail into their
heads, as Jael did into the head of Sisera. Oh, then be watchful to foresee
and provide for changes to come! Sickness may be coming, poverty may be coming,
general calamities may be at hand; Wars may be marching furiously toward a
Land; the Angel may be coming with his destroying Sword; The Arrows of
Pestilence may (...) now laid to the Bow, and drawn to the he^^ and ready to
fly abroad among us: Darkne^ may be coming, the loss of the glorious Gospel of
Christ may be at hand; Antichrist may be coming: Howsoever these things may
fall out, it is most certain, that Death is a coming not many days journey
from each of our doors, and perhaps even now ready (...) knock at some of our
gates. None of (...) know, who shall be first visited by it: and they that are
not provided for it aforehand may assure themselves, that Hell will follow
Death close at the heels. Oh then learn to (...) daily! that death may become
familiar to you, and not come as a stranger, or an enemy, or an Executioner
when it does come; but rather as a friend, to let your Souls out of this prison
of the flesh, that ye may enter into glory and blessedness.

SERMON VI.
Eccles. ^2. 1. -- nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
CHAP. I.
IN this last Clause of the Verse, the days of Old Age are opposed unto the
days of Youth, in these terms, The years wherein (...) shall say, I have no
pleasure in them. Hence I note,

Observe. That this short and mortal life may outlast the pleasures and all the
contentments of this life. This life is short, yet as short as it is, it many
times is longer than the comforts of this life, longer than the delights and
pleasures of this world. There (...) be years within the compass of this shor^
(...), wherein a man shall find no pleasure, (...) shall be weary of himself.
Man is bu^ of short continuance; the longest liver among men shall quickly go
hence; and ye^ many a man and woman may, and do outlive the comforts of their
lives; survive al^ the pleasure and contentment that ever they had here below.
And if something remain, wherein they can take delight, yet it is so little in
comparison of those things which they have lost, that they think their good
days be gone and past. They have lived to see the pleasures of life vanish
away life smoke, and do often look back with (...) hearts upon the times
wherein they enjoyed such and such things, wherein it was thus and thus with
them. So it was with David; he had been a victorious King, and prosper^^
exceedingly in his ways; but in the lat^^ part of his life, his Daughter was
deflow^^^ by his Son, and that Son killed by another Son when he was feasting:
the same Son rebelled against his Father, defiled his Concubines, sought his
life, and was slain in rebellion. Then Sheba rebelleth, and not long after
David lies bedridden, and no clothes could keep him warm, 1 Kings 1. Whe^^ were
now the pleasures of life? might (...) he very well have said of these last
years (...) his life, I have no pleasure in them. It is true he did comfort
himself in God, and in (...) assured expectation of a better life, but the
pleasures of this life were gone and past: and if he had been one of those that
have hope only in this life, what good had all the former pleasures of this
life done him? That which was verified of this good King, was true also of one
of his best Subjects, viz. Barzillai the Gileadite, who had so liberally
supplied King David, when he was forced to flee from Absalom. The King would
now have him to be his Guest at the Court, and to live with him at Jerusalem:
But thus he answers David, 1 Kings 19. 35. I am this day fourscore years old,
and can I discern between good and evil? Can I taste what I eat, or what I
drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women?
Wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden to my Lord the King? The
pleasures of this life are gone with me, says Barzillai, I was wont I could
relish my Meat and Drink, now I cannot: Music now is no Music to me, I have
outlived the delights of this world.

Now if these men did out live the outward comforts and contentments of this
life, how much more do many wicked persons? How was it with Saul? He was
preferred beyond his expectation before all the men of Israel: He overcame the
Ammonites and Philistines, and was in a flourishing estate: But for his sin the
Lord blasted all the comforts of his life, took away those gifts of his Spirit
from him, whereby he had fitted him for the Kingdom; suffered an evil Spirit to
vex and torment him; gave him over to torment himself with envy and bitterness
of spirit, to vex himself with David's success* answers him not in his
distress; leaves him to consult with a Witch, and thereupon to receive a sad
answer, and to hear his doo^, which soon after was executed upon him* Thus ye
see in these examples how this sho^ mortal life lasts beyond the pleasures
and comforts of this life. We have also a notable example in this kind in King
Jehora^ a wicked Son of a good Father: He had a flourishing Kingdom left by his
Father; but after that he had slain his Brethren, and wrought much wickedness,
the Kingdom of Edom revolted from him, Ver. 9. 10. So did the City of Libnah.
He was severely threatened from Heaven, Ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. which threatenings
took effect accordingly. The Philistines and Arabians brake into his Kingdom,
entered his Place, took away his Goods, his Wives, his Sons, all save (...)
youngest, Ver. 16, 17. Then also the Lord smote him with an incurable Disease
in his Bowels, and after two years torment (as it seems) his Body rotted, and
his Bowels fell out, so that he died of sore Diseases, and had not that honor
at his Funeral which was usually done unto Kings: See how his life out-lasted
the comforts of his life, and yet his life was short; he died when he was about
forty years old, and reigned eight years.

Now ye may see by these examples, that there are two ways in general by which
it comes to pass; that the comforts of this life are shorter than life it
self, and that this life out-lasteth them all: and that is, 1. By reason of old
age. 2. By reason of crosses and afflictions. 1. In respect of old age: so it
was with David and Barzillai: So it is expressed at large in this last Chapter
of Ecclesiastes; where he shows how the days of old age are such many times
that a man has no pleasure in them; and shows at large how the several parts
of the body decay, and the powers of nature fail. The Grasshopper shall be a
burthen] that is, every little thing shall trouble them. And desire shall fail.]
They shall have no mind to any thing: Therefore also it must needs be that
delights should fail, they should joy in nothing; all the pleasures of Youth,
and the delights of Life are gone. Moses says, Psalm. 90. 10. The days of our
years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be
fourscore, yet is their strength but labor and sorrow. Yea, and some ere they
be threescore, do feel the burden of Old Age, as much as others do at
fourscore. 2. In respect of sufferings and afflictions, some do outlive the
comforts and pleasures of this life. So did Job: but that afterward the Lord
restored his prosperity to him in an extraordinary manner. So Saul (it seems)
in respect of age might have enjoyed many a fair year) but all was blasted, and
his Kingdom did him little, good. The Lord declared himself against him. So ye
see in the example of Jehoram: the Lord may take away those comforts from a
man, that the loss of them may drown all the pleasures of this life, embitter
all those sweets that this world can afford to us.

CHAP. II.
THe Reason in general is the sin of man: that has shortened life, and made it
mortal, which (had it not been for sin) should have been imortal. That has
made the comforts of life shorter than life it self, which should have been
everlasting, as life it self should have been immortal, had not sin given a
deadly wound both to the life of man, and to the comforts of this life. Man
should have had no thorns nor thistles to have vexed him in Paradise, if he had
not let Sin into the Garden; but Sin being let in cast him out into a thorny
world full of miseries, whereby his short life was made bitter to him, and the
pleasures of life not so long-lived as life it self.

Many times the special sins of men are the cause of this, and that both of
God's Children and of the wicked. The special sins of the Godly, as in David:
his sins into which he fell, made the latter part of his life full of
bitterness: and had not he been able to comfort himself in God, and to have
refreshed his heart with his saving love and mercy, how could he have been able
to bear up his Spirit under such grievous burdens?

So the Lord does many times change the outward condition of his Children, and
causes them in stead of many outward comforts formerly enjoyed, to eat the
bread and drink the water of afflictions; and causes sad times to pass over
them; insomuch that all the comforts of this life do no way yield them so much
content, as their outward afflictions do bring bitterness upon them.

On the other side, the special sins of the wicked, do sometimes move the Lord
to turn their laughter into mourning, and to bring a a dark Cloud on all the
Sunshine of their outward comforts, so that all things in the world shall look
sad upon them, and this he seems to do for two causes.

1. To bring them home to himself, that being taken off from carnal contentment
in outward delights, and brought to deal seriously with their own hearts, and
to consider their ways; and finding nothing in the world for their hearts to
rest upon, they may be made to turn to the Lord, and to seek peace with him,
and comfort in his love. Thus it was with Manasseh, whiles he flourished in his
Kingly dignity, and had what his heart could wish, how did he exceed in
wickedness? But when the Lord gave him that blow by the hand of the King of
Babylon, which struck him down from his Throne, and said him in fetters; then
in his affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of
him, etc. 2 Chronicles. 33, 11, 12, 13.

2. The Lord seems to do this many times to manifest his Justice, and to let
the wicked know what they are to look for in another world. Thus he seems to
have dealt with Pharaoh, Saul, and many others. This I am persuaded, the Lord
does often aim at even in those changes which are brought with Old Age. Many
which have been flourishing in their days, and abused their prosperity, their
bodies decay with old age, and their outward means wither together with them,
and they are set before the world for spectacles, wherein men may read the
vanity of all things under the Sun, together with the fading and uncertain
condition of all the comforts of this life. I mean of such, who after Youth and
riper years spent in sin and impenitency, do afterward go creeping under the
burden of Old Age, and have no heart to seek the Lord in sincerity; but their
hearts die within them, and become like Nabals, having lost the content which
they took before in the pleasures of sin, and wanting grace to raise their
hearts to the Lord, that they might delight their Souls in him. Many such
examples may be observed in the world.

3. Sometimes the Lord does this to exercise the graces of his Children, and to
make them examples unto others of patience and stedfastness in his ways: as it
was with Job, who continued in his integrity after that those great changes
were brought upon him.

CHAP. III.
Use. I. HEnce we may be brought to a consideration of the shortness and
uncertainty of all the contentments of this present life. How short is life it
self? And yet the pleasures of life are shorter than life, Psalm. 39. 5. Behold
thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, says David. There is the life of
man measured by a span: it is but an handful long; not an Inch long compared
to eternity: for so it follows; Mine age is as nothing before thee. Compare
it to eternity, and it is nothing. The days of a man's life are not worth the
reckoning, not worth numbering. Nay, compare it not only to the eternity of God,
who is from everlasting to everlasting; but make the comparison between the
time of this life, and the immortality and everlasting continuance of the Soul
of man in another world either in misery or blessedness, and it is as nothing.
What then are all the pleasures and contentments which this life can afford,
which usually are expired before life it self? The year is but short, and
quickly turned about in its several seasons: how soon is the Spring gone? How
soon the Summer? The Autumn is quickly spent, and the Winter is not long ere it
be ended: but the pleasures of the year last not so long as the year it self.
When once Winter appears, we may say, where are all the flowers and Rose-buds
of the Spring? They are long since dead and withered, yet the year is not
ended: within a few weeks what will become of all the green leaves that have
beautified the Trees: they will fall and die. Within a few months what will
become of all the green grass that cloatheth the Earth? It will be dead, and
lose its beauty and sweetness. Now unto the year ye may compare this present
life: to the flowers, blossoms, leaves, grass, you may compare the pleasures,
delights and contentments of this life: The year is short, and quickly gone;
yet the flowers, blossoms, leaves, etc. are gone before it. So life is short,
and soon spent, yet the pleasures and contentments of this life are spent
before it. In the eleventh verse of the same Psalm, David says, When thou with
rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away
like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Thou make his beauty, and all those
delights, and that prosperity wherein he flourished, and took contentment, to
consume and wither like corn that is blasted: surely every man is vanity. At
the end of the fifth verse he says; Verily, every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity. Take him at his best estate, when he has the most of those
things which belong to this life, strength and health, wit and understanding,
wealth, worldly honors, credit with the world, and respect from worldly men,
yet even then this holy Prophet guided by the spirit of truth, doubts not to
pronounce or proclaim him mere vanity; an empty thing, a bubble, a bladder
swollen big, but filled with wind. Take him as he is a mere man, not renewed by
the Spirit of God, not having Christ dwelling in him: and take him at his best
with all those things with which this mortal life is capable of, and wherewith
this lower world wherein we live, can furnish him, and he is but vanity; there
is nothing sound, nothing solid nor substantial in him: his life and the
pleasures of this life are but for a moment, and of the two the pleasures of
this life usually are the shorter, and sooner ended than life it self. The
Apostle says, 1 Pet. 1. 24. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as
the flower of the grass; the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades
away. Man and his mortal life are like the grass: the glory and prosperity of
man's life is as the flower of the grass. The grass it self is not long-lived,
but the flower of the grass is dead before the grass it self. Life is not long,
but the flower of life, the pleasure and prosperity of life is shorter than
life it self, Jam. 4. 14. What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away. Where the Apostle meets with the
fond thoughts of our fleshly hearts: for when a man is strong and healthy, and
in prosperity, and enjoys the pleasures of this life, he thinks he has
gotten a jewel, and his heart rests in these things, he thinks it is well
with him: Oh this life, and that which belongs to it, is a thing which he
does highly prize, and sets a great rate upon it. Now says St. James, What
is your life? Ye think ye have a great treasure of it, I pray what is it? What
is that life which ye do so highly esteem? I will tell you says he, it is even
a vapor that appears: it has rather an appearance than a being. It makes
some show in the eyes of the world, but it is nothing in a manner; and that
show and appearance which it makes, is but for a time, and when the time is
gone, it is as if it had never been; it is all lost, man is never the better
for it; for those things which are limited within the compass of time, and
measured by a term of days or years, both in respect of themselves and their
fruit, all the good of them wears out with that time, and he that enjoyed
them, is never the better for them, no more than if he had never had them. I
speak of those things which in themselves and in their fruit are measured by
time; for some things in respect of themselves, and their continuance, are but
for a time; but the fruit of them is everlasting to those that use them in an
holy and sanctified manner, to those who receive the truth in love into honest
and good hearts, in whom it becomes an immortal seed, enlivened and actuated
with the Spirit of life and holiness; yea, there are some principal graces,
which end with time in respect of themselves, but in respect of their fruit are
everlasting, as Faith and Hope which cease with this life, but in their fruit
are perpetua and immortal. Nay, even many outward things in the possession of a
Child of God, being sanctified to him, and improved by him to the glory of God,
though they are mortal and temporal in themselves, yet they have an everlasting
fruit; so that a Child of God that is rich in good works, may be the better for
his wealth for ever. The Psalmist speaking of him that fears the Lord, and
delights greatly in his Commandments, speaks of his wealth and riches,
Psalm. 112. 3. and ver. 9. of the good use of them. He has dispersed, he has
given to the poor: and then of the everlasting fruit of wealth so employed with
such an heart; he says, His righteousness endures for ever. So Matthew. 6. 20
says our Savior: Lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through, nor steal.
But now to an unregenerate man, both his life it self, and all the good he
enjoys in this life, and all the fruit of that life, and that good is
temporal, and limited by time. All his pleasures, and prosperity, and all the
fruit of these end with time; and so when the time is past, and these do him no
good, he is never the better for them, no more than if he had ^ever possessed
them. Take two natural men living and dying in that estate; the one ^ich, and
the other a stark beggar: the rich man's case is not a jot better, when the
time of this life is worn out, than the others; it may be worse because of his
unthankfulness, and the abuse of his wealth. So take a natural man that has
enjoyed abundance of pleasures, and another that has scarce seen any good
days all his life long; if both of them live and die in their natural estate,
they are both alike: the pleasures that the one has had, do him no more good,
than if he had never had any more than the other: It may be they have increased
his condemnation exceedingly. Now St. James says, that life is but for a time,
or rather it appears but for a time: so the pleasures of life are but for a
time; nay, it follows there, life appears but for a little time; and the
pleasures of life are shorter than life; and therefore their time is less than
life, and the^ says he, life vanishes away, and the pleasures of life must
needs vanish with it, (...) they be gone before it, as many times (...) are:
for as ye see in the Text, a man may l^ve such years, whereof he may say and
think, I have no pleasure in them: wherein he may say, in his heart, Alas! I
breath yet, I keep above ground, I yet live, but I have outlived all the
comforts of my life, they are as it were dead and buried; I shall never en^oy
them any more: so that he can look back upon his former comforts and prosperity
with a sad heart, and weeping-eye, comparing it with his present sorrows, as
(...) did, as ye may read at large in the 29th. and 30th. Chapters of that
Book. In the 29th he expresses his former prosperity, in the 30th his present
affliction. In Chap. 29. 2. (...) says* Oh that I were as in months past, as
(...) the days wherein God preserved me; (...) his candle shined upon mine
head, and when by his light, I walked through darkness! So he goes on. Even so
man lives to that day, when he can reckon up a great many comforts as so many
los^es: things once enjoyed, now gone, and can compare them with many crosses
now lying upon them: for sometimes the Lord takes away men's wealth, so that
those who have lived plentifully, are brought to a poor and hard condition:
sometimes their health, that men are afflicted with languishing or painful
diseases, that their wealth does them little good; they cannot enjoy it.
Sometimes he leaves them health and wealth, but takes away those friends that
are dearer to them than either: the loss of whom embitte^eth all those things
that are left them. Sometimes he depriveth them of liberty, and these things
come alike to all; sometimes he prolongeth their lives unto old age, and
burtheneth their old age with so many infirmities and grievances, that their
life is but a ling^ing death unto them. Sometimes he takes away their sight,
sometimes their hearing etc. and sometimes he leaves them to the g^awings and
gripings of a guilty conscience, not cleansed and washed by the blood of
Christ. Thus many ways, and in many respects ye see, that the pleasures and
prosperity of life may be made shorter than this short life it self.

CHAP. IV.
II. IN the second place this should serve to wean us from the love of this
world, and the things of this life, whether it be wealth, or pleasure, or
wordly credit, or health or strength, or friends or children that we set our
hearts upon, or take content in: how soon may all, or any of these be taken
from us? or how soon may some such heavy blow from the hand of the Lord fall
upon us, as may strike dead all the delight and comfort which we took in these?
Therefore as the Prophet says, Isai. 2. 22. Cease ye from man whose breath is
in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Cease to put your trust,
or place your content in man, whether men of high degree, or of low degree, for
he is a mortal creature, soon gone. When that fading flee^ing breath that
issues in and out at his nostrils, is stopped by death, he is gone: and
wherein is he to be accounted of? What reckoning should be made of so frail a
creature? So in this case I say, cease ye from the things of this life, for
they have their breath in their nostrils (as it were) they are frail,
short-lived comforts; and wherein are they to be accounted of? Here then is
Christian wisdom to have the heart crucified to these things when they are at
best, and when a man has most of them: then to die to the world, and to look
upon the best things of the world, and the greatest outward comforts of this
life as upon so many dead things: to affect them, and make account of them as
so many shadows and empty vanities to use them as dying things. I am crucified
to the world (says the Apostle) and the world is crucified to me. This is
Christian wisdom when a man can so carry his affections toward the greatest
comforts of this life, as he would to a thing that is crucified, to a thing
already nailed to the cross, and dying. It were a vain thing to take a few
flowers and blossoms in the Spring, and to lock them up safe in a Cabinet, like
so many precious Stones, or Pearls of great value, meaning to keep them many
years: whereas if he look upon them the next week, he shall find them dead and
withered, their beauty is gone. And is it not yet a far greater ^olly to lock
up the fading comforts of this life in that precious Cabinet of thy Heart and
Soul, as as if they were everlasting treasures, as if they were some enduring
substance? such a heart is poorly furnished. For an immortal Soul that must
live for ever, to be stuffed and filled with perishing trash, it is as if a
rich Cabinet of Gold, beset with Pearls, should be filled with dust and dross;
yea, it is far worse, such a soul is miserably furnished; when the Soul wherein
Christ should dwell, the Sold which should be a Temple of the Holy Ghost, the
Soul that should be stored and furnished with heavenly graces, shall be stuffed
and filled with such rubbish and ^rash as men gather from the dunghill of this
world, with the things of this life, that are shorter than life it self. So St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 3^, 31. This I say Brethren, the time is short, it
remains, that both they that have Wives, be as though they had none: and they
that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not: and they that buy, a^ though they possessed not: and they that
use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away.
It is always in fluxu, still in passage, ever flee^ing, going, vanishing.
Therefore go not about to keep that in thine immortal Soul, which will not be
kept, which will not abide with thee, but will suddenly be gone, and is already
going, and sliding from thee: but we shall never be beaten from this, unless we
take possession of better things, and lay hold (...) the enduring s^bstance.

PIOUS FATHERS, the Glory of CHILDREN. AND GODLY CHILDREN the Glory of FATHERS.

By WILLIAM GEARING, Minister of the Word.

Maxima debetur puer's reverentia.

Juvenal. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, 1669.

Pious Fathers, the Glory of Children, etc.
Proverbs, 17. 6. Childrens Children are the Crown of old men, and the Glory of
Children are their Fathers.
CHAP. I.
THE Proverbs are like Manna scattered upon the ground by Solomon, which his
Servants gathered up, and put into the Pot for the benefit of Gods people. It
is labor in vain to seek the dependence of them one upon another; for they do
not (like Jacob and Esau) catch one another by the heel. The Text therefore
being an independent Proposition, I will first open the words, then draw some
doctrinal conclusions from them.

Children.] To have Children, is every way in Scripture commended for a great
blessing, Psalm. 127. 3. Lo, Children are an Heritage of the Lord, etc.] Lo,
being prefixed, implies, that a numerous posterity is an admirable blessing.
Worldlings look upon many Children as a great Charge, not as a temporal
blessing. Children are an Heritage of the Lord.] Implying they do descend from
God, as an Inheritance from the Father to the Child. The word implies a free
gracious blessing.

Childrens Children] Here is blessing upon blessing. That thou art a Father of
a Child is a blessing: and that thy Child is a Father of Children is a
superadded blessing. This was the blessing of Rebecca by her friends at her
departure. Grow into thousand thousands, Genesis 24. 60. Blessed is the man that
has his quiver full of Children, says the Psalmist. When the Lord would show
the manner of his blessing to the Jews after their return from captivity, he
thus describes it. The streets of the City shall be full of Boys and Girls,
Zech. 8. 5. It is not only a reward and blessing to the rich to be full of
Children, but it is specified as a blessing upon the p^or; that the Lord will
make him a family like a flock of sheep, Psalm. 107. 4^.

Are the Crown of old men.] That is, it is the honor of old men: or, posterity
is a crown of honor. Then the 3d generation is a treble Crown of honor.
Joseph saw Ephraims Children, of the third generation: the Children also of
Machir, the Son of Manasseh, were born upon Joseph's knees, Genesis 50, 23. Of the
Lord's blessing the last days of Job more than the first; it is said that Job
had seven Sons, and three Daughters; and that after this Job lived an hundred
and forty years, and saw his Sons, and his Son's Sons, even four generations,
Job 42. 13, 16.

And the glory of Children are their Fathers. As the Children are the ornament
and honor of old age: so the aged Fathers are to be an honor of their dear
Posterity. Honor descends from Father to Children, and ascends from
Children to Fathers.

CHAP. II.
Obs. HEre we may observe that Fathers are, and ought to be the honor and
glory of their Children. Or, Fathers ought so to live, that they may be the
glory of their Children. I shall only insist upon the last clause of my Text.
The glory of Children are their Fathers. Children are not always the glory of
old men, no.] foolish Children, of the Tribe of B^lial, a riotous, drunken,
wan^on, blaspemous, and irreligious posterity; or Children are a reproach to
their Father, and a shame to their Mother: such crosses as do embitter all
their worldly comforts, and bring down their gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave. Therefore the words are not to be understood de (...), of a numerous
posterity, of having many Children: for the more wicked Children men have, the
greater reproach and sorrow. Neither are the words to be understood de (...),
of fair, comely, witty Children: for though these be outward ornaments, yet
they may be wantons, drunkards, very fools, and so a reproach to their Fathers.
Absalom was a fair and proper man, but David's heavy cross. Esau was a strong
man, but Isaac's cross; the Spirit of God calls him profane Esau, Hebr. 12.
But the words are meant de pia posteritate, of a godly posterity, of pious and
religious Children: they, and only they are the glory of old men, the joy,
hope, comfort, and support of their aged Parents. Such Chldren are called Olive
Plants and Arrows: Olive branches for cheerfulness, and Arrows for strength and
protection. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not
be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate, Psalm. 127. 4, 5.

So again, the words are not to be taken for all Fathers, for there are Fathers
that be disparagements, a shame, a reproach to their Children, Atheistical,
drunken, blasphemous, adulterous, oppressing Fathers are the stinking
reproaches of their surviving posterity; they are not the glory of their
Children: so the words are not to be meant of their descent. Many glory, that
they are descended of such a noble and honorable Stock, from such wealthy or
ancient Families. It is an extrinsecal honor and privilege, and indeed it is
the great Diana of the world. But this is nothing, if their Fathers were
drunkards, whoremongers, blasphemers, persecutors, heretics; these foul vices
(like the Plague of Leprosy in the wall) make such extrinsecal privileges to
be vile and base. As it was said of Naaman the Syrian, Captain of the Host of
the King of Syria, that he was a great man with his master, and honorable, he
was also a mighty man in valor, but he was a Lepper, 2 Kings 5. 1. So for any
one to say, that such a Gentleman's Father was a drunkard, or a swearer, or an
ungodly man, or the like; is a reproach, and no honor to his posterity. But it
is meant of godly, wise, religious Fathers, they are a glory of their Children.

CHAP. III.
GOdly Fathers are said to be a glory of their Children in these following
respects.

I. Their very graces are their own and their Childrens glory, Prove. 16. 31.
The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.
Their very silver hairs are their crowns. It behooveth the young to reverence
them for their age. Hoary hair is a Crown set upon the heads of godly men by
God himself, therefore we ought to reverence them. Then a^e their silver hairs
true crowns of glory, when they are found in a way of righteousness. Grace is
the Crown of old age. The holiness, heavenly-mindedness, gracious counsels,
pious instructions, and godly conversations of aged persons, wins honor and
reverence. To see aged men to be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in
charity, in patience: and the aged women likewise to be in behavior as
becomes holy women, to be teachers of good things, to be discreet, chaste, etc.
this is a Crown of glory to them. Otherwise, though men and women live long,
and are found in the way of sin, they are a cursed people, Isai. 65. 20. The
sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. An old drunkard, an old
swearer, an old whoremonger, an old profane worldling is a wicked wretch.
Diogenls being asked, what was the saddest spectacle in the world, answered, an
old man in misery. But an old man in misery, is not so vile an object, as an
old man in his sins. To see an old man durunk; to hear oaths, curses,
revilings, ribauldry, come from the mouths of aged persons, is a most
lamentable thing. Poor wretches! they lie under the evil of Age which is
burdensome; and they have the evil of Sin upon them, which is intolerable; and
may daily expect, when their gray hairs shall be brought down with sorrow to
the grave, yea, to the pit of Hell.

II. It is Children's glory, that they are descended from such gracious and
aged Parents. We see how the world esteems of descent from men of noble
birth, from ancient Stocks and Families. But this is nothing, if Children do
degenerate from their generous and noble Ancestors. In this respect, if any
glory be due, it is due to the Parents, not to the Children, unless they tread
in the steps of their worthy Parents: which gave occasion to Cicero, to
reprehend Cateline, by comparing the antiquity of his blood, with the vitiosity
of his manners; who says of him, That he was not more famous by the Nobility
of his Parents, than ignominious by his own notorious Vices. It is a vanity for
men to derive their Pedigrees from ancient Houses, and to carry themselves
unworthy such Ancestors: surely the Nobility and goodness of their Progenitors
cannot so much credit them, as their own badness and wickedness will discredit
them: But if nobility of blood be joined with grace and virtue, it is highly to
be esteemed. Now if men account it an honor to them to be nobly descended:
surely much greater honor it is to descend from godly Parents; grace and
godliness being much better than all outward wealth, riches, honor and
greatness. This was the glory and boast of the Children of Israel, that they
had Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for their Fathers. We have Abraham to be our
Father, said the Jews, Matthew. 3. 9. Our Father Jacob.] said the woman of
Samaria, Jo^. 4. 12. and St. Paul speaking of the privileges of the Jews, puts
in this for a great privilege, Romans 9. 5. Of whom are the Fathers. So it is
the glory and crown of Children, when they have believing Fathers; when it can
be said of them, as of our Savior, Who was the Son of Enos, which was the Son
of Seth, which was the Son of Adam, which was the Son of God, Luke 3. 38. So it
is spoken to the honor of such a Child, when it is said, He is the Son of such
a godly Father, and such a godly Mother; who were, and are the Sons and
Daughters of God. Solomon sets it down as an honor to him, that he was the Son
of David, Prove. 1. 1. The Proverbs of Solomon, the Son of David, King of
Israel. It might well be an honor to Solomon to have the Title, which was
afterward given to Jesus Christ, Mat. 1. 1. It was an honor to young Timothy,
that the unfeigned Faith that was in him, dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois,
and in his Mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1. 5.

III. It is their glory and Crown, in that they can glory in this, that God
was, and is the Father of their Fathers. It is a frequent title in Scripture
given to God [The God of our Fathers.] It is that wherein the faithful boast.
Except the God of my Father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac had been
with me, says Jacob to Laban: that is, that God whom his Father Isaac feared,
or worshipped, Genes. 31. 42. God himself glories in this title. I am the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Israel. The Lord appeared unto
Isaac at Beer-sheba, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy Father, Genes. 26.
24. So the Lord said unto Jacob, I am God, the God of thy Father, Genes. 46. 3.
So the Lord said unto Moses, I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3. 6. And when he sent Moses to
the Children of Israel, he said unto him, Thus shall thou say unto the Children
of Israel, The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob, has sent me unto you. This is my Name for ever, and my
Memorial unto all Generations, ver. 15. This is a memorial of my faithfulness,
of my truth and constancy in my promises made with your Fathers, that all
succeeding Generations may see, and acknowledge me to be a God keeping Truth
and Covenant for ever. The glorious God is not ashamed to be called the Father
of his people; neither is Christ ashamed to be called their Brother. Now that
their believing Parents are thus allied to God, to Jesus Christ, to all the
company of Angels and Saints, what an honor and crown of glory is this unto
the Children?

IV. The Parents being in Covenant, makes their Children holy, this is a glory
to their Children. 1 Cor. 7. 14. because they come of a believing Parent, they
are federally holy; for God covenanteth with believing Parents, that he will be
the God of them, and of their seed. So the Apostle, Rom, 11. 16. If the
first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy, so are
the branches. The Apostle proves there, that the Children of believing Parents
are within the Covenant of God; because the Parents, the Children too.
Therefore that the seed of the Jews are not finally rejected, for they be the
seed of faithful Abraham, they spring from that holy root. That which he made
an Argument for the Children of faithful Abraham, is a good Argument for the
Children of all faithful Parents. The Parents being within the Covenant, so
are the Children: for the Children are as the branches, the Parents as the
root: Children as the lump, Parents as the first fruits. It is the ground why
Christian Parents bring their Children to Baptism, to receive the Seal of the
Covenant, because the Children are comprehended in that Covenant, Act. 2. 38,
39. Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins, etc. (says Peter to his hearers) for the Promise is to
you, and unto your Children. God owneth such for his people, for his Sons and
Daughters, who are in Covenant with him. Other people are called by the name of
that Idol-god which they worshipped; as the Moabites. were called the people of
Chemosh, because they worshipped an Idol so called, Jerem. 48. 46. So likewise
the Ammonites are called the people of Milcom, because they worshipped an Idol
so called. And Euripides calls the Athenians the people of Minerva, because
they worshipped that Goddess: by this you may gather that those whom God owns
for his people, are in Covenant; for to be the people of God is a
Covenant-stile: and this the Children of all believing Parents are.

V. Godly Parents are a glory and honor to their Children, in that for their
sakes the blessing of the Lord falls upon their Children, Prove. 20. 7. The just
man walks in his integrity, his Children are blessed after him. The Hebrew
word denotes one that walks in all godliness constantly to the end, (...)
beat itudines, blessings shall be upon his Children. God has graciously
promised, that he will show mercy to thousands of them that love him, and keep
his Commandments. What a motive should this be to Parents, to stir up Parents
to labor after godliness. Ye would have your Children to be rich, and many men
do adventure the loss of their immortal Souls to advance their posterity, now
the blessing of the Lord makes rich, and adds no sorrow with it. God does
sometimes divert his anger from the Children of Godly Parents, and give them
special mercies. It is a frequent passage in Scripture, nevertheless for my
servant David's sake, etc. So God says of Solomon, I will make him Prince all
the days of my life, for David my servant's sake, whom I chose, etc. 1. Kings
10. 34. So in the days of Abijam, it is said, Nevertheless for David 's sake
did the Lord his God give him a Lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his Son after him,
and to establish Jerusalem, 1 Kings 15. 4. God ten says, that he remembers
the Covena^^t that he made with their (...) show how faithful God is in his
promise^ to his believing servants.

VI. It is a glory to a Child, that his Father dies a servant of the Lord: his
death is precious in the sight of the Lord, and in the sight of man. It is the
highest commendation that can be given of any one, that he died the servant of
the Lord, Moses my servant is dead, said God to Josua, Jos. 1. 2^ Such a one is
dead that was the servant of the Lord, what greater commendation than this can
be given to any? Worldlings will say, such a one died worth so many hundreds by
the year, worth so many thousands of pounds; poor creatures! did not the fool
in the Gospel die rich? Did not the glutton die rich? What commendation is it
to say of such a one, he was rich, but a glutton, a fool, an adulterer, an
oppressor, a covetous unjust dealer? What honor is this to the Children of
such a man enjoying his wealth and riches? And as his death is precious, so the
memorial of a good man after his death is precious. The memory of the just
shall endure, but the name of the wicked shall rot.

CHAP. IV.
IN the next place I shall also show, how Children are the glory of their
Fathers.

I. Their filial obedience to their just and lawful commands is an honor to
their Parents. Therefore in the fifth Commandment it is said, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, that is out of reverential obedience to them. St. Paul
says, Ephesians. 6. 2. That it is the first Commandment with promise. But it may be
said, Is not the second Commandment with promise? The answer is twofold.
There is a double Commandment, affirmative, and negative: This is the first
affirmative Commandment: or rather, it is the first Commandment in the second
Table, to show, that next after the care of Religion, our duty to Parents must
be regarded. Diis and Parentibus nunquam satis fit. Aristot.
Aristotle could say, God and Parents cannot be sufficiently required. The
Heathen punished injuries to God, and Parents alike. Valor. lib. 1. Qui dubitat
utrum oporteat Deos revereri, aut Parents, non indiget natione, sed pari
poena. Arist. Topic. lib. 8. He that doubts whether God or Parents be to be
reverenced, needs not to be confuted by reason, but by the same punishment. Now
stubbornness in a Child is a reproach to his Father. Who so keeps the law, is
a wise Son, but he that is a companion of riotous men, shameth his Father,
Prove. 28. 7. God ordained a Law, that such Children should be stoned to death,
and the Parents should be the first that should throw a stone upon them, to
show, how heinous a sin stubbornness is in Children, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21. The sins
of Riot and Drunkenness were not by Moses's Law punishable by death: this
punishment therefore was inflicted upon a riotous Son, in respect of his
disobedience to his Parents, which greatly aggravated his sin, and for which he
was to die, when other Drunkards escaped with lighter punishment. The
Rechabites were an honor to their Father, in that they kept the Commandment
of Jonadab, the Son of Rechab their Father.

II. When they shall give pliable attention to the godly instructions, and
admonitions of their Fathers. A wise Son hears the instructions of his
Father; but a scorner hears not rebuke, Prove. 13. 1. It is an high point of
folly and contempt when the Father is wisely charming, and the Son stops his
ear against the voice of the charmer. Hear ye Children the instruction of a
Father, and attend to know understanding, Prove. 4. 1. Children are sluggish,
and had need to be often called upon to hearken to pious instruction. None can
be more faithful to give counsel to thee, Gregor. Epist. lib. 1.
than he that loves not thine, but thee, says Gregory. Such indeed are
Parents and therefore most worthy to be heard. Godly Parents take care of their
own Souls, and therefore will not neglect the Souls of their Children.
Therefore says Gregory, Commit an^mam diligent: bu suam, commit thy Soul to
them that love their own. Let not Children slight the sharp rebukes of
faithful Parents, seeing it is for the good of their S^uls. Quem enim se^ret,
patrem si n^n ferret suum? Trent. For whom should a Child bear withal, if not
with his own Father?

III. When Children walk in the holy steps of their godly Parents, and are
followers of them, as they are of Christ. Such a one is an honor, and no shame
to his Father. There cannot be a better resemblance between a Child and a
Father, than this spir^tual resemblance in that which is good. This was ever
the praise, or ignominious brand of the Kings of Israel, That those that were
godly, they did walk after the Lord, as did David their Father: or who walked
in the way of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin. So it is the high commendation
of a Son, when it shall be said, he walks in the same holy religious course,
as did, as does his Father. It is the reporach of both, when as they say of a
Child, that he is a drunkard, or a swearer, his Father was so before him. How
does St. John honor the elect Lady in his Epistle to her, with a praiseful
memorial, 2 Epist. Joh. 4. I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy Children
walking in truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.

IV. A wise Son is an honor to a godly Father. A wise Son makes a glad
Father, Prove. 10. 1. So in Prove. 23. 15. My Son, if thine heart^le wise, my
heart shall rejoice, even mine. Such a Son is an honor to his Father while he
lives. My Son be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that
reproacheth me, Prove. 27. 11. Men desire to leave memorials behind them: a wise
and godly Son is a better Monument of a Father, than a stately Palace left
behind him. Absalom having no Son, he built him a Pillar, to keep his Name in
remembrance, 2 Samuel 18. 18. A grave Divine tells us of an ancient Minister of
good note in this Nation, who being unmarried himself, reasoned with a married
Gentlewoman about the best Estate of the two, pleading his great freedom from
family cares, and for his studies: She calls a Child of hers, and catechizeth
him before the Minister. Now Sir (said she) you had need serve God while you
live, for he shall get no glory by you in this world when you are dead. This
Child may honor God, when I am dead and gone, and others that may come from
him to the worlds end. Godly Children, as they are an honor and comfort to
their Parents while they live, so they honor the memory of their Parents, when
they are dead. But as for foolish and wicked Children, they are like Peacocks,
which uncover the house where they roost, or the Ivy, that pulls down the wall
that holds it up.

V. Parents and Children, will be mutual crowns and glory to each other at the
day of Judgment. When the Father shall present his godly Children before
Christ, Lord, here are the Children whom thou have given me; blessing and
praising God for them; how will the Children bless God for such a Father, and
bless the Father for his example, and pious instructions.

CHAP. V.
Use. I. THis may serve for a just reproof of those Fathers, who live in
swearing, whoredom, drunkenness, oppression, and so are a shame and reproach to
their Children: and regard not, though their Sons likewise to their sh^me and
reproach, be a stinking generation and family, walking in their sins. Diogenes,
when he saw a young man drunk, said, the reason was, because his Father begat
him when he was drunk. In like manner when he saw a young man beating his
Father, he said, he does it because his Father did neglect his duty to him in
bringing him up. The wicked lives and dissolute conversations of Fathers, is
the cause of their Sons wickedness. Hearken to me all ye Parents, let me demand
of you; Are not ye the propagators of original sin to your Children, which
makes them Children of wrath, and heirs of damnation? Will not ye rest there,
but must you needs by your wicked and licencious conversation make them twofold
more the Children of Hell, Have not thou sins enough to answer for? but thou
must have their sins upon thy score too? Ye wicked Parents, that sin in the
sight of your Children, you draw them to sin as you do: a Parents sin committed
in the sight of a Child, is a double sin. It is said of a corrupt generation,
Hos. 2. 3, 4. Their Mother played the Harlot, and they are the Children of
whoredoms. The Holy Ghost seems to give in this as the reason why the
Children are the Children of whoredoms, viz. Because their Mother played the
Harlot: so that there was a succession of wickedness among them. Take heed
therefore O ye Parents, of breathing infection upon your Children, to make them
like your selves in wickedness, and the guilt of your sins, and to bring them
to partake of God 's Judgments together with your selves. The Switzers foresaw
this, who enacted a Law, that if a Child were condemned to die, the Father
should execute him; because that usually the neglect and evil carriage of
Parents, is the fountain of all misery and wickedness in their Children. Oh,
what cruel Parents are they to their Children! that will lie, swear, curse, in
the hearing of their Children, that will teach them to lie, to game, to steal,
to use deceit, to break the Sabbath, as if they would have them to learn the
Devils Carechism without book? Thou that art a Father of Children, consider
thou, that at the resurrection day, thy Children, whose damnation thou did
further by thy wicked example, will curse thee to thy face. Cursed be that
Father that begat me, and the Womb that bare me, and the Paps that gave me
suck: Oh! that there had been news brought to my Father, that a Toad, or a
Snake had been born to him, when it was said, there is a man-child born. Then
will the Son cry out in Hell Torments, I had never come into this place of
torment, had not my Father been; had he given me good instruction, a good
example, I had not been cast into this dark dungeon. I learnt to curse and
blaspheme from that cursed blasphemous Father. I learned to be drunk from that
drunken Father. I learned to mock at piety and holiness, to scoff at the ways
and people of God, of that scoffing Father. I learned to profane the Sabbath,
I neglected Prayers in my family, I neglected the hearing of the Word, for my
Father did so before me: he was an Atheist, and so was I. Oh, that I had been
his currish Dog, his filthy Hog, rather than his beloved Son. As they in Rome
said of Nero, because of his cruelty, it were better be Nero's Hog than his
Son. Oh, how will such Children be ready to cast firebrarnds in the faces of
such wicked Parents, when they are in Hell-flames together.

CHAP. VI.
II. This may reprove those Parents, who labor more to make their Children
rich, great, glorious in the eye of the world, than to make them gracious and
glorious in the eye of God, who care not by what unjust means they scrape their
wealth together, to leave behind them a rich posterity, and care not that their
Children be enriched with grace; that drown themselves in perdition and
destruction, for their Childrens greatness in the world. Salvian has an
excellent Meditation upon the rich man in the Gospel, B^nis suis aliis
praeparat beatitudinom, sibi miseriam; aliis gaudia, sibi lachrymas; aliis
voluptatem brevem, sibi ignem perpetuum. Salvian.
that laid up much riches together. With his goods (says Salvian) he prepares
happiness for others, misery for himself: mirth and jollity for others, tears
and sorrow for himself; a short pleasure for others, everlasting torment for
himself. His heirs that possessed his wealth and substance, did game, take
their ease, eat, drink, and were merry: and this poor covetous wretch was
howling and roaring, weeping and wailing in Hell. Oh, what fools are those
Parents, that labor more for temporal riches for their Children, than for
grace and godliness! God usually crosses such Parents in their plots and
purposes: their Children after them usually do prodigally spend that wealth
which the Parents wickedly scraped together: and the Parents are tormented in
Hell, whiles their prodigal Children are merry and jovial upon earth: Graceless
Children are drinking and gaming and drabbing, spending their days in mirth
and pleasure, whiles the wretched covetous Father is houling, roaring, and
tormented in Hell. Now if thy everlasting confusion, be either thine, or thy
Childrens glory, much good may it do thee. Such Parents are the most deadly
enemies their to own Children. Many wicked men (like Ahab) kill, and take
possession of the Vineyards and Inheritances of poor Innocents, and settle them
upon their Children, as firm as firm as Law can make them, to them and to their
Heris for ever: But after all this, if such Parents would but cast up their
Bargains, they would see, they had damned themselves to enrich their Children:
and enriched their Children to undo them: they had brought the curse of God
upon their own Souls, to leave their Children that, which should undo them and
theirs. How politic was Jeroboam to entail the Kingdom of Israel to his own
line! and therefore sets up two golden Calves, the one at Dan, the other at
Bethel, to hinder the people from going up to Jerusalem to worship, where King
Rehoboham was. But that very course of his, by making Israel to sin, was the
ruin of him and his house. The Lord swept away the remnant of his house, as a
man sweepeth away dung, till all be gone, 1 Kings 14. 16.

Ye that are Parents, ye can love your selves in your own persons, and in the
images of your nature, and in those that are the supports of your families, the
Children which God has given you. Therefore when you commit great sins, or
leave great estates to your Children wickedly gotten, what do ye but represent
the future estate of your Children, and as it were slay them with your own
inhumane and barbarous hands! Oh, how vile a person is that Father or Mother,
who for a little money gotten by usury, extortion, or oppression, will leave an
Estate to their Children, and the curse of God with it, and become parricides,
and embrue their hands in the blood and ruin of their own Children! Many men
think no course amiss, so they may set their nests on high, and make their seed
great on earth, Habbak. 2. 9. But in this they are utterly deceived, for this
is the very next way to bring the curse of God upon their Children. How often
is that snatched away by others, which men provided for their own Children, and
that of Solomon is verified. The Riches of the sinner is laid up for the just,
Prove. 13. 22. Thus the Estate of Haman was given unto Mordecai. Solomon
speaking of an oppressor, says, That he begets a Son in whose hand is
nothing, Eccles. 5. 14. Woe be to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his
house. There hangs a judgment over the heads of the Children, for the Fathers
covetousness, as rain in the clouds, which perhaps in their Sons, or in their
Grand-childs days may come down as a mighty flood upon their House, Habak. 2.
9. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house by cutting off many people, and
have sinned against thy Soul: for the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the Timber shall answer thee, ver. 10. Such Parents are no glory of
their Children.

CHAP. VII.
Use II. LEt this serve therefore for exhortation to Parents, when they have
ridings that a Child is born unto them; Take the mercy, but remember your duty,
lest this or that Child be not one day thy greatest shame and reproach, which
is at present thy joy and comfort, for according to thy fatherly duties, so
will thy comfort, or thy sorrows be. Do ye desire your Children may be your
joy, and not your sorrows; your glory and crown, and not your reproach and
shame, then walk wisely toward them, and before them: be thou a glory to them,
so may they prove thy glory and crown. Now that you and they may be crowns and
honors to each other, consider these following duties.

I. Give a good example of an holy life to your Children: be frequent in the
exercise of holy duties and graces before them. Thus David did, Psalm. 101. 2.
He would walk within his house with a perfect heart, Let thy little Children
keep thee from sin, said the Poet Juvenal.
and behave himself wisely in a perfect way: that i^ godly, in a perfect way of
godliness before his Children and Servants. Examples of Parents have a strong
influence into the manners of their Children. Personal sins are usually derived
from Parents to Children by their bad lives: for a Father to lie, to swear, to
be drunk, to neglect holy duties, this has a great influence upon the
Children. A Son may inherit the Father's sin by imitation, by following his
example, and doing the same sin, and the proverb is, The young birds will do,
as they see the old ones do before them. We read that more than forty Children
were destroyed by two she-bears for mocking the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 2. 23,
24. One has this Query upon it, Why did the Prophet call for revenge upon the
Children, who scarce understood what they did, much less did act any thing upon
design? He answers; Martyr in 2 Reg. cap. 2.
Though we might suppose that they were of such a tender age, that they were
ignorant of the evil of this action, yet having learned this from their
Parents, God sent this judgment upon them to punish the Children and the
Parents at once: for doubtless they had learned that mocking Language from
their Parents, at least by hearing them say so to the Prophet Elisha, Go up
thou bald-head, go up thou bald-head, if they had not taught them to say so.
Which scoff they cast upon Elisha, in allusion to the rapture, or carrying up
of Elijah to Heaven. As if they had said, Go thou up also to Heaven as Elijah
did that we may be rid of thee, as we are of him. Children are apt to imitate
their Parents i^ every thing, and are best at imitating them in the worst. It
is written of Jeroboam, that he caused Israel to sin; so it may be spoken of
wicked Parents, that they cause their Children to sin. It is said of Abijan the
Son of Rehoboam, that he walked in all the sins of his Father, which he had
done before him, 1 Kings 15. 3. Ye that give ill examples to your Children, you
shall answer both for your own sins, and the sins of yo^^ Children, occasioned
by your bad example.

II. Ye that are Parent^, be often deho^^ing your Children from sin and vain
company. The Book of the Proverbs is full of sus^pious dehortations. My Son,
says Solomn, enter not into the path of the wicked, and g^ not inot the way of
evil men, avoid it, pass (...) by it, turn from it, and pass away. What most
affectionate dehortation is that of Solomon's Mother unto him, Prove. 31. 2. Who
my Son! and what, the Son of my womb! (...) what, the Son of my vows! Give not
(...) strength unto women, nor thy ways to the which destroys Kings. It is
not for King O Lemuel, to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink, lest they
drink, and forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted,
ver. 3, 4, 5. Parents should often tell their Children, that such and such
ungodly courses will be their reproach; bring down the gray hairs of their
Parents with sorrow to the grave, and their own Souls down into the pit of
everlasting destruction.

III. Instruct them in the worship, word, and way of God and godliness, ye
Fathers, bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians.
6. 4, in the nurture, (...), it signifies it the Childhood. Beza renders it in
the doctrine of the Lord: and (...), that is, in admonition drawn from the word
of God. Henoch had his name, as one taught from his Youth, and consecrate unto
God. God commanded his people, Deuteronomy. 6, 7. Thou shall rehearse these words
continually unto thy Children. The word is, Thou shall whet them continually
upon thy Children: as when an Arrow, or other Instrument is sharpened, that it
may pierce the deeper. It implies two duties, 1. That the Parent make his
Instructions delivered, plain and piercing, by perspicuity giving it an edge,
that it may the more easily enter into the dull heads, and pierce the hard
hearts of his Children. 2. That he repeat it again and again, going often over
the same thing, as the Knife goes often over the whet-stone, as the beast in
chewing the Cud. Abraham is highly commended of God for instructing his Family.
I know Abraham will command his Sons, and his household after him, that they
keep the way of the Lord, Genes. 18. 19. He taught them the substance of the
Law, in commanding them to do Righteousness and Judgment: and the substance of
the Gospel, in declaring unto them the tenor of the Evangelical promises: that
in him, or his seed, that is in Christ (the promised seed, who was to come of
his loins) all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: as also the meaning
of Circumcision. Genes. 17. 23. Joshua professed, that he and his house would
serve the Lord, Jes. 24. 15. Intimating, that he would instruct his Family in
the true knowledge, and right manner of the worship of God, without which they
could not perform any acceptable service unto him. David taught his Son
Solomon, and laid this Charge upon him, And thou Solomon my Son, know the God
of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28: 9. So others, Psalm. 34. 11. Come ye Children, hearken to me, I will
teach you the fear of the Lord. Thus Solomon instructs his Son Rehoboam in
the beginning of the Book of the Proverbs. Hezekiah professes as much of
himself. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: The
Father to the Son shall declare thy truth, Isai. 38. 19. He established a
testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children, that they might
set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
Commandments, and might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn, and rebellious
generation, etc.

IV. Have a watchful eye over the duties, practices and conversations of your
Children. David would not suffer a worker of deceit to dwell in his house, nor
a teller of lies to carry in his sight, Psalm. 101. 7. Oh, take heed of
countenancing or allowing your Children in any sin. Their sins, and thy neglect
of godly reproof, will make thee stink in the Land as Simeon and Levi made
Jacob their Father to stink, his name to stink among the people of the Land.
Take heed of cockering, and overmuch indulging your Children. It is observed,
that usually that Child which the Parent cockereth most, regards the Parent
least; and many times proves the heaviest cross unto it: making him to speak
in bitterness of Soul, Why died it not from the womb? Job 3. 11. One says,
Bolton's Direct. p. 19.
That the bloody knife of Parents unconscionable and cruel neglect in training
up their Children religiously, does stick full deep in their Souls. We have
read and heard of some Children that have been loosely trained up, who have
pierced their Parents hearts with sorrow, yea and their throats too, who have
stuck the knife in the bowels of their Parents. A certain fond Mother must not
have her Child corrected at School when he deserved correction. Woodw. Child's
Patrim.
Not long after the Child angered the Mother, and the Mother struck the Child:
he runs to the fire, and up with the fire-fork, and at the Mother he makes,
threatening what he would do. The Mother would not have her Child struck with a
rod, to let out his folly, and the Child offers to strike the Mother with the
fire-fork. Then the Mother hastens to the Schoolmaster, as much displeased
with the Child, as ever before she was pleased with it. Another Parent so doted
upon her Child, that she could not endure it out of her sight: but at last he
proved so dissolute, that she would have sent this Son to the remorest Islands:
any where, so he were on shipboard (that would keep him in compass, which a
Prison did not) or out of her sight. That Child which the Parent so cockereth,
that it must not be out of his sight, is the Child that is most like to be an
eyesore, and heart-grief to the Parent, to whom the Parent is most like to
say, Stand out of my sight, thou art a burden to me. S. Augustine gives us a
sad relation of one Cyrillus, a man mighty both in word and work, Agust. Sermon.
33. ad Fratres in Eremo.
but a very fond and indulgent Father. One Son he had, and but one, and because
but one, he must have his will; he must not feel the rod, he must not be
crossed. He might have what he would, and do what he listed; he might go forth,
and return when he pleased; he gave no account either of his purse or time: we
read in the story, that this Child brought his Mother to shame; nay, more than
so. This Child came home drunk, and in the day time he violently and shamefully
abused his Mother great with Child, he killed his Father outright, and
mortally wounded two Sisters. Hereupon a great Assembly was called, that all
Parents hearing so sad and lamentable a Tragedy, might for ever beware of this
loose and sottish indulgence, which brings woe to the Parent, and ruin to the
Child.

V. Pray for your Children, that they may glorify God* and so be your glory
and crown, this was Job's practice, Job 1. 5. Job sent, and sanctified his
Children, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings
according to the number of them all. Whiles his Children were feasting, he was
fasting: while they were merry, he was mourning and sacrificing, lest his Sons
should blaspheme and dishonor God. A godly Father's Prayers do fly to Heaven,
and return into the bosom of his posterity with rich and precious blessings. If
these rules I have propounded here, were well and conscionably observed,
Parents and Children would be a crown and glory to one another: and God would
set an incorruptible crown of glory upon the heads both of Parents and Children.

CHAP. VIII.
SECT. I.
THis in the next place may serve for a just conviction of those whose Fathers
lived in gross errors, and wicked practices, and think it no dishonor to them
to live and do as their Fathers did before them. When Hezekiah sent the Posts
from City to City through the Countries of Ephraim and Manasseh with this
Message, that he would have a Reformation according to the first Institution
and pattern, and would not have them abide any longer in the ways of their
Fathers, it is said, 2 Chronicles. 29. 10. They laughed the Messengers to scorn.
They mocked them, what, must we be wiser than our Fathers? See what answer is
given to them, Be not ye like your Fathers, which trespassed against the Lord
God of your Fathers, ver. 7. They that will err by their Fathers Copy, may
also perish by their Fathers example. In the beginning of King James his Reign
in England, the Papists made a Supplication to that King of happy memory: one
branch whereof was this. We request no more favor at your Graces hands, than
that we may securely profess that Catholic Religion, which all your happy
Predecessors professed, from Donaldus, the first converted, unto your Majesty's
Peerless Mother. And to this purpose does Dr. Kellison recite unto that King, a
long Catalogue of his noble Predecessors, to incline him (if possible) to
embrace the Popish Religion.

Many of our Fathers lived in times of ignorance: had they lived in the light
which we do, it is not probable they would have lived in such gross errors and
superstitions as they did. Therefore we are not hand over head to follow all
that our Fathers did, but try them, and follow the best. When Frederick the IV.
Elector of the Roman Empire, and Count Palatine of the Rhine, was by a certain
Prince advised, for his Religion to follow the example of his Father Jews, his
answer was, In Religione, non Parentum, non majorum exempla sequenda, sed
tantum voluntas Dei. In matters of Religion, we must neither follow the
examples of Parents, nor Ancestors, but the will of God only is to be regarded.
And for this resolution, he alleged the testimony of the Lord out of Ezekiel. 20.
Walk ye not in the Statutes of your Fathers, nor observe their Judgments, nor
defile your selves with their Idols: I am the Lord, walk ye in my Statutes,
verse. 18, 19. Therefore it was a good Confession of the Church, Psalm. 106. 6.
We have erred with our Fathers. S. Hierom once desired of S. Augustine, that he
might have leave to err with seven Fathers whom he found of his opinion. I
should not crave that leave, nor envy any one the privilege. The Fathers are
but Children when they err: and they who will err with their Fathers, are
more foolish than Children.

SECT. II.
THere are many others that make the manners of their Fathers, the rule of
their life and conversation. The Children of idle Beggars take up the same
wandering course of life as their Fathers did before them. And it is commonly
seen (for the most part) that whole Families are tainted with the same vices of
their Stock. John Baptis^^ (...) of a generation of Vipers. So if we look
abroad into the world, we shall see generations of Swearers, generations of
Drunkards, generations of Idolaters, of Worldlings, of unclean persons. Ahab
was a very none such in wickedness: and all that come from him, are like him in
evil manners. It is said of his Son Ahaziah, that next succeeded him in the
Kingdom of Israel, 1 Kings 22. 25. That he walked in the way of his Father, and
in the way of his Mother: in the way of wicked Ahab, and cursed Jezebel. There
was annother Ahaziah, King of Judah; the Grandchild of Jehosophat by the
Fathers side, and of Ahab by the Mothers side: He drew poison from the Mother,
and so trod in the paths of Ahab. The Scripture says expressly of him, 2 Reg.
8. 27. That he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the
sight of the Lord, as did the house of Ahab, for he was the Son in Law of the
house of Ahab. Oh what mischief comes to many a man, and his whole stock, by
joining himself in affinity with a wicked Family!

See the wilful resolution of a generation of Idolaters, Jerem. 44. 17, 18, 19.
We will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our own mouth, to burn
Incense to the Queen of Heav^^ and to pour out Drink Offerings to her, as
wo^ave done: we and our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes in the Cities of
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: For then had we plenty of victuals, and
were well, and saw no evil. But since we left off to burn Incense to the Queen
of Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings to her, have we wanted all things,
and have been consumed by the Sword and by Famine. How does our Savior
complain of the Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 32, 33, 35. Wherefore ye be witnesses to
your selves, that ye are the Children of them that killed the Prophets. Fill ye
up then the measure of your sins, ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can
ye escape the damnation of Hell?

CHAP. IX.
SECT. I.
IT becomes every one of us therefore to confess our own sins, and the sins of
our Fathers, Nehem. 9. 2. The seed of Israel separated themselves from all
strangers, and stood, and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their
Fathers. So in verse. 16. But they, and our Fathers dealt proudly, and hardened
their necks, and harkened not to thy Commandments. And verse. 33. 34. Speaking
of the Judgments of God, that came upon them for their sins, they say, How be
it thou art just in all that is brought upon us: for thou have done right, but
we have done wickedly: neither have our Kings, our Princes, our Priests, nor
our Fathers, kept thy Law, nor hearkened to thy Commandments, and thy
Testimonies, wherewith thou did testify against them. Moreover, it is worth
observing, that the Holy Ghost does not record their sins which they confessed,
as their own present abounding sins, but records the sins of their Fathers,
which they confessed before God, as appears from the ninth to the 30th.
verse. It is not recorded, we dealt proudly, we hardened our necks, we refused
to obey, we were disobedient and rebellious. No question, this was their own
carriage toward God. But it is said [They] meaning their Fathers: They dealt
proudly, they hardened their necks, etc. Furthermore observe, they did not
insist upon the sins of their immediate Progeni^ors, but upon the sins and
rebellions of their Fathers that came out of the Land of Egypt, and first
inhabited Canaan. They make mention of their Fathers sins, as if all their
m^sery came upon them chiefly for their Fathers Sins, rather than for their own
Sins.

What reason can there be assigned, why the Holy Ghost makes such a record of
their Confession of their Fathers Sins, rather than of their own, if it be not
to convince, and show what we ought to do, viz. Not only to lay our own sins to
heart, and to confess them before God, but also the sins of our Fathers: as
also to show us, that the iniquities of our Fathers do bring the dreadful
Judgments of God like a flood upon us, as well as our own sins, Jerem. 3. 25.
We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covers us, for we have sinned
against the Lord our God, we and our Fathers, from our Youth even to this day,
and have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God: And Jerem. 16. 19. The
Prophet cries out thus to God. O Lord, my strength and my fortress, and my
refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the
ends of the earth, and shall say, surely our Fathers have inherited lies,
vanity, and things wherein there is no profit, Lam. 5. 7. The Church cries out:
Our Fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born their iniquities.

SECT. II.
ONe reason why we should be humbled for the sins of our Fathers, as well as
for our own is, because God has threatened, and accordingly has visited the
sins of the Fathers upon their Children. Their Idolatries have brought
destruction on their posterity: the Fathers-adulteries have brought the
Children to a morsel of bread. That God has threatened to visit the sins of the
Fathers on the Children, you find in the second Commandment [visiting the sins
of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation.] So
Exodus 34. 7. That God has visited Children with Plagues for the Iniquities of
their Fathers, there are manifold sad instances of it, Numb. 14. 32, 33. Ye may
see a double punishment threatened.

^ Against the Fathers who murmured. But as for you, your carkesses shall fall
in this wilderness, verse. 32. 2. Against the Children, who certainly did not
partake in that Sin; for many of them were Infants, verse. 33. And your Children
shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms until your
carkeisses be wasted in the wilderness, 1. Sam. 15. 3. The Lord commands Saul
to go, and smite Amalek, and utterly to destroy all that they have, and spare
them not: but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep,
camel and ass. Now see what reason the Lord renders, why Saul should put all
the Amalakites to the sword, verse. 2. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I remember
what Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up
from Egypt. Now the Children must be destroyed for the sins of their
Progenitors. So the Infants, and little Children of the Sodomites, perished by
fire and brimstone for the horrid abominations which their Fathers had
committed. What a dreadful Judgment did God inflict upon old Eli for his sin?
So the Lord told David, that the Sword should never depart from his house,
because of his sin, 2. Sam. 12. 9, 10. How did God visit Readiness perfidiousness
to the Gibeonites, on his posterity? 2. Sam. 21. 1. There is a double
Judgment, he visited the Kingdom with Famine for three years, verse. 1. and
visited his Children with a cursed and shameful death, verse. 6. they were all
hanged. How did our Savior threaten the Jews with all the blood which their
Fathers had shed causelessly? Wherefore behold, I send unto you Prophets, and
wise men, and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of
them shall ye scourge in your Synagogues and persecute them from City to City,
That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the
blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, the Son of Barachias,
whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar, Matthew. 23. 34, 35. And is not
the blood of Christ upon the Children of the Jews unto this day? I have
brought the more Instances to show the truth, how God does punish the Children
for the sins of their Fathers: to convince us, of what concernment it is for us
to confess their sins before the Lord, as well as our own; and to deterr
Fathers from sinning against God. Ye may see, that Fathers in sinning, do not
only sin to their own destruction, but to the destruction of the Children that
are yet unborn: ye lay up Estates and Portions for your Children, and God lays
up wrath and vengeance, which shall consume both them and there Estates.

CHAP. X.
NOw because there are objections, which perhaps may arise in your thoughts
against this Doctrine, and they seem to be grounded on Scripture, I shall
endeavor to remove them.

Object. But it is said, Ezekiel. 18. 4. The Soul that sins, it shall die,
verse. 18. as for his Father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother
by violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo even he shall
die in his iniquity. So in Jerem. 31. 29, 30. In those days they shall say no
more, the Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on
edge, but every one shall die for his own iniquity: and every man that eats
the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge. How can these Scriptures be
reconciled with that in the second commandment, where God is said to visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth generation, etc.
how can it agree with these dispensations of Judgments?

Sol. There are diverse answers given hereunto.

I. Origin, and some others make an allegorical Interpretation, and say, that
by the third and fourth generation is not meant Children, but so many degrees
of sins, as if God would spare men for the first and second fault, and punish
the third and fourth. But this is a false and foolish conceit, because God
sometimes punishes men for the first sin. God chastised David for one act of
adultery.

II. Some answer it by distinction of civil and divine punishments. The Civil
Law, which God made for the Commonwealth of Israel, did forbid to put the
Child to death for the sin of the Father: as Deuteronomy. 24. 16. The Fathers shall
not be put to death for the Children, nor shall the Children be put to death
for the Fathers: Every man shall be put to death for his own sin. But God, who
is the supreme Judge of the whole world, and is not tied to humane Law,
punishes Children for their Fathers sins. But this answer is not sufficient,
for those places of Jerem. 31. and Ezekiel. 18. speak not of a civil, but of a
divine punishment.

III* Others again answer it thus, that God punishes the sins of Fathers on
their Children, if they do such like sins as their Father. He will punish the
Children for their Fathers Idolatry, if their Children are Idolaters also, and
punish them that hate God, as their Fathers did before them.

If this were true, then those places in Jeremiah, and Ezekiel were answered
with this exception. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of his Father, unless
the Son be wicked too: the Childrens teeth shall not be set on edge unless they
eat sour grapes, as their Fathers did before them. But this answer is not to
the purpose neither.

1. Because Children have been punished for their Fathers sins, which they
never imitated, as the Children of the Sodomites were destroyed with the same
destruction their Fathers were.

2. Sometimes the Children who have repented, have been outwardly miserable,
because their Fathers were exceeding sinful.

3. Because then God did not punish the sins of their Fathers on them, so much
as their own personal sins: not punish their Fathers Idolatry, but their own
Idolatry; nor their Fathers Adultery, but their own.

4. The force of the threatening is taken away; for God brings that threatening
of visiting their Idolatry upon their Children, to make Fathers to take heed of
Idolatry. Then this would be the sense of it, according to their
interpretation. Take heed, ye Fathers, of Idolatry, for I will punish your
third and fourth generation if they be Idolaters. By these reasons it is
evident, that this answer, that God punishes Children for their Fathers sins,
because Children follow their Fathers in their sins, is not sufficient.

IV. This answer may give full satisfaction. There is a threefold evil of
punishment, with which God visits sinners.

1. There is eternal damnation: so no Child is punished for his Fathers sins,
but the Soul that sins, that shall die. Every man is damned for his own
proper sins: only such as eat the sour grapes of sin, they shall gnash their
teeth in Hell.

2. There is malum morale, a moral evil. God his giving up the Children to
follow their Fathers steps, is a punishment for their Fathers sins. But this
God does not inflict upon them as they are sins, but by denying grace to the
Children of wicked Parents, upon which denial they fall into the like sins
their Fathers did before them. God denying grace to the posterity of Idolaters,
they commit Idolatry also.

3. There is malum naurae, evils of nature; as Losses, Crosses, Afflictions,
Famine, Sword, Plague, temporal death. God oftentimes punishes the Children
for their Fathers sins with these temporal punishments: For Gehazi's
Covetousness, his posterity shall be leprous, and for the mutiny of Dathan and
Abiram, their Children perished with them. For David's Adultery, the Sword
shall never depart from his house to all successions: So oftentimes it falls
out, that for the riot, adulteries, or oppressions of Progenitors, Children are
brought to a morsel of bread. The reason is, because God in punishing the
Children, punishes the Fathers also, Qui^ Filii quaedam pars parentum, because
Children are part of their Fathers, as branches are part of the tree: therefore
the good that is bestowed on the Child, or the evil inflicted on him, is the
good and evil of the Father.

Quest. But how can the evils which Children suffer when their Fathers are
dead, be a punishment to him that is deid? how can the evil which the fourth
generation suffers, be the evil of the Father, dead it may be many years
before?

Resp. 1. I answer yes, they are evils to them, because God threatens them as
punishments to them. Shall we think, that God would threaten this as an evil,
if it were not? look as other evils threatened, which follow the wicked after
they are dead, are a punishment: as the name of the wicked shall rot, shall
stink when they are dead: They that pass by their graves shall say, Here lies
a beastly drunkard; here lies a profane swearer, a cruel oppressor. These are
curses, though they are not sensible of them. So, when God shall ruin the
posterity of wicked men, it is a sore punishment to them. As now it is a mercy
to just men, that their memory (when they are dead) shall be blessed, and that
the seed of the Righteous shall be blessed on earth. Then on the contrary, if
the seed of a man be cursed, it is a punishment to the Fathers.

2. We are not to judge of punishment only by our sense and feeling, as if it
were no punishment, because dead men are not sensible of the miseries of their
Children: but we are also to judge of punishment by the evil which is in it.
Now it is a sore evil, when God shall for the sins of our Fathers bring ruin
upon our estates, miseries upon our bodies, Plagues, Sword, or Famine upon us.

3. It is a punishment to the Fathers, though dead; because it is directly
contrary to their wills and intentions. Fathers would have their Children, rich
and happy after their death, and would have their Houses and Names to contiue
for ever: but God in justice ruinates their Families, and cloatheth their
Children or Childrens Children with misery as with a garment.

Object. But put the case, the posterity of wicked men are converted, and
become godly, does God punish such for the sins of (...) Fathers?

Sol. I answer yes, God sometimes may, and does deprive such of their honors
and estates, and takes them away with temporal death for the sins of their
Fathers. But then the evils which such Children endure, are only parentum
poenae, their Fathers punishment, and are filiorum probationes, medicinae,
exercitia, the Childrens trials, medicines, exercises. God in mercy turns
their afflictions into their spiritual advantage: God makes their death a
passage to glory, and life eternal. And these afflictions, (though they are the
punishments of their Fathers, yer shall work out for them a greater weight of
glory. Here let me add these things.

1. We must hold this as an undeniable truth, that God is always righteous in
all his administrations of Judgments, whether in punishing Parents, or
Children for Parents sake. Though the Judgments of God are sometime hidden,
yet they are never unjust. There is no iniquity in the ways of God, though we
cannot see the equity of them.

2. There is a matter of condemnation in all Children, though God sometimes in
punishing, does not punish them with an immediate relation to their own sins.

3. When God visits Nations and Kingdoms, then usually he does it for the sins
of the present generation, as for the sins of our Fathers. Our sins, and the
iniquities of our Fathers do join forces to bring down Plagues and devastations
upon the Kingdom. The Jews were led into Captivity for their own sins, and
their Fathers also. So Daniel in his Confession of sins acknowledges, We, our
Kings, our Princes, our Fathers, and all Israel have sinned.

CHAP. XI.
GReat are the benefits, which may redound to Children sincerely confessing the
iniquities of their Fathers, as well as their own sins. The Promise is made,
Levit. 26. 40, 41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity
of their Fathers, with their trespass which they have trespassed against me,
and that also they have walked contrary to me, and that I have also walked
contrary to them, etc. Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my
Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham will I remember, and I
will remember the Land.

1. Sometime it procures and obtains a delay, and putting off the pouring
forth the wrath of God upon a Family, Person, or Nation. God oftentimes
delayeth the punishments, not remitting the sins. As upon Ahab's humiliation,
he delayed the punishment, but did not remit the sins of him and his house: yet
for his humiliation, the punishment should be prorogued to his Son's days, 2
Reg. 21. 29. Upon Moses his humiliation for Isreal's murmuring, he remitted the
execution of his wrath, but remitted not their sin, Numb. 14. 18. ad 23. We
have a clear Instance for this in Josiah, who humbled himself for the
iniquities of his Fathers, and the sins of Israel: and the Lord put off the
execution of his wrath, till he was laid in his grave, 2 Chronicles. 34. 21, 24, ad
28. Perhaps the second generation may die in peace; or it may be the third and
the fourth generation shall bear the iniquities of their Fathers it is no small
mercy that wrath breaks not in upon the first generation.

2. If it does not keep off, and procure delay of execution, but wrath from the
Lord breaks in upon u^, yet it may mitigate the wrath of God: so that God
(though justly he might) yet proceeds not to a final devastation of Persons,
Families and Kingdoms, but a remnant may, and shall escape, Jerem. 39. 16, 17,
18. Thus God bids Jeremy tell Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, that though he would
bring his words upon the City of Jerusalem for evil; yet say thou to him, I
will surely deliver thee, and thou shall not fall by the Sword, but thy life
shall be for a prey unto thee, because thou have put thy trust in me, says the
Lord. And that God made them not as Sodom and Gomorrha, but left a remnant,
Ezra acknowledges in his confession, Ezra 9. 8. And now for a little space
grace has been showed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape,
and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and
give us a little reviving in our bondage. When people are generally stubborn
and wicked, God sometimes makes a full end of them, when their determinate day
of visitation is come upon them, he overthrows Families, as he overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrha, cutting down root and branch, and casting them into the fire.

3. Sometimes it procures a shortening of the day of visitation, God will not
lengthen out their judgment: will not (as justly he might) spin out their time
of calamity. For mine elects sake these days of calamity shall be shortened.
The day of Jerusalem's calamity should be shortened for his el^ct which were in
it.

4. If God yet visit the iniquities of our Fathers upon us, he will change the
nature of our punishments: though they be to the destruction of our estates and
bodies, yet they shall be to the Salvation of our Souls in the day of the Lord
Jesus: he will inflict them upon us as trials and fatherly chastisements, doing
us good in the latter end; though in relation to the iniquities of our Fathers,
they be sore punishments.

Moreover, we ought to be humbled for the sins of our Fathers, because God was
dishonored by them. Nehemiah was ashamed, and confounded for his Fathers sins,
as well as his own. That God was dishonored in former years, grieveth a godly
heart, as well as in present times.

Besides -- the sins of our Fathers are reproaches to us. That men should say
of such a man, his Father before him was a drunkard, an oppressor, an
idolater; so was his Grandfather, his Great-Grand-Father before him; this is a
reproach unto the Family: the best way to wipe off the reproach, is for the
posterity to mourn for their Fathers sins: the godliness of Children will be
some covering to their Fathers nakedness. But if our Fathers greatly provoked
the Lord, and we are not humbled for their sins, but walk in the steps of our
evil Progenitors; then hear what the Lord says to such, Isai. 14. 20, 21, 22.
The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned: prepare slaughter for his
Children for the iniquity of their Fathers, that they do not rise, nor possess
the Land, nor fill the face of the world with Cities: for I will rise up
against them, says the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon the Name and
Remnant, and Son and Nephew, says the Lord.

FINIS.

