A SERMON CONCERNING Unity and Agreement. PREACHED AT CARFAX CHURCH in OXFORD,
August 9. 1646.

By JASPER MAINE, D. D. and one of the Students of Christ-Church, OXON.

ROMANS 12. 18. Jf it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.

Printed in the Year, MDCXLVII.

A SERMON CONCERNING UNITY and AGREEMENT.
1 COR. 1. 10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions
among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment.
THough Truth, from what mouth soever it be spoken, or in what shape or dress
soever it appear, be but one and the same; and where it is rightly understood,
carries this uniting, peaceful quality with it, that it makes all its
followers of one consent, and mind too; yet I know not from what mist, or
impotence, lodged in our nature, with whom errors and mistakes do for the most
part prevail more then Arguments or Demonstrations; and with whom our own
mis-conceipts (conveyed into us from such whom we think too holy to deceive us,
or too learned to deceive themselves) do for the most part stick so deeply,
and take such root and impression in us, that it is not in the power of truth
it self to remove them: This one, uniting, peaceful Bond of minds, this Ray
of our Souls, according to the several Teachers of it, and according to the
several forms and shapes, into which they have cast it, has always been
looked on as so many several Truths; And to the discredit, and disadvantage of
it, has in all Ages been as severally entertained and followed. Thus among the
Heathen Plilosophers, we find the number of Sects, to be much greater then the
number of Sciences. Every new famous Teacher, who professed severlty in his
looks, and austerity in his manners, had the power to draw a cloud of Disciples
after him, and to erect a new Truth with a new School. And thus in the very
Church of God it self, the Gospel no sooner began to be preached to the
world, but it began to have its Sects and Schisms, and sidings too. The
Apostles taught but one Faith, one Baptism, one Christ, one plain, open way
of salvation to men; yet they were mis-understood by some, as if they had
preached many: Or as if the numbers of their several Doctrines, had equalled
the number of their several persons, and they had (every one where he went)
scattered a several Gospel.

To speak yet more plainly to you, and nearer home to the History of this
Text; The Corinthians (to whom this Epistle was written) as if from every new
Teacher that came thither, they had learned a new Religion, began at length to
have as many Religions among them as they had heard Teachers. You might have
distinguished diverse Churches in the same City, and have divided their Beleefs
and Creeds by their Families and streets. Where, by a fallacy and deceit of the
ear, judging of the things taught, by their affection to the Teacher, and not
judging of the Teacher by the things which he taught, every one chose to
himself the name of his Minister to make a Side and faction by. One (as you
read at the 12. Verse, of this Chapter) said, I am of Paul, another, I am of
Apollos, a third, I am of Cephas, a fourth, I am of Christ: As if Christ had
either been divided, or else were to stand with the rest as the name of a
distinct Religion; Or at least, as if the Gospel (which at first sprung from
him) like streams broken off from their springhead, were no longer to retain
the name of the Fountain from whence it rose, but were to wear the style of
the several pipes and channells, by which it was conveyed abroad into the
world.

This diversity of names, and sides, grew at first from their diversity of
opinions, and minds. When the unlearned wresting the Scripture which they had
heard preached to an Apostles sense, would presume to impose that sense, which
was indeed, not an Apostles, on others. And those others, equally as unlearned,
thought it as reasonable, so they could entitle it to another Apostle, to
impose their interpretation of Scripture on the first.

This diversity of minds, proceeded at length to diversity of language and
speech. Congregation spoke censoriously of Congregation, as if none had been in
the right, but they only who most vehemently could charge others with being in
the wrong. Saint Paul was urged, and quoted against Saint Peter, and Apollos
against both, and Christ against all three. Whose Sermons, like those
changeable figures which melancholy men frame to themselves in the clouds,
were made to wear the shape and form, which every man's zeal and fancy
suggested to him.

Hence, in time, from difference and disagreement in minds and speech, they
grew to difference and disagreement in society and conversation too. Difference
of opinion bred separation of companies; and that which was at first but a
neighbourly dispute, by degrees took flame, and grew to be mortal hatred,
division and schism. Men of the next door were no longer neighbors to one
another. All the bonds of Charity became utterly broken. All Christian
intercourse, and familiarity and commerce ceast between them. He was thought to
be false, and to betray his side, who offered to show himself affable or
civil to one of another party.

In short, the breach became so wide, that he was thought to be the only
religious man who could most enlarge the rent, and could bring most fuel to
the present combustion which was thus unhappily kindled among them. To compose
these differences therefore, (differences not unlike those of our miserable,
distracted times) and to make the Knot and Reconciliation as fast and strong,
as the disagreement and rent was large and wide, S. Paul here in this Text,
prescribes a several Cure, for every particular and several breach. First, to
remove the discord which rose among them, by calling themselves by several
names, and to banish the ill consequences of all such factious compellations,
which for the most part are bitter Invectives, and sharp arrows of detraction
hurld at one another, he persuades them to unity of language and speech, and
exhorts them to call themselves all by the same name, in these words, Now I
beseech you Brethren, that ye al speak the same thing. Next, to remove their
want of meetings, and Communion together in the same place of Gods Worship, he
persuades them to unity of Assemblies, and Congregation, in these words, Now I
beseech you, Brethren, that there be no divisions, That is, (as I shall in the
progress of this Sermon, make it clear to you from the Original) that there be
no separations, that is, (as our English word does well express it) that there
be no private sequestered meetings, no such things as Conventicles among you.
Thirdly* to remove the root, and spring of all these uncharitable strifes, and
divisions, and separations, he persuades them to unity of opinions and minds,
in these words, Now I beseech you, Brethren, that you be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Lastly, that he might
with the greater success do this, and (like a skillful reconciler) might win
upon all sides, he for a while lays aside the Authority of his Apostleship;
and mingling Request and Conjuration, with Exhortation and Advice, he acts the
part of an Apostle, in the form of a Petitioner, in these words, Now I beseech
you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Upon these parts, the
Apostles mild insinuation, and address of himself, and the several Degrees
of unity and concord, in speech, in Assemblies, and in Opinions, to which he
here exhorts the Corinthians, I will build my future discourse. In the ordering
of which, I will begin with the Apostles submissive insinuation, or address of
himself, in these words, Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

S Paul's qualification.
it will be necessary that I speak something to you of Saint Paul's person, the
Preacher here in the Text, and of his calling to the Ministry; which well
considered, will conduce very much to the removal of a certain dangerous
error received of late into the minds of too many unlearned, vulgar men among
us: Which is, That Universities, and Books, and Studies, and Learning are so
far from being necessary preparations to make a Preacher of the Gospel, that
any Layman, though perhaps brought up to a manual Trade, of a vocation of
Husbandry, or attendance upon Cattle, if he find by himself that he is called
by the Spirit of God, may put himself into Orders, and take the Ministry upon
him. And thus enabled from above, without the form of Ordination, or those
other slow, tedious, lazy helps, of sitting twenty years in a College to
understand the Bible, may in the few minutes of a powerful Inspiration spring
up an Apostle, and go forth a Preacher of the Word of God.

To this persuasion they have been invited by two sorts of Examples in the
Scripture; one in the Old Testament, the other in the New. In the Old
Testament, Do you not read, say they, that God called Elisha from the Plough
to be a Prophet? And does not Amos tell you in the 7. Chapter of his Prophecy,
at the 14. Verse, that he was a Herdman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruit? Then
for examples in the New Testament, pray what were the Apostles? were they great
Scholars? or did Christ send to Athens for them? were they not Fishermen, men
altogether unlettered, men called from mending nets to preach the Gospel? If
this were so, That God according to his good pleasure, without any
consideration of study, or height of parts, chose simple, unlearned, unstudied
men, to be Prophets and Apostles, and Teachers, then why should any think he
has so confined, or entailed his free Spirit, or vocation of men, upon great
parts, and studies, that he may not, if he please call the like unstudied,
simple men from the Plough or Fisher-boat, or Stall, or Shop-board, to be
Ministers of his Gospel, and Teachers of his people now?

My Brethren, you see I have not prevaricated, or diminished ought of the
strength of the Argument which is urged in favor of Laymens preaching. In
answer to which, laying aside all partiality to my self, and prejudice against
them, I shall with the same spirit of meekness and Candor, with which Saint
Paul here in this Text bespoke his Corinthians, beseech you, who hear me this
day, to observe, and weigh, and consider well this which I shall say for a
Reply?

First, Far, far be it from me so to flatter the place of my Education, or so
to biass my belief, by any false ovevarluing of humane Industry, or great parts
that I should pinion, as it were, or put limits to the power of the Almighty;
Or should be so irreligiously bold, as to gainsay that piece of his Gospel
which compares his holy Spirit to the Wind, which blows where it lists. If
they who thus pretend to a private Inspiration do mean, that whatever God did
in the times heretofore, he is able to do now, I shall easily grant it; And
here in the presence of you all, confess my self to be of their opinion. Nor
shall I make any doubt or scruple at all, to say, that, if we look upon what
God is able to do, by the fame power by which he was able to raise up Children
to Abraham out of stones, or (to speak yet more nearly to the Argument in
hand) by the same power that he was able to make a Herd-man a Prophet, or a
Fisherman an Apostle, he is able, in our times also, if he please, to make the
meanest Tradesman one of the greatest Luminaries of his Church. Since to an
Omnipotent Agent, whose gifts are merely Arbitrary, and depend wholly upon the
pleasure of his own will, the greatest endowments of men, and the least, are
alike easy. But though he be able to do this, and in the ancient times of the
Scripture have imparted his Gifts without respect of Persons, yet whether he
now will, or whether in our times he does still thus extraordinarily raise up
Teachers to himself, is extremely to be doubted. For here with all the
Christian gentleness and reason, which may possibly conduce to the clearing of
this doubt, were I to argue this Controversy with one of those men who invade
our function, and from gathering of Sycamore fruit step up into the Pulpit, I
would only ask him this question; What Commission he has thus to usurp upon
our Office; Or who signed him his patent; Since the Apostle tells us in the
fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, at the fourth Verse, (A place
well worth your marking, my Brethren) That no man takes this honor of a
Priest to himself, But he who is called of God, as was Aaron? I know his
common answer will be, that God has called him to this Office by the secret
Instinct, and Motion of his Holy Spirit. But, then, he must not take it ill, if
I yet farther ask him, by what signs, or marks, or testimonies, or tokens,
he can either ma^e it reasonably appear to himself, or others, that God has
dealt with him as he dealt with some of the Prophets, or Apostles; called him
from his Trade by such a motion of his Spirit? Elisha we know, made Iron swim,
and knew men's Closet-discourses in a far Country, which was a sure and
certain sign that God had called him to be a Prophet. The Apostles also we
know, wrought many of Christ's miracles, which was a most infallible sign that
God had chosen them to be Apostles. If any of these men, who derive their
warrant from the same sacred spring, can make Iron swim, or like Elisha,
remaining here in their own Israel, can tell us what the King of Syria says
in his Bedchamber; Or if like Saint Peter they can cure fevers and diseases by
their bare shadows passing over them; Or if, like the rest of the Apostles,
having never before known Letters, they can of a sudden speak all Languages,
the Controversy is at an end; It would be a very great sin against the
Spirit of God to deny, that he is in them of a Truth. But if all the proof
and sign they can give us that they have him, be only a strong persuasion of
themselves; Nay, if by an infallible Illumination they could assure themselves,
that they have him, yet as many as have not the like infallible Illumination to
assure them so too, will not be guilty of an unpardonable offense, if they
suspect they have him not. For here, I must once more repeat my former
Question, and ask by what effects, or signs of the Spirit, men shall know
them to be called? By what? will some man say, why? Do you not hear them
preach, expound Scripture, unfold Prophecies, interpret Parables, nay pluck
the veil and cloud from the Book of Mysteries it self, the very Revelation?
Can any of you great Scholars, with all your study of Philosophers, Fathers,
Counsels, Schoolmen, Historians, Orators, Poets, either hold your
Congregations longer, or send them away more edified? And will you yet ask
Questions? Or doubt of the certainty of their vocation? I must not dissemble
with you, if I could meet with an unlearned Handicraft-man, who without study,
can do this to the same height, and measure of Truth, as those unjustly-cryed
down, learned, and well-studied men do, I should begin to alter my opinion;
And should reckon him as he deserves, in the number of the inspired. But alas,
my Brethren, as I am not come hither to disparage the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
in what person soever I find them, or to persuade that Scripture rightly
expounded, is not one, and the same, from the mouth of a Priest, or an inspired
Layman; so this I must freely say to you, That as many of those strange
Teachers as I have heard, have expounded Scripture indeed, and have ventured
upon some of the hardest places of the Prophets. But, then, if all my studies
of the Bible, assisted with all those holy, uncorrupted learned helps, which
might enable me to understand it aright, have not deceived me, their
expositions, and Sermons, how passionately delivered, or how long soever, are
evident proofs to me that they have not the Spirit. If they had, they would
never, certainly, expound Scripture so directly contrary to his meaning; Or
make the writings of the Prophets or Apostles, wear only that present shape,
not which the holy Ghost has imprinted and stamped upon them, but which tends
to the division of a Kingdom, and the confusion of a Church; Nor would they, as
they do, what ever the Text be, press that sense from it, not which is
genuine, and natural, but which tends most to the destruction of a party, or
the fomentation of a most unnatural Civil War. Saint Paul tells us in the
fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, at the 22, and 23. Verses, that
the fruits, or effects of the Spirit, are love, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, meekness, temperance. He uses to speak to men in the voice, and
figure of a Dove: But to entitle him to all those forbidden works of the
flesh, of variance, hatred, sedition, heresies, envyings, murders, and the
like, there reckoned up in the precedent Verses of that Chapter, is to make him
speak with the voice of a Raven.

In short, my Brethren, the Holy Ghost is not the Author of such Doctrines as
break Gods Commandments in the Pulpit. Nor is it a long Prayer, or a zealous
two-houres reviling of the footsteps of the Lords Anointed, their lawful
Sovereign, which can make their Sermons to be any other then so much Libell,
or holy Detractation; Or which can make their Intrepretations of the Word of
God, how moderate soever in other cases, if they be not agreeable to the scope,
and mind, and intention of the Holy Ghost, to be any more then so many zealous
mistakes, and so many illegitimate births, and creatures of their own deluded
fancies.

Next, in pursuit of this seasonable Argument, give me leave, I pray, with all
the plainness I can, (for I well know where I am, and to what Auditorie I
speak) to make it yet farther evident to you, that if I should grant what
these (...), as S. Basil calls them, these Saints of a days growth, challenge
to themselves, who think that all that is required to make a Minister of the
Gospel, is (...), only to be willing, and to start up a Preacher. If, I say,
it should be granted them, that they have the inward calling of the Spirit, yet
God is so much the God of order, that unless they will enter themselves into
his service, by undergoing those Rites of Consecration and Imposition of Hands,
which God has prescribed in his Church, to stand for ever as the outward
forms and signs of their vocation too, every act of the Ministry which they
perform, is but a sacrifice like theirs who offered strange fire before the
Lord, and miserably perished by their own forbidden Censors. Or if you will
have me express the danger of it by a judgment as terrible. Thus to put their
hand to the Arc, thus to support it, if 'twere ready to fall, is such an
unwarranted piece of officiousness, as will (certainly) unrepented, at some
time or other, draw the punishment of Vzzrah upon them, provoke the abused
Almighty to break forth in a flame of fire upon them, and consume them for
their unnecessarie diligence. For here, all the Scripture examples which
imbolden them to this work, do return upon them, as so many instances and
proofs of their incroachment on our office. For here let me once more ask
them, How was Elisha called to be a Prophet? merely by the secret, unknown
whisper and instinct of the holy Ghost? Truly, if he had, yet this would not
make much for them; because God never tied himself precisely to those outward
forms in the choice of a Prophet, which he then did, and still does in the
choice of his Priests. Yet the calling of this Prophet was not without its
visible sign* Go, says God to Elias, in the 19. Chap. of the first book of
Kings, at the 16. Verse, Anoint Elisha the Son of Shaphat to be Prophet in thy
room. And whether the like Ceremony of pouring oil on his head, were not also
performed by some elder Prophet upon Amos as the younger, as it is not affirmed,
so it is not denied in Scripture, but left probable. In the Consecration of the
Priests of those times, the case is much more evident: Read at your leisure the
29. Chapter of Exodus, there you shall find, that before God would receive
them into that sacred function, first, diverse Sacrifices were to be offered
for them; then they were to be brought to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and there to be washed; then the Priests Garments, the Coat, the
Ephod, the Breast Plate, and Mitre, were to be put upon them. Lastly, followed
the anointing oil, which was powered upon their heads: And this was the
Consecration of the Priests of those times.

The Ceremonies of Consecration in the New Testament, were different, I
confess, from those of the Old; but yet equivalent, and answerable to them in
their kind. These were, a public meeting of the Church together, a
presentation there made of the person to be made a Priest; solemn prayers and
supplications put up to God, to make him useful to his Church: and for a seal
of all the rest, the Imposition of the Bishops hands, assisted by his
Presbyters. Now, my Brethren, apply this to the strange Priests of our times,
who with unwasht feet thrust themselves into the Tabernacle; not a sacrifice,
not so much as a handful of meal, or grain of Incense, or drop of oil spent
toward their Consecration; No solemn assembly, no presentation of themselves
made to God, no imposition of hands, not so much as a short Prayer, or
benediction, or God speed you, used toward their setting forth into the Lords
Vineyard, and you will find that these are the thieves and robbers (pardon the
hardness of the language, I cannot make the Scripture speak mildlier then it
does) which our Savior Christ speaks of in the 1^. Chapter of S. John at the
first Verse, Men who enter not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climb
up some other way. In brief, men, whose Sermons and Doctrines correspond to
their consecrations. By stealth they enter into the Ministry, and by stealth
they exercise it. And whereas the mark and Character of all the true Ministers
of the Gospel is to stand, having their feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 5, 15.
these men wander, and go about, having their feet shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of strife. Men, who never think themselves sufficiently Apostles,
till all the world do call them the sons of thunder too. Men who speak fire,
and throw lightning among the people; and think they have then only done the
work, and business of an Apostle, when they have cast the Congregation which
they leave behind them into a cumbustion and flame. I shall trouble your
patience but with one Objection, which may possibly be made against what I have
hitherto said; that is this: Here, some one of these modern, selfe-inspiring
Teachers may say, Sir, you tell us of Ceremonies and Consecrations, and I know
not what, Imposition of hands; but either you have forgot your self, or wisely
dissembled the vocation of the Apostles. Were not they without your formality
of laying on of hands, without all this ado of conveying orders, and the holy
Ghost by fingers, immediately called by Christ? What imposition of hands went
to change S. Peter from a Fisherman into an Apostle? or what Bishops
Ceremonies past to make S. Paul (in whose person you have all this while
preached against us) of a persecutor of the Church to become a Doctor of the
Gentiles? Does not your own Tertullian say, Nonne and Laici Sacerdotes sumus,
That any Layman, if he please, may be a Priest?

To this I reply; first, As for the Apostles, it is true, indeed, we do not
read that they were consecrated to their Ministry by such Rites and
Imposition of hands, as were afterward received and practiced in the Church.
Yet something answerable to the Imposition of hands went to their Consecration,
before they were invested with full Authority to preach the Gospel to the
world. For besides their first vocation by Christ to be his Disciples, from
whom they learnt that Gospel which they afterward preached, what says the
Scripture? Tarry ye at Jerusalem, says Christ to them, Luke 24. 49.
after his Resurrection, till I send the promise of my Father upon you, and ye
be endued with power from above. And, pray, what was that promise, and what was
this power? Certainly, that which you read of in the second Chapter of the
Acts, where at the time prefixed by Christ, the Holy Ghost descended on them.
And how did he descend? in a still, soft, secret, invisible persuasion of the
Fancy? Or in the silent whisper of an unperceived Illumination? No such matter,
Quod Episcopus aliis, Spiritus sanctus Apostolis, says a learned man. The holy
Ghost here supplied the Office of a Bishop, descended upon them in an audible
rushing wind, which signified his election of them to the ear; And sat upon
their heads in the shape of cloven Tongues of fire; which signified his
election of them to the eye. Hi ritus, haec impositio; These were his
Ceremonies, this his Imposition of hands, says that Author. So that all the
difference between the Admission of the Apostles to the Ministry, and others,
was only this: In other Consecrations the Bishop only granted the power to
preach, but bestowed not the Gifts; Here the Holy Ghost bestowed both. He
first by visible, outward signs, testified to the world whom he had chosen,
and to whom they were to hearken; And then furnished them with Tongues, and
Languages, and knowledge, and parts, fit to be the Guides and great Instructers
of the world. Let these men make it appear to me, that the Holy Ghost has
thus descended upon them, thus furnished them with parts, and I will most
willingly resign my place to them in the Pulpit.

Next, as for S. Paul, it is clear by the story of his Conversion, that he
received not his Commission to preach from that which Christ spoke to him
immediately from Heaven. But what says the place? Acts 9. 6. etc.
After he was fallen to the Earth blind, Arise, says Christ to him, and go
into the City, and there it shall be told thee what thou must do. When he
came into the City, a certain Disciple named Ananias, Act. 9. 17.
pre-instructed by Christ in a vision, was sent to him, who putting his hands
on him, says the Text, said to him, Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus that
appeared to thee in the way) has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight,
and be filled with the Holy Ghost. Till his Imposition of hands, the holy Ghost
was not bestowed upon him. And when he was bestowed upon him, yet he had not
his full Commission; he was but yet a Disciple consecrated by a Disciple. To
make him an outright Apostle, a higher, second, and more solemn consecration
past upon him, which you may read in the 13. Chapter of the Acts, where, says
the Holy Ghost to the Prophets, and Teachers of the Church of Antioch, Separate
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, Ver. 2. And
how were they separated I pray? The third Verse tells you, When the Prophets
and Teachers (there mentioned) had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, says the Text, they sent them away, till then they wanted power. To
which passage of this vocation, or calling to the Ministry, give me leave to
add this for his parts. That in a humane way of acquired Learning, he was the
greatest Scholar of his time, bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, a great Doctor
of Law, spoke more Tongues, attained by his own Industry, then all the other
Apostles, which had almost all Languages instilled into them by infusion. In
short, he was verst, and read, and studied, not only in the Scripture, but in
the highest parts of secular learning; In the writings of Menander, Epimenides,
and Aratus, Heathen Poets. Which is sure sign to us, that studies, and
learning, and parts acquired in Universities, are no hindrances, or
impediments, if not helps to the Ministry. Lastly, as for that saying of
Tertullian, that Laymen may be Priests, he tells you, in the following words,
in what case this is to be understood. Vbi Ecclesiastici ordinis non est
consessus; Where the condition of the time and place is such, that
Ecclesiastical orders cannot be had; If a Christian Layman should come into a
Pagan Island, or into a Country of Heathen people, where there is no true
Minister, here Tinguis, and offers, and sacerdos es, every man is a Priest,
and may baptize, and adminster the Sacrament, and preach as much of the Gospel
as he knows. But where this necessity is not, to snatch the Sermon out of the
mouth, or the Sacrament out of the hands or the child out of the arms of the
true Minister, is certainly to to be in the number of those uncalled Teachers,
of whom God complains in the 23. Chapter of Jeremy, at the 21. Verse, where he
says, I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them,
yet they prophesied. And farther then this I will not pursue the first thing I
proposed to you; which was by occasion of Saint Paul's calling to be an Apostle,
to remove an error of late taken into the minds of some, that crafts-men may
exercise the place and function of a Priest.

The next thing I shall observe to you, The arti(...) insinuation himself.
is, the holy art and insinuation which S. Paul here uses to win upon the
minds of his disagreeing Corinthians. Though he profess, in the beginning of
the next Chapter, that he came not to them with that part of an Orator about
him, which consists in the excellency of speech, or the entising words of man's
wisdom, (lest if he had done so, he might perhaps, have gained much glory to
himself, but then his Master must have been in danger to lose his, and so the
Gospel have suffered from his Eloquence; and his Epistles might, perhaps, have
past for a good piece of Rhetoric, but not for good Sermons) yet he every
where carried this other, equally prevailing part of a good Orator with him,
that by complying with the affections of those to whom he wrote, he first
transformed himself into their shapes, and became all things to all men, that
he might the better transform them into his, and make all men become like
himself. Thus to the Jews he became as a Jew; and put himself a while with
them under the Law, that by insensible degrees he might take their yoke from
them, and might beget their liking, and entertainment of the Gospel. And thus
to the Gentiles, who were without the Law, he became as a Gentile, without the
Law too, that he might unite them to the Jews. If I may speak of him, by his
own description of himself, (and certainly, in that description of himself,
he was inspired to speak truth as well as in his other writings) as he was not
chosen, like the rest of the Apostles, out of Fishermen, or men unlearned, nor
called to preach the Gospel from mending Nets; But as there was a concurrence
of natural, acquired, and infused abilities in him, which rendered him though
not one of the twelve, yet of equal gifts and endowments to them all. Lastly,
as his task and patent to preach the Gospel was much larger then the rest, as
much larger, as the rest of mankind was larger then the Nation of the Jews; So
in the performance of his task, he never failed to express all this. Like the
beast, of which Pliny speaks, which puts on the likeness of every thing next
it, and shows like a flower before a flower, like a stream before a stream,
and like a flame before a flame; so 'twas a piece of this Apostles (Art shall I
say? or) holy commission, to be all things to all men. Strong with the strong,
and weak with the weak. To part with his Liberty to the scrupulous, and to use
it with the indifferent. To eat all things wtth those that did eat all things,
and with those that did not, to keep himself to herbs. Will you hear him in
all these particulars express himself? Turn to the ninth Chapt. of this
Epistle, and to the nineteen Verse, where setting down the end, and aim,
which he proposed to all his holy Arts, he says, Though I be free from all
men, that is, no way obliged to do as I do, but for my Masters service, yet
have I made my self a servant to all, that I might win the more. Now if
humility, and the casting of himself below himself; if to beseech, and
entreat, and petition there, where he had sufficient authority and commission
to enjoyne and command, be to wear the form of a servant; and if all discreet
behaviors, compliances, and applications, take their measure, and use, and
praise, from the good end to which they are directed, and the good success
which they are likely to procure, in all his Epistles I find not this Apostle
more expediently making use of his Art in the form of a suppliant, then in
this Text. For consider these Corinthians, to whom he here applies himself,
divided, and broken into Factions; and these Factions severally deriving
themselves, some from him, others from Cephas, others from Apollos, (Names in
their opinions, as holy, and great as his) and to have dealt imperiously with
them, or to have used his Apostolical power, and to have commanded them to
agreement, had not been to make peace, but to animate, and inflame that party
which called themselves his side. It had been too, to call up opposition, and
disdain in the others, who were not of that side. Who citing Apollos, or Saint
Peter against him, and thinking it to be some confession of their error and
weakness to yield first, or to go over to them who said they were of Paul, it
being as reasonable that they should come over to them, who said they were of
Cephas or Apollos, might have asked the same question which the striving
Israelite asked Moses, Who made thee a Judge over us? And might have seconded
this question with another, and have asked him, how one interested, and engaged,
nay the head (as they conceived) of a Faction, could be presumed to be an
impartial reconciler? The better therefore, to establish a peace and concord
among them, S. Paul in this Chap. proceeds by three conducible ways of
Reconciliation. At the 13. Ver. he cleares himself from all interest and
engagement to a side; and equally blaming those who said they were of Paul, as
those who said they were of Cephas, or Apollos; he asks them how it came to
pass, that they dealt with the Gospel of Christ, which was entire and
seamlesse, like his Coat, as the Soldiers did with his other Garments, divided
it by a kind of blind Lottery among them, and every one take his share? Is
Christ divided? Says he. Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized in
the name of Paul? If you were not, why do you raise a Sect, and Faction from
him? Why do you call your selves by way of mark and distinction, Paulists?
And so turn the name of your Preacher and Apostle, into the name of a Schism
and side?

Next, as he well knew that the readyest way to reconcile all sides, was to
manifest himself to be of none; so he well knew too, that he that would knit,
and reunite disagreeing minds, was not to deal roughly, or magisterially
with them, (for that were to lose both; and to turn the enmity and hatred
which they held between themselves, upon the Reconciler, who strived to make
them friends) but was to quench such discords with soft language, and to cure
such rents and wounds of the Church by pouring oil into them. Though,
therefore, being armed with the authority of Christ himself, he might, with
justice enough, have made Decrees and Ordinances to bind them to agreement, yet
he rather chooses to reconcile them to one another with their own consents.
In a mild, and humble address of himself; therefore, not entitling himself
more to one side then anonher, he equally beseeches them all, that he might
the more regardfully be listened to by all. And he beseeches them for things
which little concerned himself, but for their own good. He petitions them
that they would be saved, and spends entreaties that they would vouchsafe to
go to heaven. He requests them that they would not be worse Christians, that
is, Schismatiques and Seperatists, then they were Heathens, that is, unanimous
Idolaters.

Lastly, he begs of them that they would once more be a Church and City; that
is, a place of communion, and society, and Christian conversation. And that he
might the more prevailingly obtain this of them, he addresseth himself to
them in a style and compellation of the greatest and gentlest persuasion to
peace that can be used, and calls them Brethren. A word, which to remove all
opinion of better or worse, or of inferior or superior, (the usuail grounds
of discord) not only signifies an equality between the beseecher and the
beseeched, and the besecched among themsevles; (For Esse Fratres est relatio
inter aequales, says the Lawyer as well as the Logician; to be brethren,
carries a reference of equality to one another) but it implies all the natural
and religious grounds for which men ought to maintain League and Agreement,
and Peace with one another. For in calling them Brethren, he called them men of
the same sociable kind, equally descended from the same common Original and
stock, and equally wearing in their nature one and the same common Image of
God. And therefore, for this they were not to disagree, or quarrel with one
another: Since likeness of kind maintains agreement between savage beasts and
Tigers. Leonum feritas inter se non dimicat, serpentum morsus non petunt
serpents; Who ever heard of a Lion devovred by a Lion? Or who ever heard of a
Serpent stung by a Serpent? much less should men then, bite and devour, and
prey upon one another.

Again, in calling them Brethren, besides the natural affinity that was
between them as men, he put them in mind of their spiritual alliance, as they
were Christians too. That is, men allied to one another by one common Faith,
one common Hope, one common Redemption, and therefore to meet in one common
bond of Peace and Charity too. Rixari, and se invicem convitiis lacessere
Infidelium est; It Is for Infidells, and men not converted to the Faith, to
provoke, or brawle, or quarrel with one another.

Thirdly, lest all this sweetness of address and language should not
prevail, he joins Conjuration to Petition, but vailes it in the style and
form of a Petition too, and beseeches them to unity by the name of his, and
their Lord Jesus Christ. A name, by which as he had before dispossessed Devils,
cured sicknesses, and restored the dead to life again, so he repuests that he
may dispossess opinions, cure divisions, and restore agreement by it too. It
being that name into which they were all baptized, and to which they had all
past their promises, and vows. Lastly, a name by which they were all to be
saved; and by which they, by whose names (to the blemish and disparagement of
this) they called themselves, were, with them, equally to be called, that is,
Christians.

Here then, 'twere much to be wished, that the Preachers of our times would
deal with their disagreeing flocks, as this Apostle dealt with his: That is,
that they would employ their holy, and religious arts and endeavors, by
sweetness of language, and indifferency of behavior to all parties, to
reconcile them. For since it may be truly said of Preachers, what was once said
of Orators, that the people are the waters, and they the winds that move
them; to be thus the winds to them, as to speak, and move, and blow them into
waves and billows, which shall roll, and strike, and dash, and break
themselves against each other; Or to be thus the winds to them, as to rob them
of their calm, and to trouble the peaceful course, and stream of things well
settled, and to raise a storm and tempest there, where they should compose and
allay one, is not to act the part of an Apostle, or of a Preacher of the
Gospel, but of an Erynnis, or Fury, who ascending from hell with a firebrand
in her hand, and snakes on her head, scatters wars, and strifes, and hatreds,
and murders, and treasons, and betrayings of one another as she passes. Every
hair of her head hurld among the people becomes a sedition, and serpent; and
every shaking of her Torch sets Villages, and Towns, and Cities and Kingdoms,
and Empires in a Combustion.

Alas, my brethren, how many such furies, rather then Preachers, have for some
years walked among us? Men who speaking to the people in a whirle-winde, and
breathing nothing but pitcht-fields, and sieges, and slaughters of their
Brethren, do profess no Sermon to be a Sermon, which rends not the Rocks and
the Mountains before it: forgetting that God rather dwells in still, soft
voices. It Is true indeed, the Holy Ghost once assumed the shape of cloven
Tongues of fire: But that was not from thence to beget Incendiaries of the
Church; Teachers whose Doctrine should be cloven too; and which should tend
only to divide their Congregations.

If I should ask you, from whence have sprung our present distractions? Or,
who are they who keep the wounds of our divided Kingdom bleeding? Are they not
certain tempestuous, uncharitable active men, who make it their work and
business to rob men of the greatest temporal blessing of the Scripture, and to
preach every man out of the shade of his own Vine, and out of the fruit of his
own Fig Tree, and out of the water of his own Cisterne? Are they not men who
will stone you for your Vineyard, and then urge Scripture for it? And will take
away your field, your possession, your daily bread from you, and then repay you
with a piece of Esaias or Ezekiel, or one of the Prophets, anc call this melting,
and reformation? Are they not men who do only profess to have the art not to
heal, or close, or reconcile, but to inflame, and kindle sides? Men who blow a
Trumpet in the Pulpit, and there breath nothing but thunder, and ruin, and
desolation, and destruction, Whose followers call themselves Brethren, indeed,
and boast much of their charity; But they call only such as are of their own
confederacy, Brethren: and make no other use of the word which was at first
imposed by Christ, to be the style and mark of agreement and peace, then to
be the word and mark to know a faction by, and make no other use of their
charity, which should extend it self to all men, even to their very enemies,
but only to keep themselves together in a separation and conspiracy.

Lastly, these are the men, who when they should strive to quench the present
flame with their tears, do conjure as earnestly by the name of Christ to
discord and confusion, as S. Paul here in this Text does to order and
agreement. Men who call it prophecy, and edification, and building up of the
people, when they break and divide them into Sects and Factions. As zealously
exhorting them to speak diverse things, as S. Paul here exhorts them to speak
all the same. Which is the next thing to be considered; and the first step
toward the reconciliation, and peace, here petitioned for, which is unity and
agreement in compellations and names in these words, Now I beseech you
Brethren, that ye all speak the same thing.

Whether the dispersion of men, after the building of the Tower of Babell, over
the face of the whole earth, were a panishment or a blessing to mankind, I
shall not in this Auditory examine or dispute. Only thus much we learn from
the History of that place, that the occasion of that dispersion and separation
of men from one another, sprung first from the confusion which God threw among
them, and that confusion sprung from their diversity of speech. For as speech
was at first bestowed upon us by God, that we might hold league and society,
and friendship with one another: so you may read in the 11. Chapter of Genesis,
that as long as all the world was of one language, and of one speech, they
lived unanimously together like men of one family and house. One heart, one
soul seemed to move in them all. But when they once ceast to be unius labii
homines, men of the same lip and speech, when as many languages were thrown
among them, as they afterward possessed Countries, then society, and
co-habitation, and brotherhood ceast among them too. They were scattered abroad
upon the face of all the earth, says the Scripture. They who were before
children of the same common Ancestors, and derived themselves from the same
common parentage and stock, as if they had been borne in the adverse
Hemispheres of the world, or had taken their beginning from as many several
Parents, as they afterward found Islands, of one great Family and Kindred,
became so many divided Nations.

As this diversity of Tongues at first broke the world into the several
crumbles and portions of men, who from that time to this have divided it among
them; so there is not any one thing which has so fatally divided Kingdoms,
and States, and Churches against themselves, sometimes to an utter extirpation,
many times to an eternal breach, and Irreconciliation, as diversity of
Language. I do not mean when men speak diverse tongues of several dialects,
and significations, (as when they at the building of Babell spoke some of them
Hebrew perhaps, some of them Greek) but my meaning is, that nothing more
directly tends to the division of a State, or Church, then for several
companies of men to distinguish, and divide and separate themselves from one
another by certain words and names of mark and difference, especially if they
be words of disgrace, and scandal, and reproach, mutually imposed, and stuck
upon each other; Or words of faction, and combination, assumed and taken by
themselves. Then, if hatred of person, or difference of Religion do accompany
such words of distinction, that for the most part befalls them, which befell
the men of the old world, they break society and Communion, and crumble
asunder; and of one people become so many divided Nations, and Churches to each
other. This is an Engine which the Devil and wicked Politicians have in all
ages of the world made use of, to disturb the peace, and trouble the happiness
of Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Making holy, virtuous words and names, many
times the partition wall of separation; And the device, and incitement, not
only to divide Kingdoms but Corporations, and private Families against
themselves. As long as the Jews called themselves by one and the same common
name of their Father Jacob, Israelites, they made but one State, one
Commonwealth among them. But when once ten Tribes engrossed that name to
themselves, and the other two for distinction sake called themselves by the
name of the Tribe of Judah, the most united, happiest, neerliest allied people
in the world, a people of one blood, as well as one language, fell asunder, and
divided themselves, like Jacob and Esau, into two hostile, irreconcilable,
never more to be united Kingdoms. And this was the case of these disagreeing
Corinthians, to whom S. Paul directed this Text. As long as they called
themselves by one, and the same common name of Christians, they made but one
City, one Church, one place of Concord. But when they once began to distinguish
themselves by their several Teachers, when some said, We are of Paul, others,
we are of Cephas: As third sort, we are of Apollos; And only a fourth sort,
more Orthodox then the rest, we are of Christ; Then, then indeed, as if Christ
had been divided, or had been the Author of several Religions, preached among
them by several Apostles, they became broken, and rent, and torn asunder,
into several Churches and Congregations. Where their usual custom was, not
only to oppose Sermon against Sermon, and Gospel against Gospel, and Teacher
against Teacher, but every one in the defense of their own Teacher, and his
Gospel, thought it part of their Religion to extol, and quote, and urge the
purity and infallibility of the one, to the depression, and disgrace, and
contempt of the other: Till at length it came to pass, (as I told you before)
that that which begun in Religion, proceeded to bad manners, and ill behavior.
Marks and words of distinction, and difference, grew to bitter invectives, and
mutual reproaches of one another. They who were the followers of Saint Paul's
Doctrine, called those who followed Apollos, by way of mark and infamy,
Apolonists. And they who were the followers of Apollos, by way of retaliation,
and brand, called the followers of Saint Paul, Paulists, though Saint Paul and
Apollos preach both the same Doctrine. Hard censures flew between them in as
hard language; who ever was not of a party, nor enrolled of a side, was thought
to be without the pale of the Church. The gates of heaven were shut against
him, and nothing but reprobation, and the lot of the damned, and hell fire were
allowed to be his portion.

Here then, my Brethren, lot me make my appeal to eyery one of you, who hear
me this day, has not this been our very case? I must with sorrow of heart
confess to you, that as often as I have for some years, made to my self a
contemplative survey of this unhappie Kingdom, I have been able to discover no
cause so pernicious for the many alienations of mind, or the many separations
of Congregation from Congregation, heightened at length into the tragedy of an
over-spreading Civil War, as certain vain, ridiculous, empty words, and names
of distinction among us; which have sprung from some men's stricter or looser
carriage of themselves in their profession of the same Religion. They of the
more free, and open carriage and behavior, who call a severe regularity and
strictness of life, preciseness, and an abridgement of Christian liberty,
have called those of a more reserved, and locked up, and demure conversation,
Puritans, and Roundheads, and I know not what other names of contumely, and
reproach. And they of the more strict behavior, have equally as faulty, called
those of afreer, and less composed conversation, Libertines, and Papists; the
usual words of infamy made to signify a Cavalier. These two words my
Brethren, have almost destroyed a flourishing Kingdom between them.

To this, I cannot but add one most pernicious cause of our present divisions
more, which people have derived to themselves from making themselves followers
too much of several Teachers; and affecting too much to be called after their
names: whilst one says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Cephas, a third, I am
of Apollos, only a few neutrall men, We are of Christ. Nay, if we needs must
go several ways, I could wish we had such sacred names as S. Paul, or S.
Peter, or Apollos to divide us. I know not whether it will be seasonable for me
to speak it in this Assembly: But we for some late years have chosen to our
selves names more modern, and fallible to divide ourselves by; whilst some
have said, We are of Calvin, others, We are of Arminius, others, We are of
Socinus. These, to the blemish, and reproach of Christian Religion, have been
made names of strife and faction, Yet they have been great and learned names;
though some of them, I must confess, have been liable to humane Errors. But
if you consider the many rents and separations into which the ordinary sort of
people have for some years divided themselves, either you will find no names at
all for them, or names so unlearned, so obscure, so altogether mechanic, and
unconsiderable, that it will be your wonder how such vulgar, rude, untaught
Teachers should draw Disciples after them. It would pose me very much to tell
you by any Monument of learning, or piety, which he has left behind him to be
known by, who was the Father, or first bringer up of the Sect of the
Brownists; or who was the first Author of the Sect of the Anabaptists. I know
there were Anabaptists in diverse of the Fathers times; and I know too, that the
Parent of that Sect then, though he were an Heretic, yet he was a Scholar.
But as for the Auther of the Sect of the Anabaptists of our times, I cannot
well say what he was. One who has written the History of their wild
proceedings at Munster, (where they begun with the Reformation of the Church of
Jesus Christ, and proceeded at length to three wives a piece) says, he was a
Dutch Botcher; one who repaird old Germents under a stall at Leyden in the
Low Countries; Another says, he was a Garmane Cobbler; A third, that he was a
Westphalia Needle-maker; But another controlls that, and says he was a
Westphalia Baker. But whatever he were, have not we in our times seens
Patriarchs and Prophets, as vulgar and mechanic, as unlearned and base as he?
Men who have invaded the Pulpit. I will not say, from mending old breeches, or
cobling old shoes, (pardon the homeliness of the expression I beseech you, it
is but the Historians Latin translated into my English) but from Trades so
mean, so dis-ingenuous, so illiberall, that I should defile your ears, and
the Pulpit to describe them: And yet, have not these modern shades of Muntzer,
John of Leyden, Rotman, Knippenburge, Knipperdolling, Melchior Hoffman, the
great Enthusiasts, and disturbers of Germany, to the Astonishment of all
Judging men, drawn Disciples after them, I wish I could only say, as mean, and
base, and vulgar as themselves? Certainly, my brethren, consider the parallel
well between the inspired Troublers of our Kingdom, and those, who by their
wild Doctrines did set Westphalia, Saxony, Munster, and all the noblest parts
of the Germane Empire in a flame, and you will find, that in this sad Eclipse
of Monarchy among us, there wants only a Sarcinator, or botcher, to assume to
himself the Crown, and to be called by a Sanedrim or privy Council of the
like Trades, Rex Justitiae, and novae Jerusalem Imperator, King of
Righteousness, and Emperor of the new Jerusalem, to make our case the very
same with theirs.

Again, in this diversity of Guides and pastors, (Pastors scarce fit to be
Overseers of unreasonable Flocks) do we not also hear as great a diversity of
language spoken? The Lay-Preacher accuses the University-man with want of the
Spirit; and we of the Uaiversity do back again account such Laymen mad. Nay
among us Scholars, they who pretend to Calvin's Doctrine, do banish all those
out of the state of salvation, who deny absolute Predestination; Or hold not,
that from all eternity without any respect of their works or actions, whether
they be good or bad, God has past this sad irreversible sentence and decree,
That some shall necessarily be saved, others shall as necessarily be damned.
They who think this a piece of Stoicisme, or a Doctrine brought into the world
to drive People to despair, do equally banish those from the state of
salvation, who thus uncharitably banish others. But what speak I to you of
this Congregation of such high, schollarly dissentious? or discourse to you of
disputes and controversies, not in the power of Scripture, Synods, or General
Counsels to decide? That which has more troubled the peace of our distracted
Kingdom, has been a strife of words about things as small as Cummin, or
Annise And about that part of the Kingdom of heaven, which lies not wrapped up
in an insearchable (...) or an eternal sentence of Gods concealed Will, but in
a grain of mustard seed: A little, slight indifferent Ceremony, or piece of
Church Discipline. One has called it an Idolatry to make an obeisance in the
Church; another has called it a piece of Gods outward worship to do so. One
has styled the Cross in Baptism a sign of Superstition; another has styled
it the mark, and badge, and emblem of his Christianity and profession. One
calls all Pictures in Church windows, Idols; another looks on them as so much
holy story, brought into Imagery and Colors. The very garments we wear have
not escaped contradiction. One calls the Surplice a Romish vesture; another
calls it a white robe of Innocence, and Decency. Nay our very Prayers and
Devotions have not been free from quarrels. Whilst some have called the Lords
Prayer, A perfect form, enjoined by Christ to be said as it is; others most
irreverently have called it a Tailors Measure, fit onley to cut out other
Petitions by*

In this miserable diversity of sides, then, where Countrymen, and men of the
same speech, do so ordinarily speak diverse languages, What why is there left
to beget a peace and union among us?

Truly, my brethren, I know none so fit as that Saint Paul here prescribes in
this Text; a way, which if it were well practiced, or if men would either have
more charity, or less gall in them, would in time beget an union and agreement
between all Churches; that is, (...), that we all speak the same thing. That
is, first, that we lay aside all those odious, hateful names and words of
reproach, which serve only to Provoke and engender strifes, and to beget a
dislike of one man's conversation with another; that the honest, strict,
regular, heedfull, conscientious man, be no longer called a Puritan, nor his
wife a holy Sister; Nor the free, sociable, affable, open, harmlesly
unssrupulous man, be any longer called a Papist, or Atheist, or by way of
reproach, a Cavallier. I speak not now of the adulterous, swearing, riotous,
lying, drinking, covetous man; these are such, that one of the ways to reform
them, is to call them by their right names.

Next, that we no longer, as our interest, or affections, or prejudices, or
education, or customs sway us, pin our belief or faith upon any one
Particular Guide or Teacher, so irremoveably, as without comparison or
examination to reject and desplse al others. I am of opinion we should quickly
make one Church again, if those newborn names and words of Independent and
Presbyter did not divide us. And I am also Persuaded, that our several
Disciplines and Doctrines have not kept the Church of Rome at a greater
distance with us, then the style and compellation of Protestant and Papist

Thirdly, that we Scholars, in those high mysterious points which have equal
argument and proof on both sides, and which both sides (for ought I know) may
hold yet meet in heaven, do factiously or peremptorily betake our selves to
neither; But either lay them aside, as things of mere contemplation, not of
practice or use; or else speak of them to the people, only in that general
sense wherein all sides agree, and as that general sense is laid down to us
in the Scripture.

Lastly, that in matters of Ceremony and form, things either altogether
indifferent, or at most, neither enjoined, nor forbidden in the Scripture, that
our carriage and words be always as indifferent: That we call not that
scandalous which is decent; or that decent which is scandalous: That we press
not things as necessary, which are merely ornamentall; nor impose ornaments as
things of necessity. That where no well-establisht Law is broken by it, both in
Actions and Language, where ever we come, we conform our selves to the
harmless (though to us unusual) custom of the place: Herein imitating that
sure example of S. Paul, by being strong with the strong, and weak with the
weak, as near as we can, to become all things to all men. In things merely
Ceremonial, to part with our Christian liberty, and peaceably to yield to
those, who, being otherwise persuaded, will contentiously refuse to part with
theirs. And where our salvation, or the salvation of our neighbor is not
concerned, charitably to comply, and sort with their infirmities; neither
crossing them by our practice, though perhaps the better, nor perplexing them
with our disputes, though perhaps the more rational: But if it be possible, as
much as lies in us, not only to have peace with all men in words and speech,
but in society, and conversation, and Church Assemblies too: Which is the next
degree of Unity here petitioned for, that is, an unity of meeting together in
the same house of God, set down in these words, I beseech you Brethren, that
there be no divisions among you.

That I may the clearlier proceed in the interpretation of this Unity of
Ass(...)blies.
I shall desire you to observe, that the word which we here in English do
translate Divisions, is in the Original Greek (by which we are to order our
exposition) (...): A word which signifies not every kind of rent, or division,
or disagreement among men; but such a division only as is accompanied with a
perverse, unreasonable denial of society and communion together in the same
Church. A division which carries with it an obstinate separation upon
unnecessary grounds. Which unnecessary separation upon weak, slight grounds,
is that which Saint Paul here in this Text, by way of difference and
distinction from lighter Rents, calls (...), Schisms. A sin, my Brethren, of
which if I should discourse to you at large, and should show you the
hainousness of it, by its dangerous effects; I might tell you that it is not
only a sin against the sociable nature of men, who are borne for Communion and
Commerce, and the mutual help of one another; but it is a sin directly against
that unity and peace, which Christ, as his last Legacy bequeathed to his
Church. A sin, which (besides the uncharitable opinion which accompanies it,
which is, that they who are separated from, must therefore be separated from,
because they are wicked, deplorably wicked men, men reprobated, and utterly
lost in the ways of Error, and with whom all communion is destructive to our
Salvation) does not always confine it self within the retired, sequestered
limits of a bare separation. But that which at first began from a scruple, has
many times proceeded to a Tragedy and massacre. They who at first causelessly
separated themselves from their Brethren, because they were wicked, have many
times, as their strength and numbers have encouraged them, and as the time has
favored their Reformation (as they have called it) proceeded from the
rectifying of men's Errors, to the lessening of their fortunes. And they only
have at length been called the wicked, who have been rich, and have had estates
to lose.

That only which I shall further say to you of it, is this: Separation is a
sin which has always veyl'd it self in the disguise of sanctity. Thus
Montanus, and his followers broke off Communion with the whole Christian Church
then in the world, because, forsooth, 'twas revealed to them by divine
illumination, that the Holy Ghost was no where to be found but in their
Conventicle. An Heresy, which beginning in Schism proceeded at length to this
monstrous conceit among them, That only the house of Montanus was the true,
Church, and that Montanus himself was the Holy Ghost. Thus also the Donatists
(an over-scrupulous Sect of men) divided themselves from the then Catholic
Church, because it was not pure enough for such sanctified Communicants; nor
complied with the inspired doctrines of the Father of that Sect. And this, it
seems, was the fault of these Corinthians here in this Text; who having
entitled themselves to several Teachers, proceeded by degrees to divide
themselves into several Churches and Congregations: every one of which
challenging to themselves the true and right Religion, and charging the others
with the name of the false, thought at length that no way was left to keep
themselves pure and unspotted, but by breaking off all Religious, nay Civil
Commerce and Communion with each other. Hence, for fear of infection, it was
held a crime for any but the Righteous, to assemble, or converse with any but
the Righteous; or for any to meet together at a spiritual Exercise, but such
who first agreed in the same purity of Opinions.

Here, then, if I may once more take the liberty to parallel one people with
another; is not this our very case? Has it not been the practice of many, many
years, for those who call themselves the godly, the righteous, the children of
the most High, to break off society and communion, nay almost neighbourly
civility, with those whom they call the wicked? As there were among the Jews
certain unclean places, and things, and persons, which whosoever touched were
for that time unclean too; so, has not the like opinion past among us, that
there have been certain unholy, un sanctified places, and persons, which make
those who touch, or approach near them unholy too? Have not some Pulpits been
thought unsanctified, because, forsooth, the Preacher has been ungifted? And
wherein, I pray, has his ungiftedness appeared? Because he has not expressed
himself in that light, fluent, running, passionate, zealous style, which should
make him for that time seem religiously distracted, or beside himself? Or
because his Prayer or Sermon has been premeditated, and has not flowne from
him in such an Ex tempore loose careere of devout emptinesses and nothings, as
serve only to entertain the people, as Bubbles do children, with a thin,
unsolid, brittle, painted blast of wind and air? Or because, perhaps, the
sands of his Glass have not fleeted for two tedious hours together with
nothing but the bold insolent defamation and reviling of his Prince?

Again, have there not been some who have thought our Temples unholy, because
the Common Prayer Book has been read there? And have renounced the
Congregation, where part of the Service has been tuned through an Organ? Has
not a dumb Picture in the window driven some from the Church? And in exchange
of the Oratories, have not some in the heat and zeal of their Separation,
turned their Parlours, Chambers, and Dining-roomes into Temples, and Houses of
Prayer? Nay, has not Christ been worshipped in places yet more vile and mean? In
places, which have reduced him the second time to a Stable? If I should ask
the people of both Sexes, who are thus given to separation, and with whom a
Repetition in a Chamber edifies more then a learned Sermon in the Church, upon
what religious grounds, or motives either taken from the Word of God, (which is
so much in their mouths) or from reason, (which is so little in their
practice) they thus affect to single and divide themselves from others: I
believe it would pose them very much to give a satisfying Answer. Is it because
the persons from whom they thus separate themselves, are irreligious, wicked
men? Men who are Christians only in form, and whose conversation carries
nothing but evil example and pollution with it? If I should grant this to be
true, and should allow them to be outright what they call themselves, The
Elect, and Godly, and Holy ones of the earth; and other men to be outright what
they call them, The Reprobate, the wicked, the ungodly and profane, yet is not
this warrant enough to divide or separate themselves from them. Nor are they
competent Judges of this, but God only, who by the mouth of his Son, has told
us in the Parable, that the wheat and corn is not to be separated from the
chafe and tarres when we list, but that both are to grow together till the
great harvest of the world. Till then it is a piece of the building of it, that
there be a commixture of good and bad.

Besides, let me put this Christian Dilemma to them: either the persons from
whom they divide themselves are holy or unholy: If they be holy, they are not
to separate themselves from them, because they are like themselves; If they be
unholy, they are in charity to converse with them, that they may reform and
make them better. Did not our Savior Christ (and certainly his example is too
great to be refused) usually converse with Publicans and sinners? Did he
forsake the Table, because a Pharisee made the Feast? Or did he refuse a
perfume, because a harlot powered it on his head? Or did he refuse to go up
into the Temple, because buyers and sellers were there, men who had turned it
into a den of Thieves? Certainly my Brethren, we may, like Christ, keep
company with Harlots, and Hypocrites, and Publicans and Sinners, and yet
retain our innocence. It Is a weak excuse to say, I will never consort my
self with a swearer, lest I learn to blaspheme: Or, I will utterly renounce
all familiarity and acquaintance with such and such an Adulterer, or with such
and such a Drunkard, lest I learn to commit Fornication from the one, or
Intemperance from the other. In all such conversations, we are to imitate the
Sun, who shines into the foulest puddles, and yet returns from thence with a
pure untainted Ray. If men's vices then, and corruptions, be not a sufficient
cause to warrant a separation, what else can be? Is it the place of meeting, or
Church, or the things done there, which has made them shun our ordinary
Congregations? Yes, say some, we have held it very unlawful (as we conceive)
to assemble in such a place, where we have seen Altars, and Windows
worshipped, superstitious garments worn, and have heard the more superstitious
Common Prayer Book read, that great bolster to slothful Ministers, and
twin-brother to the Mass, and Liturgy of Rome.

Were this Charge true, (a very heavy one, I confess) had there been any among
us so unreasonably stupid, as to spend their devotion on a pane of glass, or
pay worship to the dumb senseless creature of the Painter, or adore the
Communion Table, the wooden issue of the Axe and Carpenter, (as I think there
were none) had there (I say) been very Idolaters among us, yet unless they
would have compelled them to be Idolaters too, I (after all the imparciall
Objections which my weak understanding can frame) can see no reason why they
should not communicate with them in other things wherein they were no
Idolaters. I am sure, if S. Paul had not kept company with Idolaters, we to
this day (for ought I know) had remained Infidels.

My Brethren, deceive not your selves with a fallacy, which every child is able
to discover. If such superstitions had been publicly practiced among us, it is
not necessary that every one that is a spectator to another man's, sin, should
presently be an offender. Nor are all offenses so like the Pestilence, that he
that comes within the breath and air of them, must needs depart infected. Thou
see one, out of a blind zeal, pay reverence to a picture, he has the more
to answer for. But why do thou, out of zeal altogether as blind, think thy
self so interested in his error, as to think thy self a partaker of his
fault, unless thou excommunicate thy self from his coversation.

Again, tell me thou, who call Separation security; what see thou in a
Surplice, or hear in the Common Prayer Book, which should make thee
forbear the Congregation where these are retained? Is it the web, or matter,
or color, or fashion of the garment, or is it the frame or form, or
indevotion of the Book which offends thee? Or art thou troubled because they
have both been borrowed from the Church of Rome? That indeed is the great
argument of exception; which under the style of Popery, has almost turned
Religion it self out of the Church. But, then, it is so weak, so accidental,
so vulgar an Argument, an Argument so fit for none to urge but silly women,
with whom the first impression of things always takes strongliest, that I must
say in reply to it, That by the same reason, that thou poor,
tender-conscienc'd man, (who art not yet past milk, or the food of infants in
the Church) make such an innocent, decent vesture as Surplices, unlawful,
because Papists wear them, thou may make eating and drinking unlawful,
because Papists dine and sup. The subject is not high or noble enough to
deserve a more serious confutation. That therefore, which I shall say by way of
Repetition, is only this: If to wear or do, whatever Papists wear or do be
unlawful, as it will presently concern us all to throw off our garments and
turn Adamites, so it will very nearly concern us too, to lay aside our
Tables, and betake our selves to fasting, as the ready way to famine. Then to
reject the Common Prayer Book, because some of the Prayers in it resemble the
Prayers in the Romish Liturgy, is as unreasonable, as if thou should make
piety and devotion in general unlawful, because Papists say their Prayers.
And so, in opposition to whatever they do* should think thou art to turn
Athiest, because most in that Church do confess there is a God.

The time will not give me leave to say much in the defense of that excellent
Book; Or, if I should, it is in any thing, I presume, which can fall from my
imperfect mouth, which will be able to recover the use of it back again into
this Church. Yet thus much, out of the just sense, and apprehension which I
have of the wisdom, as well as piety, and devotion of it, I shall adventure
to say. That I cannot think, that ever any Christian Church, since the time
that that name first came into the world, had a public form of Gods Worship,
more Primitively pure, more Religiously grave, and more agreeable in all points
to the Scripture, then that is.

To which I shall only add this one praise of it more, that there is not any
Ancient, Classically condemned Heresy, to be found in the Records of
Counsels, Church-Histories, or the Confutations of Fathers, which is not by
some clause or other in that most Orthodox Book excluded.

Here, then, if there be any in this Assembly of that il-perswaded mind, that
he would not at this present make one of the Congregation, if the
Common Prayers were read, let me once more ask him, what that great Antipathie
between him, and that admirable Book is, which should make them quarrel one
another out of the Church* Is it because it prescribes a Ring in marriage, or a
Cross in Baptism? over-scrupulous man! who would rather choose to make a
rent and schism, and division in the Church, then be spectatour to things so
harmless, and indifferent. But thy weak Conscience is wounded. Weak, indeed,
when a piece of marriage-Gold, or a little water sprinkled in the sign, and
figure of a cross, the Type, and Emblem of thy Christianity, shall drive thee
from the Church. I must confess to you freely, if such things, as the
veneration of images, or adorations of Altars, or sacrifices for the dead, or
the worshipping of the Host, or the Mass Book, with all the unsignificant Ave
Maryes, and superstitious prayers, which use to travel round the Circle of a
numerous set of Beads, had been established among us by public Authority; And
had been enforced upon the practice, and Consciences of men, and no Liberty of
person, or freedom of estates allowed them, unless they would conform to the
present Golden Calf of superstition set up before them, a separation had not
only been allowable, but necessary.

We would have offended God very much to be partakers of such dross. And our
best Answer would have been the Answer of the Three Children, Dan. 3. 16.
when the King would have had them fall down to the huge image, and Colossus
which he had set up, O King, we are not careful to observe thee in this
matter. But where no such things were enjoined, where every one was left to the
full use and exercise of his Christian liberty, where nothing was blameable
among us, but the ridiculous, over-acted postures and gestures of some few
busy, fantastical men, whose Popery lay in making discreet men laugh, to see
them so artificially devout, and so affectedly ceremonious, to divide, and
separate, or to give us over for a lost Church, because the Psalms of David,
after his own Musical way, used to be sung to an Organ; As innocently,
certainly, as if they had been tuned through his own loud Cymball, or had more
softly been sung, and vowell'd to his Harp: Or to renounce our solemn
Assemblies, for such slight, indifferent things, as a piece of holy story in a
glass window, or because the Minister wears white, or because married people
come together by a Ring, or because the Lords Prayer is more then once
repeated, is not only Schism, and I may safely say, Schism upon scandal
taken, not given, but it is directly contrary to S Paul's advice, here in this
Text; who is so far from tolerating any such needless divisions, and
separations of presences and bodies, that he will not allow in the same Church
and Congregation the least dissent or division of minds; But makes it the least
part of his Petition to his disagreeing Corinthians, that they would not only
meet together in the same place of Gods Worship, but that they would be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judg-ment, which is
the last part of the Text. To which I shall only add some brief Application of
some things in this Sermon to you my hearers, and so commend you to God.

Nihil est in Intellectu, Unity of minds
quod non fuit prius in sensu; That there is nothing in the understanding, or
mind within, which was not first in the sense without. It Is as great, and
measured a Truth, that there is nothing in our speech, or words, or actions
without, which was not first in our mind, or will, or affections within. For
what our Savior Christ said, that Out of the heart proceed evil thought's,
murders, adulteries, Mat. 15. 17.
thefts, false witness, blasphemies, and the like; to every one of which sins
without, belongs some secret, invisible spring within. As, I say, to every
Adultery without, belongs some hidden lust within; and the uncleanness of the
body is but the soul issue, and offspring of the soul; And as to every murder
without, belongs some secret envy, or hatred, or thirst of revenge within; and
the rancour of the heart only clothes it self in the violence and bloodshed of
the hand: so we may say of our Divisions, and Disagreements too. All those
odious words, and names of mutual infamy and reproach; all those perverse
crossings, and thwartings, and contradictions of speech; all this duel, and
skirmish, and quarrelsomeness of language; Lastly, all this shunning and
lothing of one another company; all this separation, and denial of communion,
which we so ordinarily see exercised, and practiced without, are but so many
unchristian behaviors, which take their original and birth from as
unchristian grudges, and prejudices, and jealousies, and mis-apprehensions
within. Never man yet dissented from another in speech, but he first dissented
from him in opinion: And never man yet separated from another in communion, but
he first separated from him in affection and will. To remove, therefore, the
root and spring of all disagreements, as well as the current and stream; and to
beget a peace, and concord, and reconciliation without, Saint Paul, like a
skillful Artist, who reserves the hardest part for the last, proceeds from men's
words and actions, to their opinions and thoughts: and like those who fet
Watches, and Clocks, where the Hand upon the Dyall without, cannot move
regularly, unless the weights and springs which guide it, move orderly within;
the better to make us go all alike, and strike the same time, he endeavors to
setle and compose those inward wheels, by which our words and behaviors
without, are to be ruled and governed.

The thing then for which he here so earnestly Petitions, is Unity, and
Agreement, and Consent of minds. Which, in plain terms, is to exhort us, that
as we are all men of one and the same reasonable kind, formed and created like
one another in the shape and figure of our body, so that we would approve our
selves to be men of one and the same reasonable kind, in the Music and
Harmony of our souls too. Which would then come to pass, if every one of us
would by the impartial search, and examination of his own mind, dislodg those
mists and clouds of error, which blind him toward himself, and benight him
toward others. Or, if he cannot do this by the strength and diligence of his
own natural Forces, that he would have recourse to those who are most able to
pluck this beam out of his eye; and whose work and business it is so to apply
their Cures, as by proposing that one, constant, immutable, eternal, Divine
Truth to his mind, in which it is possible for all minds well enlightened to
concenter and agree, by degrees to reduce him from his blindness and error,
and to make him not only speak, but conceive, and think the same things with
him that taught him.

It was well said of him, who compared our minds to Looking-glasses, or
Mirrours; For certainly if we could but keep them open, and unclouded, they
carry this property of Mirrours with them, not only to return the images, and
shapes, and truths of things, which pass before them as they are; but all minds
in a clearer, or less clear degree, have a capacity to receive into them the
truth of the same things alike. As a thousand Glasses, if they be true,
successively looked in, will show us the same faces: But then, as Glasses, if
they be false, will cast false resemblances; or if they be discolored, will
transform all things which flow into them into their own die: So it is with us. I
know not how it comes to pass, or whether I may ascribe the fault to Education,
or Custom, or to our parents, or to our Affections, too much knit, and wedded
to the Religion, or Doctrine, or Opinion, or Teacher, which most complyes with
our Fancies; but there are certain ill-cut, false-reporting minds, which look
upon men, and things, in another size and figure then they are. Other minds
there are stained and died (as it were) with certain weak prejudices, and
corrupt opinions; through which, as through so many deceiving colors, they
discern no truths which wear not that hue. As he that looks through a green
Glass, takes all things for green; and he that looks through a blew Glass,
takes all things for azure. And this was the very case of these Corinthians
here in the Text. They first addicted themselves over-partially to several
Teachers; and from their several Teachers, took in several apprehensions, as
they pleased to like or affect him above others, whose Disciples they called
themselves. Some, though they did not well understand what they held, resolved
(without any examination what they were) to be only of Saint Paul's opinions:
Others resolved to hold only what had been taught them by Apollos: Others
resolved to hold only what had been preached by S. Peter. All which three taught
and preached one and the same Gospel; yet that Gospel was not alike entertained
by all hearers. 2 Cor. 10* 10.
Whilst some disliked it in S. Paul, because (as himself complains) he was of
an humble presence, and of an ungrateful utterance. Others dislike it, perhaps,
in the mouth of Apollos, because it came Rhetorically from him, and he was
guilty of that unedifying crime, forsooth, of being eloquent in the Pulpit.
Others perhaps entertained it coldly from S. Peter, because he had not been
bred up in the School of Demosthenes, nor tasted of the finer Arts and
educations of Greece.

In short, one and the same saving Truth, for want of a little right judgment
in the Hearers to compare it, coming from several mouths, past into diverse
opinions first; and then these opinions broke forth into diverse factions. And
is not this, my Brethren, our very case? Do but consider the present
distempers of our poor, divided Kingdom; and, pray, what has been the true
root and spring of so much variance, and hatred, and heart-burning among us?
What has crumbled us asunder, and turned one of the purest, and most
flourishing Churches of the world, into a heap of Heresies and confusion? Has
it not been the very word of God it self? In which all minds, I confess, should
agree, and which should be the rule to compose all our strifes; and before
whose decisions the greatest Scholars Disputes, and the meanest man's Doubts,
should fall down, and mutually embrace, and kiss each other. How comes it then
to pass, that Religion, which was ordained by God to be the oil to cure our
wounds, should prove only the oil to feed, and nourish our combustious? Whence
is it, that the Scripture, that Sword of the Spirit, should prove to us only
(...), a two-edged sword, and that no other use should be made of it by us, but
only to be the weapon of our Conflicts, by committing the edges, and making
them enter duel, and combat with each other? Truly, my brethren, all the
reason that I can give you for this, is, That some (perhaps well minded people,
but not of understandings either strong, or learned enough to reach the true
sense and meaning of some places) have stepped beyond their measure; and have
presumed to interpret more then they have well understood. Others, of a more
modest, but credulous composition, have thought that only to be the right
meaning of the Word of God, which they have heard from the mouth of the
Preacher which they most affect. Others, of a more dangerous policy, finding
that the Scripture rightly expounded would extremely make against the plot of
their dark proceedings, and that the holy Ghost cannot be bribed to find Texts
to make covetousness, sedition, or the slaughter of their Brethren, or
Rebellion against their Prince, lawful; have, with some formal helps of
piety, and zeal, put to their expositions, made the Scripture speak only those
plausible untruthes, which most complied with their ends, and the peoples
Fancy. Hence, the better to arrive to their Estates, by the distractions of
their minds, they have dealt with them as cunning Anglers do with silly fishes,
troubled the stream, and blinded them, and then made them their prey. The way
to do this was to affront, and disgrace, clamor down all the primitive Truths
for some Generations taught among them; and to recall from their sepulchers,
and dust, all the old, intricate, long since buried Opinions, which were the
madness of their own times, and the Civil War of ours. With which opinions
they have dealt, as the Witch of Endor dealt with her Familiar, raised them up
to the people clothed in a long mantle, and speaking to them in the shape and
voice of a Prophet. Hence come those several acceptions, and interpretations
among you, even in your ordinary discourses, of one and the same plain, but
sinisterly understood places of Scripture. One, following the practice of all
the purest ages of the Church, thinks the Sacrament of Baptism is to be
administered to Infants. Others, (who would certainly be a strange sight to the
Congregation, if they should appear the second time at the Font) of late are
taught to think that none are to be baptized, but such as are old enough to be
their own Godfathers, and can enter into Covenant with God, and promise for
themselves. Some, because it has been called a binding of the spirit, to
fetter their devotions in a set form of Prayer, have banished that Prayer,
which Christ prescribed to his Apostles, out of their Closets, as well as
Temples. Others, of as rectified a piety, think no Prayer so likely to find
acceptance with God, as that which was conceived, and put into form by his
Son. I should tire your patience too much to give you an exact Catalogue of
all the rotten opinions which at this present swarm among us. One who has
computed the Heresies, which have sprung up in this Kingdom within these five
years, says, they have doubled the number of those which were in Saint Austins
time; and then they were very near fourscore. One is a Chiliast, and holds the
personal Reign of Christ upon Earth. Another is a Corporealist, and holds the
death of the Soul with the Body. Nay, as it is said in Afric, a Lion will
couple with a Tiger, from whence will spring a Libbard; so certain strange,
unheard of, double-sex't Heresies are sprung up among us: not able to
understand what he would hold himself. You shall have an Arrian and Sabellian
lodged together in the same person. Nay, (which is yet worse) whatever Celsus
spoke in scorn, and Origin in vindication of our Redeemer, Christ and his
Mother, has of late trodden the Stage again, and appeared to disturb the
World. One (I tremble to speak it) has called the Virgin Maryes chastity into
question; And others have spoken of the Savior of the World so suspiciously as
if he had been a thing, of a stolen, unlawful Birth. In short, there want only
some of those Munster men among us, of whom Sleydan writes, where one calls
himself God the Father, another God the Son, A third Paraclete, or God the
holy Ghost, to make our Babel and confusion of wild opinions at the height. In
this miserable distraction, then, where Heresy, and Error, has almost eaten
up the true Religion; And where all the light at the Gospel, which shines among
us, is but like that imperfect light at the Creation, which shined before the
Sun was placed in the firmament; A light creeping forth of a dark Chaos and
blind mass, and strifefull heap of jarring Elements: In this thick fogge of
strange Doctrines, I say, which has condenst it self into a cloud, which has
almost overspread this whole Kingdom, from which Truth seems to have taken
slight, and made way for Ignorance to style it self once more the Mother of
devotion, what way is there left to reconcile our minds, or to beget one right
knowledge, and understanding of the ways of God among us? Truly, I know none
but that which Saint Paul here prescribes in the Text; which is, that we
endeavor as near as we can, to be of one mind, and of one judgment.

But how shall this be brought to pass, unless all judgments were alike clear,
and unbiassed? Or, unless, laying apart all partiality, and affection to their
own side, and all prejudice, and hatred against those from whom they differ,
men would submit themselves to him, who is best able to instruct them; Or who
can bring with him the most saving Truths into the Pulpit? Besides, (may some
one say) if people should bring minds prepared to entertain the Truth, where is
that instructor so infallible, or so opinionated of the strength of his own
gifts and knowledge, that another pretending to the same Truth, may not
challenge to himself the like infallibility? who shall be the Judge of
Controversies? or who shall present Truth to us with such known marks and notes
about it, that as soon as it is presented, every congregation (of what mean
capacities soever) shall presently acknowledge, and entertain it? Will you, Sir,
who have all this while thus bemoaningly pitied our divisions? We are bound to
thank you for your charity to us; and should be desirous enough to embrace a
truth of your description. But you are a Scholar, whose parts and abilities lie
in the humane model, and building of your own secular studies. We are
therefore bid to doubt very much, whether you have the Spirit; and are told by
some who profess themselves inspired, that all your Readings, and Studyings,
and tyrings of your self over a difficult piece of Scripture, at midnight
perhaps, when all others sleep, by a lone, solitary, dumb candle, are but so
many labors in vain, Since it is impossible for any to understand the Scripture
aright, but such only who have it revealed to them by the same holy Spirit that
wrote it.

My Brethren, what shall I say to you? Modesty, and the knowledge I have of my
own imperfections, will not allow me to say peremptorily, that I have the Spirit
of God. Or if I could distinguish his secret influences and assistances from
the operations of my own soul, or could certainly say I have him, (which S,
Paul himself durst not say definitively) yet 'twould not become me so to
confine him to my frail, narrow parts, as to deny him to all others more
learned then my self.

For the settling therefore, and composing of your divided minds, I will not
take upon me to be the Judge of Controversies, but you your selves shall be.
Only the better to enable you to perform this charitable office to your
selves, and for your better direction how not to be out in your judgment, as a
sure clue to guide you through the perplexed windings of that labyrinth into
which some of you are fallen, so fallen, that they seem to me quite lost in a
wood of mistakes, where every path is a guide, and every guide is an error,
give me leave to commend to you that seasonable advice of Saint John, which he
delivers in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle, at the first verse, where
(as if he had prophesied of our times) he says, Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God: because many false Prophets
are gone out into the world. In which words; you have two of the best Rules
assigned you to go by, that can possibly be prescribed for the settlement of
minds.

First, be not too credulous; Do not presently believe every man that says he
has the Spirit; nor suffer your selves to be tossed and carried about with every
wind of doctrine: For that is not the way to be all of one, but of as many
several minds as the art or cunning of several Teachers shall please to work
upon you. I am persuaded this easiness of belief, this credulity, or (as the
Apostle calls it) this admiration, this overvaluing of some men's persons, has
been one of the great parents of our present dissentions: whilst some weak, but
yet well-minded people, building their judgment merely upon the outward
appearances of men, have mistaken the zeal and strict life of their Preacher
for his sufficiency. And taking their Logic from the preciseness of his
behavior, have framed these charitable, but false conclusions to themselves:
He is a man of a composed countenance, of a reserved speech, of a grave
carriage, and of a devout elocution, therefore surely he is a holy man. And
because he is a holy man, therefore whatever he says, shall be to us Oracle;
as coming from the mouth of one, so much in the favor of God, that it is
impossible he should deceive us, or speak that which is not right.

My Brethren, I have no design or purpose to bring Holiness into contempt;
nor can I be so injurious to piety or a good life, where ever I find it, as to
expose it to the scorn of the licentious, by not giving it its due. I am so
far also from lending encouragement to the lives of vicious Teachers,
(Teachers who are the shame of their Mother, and the scandal of their Flock)
that I could wish that every Congregation in England were furnished with such
an exemplary Minister, that his life as well as preaching, might be Sermon to
the people. Nay, give me leave, I beseech you, to extend my charity yet one
degree farther. I am so far from disliking holiness either in Preacher or
people, that I wish we all made but one united Kingdom of Priests. Or, if you
will have me express my self in the words of one of the holiest and meekest
men of the earth, Numb. 11. 29.
I could wish that all the Lords People were Prophets. But, then, you must give
me leave to say too, That holiness and strictness, and austerity of life, are
no infallible signs that the Preacher may not err. Nor has God so annexed the
understanding of his Word to the unstudied, unlearned piety, or sober carriage
of the Expounder, that he that is most zealous shall still be most in the
right. 2. Cor. 4. 7.
As long as that saying of S. Paul remains upon record, That we hold this
treasure, this knowledge of Gods Will, (...), in earthen vessels; As long as
the Preacher, how holy soever he be, is so much one of the people, as to dwell
in a frail, weak Tabernacle of clay; Lastly, as long as men are men, they
will be liable to men's infirmities. And as the learned scandalous Preacher may
be sometimes in the right; so it is possible that the ignorant, zealous, holy
Preacher may be often in the wrong. How to know this, and how to distinguish
them, therefore, you are to make use of the next Rule prescribed to you by
Saint John; that is, when you hear an Exposition, or a Sermon, or a new
Doctrine preached to you, not rashly, without distinction or choice to consent
to it, till you have past the impartial sentence of a clear judgment on it;
compared and weighed Sermon with Sermon, and Preacher with Preacher; called
every Doctrine, every Proof, every confident Assertion to the touchstone, and
measured it by some plain evident place of Scripture; and examined whether the
Holy Ghost, or his own vain, popular ambition* have for that time inspired
the speaker; or whether his Sermon have had some dissembled, secular end, or
Gods glory for its mark. And this Saint John calls, trying of the spirits;
which is then done, when (as I said before) you reduce what you hear spoken by
the Preacher to the infallible Rule of Truth, the Word of God; and make that,
well cons^^^ed, the scales to weigh his Doctrine in. Does he preach charity,
and banish strife from his Pulpit? Does he not flatter Vice, though he find it
clothed in Purple, nor speak neglectfully of Virtue, though he find it clothed
in rags? Does he strive to plant the fear and love of God in his Auditory, the
forgiveness of their enemies, and pity toward the poor? Dares he arraigne a
public sin, though never so fortunate? or speak in defense of afflicted
Innocence, though over-borne by oppression? Dares he maintain his Christian
courage in Tyrannical, doubtful times? And dares he call prosperous Sedition,
but a more successful mischief? Lastly, does he preach such Christian Truths
for which some holy men have died, and to which he himself would not be
afraid to fall a sacrifice* This, this man is to be hearkened to; this man is
fit to be obeyed. And this man speaking the same things which God himself
does in the Scripture, (whatever his gifts of pleasing, or not pleasing sick,
fastidious, delicate fancies be) is thus at least to be thought of, That though
he speak not by the Spirit, (as a thing entailed upon him) yet, for that time,
the Spirit speaks by him, which ought to be all one to you. On the contrary,
does the Preachers Sanctity and Religion consist merely in the devout composure
of his looks and carriage? Does he strive to preach down Learning, or does he
call Study a humane folly? Does he choose his Text out of the Bible, and make
the Sermon out of his Fancy? Does he reprove Adultery, but preach up discord?
Is he passionate against Superstition, but mild and calm toward Sacrilege?
Does he inveigh and rail at Popery, and at the same time imitate the worst of
Papists, Jesuits, urge Texts for the Rebellion of Subjects against their
Prince, and quote Scripture for the deposing, and But chery of Kings? Does he
startle at a dumb picture in a Church-window, and at the same time preach all
good order and right Discipline out of the Church? Does an Oath provoke his
zeal, yet does he count lying in the godly no sin? Lastly, does he preach
separation upon weak untemper'd grounds? Or does labor to divide the minds,
which he should strive to reconcile? Let him bring what demureness or
composure of countenance he please into the Pulpit; Let him, if he please,
join sanctity of deportment to earnestness of zeal; Let him never so
devoutly bewail the calamities of his Country, which he has helped to make
miserable; Or let him weep never so passionately over the Congregation, which
he has broken into factions; In short, how seemingly holy, how (...), how
unprophane soever his behavior be; though the Scripture do so continually
overflow in his mouth, that he will neither eat, nor drink, nor speak, nor
scarce sleep but in that phrase, yet as long as he thus forgets his Charity,
thus Preaches strife, thus Division, I shall so far mistrust whether he have
the Spirit, that I shall not doubt to reckon him in the number of those false
Prophets which S. John says are gone out into the world.

The Conclusion then of this Sermon shall be this. Men and brethren, I have
with all the sincerity and plainness which might benefit your souls, preached
Truth, and Concord, and mutual Charity to you. I have also for some years,
not been so sleepy an Observer, but that I have perceived some of you (who have
thought your selves more Religious then the rest) to be guilty of the (I might
say Crime, but I will rather say of the) mis-guided Zeal of these Corinthians
here in my Text. There have been certain Divisions, and I know not what
separations among you. I have farther observed, that certain false, causlesse
prejudices and aspersions have been raised upon our University, which to the
grief of this famous Nursery of Gods Church at home, and the reproach of it
abroad, are still kept waking against us by some of you, as if Conscience and
Religion, as well as Learning and Gifts; had so far forsaken us, that all the
Schools of the Prophets cannot afford you a set of able, virtuous men, fit to
be the Lecturers to this soule-famisht Parish. How we should deserve to be thus
mistaken by you, or why you should under-value those able Teachers which you
have already, or refuse to take your supply from so many Colleges which here
stand present and ready to afford you choice: or why you should supplicate to
the great Council of this Kingdom, in pity to your souls, to send you Godly
Teachers, (which, perhaps, is but a well-meaning Petition from you, but
certainly it is a great scandal, and Libell against us) I know not. But
whatever the mysterious cause be, I am confident, that unless they will sleep
over their infamy and reproach, it will always be in the power of our despised
University-Divines, to make it appear, even to those whom you intend to
petition, That this is but a zealous error in you: And that they are as able
to edify you, certainly, as he, whose occupation it was to repair the old
shoes of the Prophets. I should shame some of you too much, who were the
Disciples of that Apostle, if I should discribe him to you by a larger
character.

Instead therefore of a farther vindication of the reproach thrown upon us,
that which I shall say of more near concernment to you, is this: If I have in
the progress of this Sermon, ripped open any wounds among you, it has not been
with a purpose, to enlarge, or make them bleed, but to power wine and Oil into
them, and to heal, and close them up.

Next, If I have cleared any of your sights, or enabled you at length to
discern, that the reason why the mote in your brothers eye seemed so big, was,
because an over-scrupulous zeal had placed a beam in your own; and that in
contributing to the ruin of one of the purest Religions in the world, the
reason why you have swallowed so many monstrous Camels, has been, because at
first you made scruple, and strained at gnats, I have what I intended: Which
was to let you see, that to divide and separate your selves from the communion
of our Church, if it had been guilty of a mole or two, is as unreasonable, as
if you should quarrel the Moon out of her Orb, or think her unworthy of the
skies, because she wears a spot or two writ on a glorious ball of light.

Lastly, if I have said any thing in the reproof of discord, or the praise of
charity, which may reunite your minds, and make you all men of the same heart
and belief, as well as of the same City and Corporation, I shall think I
have done the work and business of a just Divider of the World of God toward
you, and of a faithful Servant and Steward toward my heavenly Master. Whose
blessing of peace be upon you all, together with the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost. To which glorious Trinity, be
ascribed all Honor, Praise, Dominion and Power, for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

