THE HISTORY and MYSTERY OF THE VENEREAL LVES

Concisely abstracted and Modelled (occasionally) from serious strict
Perpensions, and critical Collations of diverse repugning Sentiments and
contrary Assertions of Eminent Physicians: English, French, German, Dutch,
Spanish, and Italian dissenting Writers.

CONVINCING By Argument and Proof the Traditional Notions touching this Grand
Evil, and common reputed Practice grounded thereon, as erroneous and unsound.

Solving the most dubious and important Quaeries concerning the abstruse
Nature, difficult and deceitful Cures of this Popular Malady.

WITH Animadversions upon various Methods of Cure, practiced in those several
Nations.

By E. Maynwaringe Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and Sold by the Booksellers, MDCLXXIII.

Licensed

November. 18. 1672. Roger L'Estrange.

Ratio Operis. The Occasion, Design, and Management of this Work,
Apologetically prefixed.
THE vast extent and comprehension of the Medical Study, taking cognizance of
all things comprised in the Universe, Celestial and Terrestrial: as also the
prodigious company of multifarious Diseases and Discomposures in the Microcosm;
are not the whole labors and difficulties attending this Science, but to make
this Undertaking more intricate and perplex, the variety of dissenting
Judgments upon every Disease, gives a strange check and distraction to prevent
and frustrate a certain, steady, well-grounded Knowledge.

Particularly and for Example, the Subject in hand offers great dissatisfaction
and disappointment to the industrious Skeptical Physician that is in pursuit of
a complete indubious knowledge; by reason and from the dissimilar opinions and
clashing of Authors of the highest reputed Rank, which for number and variety
of different persuasions, scarce any Disease can equalize or parallel this.

And notwithstanding they are thus divided, and have eagerly hunted and cast
about this way and that way to find the right scent; yet after all they are at
a loss, are forced to acquiesce, and most of them sit down and conclude with
this determination, that the Venereal Pox is Morbus occultus. And although in
practical points, the generality of Professors are easily persuaded and lightly
take up this or that Course of Physic for this Disease (commonly from the
'greater number of Assertors and Followers thereof in Practice) and prosecute a
Method of Cure upon fallacious unbottomed presumptious and traditional
Prescripts. Yet there are some, and but a few, that are not so satisfied, that
are not thus lightly carried away, and stiffle their Judgments in the great
Current of general Opinions; but are laborious and diligent to acquire such a
knowledge and stable Judgment as will abide the Batteries of all contrary
opinionated Gainsayers and Disputers: and in the Therapeutick part, to purchase
such Medicinal Arcana's, as will certainly and speedily rescue tortured man
from this affrighting and defaming Malady.

And although many discouragements present upon such enterprises to deter the
Undertakers; yet notwithstanding I have endeavored to clear up and bring forth
this latent Disease out of the obscurity and uncertainty, wherein various
entangled Judgment have involved it, and rank it in the number of manifest and
known Diseases; being a Work of such importance to Mankind, as none other is
greater in the whole Catalogue of Sicknesses.

This Disease is not mean and contemptible, but Lords it over the rest, is
familiar with Nobles, and has admittance into the Courts of Princes. For its
frequency, popularity, and diffusiveness none exceeds it, being confined to no
Region, Country, or Climate; but perambulates hic and ubique and walks through
the Earth, visiting all Nations. The contagious Seminary of this Lues lies in
Ambuscade, assaults and sets upon Mankind several ways, seizes upon various
parts, fastens here and sometimes there uncertainly, appears in diverse shapes,
affrights with dismembring or disfiguring, tortures exquisitely, kills slowly,
acts many tedious and dolorous parts, and makes its Exit dubiously.

This Manual, though mean in bulk, compriseth the sum of what has been
delivered by Authors concerning this grand Disease; presents you with variety
of dissonant and jarring opinions, in the Rise and Antiquity thereof, in its
subtle nature, causes, seat of residence, various kinds, Diaetetick
institutions, indications for Cure, designments and adaptation of Medicines,
with the Authors decision and determination thereupon. And this uniform Draught
(with the help of practical and often experimented proofs) I have abstracted
and modelled out of the difformity and confusion of thwarting Judgments, and
settled such informing Notions of this Disease, as may render the Cures thereof
more certain, safe, and expeditious; very useful to whom it may concern, either
as Practicers or Patients: the truth whereof I doubt not but will appear
confirmed upon trial of what is here proposed, and set forth in the Front of
this Work.

London, From my House in Fetter-lane. E. M.

Books lately Printed for the Booksellers of London.
PRaxis Medicorum, Antiqua and Novae. The Ancient and Modern Practice of
Physic, Examined, Stated, and Compared. The Preparation and Custody of
Medicines, proved to be the Physicians proper charge and grand duty. The new
Mode of Prescribing and Filing Recipe's with the Apothecaries, manifested an
imprudent invention and pernicious innovation, etc. By E. Maynwaringe, Dr. in
Physic.

Morbus Polyrhizos and Polymorphaeus. A Treatise of the Scurvy: Examining
Opinions of the most solid and grave Writers, concerning the Nature and Cure of
this Disease. Determining the whole matter from the latest Experiments and best
Observations. The fourth Impression with Additions. By the same Author.

Tabidorum Narratio. A Treatise of Consumptions; Scorbutic Atrophies, Tabes
Angelica, Hectic Fevers, Phthises, Spermatic and Venereous Wastings; radically
demonstrating their Nature and Cures from vital and morbific Causes. The Second
Edition. By the same Author.

Vita Sana and Longa. The Preservation of Health and Prolongation of Life;
proposed and proved in the due observance of considerable precautions, and
daily practicable Rules, relating to Body and Mind; compendiously abstracted
from the Institutions and Law of Nature. By the same Author.

Medicus Absolutus (...). The Complete Physician, qualified and dignified. The
Rise and Progress of Physic, Historically, Chronologically, and
Philosophically illustrated. Physicians of different Sects and Judgments
charactered and distinguished; the abuse of Medicines, imposture of Empericks
and illegal Practicers detected: Cautioning the diseased in the use of
Medicines; and informing them in the choice of a good Physician. By the same
Author.

THE HISTORY AND MYSTERY OF THE VENEREAL LVES.
CHAP. I.
Of the various names given to this Disease in several Countries.

THE denomination of Diseases is not to be neglected, and passed over as
frivolous; for as much as most Diseases have names significant and proper; or
denoting something remarkable, appertaining thereto.

This Disease as it wandered about in several parts of the World, has changed
its name almost in every Country where it appeared; but why this malady should
not retain and own a constant name, but pass under several appellations, the
reasons may be: Heteronymiae ratio. 1.
First, The scandal of the Disease, that no Nation is willing to own it, for
the place of its birth and original descent; but quit themselves and lay the
imputation upon another Country; hence it is called by the French, the
Neapolitan Disease, as taking its rise, or being first known in Europe at the
Siege of Naples; the Italians return it back again, and call it the French
Malady, and in England it is commonly known by the French Pox, as being first
transported hither from France: in the Low Countries it commonly goes by the
name of the Spanish Pox, being brought by the Spanish Soldiery into the
Netherlands; but the Spaniards to quit themselves from the original extract of
this evil, call it Patursa, or the Indian Disease; as having brought it over
with them from West India, in that Voyage Columbus made about the year 1492. to
discover the Western parts of the World.

Secondly, Ratio. 2.
The various opinions among Writers concerning the nature and rise of this
Disease, has caused it thereby to be known by several names, answering such
their Conceptions: Fracastorius calls it Syphilis, some pudendagra, because
commonly seated in the privities; others mentagra, and some call it the great
Pox to distinguish it from Variolae the small Pox, but Fernelius terms it Lues
Venerea from the usual procuring cause, which appellation we retain chiefly
through the progress of this discourse; and although there are other Diseases
arising from Venus by excess or defect thereof; yet this exceeding all the rest
in cruelty and pertinacy, may well carry the title from the rest, and be styled
eminenter, the Venereal Lues.

CHAP. II.
The Antiquity, and Rise of the Venereal Disease.

ABout the original descent of this malady, Writers do much differ and vary in
their opinions: some would have it a new Disease, others plead for its
Antiquity; some would have it to take its rise from this Nation and Country,
others from another Region: that you may be acquainted with the several
persuasions of learned grave Authors touching this matter; I shall give you
some brief account of their different judgments in this point, worth your
observation, and then abstract my own determination, from the most valid
reasons and probability of truth.

Some will have this Disease to take its rise at the French Camp before Naples,
in the year 1494. and till then was not known: others will have the West India
to be its native place, where it is endemical; and that Columbus his Soldiers
at their return from discovering the Western World, brought it thence into
Spain; who upon their arrival were dispatched away to Naples (being then
besieged by the French) did propagate this venereous evil amongst the Italian /
Women; and that they spread it amongst the French, in whose Army it raged very
fiercely. The French returning home brought it into their own Country, and from
thence it came into England; wherefore in England it is called the French Pox:
the French not willing to own this foul Disease, call it the Neapolitan and
Spanish Pox: the Spaniard to free himself from the scandal, call it the Indian
Pox.

Sebast. Aquilanus a Galenist, Sebast. Aquilanus. Tract. de morb. gallic.
(that lived under Ludovicus Marquess and Bishop of Mantua, about the year
1508.) contends for the Antiquity of this Disease in a Treatise de morbo
gallico, of this Venereal Malady; but will have it the same with the
Elephantiasis, the Leprosy; which is a Disease of great Antiquity: and this he
endeavors to prove from a parity of symptoms that attend the one and the
other; and compares Galens description of the Elephantiasis with this Venereal
Lues.

Leonicenus a Physician of note at Ferrara about a hundred and forty years ago;
Leonicen. lib. de morb. gal.
writ of this Disease, and says it is ancient, long before the Seige of
Naples; but does not agree with Aquilanus that it is the Elephantiasis; or
those that would have it the lichenae; nor the saphatum of the Arabians; but
pustulae rising upon the skin from the corruption of air; and counts it one of
Hipocrates his Epidemical Diseases: 3. Epid. Sect. 2.
of this opinion likewise is Reusner in his Book de Scorb. and also Vallesius
1. Epid. Com. 1.

Scanarolus consents with the determination or Leonicenus; Scanarolus.
and writes a Tract in his defense against Montesaurus a Physician of Verona,
that had opposed it.

Cataneus will have it a new Disease sprung up in Italy in the year 1494.
Catan. tract. de morb. gal.
exortus est in Italia monstrosus morbus, nullis ante seculis visus, totoque in
orb terrarum in cognitus.

Vlyricus de Huten, a German, who wrote of this Disease in the year 1519. is of
the same opinion.

Wendelin Hock, Wendelin Hock de morb. gal.
a Doctor of Bononia, who wrote of this Disease a little before de Huten,
pitches upon the same time that it brake forth; and ascribes the original cause
of this Disease to a position of the Planets, in the year 1483.

Laurentius Frisius a German, Laurent. Frisius de morb. gal.
(a great assertor of Avicen) who wrote of this Disease in 1532. agrees with
Hock, and de Huten, concerning the time that this malady brake forth.

Joanes Almener, a Spaniard, calls it morbus gallicus, or patursae; ascribes
the first rise to Celestial influence, afterward propagated by Contagion.

Fernelius a famous Physician of Paris, Fernel. lib. 2. de abdit. rerum causis.
Cap, xiv.
in his Dialogue of this Disease, declares himself negatively, that it came not
from Celestial influence, or any popular cause; but agrees with Cataneus and
others concerning the time and place, where it first manifested it self, namely
at the Seige of Naples in 1493.

Baptist. Mont an. tract. de morb. gal.
Montanus a Doctor of Padua in great esteem there, about the year 1540. does
not agree with the opinion of Fernelius and others that gives this Disease no
longer standing in the World than from the Seige at Naples; but believes rather
that it came from America with Columbus.

Falopius alfo a Padua Doctor, Falop.
much esteemed about the year 1554. is of the same opinion with Montanus his
Tutor; that it came out of the India's, is a new Disease in Europe, but of
ancient standing in its own Country.

Forestus, Forest. Sennert.
and Sennertus, also two Judicious and Learned Writers, reckons up the
different sentiments of some chief Authors, but rather adheres to this opinion
that it was brought first into Europe with Columbus his followers.

Mercatus a learned Spaniard chief Physician to Philip the II. and Philip the
III. Kings of Spain, Market. lib. de morb. gal.
wrote of this Disease; recites several opinions of Authors before him,
concerning the rise of it; but does not determine this point, nor declare
plainly to whom he adheres.

Some will have this Disease to arise from an inundation of the River Tyber, in
the time of Pope Alexander the Sixth; that in the Summer following this
infectious Disease began from the filth cast up upon the land, which infected
the air, and so begat this Disease.

Joannes Benedictus a German, Benedict.
who wrote above a hundred years since, will have this Disease to be of late
standing; unknown to Hipocrates, Galen, Avicen, or other ancient Physicians;
and calls it the Disease of St. Maevus.

Hieronimus Fracastorius, Fracastor. lucubrat. de syphil.
thwarts this opinion, and would have this Disease to be antique; to have its
risings and settings, to appear and disappear for a long time; and that after
such intermission, at its first advent, it has been accounted new.

Gasper Torrella writ a Tract of this Disease and calls it Pudendagra, Torella.
because commonly seated in the Privities of Man or Woman. Ferrarius gives it
the same name, others call it Mentagra.

Aurelius Minadous, Minadous.
a Physician of Venice, put out a Tract of this Disease in the year 1596. after
he has reckoned up several opinions, he produces his own in these words: ego
sum ex illorum Class qui putant fuisse semper hunc morbum. Cum enim considero
eadem natura praeditos homines, eodem Coelo natos, sub iisdem syderibus
educatos, cum idem sit mundus qui fuit olim, cumque nec dierum nec horarum, nec
omnino nino temporum ordo sit immutatus, non potest mihi aliter in captum
mentis pervenire quam omnes fuisse semper eisdem morbis obnoxios, potuisse
semper vigere haec mala, and multa non esse nova ex se, sed nobis videri nova,
causas naturales milies easdem extitisse, similem morbum ex causis similibus
etiam superioribus aetatibus potuisse contingere: which words are much what the
same with Leonicenus that writ of this Disease 90. years before him, Leonicen.
libell. de Epidem.
and was the first Italian Physician that put forth a Book of this Malady.

To be brief; I shall sum up the number of dissenting Authors, and divide them
into two Companies, as I find them to stand opposite in opinion, recorded in
their own Works. And first, for the novelty of this Disease are these
Physicians following (men of repute and fame, especially in those times and
places, when and where they exercised this Profession. Scriptores pro novitate
hujus morbi litigantes.
) Bapt. Montanus, Jacob Cataneus, Nichol. Massa, Joan. Benedictus, Vlrychus de
Hutten, Windel. Hoch, Laur. Phrysius, Aloysius Lobera, Pet. Maynardus, Anton.
Benivenius, Fallopius, Fernelius, Petronius, Rondeletius, Forestus, Sennertus.

On the contrary party, who contend for the Antiquity of this Disease, are
these Physicians, men of note. Sebast. Aquilanus, Nicol. Leonicenus, Medici pro
antiquitate luis vener. disceptantes.
Anton. Scanarolus, Joan. Paschalis, Bened. Victorius, Franc. Vallesius,
Reusner, ^inadous, Joan. Langius.

Having showed you the different opinions of Authors concerning this point,
Authoris determinatio.
it remains I should give in my own sentiment, and determine the controversy.

First, I allow that all Diseases incident to humane nature, Judicatio. 1.
did not appear in the World together, but have their priority of existence in
several Ages, suitable and answering to the condition of places as they came to
be inhabited; as also the various state and alteration of bodies, by the
commixture of people of different Climates, or variously tainted with Diseases
ingenerating with each other; also by spontaneous declensions and degeneration
of depraved nature; by various diaetetic causes, strange accidents, and
unwonted procurements: from whence new Diseases do assurge and sprout forth;
old Diseases become rare and commute.

Secondly, (...), I must affirm; That the Pox is not always the Parent of the
Pox, but untainted persons using immoderate, unusual, and bestial Venery, may
procure the first symptoms leading to this Lues, which neglected, may introduce
and settle the Pox.

Thirdly, That Venery and the enormities thereof being antique; the product
Lues we may well judge antique also.

Fourthly, That the Venereal Evil is no new Disease, as some do imagine, but
antique; though not mentioned by Hippoc. Galen, and the Ancients under those
Titles it now goes by; yet the symptoms of those Diseases which they describe,
are very like to those belonging to this malady, and probably might issue from
the same procuring causes, and sprout forth from the same Seminary.

Fifthly, That the variation of some symptoms now in this Disease, by time,
persons, or places, is not sufficient to denominate it new, except you can find
out a new radix, or spring from whence it does arise; for, else all Diseases
upon the same account may be called new, from their unwonted Phenomenon and
different appearance; and this of necessity will be, and has ever been from
diversity of bodies, different complications, with other Diseases and
individual propriety, which sets as it were a new face and different garb upon
every Disease, though the same in specie, in radice and modo generationis: and
as nature is not constant in her uniform and regular actions, and the due
economy of humane bodies, much less may we expect it in her disorder, and
preternatural motions.

Sixthly, That the Venereal Pox being something changed and altered in the
symptoms now from what it was at its first breaking forth at the Seige of
Naples, or rather their more plain discovery in Europe; may upon good grounds
be supposed to have then not its rise, but augmentation and aggravation, since
many and most of the attending symptoms were observed by the ancients long
before.

Seventhly, That this Venereal malady was not so familiar, was not so much
noted and inquired into before the Seige of Naples; but being brought over from
America as an additional taint to propagate and spread more plentifully in
Europe, and to make it more fierce and raging, which busied the heads of
Physicians to inquire more nicely into the matter, to denominate it peculiarly,
to invent methods for Cure, and new Medicines.

CHAP. III.
The Progress and propagation of the Venereal Lues into several Countries.

Luis Vener. historica narratio.
IN giving you the Historical Narrative of this Disease, we shall take our rise
but from the year 1492. about which time the Spaniards made a Voyage under the
conduct of Columbus into America, to discover that part of the unknown World.

And although this Lues bears an ancienter date, and derives its Pedigree far
before that time, yet we have so little account of it recorded by Writers, that
it will not well admit of a Narration. But after this expedition of the
Spaniards it became so notorious, that many since have spent their judgments in
remarking what was most considerable and obvious to their reasons, in the
various passages that frequently occurred. We must then in this part of our
discourse, depend upon the credit of Authors, and collect the Historical
Account from the most authentic Writers.

The Spaniards arriving in that Septentrional part of America, about the
latitude of Florida (where confidently it is reported this Lues is endemical)
they soon got the taint of this Disease, and after a year or two roving there,
in 1494. they returned home well fraught with this Indian Commodity; and no
sooner they were landed in Spain, but another expedition was provided for them,
and they were dispatched away to relieve Naples, which was then besieged with a
great Army of French, under the Command of Charles the Eighth of France.

The City being distressed for provisions, eased themselves of some of their
superfluous Women (of the worser sort we may well imagine) such as were
over-ridden and notably seasoned with the Indian Itch, and sent them into the
Besiegers Camp, where they were entertained as welcome variety, and we may
easily believe they did not spare to use them sufficiently; Soldiers are not
nice in this point, (especially where Women are scarce) and here could be no
good choice to pick and choose, but bad enough was the best.

These Courtizans so sauced the French, that in a short time this Venereal Lues
raged throughout the Camp, and for an aggravation of the matter, the diet of
the French Army did not a little contribute to add to the fury of this Disease;
for being straightened for food, as there was great scarcity of flesh chiefly in
the whole Country, the Victuallers that provided for the Army, amongst the
Boars flesh that was appointed and commonly barrelled up for the Leaguer; did
mix therewith the flesh of dead Men, these two having great similitudes, so
that the cheat past undiscovered for some time.

And this report we have from Fioravantus a famous Italian Emperick, who
received this relation from a Neapolitan, whose Father was a Victualler to the
Army of Alphonso King of Naples.

And it is likewise reported that in that part of the West Indies, where this
Lues is epidemical; that those people are Anthropophagi eaters of Man's flesh.

And the forenamed Author Fioravantus, to satisfy himself what effect would
follow upon a Creature feeding upon its own kind, did feed a Hog at his own
House, with Hogs-flesh mingled with other meat, and within a few days the
brisles and hair came off, and Pustuls arose in the flesh. After that (he
says) he took a Dog and fed him for two Months with Dogs-flesh only, and great
pains seized him, with Pustuls and shedding of his hair.

Whether the eating of Man's flesh were sufficient to create the Pox, I shall
not affirm; but this upon good grounds I may conclude, that if the story be
true, as that the French were so abused with Man's flesh for their food, it
could not but highly exasperate the taint of the Indian Pox and Scurvy; which
two shaking hands together, the result must be something extraordinary; and
indeed so it proved by its intractable fierceness and truculency, which in a
short time devoured some thousands of the French: the remainder that returned
back into France, propagated this evil, and increased it there, that it became
to be notorious and common: the intercourse between France and England being so
great, this Disease could not be confined long in the French Quarters, but must
be communicated to the English; we as kind a sort of people as most Nations,
freely and plentifully bestow it upon one another, and being ingrafted into so
many families, it is probable the taint will never wash out, but derive a
perpetual succession, and transmigration into the Offspring.

The Spaniards having a propriety and great intercourse with the Netherlands,
transports this Disease with their Soldiery, and spreads it very plentifully
amongst the Dutch.

After this manner being introduced into the chief parts of Europe, and made a
Companion to the greatest traders and travelers in the World, it soon spread
into all places of traffic, and by time increased so, that it is now grown
very familiar to all Nations, and generally owned to inhabit all the known
parts of the World where we have Commerce; and this Commodity is to often
dearly bought by Travelers into far Countries, where they imagined this a la
mode Disease was not to be met with.

CHAP. IV.
The virulent nature of the Venereal Lues.

COncerning the nature of this Disease, opinions are very various amongst the
most judicious Writers, and this difference arose from the various symptoms
that attend this malady, of a very different signature, as challenging several
causes for such morbific impressions; to understand therefore the several
persuasions and verdicts that have passed hereupon; it will be necessary to
examine the definitions and descriptions of former Writers, wherein succinctly
they have comprised and declared their judgments touching this matter; and
adjoin our animadversions to the particular sentiment of each Author, for the
better information of the Reader.

Leonicenus one of the ancientest Writers of this malady, Leoniceni opinio lib.
de morb. gallico.
describes it thus. That the French Disease is Pustuls generated from a various
corruption of humors, from the intemperate heat and moisture of air, affecting
the privities first, afterward the whole body, for the most part with great
pain. But this is a very unsatisfactory account, Rejicitur.
and irrational; for as much as Pustuls are not the ratio formalis of this
Disease and inseparable; but are uncertain effects that happen sometimes; and
the Disease is as truly generated and fixed without these signals as with them;
and he might as well have said, the French Disease is Ulcers, or Spots, or
Pains or Gonorhaea; because these as frequently attend the Disease as Pustuls.
The remaining part of that description I dismiss, not to spend time about it;
because every common judgment may detect the errors.

Some will have this Disease to be intemperiem, and define it thereby as the
essence and quiddity of this Lues; but those that consent herein do also differ
about the intemperature, and cannot agree what the intemperate quality is, or
combination of qualities.

Some say it is hot and dry; others say it is cold and dry; some will have it
to be hot and moist others cold and moist; and if these four qualities could
admit of more conjunctions, and Partnerships, we should have more variety of
opinions; but the (...) are stinted here, unless they will assert
contradictions.

Massa a Venetian Physician, Nicol. Massae opinio.
who writ of this Disease not long after it raged so in Italy; he defines the
nature of this evil to be cold and somewhat dry. As for cold, we find for the
most part the contrary, Rejicitur.
and the concomitant effects to carry with them signals of heat: as acrimony
and sharpness of Urine, inflammations, dolorous Ulcers, etc. and whereas pain
is a molt frequent symptom attending this Disease, so a preternatural heat most
commonly is the consequent of pain.

Montanus in his Tract of this Disease, Joan. Bapt. Montani sententia.
contradicts the former opinion, and says that the essence and nature of this
Disease is a hot and dry distemper of the Liver introduced by Contagion. But
this cannot be rationally allowed neither; in that we daily see this Lues to
produce a putredinous moisture, Refutatur.
which breaks forth into Ulcers and Scabs frequently; although in some bodies
such effects may not appear; and who ever did know a hot and dry distemper of
the Liver to cause a Gonorrhaea, which is one of the master symptoms that
commonly attends this Disease.

Tomitanus a Padua Doctor, agrees with Montanus upon coupling the intemperate
qualities in this Lues; but differ very much about their introduction and rise,
asserting therein contrary to each, other: for Montanus says they a^^
introduced per Contagium; Bernard. Tomitan. definitio.
but Tomitanus says this Disease is a hot and dry distemper of the Liver, to
such a degree that it becomes Contagious. In the former, Contagion is made the
cause of the intemperate qualities; in the latter, Contagion is put as the
product, effect, and result of those qualities; but neither will hold good; nor
carries a probability of truth. But Tomitanus his Philosophy seems very
strange, that heat and dryness should arrive so far, Repudiatur.
and to such height, as to become Contagious: putrefaction which is chiefly the
effect of moisture, or conjunct therewith, may degenerate so as to become
infectious; but dryness is preservative, hinders putrefaction or corruption for
the most part; and heat in the highest degree is not Contagious, except you
will say that fire is Contagious, which none yet ever asserted.

Rondeletius and Laurent. Phrisius of a quite contrary opinion to Montanus and
Tomitanus; Rondelet. and Laur. Phris. Opinio.
will have this Lues to be a cold and moist distemper; induced to this
persuasion from some cold symptoms that assurge from this Disease; as Coughs,
Hoarseness, hanging down of the Uvula, much spiting, and Phlegmatic tumors; us
also from the remedies that effect the Cure, which are most of them hot.

But this opinion I cannot admit of neither; as for these qualities in excess,
if we allow them to attend upon this Disease in some persons, Improbatur.
yet they are not inseparable, and the Disease is often without them; as in such
persons tainted, who find no alteration, but a defluvium pilorum, a shedding of
the hair: so that they are not necessarily included in this malady, nor do they
explicate the subtle various nature of this evil, nor distinguish it from other
Diseases, for they are as eminent and apparent in their exaltations in other
Diseases, as in this. Since then these intemperate qualities are not
distinguishing Characters of specific difference, but the common appertainers
to, and consequents of most Diseases, and Cures, are not performed by levelling
and aiming at these, but at their several causes upon which they do depend;
therefore they are not to be assigned as the groundwork and nature of this
Disease, whereon it is founded, and wherein essentially it does consist. And
whereas they argue a juvantibus from hot and drying Medicines, that commonly
effect the Cures, therefore the Disease must be cold and moist; is a grand
error drawn from the celebrated therapeutic axom. Contraria contrariis,
curantur: Which indeed is very false, and a pernicious guide in practice. But
to lay open the evil consequents thereof, would spend too much time, and make
too great a Chasm in this little work; therefore I forbear to enlarge upon it,
and because that Canon is fairly convicted by another Dr. Thomson Galeno-Pale
Chap. 14.
Author, whither I refer the Reader for satisfaction herein.

Some there are that place this Lues under the second head of the general
division of Diseases, and would have it to be organical, as the proper genus of
this Disease, because the due conformation of parts are vitiated thereby.

Others put this Lues in the third rank of that general division, and make
solution of continuity to be the genus thereof: as Johan. Manarde definitio.
Manardus who says, Morbus gallicus est soluta continuitas ab exustis
humoribus per Contagium fere in concubitu genita, etc. but this definition does
not quadrate with the latitude of this Disease; Culpatur.
for as much as Solution of Unity is not essential, but an accidental
consequent, which happens but in some Cases, where there is excoriation and
Ulcers.

Others there are that will have this Disease to be of a more comprehensive
nature, to have a share and to challenge a part in each branch of the triple
division of Diseases, similar, organical, and common. Of this judgment is
Paschalis, Joan. Paschal.
who asserts this Lues to be a compound of all other Diseases, and that it was
well known to the ancients. Joan. Lan.
To this agrees Johan. Lang. who will have this Disease to be Colluviem veterum
Morborum: and Prosper. Prosper. Boargut. sententiae.
Boargutius consents to the latitude and extensiveness thereof, in the
tripartite general division of Diseases, but dissents from them as to its
antiquity.

And although these men affirm that this evil is quasi Compago quaedam and
Compositio omnium malorum, and that it is a Disease compounded of many;
notwithstanding Aurel. Minadous a Venetian Physician asserts quite contrary,
Aurel. Minad. Tract. de virulent Vener. page 33. Cap. 17.
and will not have it reducible to any Disease, and says it is neither
intemperies, nor mala Compositio, nor Soluta unitas. This Minadous, a strict
examiner of former Writers that had put forth tracts of this Disease, and after
that he had very nicely run through the opinions of other men concerning the
virulent nature of this malady, and evicted their determinations; at last he
concludes with his own in these words; Minad. definitio tract. ejusdem. Cap. 27.
ut sit vapor a tota substantia adversus facultati naturali sensim agens. For
my own part I am never the wiser for this definition, giving very little
information touching the abstruse nature of this Venereal virulency. And
although this Author is very ingenious in some parts of that Tract, yet here he
fails.

Fererii definitio.
I rather approve of Ferrerius his definition (which Minadous condemned) and
that is this. Pudendagra Lues Hispanica nihil aliud est quam putredo humorum ex
contagione in coitu magna ex part contracta, participatione venenatarum
exhalationum and spirituum infectorum. This description though Minadous
quarrels with and rejects; yet it seems to me more intelligible and a more
satisfactory account than his.

First, he says it is putredo humorum that very frequently is apparent, from
the Ulcers and Scabs that break forth in this Disease.

In coitu magna ex part, there he shows the most frequent procatartic or
primitive Cause: and after that he declares the manner of causation or
introducing this virulency, and that is says he: by receiving venomous
exhalations and infected spirits; all which is very tolerable and the best
that I have met with yet.

Hieron. Capiuaccius, Capiuacc. definitio.
a Doctor of Padua, defining the nature of this Disease, says it is excrementum
toto genere praeter naturam, quod nultifariam laedere potest hominem, genitum
ex humana substantia a simili

Excrementum] this Author here sets forth the nature of the Venereal virulency,
Arguitur.
by an excrement or degenerate matter in man's body; as if it were the product
or consequent of some vitiated digestion, and had its rise and dependence
wholly from internal causes and defections in nature, not by any contamination
from external primitive Causes, and contagious infection received ab extra.

Toto genere praeter naturam.

This part of the definition may as well agree and be applied to Worms that are
generated in Man's body, as to this Lues; and does not at all distinguish and
discover the subtle nature thereof: and therefore this Philosopher did miss the
matter very much in explicating and laying open the abstrusity of this Lues,
which is the intention and scope of every definition.

Macolon a Scotchman, Doctor in this faculty, and Professor at Pisa; above
fifty years since put forth a Book of this Disease, wherein he calls the
Galenists to an account severely for their determinations upon this malady;
recites their opinions and rejects them as frivolous, in a very few words. At
last he produces his own judgment and results the whole disceptation into this
theorem. Macolon. theor. Chym. Luis Vener. Cap. 5.
Lues venerea impuritas est salis and Mercurii specifica and contagiosa
prognata e seminibus quae prius in superiore orb delitescentia posleaque
germinantia quaedam corpora humana parata ad ea suscipienda primo invasere and
ad alios contage vel haereditario jure propagata sunt. If any one can pick out
his meaning, and set forth a rational probability of truth comprised herein, it
is more than I shall undertake to do.

By the Narrative and Series of these reports, you may plainly see, how far the
opinions of learned Men in this Profession do lie asunder; and how hazardous it
is to presume upon any single judgment, though Men of Fame and great repute in
their times. To comment and enlarge upon every extravagant opinion, would give
the Reader more trouble than profit; therefore in short, I only name some of
them and pass on; others I insist upon, that you may be acquainted with the
variety of persuasions upon this subject, whereby you will be better able to
establish and fix your judgment, when you meet with the truth.

After all we come now to inquire of Sennertus, one sufficiently known to be a
judicious grave Writer, that has gleaned up many good notions that lies
scattered here and there in antique and modern Writings; besides the additions
and improvements of his own, that are very learned and considerable. This
Author after he had perpended various opinions concerning the nature and causes
of this malady, sets down his judgment of it in this definition.

Lues Venerea est morbus occultus and peculiariter malignus, Sennert. pract.
lib. vi. pars. 4. Cap. 4.
contagione in ductus and contagiosus, hepati and facultati nutrienti inprimis
adversus, and propterea nutritione in toto corpore laesa, varios morbos and
symptomata excitans.

I need not render it in English, being very plain and intelligible to the
meanest Capacities in the Latin tongue: as for others I doubt the discourse
will not be very beneficial. We will examine this definition in the several
parts distinctly, as coming from one whose authority persuades much, being a
general approved Author for Conduct in practice; his works summarily comprising
the most and best of what has been written before him: But since his time, we
have had great discoveries, and much of that Doctrine is laid aside by the most
ingenious skeptical Philosophers of this Age: And had that laborious Author
been so fortunate as to be acquainted with what some notable heads are masters
of now; I doubt not but he would have reformed his works, rebuilt physic laid
it upon another foundation: therefore let none think it strange, to set aside
this Authors opinions, though a man of great worth and industry in his time: to
the purpose in hand then.

Est morbus occultus.

Sennertus here adhering to the Doctrine of occult and manifest qualities,
Sennert. defi^^^tio disceptatur.
and not finding the nature of the Venereal Lues amongst the manifest
qualities, assigns it to an occult. Which indeed is as much as to say, I know
not of what nature the Venereal Lues is: and herein consents with our Author,
Minadous, Fernelius, Mercatus, and others, as to the occult nature; yet they
differ about it, whether a quality or substance. But I see no reason why we
should take shelter under this Asylum ignorantiae; that this Lues should be
occult in its nature, since it does discover it self by manifest Characters
resulting from its peculiar nature, as Gonorrhaea, Pustuls, Ulcers, etc. and
when we come to Philosophise upon these, we may trace them in their causation
as far, and with as much satisfaction, as we can do any other Disease arising
from manifest qualities, as they call them. The Stone and Worms are not
accounted occult Diseases, yet when they come to render an account of their
production, they will meet with as many difficulties, as in laying open the
nature of the Venereal Lues; and Spiritus Virulescens may be as good Philosophy
and as evident and plain, as Spiritus Lapidescens and Lumbrificans; and so they
are equally manifest and no more occult, the one nor the other. As for the
Generation of Stones, it is very learnedly discoursed by a late Dr. Sherly's
Philosoph. Essay of petrification.
Writer, worth your perusal.

Who knows any thing more in Causes, than what is discovered and manifest to us
by the effects: we know nothing a priori; and if so, then I can see no reason
but that the Venereal Lues is as truly to be accounted a manifest Disease, as a
common Fever. I do not say that all Diseases are equally manifest and
discoverable alike to all persons; in regard some Diseases are more rare and
infrequent, not obvious to every eye; and some are more intricate, implicit,
and entangled with other Diseases; therefore not so easily to be determined of,
because sometimes disguised with other complicated affects, of a semiotic or
signal affinity, as the Pox and Scurvy; not to be judged of by common heads:
but this is not sufficient to give a denomination of occult, but only of
difficult. Therefore true it is, this Lues is not a manifest Disease to every
Emperick, (though impudently they undertake it, and as imprudently some resign
themselves into such hands to be abused) nor yet to every legal Professor it is
not so patent in its nature, as some other Diseases, but to the most acute
sagacious Physician, it lies open and discoverable as a Feavor, in its nature
and diagnostick signs.

A Fever (you will say) is easily known by a preternatural heat and burning,
which is manifest; and likewise I say the Venereal Lues is as easily known (to
an expert Physician) by a Gonorrhaea, Pains, Pustuls, Scabs, etc. But here is
the difference a Fever is known (in the common titular notion only) by heat
alone, which is but one signal: the Pox by a syndrome or concurrence of many.
So likewise the Scurvy, Plague, and others are not manifested by a single
diagnostic, but by a Convent consenting. But this Fever. which is so easy to
be known and apparent by heat. (as you say) If I inquire of you the true nature
thereof, what this preternatural heat is, and how it does kindle, from what
principle, and where the radix or fomes morbi is; I fear that this Fever will
be an occult Disease also, to a great many of our Professors, who knows nothing
beyond tradition, and the old erroneous Doctrine of Fevers.

A Fever takes its denomination from heat, a general signal which attends all
sorts of Fevers: but if you know no more of a Fever than what this common
Character does discover and manifest, your knowledge is very shallow, and
avails little to adapt a Cure thereby; for Fevers as different as the Causes
from whence they arise; and they are many, their nature very different and
various, and as secret in their Causes as this Lues, requiring a different
method of Cure: Colds, heats, repletion of indigested matter, obstructions,
surfits, discordant food, intemperate drinking, watchings, small Pox; Worms,
and the verminous, putredinous matter of which they are generated, etc. which
Fevers are more abstruse in their Causes, and little thought of in their
Cures; whereby the common way of Curing Fevers becomes so fatal to many: and
this I am persuaded to believe, from the imprudent irrational practice, that
most commonly is used in the Cure of Fevers, by bleeding, blistering, and
Julips: for did they understand aright what it is that does aestuate and
raises a febril heat, and the occasional causes or provocation thereto, they
would take more proper courses for remedy, and institute other manners of Cure;
but of this more at large elsewhere, Tract of the Scurvy. Chap. 11.
therefore I pass on, that I may not disjoint our main intended discourse with
too long digressions.

The generating of Worms in Man's body, is mustered up amongst the manifest
Diseases: but this strange production is not to be ascribed to any of the
manifest qualities; therefore lumbrisication is as occult as the venereal
virulency; and oftentimes is a more latent and abstruse Disease, for as much as
the symptoms or preternatural effects attending, are common to many other
Diseases, not distinguishable certainly to whom they belong, but conjecturally
and probably.

But the first and second qualities being more familiar to us, and more
frequently occurring; therefore they must be manifest, the rest must be occult,
and this Sennert.
Author (with others of the same Tribe) in distinguishing and setting forth the
difference between manifest and occult qualities, seems to be very exact, and
says, those are occult quae non sensibus and ratione, Institut. med. lib. v.
pars 1. Sect. 1. Cap. 2.
sed sola experientia deprehenduntur: and those he calls manifest, quae sensus
nostros afficiunt, and quarum causa manifesta reddi potest.

First, Here I would fain know, what qualities, properties, results, or
emanations from causes are so occult, as does not affect some of our senses;
and whether we do take cognizance of any thing, but by their effects, which are
the objects of some sense.

Secondly, I would also understand, and do demand, wherein the causes of the
first qualities are so eminently patent above others as to be called manifest.
Truly for my part I can see no such manifest causation: the (...), the effects
are plain; the (...) is obscure; dark enough in the Fountain from whence such
effects do emane and spring forth. The fire heats and burns, that is plain, but
why? Our Author makes this answer, Ibidem.
ignis id praestat, quia calidus. Pray where is the manifest causation now? it
is so, because it is so: but he seems to Philosophise something better in the
same Chapter, where he complies with the opinion of those, that determine both
manifest and occult qualities to issue primario forma substantiali: and he will
have the manifest qualities to emerge from the substantial form, and peculiar
mixtion of the Elements; but the occult from the substantial form alone. Now if
we examine and inquire, why Water is cold and moist, (manifest qualities) and
desire the reasons of such a nature; the answer then according to this
Philosophy must be; that it is so from the substantial form and mixture of
Elements: and if we ask why poisons ( occult qualities) work such strange
effects; the answer is, that such energies proceed from their substantial form
alone.

Now judge whether are more manifest in their causes, the former or the latter:
for my part I think both alike? and the distinction of manifest and occult to
be useless, as having no real foundation.

From this discourse (wherein I might have enlarged if it were necessary) we
may set aside the occult nature of the Venereal Disease, and allow it to be as
manifest as other Diseases to judicious men; being so well known by the
sensible products and apparent effects that follow and assurge from thence: and
other Diseases are discovered in like manner, a posteriori; which gives
occasion to discourse of and assign their causes, from the greatest
probabilities and strongest persuasions of reason. Now we shall dismiss this,
and come to the next considerable in the definition.

Et peculiariter malignus.

Our Author here determines and distinguishes the Venereal Lues, by a peculiar
malignity; which (being the Constitutive specific difference in the definition)
must be understood as the proper inseparable distinguishing Character
univocally agreeing with the whole species morbi, and the same in every
individual person seized with this Disease and according to this Doctrine are
the Cures promiscuously instituted, and appointed without distincton; save only
a respect had to the fictitious temperaments, arising from elementary mixtion.
But I am otherwise persuaded and must assert contrary to this Doctrine; that
Lues venerea non est morbus peculiariter and (...) malignus a specifica quadam
proprietate corruptionis ortus. The Venereal virulency is not of one univocal
specific nature, but diversified and variously different in several
individuals, tainted with this Venereal malignity. The reasons inducing me to
this opinion, are both theorical and practical; drawn from the rules of Art,
and therapeutic observations in different Cures.

First, Argu. 1. A dissimilitudine symptomatum seu phoenomenwn.
Quia non semper sibi similis: this Disease has a different aspect and is
Characterised variously in several persons; and although symptomatical and
signal dissimilitude is procured upon some other accounts, yet this equivocal
nature contributes as a partial and not the meanest cause. 2. A diverso genere
causarum.


Secondly, Non iisdem causis, nec una via corporibus inductus. This Disease
having its rise and dependence from several primitive causes, and introduced in
a different way, is thereby variegated and altered in its nature, and the
Venereal virulency becomes equivocal and various in diverse persons. The former
part or supposition is proved. The illation from thence is consonant to reason,
as various effects naturally arise from several causes.

Thirdly, Non semper contagiosus: 3. A contagiosa and non contagiosa natura.
this Disease must needs be of a different nature, for as much as the
effluviums emitted from some pocky persons are venenate and infectious; from
others not at all contagious, and do not taint or seize by any manner of
contamination; and this does more evidently appear where we treat of Contagion.

Fourthly, Non aeque contumax and difficilis sanatu. 4. A facili and difficili
curatione.
The virulent nature of this Disease is sometimes very stubborn, dispising
generous good Medicines and the rules of Art; and sometimes of a very facil
Cure, presently yielding to the power of efficacious proper Medicines.

5. A necessitate diversorum remediorum.
Fifthly, Non semper iisdem remediis curandum est. I do not find any specific
Medicine, or peculiar method and tractation of Patients, equally successful;
but some will admit of Cure this way, and with such Medicines; others must be
Cured another way* and with different Medicines; which argues the nature of the
Disease to be various and different. As for the (...) of the former part, all
practisers I think must confess that have had frequent experience in these
Cures: the latter or inference is drawn from reason and strong probability.

I might have illustrated and backed these arguments with some confirmations,
but I forbear at present until I find this Doctrine opposed. As for the
remaining part of this Authors definition, we shall not prosecute here, since
that matter falls under distinct heads, that I controvert in their proper
places: viz. the Section of Contagion; and that of the seat of this Disease.

Several other Writers there are that I might animadvert on; but that would be
too tedious, and I think superfluous; since their judgments are much involved
with those already recited. And having thus given you the opinions of some
eminent Writers, concerning the nature of this Lues, and my reasons in short
for dissenting from them; I come now to declare my own thoughts freely, and to
be positive in determining the matter. And here I shall not define this
Disease, per genus and differentiam (the common rule of definitions) which
being too angust a method will put me upon some unavoidable errors; but I shall
take such a latitude as best serves my purpose, to explicate and detect the
difficult and various nature of this grand evil; in its contagious and non
contagious Generations; modes of propagation; various appearances; fallacious
disguise and latency; ferocity and calmness; contumacy and submission to
curative means.

And here I must premise and lay down some assertions by way of introduction,
to usher in our subsequent resolves and determinations upon the matter in
debate.

in facto esse, are signally diversified and distinguished, by the various
producted aberrations and defections in nature, deviating from rectitude and
integrity.

morbific causes operate primarily and chiefly, upon the vital, active and
governing principle of humane bodies, seducing or constraining that to act
irregularly or dissonant from its natural due course: from whence the Organs of
the body (so governed) perform depravedly, and produce thereby this or that
symptom and unwonted effect.

Procuring and occasional causes, variously prompting or enforcing the
functions of the body from off their duties, do thereby produce variety of
irregularities and diseases, as various effects answering their different
causations. Hence the Venereal Lues bears distinguishing Characters, and is
peculiarly denoted by its train of attending symptoms.

Idiosyncratical propriety of individual bodies, may and do produce
heterogenious effects, though procured by the same or consimiliar causes: from
hence as a partial cause, the Venereal Lues is different in several persons,
and is not curable but by a different way and means.

particular parts of the body, as their office and organizations are different,
so have they peculiar morbous effects: hence one and the same univocal cause
discharging its energy upon diverse parts and faculties, does thereby produce
various symptoms: and therefore it is that the venereal virulency appears in
various shapes, and presents it self in a different train of symptoms: if it
affect and act upon the membranes, great pains ensue; if this venom seize upon
the parts elaborating or containing the seed; then gonorrhea's or an
involuntary fluxion of a degenerate sperm is the consequent; if the Urine be
tainted, it becomes hot and sharp: if other humors and juices of the body be
infected, a foul Catlexy and malign habit of body follows, With Spots Scabs,
or running Ulcers. If it arrive to the extern parts of the head, the hair
loosens and falls off; if it invades the bones, a caries, or rottenness is the
product, etc. so every part is peculiarly stigmatized and marked.

Sixthly, That venenate and malign causes are respective denominations; as they
stand in opposition and hostility to this or that natural Patient, where they
exert their destructive power.

venenate and malign causes, are purely natural, operate constantly as other
Agents, circumscribed with due limitations in the sphere of their activity, and
act as visibly producing sensible effects; but are more strange and seemingly
abstruse, from their unwontedness, as not being so familiar and common, are
therefore unreasonably termed occult: and particularly this Lues is equally
demonstrable with other manifest Diseases so accounted.

Deleterious and malign Diseases, although they consent to the impediment,
disturbance, and destruction of nature, putting her out of a regular course,
and harmonious Government, leading to mine: yet their actions differ much, and
they take various ways and courses to effect that general end.

narcotic and soporiferous property; or delirious watchings and restlessness.
evacuations, constipations, or stagnations. pains, punging, eroding, or
lancenating. colliquations, or coagulations. Convulsive motions, rigid
distentions, or pertinacious contractions. putrefactive degenerations. erosions
and absumption of parts; or tumefaction and superfluous excrescences.
inflammations, or mortifications, and extinction of vitality. Such effects are
commonly the products of venenate and malign causes; and some of these do
attend upon, and are often the consequents of venereal virulency.
corruption of humors in man's body is of greater importance, according to the
degree of its worth, and excellency of its use; and therefore the degeneration
of the blood is worse than that of the chyle; and the depravedness of the
nervous succus is more prejudicial than that of the blood; but a virulent
putrefaction of the sperm, is worse in its nature than either, being an extract
elaborated and refined from both: and this is confirmed by the common axiom,
Corruption optimi est pessima. And this corruption is not ordinary, for it
arrives to such a height and degree, that not only the same body is overspread
with its malignity, but it also infects and injures another, and is most
commonly contaminating and contagious to others: hence venereal virulency is
derived to posterity, and propagated to familiars with whom they do converse;
and having such ways of continuation, of all contagious Diseases this seminary
abides most certainly, and is most likely to outlast all others.

venereal virulency in general is not of a homogenous nature; but in some of a
more fierce, contagious, and destructive properties; in others not so venenate,
malign, and spreading, but lodges and abides in the body more sedate and
placidly, and makes not so great a disturbance and apparent alteration: from
whence it is sometimes doubted whether it be the right Lues, or something else
affine thereto, and puts many to a stand in their determination of the matter.

sting or pocky effluviums of venereal virulency, darting upon the parts of a
another body and entering the pores; does then seduce or compel the vital
governing principles of those parts from off their functions, to a peculiar
enormity conspiring with their own nature, and producing such effects common to
this Disease.

Venereal Lues is not always propagated contagiously, but takes its rise
spontaneously, sometimes, from sound persons using immoderate unfitting and
bestial venery: for as this Lues has had its birth by such natural means or
causes; so likewise (probably) is often generated by the same procuring ways,
and may begin again from the same primitive causes, aequipollent to its
original descent and production.

Venereal Lues in the fountain of natural causes contained in the body, does
assurge from a vitiated impure sperm, arriveing to a contagious malignity;
whether the primitive cause be unlawful and undue coition, or other corrupters
of seed in such Climates where this Lues is accounted endemical.

CHAP. V.
Various Phenomenon and Diagnostick signs, discovering the Venereal Lues, in
several gradations.

Lues Vener. dispar. aspectus.
THis Disease is variegated by the diversity and train of attending symptoms,
and seldom appears alike in two persons; but by the absence or presence of this
or that sign, does present it self with a different face and peculiar garb. And
this dissimilitude or variety of appearance, is procured upon a fourfold
account.

nature or virulency of the person giving or communicating it, Virulentiae.
Varia dispositio.
makes the impression upon the party receiving it, either better or worse, more
or less contaminated, according to the various malignity of the aggressor or
pocky person infecting; who darts the veneous miasms with greater or lesser
force, and is more or less virulent; from whence the products are different,
and causes various and dissimilar symptoms.

idiosyncrasia, Individualis natura personae contiminatae.
the disparity or peculiar properiety of bodies that are tainted, modifies the
venom differently, and receives the venerous sting more calmly or impatiently;
with more or less antipathy and averseness to this or that nature: Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur per modum recipientis.
whereby (in some) the venom ferments and breaks out sooner and more
conspicuously, with plain Characters that every one may read; or else (in
others) it lies more sluggish and dormant, lurks more slily, and dissembles
this or that other Disease; which consens vulgar judgments in determining
what is the matter.

Contagium recipiendi modus.
The manner of receiving this contagion and different parts affected, puts this
Disease into a singular mode and peculiar dress; for if it be received by fond
embraces only and kissing of the lips, it blossoms there first, and appears
with scabby cruptions, and a sore mouth commonly; but if it be gotten by the
tail, it is not presently charactered in the face, or other parts, but stays
some time in the Lord-Countries, the place of its conception and birth,
afterward travells into other Regions of the body, and appears here and there
with variety of ugly shapes and unwelcome salutes to its new quarters, as
pains, pimples, itch, spots, scurs, scabs, etc.

Morbi senioritas.
The seniority and duration of this malady in the body, makes great alteration
and different Phaenomina: a recent young Pox before it comes to Age, has not
such a train of attendants, nor gives the same livery, as a confirmed or
inveterate Pox. The infancy of this Disease (if taken by copulation) presents
to you only with a sharp, hot Urine, and some diffitulty in making water; or
some gleeting seminal excretion, which continuing to discharge the virulency,
keeps of the rest of its fellows from appearing upon the Stage, and acts a part
alone for some time; afterward comes in soreness, inflammation, Ulcers, etc.
and so proceeds on by time, increasing the number of Actors in this tragedy,
gradually arriving to a confirmed, after that an inveterate Pox; which will
then exhibit to your view a Hospital of Diseases, and scare you with variety
of deformities and strange defects in nature: there you will see the lame
swinging between two crutches, the faltering snuffling speech, the mattery
blear eyes, the down fallen nose, the rotten palate, the scabby face, the
stinking breath, etc. what not;

Having given you the Capital reasons, why this Venereal Lues is so diversified
and unlike in several persons; Symptomatum syndrome.
it remains I should draw up in their order the whole Company and train of
pocky symptoms; placing them in that method and rank as most commonly they do
present upon the sick, for your better understanding the series and order or
gradual increment of this grand Disease. And here I shall distribute all the
Phenomenon or appearance of this malady into three divisions.

Lues Venereae, incipientis signa.
First, Such as make the onset and seize the patient in the beginning.

Secondly, Such as discover the increment or progress, Angescentis vestigia.
and confirms the radication of it.

Thirdly, Such as display all its colors, Inveteratae stigmata.
represents its monstrous full growth, and exhibites the most deplorable and
most formidable defects of nature.

signs of the first rank emerging from this Lues, Classis signorum.
are such as attend its minority, and they (commonly) are more mild, obscure,
and dubious, (except they arise from a very soul copulation) such as may be the
products of other Diseases, and give occasion of suspicion and inquiring into
their causes. As those who are tainted by familiar contact and intimate
approaches to pocky persons, have no appearances of this Lues in the privy
parts, all may be well there; and yet the contagion may have entered, and seized
the person; and the alteration from hence may be only a general change of the
body as to the liveliness and vigor thereof, some orratick pains twinging here
and there in the head and body; the countenance changed more pale and dark;
unwonted melancholy and sadness; lassitude, heaviness and indisposition to
action: but if the infection steals in by impure copulation, and not of the
worser sort; then a heat and sharpness of Urine may molest the Patient, with
some of the former symptoms. (For a Gonorrhaea does not always erupt upon
coition with a tainted bedfellow) and these signs being general, or common to
other Diseases, and not pathognomonical; it is not easy, nor the work of
vulgar heads to determine, of what kind they are, to whom they belong, and from
whence they had their being: but by strict inquiry into preceding causes, and
perpending former probabilities and occurrences; these being duly collated,
judgment may truly pass what the Case is. A plant when first it puts forth and
peeps out of the ground, is hard to be known of what kind it is, but by a
skillful Herbarist; which when it is grown up, there is no such difficulty, and
common people can call it by its name. Semblably this Lues in its infancy is
not apparent but to the most sagacious judgments; except in some furious
envenomed assaults of this Disease, that forthwith indubitably declare the
whole matter.

symptoms and Characters of the second Classis, Classis signorum.
are such as more apparently own the Pox for their Parent, and they pronounce
it confirmed and radicated in the body; and of this sort are virulent
Gonorrhaea's (commonly called the running of the Reins) being a green,
yellowish, or other discolored matter issuring from the privities, and in men
is more apparent; but in women it passes with them commonly for the whites
(except when there is great pain, inflammation, or tumor accompanying) which
delusion makes them the longer to neglect their Cure; and very often the
Physician is deceived and takes it for the fluor muliebris, trusting to the
Woman's relation.

But if there be no such contaminated spermatic Flux, then the venomous
contagion is more diffusive and spreading into several parts of the body, finds
out other places to bud forth and vent it self. Sometimes it mounts up to the
head and face, there breaking forth into scurfy pimples, pustuls, or scabs; and
sometime they spread all over the body. Others have not these extuberant
eruptions, but their skin only bespotted with small, red, or yellowish spots;
intimating the mass of blood to be tainted and impure.

Venereous buboes or great hard ^^ellings in the groin appears in some, when
the contagion is lodged within, and issues not forth by a Gonorrhaea.

Pains now are more sharp, especially toward night and in bed; afflicting the
head, shoulders, arms, or shins, which causes them to have restless tormenting
nights, hence appears the hollow eyes, and the thin, pale, shrunk visage, for
want of natural rest and quiet repose.

Some are afflicted with painful malign tumors in the fundament, like the blind
haemorrhoids, and the common attending extuberances there.

Shedding of the hair oftentimes accompanies this Disease (when confirmed) of
the head, beard, or eyebrows; and is a certain sign if pustuls or scabs, do
appear also.

Sometimes chaps or clifts in the hands or soles of the feet, without a
manifest cause.

Warts or other excrescences in or about the privities, do confirm judgment of
this Lues.

Distillation of rheum and hoarseness, with a relaxed pendulous Uvula, causing
difficulty of swallowing, is a common confiding symptom.

Tumors, soarness, and Ulcers about the genitalls, do attest the confirmation
of this foul Disease. Nor is it to be expected that all these symptoms should
concur and appear together in one person, in regard of the different nature of
the virulency, and manner of invasion of this Lues; but some or other of them
are sufficient, (reflecting upon preceding causes) to pronounce the Disease
confirmed.

inveterate Pox carries some, more or less, Classis signorum.
of these grand symptoms, denoting this mallady to be antique, more
contumacious and deplorable.

A Consumptive leanness and flaccidity or looseness of flesh throughout the
body; with a hectic or habitual febril heat commonly adjoined.

Nodes or hard bunches upon the head, arms, legs, or other parts.

Hoarseness, snufling, speaking hollow, and through the nose.

Deafness or ringing noise in the ears; and falling out of the teeth.

Erosion of the palate, and sinking of the nose, stinking breath, strong saedid
Urine, pocky tettars here and there.

Depascent sordid Ulcers, in the mouth, kidneys, bladder, secrets, or other
parts; sometimes Fistulous, gangrenous, or cancerous.

Caries or rottenness of the bones in this or that part.

These and such like, many more ruinous effects of this cruel malady, poor
mortals are liable to be stigmatized and tortured with; if not prevented by a
prudent care and efficacious Medicines, to check and eradicate this spreading
evil before it arrives to its full growth and monstrous height, scarce then to
be dealt with, but often contemns the medical art and most approved remedies.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Parts primarily affected, and seat of the Venereal Lues.

TOuching the subject or Part principally affected, where this grand malady
keeps its Court and fixes more eminently, as the place of chief residence or
head quarters; Physicians do not consent and agree herein: the reasons of this
difference may be gathered out of their several opinions, as they stand
recorded in their works: and that we may the better establish and illustrate
the truth of our own assertions concerning this matter, we shall briefly run
over and discuss some of the chiefest opinions that have been promoted by
eminent men in this Profession.

Some there are that assign the head to be the seat of this Disease, being
induced thereto from some apparent symptoms that commonly afflicts this part;
as pains, pustuls, scabs, shedding of the hair, distillations, noise in the
ears, etc. Which last was so contumacious, that Falopius an eminent Physician
professes that no symptom belonging to this Disease was more difficult and
troublesome to him than this. Ego non habeo symptoma, Gab. Fallop. tract. de
morb. gallic. Cap. 11.
quod magis hoc me cruciet, and testor ignorantiam meam, nunquam potui ejus
certam invenire ablationem, superavi aliquando vel hoc, vel illo decocto, sed
certe non habeo proprium medicamentum, are his own words. Notwithstanding this
Author does not comply with those that would have the head to be the principal
part affected; for although the head be notably afflicted in some persons, yet
it is not always so; and sometimes the head is free from any impression of this
Disease, when other parts are not a little stigmatized with the manifest
Characters of this Lues. Therefore we must seek out some other part that may
rightly be styled proprium subjectum, the constant place of residence, or chief
seat of its abode.

Others by a parallel argument with the former, (as Leonicenus, Gasper Torella,
Rondeletius, and others) would prove the frontier, or exterior parts of the
body, to be the chief seat; being thus persuaded from the defaedations of the
skin that frequently are conspicious on persons contaminated with this Disease:
as spots, pustuls, tettars, scabs, Ulcers, that erupt upon the superficies of
the body.

And upon this error Torrella (Physician to Pope Alexander the sixth) grounds
his definition of this Lues in these words. Gasp. Tor. tract. de Pudendagra.
Est defaedatio universalis cutis corporis cum dolor and excoriatione modica.
As if this Disease were seated only upon the superficies of the body, and did
not reside in the inward parts; which is against all reason: for, the juices of
the body being first tainted and alienated from their balsamic natural good
state, cause those eruptions and external appearance: and to make this Disease
to be only or chiefly a defaedation of the skin, when oftentimes the intrinsic
parts are more injured corrupted and putrid, is against common experience to
affirm. And although I do not deny, but that this infections Lues may be caught
by external contact only (as the common itch may be taken) and goes no deaper
than the surface of the body, rarely; yet most commonly those external
Characters that flourish the skin, are the pullulations and blossoms that put
forth and spring from a radix that has a deep insertion, and is profoundly
planted in the body.

Guliel. Rondelet. lib. de morb. gallico.
And Rondeletius (then Chancellor and Regius Professor at Monpelier) runs upon
the same rock, in defining this. Lues to be an evil distemper of external
parts. For although the external parts be sometimes disfigured and branded with
this foul Disease, yet it is not always so; and then for the most part erupting
from within: therefore the exterior parts are ill assigned to be subjectum
morbi, and the definition to point thither only or chiefly.

Herc. Saxon. de Lue Ven. Cap. 3.
Hercules Saxonia will have the subject of this Disease to vary according to
the progress thereof; and assigns the natural spirits for its place of
residence in the beginning of this evil; but the excrementitious humors to be
the chief seat in the increment; and the alimentary humors, in the state and
vigor of this malady.

Some stand for the genitals to be the chief seat and part primarily affected;
because most commonly this Lues makes its ingress and invasion here, and
presently stamps manifest impressions of its contagious nature upon these
parts: as dysury, gonorrhaea, inflammation, tumor, Ulcers, etc. which gradually
coming on, gives notice and plainly declares that this subtle enemy has made
entrace, is planted and seated here as the chief place where to exercise and
appear in its severe malign power and grandeur.

Notwithstanding the major party and more eminent men (as Fallopius, Massa,
Tomitanus, Brassauolus, Mercatus, Montanus, Forestus, Sennertus, etc.) give in
their suffrages for the Liver to be the principal seat of the Venereal Lues,
and this part carries it from the rest by many Votes.

Massa (a Venetian Physician) assigns these two reasons for his opinion: first,
that the Liver is membrum generativum massae humoralis, the fountain from
whence arises all the humors of the body: secondly, that from thence nutrition
and the natural faculties are derived. But these Hypotheses on which his
opinion is grounded, are found to be erroneous from the new Doctrine of
circulation, and exploded by most in these times: and therefore our Author
arguing exfalso suppositis we need not answer further to the arguments offered.

Fallopius upon the same error gives in his verdict for the Liver.

Tomitanus does the like.

Mercati argumentum lib. de morb. gallic. Cap. 1.
Mercatus also (the learned Spaniard) being biassed with that doctrine, urges
the same argument; and moreover adds, that the venom of this Lues by a peculiar
propension to, and sympathy of parts, does fly to the Liver and infect there:
as an opthalmy, or sore eye, does hurt a sound eye: or a phthisis of the Lungs,
is apt to set a tabid impression upon the Lungs of another, by intimate and
near approaches; so the Venereal virulency discharges it self upon the Liver;
particularly and especially, from the mutuation and consent of parts.

But notwithstanding this Author be grave and solid in his Writings, yet I
cannot admit of his reasons to prove what he contends for. Arguitur.
And although I grant that an opthalmy or phthisis may send forth injurious
miasms and dart upon the like parts to infest them with the same Disease; yet
here he begs the question, and supposes a concession, that the Liver is always
tainted in this Disease, which I altogether deny, where then is the sympathy of
parts; and although we concede and do admit that the Liver is vitiated in some
persons; yet then I do not allow that the Liver does more infect another Liver
than any other part; nor are the effluviums carried to another Liver
sympathically, or antipathically, but promiscuously are transmitted and
received into another body by this or that other part, where the passage or
pores are patent, or otherwise infirm and liable to be tainted. Besides, the
comparison will not hold, nor is there that parity of reason between Liver and
Liver, as between eye and eyes, or lung and lungs, for a transmission,
communication, and reception. As for the eyes, they act and react upon one
another by Vision directly (and have no power upon any other part) darting and
working eminently upon each other (which might be illustrated amply) and by
this means many strange effects are wrought; otherwise they have no power; nor
could one eye infect or hurt another, but by gazing long or often, and fixing
upon each other. But from liver to liver there is no such direct passage, no
such correspondence between them, nor operation upon each other, nor is their
any probability for it. And as for a phthisis why that should be infectious to
the lungs of another, there is good reason for it; because the corrupt breath
going out of the phthisical person, is drawn in and received by another (in
their near approaches) and coming into the aspera arteria of the sound person,
is by that canale immediately conveyed through various ramifications into the
whole parenchyma of the Lungs, which being totally pervious, and of a spongious
substance, is very susceptible and obnoxious to alterations from the quality of
inspired air. And having imbibed phthisical corruptive miasms in the breath,
may lodge and six there, changing the natural tone of the lungs into a tabid
and corruptive state; but from liver to liver, there is no such speedy
conveyance, no such capacity to receive, nor aptitude to act upon each other.

Sennert. sententia.
Sennertus being guided by his Predecessors, asserts much what to the same
purpose, that the Venereal virulency being inimical to nutrition, does more
peculiarly aim at and offend the natural faculty; which natural power he takes
for granted and unquestionable to be seated in the liver; and therefore
concludes that to be the part primarily affected, from whence as the Fountain
all ill symptoms of the other parts, do issue from, and are fed from thence.
Thus supposing the liver to be officina sanguificationis; and in this Disease
the blood being commonly much tainted and corrupted, it was thought very
rational that this must proceed from the impurity of the Fountain: but the
liver now being discharged from the supreme office of sanguification, upon
latter and more exact inquiries, and is not found to be membrum principale
(...), as formerly has been asserted and maintained; the opinions depending
thence fall to the ground.

And further we have to say; that the liver is not always the seat of this evil
(according to the opinion of some) nor that it is for the most part their
primario resident (according to the sense of others) is further cleared from
the discourse following.

Diseases in respect of their situation and residence may be divided into two
parts: First, such as claim a peculiar part of the body to abide in for their
proper station, and where they exercise their power eminently; and are
particular defects and aberrations of those faculties and parts, from whence
commonly they have a proper denomination, or some adjunct pointing at the part
affected; as Pleurisies, Colicks, Cephalalgyes, dysenteries, iliaca passio,
peripneumonia's etc. Secondly, there are others of a larger extent and erratic
power, that are not confined to any particular part, but challenge the whole
body for their subject, and appear here or there, or chiefly here and remisly
there, without restraint variously and are unlimited: and such are contagious
Diseases of the highest rank, venenate, pestilential, and virulent; which seize
sometimes here and sometimes there, and spread variously in the body; and this,
from the primitive causes and manner of invasion; from the different nature of
the malignity, and from the different propriety of bodies tainted; all which
being multifarious, makes gr^^^ difference as to the spreading and appearing of
Diseases in this or that part more eminently, though the whole body be
subjectum morbi; that is, every part liable, and no part constantly the chief
seat of residence.

In this latter rank we must place the Venereal malady; whose virulency being
received into the body, or quartering upon the frontiers; does not commonly
stop at the part first infected, but as other Venoms, does creep into the more
intimate recesses, and taints other parts of the body. Secondly, no part of the
body is exempt and secure, but liable to the infection, either by communication
and transmission from other parts affected; or by the first seizure and
attacque. Sometimes the mouth lets it into the body by kissing; sometimes the
breast receives it first by suckling a pocky Child; others are first seized and
clapped in the genitals; and some take it by Bed Cloths, Garments, or such like,
and the contagion enters the pores in diverse parts, and the body liable on all
sides; and being thus let in, does then circulate with the blood, and
perambulate diverse regions of the body; and such parts as are most infirm and
less able to stand in their integrity, this virulency invades and makes
impressions (propter inequale robur partium and imparem resistentiam) sometimes
upon the brain and nerves; sometimes the lungs, and begets pocky asthmaes,
phthises; sometimes the kidneys, neck of the bladder, throat, groin, etc.
Planting Ulcers there, and sometimes the liver goes not free; but this part
escapes as often as the rest, which has plainly appeared upon frequent
dissections after Death, that the liver has evaded sound when other parts have
been wasted and rotten. And therefore we conclude, this Venereal Disease has
no settled abode, but is vagrant; and it is uncertain where this virulency will
pitch and seat it self; nor is there any place of constant residence: which
might more at large be proved, but for brevity sake I pass on, as thinking what
has been said, may give sufficient satisfaction.

CHAP. VII.
Whether this Lues be Contagious or Infectious; and the manner of giving and
receiving it.

IT is generally agreed upon amongst Authors, that this Disease is Contagious.
So affirms Montenus, Massa, Rondeletius, Ferrerius, Maynardus, Fallopius,
Fernelius, Tomitanus, Andr. Mathaeolus, Victorius, Mercatus, Sennertus, and
many others.

And that you may the better understand what this contagious Disease is, and
the manner of its propagation: it is necessary you should know what is meant by
contagion or infection; the several acceptations of the word, and the different
degrees or sorts thereof.

Contagi^ tres gradus.
Contagion may be considered in a threefold degree; or contagious Diseases may
be divided into three ranks or sorts: First, such as may be communicated by
length of time, in frequent copulation or intimate approaches and contact by
lying together: and thus a phthisis, scurvy, or notable Cachexy are contagious,
and may be transmitted to their Bed-fellows. Secondly, such as more eminently
and sooner does infect; as the Venereal Lues, Itch, etc. Thirdly, Such as are
of the greatest force and power, that seizes at a distance and is very mortal,
as the plague.

Contagii quadruplex acceptatio.
Contagion also may be taken four ways or considered in a fourfold respect:
either as it is a Disease impressed, and then denotes a preternatural affect
introduced by communication or contact, from another body so affected: or it
may be considered abstractly in its nature, and so it is termed venenosa
qualitas: or it may be looked upon as it is in action, efflux, or operation; and
so it is actio inficiens and contagiosa: or as the medium communication and
contact; and so it is inquinamentum, (...) or effluvium. These two last
considerations or acceptations respecting the Venereal Lues only, we shall
discuss and lay open as proper in this place.

To the act of infection also, or tainting in this Disease, there are three
requisites: the person or body infecting that does communicate. Secondly, the
virulent miasm transmitted or communicated. Thirdly, the person infected, that
does receive the taint.

The Person infecting or communicating this Lues does not loose his Disease or
give it away to the person infected; but does emittere send forth some virulent
exhalations, which seize and take hold of the other; and the person giving is
not acquitted thereby. The persons giving or tainting are not alike, but some
with more force and greater virulency do dart out and impress the idaea of this
Lues upon their Companion: and so much variation their is in the nature of this
Disease, that some persons although they are apparently marked with this Lues,
and cannot admit of any other title, yet as to contagion or infection, I cannot
say it is an inseparable adjunct; for if it were so, doubtless the Husband
could not lie with his Wife so long together (as I have known by several) but
both must be infected, if either: but that it is so, frequent examples do
testify, sometimes on the man's part, and sometimes on the woman's, that they
have not injured their Bed-fellows. And therefore I cannot affirm this Disease
always to be contagious, though ut plurimum most commonly it is so; and this is
not for any to presume or confide in, but to beware, for such cases are rare.

And further I would have you know, that although sometimes Husband and Wife in
their moderate and cooler acts of coition, may not injure each other; yet if
another person deals with either of them that is tainted; I question very much
whether the sound person that is a stranger, shall escape so well, as the
constant Bedfellow: and I rather think not; for the fiercer acts of copulation
and fiery repetitions between strangers, are more dangerous, and expose to a
more certain detriment. Parallel to this and by way of proof for our opinion,
take this experiment. Two sound persons adventuring upon an unsound one after
the other; the first has come of untoucht, the latter has been clapped: and
this because the first act being more cool, had not exasperated the latent
virulency; but by repetition of the same, the spirits are then inflamed, and
the pocky ferment rouzed up, made hot and fierce, becomes more venomous, and
seizes the second Copartner.

And here you must take notice, that this Disease is not always given by a
person immediate; but sometimes mediate, an infected Bed or Garment will do the
same; wherein the virulent miasms of this Lues ly dormant (as other contagious
seminaries do the like) but by the approach of warm bodies do revive; are
attracted and communicated to them, and received in by the pores of the body.

In the next place we are to consider what these miasms or infectious
seminaries are that pass from body to body. Some give them the denomination of
vapor, others a spirit, from their subtility and penetration, not that they
are void of corporiety: but we shall not trouble our selves upon the name,
provided we rightly know what is meant thereby. We are therefore to understand
them as Corpuscles or subtle finer invisible bodies, which are minute small
portions exhaling from infected bodies of the same nature and taint, as the
bodies from whence they were emitted. These venenous particles of contagious
matter are agile and penetrative, that they insinuate themselves through the
pores of other bodies; and being entered do then ferment and operate to alter
and change their new receptacles, and tincture them with the like labes of
their own virulent nature.

Next we must consider the persons tainted or receiving this venereal
Contagion: herein we may observe great difference; for as the persons infecting
are not alike in virulency, but are more or less contagious (as before we
noted) so likewise the persons receiving or liable thereto are not equally
disposed to receive this virulency, Corpora ad contagium recipiendum apta and
inepta.
but some make a stronger resistance, and reject it; others more readily yield
and imbibe the pocky effluviums that are emitted from unsound bodies: and this
difference there is with all bodies in respect of contagion of what nature
soever, that some more easily and sooner are infected, others not; and this is
manifest in the pestelential contagion whereto many are equally exposed and
endangered, yet some escape, others are seized therewith. And so much diversity
there is in the capacity of bodies, or aptitude for reception of any contagion
(for instance, which I know to be true) some have been Bed-fellows to
pestilential bodies, and have escaped free; others have been seized with the
Plague, that have kept a good distance from any person so infected. And thus it
happens to bodies relating to the Venereal Lues: some are soon caught, others
not: some may lie with a pocky person and not be tainted; others are infected
by intimate converse and ordinary touch only; by garments or an infected Bed:
and therefore it is very uncharitable to censure every person tainted with the
Venereal Lues, as lewd and vicious; when as this malady has assaulted the most
virtuous and innocent persons.

Contagium recipiendi modus.
Now for explicating the manner of reception, and determining the parts primo
recipient or detegent; you must take notice that this Disease is either
hereditary or adventitious: hereditary, when received from the father or the
mother in Generation or before the birth; either male or female is sufficient
to taint the offspring: if the Father be unsound in his body, his seed also is
tainted; for if the blood be impure and contaminated, the genital seed also
will participate, being an extract elaborated from the mass of blood: Cujus
causa est mala, id ipsum est malum. Likewise the unsound mother does infect the
foetus in her Womb, although the Masculine seed be sound, because she
nourishes it with her impure blood (if it will not be admitted that (he
contributes semen in the act of generation.) In this case of an hereditary
taint, it is uncertain where or in what part this Lues will first appear and
blossom, because the seminary or ferment of this Disease is diffused through
the whole body, and sometimes it first buds and breaks out in one part,
sometimes in another, and is not constant.

But it is otherwise when this Disease is adventitious after the birth,
(excepting the case of an infant infected by an unsound Nurse) for then the
Venereal virulency seizes and sastens upon one part of the body more
especially, which commonly makes the first complaint and discovers the evil, at
least gives cause for inquiry what is the matter, of such alteration and
unwonted symptoms.

Lues Ven. per coitum. Contracta:
If this Contagion be taken by impure copulation, the Man or the Woman being
infected does by that act and intimate congress, give it to the other that was
sound: and then the privy parts (most frequently) makes the first discovery, by
sharpness and heat of Urine, etc. especially if either were afflicted in the
genitals; but if otherwise the virulency of this malady fastens upon other
parts of the body, does then lurk longer before any alteration be perceived,
but in time does bud forth and show it self, causing indisposition, pain in the
head or other parts, and proceeds gradually (if not corrected) to display those
symptoms as we have enumerated in the preceding Chapter, where the diagnosticks
of this Lues is set down: nor does this venom keep its station and abide in the
part that first received it, but commonly aliorum venenorum more, perambulates
and penetrates through the body, perverting the crases of other parts, and
alienating them from the rectitude of their offices and duty; from whence by
time the whole economy is out of frame, and the alimentary juices of the body
impure and stained move or less, pro virulentiae natura and condition
corporis. For the manner how Contagion in copulation is contracted, take this
account from Sennertus, which shall suffice. Sennert. Pract. Lib. vi. Par. 4.
Cap. 4.
Et quidem viri a foeminis infectis hoc malum contrahunt, quia in venere
propter spirituum concursum and per motum utero calefacto, vapores ex malignis
humoribus in utero elevantur, qui a membro virili rarae constitutionis
absorbentur and in venas recipiuntur. Vir vero infectus sanam mulierem inficere
potest, vel per membrum virile, si id infectum and exulceratum habeat, vel per
semen, et si membrum virile ulceratum non sit, vel utroqque modo. Quanquam enim
semen in viris non semper plane corruptum est, cum videamus multos viros infec^
os hac Luc generare; alteratum tamen and infectum est, unde non solum soboles
hanc luem contrahit, sed and soemina infici potest. And thus most frequently
this Lues is communicated in venereous acts, especially if the genitals of
either Sex be ulcerated, scabby, or foul.

Per osculum.
But if this contagion be received by kissing ot the lips only; as when the
person infecting has a scabby lip or sore mouth; then the genetals do escape,
and the person infected is branded in the mouth or lips: therefore it is a
hazardous custom of saluting all strangers, and to drink after such sore mouths
is dangerous: and although some go free that have made such adventures, and
have not been prejudiced thereby; yet others have paid for it, and may warn the
rest to be cautious.

Per sudorem and transpirationem.
Sometimes this Contagion is comminicated by sweat, or a vaporous transpiration
from bodies to their Bed-fellows, when no copulation or kissing has preceded:
as between Man and Man, or Woman with Woman lying together; yet are they liable
to be infected after this manner; and then it is uncertain where this virulency
does enter, and what parts will first be stigmatized and complain.

Per lectum and vestimenta.
The case is much what the same when this lurking Venom is received from
Bed-Cloths and Garments. It Is doubtful what part is most ready to attract,
receive and imbibe the latent pocky miasms, that are lodged there, when all
parts are equally exposed; but sometimes they seize here, and sometimes there.

Per lactationem.
By sucking, and suckling of Children this Lues is often caught: sometimes the
Child gives it the Nurse, and then the breast makes the first complaint: and
sometimes the pocky Nurse infects the Infant, and then it is not certain where
the virulency will breakout and appear; for being diffused throughout the body
and radicated in the constitution of the Child by the tainted milk; It Is
doubtful what part will make the first discovery. But sooner or later, here or
there, it will show it self; and then perhaps may puzle good judgments to
determine what is the matter. Therefore Children ought very cautiously to be put
out to nursing, since the venereal taint is become such a popular evil. And
Nurses likewise may beware what Children they receive; especially if the Child
have a sore mouth, it may prove a pocky thrush, and then she earns her wages
very dearly.

CHAP. VIII.
Presages of the Curability and Incurability of the Venereal Lues: with
cautionary advice to Undertakers and Patients.

BEfore judgment be given of this Disease, whether Curable or Incurable; of
facil or difficil curation, or whether the Cure may be of longer or shorter
performance: that the event may answer the determination of the Physician
herein, and not be deceived; these things are first to be considered, and he
must steer his judgment by this problematical compass.

Lues be antique or of late standing?

parts are invaded, and where the chief place of residence?

Contagion was contracted, by impure copulation or otherwise?

Lues be hereditary, or adventitious?

mild, and gentle; or fierce, raging and spreading?

constitution; or some extern parts only seized?

humors and juices of the body; or any the solid and carnous parts be also
wasted

old or young?

male or female?

Physic for the same?

strong, fleshy, and lusty; or weak, hectical, and Consumptive?

infected, and supposed to be cured; or it be the first taint and surprise?

Lues be planted in a scorbutic, infirm and Caco-chymical body; or in a clean
constitution, and of sound organical parts?

In answer to these Problems, and to satisfy the Quaeries proposed, I affirm.

Venereal Lues which is recent, and but lately contracted, is sooner Cured
(caeteris paribus) then that which is of longer abode: for nature then sooner
and easier reverts to her pristine state and integrity from a late declenstion,
than when she is habituated in any morbific evil: besides, the contagious
vestigia of this Disease at first are not so deeply imprinted; and so more
easy and better to be razed out, then afterward when by time they are
profoundly radicated.

Lues is more facil or difficult to be Cured, as the parts invaded are in
condition and capacity; and therefore the principal parts are more dangerously
affected than the inferior: and of, the more noble parts the brain commonly
produces the most contumacious symptoms, and the pocky ferment is with
greatest difficulty displaced thence.

Beds, Garments, kissing, or familiar converse with a pocky person; does not so
deeply insinuate it self into the body receiving, as that which is introduced
by coition; and is more easily cured. Because the former takes up its quarters
in the confines and extern parts, and has not admittance within, but after
some considerable time: but the latter in the Venereal act, is conveyed more
intimately, and received greedily by the delectation accompanying, and the
virulency stirred up vigorously, made hot and powerful to infect. Yet this
Contagion is sooner ejected and cleared out of the body, than that which is
imbibed by Children from a pocky Nurse; for the venom being received with the
milk, does radicate it self in the whole constitution of the Child, and
requires a longer time to dispossess it.

Hereditary Pox is worse than that which is adventitious; has the deepest
stain and tincture most difficult to be abstersed and fetched out; being
connatural and congenerous with the seminal and sanguine principles of the
body: therefore the undertaking to amortise and kill this venom, requires a
considerable time and potent medicaments, else the labor is ineffectual and
frustraneous.

calm, sluggish, and inactive, gives leave to deliberate and to make choice of
the fittest season and conveniences for Cure: but being notably clapped, and
stung with a furious enraged venom; then admits of no delay nor dallying with;
and to loose time in such Case is dolorous and dangerous; advances the
difficulty of the Cure, and protracts the length. Obsta principiis -- Is then
most necessary advice and caution.

Lues be frontier only, and seated as a borderer upon the external parts, as a
pocky itch, or tettar; the Cure is more easy and shorter: but having
insinuated deeper into the habit of the body, and perverted some principal or
subservient internal part; the Cure is not so facil and short; And not equally
to be undertaken and promised.

succulent parts, and fluctuates in the blood and humors of the body; the
organical parts standing firm without solution of continuity; an ejectment is
sooner made, and the Cure more easily perfected: but if any solid part be
tabefied or ulcerated, the Cure is more difficult and much longer in effecting;
and s^ much the worse if the part be principal, or seated difficultly, to be
applied unto or to be dealt with; and therefore pocky Ulcers of the Bladder,
Kidneys, Lungs, etc. Are of such difficult curation, that they prove mortal to
most, unless they fall into the hands of some Physician of extraordinary
ability and expertness in these Cures.

ancient people, it catches faster hold of them, and they are not easily
rescued: for nature being past her strength and worn out, at least debilitated
by intemperance, casualties or other infirmities, makes her more incapable to
encounter and contend with this last assault, and therefore the assistance of
Physic and Physician must not be ordinary.

Men seized with this Disease bear it out more resolutely, hide it better, and
more easily complies with a Cure, by their firmness of body and Masculine
strength: but the Feminine Sex being fainter in courage, and their tender moist
bodies more liable to the injury; so their success in Cure is not so good, for
they evade not this evil so soon, but require a longer course and diligent use
of means.

Patients upon the first complaint and address for Cure, are sooner and easier
reducible, and cleared from the virulency of this Disease; but such as are
drove by ill success, from one Physician to another, or (which is worse) by
ignorant, deceitful, and bad usage of Empericks of diverse sorts: these are not
to be dealt with upon the same score; their Cures being more difficult and
longer in the performance: for, the work is commonly double; the mischief of
improper or bad Medicines to be corrected and redrest; then the Disease, which
by ill management or contemning of Medicine is made thereby more contumacious
and intractable. This is often verifyed, and my own experience confirms it from
several that were forced from their first undertakers, bringing with them sad
memento's of their insufficiency and bold adventures. And here I might relate
strange stories of the ignorant and ill usage that some Patients have
undergone, and have been driven from one to another, not only without their
Cures, but with marks of their sufferings in hazardous courses: but I shall
forbear at this time.

gaining possession of strong and firm bodies, yet takes not such certain hold
as on persons of another condition; and is more easily expulsed for nature
being more vigorous to acquit her self and eject the virulent adversary; is
also better able to bear and comply with the continuance or repetition of any
medical operation requisite for Cure; whether Cathartic diaphoretic,
salivatory, etc. But Consumptive, macerated, and hectical bodies have not that
assistance of nature; nor do they undergo those operations required with that
facility, nor commonly with that good success: therefore a great difference is
to be made in the undertaking; the latter being much more hazardous and
difficult. And I have known the Pox Cured, when the Patient not long after has
died of the Consumption.

first attacque and seizure of this Disease, goes of sooner and is more easily
removed; but relapses from imperfect Cures, or long delays and bafling of
Medicines by ill management; or second contaminations and encounters, prove
more stubborn and contumacious: nature being then accustomed to the enormities
of this evil, does more readily yield up and comply with; and not easily
reduced to integrity and a sound state.

Lues enters into a clean habit of body and sound organical parts, Nature is
not so easily depraved and corrupted, and the Venereal venom in such bodies is
sooner tamed and mortified: but coming into an unwholsom putrid, Cacochymical
or Scorbutic habit of body; this venereal ferment aggravates all the rest, and
such condition of bodies degenerate strangely, and produce the most formidable
symptoms: for these several corrupt seminaries conspiring and joining their
forces together are not easily broken in their confederacy and conquered; but
require a considerable time, and more exquisite Medicines and method to
extirpate and break this associated strength; else commonly in such cases this
Lues becomes inveterate, and coh^bits during life, though sometimes lurking and
disguised under a Cathe^ic habit of body. Particularly concerning the contumacy
of the Venereal Disease complicated with the Scorbute, Tract of the Scurvy.
Chap. 5. 4th Edition.
I have formerly noted elsewhere in another Treatise, whither I refer the
Reader.

These Quaeries being thus satisfied, well collated and applied to any case
proposed, the prediction thereupon will carry great probability of truth, and
much certainty of the event and success: but withal take notice, that although
in many cases the Disease may be of facil curation, or with difficulty curable
in their own nature, to a truly able expert Physician; and it may most
reasonably and confidingly be expected to succeed and fall out according to our
prognostics in the several cases recited by way of quaery; yet to another that
is not a steady and sure practicer, or that has but one common method of Cure,
or road to walk in; to such I say the Disease may be tedious, difficult, or
incurable; and the event much otherwise than we have promised, in the several
cases; because he cannot vary nor go out of his track, but is confined to one
way of Cure, which often fails and then he is at a stand: or if he be a
traditional man of more learning, and depending upon the various opinions of
Authors, wafted here and there, and trying this and that with uncertain
fallacious shop Medicines; I do not wonder that such are often bafled with this
Disease, being not firmly bottomed, upon their own experiments in pharmacy; and
many Cases that are curable, and also such as are of easy curation, often run to
an incurable state or mortal event, and the virulent stain never washed out,
but remains during life.

The reasons, and manner how this uncertainty and disappointment in medical
practice does arise, and is too frequent, even amongst the most learned
Physicians so reputed, is amply set forth in a late The Ancient and Modern
Practice of Physic, Examined and Compared, etc:
Work exposed to public view, for information and caution to all those that
are any way concerned in Physic, either as Physician or Patient.

CHAP. IX.
General Therapeutic considerations.

THE grand business appertaining to this Disease, is the invention of means and
forming of remedies to profligate this direful malady. To which purpose
Physicians have labored to find out rational ways of Cure, answering their
several opinions and determinations of this Lues. Empericks not being
capacitated to dive into the abstrusity of this Disease, nor willing to spend
time about the notional part wherein they find no gain; fall presently upon the
practice, consulting only or rather at a venture borrowing from tradition a
method of Cure, which boldly they experiment upon all persons, and whether it
hit or miss, are not able to give an account or reason for either.

But the legal and rational Professor is not so satisfied and contented to
oppose this Lues Andabatarum more, but propose marks to aim at, and certain
rules to go by, that they may have some certainty and confidence in their
endeavors, to attain the end and scope of this Art, the relief and rescuing of
Mankind from the tyranny and oppression of Diseases. And although this be the
ultimate end to which Physic is directed, yet to acquire and attain this,
several men go several ways, according as they are biassed in their various
opinions and conceptions of this or any other Disease: from whence (together
with mere empyrical adventures and chance experiments) diverse methods of cure
and variety of Medicines have been excogitated and found out to extirpate this
contaminating ignominious Disease.

It is then worth our labor to revise and examine, both the rational and
empyrical chance Medicines, as also the method and appointments that govern
their use, and all circumstances attending, as tradition and Authors set forth
in their several tracts of this Disease; by which examples and Patterns the
practisers of our times do steer their courses of Physic as the safest and
best conducts hitherto found out and discovered: some adhering to this Author
and his Medicines; others to another, prosecuting in a different way and with
other remedies: all which are recorded upon the Apothecaries files, and
reposited with them as a trust (whether to the honor or shame of the
Professors, may plainly be seen in a late The Ancient and Modern Practice of
Physic, Examined and ComPared, etc.
Work of general concern) upon the review and scanning whereof, we shall come
to understand what projections and modes of Cure now in practice, are rational,
fit to be retained and imitated, and what courses and medicaments are frivolous
or injurious, to be exploided and avoided.

For a complete regimen and institution for Cure, three things are to be
observed: First, the Diaetetick part, which consists in a due observance and
appointment of the six non-naturals, so termed by Physicians; secondly,
Chyrurgical operations; thirdly, the pharmaceutical or medical apparatus.

CHAP. X.
Diaetetick Institution, for the Venereal Lues.

UNder this head is comprised the regular and due ordering of bodies most
suitable and convenient, relating to the six non-naturals, which are these: Meat
and Drink, Exercise and Rest, Sleep and Watching, Air, Evacuation and
Retention, Passions of Mind.

General Diaetetic rules governing and limiting all bodies in the aforenamed,
during the course of their lives, most conducing to Health and vigorous
Vitality; I have laid down in another The Preservation of Health and
prolongation of Life.
Work wholly designed for that purpose; so that here we shall say nothing but
what peculiarly belongs to such who are tainted with this Lues.

Meat and Drink.
Fallopius enjoins such a diet as he thinks does most resist putrefaction and
ebullition of the blood: Gab. Fallop. De morb. gal. Cap. 28.
and therefore forbids the moister sorts of flesh and fish; prohibits all
fruits, also Onions, Garlic, and Radishes; he commends Biscuit bread above
other: approves of Vinegar; also allows Pepper grossly beaten if the stomach be
weak; but forbids it if there be Ulcers cica sedem, are his own words. He is
willing to admit Cloves, Nutmeg, Cardamum, Cinnamon, unless ebullition in the
Liver forbid them: strong Wines (he says) are injurious unless diluted with
Water.

Vella commends bread that is new, Georg. Vella de morb. gal. opuscul.
something brown, having a little bran in it, that it may be the more
abstersive. He is silent in the kinds of meat proper for this Disease; but
approves of old Claret moderately drunk for digestion.

But Mercatus forbids all Wine severely, Market. de morb. gal. Cap. 5.
unless necessity urges by great languishing and weakness of the Patient; and
then he would have it allayed with Water. He approves of Mutton, Veal, Fowls,
and Rabbits; but condemns Fish, and all salt meats.

Montesaurus appoints bread well baked, Montesaur. de morb. gal. Cap. 6.
but not new: he approves of Veal, Kid, Lamb, Hens, and Capons, but rather lean
than fat. He allows all sorts of Fish; but condemns Pork, Ducks, and Geese, as
too gross meat, and all salt meats as injurious: but commends Partridge,
Phesant, and small Birds. He approves of milk as a most proper food, if pustuls
do much appear upon the body; and then makes this Lues a parallel Cure with the
Leprosy; imitating Abohaly an ancient Arabian Physician, who applauds milk as
a most requisite diet in the Leprosy. He disapproves of all Spices but
Cinnamon: forbids all fruits but almonds, pistaches, raisins, and pomgranates:
condemns butter and oil.

De Hutten commends a spare diet: De Hutten de morb. gal.
and interdicts Mutton, Goats-flesh, Beef, and all other meats ingendring
melancholy: also hard Eggs, old Cheese, all kind of Pulse, salt Fish, and green
Fruits. And forbids Wine very strictly. Joan. Bened de morb. gal. Cap. 4.


Joan. Benedictus appoints a moist diet and something plentiful, because the
Disease is Chronic, following the precepts of Hippoc. and Galen, who appoints
spare diet for acute Diseases, but larger feeding for Diseases of continuance.
He enjoins the Patient white bread, leavened, well baked, and not above three
days old. Commends to him white Wine mixed with borrage, bugloss, and rose
water; and this chiefly in the declination of the Disease: but if the Disease
be very painful, then he rather approves of Claret. He approves of boiled meat
rather than roast; allows of Fish, Eggs, also barley water with almond milk;
Borrage, Bugloss, Spinach, and Beets. I think they wrought miracles in those
days, when Venereal Patients were Cured after this rate: for this seems a very
unfit and improper diet. He forbids Cheese and other milk meats; but yet he
has a good mind to allow of milk. Ibidem.
Attamen lac (nisi esset hepatis and stomachi ardor) propter conformitatem quam
habet hic morbus cum lepra, admitteretur: his own words. He allows of baked
fruits, and condescends to the use of Mace and Cinnamon sparingly.

Pet. Maynardus forbids Mutton, Pet. Maynard. de morb. gal. tract. 2. Cap. 1.
Beef, and Pork; all salt meats, all Fish, except those in gravelly Waters.
Disapproves of Geese, Ducks, and all Water Fowl, but allows of others:
prohibits all Pulse except red Cicers, commends Veal, Kid, rear Eggs, and baked
fruits. Allows Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Lettice, Hops and Spinach. Admits of
Wine in the Cure, red Wines, no white or blackish Wines.

Ferrus a Neapolitan, Alphons. Ferrus de morb. gal. lib. 4. a Cap. 1. ad 6.
Professor in this faculty, waves all the Diaeteticks save only Wine, of which
he discourses something largely; and would prove the use of Wine in this
Disease, as conducing to the Cure: and brings in the Authority of Abenzoar an
Arabian Physician to back him, who said, nec cibum nec medicinam vino unquam
privari debere. And therefore appoints the common decoction to be made with
Wine, by analogy from other medicated Wines that are proficuous in other
Diseases: and for the kind, he chooses white Wine before others, and to be old
Wine, if the Disease be ancient. But if the Patient be of a sanguine or
choleric Complexion, and has a hot Liver, and the season be hot; then he
allows of water for the decoction.

Victorius forbids Wine as noxious in this Disease, Bened. Victor. lib. de
morb. gal.
and instead thereof commends hydromell, a drink of honey and water wherein
hyssop and betony is boiled. He forbids Beef, Venison, Mutton, Pork, and Goats
flesh as difficult of concoction and producing a faeculent and gross blood, and
disallows all salt meats. And because he determined this Disease to be cold and
moist, he therefore opposes it with that is hot and dry (in his opinion) and
commends young Rabbets, Leveretts, Capons, Pigeons, Hens, Partridge, Pheasant,
all wood Fowls and small Birds: But condemns Geese, Ducks, and all water Fowl,
also Lamb because it is too moist; and all fish upon the same account, as
promoting the corruption of humors in this Lues. He allows of Hen Eggs boiled,
and commends the yolk, but not the white, as being viscous, cold, and moist, (a
strange fancy) he prohibits milk and milk meats, as being offensive to the
head and praecordia, and cites Hippoc. and Galen to confirm his opinion.

Amat. Lusitanus is very short in his Amat. Lusitan.
diaetetic Precepts, Epist. tert. Cent. Med. Curat.
the chief are these: he appoints hard Ship Biscuit, but made with Sugar after
the Venetian manner. Commends Sugar very much in this Disease, also honey. But
forbids salt, vinegar, and all acid or acrid things: he will not allow of any
salt in bread, nor any meats seasoned with salt: and commends boiled meat
before roast. But why salt should be so strictly forbidden, I see no reason,
since it opposes the products or effects of this Disease: viz. a superfluous or
degenerate moisture, and from thence proceeds to a corruption of humors; now
salt desiccates, roborates and corrects a depraved abounding moisture, helps
digestion, is preservative from putrefaction, and promotes some intentions of
Cure being discreetly used: wherefore moderately seasoned meats are better than
fresh.

Petronius does not allow of hard Biscuit, Alexand. Trajan, Petron. de morb.
gal. lib. 3. Cap. 7.
especially to such who are costive, of a dry body and weak stomach: and quotes
Hippocrates lib. (...), where he appoints Biscuit to such as are hydropical:
and therefore Petronius conjectures it too dry in this Disease, and brings in
Galen to second Hippoc. quint. de simp. Cap. 9. Yet afterward this Author
allows Biscuit to such who have a moist and strong stomach. He prefers boild
meat before roast; and says, roast is harder of digestion, choleric, dry, and
astringent; but is not curious concerning the kinds of flesh, whether this or
that: modo quae solita est, eligatur; prefertim si magis jucunda fuerit.
Forbids salt and all salt meats severely, and gives strange reasons for that
opinion. He prohibits all Spices, Onions, Leeks, Garlic, and Mustard: also
milk and milk meats; all sorts of pulse, fish, and fruits, especially Figs, if
the eyes or skin be affected.

Ferrerius commends roast meat before boiled; Auger. Ferrer. de pudenda gra.
lib. 1. Cap* 5.
yet allows of flesh broths, panadoes and almond milks. He forbids all salt
meats and acrid: but approves of acids, as Verjuce, Vinegar, juice of Sorrel,
Citrons, Oranges, and Pomgranates. He appoints Wine but diluted with Water: and
instead of Wine allows barley water sugared water, or honey and water: he
approves of wheat bread, leavened, with some bran in it for abstersion; forbids
Biscuit, and condemns a spare diet.

Tomitanus is large in his Diaeteticks concerning this Disease, Bernard.
Tomitan. de morb. gal. lib. 2. Cap. 5.
the chief heads are these; a spare diet, inclining to cooling, and moistning;
yet he prohibits Lamb and Pork, as being too juicy, and raw fruits: also fish
upon the same account, except some of the better sort. He condemns salt meats,
and Spices, also Fennel, Parsley, and Mint, because they are too hot (as he
thinks) and Spinach, because too moist; and Sorrel because binding and
obstructing: allows Sparagus (which makes a stinking Urine, and is worse than
all the rest) prohibits sweet things, acrid, austere, acid, and acerb; and
approves of boild meats before roast. This is his sense.

Sennertus waves all Diaetick Precepts, Sennert.
and is silent in that part of the Cure.

I have here presented to your view, the practice and approbations of our
Predecessors of several Countries, in dyeting their Patients that were affected
with the venereal Lues: and by this collection you see the several sentiments
of Authors and their different appointments touching this subject (worth your
observation) many more I might have laid before you, but what has been
delivered is sufficient for you to descant and deliberate on. I find amongst
these and other Authors, Authoris animadversio.
variety of opinions twharting each other in appointing a diet proper and fit
against this Disease: and can see no agreement in any one thing that is either
meat or drink; but one approves, and another condemns in every particular:
their reasons and arguments alleged (though sometimes the thing contended for
be right) are many of them light and vain, being founded upon false hypotheses,
and erroneous traditional doctrines that are, or must be exploded. They most of
them acknowledge the Disease to be occult, yet all their aims are at manifest
qualities; and lay a great stress here as matters of much importance and great
moment in Cure: some for a drying diet, others for a moist; some for heating,
others for cooling: some will have a slender diet, others for a larger feeding;
some for Wine, others forbid Wine; some applaud milk, others decry it; some for
roast meat, others for boiled.

To set these several Antitheses in their Order, with their Authors owning and
defending these repugnant assertions; together with our own judgment moderating
and determining between them, would swell this part equal with the whole work
beside: in regard these several different persuasions are bottomed upon some
fundamental or preceding hypotheses that must first be evicted, before we can
fairly and clearly confute these errors built thereon; which to do, will take
up some considerable room, and make too large a digression and perhaps an
unnecessary parergy, unbecoming the intent and promise of a succinct
compendious work; therefore I must forbear to enter upon the controversy: nor
must you expect I shall ((...)) condemn and reject this or that by my own
authority; until a further opportunity present, when I may ((...)) with reason
and argument refel the seeming validity of the opinions rejected. And so I pass
on to the next that comes under consideration which is.

Air.
From Air bodies receive great mutations, Aer.
according to the various tempers and conditions thereof, and does operate upon
sound bodies, either for the better or the worse; so likewise in a valetudinary
and sickly state, the Air is helpful or prejudicial, as it is in goodness or
sutableness with this or that condition of body, and is either assistant to
nature, or promoting the Disease.

Air may be considered, either as relating to a Climate or Region, or in
respect to the seasons of the year: As for the Climate, hot Countries perform a
Cure of this nature with more ease and speed than the colder; and therefore in
Spain, Italy, etc. the Cure of this Lues is more easy than in England,
Holland, Denmark, etc. colder Countries. Upon the same account the Summer
season here in England is more assisting and advantageous than the Winter:
because where there is apertion of pores and a freer perspiration, there the
malignity of this Disease does less molest and trouble the Patient, and is
continually spending: but when the pores are occluded and shut up by cold, and
transpiration cohibited, the malign virulency is retained, does thereby augment
and ferment, causing turgid aestuations and dolorous symptoms: therefore I say,
that cold Climes, moist foggy air, and maritine places, are worse to live in
for those that are tainted with this malady: but a dry, warm, pure Air, is most
preservative; and experience declares that those who are infected with this
Disease, are more afflicted in Winter than in Summer: and observe, that where
the Scurvy is most predominant and endemical, there the Pox is most difficult
to be Cured: but when Cures are undertaken in such disadvantagious places or
cold seasons, the assistance of Art must correct those impediments, and a
Summer warm air procured in the Patients Chamber.

Exercise.
As it is preservative to sound bodies, Exercitium.
so is it as Physic to some kinds of Diseases; and many by this help have bore
up and withstood, the threatenings and encroachments of some infirmities: yet as
exercise is not proficuous and proper for all Diseases, so is it not convenient
in all degrees and conditions of those Diseases, where otherwise it might be
proper and advantageous: for such who are Consumptive, emaciated and enfeebled
by this Lues, are not fit for exercise nor benefitted thereby; and such who
labor under a Gonorrhaea, are made worse by exercise and not the better:
therefore the ability of the Patient, the progress of the Disease, and
circumstances attending are to be considered; which being collated, from thence
will appear whether exercise be proper and convenient. But this we shall
conclude on, that such bodies who are fit for labor and exercise, and do use
it, shall best avoid the dangerous consequences of this Disease; but idle,
slothful, and sluggish bodies, do sooner come to ruin, and have the grand
Characters of this Disease sooner appearing: and therefore the ordinary sort of
laboring working people, do hold out longest and escape best.

Sleep.
Being appointed by nature for refreshment of our bodies in health, Somnus.
and does repair lost strength by transpiration, weariness and watching; is
likewise required in Cases of sickness; and at such times the want of it is
much more perceived by how much then the body is less able to endure without
it: for all the supports of nature are then to be summoned and called in for
aid, more especially when she labors with an intestine Enemy. Therefore if any
dolorous or afflicting symptom, attendant upon this Disease, do disturb nature
and rob her of her due repose, causing restless and unquiet nights; you must
seek for the assistance of Art to check and allay the causes of such
disquietudes; else nature will sooner succumbere, yield to the power and
prevalency of this Disease, and your countenance will straight discover the
oppression of your malady: besides, when nature is put by her accustomed rest
(which gives vigor and reinforceth all the faculties) no function will be
performed ed rightly, but weakly and depravedly, and then are more easily
compellable by the malignity of this Disease, to run more swiftly into
disorder, and sooner produce the ruinous effects of this Lues. But e contra,
indulging of sleep beyond what nature has appointed and requires, is
pernicious on that hand: for nature being thus detained sluggish, ill humors do
abound, evacuations being cohibited and restrained beyond their due times of
excretion, and the body not freed and discharged as it ought, which gives
advantage to this Disease, as further appears following.

Evacuation.
All bodies seized with or inclining to a malign Cachexy, putrefaction, or
degeneration of humors, daily evacuation by stool is good; but costive bodies
retaining excrements beyond their due times of excretion, Excrementa.
does accumulate sordid matter to advance and increase a Disease, and does
pejorate an ill habit of body: for that which should go out by the guts being
retained, is sucked and drawn into the habit of the body, (the thinner part) and
contaminates the blood: therefore such who are tainted with this Disease,
having the inconvenience of an astringent belly; must use medical assistance to
obviate the mischief that may accrue thereby.

But Venereal or spermatic evacuations must be forborne as most injurious in the
Cure; Venus.
and warily to be admitted out of a curative regimen until this malignity be
eradicated, and the body freed from that venom: for as the faculties are
debilitated and oppressed by the Disease; so venereal acts do enervate and
bring down the strength, whereby this Lues takes advantage and prevails the
more; remembering that natura corroborate est morborum medicatrix.

Passions of Mind.
The next and last we are to precaution you, is concerning the passions of
mind, Animae Pathemata.
whereof some are good ut signum and causa; as hope, joy, and mirth, which
enables the mind to bear the infirmities of the body with more ease and less
prejudice; for the faculties do then exert their energy more strenuously, and
are not so soon depraved and perverted in their functions, but contend and
struggle with the assaults of this or any other Disease: and being thus
fortified and kept up in their vigor, they are not so apt to receive the
impressions of Diseases, nor decline so suddenly when they are se^zed.

But Fear makes the Soul to shrink and wither, abates her influence upon all
the faculties whereby they languish and grow weak, not performing their duties
as they ought.

And melancholy lays a weight and clog upon the springs of the faculties, so
that they move heavily, unduly and with great deficiency; which gives
considerable advantage to the prevailing power of this malady.

Anger raises the spirits, but with disturbance, with confused irregular
motions, and makes a tempest in the body, fermenting the blood and humors with
a turgid preternatural ebullition: whereby the virulency of this Lues is
exasperated and scattered into all parts, that before lay dormant, at least
more quiet and sedate, confined to some particular region of the body: but
being agitated and roused up by this furious storm, is dispersed into other
quarters, lodges there and infects sound parts.

CHAP. XI.
Of Phlebotomy, in the Cure of this Lues.

HAving dispatched the diaetetick part, the next in order to be treated of, are
Chirurgical or manual operations; and here Phlebotomy comes to be discussed,
whether useful or not in the Cure of this Pox; because it is most frequently
used in these Cures, and most Practisers very formally begin their course with
this celebrated remedy, as if their method were not complete if this did not
lead the Van. It will not be lost time then but profitable to cast our eye upon
the Practice of such Writers as are accounted men of note, leaders in the
profession, at least in these Cures; and see how they consent in this point,
and their reasons for what they do, because the age is much governed by
tradition and example, and think they are safe practisers, and what they do is
warrantable, if they keep the beaten road, and have the Authority of their
Predecessors to back them; and this is one main block that puts a stop to the
proficiency and progress of this Science: else it would have arrived to a
greater perfection and certainty, than as now it stands.

Upon inquiry I find most Authors consent to the administration and use of
Phlebotomy, as a necessary curative remedy and means; yet differing amongst
themselves in some circumstances for the admittance; in viewing their several
appointments herein, we shall remark something to be taken notice of from the
bias of their various opinions.

Massa a Venetian, Nichol. Massa.
one of the ancientest Writers upon this Disease, declares for bleeding as
necessary, and urges the utility and fitness thereof from this reason, that
Phlebotomy drains the Liver and Veins, which (he says) is locus generationis
of this Disease; and making a depletion or diminution here, he supposes and
alleges that so much of the antecedent and conjunct morbific cause is abated
and taken away: and draws in some Canons of Hippoc. Galen, and Avicen. to
confirm this judgment. But this Author mistakes the place of generation or
chief residence, as already proved, Chap. 6. ^ That I need not repeat here: and
as for the Authority to second him, I see no reason why Hippoc. Galen, or
Avicen should bear sway here in the Cure of this Disease, when as this Author
and most others will not allow them or any of the ancients to have any
knowledge of this Lues: and this Disease being confessed by them to be of an
occult nature; I judge it therefore to be exempted, and not to be regulated by
the general therapeutick precepts of the Ancients: besides, Authority
whatsoever is no convincing argument, but must give place to reason and
experience, founded upon latter and better discoveries.

Almenar a Spaniard, Joan* Almenar.
allows phlebotomy in the beginning of this Disease, but scruples at it in the
progress.

Cataneus asserts phlebotomy very Jacob. Gatan.
stiffly in all Cases of this Disease, where there is signs of plenitude; and
brings this as an argument, the general success that Women have, whose monthly
courses are constant, above others who have not the benefit of that evacuation.
I answer; as to the matter of fact (which I might very well question) if we
give him credit, and grant him the quod sit of his observation; yet this does
not prove sufficiently and clearly the efficacy of phlebotomy; for as much as
that impediment or obstruction of nature may depend upon, or result from some
considerable preternatural cause in the body: so that the bare retention of the
menses did not make the difference in success, but the greatness of the cause
obstructing, might make a great disparity and disproportion in the Cases, and
therefore success in Cure might not equally follow. Besides, in comparing Cases
together, and drawing observations equally from them in curation; many
circumstances are to be considered, and niceties exactly to be weighed,
relating to the persons, the curative regimen, and pharmateutick preparations,
for a parity and levelling the Cases, if you will give an impartial judgment,
and not deceive your self.

Torrella prohibits phlebotomy when Pustuls appear externally, Gasper. Torrell.
for this reason that it does attract the virulent matter inwards, and in this
case he severely forbids it, nam si aliter faceres, non esses medicus, sed
interfector; are his own words: but in other cases of this Disease allows it;
And shelters himself under the Protection of Hippoc* and Galen, whose general
rules of phlebotomy he would have to extend hither.

Hock allows phlebotomy generally in the Cure of this Lues, Wendel Hock.
but agrees with Torrel that it, must be forborne when Pustuls appear upon the
skin, lest it cause a retraction; quia convertit and repellit scilicet ad
interiora illud quod procedit ad exteriora. His words.

Petronius prohibits phlebotomy in general, Alex. Trajan. Petron.
and offers good reason against it, as not conducing and proper against this
Disease: afterward he falls off, and allows it in some Cases which are of no
validity to countenance the admission of it, and nuls his former arguments, by
this concession.

Fallopius appoints bleeding in this Disease, upon a threefold account, Gab.
Fallop.
as conducing and promoting the Cure: first, to temper and allay the ebullition
in the Liver; secondly, to diminish or lessen the matter that is to be altered
with Medicines and evacuated; thirdly, to make a revulsion of humors from the
Liver that are gathered there: haec tria sunt, quae indicant nobis sectionem
venae, says that Author: but by his leave, we are not obliged to take notice of
them otherwise than as vain suppositions; for as much as they have not the
force of reason to persuade or compel to the observance: for there is no such
ebullition in the Liver (in the common course of this Disease) nor confluence
of humors thither to be revulsed back: but (erroneously) supposing that part to
be the seeds Morbi (which opinion we have refuted) these other errors have
sprung from thence also, and do depend thereon as their foundation; which amply
might be set forth, but I judge it not necessary, and therefore forbear to
enlarge hereupon.

Brassavolus observes no indication for bleeding but plethory; Anton. musa
Brassavol.
and then regards no contra-Indication; but all Cases alike with him.

Botallus is very free in bleeding for this Disease; Leonard. Botall.
and commends (a strange invention of his own) a vein to be opened in the
genital of Man, in case that part be ulcerated: Vena colis ulceri proxima
aperienda est, vel sanguisuga affigenda, quo putridus sanguis ulcus nutriens
hoc ingenio educatur, are his own words: wherein we may see the ridiculous
conceptions and aims that some men have had in the design of healing; and how
ignorant they were in the true knowledge of Diseases and the work of nature, to
help her self.

Tomitanus thinks bleeding very necessary, Bernard. Tomitan.
and to be performed according to Galens rules in his Book de curandi ratione
per sanguinis missionem and that (he says) is chiefly by opening the basilica
Vein; and this is all his arguments and advice for phlebotomy in the Cure of
this Lues.

Ferrerius commends bleeding in this Disease for plethorick bodies; Auger.
Ferrer.
and for such whose Pustuls, Tumors, and Ulcers, do tend toward inflammation,
and is nice in choosing this or that vein to be opened, as the superior or
inferior parts are affected: and this to no purpose, since the circulation is
found out and approved. Herein we may see how errors are planted upon one
another, and how little of the old doctrine will stand, when it comes to be
examined by latter inventions, and more certain approved truths.

Mercatus is for bleeding in the beginning of this Disease, Ludovic. Market.
for these reasons: to abate plenitude; secondly, that the purgatives which
ought to be violent, may have a fiercer passage; and thirdly, that the Liver
may be discharged of a great part of blood contained there, lest it should be
dispersed, and infect other parts of the body.

To this Author I answer in short: first, supponat quod non est supponendum: he
supposes always a plethory, which oftentimes is not in these Cases; therefore
not to be pleaded as a general indication. Secondly, violent purgatives are not
necessary in any Case, therefore not in this: for, let purgatives be supposed
to work elective, fermentative, or per antipathiam; yet moderate and gentle
purgation is less injurious to nature, and more advantageous for the purpose
intended, than forcing nature to a violent expulsion, where no separation can
be made, but good and bad is hurried away together. As for his third reason;
that does depend upon two errors: first, that the Liver is seeds Morbi which we
have proved the contrary: secondly, that the Liver is officina
sanguificationis; which ancient opinion is now exploded by most Modern
Physicians, that I need not add more than what has been said by others. And
lastly, he supposes the blood to be stagnant in the Liver, which is contrary
to the doctrine of circulation, and therefore not to be admitted as a good Plea.

To the assertors of Phlebotomy in general, I say; this Disease being
considered in its own nature, does not require bleeding: for, this Venereal
taint is either in the mass of blood, or out of the blood: if the blood be
infected and vitiated thereby, promiscuous evacuation does not purify, only
abates the quantity, and the malign venom remains equally proportionable to the
remainder, and as prevalent; so that this is no depurating remedy: but I shall
wave further illustration hereof, because else where I have been large, Tract.
of the Scurvy 4th. edition p. 177.
opposing Dr. Willis upon this point, though in another Disease; that Author
asserting phlebotomy to be the greatest depurative antiscorbutick remedy. And
if the contaminating virulency be not yet communicated to the blood, but
remains in other parts, to what purpose then is phlebotomy, since that
evacuation carries out nothing of the malign matter lodged in those parts: So
that in either Case it does appear to common reason, that the Venereal Lues per
se, and in sua natura, abstractly considered, does not indicate bleeding.

As for complicated affects, and peculiar adjunct Cases supervening the Pox,
and bringing with them an additional denomination of a Disease as Pleurisy,
Angina, etc. If they challenge phlebotomy, it is performed upon their
particular score, and not for this Lues, which in it self does not require
bleeding; but by reason of some other circumstances attending.

And whereas some urge the necessity of Phlebotomy, because antivenereal
remedies are hot and dry, therefore the constitution is to be cooled, that
those Medicaments may more safely be used; I think this has not the force of a
good argument: for in the highest and most intense Feavors, diaphoretick and
hot Medicines are most safely used and with best success, which I have proved
else where against Juleping, Tract. of the Scurvy 4th. edition page 197, 198.
etc.
that common irrational, and fatal practice, yet continued amongst the famed
Professors of this Age. If hot Medicines then be not injurious in the greatest
Fevers, we shall not need to fear them in this Disease; therefore phlebotomy
may be laid aside upon that account also, and hot Medicines may be administered
without bleeding, as safely as with it. But in case there be a repletion or
over-charge of blood, the Vessels turgid or extended, this carries the best
face of an indication to countenance phlebotomy; other Cases condemn it as
needless or noxious.

Whereas I said in page 106. that Sennertus waved the diaeteticks belonging to
this Cure; I then concluded so, because I found them not in their right place,
according to other Authors in this Disease, and his Custom in others.

CHAP. XII.
The Italian Practice or Methods of Cure for the Pox.

THis Disease discovering it self more eminently in Italy, and raging first
there with great fury at the Seige of Naples; put the Italian Physicians upon
the first inquiry into the nature of this calamitous Pest.

Sebast. Aquilanus I find to be one of the ancientest that wrote upon this
Disease, and wanting the advantage of Leaders in these Cures, and having no
footsteps to trace for the practice, he consults the Ancients: and supposing
this Disease to be, or come very near the Elephantiasis, Sebast. Aquilan.
Praxis.
institutes the Cure of this Lues parallel with that, according to the rules of
Galen. his digestive for preparing the peccant humor, and to make it fit for
evacuation (aiming at gross phlegm and melancholy) was composed of these
ingredients.

R. borag. bugloss. fumiter. asparag. lupul. scolopend pimpinel. lavendul. f.
decoctio. Decoct. digest.
This sweetened with Sugar was to be taken for seven days; five Ounces every
Morning: and he tells us that some added mirabolan^ to this decoction; and some
put in sena without mirabolans. Another digestive he sets down which is this.

R. syrup. de fumoterr. mellis rosat. ana. j. aquar. lupulor. bugloss endiviae
ana j. misce.; Potio digest.
after the digestive he appoints this solutive.

R. mirabolanor. indor. chebulor. hermodact. ana j. flor. borag. bugloss. ana
M. ss. bulliant in septem unciis aquae lupulor, vel si aliqua affuerit
febricula, endiviae and cichor. and facta condecenti decoctione Recipe agarici
elect. j. salis gem. j. and infundantur condecenti tempore in ij. praedictae
decoctionis. Praeterea fiat expressio, cui addatur diacatoliconis iiij.
diafiniconis iij. mellis rosat. colat. j. misceantur simul cum praedicta
decoctione. I give you the Authors own words, therefore let not me be blamed in
the transcription. But how this is to be used, is not set down, and it is no
great matter, for I think many will not practice after him. And he admits of
Confec. hamech. and some other that purge phlegm and black choler. For the
Pustuls and defaedations of the skin, he appoints this unguent.

Accipiantur saponis albi and minuti and in parva folia redacti iij. multoties
loti in succo endiviae and plantag. Vunguentum.
deinde bulliant in succo lapatii acuti usque ad levem spissitudinem. Praeterea
Recipe masticis, thuris ana iij. aromatici, sulf. Vivi, nitri ana j unguent.
Communis ad scabiem vj. misce. And this ointment was to be used one day, and a
wash another day; which was made of mallows excorticated Barley, and bitter
Lupines. But besides these Medicines he had a great esteem for Galens Pills
quas licet ipse mirabiles appellet: ego mirabiliores inveni (says Aquilan.) and
sunt.

Recip. mirabolanor. Chebulor. indor, Pilulae mirabiles Galeni.
corticum cucumeris asinin. Vel loco ejus elaterii, gingib. coloquint. salis
nitri, hermodact. hieraepier. satirionis ana part. equal. serapini ad duplum
unius praedictor. and non omnium. Pistentur pistanda subtiliter, and redigantur
in formam, aut massam pro pilulis cum aqua endiviae and aliquantulo mellis ros.
and fiant pilulae ad modum ciceris. Of these Pills he exhibited three,
sometimes two, and sometimes but one. For mitigation and allay of pains he used
rarifying Oils, as of Chamomil and Dill; but Cassia fistula outwardly applied,
he commends as the chief for that purpose. But those which desire a hasty Cure
(says he) use this Ointment for five days, being covered warm in bed that they
may sweat.

R. resin. pini, Vnguentum.
thuris, masticis, tartar. albi, litargirii auri, argent. vivi, olei laurin.
vulpin. olei abjetis, cuscutae, succi pomor. arantior. ana ij. axung. porcin.
colat. vj. rediganter in formam unguent. But he cautions those who are of a
weak constitution, to forbear this unction; but for others (he says) cum
praedictis pilulis and bona diaeta, it will avail much.

And this is the chief of this Authors Practice for this Lues: I must confess
this was but an odd kind of method, and as strange Medicines; but he being one
of the first practisers upon this Disease and had no guide, you must excuse
him. As for the specificks made use of now in our times, he mentions not in the
least; I suppose they were not talked of in those days, nor come into use.

Gasper Torrel also being one of the primitive Italian Practisers, Gaspar.
Torrell. regimen curat.
and a more exact Writer than the former; we shall take a view of his Medicines
appointed for this Disease. After phlebotomy was performed, if humors were
adust he gave syrup of fumiterry mixed with endive and scabiose water, for a
digestive, or this syrup following.

R. succor. endiviae, lactucae, boraginis, Syrup. digest.
bugloss. fumiter. and lupulor. depuratorrum ana iiij. aq. emulsionis sem.
Communium, flor. and sem. portulacae lib. ij. misceatur illa emulsio cum succis
praedictis, and bulliant in eis violae, rosae, epithimum and pruna damascena
quantum sufficit and coletur, and in colatura ponantur Zucchari lib. ij. and
syrupizetur and acetosetur. (the Authors own words) After this, digestion being
made, he proceeds to evacuation, which was performed with Electuar. succ.
rosar. or with diaprunes or diasena mixed with scabios. or fumiterry water,
Potiones purgant.
or their juice: he also commends Pil. de fumoterrae, and de lapid. lazuli. But
if the peccant matter be a salt phlegm, then he appoints this digestive.

R. rad. apii, faenicul, petrosel. polipod, endiviae and bugloss. ana ij.
camaedrios, calamenti ana M. 1. decoquantur in sufficienti quantitate aquar.
fumoter. lupul. and scabios. ad Consump. medietat. and in colatur. Ponantur
succi fumiterr. scabios. lapacii acut. depurat, ana iiij. and fiat sir.
acetosus cum Zuccharo. The matter being digested, was to be evacuated by
diaphaenicon and diacatholicon in scabios and fumiterry Waters. Other
digestives for this purpose he sets down which I pass by; but I must not omit a
syrup which he magnifies at a high rate: Syrupus mirabilis and expertus cum quo
(says the Author) innumerabiles non solum curavi, verum etiam preservavi ab
omnibus defaedationibus cutaneis and doloribus panniculorum, lacertorum and
nervorum.

Syrup Mirabilis
R. succi bugloss. lib. ij. succi endiviae and lupulor. borag. faenicul. and
apii ana iiij. depuratis succis infundantur in cis senae ss. polipod. ij. sem.
anisi ij. turbit. j. Cinnamom ss. and stent. ibi per diem. Deinde bulliant ad
consumptionem medietatis. This was his wonderful Syrup, which I fear will not
do wonders now. But when the matter was melancholy, and adust, then he appoints
this digestive.

Syrupus digest.
R. rad. borag. bugloss. polipod, cort. rad. cappar. median. cort. tamarisci
ana ij. cus^utae, camaedrios, camepitheos, scabios. ana M. 1. follicul. senae,
epithimi, rosar. violar. ana ss. succi and cum Zucchar, f. syrupus. The matter
being digested with this; was afterward to be evacuated with diacatholicon and
diasena, or with Pills de fumiterr. or de lapide lazuli, or pillul. Indae, or
Electuar. Indum.

For resolution, evaporation, and exsiccation of the matter which nature has
protruded and brought to the circumference or extern parts of the body, he
appoints baths and unguents. And here he commends balneum aq. maris, Balnea.
baln. sulphureum, aut aluminosum. Also artificial Baths ex decoctione rad.
Cucumeris asinin. folior. oleandri, lapacii acut. celedon. lupinor. scabios.
and decoctio jusquiami est mirabilis.

For a dry scabby pudendagra, this Ointment he appoints. Unguent.
R. ol. ros. butyr. ana j. succi fumiterr. plantag. ebuli vel sambuci ana ss.
fac. aliquantulum bullire, dein add terebenth. lot. and parum sulph. vivi.

But if the matter of these eruptions be hot and sharp, then this Ointment is
to be used. Unguent.
R. ol. violat. butyr. lot. ana j. argent. vin. extinct. j. succi plantag. iij.
litargir. alb. j. misce. But our Author was mistaken here, for these
ingredients will not come into the form of an unguent: he never saw this
Medicine made, and perhaps never used it, but thinks it a good contrivance to
commend to the World at a venture, (as Authors use to do.) And if I would be
critical, and undertake to note all the absurdities, incongruities, and strange
designment of Medicines as I pass along, it would prove a long piece of work,
to set it forth clearly as it ought; else my exceptions and dislikes will be
looked upon as carping and detracting: but at present you must expect only a
bare narrative of their practice, and a brief account.

For a crusty Ulcer arising from salt phlegm he appoints this unguent. R.
calcis multoties lot. exsiccat. and pulverisat subtle. iij. succi siclae aut
caulis q. s. incorporentur, deinde supermitte ol. ros. liquefact. cum modica
cera and f. unguentum.

For mitigation of pains in a hot cause, he commends these anodynes: an
embrocation of warm milk: also ol. violat. rosat. vel nenuphar. mixed. cum
pingued. porci recent. vitel. ovi and album. cum pauco sale. Also he commends
this unguent for the same purpose: Unguent anodyn.
R. pingued. pulli and anatis recentium, butyri recent, adipis porci recent.
cerae alb. ana j. ol. camomil. aneth. amygdal. dull. ana ss. mucilag. altheae,
sem. lini and fenigr. ana ij. misce and f. unguent. Some (he says) do apply
Sheeps Lungs warm to the parts pained; or a Hen, Pigeon, or Dogs Whelp, cut
down the middle and laid warm to the place. And after the pain is removed he
advises the part to be bathed with Alum Water.

For the Cure of virulent Ulcers (he says) it is to be effected; by
prosecuting these four intentions: the first is purgation or clensing the body;
the second is a diaetetick regimen; the third is exsiccation of the virulent
matter; the fourth is incarnation and consolidation. The two first we have
spoken of: to answer the third, he proposes Wine made stiptic ex decoctione
aluminis, cort. thuris, nuc. cupressi, cyperi, sabinae, To wash the Ulcer: but
this Medicine following he commends above all the rest, and says it is
mirabiliter exsiccans.

Unguent mirabiliter exsiccans.
R. litharg. aur. vel argent. valde pulverisat. cum aceto and ol. rosat.
vicissim imbibatur. scil. una vice cum aceto and alia cum oleo; and hoc toties
fiat donec albescat; deinde sumantur antimon. aeris ust. balaust. rad. celidon.
gallar. sang. dracon. aluminis, climiae argent. ana sextam partem ejus quod
sumptum est de litargirio albificato, and omnia incorporentur diu cum pistillo,
postquam fuerint been praeparata. I give it you exactly from the Copy,
therefore lay no faults upon my score.

For an incarnative Medicine he gives you this. Pulvis incarnat.
R. thuris ij. sang. dracon. ss. calcis vivae vj. misce. f. pull. subtilis. He
sets not down the manner how it should be used. But I cannot suppose otherwise
than that it should be strawed upon the Ulcer. And then it will make notable
work.

But if the Ulcer be sordid and very foul, then he appoints abstersive
Medicines to be used; whereof this is one. Unguent ad ulcera sordida.
R. galban. ammoniac. resin. Terebinth. picis naval. sevi. vaccin. ol. antiq.
and cerae ana part. aequal. and dissolvantur gummae in aceto, deinde omnia
liquefiant ad ignem, and conficiatur unguentum. For this purpose also he
approves of unguent apostolor. and aegyptiac.

For putrid Ulcers in this Disease, he appoints this: Unguent ad ulcera putrida.
R. Cerusae lot. aceti ana j. plumbi ust iiij. litargir. ij. myrrhae j. mellis
rosat. ij. ol. ros. v. vitell. ovor. numero sex. cerae q. s. misce f. unguent.
Many more Medicines he has set down to answer his intentions of Cure, but I
have chose only one example for each, that you may guess by that what the rest
are. One thing more of his I cannot omit and that is a notable piece of skill
for an Ulcer in the Privities, which I shall not undertake to translate; but
his own language will best become the invention. Infectus and ulceratus in
virga, quanto citius poterit, faciat sibi sugi locum ul^eratum ab aliqua vili
persona, exeterius semper exprimendo; aut parum per scarificetur, aut desuper
apponatur parum de sapone molli cum calce, aut gallus sive columbus in culo
deplumatus and excoriatus, sic vivus loco ulcerato saepius apponatur. Which
being done, the Patient was to take a dram of old Treacle in four Ounces of
Sorrel Water, hot; and after six hours the Ulcer must be anointed with theriac.
antiq. and in radice virgae (says our Author) a repercussive of bole armeniac
was to be laid on. The Morning following he appointed this potion. R. theriacae
de citro, limoniatae, smaragdorum, ana ij. aquar. buglossi acetos. and
sublimationis rorismarini. ana j. misce. And this potion was to be continued
for seven days. And this was part of the practice of Gasp. Torrellus, no less a
man than Physician to his Holiness Pope Alexander the Sixth. I refer the Reader
to his own judgment, upon the matter delivered: and my observation from thence
is what may plainly be noted in our times also, that mundus vult decipi: I
perceive that the best Physicians do not always get the best preferments: that
it is good fortune and great Friends, not excelling abilities in this faculty,
that places them in the Courts of Emperors, Kings, and Princes; and great men
are cheated in their opinion and choice of Physicians, as soon as the inferior
people. And now I pass on to show you the Practice of another Italian Physician
of great repute, that came after Torrell.

Anton. Musae Brassavol. praxis ad morb. gal.
Musa Brassavolus begins his Cure of the Venereal Lues thus: First he gives
this Clyster. R. maluae; violar. altheae, mercurial. ana M. 1. coq. in aq. s.
a. recip. hujus decoct. lib. 1. ol. violac. iiij. Cassiae extr. j. salis com.
ij. misce. After this Clyster phlebotomy came in, if the Patient was adjudged
sanguine and plethoric; and then a pound of blood was let out, if strength
would bear that exhaustion. Then this potion was given sir. capill. ven.
endiviae ana j. infus. senae iiij. misce. But if the Patient was of a choleric
temper, then the potion was syrup. of violets, endive, and the infusion of
sena: but if of a phlegmatic temper; then sir. of Hyssop, and Maiden hair, was
added to the infusion: but if of a melancholy temperament; then sir. of
epithimum and fumiterry was added; but the infusion of sena was never to be
omitted: because sena unum ex his est, quae supra alia omnia affectui gallico
adversari videtur, says our Author: but believe him that will.

After these lenitive preparing potions were taken nine or ten times; then he
gave stronger purgatives: of pil. cocheae, aureae and de lapide lazuli; with
other purgative Medicines, as likely as those. After this course of Medicines,
he puts the question whether the Patient be sound: si hic videatur sanitati
restitutus, been illi erit; hoc autem videbitur per unius mensis, vel duorum
spatium: if after a month or two the Patient had such great fortune to be well;
then only he was delivered up to Pillulae Alexandri ut frequenter expurgetur.
But if he were not yet Cured; then a long purging apozem was appointed of above
twenty ingredients boiled in Fumiterry Water; and six Ounces of this was to be
taken for twenty days together: (this course of Physic would scare one as bad
as the Pox) after this he queries if the Patient be Cured; if so, nihil aliud
agendum superest. But if otherwise, then he was turned over to the decoction of
lignum Indicum. And our Author says he was the first that practiced with this
decoction at Ferrara (a noted City in Italy) in the year 1525. at which time
the Physicians of the place derided him for it. This decoction was to be taken
for 27. or 30. days. And this was made either with Wine or with Water. From the
first day to the ninth, the Patients diet was lessened every day. And then he
must be contented with three Ounces of Bread at Dinner, and two at Supper, with
an Ounce of Coriander Comfits or as much raisins at Dinner, and half an Ounce
at Supper. And for nine days he was to continue this(...) diet. After which he
was to enlarge every day until he came to his accustomed quantity of eating.
And every other day during the decoction, a Clyster was given; supposing the
decoction to be simple: but sometimes this decoction was compounded, and this
addition put to it. R. senae iiij. polipod. jss. flor. borag. bugloss. rosar.
violar. ana j. gingib. cinnam. ana j. infund. in praedic. decoc. Which was then
made of Water. But in the year 1535. when Brassavolus returned from Rome he
began to make the decoction with Wine, and this too was either simple, or
compound as the former.

Other ways there were invented at that time says our Author, for the Cure of
this Disease; as by suffumigation, and by Unction. The first was performed
thus: Modus curandi per suffumigia.
The Patient was stripped naked, and placed upon a stool, a hole being made in
the seat thereof: under which the fume was put; and over the Patient a covering
was put which reached to the ground, to keep in the fume and apply all over to
the Patients body. But his head was to be out of the covering, (for fear of
suffocation) and was wrapped close about the neck. The ingredients for the
suffuming was this. R. cinnab. ijss. thuris, styracis ana j. f pull. The
Patients remained in this fume until sweat began to come, and then they were
put to Bed, well covered to sweat there for an hour; after that Clothes were
taken of by degrees, the Patients wiped with warm linen, and after a while they
eat and drank for refreshment. And this was performed thus every day for eight
or ten days together.

And our Author says, that some Physicians did suffumigate their Patients, with
their heads under the covering (which must needs be very dangerous) and he saw
one thus used, that fell down dead. But this way of Cure at the best
contrivance, is bad enough: and this Author confesses that fewer were Cured by
this means, than by other remedies; and this did often miss in the desired
effect. And because our Author had a good mind to prosecute this way of Cure,
he excogitated a suffumigation of wholsomer and not dangerous ingredients;
which was this:

R. hyssop. salviae ivae, rorismarin, lauri, ros. rub. puleg. calamint.
cartham. card. bened. amaraci, artemisiae, rutae, polii montan. millefol.
calend. ana M. 1. anisor. amidis, faenicul. gingib. selidis, amomi, carvi,
cumini ana ij. misce f. pull, and this was to be strewed upon the Coals, and put
under the stool as before. And this (says he) did provoke sweat and mitigate
the Disease; but not wholly take it away.

Having noted the chief things our Author mentions upon this way of Cure by
suffumigation. I come now to relate something of his Cure by Unction, and
because Mercurial Cerecloths and Emplaisters are affine, or of the same nature
with the unguent, we must give you some account of them also, as this Author
practiced in those days. Cerat. mercurial.
The Cere-cloth was this. R. pingued. suis xij. argent. vivi viij. styracis,
Theriac. an j. misce and cum cera and resina pini f. ceratum. And this was
spread upon linen, and laid on, from the knees downward so to continue for the
space of 8. or 9. days. And sometimes the Cere-cloath was applied to all the
joints, both of Legs and Arms, and were changed every three days, (three times)
and a new one were laid on. And every Morning he gave j. Pil. Alexandri, to
carry the Flux of humors downward, but our Author says these were an uncertain
way of Cure; and for one that recovered, ten failed under this means, and were
deceived in their expectation. Wherefore he deserted this way.

Curandi modus per unctionem.
But he rather approves of the V;nction, for which purpose this was much in use
then: R. axung. suill. neque recent. neque antiq. lib. j. butyri recent. iij.
Theriacae quae sit in decimo anno jss. mitridati j. argent. vivi ijss. cinnab.
ss. lythargir. aur. salis com. ana j. masticles colophon. ana v. ol. laurin. q.
s. misce f. unguent. Several other mercurial Ointments there were, but this is
as good as any of the rest; and this shall suffice at present. About the
Unction practicers did then differ: some anointed from the knee downward, and
from the elbow downward; and that twice a day: but Brassavolus anointed but
once a day, in the Mornings; from the hip downwards, and from the shoulders to
the fingers ends, rubbing it in before the fire: and this he did for nine days
together every Morning; and then also he gave Pil. Alexand. j. every day during
the use of the unguent; which sometimes was continued to the tenth or twelfth
day, if good signs did not appear before. After the Ointment used, they were
put to bed, covered warm to procure sweat; and after three hours they rose and
eat. When their mouths began to be sore, they used this gargarism: R. hord.
fol. plantag. myrtill. aq. font. q. s. f. decoctio; Gargarismus.
to this was added mel. rosar. and sometimes a little Alum: but if they did not
salivate well and freely, then this they gargled with. R. caricar pussular.
sebeslen. an^ ss. bulliant in aq. postea add mell. rosat. f. gargar.

The day after the last Unction (our Author says) he caused them to be washed,
their Arms and Legs in white Wine, wherein Roses had boiled; and the day after
that, they went into a Bath, made thus:

R. salviae, Balneum.
menthae, rosmar. ros. rub. flor. Chamomelli staecados, melilot. fol. lauri,
rutae puleg. Calament. hyssop. art mis. absinth. ivae. ana M. iij. misce
bulliant in sufficienti quant. aq. This being put into a convenient tub; they
went in and bathed to cleanse the skin from the Unction. And I must acquaint vou
also, that during the time of Unction this lineament was used to defend the
heart. R. ol. de citrangulis iij. boli armen. sigillat. ana j. Theriacae ss.
misce. With which the region of the heart was anointed; and after this a
Cordial Epithema was applied, of these ingredients.

R. aq. rosar. citrangulor. Epithema.
melissae ana iij. galliae moschat. cort. citrior. ana ss. caryophill. cinnam.
ana ij. aceti j. vini cretici ij. musci, ambracani ana gr. ij. croci gr. vi.
misce. A Cloth way dipped in this, and applied to the region of the heart.

Before Dinner and Supper, he gave his Patients the quantity of a Hasel Nut of
this Cordial Electuary. Electuar. Cardias.
R. Zuccari rosat. boraginat. ana ij. laetificant. Almansor. diamusci dull. ana
jss. theriacae mag. j. boli armen. terrae sigillat. ana j. misce and cum sir.
de cort. citri f. Electuar.

And if Patients be very weak, he advises to give this following restaurative.
R. pulpae capon. vel phasianor. vj. nucleor. pineor. pistach. amygdal. dull. ana
iij. cinnam. gingib. garyophil. ana j. musci gr. ij. ambracani gr. iij. misce
cum Zucchar. q. s. and fiant morselli. Each weighing half an Ounce; one of
which was to be taken every Morning before Dinner, and also one before Supper.

And now I have given you the heads and chief matter of Musa Brassavolus his
practice in the Cure of this Disease. I might here have showed you the
Medicines and methods of other Italians, as Montanus, Fallopius, and others;
but I pass on to the practice of other Countries.

CHAP. XIII.
The German Practice for Curing the Pox.

ULrichus de Hutten being the first amongst the Germans that writ upon this
Disease, we shall take an account from him of their manner of Cure, and what
was most considerable to be noted there in his time. Germaniae praxis ad Luem
Veneream.
When this Lues came into Germany, the Physicians were very much puzzled and
knew not well what to do; the Surgeons also pressed in to give what
assistance they could: and at first they applied causticks to the Scabs; but
afterward bethought of Unguents; but they which did not admix argent. Viv.
therewith, the effect was inconsiderable. The ingredients of which their
Unguents were made were these.

Myrrha, mastiche, cerussa, bacc. laur. alumen, bol. armen. cinnab. minium,
coral. sal. ust. virid. aeris, scor. plumb. plumb. ust. rubigo ferrii, resin.
vulgar. Terebinth. ol. laurin. rosat. Juniperin. nardin. adipe^ s^ill. anserin.
ursin. human. butyr. maiai. m^dull. cervi, sevum hircin. cervin. mel. rosat.
ol, lumbricor. camp^^ora, euphorb. castor. Out of these, Curatio per unctionem.
several Ointments were made, according to every ones particular fancy; and
with these they anointed the joints of the Arms and Legs: and some down the
Spine also: others the Temples and the Navel also: and some anointed the whole
body; and this Unction was performed, sometimes once, twice, thrice, or four
times a day, in a hot House, where their Bed was, and they laid therein
presently after to sweat; in this hot Stove they continued some twenty days,
some thirty, and some longer, sweating every day. These Unctions workt so
severely upon some, that their Teeth dropped out; but at best their mouths were
all very sore and raw, their gums swelled, teeth loose, and drivelling at the
mouth continually, with a grievous stink, that the smell of it was enough to
infect a sound body (says our Author) and this way of Cure was so terrible,
that some chose rather to dye than undergo it: and few that did suffer this
severe course were Cured, for they relapsed again in a short time, and our
Author says of himself, that he underwent this course of Unction eleven times
before he was Cured. For Ulcers that did proceed from this Disease he used an
Unguent, ex alumine, virid. aeris m^llis and aceto part. aequal. this was a
chastising Medicine indeed: but afterward he used aq. calcis viv. which did
not cause so many wry faces.

This Author continued not long in his first way of practice, being hazardous,
dolorous, and insuccessful; but hearing of a more gentle remedy brought from
Hispaniola by a Spanish Officer, that also had been Cured therewith, which was
guajacum; he applied himself to the use of this, and gives great commendations
thereof upon the experiment. The description of this Vegetable I need not set
down, being no strange thing now a days. And for the manner of its use, and the
preparation thereof according to this Author, was thus.

R. scob. lig. guajac. lib. 1. aq. com. lib. viii. diem and noctem macerant.
dein. coq. in olla vitreata nova, Decoct. guajac.
lento calore horis sex colat. servetur ad usum. This was the first decoction:
and then he put eight pound of water more to the residue and boiled it over
again, for a second decoction. Modus exhibendi decoct.
The Patient was to take a draught of about half a Pint of the first decoction
in the Morning early in Bed; and likewise at night as much in Bed; for drink at
meat the second decoction served, or at any other time to satisfy thirst. And
this course was continued for thirty days, in which time a purge was given once
in six or seven days. And for Ulcers or Pustuls externally. Unguent. alb.
Camphorat. was applied: this was very plain doing, and the chief of this
Authors designments to oppose this grand malady. But after him, another German
appears publicly and gives the World an account of his practice against this
Lues. The chief whereof is as follows.

Joannes Benedictus a German Doctor, Joann. Bened. praxis.
seems more methodically and artificially to oppose this Disease than the
former; Septem intentiones curatinae in morb. gal.
and in his institution for Cure, proposes several intentions or scopes to aim
at for a complete prosecution against this Disease.

Per lenitionem ventris, by lubrifying and opening the belly. Per minorationem
materiae, by abating the morbific matter. Per digestionem, by preparing the
matter (but this ought rather to have been second, if any such intention be
necessary.) Per evacuationem ipsius, by evacuating and sending it forth. Per
alterationem membrorum, by taking of the impressions upon the parts. Per
confortationem eorundem, by fortifying and cherishing the parts. Per
correctionem accidentium, by checking concomitant symptoms.
To answer the first intention, an emollient Clyster was appointed which was
this: R. fol. maluae, mercurialis, Clyster emollient.
fumiter. ana M. 1. violar. M. ss. f. decoct. colat. lib. sss. add ol. violat.
iij. Zucchar. rub. j. vitell. j. ovi, salis com. jss. and interdum cassiae j.
aut electuar. lenit. ss. f. Clyster. And this was to be taken in the Morning
fasting, or else a Bolus of Sugar and Cassia mixed with half an Ounce of
Electuary Lenitive, or it might be dissolved in fumiterry water, and made a
Potion; to be taken an hour before Dinner; but I doubt they would have no great
stomach to eat so soon after their Physic.

To prosecute the second intention, this preparation was made. R. electuar.
lenitivi j. Confec. hamech presertim in materia melancholica adusta; aut
electuar. Indi major. jss. Zucchar. fini q. s. f. bolus: Bolus.
or else this was dissolved in decoction, flor. and fruct. q. s. with a dram of
sena and epithymum added, to be taken in the Morning: but those who desired
Pills rather, were appointed their Doses of Pil. de fumoter. and faeticiar. ana
j. this was made up into five Pills with mel. rosat. to be taken after Supper.
This was a lusty dose to sleep upon, and they had wide throats in that Country,
else those Pills would not go down; after this they caused the Haemorrhoids to
bleed, and erit presentissimum remedium huic dispositioni and similibus, says
our Author.

Potio digestiva.
To satisfy the third intention. R. sir. de fumoterr. buglossi simp.
geneneliabin (which word I know not what to make of) cum Zuccharo ana j. aq.
endiviae, lupulor. cichor. ana j. f. potio. to be taken for five days together,
or longer until digestion did appear in the Urine. And not only inward
digestives (says our Author) but outward digestives also are necessary, as
Unguents, Embrocations, and Emplaisters; his Unguent was this. R. butyr. iij.
axung. porcin. inter recent. and antiquam lib. 1. theriacae bonae jss.
mithridati j. argent. viv. ijss. litarg. aur. salis com. ana j. misce f.
unguent; Remedium secretissimum and perfectissimum Joan. Benedict.
incorporating with it as much Fumiterry and Scabios Water as it would receive
(which would be little or none) and this is the most secret and most exact
Medicine for outward application in this Disease (says my Copy) and here
Mercury is extolled to the Skies, being used in Unguent, Mercurii Laus.
and if at any time ill effects happen up (...) Mercurial Unction: hoc fit
errore empyricorum, says this Author. But how this Unguent can properly be
called a digestive; and whether the effect of this which must be salivation,
will not disturb his methodical course and put him by the stages he has
prefixed, may very justly be questioned; but I must not comment nor argue the
point now. And for people of great quality and the richer sort, that would not
endure the Unction; he gave them sir. de pomis Comp. Mesues, Syrupus mirabilis.
but made after his own manner or way; with which he perfected the whole Cure,
and non vidi rem mirabiliorem says the Author; and truly had I been there to
have seen such Cures wrought with that poor Medicine, I should be wrapped up in
admiration too; but factum meo modo (the Authors words) was that which gave the
efficacy to work these great effects; which manner of preparation he tells us
not, but you must imagine it was magical.

To perform the fourth intention, his Medicines are of two sorts; for the poor,
and for the rich; the Poor Medicines we shall pass by; that for people of
ability is this: R. flor. borag. bugloss. violar. epithymiana ss. mirabolanor.
citrin. and nigror. senae ana j. polipod. quercin ss. bulliant in aq. bugloss.
and scabios. ana q s f. decoctio s. a. de qua recipe iij. infund. rheubarb
elect. j. spicae gr. iij agarici trochiscat. ij. stent per octo horas in
infusione, tandem fiat expressio, cui addantur, Electuar. de Cassia vj.
electuar. Indi confec. hamech ana jss. misce f. potio; to be taken in the
Morning early (just such brave Medicines as these we have recorded upon the
Files in Apothecaries Shops) after the Medicine had operated, Difficile est
satyram non scribere.
a lenitive of four Ounces of Chicken broth sweetened with Sugar, was to be
taken, or as much Barley Water, with an Ounce of Sugar in it, to wash down the
relicts of the Medicine: but I doubt this would not quicken the Patients
Stomach for Dinner.

To effect the fifth intention, bathing was appointed with this decoction. R.
fumiterr. lapat. acut. bismal. Camomill. melilot. ros. violar. q. s. coq. in
aq. com. f. balneum. When they began to sweat, this Medicine was to be taken.
R. rad. diptani, beton. ana j. altheae enulae, scabios. fumiter. lupulor.
lapat. ana lib. ss. torment. j. incidantur minutim, and ponantur in lib. iiij.
vini malvatici ad remolliendum, per diem and noctem unam; postea adatur
thiriacae veteris xii. aut xi. annor. jss. ponatur ad alimbic. and destilletur
aqua (I write after my Copy) and this Medicine he thus extolls. Obtinet in hoc
morbo principatum inter intrinsecus juvantia. Of this three Ounces must be
given at a time in two Ounces of Balm Water.

To satisfy the sixth intention, our Author proposes that himself practiced;
and recommends laetificans Gal. electuar. Gentilis, with this Elogium;
clarificant mirabiliter spiritus and sanguinem; and restaurant confortando
omnia nutritiva membra. And these super-excellent Medicaments were to be taken
thus. R. de altero eorum j. Zucchar. violat. buglossat. ana jss. sem. citri ss.
smaragd. j. and cum sir. de pomis f. mixtura. Of this the Patient is to drink a
spoonful four hours before Dinner, and after it a little while Wine mixed with
Balm or Rose Water. for this intention also were prepared and used sacculi and
epithemata cordialia; and because sometimes their mouths were Ulcerated and
tender, a Pasta regalis was prepared for them after this manner. R. carn.
capon. been coct. vi. carn. perdicum coct. iij. passular. fisticor. amygdal.
mundat. pinear. collect. in aq. tepid. ana ij. pull. diatrag. acanth. frig.
cinnam. elect. ana ij. Zucchar. finissimi in aq. flor. violar. q. s. f. pasta.
Pasta regalis.
Of this our Author appoints cochlear unum to be taken an hour before Dinner.
Excellent contrivances!

The seventh and last intention consist of many parts, and applies variously to
several purposes: first to allay and mitigate pains, a frequent attendant upon
this Disease; for which this Electuary invented by Dom. de Raggosa, is
commended as an approved remedy: Electuar. ad sedand. dolorem.
R. Juniperi, piper. long. anisi ana j. ambrae ss. pulp. cassiae ij. turbith,
euphorb. ana iij. hermodact. j. Zucchar. rosat. jss. cinnam. j. coagul. haedi
jss. misce in forma electuarii. And this to assuage pains is mirabiliter
rabiliter valens; the dose a dram or two; then our Author comments upon every
ingredient of the Medicine, showing their propriety and fitness for this
purpose; so learnedly, that you would never forget him, if you understand the
intrigue and sophistry of Physic. After this you are to use an Unguent; for a
hot cause this: Unguent anodyn.
R. pingued. pulli and anatis, butyri, adipis porci recent. cerae alb. ana ss.
ol. camomill. aneth. amygdal. dull. ana ss. mucil^g. altheae and sem. lini and
faenigr. ana ij. misce f. unguent. with which the parts pained are to be
anointed: but if a cold cause; then this: Aliud.
R. succi rad. urticae, ebuli, herb. gatia dei ana lib. ss. axung. catti,
ursae, vulpis aut porcin. vij. cerae iiij. misce f. unguent.

For Pustuls this Unguent was used. Pro Pustulis.
R. resinae mundae. iij. cerussae vj. alumin. ust. argent. viv. extinct.
litargir. ana ij. thuris alb. j. cum ol. com. f. unguent.

Aqua ad fistulas and ulcera maligna.
For Fistula's and malign Ulcers this. R. succ. salviae ss. succ. celidon. j.
succ. assodillor, ij. succi agrimon: iij. sublimat. ij. salis ammoniac. and
commun. ana iij. flor. aeris, alumin. roch. ana jss. aq. vitae x. bulliant
simul ad consump. medietat. succor. then it is fit for use. Which Water says
our Author. Omnem fistulam interficit.

For hard nodes or gums caused by the Pox, appearing on the Forehaed, Shins,
Arms, or other parts; this Unguent was thought most proper. R. mucilag. sem.
lini, altheae ana ij. ol. de spica, amygdalar, camomill. ana ss. butyri j.
pingued. ursi. ss. gum. arab. tragacanth. ana j. cum cera f. unguent. this is
emollient and resolutive. And thus much is sufficient to let you understand the
several ways and means used against this Disease, by eminent Physicians in
Germany.

CHAP. XIV.
The Spanish Practice, and Methods of Cure for the Pox.

TO give you the best account of the several Modes and Medicines practiced in
Spain for this Disease; I consulted Joannes Almenar, Joan. Almenar.
and Aloysius Lobera, two Spanish Doctors: but upon examining the first, I
found him to tread in the steps of Benedictus the foregoing Author; and his
Treatise to contain little else, but what you have in the other. Aloysius
Lobera.
As for Lobera he is very short in his writings, which affords little of
variety from what you have had: therefore I shall pass him by too, and come to
Mercatus the most copious and best Author of that Nation; and were he not
planted upon galenic Principles, and his judgment overruled by that Doctrine
(which of necessity runs him into many errors) he had been an excellent guide
in practice: but take him as he is, he excells many; and a wary man that can
pick and choose, may make some good use of him.

Ludovicus Mercatus, Ludovic. Mercatus.
chief Physician to two Kings of Spain, and of the greatest esteem for ability
in his Country; institutes the Cure of this Lues after this manner: first he
bleeds; then he prepares the body for purgation: this preparation was of two
sorts; the one to respect the temperament of the body, whether Choleric,
Phlegmatic or Melancholic: the other to aim at the Venereal Contagion, lodged
in the predominant humor (this seems a very plausible designment) and to
prosecute this projection, he advises to mix alexipharmacums with the other
preparatives appointed for the humor denominating the constitution: and
therefore he adds theriacae modicum vel mithridati, to the several preparitive
syrups, and potions; and sometimes he gives the Patient overnight, theriacae
vel mithrid. ss. dissolved in aq. lig. guajac. Chinae, Spartae, Juniperi aut
rad. carlin. and next Morning the other preparative Potion; which course was to
be continued until the humor was made gentle and obedient, the body fluid and
fit for purgation.

Bilious humors he prepares with such as refrigerate and humects; and appoints
for this purpose, Bilem preparantia.
sir. borag. cichor. de soncho, rosat. aq. hord. and such like.

Phlegmatic. bodies he prepares with mel rosat. Pituitam prepar.
oximel simp. de 5. radicibus cum vel sine aceto; and if the Head be affected,
sir. de staechad; if the Stomach, sir. de mentha, or de absinth. and these to
be mixed with the Decoctions, anisi, faenic. dauci, spartae, guajac. chamaepyt.
scord. and such like.

Melancholy temperaments, Melanchol. prepar.
that being the most difficult humor, requires the longest preparation, which
is to be performed (says our Author) with sir. borag. lupulor. cappar. fumar.
capill. Ven. and the decoctions of such like.

After preparation comes in purgation; and this to be stronger or weaker, as
the body shall best require; and also to be adapted to the particular
temperament.

For Choloric bodies, and such as are more tender and weak, he appoints the
infusion of Rheubarb, with Syrup of the same: but for robust and strong bodies,
he orders Electuar. Bilem purg.
de succo rosar. iij. vel iiij cum pulp. cassiae fistulae in bolis, or
dissolved in a proper decoction: and for change, Pil. agregat. or Pil. ex aloe,
rhubarb. and agar.

Pituitam purg.
For bodies that abound with Phlegm, he advises to Sir. rosar. cum agar. with
vj. of Catholicon. or Electuar. diacarthami; or diaphaenicon more efficacious
than that: also Electuar. indum majus and minus: and for change, Pil. cochiae,
saetidae, Pil. Arabicae, or de agarico.

To purge Melancholy being contumacious, requireds more vehement Medicines, si
vires tulerint: if otherwise, then you are to repeat the more often with the
same Medicines, but in lesser quantity. (I write after my Author in Galenic
language, not my own sense or phrase) and first here you are to give Sir. ex
insus. rosar. persicar. and fol. senae consect. Mclancholiam purg.
Afterward you may ascend to Consect. hamech; and some give Medicines ex
ellebor. vel lapid. lazuli.

After purgation is finished, he comes to treat of the grand remedies peculiar
for this Disease; as Sweating, Unction, and Suffumigation.

Before Sweating Phlehotomy was to precede twice or thrice; and such bodies as
could not allow of bleeding twice, was judged not fit for sweating. After
Phlebotomy purgation was performed once or twice; then followed sweating:
Curatio per sudationem.
if the person was weak not well able to bear the operation, it was performed
but every third day, and the intermitting days was appointed for refection by
restauratives and Cordials: but if humors were gross and viscous, and thereby
unfit for transpiration; then some incisive and attenuating Medicine was given
overnight, as Sir. sumar. ve oximel. aut de radicibus, with a small quantity of
the decoction: and next Morning the Sudorific Potion was to be taken: and if
the body was unapt for sweating, from the density of the skin, and solidity of
the flesh, (says our Author) then assistance was given, by applying of Bottles
filled with hot Water, or some attenuating decoction, to the soles of the Feet,
Hips, or under the Arms: or else hot Tiles sprinkled with Wine laid to the
same places.

The Decoction for Sweating was simple or compound: the simple had only respect
to the Venereal Lues: the compound decoction was various pro re nata respecting
complicated affects; the simple decoction was this: Decoct. guajac. simplex.
R. interioris lign. guajac. rasi lib. s^. aq. com. lib. xvj. coq. donec tres
parts absumantur. and ante integram coctionem add liquirit. modicum, sem.
citri, saenic, rad. acetos. ana j. colat. servetur, and this was for the
stronger and robust bodies. But for tender Bodies and Women, this Decoction
more precious was appointed. R. interioris guajac. subtle. ras. lib. jss. aq.
bugloss. borag. and artheticae per instillat. extract. ana lib. v. sem. senit.
ss. cinnam. ij. madescant and calefiant leviter per horas quadraginta, and
postea facta colatura usui adserva; and moreove he says, that the ordinary
Physicians vulgares Medici, did prepare the guajacin Decoction with Wine,
giving it little boiling, because the Wine being of more subtle parts and
penetrating, did sooner receive the virtue and strength of the guajacum.

The compound Decoction was adapted peculiarly to special Cases; as when there
was a Venereal Podagra, hermodact. and iva arthetic. were added to the
Decoction: Decoct. comp.
if a Parlysis, then salvia, majoran. staechas, anisum and saenic. In affects
of the Liver, agrimon. rad. diuretic. and cichor, hordeum and rosae. If the
Spleen complained, then scolo pend. borrag. lupul. but for the Stomach,
absynth, mentha, spic. nard. And if the Breast was ill affected, the was added
Card. sanct. rad. quinquefoll, Jujub. prun. damascen. passull. sine granis,
capill. ven. liquirit, and if the skin were affected, then sumar. went in.
Other Decoctions there were in use then, of Sparta parella (so called by our
Author) and China singly used; as also Decoctions of guajac. sparta parell and
China together; and sometimes to these ingredients were added Vipers.

The Patient being in Bed was to take six or seven Ounces of some of the
foresaid Decoctions, and lie to sweat for two or three hours and not longer;
then to be wipt with warm Cloths, and laid in a dry place of the Bed for an
hour at least before any food was given; and then the yolks of two Eggs, with
Raisins, Almonds, and Biscuit was appointed; and to some a roast Chicken, or the
half of it, was allowed: and to keep up the Patients strength after sweating,
as also to impugn the Disease; this Cordial Water was administered

Aqua Cardiac. Mirab. contrae Luem Veneream.
R. sol. salviae, menthae, majoran. rutae, hyssop. origan. summit. beton. ana
M. 1. contrita omnia in vase recond. in loco calid. and desuper obrue aq. card.
bened. and quotidie agitentur, ne acescant. post 6. aut 8. diesd abject a
residentia, expressus and colatus humor servetur: rursus excipe sol. plantag.
calend. meliss. verbasci, hyper. centaur. min. pimpinell. ana M. ij. his post
quatridui macerationem and expressionem abjectis; rursus accipies scord. mors.
diabol. faenic. petrosel. buglosel. buglos. borag. ana M. 1. angelicae parum,
quibus dies totidem maceratis, expressis and abjectis* recipe rad. angel.
dictam. tormentil. beton. Zedoar. ana ss. rad. cyper. iij. nucis moschat.
caryophal. ana j. sem. saenic. citri, acetos. card. bened. bacc. Junip. ana ij.
ras. ebor. C. Cer. lig. aloes, santal. citrin. cinnam. ana j. croci ss.
praedictum pulverem expresso liquore commiscebis mithridati selectissimi lib.
ss. thereiac. veter. ss. and in alembic. vitrco projicies, and junii ardoribus
sex octove dies expones, donce serveant and perfect fermentantur, tandem fiat
instillatio lento igne in duplici vase. This Cordial Water our Author says,
does wonderfully eradincate the maligh relicts of this Disease out of the
flesh. (It had need to be a good one, for it is troublesome enough to make) to
be taken a spoonful at a time, twice a day, during the use of the Sudorific
Decoctions. But in case this course was not successful, then they betook
themselves to the Mercurial Unction, as the only refuge; and some Physicians
there were, that only used the Unction, and accounted it the most certain way
of Cure.

Curatio per hydrargyrum.
Mercury by the general consent of Physicians is that which is chief, and gives
the efficacy to this way of Cure by Unction; although it is not denied by the
most, but that it is endowed with malign properties, and the use thereof to be
dangerous; at least not so secure a remedy, to be commanded at the Physicians
pleasure; but I shall not dispute the matter here concerning the nature of
Mercury, or argent. vive; our discourse now being historical, not controversal,
giving you in brief the sense of this Author and his methods of Cure for this
Disease, with the manner of practice most used in Spain. He reckons up the good
effects procured by this Mineral; but withal gives caution that it be warily
used: Inter omnia haec bona, quibus prudenter and a perito artifice praestitum
abundat; adeo perniciosae est naturea, ut si indistincte aut temere alicui
adhibeatur, sacile gravissima mala and mortem accersat, ita, ut veteribus jure
optimo inter venera habitum reperiamus, says Mercatus; Lib. de morb. eal. Cap.
xi.
therefore this is not fit for every Emperick to practice with, as commonly
they do, to the detriment and prejudice of many people.

He advises that before the use of Mercurial Unction, Corporis praeparatio
debita ante unctionem.
the body be well prepared, according to the different temperament thereof, as
before delivered; as also that the purging and sudorific apozem may be
premitted and continued for 15. or 20. days before: which being performed,
Mercurial Unguent he appoints to be used thus: The first Morning the Feet,
Parts in unguendae quae,
Thighs, and Arms only are to be anointed before the fire: the second day, the
Spine of the back up to the Shoulders, but not the Neck or Head, nor the
forepart of the Breast: and every day was to expend an Ounce of the Unguent, or
at most jss. After Unction the Patient was covered up to sweat about half an
hour or an hour, In unctio quoties adhibenda.
and this Unction might be continued 3, 4, 5, or 6. days together, as was
thought requisite for each condition of body. If the salivation be copious, it
is not to be suppressed, sed vires roborandae sunt, that the Patient may be able
to hold out: but if otherwise, the evacuation be slow and little; the every
day, or every third day, a sudorific Potion might be given, or a guajacin.
Purgative, to carry of the humors raised by the Unction.

Mercurial Unguents to perform this operation were various; juxta corporum and
naturarum varietatem; but in all the argent. vive ought well to be prepared;
that more safely, and in greater quantity it might he used. Our Author advises
thus: Hydrarg. praep.
Hydargirum primo aequis succi salvias and aceti partibus maceretur, dei^de
sublimati, momentum adjicito, diu agitando, tandem finito, ut abjecto
inquinamento, sincerum relinquatur. I leave this to the consideration of
Artists, whether it be a good preparation. The fat also which makes the body of
the Unguents he appoints to be prepared thus: Axungiae praeparatio.
R. salviae, beton. staechad. origan. menthae, samsuchi, rorismar. chamemel.
and lauri ana p. 1. rad. calam. aromat. baccar. laur. and Junip. ana ss. aq.
vitae lib. 1. succi salviae ebuli ana lib. ss. axungiae suill. suill. recent.
lib. iiij. These were to boil together to the Consumption of the juices and
water, then the fat was to be strained out for use. This being premitted the
Unguents were made as follows.

Unguent pro naturis frigidis.
R. argent. viv. praeparat. ij. axung. porcin. praep. unguent. marciat. and
dialtheae ana iij. ol. mastich. de theriaca and de lauro ana j. thuris and
mastichis q. s. ut fiat linimentum, this is commended as most proper for cold
constitutions.

Fro calidis corporibus.
But for hot natures this: R. butyri sine sale, ol. rosar. adipis haedi
lactantis lib. ss. argent. viv. praep. iij. f. unguent.

But above all other Unguents which Mercatus could meet with and prove by trial
for this purpose, he prefers this following as most excellent and secure, that
Consumptive persons and Children may safely undergo the use of it. Unguent
Mercurial. mitissimum and securissimum.
R. pingued. porci pluries aq. fumariae ablut. lib. ij. butyr. vaccin. recent.
aq. vit. and fumar. ablut. ix. axung. anatis, gallinae and anseris saepius
praedicta aq. lot. ana ijss. pingued. ursi, equi, hominis ana iijss. pingued.
serpent. ij. pingued, taxi j. dialtheae lib. ss. theriac. Andromach. iiij. ol.
lavendul. ss. theriac. Andromach. iiij. ol. lavendul. ijss. ol. hypericon and
laurini ana jss. Unguent. agripae, Arragon. and marciat. ana iiij. pull.
masticis sandarac. and thuris ana vij. pull. lig. aloes, macis, cinnam.
caryophil. ana iiij. pull. staechad. majoran. salviae ana vij. pull. rad.
smilacis asper. jss. pull. visc. quercin. and rosmarin. ana vij. euphorb. praep.
cum succo limon. and succ. citri and granor. ^jous, ol. violar. and amygdal.
dull. xi. postea addatur argent. viv. extinct. cum saliva hominis, gummi, succo
limon. and ol. violat vel cum dialthea (pro pueris and hecticis corporibus)
iij. pro reliquis vero vi. and fiat unguentum. This, our Author says, may be
used freely as the most gentle and safest unguent for the Venereal Disease. But
this is not for every body to make, not easy to procure the ingredients: you
that will purchase it must bestow pains and cost about it.

But in case this Disease be so deeply radicated and fixed in the body (says
Mercatus) that neither Sudorific nor Mercurial Medicines can remove, although
some mitigation and abatement may be made; yet relicts ofter remain behind,
either from the insufficiency of the means, or insufficient use thereof; as
when Patients through weakness cannot endure long enough, or through timidity
will not: in such Cases he proposes and commends from his own experience some
Medicines to clear the body from the remainders that may cause a recidivation
and relapse into the former state: for which purpose he appoints this Apozem
among the rest.

R. spartae parellae, Apozema ad reliquias morb. gal. conterendas.
rad. Chinae, polipod. passular. rad. cichor. ana j. plantag. agrimon. borag.
fumar. cetrach. scolopend. scariolae, pimpinell. calend. ana M. 1. sem. frig.
may. and faenic. ana jss. ras. ebor. and C. Cer. ana j. sem. citri, Card. and
torment. ana iiij. fol. sennae jss. coq. ad lib. 1. in colat. dissolve Sir. de
succo acetos. de limon. and violar. ana jss. f. apozema. Of which four Ounces
was de dose once a day. But our Author did forget to set down what liquor the
decoction should be made with; Wine or Water you that have a mind to make it,
may take which you think best. This Apozem he commends much, ad reliquias
conterendas, and that it has took effect where argent. viv. and sudorificks
could not prevail.

To the same intent and purpose he has designed and commends this
distillation. Aqua stillat. pro conterendis reliquiis.
R. theriac. antiq. lib. ss. rad. elenii, caudae equin. ana iiij. ciclaminis
iij. card. hened. cardiacae, salviae ana M. 1. ivae arthetic. M. jss. rad.
ebuli and lilior. ana ss. pimpinell. eupator. fumar. aceto s. beton. scabios.
ana p. ij. capill. ven. flor. cordial. ana p. 1. lig. guajac. and cort. ejusd.
macerat. per diem in lib. iiij. hydromelitis ana lib. 1. ponantur omnia in vase
vitreo and destillentur; the dose of this is from iij. to iiij. And that aq.
Cardiaca before mentioned, which our Author affirms mirum in modum exstirpare
reliquias hujus mali, may be made use of here for the purpose in hand, which is
his advice.

And that you may not want variety of Medicines, and various forms of Medicines
he commends these Pills also for eradication: Pilulae ad reliquias conterendas.
and they are made ex succo marrubii aut salviae, and Pull. spartae parill. and
fol. sennae. And if the Patient be strong, the Powder may be admixed with
succus ebuli, or ireos cum modica conserva borag. aut violar. But these will
not make up into Pills; our Authors speculations in Pharmacy did deceive him; I
wish it were but once so.

For the robust and courser sort of people peritus and prudens medicus (he
says) may give these. R. pull. praecipitati macerat. biduo in aquis
refrigerantibus ac rursus in cardiacis j. pull. electuar. tria santalor. ss.
rhubarb. elect. j. mithridat. opt. conser. bugloss. pull. rosar. mastycis ana
ss. subigantur simul cum mucag. tragacanth. extr. in aq. rosar. f. massa. The
dose is a scruple made into three Pills, but before the taking of them the
Patient must drink a draught of fat broth made with Veal, Chicken, Sorrel, and
Purslane.

More Medicine this Author proposes to prosecute this design with ad reliquias
conterendas, but these being as good as the rest, shall suffice for all. And
now I have run through, and showed you the best of Mercatus his practice
against this Lues; which you may account as the best that Spain affords: he
being the most eminent and approved Physician of that Nation. I come now to
give you an account of the Practice used in France for this Disease.

CHAP. XV.
The French Modes, or Methods of Curing the Pox.

FOR exemplars of the French Practice in this Disease, we shall apply first to
Rondeletius, sometime Regius Professor at the University of Montpelier; a
Physician of note in the World, by his writings not only upon this Lues, but
also concerning diverse other subjects in Physic: from him we shall collect a
methodical course of Medicines most esteemed by him; which may be accounted the
best Galenic practice then used in France.

In the beginning of this Disease, Gulielm. Rondelet. praxis.
and the body plethorick, or very sanguine he proceeds thus. First, he gives a
minorative potion. R. sir. ros. solut. ij. decoctionis mercurial. iij. misce,
or instead of this, Cassi^ cum cathol. in forma boli, the next day he appoints
the Patient to bleed if no common contra. indication prohibit; to which he
adds pains of the head and joints to interdict also. The quantity of blood to
be let out is iij. or iiij. the first day; Sanguinis missio.
but the day after vj. or vij. more; and he says that this Lues is to be cured
ut lassitudo, in which lassitude Galen iterates sanguimission ad animi usque
deliquium. But our Author is something more moderate than his Master, and
proceeds no farther than quantum vires far poterunt. After this he institutes
purgation, and that must be large or frequent, with Apozems and compound Syrups
to carry off serous and phlegmatic humors; such as Sir. de fumar. comp. and de
epithymo, and they were to be given in Whey, or decoction of Mercury and
Borrage, or this Syrup.

R. cichor. endiviae, Syrupus.
scariol. lupul. fumiterr. acetos. capil. ven. ana M. 1. brassicae marin. M.
ss. (at si sicca fuerit ponatur ad iij.) prunor. sebesten. passul. ficuum ana
par. 20. anisi iij. sem: cartham. polipod. querc. ana iij. senae orient. iiij.
si brassica sit, sin minus lib. ss. flor. bugloss. borag. ana p. 1. anthos and
chamaemil. ana p. ss. sacchar. q s. s. Syrupus, which was to be continued for
five days, and after the use of this Syrup, a stronger purgative was to be
given, which he calls medicamentum eradicativum, and that must be made up of
Confec. Hamech, e succo rosar, or electuar. diacartham.

The body being thus purged sufficiently, he applies to the materia conjuncta,
which is in the habit of the body, to evacuate that; and if the Disease have
any residence in the head, then he commends masticatories: if in the joints,
then cupping with scarifications (O egregious) if in the fleshy parts, then
sweating makes the best evacuation: and this he procures either by external or
internal means: his external, are Baths, Balnea.
Stoves, Unguents, and Emplasters.

Baths than exsiccate and digest without astriction may cure by continued use
for a considerable time. Where there is pains and Ulcers; Mercurial Baths he
commends: for Ulcers and Scabs; nitrous Baths: but aluminous, for pains of the
joints. Stoves, he says, may cure a slight Pox by their long use. Mercurial
Emplasters perform after the same manner as Unguents; but more by insensible
transpiration and drying then by sweat, (says our Author) for which purpose he
appoints this: R. mass. emplast. de melilot. vel oxycrocei lib. ss. argent.
viv. ij. malaxenter cum terebinth. and ol. laurin. vel irino vel rutac. and
reducantur ad formam cerati. which was to be laid upon such parts of the bod as
the case required.

The Mercurial Unguents for this Disease he appoints thus: Unguent.
R. axung. porci non salit. nec liquefact. lib. 1. ol. chamaemel. and irin. ana
iij. terebinth. and resinae ana ij. cerae parum, argent. viv. extinct. in succo
limon. iij. misce f. unguent. with this the extreme parts, joints, emunctories
and Spine were anointed once or twice a day, in a warm room.

But if Ulcers or Pustuls appear upon the body, then he commends this as most
proper. Linimentum.
R. axung. porci lib. 1. butyri recent. terebinth. lot. in aq. vitae ana ij.
resinae and unguenti ana ^ij. argent. vivi v. thuris, mastichis iridis ana iij.
virid. aeris ij. ol. irini and laurini ana iij. lithargiri aur. j. misce f.
linimentum.

But if Herpes and Scabs appear upon the superficies of the body, then he
advises to this: Linimentum.
R. succi lapatii acuti and limon. ana ij. ol. laurin. j. ol. tartar. ss.
unguent. martiat. jss. argent. vivi, v. cerusae lot. in aq. vitae j resinae and
terebinth. ana iij. f. linimentum s. a. This is to be used as the former: and
after some time strong dryers may be added to the liniment, as Alumen, Sulphur,
Chalcitis; but not at first, lest they constringing the skin do impede
sweating. Unction is to be continued until there be a looseness of the belly,
or the breath begins to stink; then (says he) it is a certain sign the phlegm is
inflamed; then give over Unction and change linen.

Internal Medicines appointed and commended, are decoctions and destillations:
the decoctions were various; some only consisted of guajac and Water, to this
some added purgatives, either Senna, or Agaric, Turbith, Coloquintida, or
others; but our Author does not approve of purging and sweating inredients in
one Medicine, being of contrary operations: yet he sets down this as very
efficatious. R. rasur. lig. guajac. lib. 1. cort. ejusd. iij. agar. j. sennae
orient. lib. 1. aloes quar. j. f. decoctio in lib. vi. aq. bugloss. and
tantundem aq. absinth. ad consumptionem quartae partis. Of which iiij. was to
be taken Morning and Evening.

He tells you also that some practisers give this. R. lig. guajac. lib. 1. rad.
helen. beniovini, santal. omnium, senae orient. ana ij. hermodac. j. colocynth.
iij. f. infusio, deinde decoctio. colatur. add mellis lib. ij. f. syrupus
clarif. and aromat. cum ij. cinnam. ad dend. vini lib. ij.

The decoctions of China were then in use also for the Cure of this Disease,
and were prepared thus. Decoct. Chinae.
R. rad. Chinae in taleolas divis. ij. aq. fontis lib. 12. infund. per horas
12. and decoq. ad consumptionem tertiae partis. And this was given Morning and
Evening to sweat, the quantity of six Ounces, in bed.

After the same manner also, the decoction of sulsaparilla was made and used,
and no other account our Author gives of that.

The distillation commended which is chiefl^ for pains of the head, if any
remain after the general course of Medicines; is this. Destillatio p^o dol^r.
Capitis.
R. Theriac. antiq. lib. ss. rad. elenii, chynae ana iiij. cyclam. vi. lig.
guajac. and cort. ejusd. macerat. per diem in vino alb. lib. ij. ponantur omnia
in vase vitreo and destillentur, s. a. This was to be taken from ij. to iiij.
but the times when, and how long to be continued is not set down. But in case
after all this, if the pain should not quite remove and vanish; then he
advises to this Emplaister. Emplast. ad idem.
R. emplast. divini iiij. ungent de vigo iij. euphorb. ss. argent. vivi ij.
malaxentur cum ol. rutaceo and f. emplastrum; the head being first shaved this
was to be laid on.

Mercurial suffumigations was also practiced then in the Cure of this Disease,
Suffumig. Mercurial.
and our Author acknowledges himself to have used them; to take off pains and
heal running Ulcers that are difficult, and to hasten consolidation; and makes
mention of a notable Cure he performed upon a Nobleman, who before was under
Physicians and Surgeons for six Months at Lions, and could by no means be
cured. Rondeletius says, he Cured him in four days, by this way of
suffumigation; but this course he says, requires a strong body to undergo it,
because it is dangerous.

But notwithstanding he owns this way to be hazardous and fit only for strong
and very moist bodies; yet he undertakes to prescribe a way how it may be
accommodated safely, to the weaker sort, who in vain have tried other courses,
and that is this: the body being purged again and again; masticatories are to
be used for some days, if there be no Ulcer in the mouth; if there be, then
errhina are to be put up the nose; but of what he tells not (and it is no matter)
after this the fume is to be used Morning and Evening thus; Suffumigandi modus
opt.
the Patient lying in Bed, the fuming matter is cast upon hot Coals in a pot at
the Bed side; from whence a Pipe or hollow instrument conveighs the smoke into
the Bed; and if the Patient cannot endure the smoke, he ma lie with his head
out, the Cloths being pressed down close about his neck. The time how long this
is to be continued at once, or how often to be repeated is not appointed: only
in general, pro viribus agrotantis and morbi contumacia, until salivation flow
from the mouth.

The matter of these fumigations were varied as the case required: for allaying
of pains this was thought appropriated: R. Cinnabrii j. styracis Calamit. nucis
moschat. ana iij benioini ss. excipe terebinthina, Suffumig. pro doloribus
sedand.
and fiant trochisci ij. One of these Troches were cast upon the coals at a
time.

For Ulcers this was intended and used as most proper: Suffumig. ad Vlcera.
R. Cinnabrii j. beniovini, styracis, myrrhae, olibani, opopanacis, ana ss.
masticis, macis, thuris, ana ij. excipiantur terebinthina, and fiat
suffumigium. And our Author says, that for Ulcers he added Sandaracha and
Auripigmentum, and chiefly when there were Ulcers of the Lungs, in the Nose, or
other internal parts. And sometimes he added lapis pyrites, because it dries
Ulcers, and mollifies hardness; but in all these Suffumiges, Cinnabar was one
ingredient, and the chief that did the business: and this was not the native
Cinnabar, but factititious, prepared from Mercury or Argent vive and Sulphur.
And this is the chief of what is delivered upon this way of Cure by
Suffumigation, from Rondeletius, who concludes his practice with a great
applause of Argent vive, as the best Antidote and grand remedy against the Pox,
quia quomodocunque administretur, morbum curat; but I am not bound to believe
the Traditions of Authors: those whose faith is larger than their knowledge,
may swallow all that is presented, but the consequents may be fatal and sad.

And now I come to show you the Practice of another famous Physician in France,
that came after Rondeletius almost fifty years; from whom we may collect, what
improvement was made in that time; what new inventions were found out for the
Cure of this Lues; and what establishment there was, or continuation of the
former courses of Physic.

Quercitan, though an Armenian by birth, yet traveling into France, did settle
there and practice; and being diligent in study, and laborious in the Chemical
preparation of Medicines, his name advanced; whereupon the College of
Physician at Paris cast an envious eye upon him, and endeavored to suppress
and blast him, because he did not concur with their old Galenick Doctrine, and
jog on in the common beaten road of Practice; but was industrious to bring
greater repute to the Art of Physic by Chemical and more refined preparation
of Medicines, which they were altogether ignorant of: yet notwithstanding their
opposition and combination to defame and crush him, he became great in despite
of their malicious detractions and plots, and was made one of the Kings
Physicians (though I would not have you deceive your self, to think that Kings
have always the best Physicians to attend them, though this Professor did well
deserve the preferment.)

Joseph Quercitani Consilium.
Quercitan in his counsel for a venereal Patient, advises to leave off the
vulgar Methods of Physic, that began first with a Minorative of Cassia and
Rhubarb, or such like, to cleanse the first region of the body; also to forbear
bleeding, that usually followed the next day after the Minorative; and to lay
aside the preparative Apozems ex decoc. tormentil. polipod. acetos. oxi.
lapath. gramin. asparag. cichor. agrimon. scabios. chamaedr. lupuli, beton.
sem. card. bened. anisi: citrii, flor. genist. calend. borag. bugloss.
staechad. etc. in which were dissolved sir. conservat. citrii, limon. de succo
acetos. de pomis, etc. to prepare, digest, and alter the malignant and peccant
humor. Also instead of purgation, which was performed by the Infusions of
Rhubarb, Sennae, Agarici, additis etiam Confecionibus Hamech, Tripher.
Persicae, Electuar. Ind. major, vel minor. etc. adapted to evacuate gross,
viscous, adust, and malign humors, he substitutes in the room of all this a
Guajacine Decoction as follows.

R. ras. cordis lig. Ind and ras. cort. ejusd. ana iv. sem. card. bened. ss.
ulmariae M. j. flor. de hyper. p. ij. flor. rosmar. p. iij. santal. citrin. ss.
aqua fumar. lupuli ana lib. 4. macerentur per 24 horas ad ignem lentum; Decoct.
guajac. solut.
dein coq. ad unius tertiae consump. colat. clarificat. add sol. Sennae
mundat. iij. macerentur denuo ad ignem lentissim, per duos integros dies,
tandem transcolentur per manicam Hippocrat. dulcorentur and aromatizentur cum
sufficienti quant. sacchar. and cinnam.

He Appoints the Patient to take of this Decoction iij. or iv. in the morning
three hours before dinner; and to continue it for fifteen or twenty days at
least. After this is done, he comes to the use of this specific Hydrotick, as
he calls it.

R. ras. ligni. Ind. vj. salsae parill. lib. ss. sassaffr. iv. rad. petasit.
filicis ana ij. cinnam. caryophill. ana ss. macerentur per 24 horas in lib. 12.
hydromelit. simp. dein coq. ad medietatis consumptionem; Decoct. hydrotic.
and toward the end of the Decoction a linen Nodulus is to be put in, wherein
is ss. Mercur. ex Cinnab. extract. atque calcinat. and rursus in pulverem
redact. per odorem sir. sulphuris, which does wonderfully add to the virtue of
the Medicine, says our Author.

This was to be taken pretty hot vj. or vij. at four or five of the Clock in
the morning in bed, and sleep after it: but before this Potion, the Patient
must take of this Confection the quantity of a big Hasel-nut. R. conser. flor.
cichor. bugloss. j. rorismarin. ss. Theriac. Alexandrin. iss. confect. Alcherm.
and de Hyacinth. ana ijss. Diacoral. Diatriasant. Diambr. and Diamosch. dulc.
ana j. lap. Bezoard. j. C. Cer. praep. Margarit. praep. ana iv. cum syrup.
conser Citri fiat Opiat. to be used as aforesaid.

And during the time of this Hydrotic Decoction, a strict Diet is to be used:
for bread only Biscuit, but one sort of meat, and that roasted: and for drink, a
decoction of Salsa parill. Chinae and lign. rosarum, Diaeta.
sweetened with Sugar and Cinnamon; this strict course was to be observed for
25. or 30. days at least, during which time if the body be costive, Clysters
are often to be given to lubrify the belly; and every fifth day a gentle Purge
to be administered, and the Hydrotic to be omitted that day. And this is the sum
of his Guajacin, and Sudorific method for this Lues.

And he further advises and declares, that although Diaphoreticks are very
proper and auxiliary in the Cure of this Disease; Diureticorum utilitas.
yet sometimes Diuretics do help nature to carry of malign humors by the
urinary passages; and nature does oftentimes free her self and purify the blood
this way: therefore we ought carefully to imitate nature, and observe which way
she inclines, and to promote that; which sometimes is by Urine; and then
promoting and assisting nature in that evacuation is more advantageous than
sweating: but by what Medicines or means this should be done according to his
designment, he does not discover.

And moreover he says, that although some grandees of this Profession (
Fernelius for one) do attribute to Guajacum the sole Alexipharmacal or
Antidotary virtue against this Lues, and to be preferred before all others: and
not only so, but do slight and condemn others, especially Mercury as most
pernicious and dangerous: yet notwithstanding, there are other men very learned
and expert in this Art, that are of a contrary opinion, who affirm argent vive
to be the true Alexipharmacum of this Disease: and therefore the major part of
Physicians after the use of Hydroticks (which very gently and easily were
administered) had recourse to Hydrargirum as the Asylum and greatest refuge.
Hydrargirum alexipharmacum opt. contra Luem Ven.
Of this party Quercitan professes himself to be; and applauds their
endeavors in this way of Cure; and does pronounce Mercury to be the only true
Asylum and Alexipharmacum for this Venereal Lues: and that besides salivation,
it does operate by Urine and insensible transpiration according to the several
preparations thereof: all which are requisite to carry off the malign venom of
this Malady.

But although this Author does agree thus far with those Physicians that stand
up for Mercury; yet notwithstanding he dissents from them as to the preparation
and use thereof.

First, In that they admix it crude in Unguents and Plasters. Secondly, They
give it unprepared in Pills. Thirdly, They exhibit Mercury praecipitate
edulcorated only, with out further elaboration. Fourthly, they anoint the
plants of the feet, and palms of the hands, with Mercury reduced into an Oil or
liquor. Fifthly, In that they give this oil inwardly.
All which our Author protests against; and declares that he uses no Mercury
crude and unprepared; and that his Mercurial Medicines are far more noble,
safe, and efficatious than the vulgar Mercurial preparations: and refers to his
Spagyric Pharmacopoeia, where those Medicines are described. As Mercurius
Philosophicus, Mercurius essensisicatus Paraselsi, Elixir vitae Mercuriale.
Turpethum Minerale Querc. Mercurius praecipitatus diaphoreticus, etc. And there
professes to follow Paracelsus in these preparations, as the greatest and best
Spagyric Philosopher to be guided by.

Next to Mercury, he esteems the Chemical Preparations of Guajacum as the best
remedies against this Venereal Lues: and far before the common Galenic
decoctions; and for satisfaction herein, he refers to his Pharmacopoeia
Phytolog. Where he reasons the case between the Galenic and Chemical
Preparations of Guajacum; and charges the decoctions with the loss of their
virtue, as dispirited and void of their Energetic parts; which notwithstanding
the operator does endeavor to save by decoction in a close Vessel; yet the
spirit does exhale and evaporate before the decoction be finished; some boiling
two thirds away; others the half; but at the least a third part: in which time
the spirit consumes and transpires away; this spirit is acid and penetrating,
and much of the virtue of the plant resides here, and therefore ought to be
preserved as most precious; and this acid spirit being of a fermentative nature
also (as other acids) does raise and attenuate humors, and consequently fit
them for expulsion and transpiration.

Wherefore (says Quercitan) considering the benefits of these acid spirits;
Pharmacop. Quercitan.
I use to destill these Spirits from Guajacum, Juniper, Vitriol, Sulphur, and
from all Hydrotic specificks for diverse kinds of Diseases; and these Spirits I
find far more effectual to perform Cures with, than decoctions; and besides the
loss of this Mercurial acid spirit, also an oleaginous suphureous subtle part,
of a sudorifick virtue; this also exhales and vanishes in decocting. To
prevent these inconveniences, the Chemical Art does teach how to save and
separate distinctly these two precious parts, which are eminent in Guajacum;
and our Author communicates it thus.

Scobs guajaci indita in retortam atque affusi aqua quod sufficiat (the
quantities are left to the discretion of the Artist) aptandum est recipiens
amplum, Guajaci praeparatio spagyr. Quercit.
hermetice obsignandum, ne quid exhalet: tum admoto igne, vel cinerum, vel
solius tantum balnei mar. vaporosi distillabitur aqua, and cum ea exstillabit
pariter and acetositas mercurialis spiritualis, adeoque etiam spirituosior
portio sulphurea seu oleaginea ejusdem guajaci. Two or three ounces of this
Distillation (he says) will effect more than a pound of the common Decoction.
After distillation is ended, upon the Faeces you may affuse more water, digest
for twelve hours, and distill again, you shall have a pleasant liquor pro potu
ordinario, which is to be aromatized with Cinnamon, and sweetened with Sugar
according to the Patients palate.

This Water being all brought over, the fire is to be increased, and then a red
Oil will come, which is to be rectified secundum artem; and this is commended
as an excellent remedy for sordid Ulcers, cancerous or phagaedanic in the
venereal Lues.

From the incinerated Faeces, with the water of the second distillation, you
are to extract a Salt, s. a. which being mixed with the first distillation, will
make it more sudorific, and moreover gently loosen the Belly. These
preparations of Guajacum, says our Author, if they be rightly prepared and
administered according to Art, will perfectly cure the venereal Lues, though
confirmed and of the worser sort.

And these are the chief Medicines which Querecitan approves and magnifies for
this purpose, and the sum of what he advises to extirpate this foul disease. I
leave the learned and experienced Spagyrist to judge of what has been
delivered, who well knows what the issue of all this will be: and so I pass on
to view the Practice of another Country.

CHAP. XVI.
The Dutch Practice for the Cure of the Venereal Lues.

FOR the Methods of Cure practiced in the Netherlands, we shall consult
Forestus, Petr. Foresti praxis contra Luem Ven.
generally esteemed as a good Galenic Author; a long Practicer in those
Countries, and in several places: at the Hague, Rotterdam, Delph, the Brill,
etc. from whom we may expect the best account, and what variety of means was
there used, and what Methods were most esteemed against this disease.

Upon inquiry and search for information herein; I find these Methods of Cure
practiced in the Low Countries, experimented and approved by this Author.
First, the course of Guajacin Decoctions; secondly, by Distillations; thirdly,
by Unguents; and fourthly, by Suffumigation.

For an Exemplar of the first take this Cure, Lib. de Lue Ven. observat. vij.
which was performed by Forestus upon a Woman of no mean Quality, who had
Venereal Ulcers upon her Forehead, spreading and corroding even to her Nose;
and being under a Chirurgions hands a considerable time to no purpose. She
resigned her self up to the care of this Professor on the 23. of October. First
he gave her this Bole. R. Cassiae j. confec. hamech ij misce. The next day he
took blood away at the Basilica Vein.

Afterward this preparation was appointed: R. rasur. lign. guajac. cum cort.
limat. ijss. scabios. fumar. agrimon. acetos. beton. ana M. j. endiv. cichor.
summit. lupulor. borag. bugloss. hypericon. pentaphyll. centaur. min. chamaedr.
violar. scolopend. cetrach. ana M. ss. capill. ven, p. j. santal. omnium,
rosar. schoenanth. spodii, cort. rad. tamarisci ana. ss. anisi jss. sem.
foenic. ss. sem. agni casti ij. prun. damascen. number. xv. uvar. pass. ab arillis
mund. ss. aq. com. seu pluvialis lib. iij. aquar. fumar. lupul. scabios. ana
iij. aq. beton. bugloss. ana jss. Coquantur omnia secundum ordinem debitum ad
lib. ijss. vel lib. ij. Colat. add sir. de fumar. iij. sir. de cichor. cum
rhubarb. j. sir. e stoechad. violar. ana ss. misce and clarificetur. This was
taken twice a day, but the set times and Dose are not mentioned.

To the Faeces or residue of the foresaid Decoction he added ras. lign. guajac.
cum cort. limat. ss. aq. pluvial. lib. iij. coq. ad medietatem, addendo sub
finem decoct. cinnam. jss sacchar. pro sapore q. s. This being strained out,
was kept to admix with Wine; or to be drank alone for ordinary drink.

To the former preparatory Decoction was added follic. sennae j. polipod.
quercin. epithymi ana iij. coq. and toward the latter end of the Decoction
these were put in: rhubarb. elect. incis. ij. spicae j. agar. trochiscat. ijss.
Colatur. addantur sir. de fumoter. iij. sir. de cichor. cum rhubarb. ss.
facchar. opt. jss. Clarificetur and aromatizetur cum sp. diarrhod. abbat. ss.
cinnam. elect. ij. f. decoct. s. a. This was to be taken twice a day as before,
and operated three or four times a day.

The second Decoction that was to be mingled with Wine, being spent (the
Patient disliking it) was not repeated, but instead thereof this was
prescribed. R. lign. guajac. cum cort. limat. iiij. sem. anisi ss. bugloss.
borag. betonicae, flor. stoechad. utriusque ana p. j. Coquantur lib. iv. aq.
pluvial. elect. and purae ad lib. iij. Colat. dulcoretur saccharo pro sapore
delectabiliori. This was used for the ordinary drink.

The former Decoctions being spent, on the first of November this was
prescribed for digesting the peccant matter. R. aq. fumar. vj. aq. lupulor.
^^ton. bugloss. ana ij. sir. de fumar. ^j. sir. de cichor. cum rhubarb. j. sir.
violar. e stoechad. ana ss. m^sce. This was for three Doses: the times not set
down, but I suppose for three mornings.

The third of November (...) night these Pills were given he^ ^^ R pil. aur.
cochiae, de f^^ar. ana j cum sir. de fumar. f. pilulae vij. and operated seven
times. The pain of her head was now allayed, and the Ulcers reduced to a better
condition.

The sixth of November this Guajacin Drink was prepared. R. lig. guajac. cum
cort. limat. ix. aq. fluvialis and vin. rhenan. opt. ana lib. v. bulliant in
balneo Mariae s. a. This was taken every morning a good draught hot in bed to
sweat; and another draught at four of the Clock after noon, and likewise as
much at night in bed. But after this Decoction was strained, to the remaining
Faeces were put aq. com. lib. viij. which boiled ad medietatem fere, adding
toward the latter end pull. cinnam. j. and this was reserved then for the
ordinary drink.

The 12. of November this Purge was given. R. mass. pil. indar. de fumar. ana
ss. sir. de fumar. q. s. fiant pil. vij. which worked seven times. After this
the drink was continued till Christmas and longer; but in the interim the Pills
were repeated on the 20. and 26. of November, and at length the Patient was
cured (says our Author) but how long after Christmas, is not mentioned. So that
I perceive the Cure was not very speedy; but tandem perfect curata suit.

Besides this Method of Decoctions; the way of curing by Unction has also been
practiced in Holland for many years, especially in the Hospitals, as it is very
much the custom of our Hospitals here and in other Countries, being an easy
cheap way for the Chirurgions; but the Patient finds it sad and troublesome:
many also dye not able to go through it; and not a few come forth after their
sufferings without a Cure. Some think if they can but get into an Hospital,
they are safe and well provided for; and that there is excellent means and
judicious contrivances for the infected with this disease, above what can be
expected from a Physician in another place. I wish it were so; but some that
have tried the usage of Hospitals upon this account, give but a bad Character
of their entertainment: and if it be true, as I am informed, (and truly I have
it from the mouths of such as have been there as Patients) I have not heard of
more rude ignorance and slighter management of curing this disease than in such
places: and I have had occasion to examine some that have undergone their
common Unction there, and come forth uncured, that would choose rather to dye
than to go thither again to repeat the same course; and you may well think,
that the tractation of Patients in places of common reception managed by salary
Officers, is much inferior to the endeavors of a private Physician that is
otherwise concerned for Cures.

And says Forestus, Ego non possum satis admirari. I cannot but wonder at their
manner of curing in the Hospital of Delph; ten together shut up in a Chamber,
and anointed all with the same Ointment for five days together, serving them
all alike: hence it is their Churchyards are so well filled with dead bodies.
But he does not altogether condemn this way of Cure when occasion requires; but
blames the inconsiderate use thereof to all promiscuously without distinction
and consideration had of their peculiar and different cases.

And this Author relates to us of a Tailor at Delph, having got a virulent
Gonorrhoea, and being ill used by a Surgeon, fell into a pissing of blood
and a confirmed Pox; he being sent for to him, did free him from his bloody
Urine, after which he applied to the Pox: and having well purged him, he gave
him the Decoction of Guajacum with Herbs and Purgatives, such as Amatus
Lusitanus prescribed for a Woman afflicted long with the Venereal Lues, Cent.
4. Curat. 15. which was this. R. scob. lig. guajac. lib. ss. polipod. querc.
recent. contus. iij. senae jss. cort. mirabal. indor. and chebulor. ana ss.
passular. Corinth iij. sem. cartham. j. rad. bugl^ss. p. ij. sem. foenic. ss.
aq. com. lib. x. f. decoctio secundum artem ad medias, colatur. add sacchar.
fini lib. ss. and iterum parum ad ignem bulliat. Of this Decoction the Patient
drank viij. every morning for twenty days, and was cured.

But Forestus had not such good success with the Tailor, although at first he
began to mend upon the use thereof; but afterward relapsed, became
consumptive, and could not continue the course of this Medicine. Some days
after this, the Patients Thigh near the Knee was inflamed, and Isbrand, a
Surgeon of the Hospital, would undertake to cure him; and finding that other
means had not prevailed, resolved to try the Unction; and did anoint him with a
Mercurial Unguent, Forest. de Lue Ven. lib. 32. observat. 15.
which cured him of the Lues; but his Leg after the Unction was contracted and
drawn up backwards, that he was forced to use a Wooden Leg, and could have no
help for it by emollient Plasters or other means.

And our Author gives us another account of a Patient, Observat. 20.
that had been long afflicted with the Venereal disease, and could not receive
help by Decoctions: was afterward cured by Unction: and that was a Master of a
Ship at the Briel, that for nine years had deep Ulcers in his Leg and Thighs,
and was under the hands of several Physicians and Chirurgions in vain. Toward
the latter end of April he came to Forestus, who undertook the Cure. First, he
gave them a Lenitive, afterward ordered a Vein to be opened, to see his blood,
and let out vj. The 28. of April he appointed this. Potio.
R. fol. collutheae ij. sem. anisi j. bulliant cum v. decoct. cum express. add
electuar. lenit. ss. confec. hamech iij. sir. de fumoterr. j. misce. This was
given for one dose.

The 29. of April he prescribed this Apozem for preparation of humors, to be
taken every day. R. rad. enulae camp. ss. fumiter. borag. bugloss. summit.
lupul. acetos. agrimon. scabios. ana M. j. chamaedr. chamaepit. capil. Ven. ana
M. ss. trium fl^r^^ Gordial. p. j. sem. anisi iij. sem. end^^ j. sem Citri ss.
fol. senae vj. rhubar^. elect. vj. mirobel. omnium ana j. epithymi ij. polipod.
querc. ss. hagioxyli cum cort. limat. vj. prunor. Damascen. number. ix. uvar.
passar. enucleat. j. liquirit. ras. vj. aq. com. q. s. Coq. s. a. ad lib. jss.
colat. addantur sir. de fumar. borag. de epithymo ana j. misce, fiat Apozema.
What quanity of this was to be taken at a time, is not set down; but after this
preparative Apozem he purged him with pil. de fumar. j. In the interim a
Surgeon had the charge of his Ulcers and dressed him, who applied for
Corrosives sometimes Vitriol sublimat. also Arsenic, and oftentimes
Praecipitate of Joan de Vigo, and sometimes Unguent. Aegytpiac.

The fourth of May, he being well purged with Confec. Hamech, the Guajacine
Decoction was prepared thus. R. hagioxyli opt. ac deras. lib. j. aq. com. and
aq. endiviae ana lib. vj. ponantur in olla fictili vitreata per noctem diemque
integrum been cooperta; deinde coquantur ut artis est, ad tertiae partis
consumptionem, and usui asseruetur in poculo stricti orificii, pro primo potu.
The dose and times for taking this, is not declared. To the Faeces after
straining were added aq. lib. xii. and boiled again to the consumption of the
fourth part, and this was reserved pro potu secundo and quotidiano. After five
days use with these drinks the Patient was costive, Potio purg.
and therefore did take this. R. fumiter. borag. bugloss. summit. lupulor. ana
M. ss. sem. anisi j. flor. cordial. p. j. fol. senae ijss. uvar. passar.
enucleat. ss. liquirit. ij. bulliant in s. q. aquae com. and colat. iij. add
confect. hamech. sir. fumar. ana ss. misce. This was given in the morning, and
the Guajacine Decoction was forborne that day.

The 10. of May, he being costive again by the Decoction, this was prescribed
him. Apozema purg.
R. fumar. borag. bugloss. summit lupul. chamaedr. chamaepit. acetos. scabios.
endiviae, cichor. ana M. j. flor. cord. p. j. sem. anist iij. fol senae jss.
polipod. querc. ss. epithymi iij. prun. damascen. number. xiij. rhubarb elect.
agarici ana iss. hagioxyli cum cort. limat. (quia defecerat decoctum incuria
pharmocopolae) iv. schaenanth. zingib. alb. ana j. rad. enulae camp. liquirit.
ras. ana ss. uvar. passar. enucleat. j. coq. in aq. com. q. s. ad lib. j.
expressioni add sir. de fumar. de epithym. de succo ros. laxat. ana j. misce.
This was for three doses to be taken in the morning for three days together,
and after this he returned again to the Guajacine Decoction.

About the 17. of May another Apozem was prescribed, much what like the last,
for three doses also. And that being done, he was purged again with Confec.
hamech iij. in five ounces of the last Decoction.

On the 21. of May this was appointed. R. endiviae, cichor. borag. bugloss.
fumar. summ^^. lupul. agrimon. ana M. jss. some. endiv cucum. melon. anisi,
foenic. ana jss. liquirit. ras. vj. hagioxyli cum cort. limat. viij. coq. in
aq. com. q. s. ad lib. jss. colat. add sir. de fumar. de epithym. ex infus.
ros. borag. ana j. misce. This was appointed to be taken every morning instead
of the Guajacine Decoction, to procure sweat.

After this, an Apozem was prescribed, little differing from the former that
was appointed on the 17. of May; and after that was taken, on the 4. of June
another Apozem was appointed for four doses, much what the same with that of
May the 21. these were repeated and used to the 15. of June, and then he took
these Pills. R. pil. Indar. j. pil. de fumar. j. diagrid. gr. i. cum sir. de
fumoter. f. pil. iij. appointed to be taken after midnight.

Notwithstanding this long troublesome course of Medicines and repetitions of
the same, our Author confesses the Patient was not cured. For although the
Ulcers did heal, yet they broke out in new places: the malignity was not
eradicated with all this tedious doings: Wherefore they were driven to this
refuge, that the Patient must undergo the Mercurial Unction: and it was so
resolved; but first he was to take this Potion. R. Confect. hamech j. dissol.
cum iij. decoct. com. addendo sir. de fumar. misce. This was given in the
morning, and egregie purgabatur, says the story: and the man must be
egregiously strong too, or else he could not hold out.

After all this, on the 21. of June the Surgeon began to anoint him with
this Ointment. R. thuris, mastichis, myrrhae, ana jss. rad. helleb nig. and
alb. zinzib. ana j. sandarachae graecor. minii ana ss. baccar. lanri ss.
cineris tamarisci j. cinnam. ss. sulph. vivi j. caphur ss. butyr. recent. vj.
pingued. porcin. lib. ss. ol. laurin. j. succi plantag. fumar. lapath. acut.
ana j. argent. vivi extinct. in succo limon. iij. fiat ungent. secundum artem.
With this he was anointed five days together in all the Joints.

On the 24. of June, his Mouth inflamed, was very sore and ulcerated, and Face
swelled, from the salination and continual flux at the Mouth: for which two
Gargarisms were appointed. Afterward he complained of his Breast to be sore
and inflamed, for which a Linctus was provided; and a pectoral Unguent, to
assuage and mitigate. On the 26. day he was reduced very weak, and Saccharum
perlat. was given him; yet notwithstanding he was thus low, and suffered some
hardship, here covered after a while, and was perfectly cured, says our Author.

Now for an Example of Practice by Suffumigation; he gives us this account of a
Mariner that brought the Pox out of Spain with him, whose privy Member was so
severely ulcerated, that the Surgeon, who had him then under Cure, intended
to cut off the Glans, having no hopes to save it by ail the means he had or
could use. But Forestus being called to the Patient, he forbid it, and
afterward saved his Member.

First, he gave him a Bolus of Cassia, then let him blood, Julapium.
next a Julep, which was this. Mellis rosat. colat. iij. sir. de fumoterr. ij.
aq. fumiter. bugloss. beton. ana v. misce. After this he appoints an Apozem
aperitive and gently purgative; which being taken, the Julep was repeated, and
after that, this Potion was given. Potio purg.
R. confec. hamech iijss. diaprum. laxat. j. agar. trochiscat. ss. diagrid. gr.
1. aq. bugloss. iv. mellis rosat. colat. ss. misce. When this had performed its
operation, another Apozem was prescribed as follows. Apozema.
R. lign. guajac. cum cort. limat. lib. ss. salviae, staechad. utriusque fumar.
violar. ana M. j. flor. cord. p. j. sem. anisi, carui, foenic. ana ij. sem. 4.
frigmajor. and min. ana ss. rad. helleb. nig. ss. polipod. querc. epithym. ana
ss. cicer. rub. iij. coq. in aq. com. ad lib. iij. colat. dulcoretur sacchar.
This was to be taken twice a day; but the dose is not set down: and when this
was ended, pil. de fumar. j. cum diagrid. gr. ij. was given.

After he was thus sufficiently prepared and purged, he begins to suffumigate
him with this. R. cinnabr. jj. oliban. myrrhae, gum. benzoin. ana j. galliae
moschat. jss. theriacae elect. ss. styracis liquid. ad incorporandum, fiat
suffitus. This was used according to the usual manner every morning: but
because he was costive, after the third time, a Purge was given the fourth day;
and the fifth day the suffumige again, until he salivated freely, and his Mouth
and Throat ulcerated therewith; then Gargarisms were used: and because he grew
weak, Tablets of Manus Christi perlat. was given; and for expulsion of the
venenous matter contracted by the Cinnabar, a Decoction for that purpse was
appointed; also to relieve the stomach of which he complained, appropriate
Medicines were used for that purpose. And to take off pains of the head, caused
by(...) suffumige. Cephalic Medicines were used: and by this course the man was
perfectly recovered and made sound; and the Ulcers, which before could not be
healed with mundifying and consolidating Medicines, and all the the Chirurgical
Art; were soon after the Suffumige cicatrized and perfectly cured, says our
Author.

Now my occasions calling me off from prosecuting this design farther at
present: I confess the Subject is copious, and will admit of long debates; but
I have contracted and brought into a narrow compass all the important and most
considerable matter, and represented to you in a little Scheme the several
persuasions and opinions of the most famed Authors, treating upon this Disease,
with our own sentiment and reasons for noncompliance, and dissent from each of
them. The former part of this Work will give you to understand the subtle
Nature of this Malady; wherein I have discussed and laid open some grand
Errors that have passed for current Truths in the World ever since the Disease
has had a peculiar distinguishing name.

I have exhibited also to your view the various Practice of several Nations for
the Cure of this Lues; and not of the mean and vulgar Professors, but of those
whose repute is such, that most Physicians, their Successors, do adhere to and
follow as their Guides in curing: And this is thought a learned and safe way to
be governed by Authors and their Traditions, handed thus from one another;
witness the Files of Bills in the Shops, which pedantick Recipe's and
incongruous Compositions do imitate the unreformed Exemplars of their
Predecessors that were no Pharmacopoeians. And indeed it cannot otherwise be
expected, since Physicians (very imprudently and perniciously) have cast off
their proper charge and main duty, the preparation and improvement of Medicines
by their own hands and diligent inspection over all that appertains to that
Work (as it was the custom of the Ancients) the neglect whereof has rendered
them incapable to see and correct the gross errors of traditional
Book-Medicines. Indeed we might expect a good improvement find success in
Medicines, if Physicians were their own Operators in Pharmacy (such as a late
ingenious Dr. Ed. Bolnest. Auror. ^^^mica.
Author has manifested himself to be) they would then from a certain
experimental knowledge, disdain the transcribing of Medicines out of Books,
whose Authors were not expert Pharmacopoeians: and such were most of these
(though men of Note) now laid before you to deliberate on. I would advise those
that are not well knowing in the Nature of the Materia Medica, and skillful in
the due preparation of Medicines, that they be not too bold in venturing upon
every Medicine that is here prescribed; for there are some frivolous and
fallacious, others dangerous: and that they be not too confiding in the Methods
proposed. To ransack thoroughly, to examine nicely and strictly their failings;
what reason they carry and import by their designment; what Character our
Experience may put upon them, from former trials and adventures upon such like
Medicines (my self in time past being governed by Tradition and Authors) would
take up and expend a considerable time more, than at present can be afforded;
nor am I willing at this time to write a Satyr; else here is matter enough, and
thereby to let the World know (if they did deserve it) how grossly erroneous the
Art of physic has been managed in all Ages: and if an account of the dead
could rightly be taken, we should find, that more have dyed by Medicine than by
the Sword; but populus vult decipi, they love the imposture, they will not be
informed, so let it go on.

FINIS.

