Imprimatur

February 27. 1667/8. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Medicus Absolutus, (...).

The Complete Physician, Qualified and Dignified.

The Rise and Progress of PHYSIC, Historically, Chronologically, and
Philosophically Illustrated.

Physicians of different Sects and Judgments, charactered and distinguished.

The Abuse of Medicines; Imposture of Empericks, and illegal Practisers
detected.

Cautioning the diseased, in the use of Medicines; and informing them in the
Choice of a good Physician

By EVERARD MAYNWARING Doctor in Physic.

(...). Hypoc. LONDON, Printed for the Booksellers, 1668.

Clarissimis D. Dom. DOCTORIBUS (...) Scientissimis nec non in Art Medica
Nobilissima Eximiis Professoribus, omnibus Hermeticam, Hypocraticam,
Helmontianam Doctrinam Candide Profitentibus ET Subtilissime dijudicantibus
SALUIEM.
NE cui vestrum sit mirum (viri perquam eruditi, summeque colendi) quod vos,
quam-plurimis and gravioribus sollicitos negotiis, hisce meis interpellem. Meis
dixi imo vestris: excusatum me proin habebitis; omnium quippe familiae
Esculapideae res medica magni refert. Quod cum ita sit, rem totam (...)
concinnare and vestrae censurae subjicere decreverim: and ut specimen
insequentis operis ante omnes quoscunque habeatis; officium meum duxi, hanc
ichnographiam (...) delineatam primo vobis offerre.

De artis nostrae dignitate and utilitate vobis dicere, prorsus supervacaneum
esse autumo, cum vis ejus admirabilis apud neminem vestri lateat; and major est
(...) excellentia, quam ut calamus meus sit ejus (...), proinde haec Sicco
(quod aiunt) pede praetereo. Verumenimvero de medicinae scelerato abusu and
insignium medicorum contemptu indigno (quae doleo) dicturus sum vobis. Nil est
in rerum natura tam excellens and laudabile, nil tam utile and necessarium,
quod non abusu in contemptum and hominum perniciem abeat: and ita revera prae
se gerit praesentis saeculi conditio, quod omnes infimae plebis homunciones
paritatem cum medicis saltem jactant; and cuique se medicum profitenti statim
credatur: praestigias proin horum pseudo-medicorum and imposturas, quibus
credulum vulgus quotidie inescant, patescere operae-praetium duxi; magnum ut
populus sciat discrimen doctum indoctumque interesse medicum. Porro autem,
Empericos, Agrammatos and id genus medicastrorum, quod attinet; qui legem
Hypocraticam violare and in nobilissimam hanc artem, inique irrepere non sint
veriti; qui morbos judicandi juxta artis praecepta, scientiam non sint adepti,
at titulum and personam medici sibi vendicant: homines istiusmodi audaces ab
exercitio medico proscribere aequissimum autumo; eo quod medicina non uti sed
abuti tantum norint, and temerario ausu indies experimenta per mortes agant; ut
cum Langio medico illo celeberrimo dicere ausim; plures Empericorum temeritate,
quam morbo aut hostis gladio interimi.

Antiquorum ichnobatos quod spectat, quorum servilia ingenia auctoritati nimis
addicta, omnia Scholae Galenicae Dogmata superstitiose colunt; nemo aegre
ferat, cum redarguantur, nec odio me habeant reprehensorem, seipsos autem
seductos ac errorum reos incusent; proin and a veritate, non a scriptore
castigari putent: quandoquidem nihil per invidiam, aut aemulationem, nec ad
aucupandum gloriam dixi; sed veritatis Zelo, Medicinae Chymiatricae and
Chymiatrorum amore plenus; hostium eorum studia and traditiones Sine Theta
praeterire non potui.

Chymiatrum, solertissimum illum naturae Arcana scrutatorem quod attinet; qui
medendi artem instaurat and ornat, in tantum ut Medici Absoluti titulum prae
reliquis omnibus solum mereatur: non opus est hujus gloriosi Lauds prolixius
Celebrare, cum opera suae famae perennis per totum terrarum orbem monumenta
erexerunt.

De Medici Officio in Pharmacia non nimium severe, nec praeter Dignitatem ejus,
Statui; ut quisque scilicet more Majorum, praeparationis Medicamentorum (...):
accurate sit peritus, pariter ac (...) Pharmacopoeius valde diligens and
expertus; quum in hoc praecipue, tum aegrotantis vita, tum medentis fama maxim
consistat. Postremo, de Chymici apparatus praestantia and necessitate in art
medendi, pauca dixi; ut Chymiae commodum and excellentia nulli non in majus
innotescant.

Labores hosce meos qualescunque judicio eruditorum subjicio: cum omnibus autem
placere and ad cujusvis gustum calamum temperare, nemini hactenus acciderit,
sed diversa de suis laboribus quisque expertus fuerit judicia; eorum vero
quamplurimis, saltem egregiis medicisque absolutis hoc opus non ingratum fore
valde spero: in quantum non meam, at enim causam medicinae, imo vestram egi. Si
quis verum alius farinae, fastuoso supercilio ex alto despiciens, qui nil nisi
sua sapiat, haec parvi fecerit; vel privato quodam odio and invidiae stimulis
actus, de Scriptoris fama inique detraxerit: id non multum curabo, nec me hilum
commovebunt Zoilorum sibila and morsus; quippe quod hoc genus hominum conviciis
tantum quae in fumum abeunt, non argumentis pugnare; and miso-Chymicos mihi
nihil obesse in acutislimorum Philosophorum and illustrium Medicorum favore
compertum est; nec de jure meo detrahere posse, sat scio.

Haec sunt (viri eruditissimi, Jatro-Chymici experientissimi) quae sub examinis
incudem (coram vobis) revocanda digna judicavi: vos literarum and inclitae
medicinae proceres; vos aequi aestimatores Scientissimos, hac boni consulere
spero: conatibusque nostris in medicine, medicorum, nec non aegrorum gratiam
susceptis aspirare rogo, caeteros non moror.

Vestri observantissimus. EVERARDUS MAYNWARING.
Dat. Londini exaedibus meis, 8o Call. Martij. 1667/8.
TO THE Judicious Reader.
OF all Arts, Hypoc.
says Hypocrates, Physic is the most Noble: but by the ignorance of some that
profess the Exercise thereof, and people rashly judging them to be Physicians;
it may be thought more inferior then the rest.

The abuse of this excellent Art being grown so common; the learned and worthy
Professors not so highly esteemed as heretofore, and as they ought, gives me
just occasion to examine into the matter, how this should arise, and to
vindicate both from Calumny and disrepute, in demonstrating and discovering to
you who is the Physician quem creavit altissimus, and who they are that
scandalize this ancient renowned Science, and bring disrepute upon the true
legitimate professors thereof. Sunt enim Medici nomine multi, re vero perpauci.

In these later times more then ever, practisers in Physic are multiplied; and
if they were men qualified and legally inducted, it were well: but to find
Mechanics and illiterate persons of all sorts, arrogantly ignorant, and
impudently personating the Physician; audaciously assuming and usurping the
Doctoral Title, cousening the Sick by a counterfeit Authority; proh facinus!
that I cannot say whether is more mad, the people that countenance and applaud
them; or these Medicasters that delude the people.

And since Physicians are not of one species, but different in principles and
practice; pretenders also to this worthy Profession, and abusers of it, very
numerous and of a different extraction I think it worth my labor to give you
some brief account and Character of each; and worth your observation to know
aright, and discern the one from the other.

If the axiom be true, that opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt; then I
have not unnecessarily brought these different persons upon the Stage together,
but that they may more eminently be distinguished and adjudged, which is my
present purpose and design.

Here are both learned and illiterate: the worthy legitimate Professors; and a
spurious Brood of ignorant Medicasters: here are Filii Artis, and here are
Magistri Fraudis; Sons of Art and Masters of Craft: here are Chemical Artists,
and here are Vulcans in Physic, they differ in their worth, so are they
distinguished by their Habit: some wear the Gown, and dignified with a
distinguishing Title, which Authority has conferred on their merits; others
wear a Cloak for their Knavery, and a Title of their own creation and
usurpation.

This Manual is a Touchstone whereby you may know the true Physician from the
Counterfeit; to distinguish him that has been educated from his Youth, in
learning Tongues, Arts and Sciences, to fit and qualify him for this weighty
Employment; from him that has been trained up in Manufacture, Buying and
Selling, or a loose idle life, no way conducing or fitting him for this grand
Business.

I have not said any thing here upon the score of Emulation or Envy to the
persons of any party herein mentioned; but am a Monitor for the good and
welfare of this Noble Art, and the Legitimate Professors of it.

I honor all that wear the Gown in this Faculty, and have a tender regard to
their Reputations, and wish they were all Medici Absoluti. I meddle not with
men but Opinions and Abuses in the practice of Physic; I aim not to blast men,
but to reform Errors; and to restore the ancient renown and dignity of this
Science and the Learned Professors thereof, to that venerable respect and due
acceptance in the world.

Notwithstanding I know I shall displease many, and contract Envy by this Work,
ut ut sit, jacta est alea; I shall venture that and do expect it; Veritas odium
parit. But I am not discouraged in this Undertaking, Causam Medicine ago; nor
will I spare the opinions or practices of men, that tend to the prejudice and
dis-esteem of this most excellent Art, and the Reverend Learned Professors
thereof, that in this later Age are industrious discoverers of Truth and
Errors, by Pyrotecknical Experiments and Trials; and are a Credit and Ornament
to the Profession, by their expertness in Pharmacy.

I have impartially given every one their due; and set forth each Party by
their proper distinct Characters: let the world now judge who are Medici
Absoluti Complete Physicians qualified and fitted for this great Undertaking,
founded upon right Principles, laborious Searchers into the Secrets of Nature,
reaching forward to advance and approve the excellency of Physic, and who they
are that make no Proficiency or Progress, by a sedulous disquisition of their
own; but in a sluggish acquiescencie and erroneous satisfaction, live upon the
Labors of their Predecessors and Patrons, set down here as a Ne plus ultra.

You may see by this Perspective who are graduated and dignified by Authority
in this Faculty, legitimated and approved, that are to be accounted Physicians;
men set apart from their Youth, designed for, and educated in all necessary
Learning, to accomplish and fit them for this grand Employment: and who are the
rude Invaders of this worthy Profession, fallaciously usurping the Doctoral
Title, to the dishonor of our Vniversitys; illegal and illiterate Practisers,
that defame this profound Science, and abuse the Bodies and Purses of those
that unhappily fall into their hands.

I have impartially and plainly in this following Work, distinguished each
Party legitimately concerned in the Practice of Physic; and also such as
illegally pretend thereto; that every one may be accounted and esteemed,
according to their Merit: that one may not unjustly live upon the Credit of
another, by counterfeit Qualifications, Appellations and Titles; but these
Vizards being taken off, they may appear to be what and who they are (...) and
being thus made known to the World, they may have that acceptance and repute as
their worth or demerit shall justly challenge.

E. MAYNWARINGE.
LONDON, From my House in Clerkenwell Close. Febr. 26. 1667/8.
The CONTENTS.
Tract. I. The Antiquity and Dignity of Physic. Tract II. The Rise and
Progress of Physic. Tract III. The Sects and different Judgments of
Physicians. Tract IV. The several Sorts of Chemists. Tract V. The Chemical
Emperick. Tract VI The Practicing Apothecary. Tract VII. The Rigid Galenist.
Tract VIII. The Galeno-Chymist. Tract IX. Medicus Absolutus; the Complete
Chemical Physician. Tract X. Whether a Physician ought to make his own
Medicines. Tract XI. The Excellency of Chemical Preparations; compared with
Galenick Medicines. Tract XII. The Virtues of Catholic, Specific and
Appropriate Medicines examined; and compared with each other, in their
Efficacy, Safety and Certainty of Operation.
TRACT I. THE Antiquity and Dignity OF PHYSIC.
COncerning the time when Physic first began to be in use and practice, and
who it was that first exercised this Art, is not so clearly determined by
ancient Writers, who varying in their Opinions, I shall not positively assert
the time when first it began, not the person using it; but this we may believe
upon good grounds, that Physic was in use soon after the Creation. Medicine
God created for the use of man, as Sacred Writ does testify. Altissimus
creavit medicinam de terra, Eccles. 38.
and vir prudens non abhorrebit illam. And having so great an Author to appoint
it we need not doubt, nay, who dare question the excellency of it. Artis
medicae Seminaria Divina sunt and Deum ipsum autorem habent, Noct. Med.
says Freitagius.

Whether Adam used. Medicine is not recorded, but that he knew the nature of
all the Creatures, and therein the medicinal virtues of all things is most
probable to believe, being comprehended in the perfection of his nature and
exquisite knowledge; and since that Medicine was created for man's infirmities
to which he was subject after the fall; we may conclude upon very good reason,
that the use of Medicine was not long after, it being made known unto Adam for
the relief of mankind in his infirmities, to which he was subject by his lapsed
nature: and that it was in use and esteem amongst the Patriarchs, the knowledge
of which being propagated and delivered from Adam to his posterity: from
whence some are persuaded, that Physicians were not in being before the Sick;
nor the Sick before Physicians, but both Coaetaneous, had their being in the
world together, having so necessary a relation and dependence one upon the
other.

Joseph when he came to be great and made Ruler over the Land of Egypt, he had
his domestic Physicians: and when Jacob died, Joseph commanded his Physicians
to imbalm his Father, and they did so, as you may see it recorded in the 50
Chapter of Genesis. And in all ages since in the most knowing parts of the
world, it has been the Custom with Emperors, Kings and Princes, to have
Physicians attending their persons, living honorably in the favor of their
great Masters, respected in their Courts, and increasing in wealth.

That Medicine and Physicians have been in esteem, and accounted a Blessing to
a People, Sacred Scripture does sufficiently inform you in several places: the
Prophet Ezekiel commending and setting forth the Holy Land, reckons up the
Commodities of certain Trees, the Fruit whereof was appointed for Food, and the
Leaves for Medicine, Ezekiel Chap. 47. so that Physic is a great Blessing, and
to be accounted a necessary provision for a Country as well as food: and
Physicians have been accounted so necessary, that the People had these in great
esteem in all ages, as sacred and profane History do testify.

Nay, you will find a Precept for it, and that you are commanded so to do:
honor the Physician with the honor due unto him, Eccles. 38. so the Chapter
begins, and verse the 12. Then give place to the Physician for the Lord has
created him: Let him not go from thee, for thou have need of him. Profane
History abundantly furnishes us with relations and examples of the
Preferments, Privileges, vast Rewards, Riches, Fame and Honorable esteem of
Physicians, but I shall pass that by now.

The study of Physic has been of such esteem, and so worthily accounted, that
Kings and Princes have delighted in it, and have been diligent searchers after
Medicines, as credible Authors do testify, and some of their own works do
manifest the same, recorded and preserved both for use, and patterns to
imitate, for the following ages.

King Solomon that wise and wealthy Monarch, was most excellent in the
knowledge of Physic, knowing the nature of all Plants from the Cedar to the
Hyssop, nor was his knowledge bounded here; but also he knew the nature of all
Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, and was the greatest Philosopher after Adam: and had
not the works of Solomon unhappily been burnt in Jerusalem by Nabusaradan, as
Historians report, but preserved for the use of succeeding generations, our
labors now had been less, and our success greater and more frequent. By such
Casualties as these, mortality of famous men, and the loss of their works, all
Arts and Learning have had their risings and settings; sometimes shining bright
and perspicuous; in the following age under a Cloud perhaps.

The ingeny and indefatigable labors of some industrious men promote and
advance all Sciences and Arts, set up the Lights and Torches of Learning: but
by the sloth and negligence of the following generations; or by ruin and
depopulation of Countries, these Lights are extinguished, and the darkness of
Eror, Ignorance and Barbarism overspread a Land. Physic or the knowledge of
Medicine, has had its various fate in the world, as other parts of Learning
have had the like; sometimes illustrious and splendid; the professors thereof
sometimes men of great Worth and Learning, redeeming it out of the hands of
Ignorance and Decay, and some again of mean parts, empyrical and not
industrious, lessening its Worth and Value: and this I shall more properly
observe in the following Chapter, noting the progress of Physic, in several
ages to its present state in our own days.

TRACT. II. The Rise and Progress of Physic.
THE beginning and increase of the Art of Physic Rodericus a Castro sets forth
thus: Concepit medicinam necessitas, solertia peperit, aluit ratio, promovit
usus, Lib. de off, med. polit.
longaque demum experientia consummavit atque absolutum perfecit: Necessity
conceived Physic, Ingenuity brought it forth, Reason nourished it, Use
promoted it, and long Experience has perfected it. But this rhetorical account
he crosses in another place, and ascribes the Invention of Physic to God
himself, having showed unto Adam the medicinal virtues of all things, that he
might declare it to his posterity: Omnium Creatorem Deum Optimum Maximum
plantarum and caeterarum rerum omnium facultates Adae primo Proto-plasto
indicasse, Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
eique illarum cognitionem infudisse arbitramur.

The excellency and necessity of Physic is such, that the original knowledge
of it is not to be imputed to Chance, Invention, or Casual Experiments upon
necessitous occasions or otherwise, though the improvement and progress of
Physic has been much of it acquired upon this score, and is daily increased
after this manner; but the rise of it is a diviniore principio, which
Hypocrates could acknowledge and does witness. Primi inventores judicaverunt
artem dignam, Lib. de veter. medicie.
quae Deo adscriberetur, quemadmodum etiam est receptum.

But how the Art of Healing was taught and received at first, by what Rules or
Method of learning, how propagated and the primitive knowledge of it continued
to their Successors, does not appear upon any Record that I can meet with: but
this we may probably believe they were not so expert in using those ways and
means to preserve the traditional knowledge from their Ancestors (as we in our
days and the later times, whereby Learning does accumulate and increase by
Revisings and daily Additions from industrious men) that therefore much
knowledge did perish with the persons dying in those days; so that this
excellent Art was long kept in its Iufancy, had many beginnings and first
inventions whose general same was not spread in the world for many hundred
years, until the time of Aesculapius ( an. mundi 2242) the Son of Apollo, who
first settled this Art, and modelled it by Precepts, which he delivered to his
Sonns Podalirius and Machaon: and in this I find most Writers consenting, that
Aesculapius first gave the Art of Physic a great repute, and himself became
famous thereby.

Physic at first was a stranger in the world and few that understood the
excellency of it; but spreading by time, and growing into knowledge, it was
much admired and the practisers thereof adored: when the excellent worth and
efficacy of it was discovered, all were willing to advance and set it forward;
the professors thereof highly reverenced and rewarded with large stipends from
Monarchs and Republics, and had Statues erected for them in honor of their
memory after their death. Emperors, Kings and Princes in those days were not
wanting to promote the excellent knowledge of Physic, by their own study and
exemplary industry; and some Medicines of their invention were called by their
own names which stand now upon Record in Authors of good Credit for these many
hundred years; amongst whom were Gentius King of Illyricum, Attalus King of
Pergamus, Mithridates King of Pontus, Dionysius, Constantine the fourth,
Hadrian, Roman Emperors; Lysimachus King of Macedonia, Avicen e stirpe regia,
who wrote in Arabic some Volumes of Physic; Evax an Arabian King. In such
places, before there was any certain knowledge of Physic, the medicinal
virtues of many things were found out by chance; and by observation of the
brute Creatures, who by a natural instinct do avoid those things that are
noxious to them, and follow the use of what is beneficial to their natures; and
when Diseases and Accidents happen to them, they repair to what is helpful, and
use it by natural inclination and instinct, to preserve themselves. The
Heathens found out many Remedies by Divination and Sooth-saying, and invocation
of Devils: and Strabo reports that among the Indians there was a Law, Stia^.
1.15.
that if any person had committed a Crime, and did not find out some medicinal
Remedy, he was put to death; but if he did find out some such Experiment, he
was rewarded and advanced by their Kings. But chiefly the Egyptians were eager
in seeking after Physical Experiments, and improving their Skill in Medicines;
and as Herodotus relates, they brought out their diseased and infirm people
into the streets and public places to inquire of those that passed by
concerning the nature of their Disease, and the Remedies that might be good for
them: and by what means any one was recovered, it was recorded by their
Priests, and reposited in their sacred places to preserve the memory of it. In
like manner the Grecian Priests did keep their Physical Observations in the
secret places of the Temples at Pergamus dedicated to Apollo and Aesculapius:
and the Priests did communicate those Secrets to the Sick, who did receive them
with great confidence, as coming from the Oracle of Aesculapius, as Galen
reports. And Sabinus tells us that the Assyrians did expose their Sick in
public places to passengers, that they might be informed of Remedies against
their Infirmities; and this Custom was frequent also in other Countries, Strabo
lib. 16.
as Strabo notes.

It was also a Custom in ancient times for Physicians to make Experiments upon
condemned Malefactors, to try some Medicines that were dubious or dangerous,
for their better information and knowledge; and the Magistrate was willing to
permit it, for the good of mankind, to promote the Physicians Skill, being so
necessary and useful continually. The Custom doubtless was very laudable, and
we have reason to believe this Art has gained by it, and honest men's lives
less hazarded; those Experiments being recorded and brought under Rule, for the
use and satisfaction of posterity, to guide us more certainly in Practice: and
if that Custom were continued amongst us, Physicians might receive much
advantage by it and satisfaction in doubtful Cases, of which otherwise he
cannot so well be resolved, but with some hazard to his Patient, and his own
Reputation.

After Aesculapius expired, in process of time Physic began to decline and
lose its repute it had formerly, by the negligence of the succeeding
Professors, and by the injury and ruin of time, which swallows up the
transient glory of all sublunary things.

But Hypocrates of Cous coming into the world redeemed this Art out of
Ignorance and Sloth ( an. mundi 3538. according to the Computation of some) by
whose excellent parts and great industry, Physic was restored again,
cultivated and enlarged. This famous professor was descended from Aesculapius
as some affirm; and that the knowledge of Physic was accounted so sacred that
it might not be revealed and made common, but only to the Offspring of
Aesculapius: as Lacuna says, Caeutum enim erat in illa Aesculapiorum familia,
ne quis rationem and industriam medendi, possessionem plane divinam a Deo ipsis
tantum concessam cuiquam communicaret, qui non esse^ ex eodem genere ortus. And
therefore in those days, they called such as were skilful in Physic (...),
the Sons of Physicians. Freitag. noct. mid. Prolegom.
And Freitagius seems to consent with this Report: Tradunt (says he)
Aesculapium tantum in suos posteros medicinae rationalis Cognitionem propagasse
usque ad Hypocratem, qui and ipsus ex Aesculapiorum familia fuit. They report
that Aesculapius only propagated the knowledge of Physic to his own kindred
even to Hypocrates, who also was of the Lineage of Aesculapius.

Hypocrates lived in great esteem and renown, was styled Princeps Medicorum,
Hypocrates divinus, Senex venerandus, and Artaxerxes King of Persia, hearing of
the fame of Hypocrates, invites him to come to him, and writes to the Governor
of the Hellespont thus: Hypocratis Medici Choi ab Aesculapio originem ducentis,
gloria artis etiam ad me pervenit: dato igitur ipsi auri quantum voluerit and
reliqua abunde quibus opus habet, and ipsum ad nos mittito; nam optimatibus
Persarum aequalis erit. Hypocrates Physician of Cous proceeding from
Aesculapius the glory of his Art has come unto me; therefore give unto him as
much Gold as he will have, and abundantly what ever else he has occasion for,
and send him to us; for he shall be equal with the Nobles of Persia.

But notwithstanding this great invitation (says my Author) Hypocrates
refused to go, Freitag.
saying, The King of Persia does not know, that Knowledge is better than Gold;
and afterward at his own Charge he sails to Abdera to visit Democritus the
Philosopher; who lay sick there. Many examples there are in History of the
ample Rewards, (many thousands of pounds) large stipends, honors and
privileges given to Physicians for Cures, by Emperors, Kings and Princes, so
greatly valued was their skill, as Pliny, Herodotus, Philippus Commineas, and
others relate; so highly has this Art been esteemed, and the professors
thereof worthily treated. But I must wave the relation of particulars at this
time for brevity sake.

After Hypocrates, next flourished Diocles Caristius, Praxagorus, Chrysippus;
and after them Herophilus and Erasistratus: about this time Physic began to be
divided into three parts, in Diaeteticam, Pharmaceuticam and Chirurgicam; Diet,
Medicines and Surgery: thus by degrees the Medicinal Art increased, and
spread in the world; also different Sects and Judgments, amongst the
professors did arise, concerning which we will inquire in the following Chapter.

TRACT. III. Of the Sects, and differents Judgments of Physicians.
THE several forts of Physicians, and Pactisers of Physic, may be reduced to
these three heads; Empericks, Methodists, and Rational: which last may be
divided into two sorts, Dogmatists or Galenists, and Chemists.

The Empyrical Sect were of opinion that nothing was required to the knowledge
of Physic but Experience: Emperical Sect.
now Experience may be said to be of three Ways, or of three Kinds: the first
is accidental; when any thing happens by Chance, that you did not expect: the
second Experience is Ex proposito, when one does purposely and designedly make
a trial: the third is Experientia imitatrix; when a Physician uses or
rejects those things, which in the like cases he has found to do good or
hurt, and this is that Experience chiefly meant, which constituteth that
Emperical Art, upon which bottom this Emperical Sect was founded and
denominated.

Those men judged Reason useless in their practice, and trusted wholly to
Experience; and therefore did not trouble themselves about examining of Causes,
and searching into the abstruse nature of Diseases and Bodies: but herein
differ the Empericks of ancient times, and these in our days; for they profess
and own nothing but Experience to be their Guide and Master, and herein they
were ingenious: but our Empericks pretend not only Experience, but great
Knowledge, when they are very ignorant in Philosophy and the Tongues: now the
ancient Empericks, and the modern, neither make inspection into the Disease it
self or the Cause, by a rational discourse and investigation (being unable so
to do) but altogether fix their eyes upon the Phenomenon, the external and
sensible appearances, the syndrome and concurrence of Symptoms, which
historically they have noted in the like Cases, and therefore do give the same
Remedies.

This Sect in ancient times, flourished chiefly amongst the Egyptians, and as
Herodotus reports, every Disease almost had a particular Physician, some were
for the Eyes, others for the Teeth, some for the Feet, others for the Hand; and
so each of them applied themselves to the Cure of some particular part of the
Body. Men of note of this Sect were Serapio, Philinus, Apollonius, Glaucius,
Heraclitus, Tarentinus, Menodotus, etc.

But in process of time finding their blind Experiments to deceive them, which
they wholly relied on, they began to establish themselves upon a better
foundation and did inquire into Causes, and the nature of things.

Themison Laodicaeus introduced and was Author of that Sect called the
Methodists; Methodists.
who held that the knowledge of Causes did not conduce to the Cure; nor had
they any consideration of the Sick, in respect of Temperament, Age, Custom,
Sex, strength of the Patient, time of the Year, Region, or any thing else which
a good Physician ought to have, but only looked upon the Disease in facto esse,
as it appeared by the Dianosticks, and from thence only they took their
indication for Cure.

They made their Art very compendious and short, and asserted against
Hypocrates who pronounced Vitam brevem and artem longam, Aphor.
that the Art of Physic was neither long not hard; and Thessalus would vainly
boast and promise to teach it in six months, without the assistance of any
other learning. They reduced all Diseases under these two Heads, Astriction,
and Laxity: for which two general Medicines they appointed, an Astringent for
Laxity; and a Laxative for Astriction; and one of these was used in all Cases:
of this Sect was Saranus, Antipater, Thessalus, Trallianus and others.

The vanity of whose Art was such, that I need not use any Argument to refute
their Opinions.

I come now to the Rational Physicians, Rational Physicians.
who are the considerable Party, that deserve to be insisted upon and rightly
understood: they were styled Rational Physicians, because by a strict
ratiotination they did search into the Causes of all things; and were not
contented to trust Experience only for their Rule and Guide (as the Emperical
Sect) but did join Reason with Experience, to confirm and ascertain the truth
of what they did believe: they took Cognizance of the whole frame of Nature,
and dived into the Secrets thereof; they brought under examination the natural
action and proprieties of all things; they considered accuratly the Frame of
Man's Body, in its natural and preternatural state; what was conducing to
preserve him in health, and what would free him from sickness: they took an
account of all the preternatural affects, that humane bodies were incident to;
how procured, how differenced and discerned, and how to be remedied: and this
they did establish by Rules and Precepts, to constitute and settle the
Medicinal Art upon a hand some and certain foundation.

These Rational Physicians though aiming all well, and industriously tending
toward one end; yet differed much in their Progress and Medicines to attain
it, and still continue so to this day.

Of these there are two grand dissenting Parties; Dogmatists or Galenists; and
Chemists or Hermetic Physicians: they were called Dogmatists from the many
Opinions that did arise amongst themselves; and now called Galenists from Galen
their great Patron whom they assert, and profess themselves to be his
Disciples, and own his Doctrine.

Galen lived about six hundred years after Hypocrates, Galen.
and practiced Physic at Athens, Alexandria and Rome, where he was in great
fame and splendour: he was a very learned man, and intended the honor and good
of the Profession, as appears by his great labor and pains which he took in
writing so many Volumes of Physic, and crushing the Emperical Sect and
Methodists that defamed this excellent Art: but for all this, he was not so
fortunate in his works, as to build the stately structure of Physic which he
had notably framed, upon a right foundation; which caused him to accumulate
errors, that his voluminous Writings are of little advantage, except to those
who are wary and intelligent, and rightly principl'd, that know how to pick and
choose; such I say may make some good use of his Works: but they that admire,
and read him so as to swallow all that is presented, and become a perfect
Disciple of his; such shall never be excellent in the true knowledge of
Physic, if they persist. Doubtless had this great Physician been acquainted
with the discoveries in Physic, which some Physicians in these days are
Masters of; his parts and industry were such, he had excelled all before and
after him, and Galen then would not have been a Galenist but a Chemist.

I shall not note the failings of this great man, others have sufficiently done
that already; yet many there are that think his Works most perfect, at least
will have them so, Servilia quorundam recentiorum ingenia satis mirari non
possum, Senert. Co^. ct disse^. Chym. cum Gal^^.
qui scribere ausi sunt, se cum antiquis errare malle, quam cum recentioribus
verum dicere, says Sennertus. So addicted are many, jurare in verba magistri,
they will maintain the Credit of their Patrous right or wrong. But Julius
Scaliger notes the pertinacious defense of antique Authors, to be very
injurious to truth and increase of knowledge. Equidem saepenumero miratus sum
mortalium vel audaciam vel pertinaciam, Lib. 3. de Cause. Ling. Lat.
qui tuentur errores, quos ii qui commiserunt, si viverent, emendarent. Many
there are who dotingly do so adore their Patrons that they will maintain such
tenants of theirs; as they themselves, had they been alive now, would have
recanted and receded from them.

Sennertus his Counsel in this case is very just and moderate, concerning the
truth, and the repute of famous antique Authors; his words are these:
Antiquorum and magnorum virorum scripta and inventa magnifaciamus and grata
mente amplectamur: Sen. Co^s. Et disse^. Chyn. cum Galea.
iis tamen non tam quia antiqua and a magnis profecta, quam quia veritati
consentanea sunt, fidem habeamus; si vero aliquando a veritate deflectant,
nostrum esse putemus; non maledictis eos and convicijs incessere, sed corrigere
and defectus illos supplere: amicus sit Hypocrates, amicus Galenus, imo amicus
Paracelsus, sed nullius tanta sit authoritas ut veritati, quae prae omnibus
nohis amica sit, praejudicare debet.

I shall now leave Galen and his Party; and come to the other division of
Rational Physicians, namely the Chemical or Hermetic Physicians: I shall not
trouble you with the different opinions about Nomenclature and derivation of
the word Chymia or Chemia; nor do I purpose at this time, to launch forth into
the Controversy between these two great Parties, that is a large piece of
work; only I shall obliquely glance at some differences in the Current of this
Discourse.

The name of Chemist sounds harsh in some men's ears, and they suppose Chemistry
to be but a novel invention: as for Chemists the Artists and Professors
thereof, I shall speak of them hereafter; at present we will consider the
antiquity and rise of this Art; the propagation of it by whom; and thirdly the
necessary use and excellency of it.

Concerning the rise and invention of Chemistry, Authors disagree in this
point; but thus much I am convinced of and may safely affirm, that Chemistry
bears a very ancient date, and is of long standing in the world: some divide
Chemistry into two parts, Metallurgiam and Chymiatriam; transmutation of
Metals, and making of Medicines; and that the first gave occasion and detection
of the later. For metallic elaboration and working upon Metals we find the
antiquity of that in Sacred Writ; Tubalcain was an Artificer in Brass and Iron:
now Brass and Iron is not dug out of the earth complete for use, but
requires fusion and artificial separation of heterogeneous parts, to fit these
metals for use: nor can we think their trials and skill extended only to these
two Metals mentioned; but very probably we may believe they did operate and
exercise their Art in other the more noble Metals and Minerals. Now for the
Chymiatrical or Medical part of Chemistry, though I cannot positively affirm
that it was in use then, yet we plainly see there was a foundation laid and
beginning from hence that we may probably conclude it was not long after, but
medicinal Experiments were found out; for by proving and trying of Minerals
many things are found beyond the intention of the Artist.

But for a more plain discovery of this Art, and by a more general agreement of
Authors; this profound Art is ascribed to Hermes Trifmegistus (therefore called
ars Hermetica) who lived in the year of the world 2440. contemporary with Moses
in Egypt, where he exercised this Art: and some are of opinion that Moses was
skilled in this Art, being bred up in all the learning of the Egyptians, and
that by this Art he pulverised the golden Calf. But it is not antiquity that
proves the excellency of Chemistry; for as Sennertus says, Licet hodie primum
Chymia inventa esset; dignitati tamen ejus id nihil detraheret. Sat enim
antiquum, quod fat bonum; nihilque invenire est quod non aliquando novum
fuerit; and multa pro novis habentur, quae sunt antiquissima, though Chemistry
were but of a late standing that does not derogate from the excellency of the
Art, the best of things had a beginning; though we could not be so well
satisfied and ascertained in it, having not proved and examined it
sufficiently, being a matter of time which perfectly discovers all things: but
Chemistry has been a sufficient time in the world, exercised by skilful,
learned and industrious men, who have left us such infallible testimonies and
undeniable demonstrations of its admirable worth, together with our own proofs
and experiments, which has put us past all doubting, that we are able to stop
the mouths of all gainsayers) except the ignorant or malicious detractors, whom
reason cannot rule or persuade.

But to let pass the antiquity and rise of this Art; we will consider the
progress and gradual perfection, as it has been handed and delivered even to
us in these days, successively by men of great note and worth, and the esteem
they had for it, which alone without demonstration de factis, what it can
perform, is sufficient to persuade reasonable men into the excellency and worth
of it. Philosophers and Physicians that have treated of Chemistry in Arabic
are, Geber, Markos, Avicen, Albumazar, Haly, Rhasis, etc. In Greek have written
Olimpiodorus, Zosimus, Heliodorus, Dardanus, Democritus, and others.

In Latin we have a great company that have propagated and illustrated this
Art, men of great fame and worth: as Raymund Lully, Arnoldus Villanovanus,
Petrus Villanovanus, Thomas Aquinas, Joannes de Rupescissa, Paracelsus,
Libavius, Valensis, Maierus, Basil: Valentinus, Crollius, Quercetan, Mylius,
Penotus, Sendivogius, Angelus Sala, Faber, Hartman, Schroder, Van Helmont,
Glauber, and Swelfer that excellent Physician and Pharmacopaeian, (with many
more which I have not named) men of great Learning and Judgment, laborious in
Chemistry, by whose industry in this Art, we have admirable discoveries made to
us of the mysteries in Nature, not to be unlocked but by the Key of this Art;
by which we are established upon principles in Physic more consonant with
Reason, and more satisfactory then the Galenick Doctrine; being enabled thereby
to prove them by Sense, A sensibus ^aim cognitio restra depe^det, ut jure Plato
dixcrit, secsus esse sinceros mentis internantios, cosque appellaverit quasi
satellites, and duces ad veritatem comparadam.
which confirms and determines our reasonings and dubious discourses.

I shall not give you the account and testimony of these Chemical Authors
(though the best of Physicians) to establish and confirm you in the right and
just opinions of Chemistry, that it is the only way to attain excelling
Medicines; but you shall have the Confessions of Galenick Writers, and those
men of note, approved and imitated in their practice by the Galenists of our
times.

The light of Chemistry has so far prevailed against the darkness of error and
ignorance; that the most are constrained to confess and acknowledge its
excellent worth and use, though they be bottomed upon another foundation, I
mean Galenick principles.

Freitagius a Galenist, yet confesses the goodness of Chemistry: Chymia nulli
Medicorum sordere aut in vilipendio esse debet, sed potius ingeniosa Encheria
and elegans praeparandorum medicamentorum ratic in summa lauda ponenda, Noct.
Med. Cap. 19.
utpote quae scitu medicis utilis, quod ejus beneficio divinae aliquot
compositiones and essentiae inventae, multisque balsamis, eximiis liquoribus
oleisque, ante nostram atatem pene ignoratis pharmacopolia nostra ditata sunt,
quare his ^eculis nostris magno mortalium bono Chymia e tenebris revexit.

Also Mercatus that Learned Spaniard an eminent Galenick Writer, speaks the
praise of Chemical Medicines, and shows their efficacy where others cannot
prevail, Chymica enim art summa comparatur mixtis tenuitas, Tom. 2. de recte
praesid. Isu. page 193.
qua dupliciter malis penitioribus facit, and quia accedit ad imum radisesque
mali, and quia cum toto affecto loco conversatur and miscetur, Med. polit. page
19.
ut facile alteret and evincat.

And Rodericus a Castro though a severe Galenist, inveighing bitterly against
Paracelsus, yet confesses that Chemistry affords them a true way of making
Medicines: Nec inficias imus quorundam remediorum rite praeparandorum came artem
rationem nobis suppeditare; and qui hoc praestat, hunc verum ac industriosum
Chymistam appellamus.

Hear what Gregory Horstius says (a worthy Physician) in commendation of
Chemistry, and he joins Heurnius and Mathiolus consenting with him. Encomia
Chymiae non opus est ut hic recenseam, quia verum est quod habet alicubi
Heurnius: Cespitat jam profecto sine hac art medicina; quam ab causam recte
dicit, And: Horst. l. 10. de pharm.
Mathiolus in Epist. Ausim dicere neminem medicum absolutem esse posse, imo nec
medicorum quidem, qui in hac nobilissima distillandi scientia non sit
exercitatus.

Chemistry is so necessary to a Physician that he cannot be complete without
it; nay they will not allow him to be an ordinary competent Physician if he be
not exercised and knowing in this Art.

And Arnisaeus Physic Professor in the University of Julia, writing to
Horstius, gives him this account: Studium enim medicum, Dei gratia, viget apud
nos, ut vix ante hac: and ne quid desit, Aperui studiosis medicinae, meo
sumptu, Collegium and exercitium medicum, ad quod operas suas mihi conduxit
Augustus Etzlerus, homo industrius and in artis operibus diu versatus; Audio
and apud vos Chymiam public and doceri and exerceri, To which Greg. Horstius
returns him this answer: Nostri quod olim, ubi commilitones eramus in Juli^
vestra Academia, praeceptores nostri, Clariss^. Dom. Horst. Epist.
Jacobus Horstius, patr^us meus honorandus, Clariss. Parcovius, Arnoldus,
Sigfridus and Siddelius, nihil in sese desiderari paterentur, quo studiosae
juventuti poterant inservire, quod corundem monumenta satis confirmant; Unica
Chymia desiderabatur -- Caeterum conatus tuos laudo, qui nullis sumptibus
parcis, quo sarta tecta facultatis medicae existimatio nobis maneat; exercitium
Chymicum Philiatris aperuisti non tantum, sed etiam ejusmodi collaborantem
conduxisti, qui jamdudum sua diligentia multis innotuit: nos etiam Chymica
tractare non ignoras: -- this bears date 1617. you may see what esteem
Chemistry has had in some Universities, the students instructed in it and
exercised; and those Physicians that were not skilled in this Art, it was
accounted in them a great deficiency.

And Belzar Chief Physician to the Elector of Saxony, writes to Horstius that
eminent Professor, chiefly to give him this account: Caeterum quod scire
gestis, nostra officina Aulica remediorum Chymicorum varietate satis instructa
est, quorum Catalogum propediem meus Dominus videbit. But that which you desire
to know, our Laboratory at Court is sufficiently furnished with variety of
Chemical Medicines, a Catalogue of which, forthwith shall be presented to the
Duke. In Horstius his answer to this Letter he writes, Videant osores Chymiae,
praeter spem ipsorum, quotidie magis utilissimam hanc artem magnatibus
commendari -- the haters of Chemistry may see beyond their expectation, this
most profitable Art of Chemistry daily to be esteemed by Nobles.

Chemistry and Chemical Medicines were accounted the glory of a Physician with
these learned Professors; and indeed it may well be; for by this he is what he
is, if he be a Physician of worth; and without it he is of little value, for he
can have but little true fundamental knowledge in Physic.

Chemistry makes a man an exact Naturalist; and this is the foundation for a
Physician to stand upon; and this leads him into the Secrets and Curiosities of
Nature which are hid to all those that have not this Key. Here Causes and their
Effects are discovered, and their mutual relations owned: by a Chemical
Analysis and unravelling of mixed Bodies, is discovered their heterogeneous
parts and distinct properties; whereby they are sensibly manifest to be what
they are, which before was but dubiously discoursed of at random.

Sennertus a solid Writer, generally approved of by all the Galenists and
followed in his practice, gives this account of Chemistry. Almost all that has
been said by the Chemists in the praise of Chemistry and Chemical Medinines, we
freely subscribe to. Cons. and diss. Chym. c^m Gal. cap. 2.
Then he brings in Schenkius a Galenist confessing the admirable worth of
Chemistry, and recites his own words which are these: In separandis mixtis
naturis admodum ingeniosa est ars Chymica, ut digna sit admirationis, and
minime contemnenda and negligenda a Medicis.

And Mesue of a toyal blood, a Physician who lived about 500. years ago, whose
works are well esteemed; speaks thus of Chemical Physicians: They are called
Chemists, who make manifest and discover the hidden properties of things; that
I may confidently say, scarce any one is able to attain to the internal
abstruse knowledge of things, who is not skilful in Chemical Operations; by
which natural bodies are artificially disjoined and severed into parts,
Antidotar. distiect. 21.
from whence the admirable consent and dissent of things are discovered, which
otherwise would remain occult.

Sennertus in the same Tract mentioned, reckons up more Converts, eminent
Physicians that began to applaud Chemistry; and became Disciples of this
profound Art: Quae cum ita se habent, charissimi quique medici Chymiam,
postquam superiore saeculo inclarescere coepit, and coluerunt and laudarunt;
Langius, Andernatus, Gesnerus, Crato, Zuingerus, Schenkius, Horat. Augenius,
Minadous, and plurimi alij. And indeed in our times we find most of the
Galenists, at least the best of them, confessing and applauding Chemistry,
though their practice is Galenical.

Indeed Chemistry requires pains and diligence in making various trials and
experiments, before a man can obtain a competent knowledge therein; and requires
necessary accommodations for those purposes, which is both chargeable and
troublesome, that many decline it upon this score, which else would willingly
embrace it: some cannot spare time to prosecute it; others are ashamed to begin
to learn: for such causes and impediments as these, Chemistry is laid aside;
the Galenick practice is an easier life; those which would embrace Chemical
truths, cannot or will not undergo the Chemical labor and exercise in this
noble Art; but without manual operations, your speculations are unprofitable,
and your conceptions erroneous conjectures.

As for the state and condition of Physic in our own times, though we have
very illustrious discoveries made to us, such as the former ages never enjoyed,
(thanks to profound Helmont and some others) and we are in a better capacity to
advance and establish this excellent Art beyond whatever it has been before;
yet by reason of the dissent amongst the Professors, and a rabble of Empericks
and illiterate practisers, that destroy both Art and Artists, the hopes of
accomplishing this excellent work, now languisheth before our eyes; and we may
fear that Physicians of the next Generation will be Mechanics and not
Academicks, Tempestivus metus, prudens securitas est.
if timely prevention do not turn the Current, by an unanimous consent amongst
the Learned Professors.

I have now compendiously given you an account of the several Sects and
different Judgments of Physicians, whereby they have and are distinguished
into Parties, through the whole progress of Physic to our own days: our next
business is a more particular and strict inquiry into the qualifications, and
actions of Chemical Operations, and others exercising the Practice of Physic.

TRACT. IV. The several Sorts of Chemists distinguished.
I Find the people either deceiving themselves, or being deceived with
Chemists; which has brought a disrepute upon the name, that the Chemical
Physician suffers much by it; especially in the opinion of the unlearned that
cannot well distinguish.

There are four sorts of Chemical men, that go under the name of Chemist. The
Shop Chemist, the Chemical Emperick, the Galeno-Chymist, the True Chemical
Physician.

The Shop Chemist, he is Operator and Venditor; a maker and seller of Chemical
Medicines in his Shop: The Chemical Emperick he is Operator and Practitioner; a
maker and practiser with Chemical Medicines: The Galeno-Chymist, he is
Speculator and Practiser; an approver or lover of Chemical Medicines, and
practiser with them, but not operator; he does not make not exercise himself in
Chemical operations.

The True Chemical Physician, he is Speculator, Operator and Practiser. It is
his study, exercise and practice.

The Shop Chemist makes and sells Chemical Medicines, as the Apothecary does
the Galenick Medicines; they learn their Art by Apprentiships and manual
operation, not by Philosophical instruction and learned education. Their Trade
is making and selling of Medicines, and to be directed by the Physician in the
legitimate artificial preparation thereof, who alone is, at least ought to be
Magister Artis; these are ministerial and subordinate to him, and are to be
confined within that station; their business extends no farther in Medicines
then their Shop, where their Trade is: the practice of Physic belongs not to
these; and this Chemist is not a Chemical Physician, nor is he quallified for
any such employment; if otherwise he does, then he falls under the Censure of a
Chemical Emperick, and is to be taken for no other: but if he follows his Trade
honestly, making Medicines faithfully, and with skill according to the Rules of
Art, his Calling is just and useful; and may supply the wants of Chemical
Physicians, in such Medicines as their own accommodations cannot furnish them
with.

But if this man be not both able and honest, his Trade is most dangerous, and
the greatest Cheat of all others; and therefore this Trade ought most strictly
to be looked into and examined: for from this Chemist the Apothecaries are
furnished with the most of their Chemical Medicines, and they are dispersed
into all parts of the Kingdom, from London into the Country Apothecaries
hands, for the use of Physicians: the Physician though he be a Galenick
practiser, yet ofttimes prescribes these Chemical Medicines, and takes them
upon trust, as the Apothecary does, supposing them to be good and faithfully
made.

Now if these Medicines be sophisticate, and fallacious, or unskilfully, or
negligently prepared, (as too many are) I need not tell you what injury they do.

This is a general Concern and worth taking notice; every sick man may expect
to take his share here, good or bad.

TRACT. V. The Chemical Emperick.
THis man is very injurious to the Learned Chemical Physician, whom he
fallaciously does personate and represent: by whose ignorance and dangerous
practice, a scandal is brought upon Chemical Medicines, and the true professors
of that Art, the people not well discerning the one from the other, think them
all alike, and the miscarriages of these fellows defame the very name of
Chemist: but I shall inform you, and let you understand the great difference
between this Emperick, and the Chemical Doctor of Physic.

The Emperical Chemist for the most part is some broken Tradesman, or other
person of decayed fortunes, that takes shelter here to support himself, by
deluding incautelous people not knowing how to detect this deceitful Chemist,
Nullus tam stupidus Phormio est, F^citag.
vel Davus qui frustra omnibus vitam tuendi rationibus tentatis, demum ^on
profiteatur Medicinam, says Freitaius. There is none so dull a blockhead
having tried in vain other shifts to live, but at last he can practice Physic.
This is the Asylum and refuge that many men betake them to in their desperate
fortunes. He does not only deceive the Sick, but he defames a learned Art, and
the worthy professors of it: else, Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur.

But if this pretended Chemist be not such a man as I have described, forced by
fortune to profess Physic and the Chemical Art; but comes in upon a voluntary
score, and is free to live this way, or another way if he please. Yet if he be
not prepared with learning, has not laid a Philosophical foundation to fit him
for this grand Business, has not gone through the whole body of Physic, and
is well verst in every part, to qualify and fit him for practice; this man is
but an Emperick, a bold Intruder, a Cheat in this Profession, and a dangerous
man to advise or give Physic. Hear what Hypocrates says for the qualifying
and fitting a Physician, whosoever will get the true knowledge of Physic, must
obtain it by these means; Hypocrat.
A natural Ingeny and Promptness, Learning, Conveniences for Study, Education
from his Youth, Industry and Time: But these men have scarce one of these
qualifications, and yet they dare undertake the Practice of Physic, and the
making of Medicines, neither of which they rightly understand, or are qualified
to learn, having no foundation to stand upon, or praevious requisite
disposition to initiate them. Hi Medicinam nescientes, Medicina abutuntur; and
artem egregiam quam non noverunt, Rodericus Epist. in Speculo su^ vitae humanae.
profitentur; Medicinae excellenti and illustri nomine gloriantur, and quaestus
gratia pecuniam, ut finem, quaerunt. They are the words of Rodericus Bishop of
Zamora, complaining of the Empericks of those times: and so goes on; Add quod
multa millia hominum talium Medicorum insipientia aut inexperientia cadant,
quod dum unum morbum curare satagunt, plures inducunt. Although the Chemical
Emperick and the Galenick, are much alike in their qualifications to practice
Physic, that what is said of the one may serve to decipher and warn you of the
other, that I need not name them distinctly; yet more particularly I shall
describe the Cheating Chemist, who is the more dangerous fellow of the two, and
a disgrace to the most learned profound art of Chemistry. At his very first
designing and entrance upon Physic, he falls to work upon the making of
Medicines, and practicing upon the Sick: he never thinks that seven years study
is required, and little enough to lay a foundation before practice; no, he
cannot stay so long; he is for present getting of Money, not for spending of
Money. And now he begins to practice, he is an expert learned Physician, the
very first day he begins: he boasts of great Cures he has done, and what is it
he cannot cure? He will talk as confidently, and lie as handsomely, as if he had
been at the Trade a long time; telling you what wonderful Cures he has
performed, and what Patients have gone through his hands. Nihil audacia
doctius, and ignorantia audacius. Hypocrat.
He brags much of his Experience, for Reason he can produce little. He takes
the Title of Chemical Doctor upon him, when perhaps he never saw the inside of
a University; he vilifies University Learning, but loves University Honor, and
thinks himself wronged if you call him not Doctor: if you speak of a Doctor of
Physic that is so indeed; he slights his Title, and counts Degrees of no
value; but the Doctoral Title he has conferred on himself, that he expects you
take good notice of, and reverence him for. He gains his knowledge a new way,
not by University Philosophy, nor in the Schools; but amongst his Furnaces; and
he is Philosophus per ignem, a Philosopher by the Fire; and they that meddle
with them are sure to burn their fingers.

This working Chemist we will consider him as Inceptor, in the beginning of his
practice; or as Adeptus, by the length of time more experienced in making
Medicines. At first, he is a barbarous fellow and kills desperately; and few
escape (that comes in his Clutches) without a mischief, but carry about them
memento's of his Craft. He falls to work at first dash with Antimony and
Mercury, and makes Medicines enough to depopulate a City. After many sad
disasters in his practice, he begins to be more wary; and by doleful experience
(to the Sick) is taught to make more safe and gentle Medicines: Jam melius
didicit periculis vestris.

By time, if the man be ingenious and follows his work diligently, in
meliorating his Medicines and improving his experiments; is well accommodated
with a Laboratory and Utensils; he will be able to make some good Medicines,
and becomes a better operator then formerly; but a great many have paid dearly
for his skill; but their mouths are stopped with earth that they cannot complain
of his hard usage, and he proceeds on in his practice boldly and smoothly: and
now (after his long Adventures and hazardous Experiments to instruct him) we
will be so candid and favorable to him in our opinions, as to consider him
equal with the Shop Chemist, and suppose him to understand the working part of
Chemistry, that he is able to make any Medicine according to the progress laid
down in any Author or Pharmacopeian.

And now being arrived hither, if he would leave practicing upon the Sick, and
keep only to making of Medicines, and make them faithfully to sell, for the use
of Physicians, Apothecaries, or others that desire them; or be an operator to
Physicians, and Tyroe's in Chemistry; this man might live more happily and free
from blame. But he is loath to leave his old wont; Bonus odor lucri -- though
unjustly gotten: his practice brought in Money; and having usurped the
Doctorship, he thinks scorn to be degraded, and take his own proper Title
again; he will be a Doctor still, so long as any body will think him so, or
repair to him; and rather then his Custom shall fail, he will have twenty
crafty tricks to hook in Patients. Such Medicasters as these, London now
abounds with, and other parts of the Kingdom has too many such scattered here
and there, to the disparagement of Physic, Freitag.
and the learned Professors. Imposturas horum medicastrorum emendet Magistratus
and Caveat vulgus, it belongs to the Magistrate to reform these abuses, and the
people to be warned of such Impostors.

Here I shall leave this Cheating Chemist at his cunning deceits and juggling
with his Patients, and show you his Capacity and Ability to practice Physic,
supposing him at the best (which few of them attain to) a good operator and
prepater of Chemical Medicines.

I must confess, to make good Medicines, and be well skilled in Pharmacy, is
one good part of a Physician, nay a principal part; but where is all the rest
to complete him? Here is a Body but no Head; here are Medicines but where is
Skill to use them: there is a great deal more required to qualify a Physician,
besides Medicines. I can take a Ploughman and learn him to make Medicine in
some reasonable time, but what then? I may make him a good workman, but not a
good Physician: this man I may teach to work well with his hands, but he is not
capable to work with his head: he has not the rudiments and groundwork of
Philosophy to fit and capacitate him for such an employment.

That man which intends the practice of Physic, must be qualified with good
Literature, and lay a Philosophical foundation, that he may be able to
discourse and reason with himself, the causes and effects of things, both in
Nature and Art: that he may be able to judge and examine the Opinions and
Doctrine of men in the same faculty, to adhere to this or that according to
right reason. The Furniture required to accommodate and fit a Physician is
much, and requires a good time to be gathering together: he must be instituting
and fitting up from his youth, taking in Literature betimes, (Ars longa, vita
brevis est) and gradually completing step by step, from one part of Learning
to another, until he be thoroughly qualified for the Art or Science he is
designed for.

Ubi desinit Physicus, ibi incipit Medicus. A man is not to meddle with Physic
until he has run through Natural Philosophy; this is the foundation he stands
upon: and when he comes to the study of Physic, Ars Medendi, he has a long
progress to make before he comes to the Pharmaceutick part, the contrivance of
Medicines; this is the last work he has to do, he is now come to the top of
the Ladder, here he finisheth his Course, and having gained this he is
complete. But this Emperick skips all the rest, and mounts to the top at first:
if this man do not catch a fall, he is sure to make many one lie low for it: he
begins where the true Physician ends; he falls to work upon Medicines, before
he understands the nature of Humane Bodies or Diseases, the Materials he works
upon, or the Rules of his Art he pretends to.

But this man you will say has learned by long Experience to make good
Medicines, now he may practice safely? No, admit he has; good Tools do not make
a good Artist: he that makes Chirurgical Instruments is as unskilful in
Surgery as another man. If you bring me the Tools and Instruments of the
best Watch-maker; yet I cannot make a Watch; I cannot use them, because I have
not the whole design of the work in my head: so this working Chemist, suppose
he has good Medicines, yet what can he do with them, if he do not understand
the whole Art of Physic, he cannot practice knowingly and safely as an honest
man ought to do: you may as well kill a man with a Cordial, as with another
Medicine; you may kill a man with a good Medicine as well as with a bad, if the
condition of the Patient be not considered according to the indications: if you
give a, good Medicine out of season, and neglect opportunity, if you give one
Medicine when the case requires another; a Purge when a Cordial is required; or
a Cordial, when a Purge or other Medicine is required; the opportunity perhaps
is gone of doing this man good. There is a time and season to be observed, when
Medicine is to be given this or that as the occasion does call for, which none
but the skilful Physician understands; who knows the nature of the Disease, its
progress, complications, and condition of the Patients body.

The making of Medicines is not sufficient to qualify you for a Physician;
there is a great deal more belongs to accomplish a Physician besides that: a
man may be a good workman in hewing and carving a piece of Timber, yet may be
very unfit to contrive the Building of a Ship; he must have the whole Design
and Frame of such a work in his head, considering every material appertaining
that it be exact and proportionate according to Rule, that the whole may be
complete in the several parts of it. You suppose this Chemist can make a good
Medicine: what then? This does not make him a good Physician; he is only an
operator, a good workman at best: but using and designing Medicines rightly is
a profound Art, requires great knowledge which is not obtained but by long
time, and a diligent Series of study. This Chemist begins at the wrong end, he
begins with making of Medicines, and neglects all the rest that belongs to this
Learned Art; but the true Physician he finisheth his study and ends with
Medicines; then enters upon practice.

The insufficiency of these men in Learning; their inability to acquire a
sound, requisite, Philosophical knowledge, by this preposterous indirect
course, is apparent to reasonable men, that such are deceivers of the Sick and
abusers of a most learned and noble Art. And therefore it behooves all that have
a regard to their safety, to beware least they fall into the hands of such
impostors, that fallaciously personate the Learned Chemical Physician, and
impudently usurp the Doctoral Title; that vilify and reproach men of Learning,
despise their Degrees, and scoff at Universities as a ridiculous Education,
which nothing but the bold front of Ignorance, or exquisite Knavery and Envy
could do the like. And now I leave them to be handled by those, which have a
power, and ought to reform these grand abuses, and give due encouragement to
Learning and learned men.

TRACT. VI. The practicing Apothecary.
AMongst the Encroachers upon the Faculty of Physic, we find the practicing
Apothecary usurping the Physicians Function, to which formerly he was
ministerial; but has now broke that relation and become magisterial, a
professor and practiser of Physic: how this comes about, that the Doctor
should be undermined by his Servant, whom he has entrusted with his Secrets,
and put great confidence in, is worth inquiring into: Sure here was great folly
in the one to lay open the Accana's of his Art, and give occasion to be
supplanted and beguiled; or great knavery in the other to betray his trust, and
usurp the authority of his Master. Whether of the two is more to be blamed and
censured, though in a different respect, is hard to say, for both are highly
guilty. But we will proceed to a farther examination of this Matter.

How long have you been a practiser of Physic? Apoth. Almost ever since
Physicians deserted the making of their Medicines: though they be so careless
to neglect the weightiest part of their Profession, and resign the most
difficult part of their Art into the hands of others to manage; yet I am an
industrious man and had rather do more then I ought, then less: and therefore I
think I am not to be blamed so much as they.

Who taught you this trick of practicing Physic? That does not belong to your
Trade, you are only to make and sell, you are not to advise, and take charge of
the Sick, you forget the Proverb, Ne Suitor ultra crepidam. Apoth. I learned it
of my Master, he got many a fair pound by it; he gained the love of his
Neighbors and Friends by saving them the expense of Fees; and got Custom to
his Shop by it.

But how dare you to practice Physic? That Is a great Undertaking, a grand
Business which requires much knowledge and great skill to manage, you only know
how to make the Medicines. Apoth. It Is true, I do not solidly understand the
whole body of Physic, but I understand a Medicine better then he that
prescribes it; so if I be defective in the other parts of Physic, he is in
Medicines, for I correct his Bill sometimes, else it would not be secundum
artem; therefore I think my self not so incapable to practice, nor of the worst
sort of Empericks that understand neither Diseases nor Medicines.

But Friend, the Physicians deficiency in the pharmacopoietical part, does not
countenance you to be pragmatick, nor qualify you in the other parts of
Physic; and you have reason to thank him for being so, else where had been
your Trade? He parted with the Secrets of his Art to set you up: now had not
you better follow your Trade honestly, and not usurp the Physicians Function;
whereby you will show your gratitude, and acknowledgements for this great
kindness, and own what you have received from him. Apoth. Truly, the number of
our Trade does much increase, and we are so many of us, and the Chemical
Empericks so abound, that I cannot get enough by selling in my Shop, except I
go abroad and practice: besides, the Medicines of my Shop are so many, I must
find a way to vend them, or they will be spoiled before they be spent.

Although this does not excuse you in the Injury done to Physicians, yet if it
be so as you say, it mitigates your fault a tanto; but why do you not seek a
Redress, by better and more careful means; by consulting the Physicians, whose
Candor toward you is such, they will be ready to join and assist your
Corporation, in rectifying and obviating those inconveniences for the future,
you complain of; by preventing the swelling number and great increase of
Traders. By contracting and taking off the superfluous and supernumeraries of
your Melicines imposed upon you; and by suppressing the Chemical Empericks and
all other illegal practisers: which being done (as it is not very difficult to
be effected) the Business of Physic will lie between the Physicians and your
selves; and then you will have no Cause or Plea to exceed the bounds of your
Trade, nor the Physicians just Cause to complain of you, as they have at this
day.

But Mr. Apothecary, if you practice and be much abroad, visiting your
Patients, who must manage your Business at home? Apoth. My Boys can do the
Business in the Shop, they can make Medicines and serve Customers, and if a
Physicians Bill come they can make up the Medicine well enough to serve turn.

But what if the Boys should mistake, or for want of Care and Skill, the
Medicine be ill made, will not that reflect upon you, if it do not operate
well, according to the intention of the Medicine. Apoth. No, I can come off
well enough, I can say the Medicine was made according to the Prescription; the
Doctor cannot disprove me, let the fault lie at his door: I must look after my
occasions abroad; my Servants are sufficient to do the Business at home; I
cannot be always in my Shop, nor will I tie my self to wait upon his Business,
but at my own convenience: it is true, we were at first but Ministri Medicorum;
but now we are in a fair way to be Medicorum Magistri: we can bring them into
practice, and we can put them out of practice when we please: if we do but
whisper in the Patients ear, this Doctor does not prescribe well; he comes no
more there, another is sent for that we like bettter, that uses our Shop, or
pleases our humor: our words go far in the opinion of the Patient, and
except he be very much preingaged and bent upon a Physician, we can sway him
this way or that way as our interest leads us; but if he names a Chemical
Physician, one that makes his own Medicines, we cry him down might and main, he
spoils our Trade; we can say he is a Quack, or a man of no parts (though he be
the ablest Physician in the Town) that his Medicines are mineral Physic and
dangerous; we will blast his Credit if it be possible; he shall have no
Reputation if our words can defame him: but he that practices at our own Shop,
that sends his Bills hither; that is the best Physician, and him only we advise
you to.

It Is enough; we understand now the mystery and design of your Trade; your
unlawful practice of Physic, and influence upon the Sick; your encroachments
upon Physicians, and secret injuries. We understand now the Apothecary's advice
and kindness to the Patient in the choice of a Physician; his judgment and
censure of Physicians, upon what Bias it runs.

When Physic was in its Infancy, and after it began to increase and have good
growth in Hypocrates and Galen's times, Physicians then managed the whole
Business themselves, there was no Apothecaries; but the careful industrious
Physician prepared his own Medicines and would not entrust so great a Concern
in the hand of others: but when Physic came into a general repute and use;
Physicians few, and Patients many; they began to commit the preparation of
their medicines to others, whom they did instruct and train up in Pharmacy, and
were wholly guided and commanded by the Physician, and were very obsequious and
useful servants to him: but these having gained the knowledge of Medicines, a
freedom in making and selling, and by time privileges of incorporation; the
case is altered now, the Physician has lost his faithful servant, he is now
independent, an Apothecary; yes, and a Physician too, and thinks himself as
well interessed and concerned in Physic as the Doctor and interferes with him
in his practice. Freitagius checks the boldness of these men very sharply; De
Abus^ medicina page 97.
Nimis audax impudensque facin^^ est Pharmacopoeos scientiae quadam frivola
opinione infl^^os velle recta morbis remedia inconsulto medico, auctoramento
proprio, ventosa arrogantia and confidentia plus quam Cyclopica decernere.

It Is strange that our predecessors had not the Prognostic of this in their
heads, to obviate the mischief that might befall their successors; that they
did not consult what might happen upon on the Introduction of Sub-ordinate men,
and committing the Arcana's of art to their trust; that they did not as well
provide against the infidelity and encroachments of these, as design their own
ease and present convenience. It Is plain they did not, and the ill consequents
are as evident: give an inch and they take an ell; Physicians gave them the
profit of Medicines, but they take the benefit of practicing too, and ask no
leave: the propriety of Medicines they challenge as properly belonging to them;
the next will be a propriety in practice (they are not satisfied with their
trade) they would be equal with Physicians; and having gained that, ^^^^es ut
fi^nt aquales; aequales ut (...) maj^res cert^^.
the next endeavor is to be above them: Success begets boldness, and
incourageth farther attempts; winners know not how to leave off their game.
Many of these Apothecaries are grown very confident in the Practice of Physic,
and custom which makes all things familiar, will legitimate and approve them
in the opinion of common people; such thriving leaders shall not want
followers, it is casie to guess then what will be the issue and event of it this
is a bad omen and seems to threaten the Crown; which undoubtedly will fall upon
this faculty (as it comes on apace) if not timely prevented by the prudence and
unanimous consent of the Professors. The only means to avert this ill fate: and
although the Seniors that are well planted may think themselves secure and that
the storm will not happen in their days; yet they cannot but be sensible of the
great encroachments and injuries now offered to themselves; which will fall
much heavier upon the Juniors, not so able to contend but must truckle.

Dr. Thomson noting the abuses in Physic does not without cause charge many of
them upon the imprudence of the Professors, in the il management of their own
business. It Is true, says he, there are sad exorbitancies, Galius ^al^
irregularities and abuses in Physic, but who we pray have been the principal
occasions of them but your selves? who have conjured up such swarms of Quacks
in every place (who like Locusts eat the bread out of honest Physicians
mouths) by your profane prescripts. -- If they had better practiced the
Pythagotical doctrine, these things had never been; or had ye delivered your
selves, as ye find fault Paraecelsus, Helmont, and other sons of art did, more
aenigmatically, who foresaw these mischiefs, and endeavored to prevent them,
Physic had flourished to this day in its splendour and beauty.

Dr. Vindiciae medicinae and medicorum.
Hodges treats upon this Subject, of practicing Apothecaries; wherein he sets
forth the great abuse offered to this learned faculty by such men, and shows
their insufficiency for that undertaking. I shall recite some part.

Indeed such is the increase of the Apothecaries company, page 62.
that all of them cannot reasonably expect employment, who therefore hunt
abroad after Patients, and prey one upon another business; these
inconveniences would be remedied if the counsel of a grave w^ter was
observed, who advises the magistrate to be very careful not to tolerate more
Apothecaries then are sufficient for the discharge of that profession; implying
that if they super-abounded, they would most infallibly injure the public, and
rather then their Medicines for want of timely use should decay and grow
worthless, choose (...) spend them by their own practice, and think it a less
crime to harm the people then suffer any damage in their Shop (...) and when
these practicing Apothecarie have by their insinuations inveigled some to take
Physic of them, as it is not improbable but that these being ignorant of the
direct way of curing diseases, must necessarily hereupon spend more medicines
then Physicians who exactly knowing what is to be done, will not multiply
prescripts to tire out their patients and advance their charge; so how can such
Patients assure themselves that their Apothecary Physicians do not make use of
that opportunity as much to rid their shop of Physic, as them of diseases;
however if the whole is cast up, such Patients will find no cause to commend
the cheapness of their cure in respect of what it had been, if they had
consulted Physicians; not to mention that some of these do confidently take and
demand fees for their visits, besides the profitable income by their Physic. I
may safely affirm that most of them cannot afford to be so charitable as to
wait on their Patients without some recompense for their time and trouble,
which are usually accounted in the price of the medicine: So then what a
delusion do they lie under who seek to these Apothecaries, hoping thereby to
save Physicians fees.

This Author in the same Chapter sets forth the office and business of an
Apothecary, page 55.
circumscribing him within the bounds of his trade; and farther shows his
insufficiency and inability for the practice of physic, notwithstanding the
prescripts of Physicians upon the file in their keeping. page 56, 67.
He likewise shows their infidelity and breach of trust with Physicians by this
their unlawful practicing; page 60, 61.
and the danger that does attend their attempts upon the sick; neglecting their
proper business at home in their shops and leaving that to the management of raw
Apprentices; which is very injurious both to Physicians and Patients. Then he
inserts two edicts published by the Magistrates of Brussels, page 67.
upon good consideration, to check the boldness of these men; and to be a
pattern to other States and Princes equally concerned herein; and to manifest
that it is not so much the Physicians as the peoples interest that the
Apothecary be not allowed to practice. But if there be not a coercive power to
restrain them here; and these men persist obstinate in their unlawful practice;
endeavoring to bring the Practice of Physic, within the limits of their
trade, as much professing to direct Physic as to prepare or sell it; then the
Counsel or remedy proposed by this Author, is the best expedient for
Physicians to defend themselves, and this their sacred art from being
prostitute to the rude invasion of illegal pretenders; by assuming the whole
business of Physic themselves, as our Ancestors did, who prepared their own
medicines, confining their secrets within their own closets.

If these because of their settlement as free traders shall hereupon destroy
the relation between Physicians and them, page 54.
as if their interest did not much consist in the practice of Physicians, they
will have no cause of complaint, if the Professors of Physic take their
business again in their own hands, and imitate the most successful practice of
their renowned predecessors.

TRACT. VII. The Rigid Galenist.
Galenick Physicians are of two sorts: the Rigid Galenist, and the
Galeno-Chymist. The Rigid Galenist is so strait laced, and tied up to the
principles and doctrine of his Master Galen, that all his business is to
understand the sense and meaning of this grand Patron: so that if he have but
ipse dixit of his side, he seeks no further; That is truth, and That he thinks
is weapon and armor sufficient to oppose all Antagonists.

This Professor he is so feeble and weak in his parts, he cannot go alone
without leading: he cannot write nor prescribe, but his Master must hold his
pen: he dares not trust his own reason and experience, but is always a
practiser by the book; a Scholar always, never master of his art. He drudges
for the credit of his Master, never goes out of the circle of his doctrine, he
thinks all Physical truths to be reposited and stored up in the works of Galen.
The greatest perfection he aims at is to understand these; accounting them the
ne plus ultra, the bounds and limits of knowledge, in the medicinal science;
and to go beyond or beside them, is to stray from the Canonical truth.

He assents to all he reads, not by a well grounded approbation, and probation
of his own reason; but freely yields to the authority of his master, and thinks
it good manners not to contradict him. He troubles not himself with
controversy, being prepossessed and persuaded that the Theorems and Theses of
his master are undoubted truths.

If you quote van Helmont that profound Philosopher he laughs, as if you had
named a mad man; and wanting depth of Reason to fathom his Writings; he
vilifies, because he does not understand; and it makes as little impression
upon him as Episcopal Authority does upon a Quaker.

The Chemical Physicians he superciliously looks upon as so many Vulcans: he
scorns to sully himself with Furnaces, Coals and Glasses; or to keep an
Operator in his house for that purpose; he is no such Mechanic Professor.
Those Heretics in Physic he cannot endure; because they contradict Galen;
which he accounts an absurd audacity, and blasphemy against the Truth.

He makes Medicines with his Pen; (a very fine Invention) his Head and his
Hands being unexperienced in Medicinal Experiments and Trials: but the faults
and errors he commits in this new way of Pharmacy, he leaves to his Corrector
to be amended according to his discretion, and gives him authority, Fiat
secundum artem. Chemical Medicines he will have nothing to do with; he cries,
they are dangerous; (but he knows not what they are) and this begets a
Confidence in some silly Patients that he is a judicious and a wary man.

He is known by many good women in the Town, to be an able man and a safe
practiser; if he does no good, he will do no harm; they know his Medicines to
be very harmless, such as they use to make themselves, Syrups, Conserves,
Decoctions, Ptisans, Juleps, etc.

He labors not to improve or bring any additional discoveries to the Art he
Professes, but plods on in the common road of Tradition: he will tell you, he
tryes no Experiments, he practices as they did 500 years ago; that if you be
killed you die by Art, he can show you a Rule for it, and an Example,

He thinks it not possible to outdo what is done already, and counts it an
affected singularity and ridiculous pride to attempt any thing beyond the
industry of our famous Predecessors. He dotes upon Antiquity, and relisheth
nothing of a junior standing: in Consultation he asks you what Authority you
can allege for your determination? Not what Reason; what Example in Practice
you follow, and who is your Author? Not what Experience and what Reason to
confirm and establish your Judgment. If he lose his Book, you must lose your
Physician; for he practices not by his own Reason and Experience, but by the
Reason and Experience of others; and hunts among his Books for an Example,
which is his Rule, and without that he dates not proceed.

The Medical Art he accounts long since completed, that there is no room left
for Invention, and therefore he sits down and cuns his Lesson, he is resolved
to be no wiser then his Masters: but the Chemical Physicians those innovators
in Physic he cannot endure, because they will not be satisfied, but are
always laboring for variety in Physic, and making new discoveries; examining
and calling in question Opinions of 1000 years standing; exploding the
Principles and Positions of the Ancients; throwing down and setting up; he
cannot approve of such disturbances and wrangling controversies: for his part
he loves quietness, declines vain disputings, hates new notions, and would not
be disturbed in the plain way of practice he has learned; nor startled and
justled out of his Principles by a strange unheard of Philosophy, and begin to
learn de novo. But is willing to live and die with the old Doctrine he is
acquainted with, right or wrong.

If you would know more of this man's abilities and excellent parts, ask his
Apothecary; he will tell you he is the ablest Physician in Town, if you inquire
as a Patient: but if upon another account, you be intimate and freely
discoursing, he will tell you another tale.

TRACT. VIII. The Galeno-Chymist.
LIbavius distinguishes Galenists thus: Galenici sunt duplices: quidam
serviles, Epist. ded. Becarisio.
qui nihil ne latum quidem unguem a Dogmatibus Galeni sibi discedendum putant.
Quidam nullius addicti jurare in verba magistri, liberalem amplectuntur
disciplinam, and ingenue in Medicina versantur, ausi vel ipsum Galenum
reprehendere and Hypocratem sicubi a vero discedunt. Manent tamen intra veterum
Praeceptorum Scholae Galenicae septa, candemque medendi tenent consuetudinem.
The distinction is good, and therefore I shall render it to every Capacity:
Galenists (says he) are of two sorts; some are servile, who think they must
not dissent a jot from the opinions of Galen; (this is the rigid Galenist:)
others not bound to assert the Tenants of any grand Teacher, do embrace
Learning and the Art of Physic freely and ingeniously, that dare to reprehend
Galen himself and Hypocrates if they swerve from the Truth. But notwithstanding
they retain the old Precepts of the Galenick School, and follow the same method
of Curing. This suits with the Galeno-Chymist, and he goes a little farther,
for he is Chymically inclined.

To give you a description and qualifications of the Galeno-Chymist; he is a
legitimate Physician, Philosophical and accomplished with Literature; and we
will suppose him doctorated; an ingenious Galenist according to this
description of Libavius; a practiser with Galenick and Chemical Medicines: he
loves, at least he allows Chemistry to be a good and safe way of preparing
Medicines; he views over the Precepts and Doctrine of this Art sometimes; he is
a Speculator only, no Operator; he is not exercised in the manual operation and
process of these Medicines, nor Inspector over his Servants or others, to be
practically expert in Chemical trials and preparations.

I cannot say he is a True Chemical Physician, he is only well qualified for a
Tyro: he cannot direct, correct, judiciously approve or appoint a Chemical
Medicine, upon his own knowledge, but depends upon the judgment of Chemical
Authors, and is biassed uncertainly by the Opinions and Approbations of this or
that Writer, as he fancies his abilities. This Learned Physician I pity,
because he is not suis numeris absolutus; he halts upon one Leg; he must lean
and rest himself upon the uncertain and fallacious tradition of Authors; who
oftentimes collect from one another, take up upon trust, and assert the virtues
of many Medicines, of which they never tried the process or the use. I have
some reason to say this; having been deceived upon this score, and my
expectations frustrated in Medicines, after much trouble and pains in the
process thereof, depending upon the verity of Tradition for my Guide: therefore
say I, (Experto Creed) a Speculator in Chemistry, depending upon that judgment
to appoint Chemical Medicines, deceives himself and wrongs the Sick; for the
knowledge thereof is not gained but by manual operation and pharmacopoietical
experience; else his judgment is presumed, and his Prescript hazardous: he
must be conversant in making, or he shall never be able to give a good account
of them; nor can he judiciously choose or reject this or that, to know which is
a laudable good Medicine, and which is noxious or frivolous, but by observation
in the process and trials of making, as well as in the use.

For these Reasons which might be amplified much more at large, I wish the
Learned Galeno-Chymist who is Phylochymicus and but Speculator was Chymicus
practicus, an Operator in Chemical Pharmacy; he would then more closely embrace
the Principles and Doctrine of this profound Art, and be eager in the exercise
thereof; he would not then tie up Chemical Medicines so strictly to Galenick
Rules; this Harness does not well fit them, it is too strait; they act more
freely, generously and universally: not a methodically and at random to be
exhibited; but rightly used, are limited and prescribed by the greatest reason;
though not conformable in all points, and admitting the Galenick method.

This Learned Galeno-Chymist is so knowing by his theorical inspection into
Chemistry; that he judges and esteems Chemical Medicines to excel all
others in their power and efficacy; that this way of preparing Medicines is
excellent and ingenious; becoming only, and an Art for the best and most
sublime Philosophers, and truly learned men, to be employed therein. Yet this
ingenious Physician is entangled in the Galenick Practice, he cannot well get
out: he knows the Chemical Physicians are in the best way to improve the
Medical Science; to redeem the Profession out of rude profane hands; and to
regain the honor and worthy esteem of the Professors: he knows they are the
most laudable practisers, and their industry and labor in Medicines is most
legitimate, and according to the custom of the ancient most famous Professors;
treasuring up Arcana's, and repositing them in the custody of the Sons of Art,
communicable only to the Aesculapian Family; hating prostitution of this divine
Art: notwithstanding all this, the current of his practice runs in another
Channel; and he acts not according to the integrity of his judgment and reason
which informs him another Course, but biassed with the sinister persuasions of
the present Custom, Ease, Interest, the trouble and inconvenience of crossing
the stream, and sailing with another wind; he goes on against the checks of his
own reason; and he cannot but say, upon a serious consideration; Video meliora
proboque, deteriora sequor.

If the Galeno-Chymist shall say; I am a Chemical Physician as good as the
best; I practice with Chemical Medicines, when I think it convenient, and where
the case requires such, and when it does not I use Galenick Medicines; nor is
this practice inconsistent with a true Artist, to this is answered; in that you
use Chemical Medicines, and sometimes Galenick, according to the exigency of
the occasion, and rightly distinguishing the Case, what is properly required,
this is allowed to be rational and good: I am not so severe, to throw out all
Galenick Medicines, and banish them the practice of Physic, but that some of
them may be retained; yet with correction, the incongruities of Composition and
insufficiencies of Preparation being altered and amended. But how can you
justify the use and appointment of Chemical Medicines (judiciously, knowingly,
per autopsiam, and cautiously to be used) that you neither saw, nor know who
was the Operator that made them; he was a Cheat, a negligent, or an ignorant
person, a Pseudo-Chymist for ought you know (commonly it is so) and these
Medicines are not to be given at such a blind adventure, but warily and
knowingly.

The uncertainty and hazard a Physician runs in this way of practice will
appear plainly, if you strictly inquire into these two things: first how many
good Medicines are basely made and abused, that are exposed to sale: secondly,
how many Medicines that stand now recommended for use, and daily sold; which
though never so exactly made according to Prescript, are erroneous bad
Medicines. Let a strict search be made into these two points, and then you will
conclude with me, that such a practice by unknown Medicines, is not legitimate,
not rational, but hazardous: not shall you be able to discover and judge of
these two points until you be a Pharmacopoeian, and then you will see clearly
the insufficiencies, deceits and hurtful properties of common sale Medicines.

How often does the common Turbith Minerale, burn and fret in the Patients body
from the negligent preparation? but at best is not a good Medicine, and the
Mercury will revive again. The Common Antimonium Diaphoreticum frequently
causes Vomitings, contrary to the intention of the Medicine and expectation of
the Physician, through the negligent and unskilful preparation of it; not
giving a due fixation, and expelling the impure Sulphur: and therefore the
Galeno-Chymist is timorous and gives commonly under 20 grains; whereas I have
given of my own preparation 50 grains with good success, and a friendly
Diaphoretick Operation.

The Cremor and Crystals of Tartar sophisticated with Alum, quite contrary to
the intention of the Medicine. Sal Martis, nothing but a disguised Vitriol
sometimes. The fixed Salts of Absinth, Cochlear, Fraxini, Cardui, Artemis. etc.
differing only in Title commonly. The Chemical Oils most of them adulterated.
Indeed what Medicine can you name that is not abused; either by the meanness
and degenerate condition of the Drugs and ingredients; or leaving out something
of value and price, or Subtracting its due proportions; or by inartificial
preparation through want of skill, care, time and pains; or by the
superaddition and commixture of some cheap Ingredient to augment the Medicine:
and he that can falsify a Medicine best as not to be detected, thinks he has
attained great perfection, and is an excellent Artist. What confidence then can
you have in an unknown Medicine? What true observation can you make? And what
satisfactory answer can you give, if a certain account of the Medicine be
demanded as upon your own knowledge you ought to give? All that you can say is;
you hope well, that it was so and so: but is not this hope presumed, more than
rational; for if you inquire abroad, and examine into Medicine, you will find
the Sophisticate, negligent prepared and bad Medicines, to be three for one in
number to the complete, honest and duly prepared Medicines.

These things duly considered, as very worthy of serious consideration; I am
not out of hopes to see this learned Physician the Galeno-Chymist, an expert
Pharmacopoeian and Chemical Operator; following the example of Swelfer that
excellent pattern, and others the most renowned Professors of this Faculty,
both ancient and modern: the Consequence will be of great advantage to the true
Professors thereof; as the only means to rescue and recover the lost repute of
this most excellent Art, now prostituted and laid open to all pretenders, which
ought to lie only in the bosom of the Sons of Art.

TRACT. IX. Medicus Absolutus. (...). The Complete Chemical Physician.
THis Jatro-chymist and Hermetick Philosopher, is educated from his Youth in
all necessary learning to qualify and fit him for this grand business; and
that he may be introduced into the Medical Art legitimately according to the
Law of Hypocrates. (...).
Quisquis enim Medicina Scientiam sibi vere comparare volet, eum his ducibus
voti sui compotem fieri oportet; natura, doctrina, loco studiis apto,
institutione a puero, industria and tempore.

And having thus gradually received Literature and improvement in the Tongues
and Liberal Arts; and being well grounded in Philosophy, the Principles of
Nature in general, and government of the Macrocosme; he then directs his study
more particularly to the body of man, and contemplates the Microcosme, that
most admirable frame of Nature; the diversity of its parts and connection, with
the variety of harmonious Functions, all subservient to the conservation of the
whole, directed and managed by the Archaeus or Spirit of Life, and here he is
busy for some considerable time in Physiologye, as the first step in Physic.

After this he considers the requisite supports of this Machine, what is
required by Nature to preserve this humane body in due order, and to maintain
it in strength and vigor: and now he is conversant in the diaetetick part of
Physic; appoints and regulates man in his Meat and Drink, in sleeping and
watching, in exercise and rest, assigns him a fit place to live in, etc. most
agreeing and suting with his body, the longer to preserve it. And as Nature
does not continue long in the state of integrity and health, but declensions
and disorders will arise, and this exquisite Fabric tends toward a
dissolution and decay: he then considers the body of man in its preternatural
state, the Dyscrasy and Alaxy wherewith it is discomposed, or liable thereto;
he is therefore acquainting himself with the Pathological part of Physic,
taking cognizance of all the diseases incident to man's body, in their causes,
with the Symptoms and Phenomenon that discover them: and being well verst and
sharp fighted in the discovery of diseases and their complications; he next
applies himself and consults what is fit and requisite to reduce and recover
back again this lost health, and vigorous state of Nature; first qua methodo,
how this must be done, and here the methodus medendi directs and regulates him:
secondly, quibus auxiliis with what and by what means, and that is Chyrurgical,
Diaetetical or Pharmaceutical: from which three fountains he draws proper
Remedies, and applies fit means for the reduction of Nature to her pristine and
integrity of Operations. And for a copious supply of Pharmaceutick means; he
searches the Animal, the Vegitable and Mineral Family, to find out fit matter
to work upon; and industriously applies himself to the Pyrotechnical or
Chemical Art, being the most excellent and ingenious way of medicinal
preparations: he is very studious in the Scientifical or Philosophical part of
Chemistry (which distinguishes him from the Emperick Chemist) contemplating
the principles and nature of all things in their causes and effects; and to
prove the verity of his speculative notions; he is very laborious in the
operative and practical part of Chemistry, more particularly designing
medicinal Experiments and trials which makes him a perite and most excellent
pharmacopoeian, daily projecting and operating in Chymicall Pharmacy; whereby
he adorns the Medicall Art, and enricheth it with a store and treasury of
efficacious and most noble Medicines; Tinctures, Spirits, Essences, Elixirs,
Extracts, etc. and therefore Mathiolus well says, Lib. 4. epist. ad A^driam de
Blav.
neminem medicum absolutum esse posse, imo ne mediocrem quidem, qui in Chymia
non sit exercitatus. No Physician can be complete, scarce an indifferent one,
that is not exercised in Chemistry; and Sennertus he is of the same opinion,
and adds moreover; Cum enim medicus sit ille admirabilis, Cons. and dis. Chym.
Cum Galen cap 18.
qui quod est divinum in morbis, in medicamentis, in natura novit, actionumque
fontes investigat: ista omnia praecipue Chymiae beneficio assequi potest: what
ever is rare and extraordinary profound in nature, the knowledge of that is
attained chiefly by Chemistry. And Mesue a famous Physician speaks thus of
Chemists; Antidota. distiect 21.
they make manifest and discover the hidden properties of things; that I may
confidently say, scarce any one is able to attain to the internal knowledge
of things, who is not skillful in Chymicall operations, etc. To good purpose
then does the Hermetic Physician spend his time in Chemistry, since this is the
Key of Knowledge. Wonder not then, but applaude him in the Spagiricall
dissecting and opening the bodies of Concretes, in separating their Constituent
parts; since this is the way to discover the hidden properties of each part
disjoined, and to know the result of the whole in their natural composition. He
makes artificial trialls to find out their Similar and dissimilar natures;
their conflicts and actings upon each other, by what repugnant properties they
stand at distance; and by what mediums they are united. He knows how to
separate the pure from the impure; rightly distinguishing between this and that
Sulphurious, Saline, Mercurial, etc. and takes what is proper to serve his turn
and rejects the rest. He knows how to tame or kill an exorbitant or noxious
quality in a Drug or Mineral, that the amicable and excellent medicinal
property, may more safely and clearly show its energy. It Is he alone that knows
how to volatise the fixed, and to fix the volatile; that it may serve his
purpose pro re nata.

In learning and knowing these and such like artificial operations; the natural
Chemistry of the Microcosme is rightly understood; (this art being but an
imitation of nature) which being unknown, the art of curing is obscure and
dark; and he shoots at random, that has not these helps to direct and give
him aim in the prosecution of any disease. In the body of man, nature digests,
transmures, separates, fixes and volatiseth, subdues and tameth, exalts and
advances, to make fit for her purpose the nutrimental object, to serve her
several uses, in the nutrition, supply and conservation of the body: but when
nature is disordered and put by, or deficient in these her daily actions, and
these her wonted and necessary operations; who so sit and who so knowing to
restore them again, as the most expert and sagacious Chemical Physician; whose
daily business it is to perform these operations, that he may the better
understand the Chemistry of Nature, and be able to assist her by his art, where
nature is unable of her self to perform the work.

This learned Spagyrist or Hermetick Physician does not despise and throw aside
the laborious Works of our famous Predecessors, and wholly shake off their
Doctrine; but does respect, use and assert them, so far as is agreeable with
the truth of later discoveries: and therefore they do him wrong, and have a
false apprehension, that think he practices empyrically with Chemical
Medicines, and without Art established by Rules and Precepts; or by new
fantastic unstable notions: no, he stands and is founded upon most certain
Principles, demonstrable by sense; and is able to give the most satisfactory
account of Diseases according to their Radix and Seminaries; adapting Medicines
and exhibiting them most rationally and methodically, that he may most
deservedly be called The Rational Physician (...).

He knows, and can manifest it; that the Medicinal Science requires alteration
in some fundamentals, generally received; that many derivative Doctrines must
fall to the ground; that the Professors in this Faculty are not to sit down and
be satisfied with the Labors of our Predecessors (though worthy to be
reveverenced and recorded for their great endeavors) but that there is much
work yet left to be finished; and much to be unravelled, that is supposed
perfect: he is therefore strict in the examination of old Tenants, and sedulous
in the exploration of truths yet undiscovered: he is undaunted in the explosion
of errors, though maintained and upheld by many successions of the greatest
authorities and professors in this Faculty: he stands upon the foundation and
principles of nature, discovered to him by the Pyrotechnical Art: he is not
only a speculator of truth; but is trained up in Experimental Philosophy, and
confirms his notions by Chemical practice and sensible operations.

He is thorough-paced in the whole Theory and practice of Physic: he has a
worthy esteem for Hypocrates, he makes good use of Paracelsus, and reads Galen
to be acquainted with his Doctrine, because a man of great fame: but above all
he magnifies and bottomes himself upon Van Helmonts Principles; yet swallows
not all that's presented to him by any one; but preserves himself free, and
suffers not himself to be captivated and enticed away, but sticks to his own
reason and experiments of art, and nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri.
He venerates antiquity, but is not over ruled and persuaded by a 1000 years
practice, knowing that error bears date soon after the creation: authority is
no convincing argument, but persuades him to believe, where his reason cannot
clearly determine, nor experiment decide the controversy, he is well read in
the doctrine of the Schools, and is no stranger to the learning of former ages.

He speaks reverently of Universities; as becomes a legitimate son of art; and
the dignities they bestow he respects in all persons, being derived from those
famous Nurseries of Literature, esteemed throughout the world where learning is
professed. He is dignified with the Doctorall title, ex meritis obtained; and
labors diligently to adorn his degree with exemplary qualifications, and to
evidence to the world that this badge and signal distinction, is not vainly
conferred and merely titular; but a reward of virtue, and eminency of parts.

To conclude, this man is medicus re and opere; he is a Physician indeed, suis
numeris absolutus, accomplished and complete in the encyclopaedia medica, and
this is he of whom Homer speaks. (...). Mener.
His greatest enemy is the Chemical Emperick, who usurping the title of Doctor,
and fraudulently personating this learned Chemical Physician; the ignorance and
dangerous practice of the one, redounds to the disrepute and defamation of the
other; because people do not warily distinguish, and rightly understand which
is the one, and which is the other: but if you view and compare the characters
of both persons, you may discern with half an eye, the vast difference between
them, and not be deceived for the future.

TRACT. X. Whether a Physician ought to make his own Medicines.
SOme there are who think it improper; a great indignity and below the title of
a Doctor to intermeddle with the making of Medicines; and such that do so,
are accounted by them mean Physicians, of the lowest rank; and that the eminent
reputed Physicians scorn this way of Practice, as inferior to their way of
prescription, and sending the Patient to their Apothecary. But this is an
absurd opinion and a great mistake of the simpler sort of common people: I
suppose the learned and judicious party thinks otherwise; and I hope there is
no Physician either so proud as to despise a principal part of his profession;
or so ignorant as to think it was not the ancient custom and general practice
of former ages. Hypocrates, Galen, Paracelsus, Libavius, Helmont, etc. the most
renowned Physicians we read of both ancient and modern, were Pharmacopoeians,
they were very industrious, diligent and careful in the preparing of their own
Medicines; they did not think it a dishonor to be conversant in making
Medicines. Famous Quercetan upon this question an medicine deceat (...)?
affirms the same: Qutrcetan. rediviv. p. 218.
Hypocrates ipse eorum faciem conspuisset, qui praeparandorum suorum remediorum
scientiam illi detraxissent, quorum utique veteres tam vigiles fuerunt
custodes, ut ea nequaquam publica facerent omnibus, sed magna cautione sibi
asseruarent, and filiis ac nepolibus seriatim tandem Committerent, ac per manus
traderent. Hypocrates (says he) would have spit in their face, that should
detract from him the knowledge of making Medicines, of which our ancestors
have been such vigilant keepers, that in no wise they would make them public,
but did preserve them with great care to themselves, and afterward did commit
them to their Sons and Nephews.

Dr. Vindicia medicin, and medicor. c. 2.
Hodges in that Chapter treating of Practicing Apothecaries usurping the
Physicians function begins thus: That Physicians did originally provide and
dispense their own Medicines, will be (I doubt not) easily granted by those who
are acquainted with the writings of the ancients, wherein it is evident that
Hypocrates, Galen, and the chief Physicians as part of their employment
prepared what Physic they had occasion to spend in their practice: and
although their strict obligation to conceal their sacred art, least it should
be prostituted to the rude invasion of persons unqualified, might be one
argument inclining them (as the most likely way for its security) to confine
their business to their own closets and repositories; yet I conceive that other
reasons might no less persuade their furnishing themselves with all necessary
medicines both simple and compound, for these hereby very much improved their
knowledge in the materia medica, so that they were not only able to
distinguish all Plants, Animals and Minerals, and being abroad (if destitute of
convenient help) readily find but what might satisfy the intent in the
designed cure, but to prepare and compound them till they become apt medicines
for their use, with all diligence observing the several alterations which
happened in taste, smell or otherwise, by which means they were thoroughly
informed, how to change, add, or diminish, as there was occasion, to advance
the efficacy of the composition; their patients also shared in the benefit of
their industry and care herein, who having committed themselves into the hands
of those Physicians, looked upon them as the only responsible persons in that
undertaking, wherefore they prudently considering that their reputation lay at
stake and the lives of their Patients, durst not entrust others in a matter of
such concernment to both, but managed all the business themselves to a general
approbation.

It Is evident that this was the laudable and most rational practice of the
Ancients, whereby the knowledge of Medicines was improved, and the Physician
much advantaged by it, and the Patient secured. Had it not been the practice of
Physicians to make their Medidicines, how had Medicines arrived to that
excellency and worth? not by Prescription but by the industry and experiments
of Physicians in operation. And what reason is there that this should be laid
aside now? That Physicians should be Novices? That the Arcana's of the Art
should be transferred and reposited in the hands of others, alienated from the
Professors? This seems very strange: Quercet. Rediviv. page 223.
take notice what Quercetan says; Quam turpe est Medico, sibi Doctoris titulum
arrogare, and materiam qua uti debet, modumque illius parandae ac
administrandae ignorare, patique se a ministris suis superari? an ignoras,
experientiam rerum esse magistram? Ergo Pharmacopoeius eam callens magister
erit, tu vero bruta statua Cathedrae affigeris. You see how this great Doctor
charges every Physician with the business of preparing Medicines, as a
necessary duty that lies upon him; which if he neglects how unworthy he is of
his Title and Profession: making of Medicines therefore is no disparagement to
a Physician, but a credit; he does his duty; it is his satisfaction and
security in practice, and a great help to increase his knowledge. Elevat Medici
eminentiam and existimationem, Chym. in art. form. redact.
si and manum and mentem adhibeat, ipseque modum compenendi selectissima arcana
non solum norit, sed and eadem praeparet, praeparataque ipse communicet: says
Rolfinc, it raises the eminency and esteem of a Physician, if he applies both
his mind and his hand to the composing of Medicines.

But some may say; there is much servile work belongs to the making of
Medicines, not fit for a Doctor of Physic: it is true, he is not required to
toil in the drudgery of it, that is his servants work; but he must supervise,
and see there be no neglect, mistake or abuse: he may have workmen to do the
work, but in the interim he must be work-master, to design the Medicine, to
appoint, correct and overlook the whole business; and where the curiosity, and
intrigue of the Art lies, that is to be done by his own hand, that is his
Closet business. And truly I cannot see how a Physician can satisfy himself
otherwise, if he be not present and Supervisor of the Medicine; nor is it
reasonable that a Physician should venture the Life of his Patient, and his own
Reputation upon the slender care of Servants and raw negligent Boys, who if
you stand by them are apt to mistake and commit errors before your face, as I
have too often observed; what negligence is there, and what gross faults then are
committed behind your back? I dare not trust my own Servants, I should be loath
then to trust another man's. Examples we have had enough of the miscarriages and
mistakes in medicines, which have cost too many their Lives; but how many such
that never were known is not to be numbered. It is therefore the Physicians care
and duty to have the management of the Medicine, being principally interessed
therein; for he that is most concerned in a Medicine will be most careful and
exact: some are concerned only in the price of a Medicine; so that if a
Medicine be specious to the eye that's enough to answer his concern; but the
Physicians concern is in the effects and operation of a Medicine; so that he
has no way to betray his trust, but he forfeits his Reputation, and it is
charged upon him. The designs of these two persons are very much different; and
therefore we may reasonably judge there is much difference in their Medicines;
the one aims and strives to cure, the other strives to sell: an indifferent or
bad Medicine may sell, but such will not Cure.

View the Druggists Shop, and you shall see what great difference there is in
the same species of Commodity; so that the price is double and more, in the
same Commodity differing in goodness: one sort being degenerate; of the growth
of a Country or Climate producing not so good; or from a bad season of the
year; or decayed by age; or damaged by importation and Carriage, or the like:
and another sort is excellent choice ware, and scarce: and this variety you
will find in most, if not all medicinal Drugs: yet all is sold, first or last;
the Shop is cleared of all, and it is turned into Medicine.

Judge then who it is that buys the choicest and best at the double rate; and
who buys the worst at a cheap and under rate. That Physician which should buy
the worst to save money, is not so much a Knave as a Fool, though he is both in
so doing: for he lives by his Reputation of Cures; by the operation and success
of a Medicine; not by the price of a Medicine: his profit and advantage arises
by the Cure wrought, not by the Medicine sold: and therefore he will be most
exact and just, in preparing choice Medicines, according to the best of his
skill, not sparing pains or cost, his own interest and design leads him to it,
and I have heard the Druggist say, should all men be so curious in the choice
of their Drugs, as some few Physicians that buy for their own practice, that
will have none but the best; they could not tell how to manage their Trade; for
above the half of their Goods would lie upon their hands: but all are not so
nice in buying; they have Customers for the Trash, which they sell at low
rates, and many choose to have of this sort for the price sake.

I suppose we are now satisfied that the Physicians Medicine must needs excel
all others: he that makes it his business to acquire noble Medicines; that
spares neither pains nor cost (as it his interest so to do) will furnish
himself with the choicest Medicaments that Art can procure. And indeed, it is
the glory and pride of a Physician to be furnished with a stock of excellent
Medicines; such as he may confide in; such as he has completed by several
trials, and gradual alterations, to bring them to the perfection he aims at;
and which he has often proved: this man practices boldly, rationally and
securely: but he that gives an unknown Medicine, is either doubtful and
timorous (as well he may) or else he adventures boldly, at hap hazard.

There are two sorts of Physicians, differently applying themselves to
Medicines. The one endeavors to get skill in Medicines by reading; the other
by practice in making: the first depends upon the traditional account of
Authors; the latter upon his own Experiments and Trials. And here I must
positively assert; that bare reading and studying of Medicines, is but
imagining of Medicines, a dubious thinking and a deceitful conjecture, but
trials and experiments in making, is knowledge in medicines. A man cannot be
said to be skilful and knowing in Medicines until he has made them: you may
fancy in your study by reading, to make and compose a Medicine thus and thus,
of such and such Ingredients, after this manner prepared; and think you have
designed an excellent Medicine, that every thing appertaining to it will fall
out well, and suit with the form of the Medicine, as you intend and have
imagined: but come to make this Medicine, you will find your self very much
mistaken, either in the process and manner of making, or in the proportion of
the Ingredients, or their single corrections and due preparations etc. You
thought you were very right until you come to making of it, and then you see
your errors; so that to make this Medicine as it ought, and to answer your aims
in it, you must at it again, perhaps a third or a fourth time before you hit it
right, and make it every way complete for your purpose: now had it not been for
these trials and repeated experiments in making, you had never known rightly
this Medicine, but had persisted in an erroneous judgment. This I know to be
true by often experience, both in Galenick, but especially Chemical Medicines,
which are the most difficult.

In Chemical Medicines how often shall you be frustrated of your purpose, if
your own experience in the same Medicine, or collateral experiments do not
guide you in the process? How many fallacious processes of Chemical Medicines
are extant in Print? Very many; and many worth nothing when they are rightly
made: who shall understand this? Not the reader of Medicines, but the
Pharmacopoeian, the expert maker only is a competent judge. You prescribe a
Medicine to be made as your Author dictates to you, who is esteemed for a
learned man, and is so: what then? But perhaps this Author knows as little of
the Medicine as your self; he had it by collection from another Author; he
never made it, nor perhaps used it; but takes it by tradition, as you do from
him, and commends it. This is very common among Writers: do you think then our
knowledge in Physic will attain to a perfection after this rate? No, this is
not the way, nor does it become a legal Professor to prosecute this Course, and
take up his knowledge upon trust: but put the case, Authors do faithfully and
knowingly deliver the Process of Medicines; yet if you be not an Artist you
cannot make it; nor can you rightly judge of a Medicine but by the making,
which discovers and unfolds to you the nature of it; you will be then able to
determine its use, and you will know how to improve and advance its efficacy. I
never yet was satisfied in, nor pleased with a Medicine, until I had made it
half a dozen, perhaps half a score times, and each time corrected and altered
it, upon examination and observation in the repeated use of it: and by such
trials of making, and observations in practice and use, I did meliorate and
improve my Medicines: nor is it possible for any man to be knowing and skilful
in Medicines, any other way but by practice in their making and use. A man may
be reading of Medicines seven and seven years, and yet be unskilful in
Medicines. You know Medicines, you say, by reading in your study; I wish I
could do so too; it would spare both pains and cost: but I never could
understand Medicines as I ought, by reading; and yet I have read over and
studied as many Pharmacopoeians as you, both Galenick and Chemical: I ransacked
and consulted all the Authors I could meet with that treated of Medicines and
Drugs; to inform and acquaint me with variety of Medicines and the best ways
of preparation: notwithstanding such a groundwork, when I came to the making
of Medicines, I was but a Novice, I committed many errors, and threw away many
medicines, that I had bestowed much pains about, because they did not please
me, they did not answer my expectation when I had performed their operations:
but this time so employed was not lost: I found by daily experience and trials,
to gain knowledge; to understand the nature of Drugs by their simple and
compound preparations, better then all the Books I had read, could teach me. I
was satisfied then, that my Book-reading Knowledge was not comparable to this
of Practice: that is but the shadow and resemblance of Knowledge; a supposing
and believing things to be so; but this is a sensible, and certain satisfaction
to be relied on far beyond that of Report and Tradition.

As it is in Mechanic Arts, so it is in Pharmacy: a man may read of building
Ships, stately Houses, making of Watches, or other curious Engines, many years;
but if he be not exercised in the making, he will be very much to seek and very
unready at his first undertaking such a work, and shall commit many errors,
until he be well experienced by constant practice: it is so in Medicines; but
you will say the building and contrivance of a great Ship, or magnificent
House, is a far greater work and undertaking then the making of Medicines: I
answer, no; you are mistaken, there is more study, art and pains required, in
the designing and making curious Medicines, far above Ships or Houses, or any
other piece of artificial workmanship. That man which designs and makes
Medicines aright, skilfully and exquisitely, must well understand that rare
Machine of nature, the fabric and contrivance of man's body; not only by the
eye to know the several organical parts; their due magnitude, figure, number,
situation, composition; but their offices, harmonious subserviencies, and all
the internal motions and vital operations; then which there is no piece in
nature more admirable: he must also know the variety of impediments,
discomposure, and disorders of this excellent frame, and how to be remedied;
and according to this knowledge which is very intricate, must he adapt and
contrive his Medicines.

What Is a Ship or stately Palace to the Body of Man? nothing comparable in the
workmanship or mystery of support: now he that makes a Medicine, and is master
of his Art, has the Idea of this Microcosme in his thoughts, and a true
knowledge of all the internal operations; else he can never design his
Medicines to assist nature this way or that way, and to relieve her in
distress, as he ought. Besides, the Materia medica he uses, is far more
numerous and various then those materials belonging to any artificial part or
rare contrived workmanship whatever; the Physician searches both Sea and Land,
what is above and what is under the earth, to make medicines of to serve his
purpose, and takes from animals, vegitables and minerals: and when he has
elected proper and fit matter to work upon, his art and operations upon it are
perplexedly difficult, tedious, and unsatisfactory before he has finished and
satiated his curiosity.

He that is a true Artist in Medicines, that has an excellent ingeny, and is
laborious; will not fit down and rest contented in the common traditional
knowledge of Medicines, but will be continually busing himself in experiments,
reaching forward and striving to attain excelling and more noble medicines, far
above the common sort: and this cannot be brought about, but with indefatigable
contrivance and pains in the exercise and making of medicines, after long
experience and manifold trials.

For the Galenick Medicines, they are far more easy to make, and take up much
less time; yet no Physician can prescribe these exactly, that is not verst in
making, but must referr himself to the art of the Apothecary, who corrects the
prescription oftentimes as he thinks fit. But gross and dangerous errors he
shall commit in prescribing a Chemical Medicine, that is not a well experienced
and practiced Chemist. How often are ingredients appointed to be decocted, that
either yield not their virtue to impregnate the menstruum; or else evaporate
before the decoction be finished. How often are ingredients appointed to be
distilled, nothing of which, at least their virtuous part intended, comes not
into the receiver, but remains in the retort or vesica. Very often this is so,
and many errors, which are committed from the insufficiency of the prescriber,
a Contemplator of Medicines, no Operator.

Nor is this all the mischief; for since Physicians left making their
medicines, Apothecaries began to practice Physic; and I think the Physician is
well rewarded for deserting the principal part of his profession, and giving it
to another. Medicines in ancient times was only in the hands of Physicians, as
the arcana's of art, now they are become a trade, and the Apothecary by this
custom challenges them as his due belonging only to him, and thinks himself
wronged if he have not the whole management of Medicines.

But this is too arrogantly and unduly challenged. The propriety of medicines
is not yours; but every Physician may be his own Pharmacopaeian, and employ his
own servants in that business if he please, nor have you any just cause to
complain of him therein; you have your liberty to follow your trade of selling
medicines to whomsoever will buy at your shops, and that is the intent of your
employment.

But this does not satisfy, you would engross the whole business of medicines
to your selves (which is a Physicians proper business) and that Physician who
for his own satisfaction and security to his Patients takes upon him the charge
and care of Medicines, is sure to have your badge and byword, though he be
very worthy and able in the Profession.

And this usage the Learned Chemical Physician finds; but however he is not
discouraged from his industrious prosecution in medicinal experiments and
trials to increase his knowledge, and advance the efficacy of medicines by his
indefatigable labors.

And truly I must affirm, that the best Physicians in the Nation, are or have
been Pharmacopoeians; men exercised and practiced in the making of medicines,
whereby they become most expert Physicians, most knowing and most successful:
(and this I can make good, if you desire the proof it) and he that is not well
verst and exercised in the practice of Pharmacy, is not complete and fully
accomplished, but is very uncertain in the administration and appointment of
Medicines, and must give place to the Pharmacopoeian Physician, who is solidly
grounded in the knowledge of medicines, which are the instruments of Cure.

And indeed medicines is the grand business of a Physician; that he had better
be defective in any part of his Art, then in this; Non verbis, sed herbis: it is
medicine that cures, and here must be the greatest care and curiosity in the
contrivance of excellent medicines, and this cannot be done so well as by the
Physicians hand, or under his eye. Who so wary and careful as he whose
reputation must answer for the medicine in the success or miscarriage.
Institutu. l. 5. part 3. 2. sect. c. 1.
Nemo rectius composuerit medicamenta, quam medicus, says Sennertus, none shall
compound Medicines better then the Physiuan. And in the same Chapter he adds:
praestantissimi medici domi suae suis manibus medicament a composuerunt, and
suis nominibus insigniverunt. the most excellent Physicians have compounded
their Medicines at home with their own hands, Galen de comp. med.
which he proves out of Galens writings. Then he brings in Valeriola, though
seemingly of a contrary opinion, yet cannot deny but the best Physicians in
Galens time prepared their great Antidotes themselves, Institut. l. 5.
and accounts it the happiness of that age. Then says Sennertus, and cur non
sit summa felicitas, si ea medicamenta, in quibus vita hominum sita est, ipsi
etiam medici componant, nec omnia non raro indoctis hominibus committendum; And
why it is not accounted the greatest felicity, that Physicians themselves
should prepare those medicines, in which the life of man is concerned, and not
all things committed as commonly to unlearned men?

A Physicians great business may be divided into these two general parts;
knowledge of Diseases, and skill in medicines; and little remains but is
reducible hither: the latter part is as weighty as the first; and it as much
concerns a Physician, and a duty as incumbent upon him, as any part of his
Science, that he ought to be as exact and knowing in this as in that: and how
can this be without experience and practice in medicinal preparations? reading
will not do it; (...). Au. Galen. de alim. fac.
cannot make any one expert: you would be loath to sail in that Ship where the
Pilot had only read of Navigation; so I should be loath to take Physic of him
that had only read of Medicines. Perhaps you will say, though you do not see
the making, yet you view it when made, and before it be given: this is not
sufficient knowledge to satisfy you or secure the Patient; a medicine may be
specious enough to the eye that you cannot blame, and yet bad enough to him
that takes it: a Ship may look very fair and firm to the eye; but the builder
alone is able to judge of her; he can tell where she is defective; because he
knows every piece of timber, and every plank about her. So is it in Medicines,
the maker alone knows whether it be good or bad, by the matter and manner of
preparation. I would feign understand what true observation you can make upon
the operation and effects of an unknown medicine: you appoint such a Medicine
and such a Dose to be given; it works not well, it answers not your
expectation: you are now at a loss in your determination; you know not whether
you missed in the Dose, or whether the fault be in the Medicine; or discordant
with this particular person only: you know not whom or what to accuse, your
self or the Medicine or the individual propriety of the patient: and this
difficulty is put upon you because you have no certain knowledge, nor repeated
trials of the Medicine, and you cannot say whether it were a good or a bad
Medicine. And consequently no observation from hence. On the contrary, were
this Medicine of your own making, in your own custody, had you proved and
tried it often, meliorated and improved it by repeated preparations; you might
then with much confidence and reason give judgment upon its operation, and
make a certain observation, in this or that case, which otherwise cannot be
done. The diversity and uncertainty of men's bodies, and peculiar natures, is
adventure enough for a Physician to presume on; and this is unavoidable: but I
know no reason why a Physician should wilfully presume upon uncertain and
unknown Medicines; yea, it is great folly and hazard, when he may have an
assured, well grounded, rational and experientiall knowledge, as every
Physician ought.

But you will say, your employment is great, you cannot visit your patients and
look after Medicines too: then say I, take no more business upon you then you
can manage as you ought: that man which has a full practice for his own person
it will be sufficient for him if he be not very covetous and is more in love
with money, then the life of his Patients: but ease and goodfellowship takes up
so much of some men's time, that they cannot perform the whole duty of their
employment.

Now to resolve the question; whether it be a duty incumbent uyon the
Physician, as most rational, and a part of his profession, to supervise,
prepare, safely to keep and have in readiness, Medicines for his own practice,
as a great satisfaction to himself, and security to his Patients; judge you.

I shall conclude with a piece of Sennertus who thought the preparation of
Medicines very becoming and proper for the Physician: Sennert. instit. c. 1. de
natura Chyosiae.
Neque etiam praeter dignitatem medici esse, componere medicamenta, antiqui
illi viri prudentissimi, medicique peritissimi, satis docuerunt: qui etsi
haberent unguentarios, seplasiarios, and id genus hominum, qui fucos, unguenta
and similia praecipue vendebant, ornando potius quam curando corpori utilia,
totam tamen medicamentorum compositionem ipsis non committebant. Ipsi^domi suae
medicamenta composuerunt, neque sibi dedecori, sed laudi esse duxerunt, si rei
humano generi vtiilissimae operam impenderent, neque plus rationis manuum
suarum quam animi haberent. Imo i^naviorum potius esse videtur, omnia ministris
committere; quorum vel avaritia, vel improbitate factum est saepius, ut
medicaments praestantissima quae (...) antiqui appellant, vel indoctissimis
empericis communicarentur, vel corrupta and vitiata a^thoritatem suam
amitterent, nec vires ob quas ab antiquis praedicabantur, amitterent.

TRACT XI. The Excellency of Chemical Preparations; compared with Galenick
Medicines.
BY the ignorance of some, and the knavery of others, Chemical Medicines are a
great bugbear with many. Upon the name of a Chemical Medicine, some strait
conclude it is Antimony or Mercury or some poisonous or corrosive thing, and
they are as fraid of it as if it were Rats-bane. How this Cheat is put upon the
people, and noble brave Medicines unjustly defamed, we shall examine: this
comes to pass by these means: first it arises from ignorant and bold fellows
(pretended Artists in Chemistry) who venture upon a small stock of knowledge and
experience in the Art, to make Medicines of minerals as Antimony, Mercury,
Vitriol, Nitre, etc. cautiously and judiciously to be dealt with (by those only
who know very well what they do) but being unskilfully and rudely prepared; or
ignorantly and improperly given are thereby very Churlish in operation, and of
dangerous consequence sometimes in their effects. And this raises a censure
and scandal upon all Chemical Medicines, concluding from hence that they are
all such. But what is this to defame Chemistry, and Chemical Medicines; I
easily grant that such abuses there are; but what does this reflect on? Not
upon the Art but the Artist; not upon Chemical Medicines but the abusers of
them: consider the person who it is, see how he is qualified, whether he be a
complete Chemical Physician: you will find that such miscarriages do arise from
bold Empericks, and Common sale Medicines; and if you will venture upon their
Chemical Medicines, or Shop Medicines that you know not from whose preparation
they were, you must take what follows patiently, and not unjustly defame a most
excellent Art, and the noble Medicines that are made thereby.

It Is scattered abroad by vulgar mouths, and objected commonly to us, that
Chemical Medicines are dangerous, which deterr many from the use of them, who
stand in need thereof, and is not remediable but by such Medicines: but
consider who they are that give out this Report; it is either such as have been
abused by cheating Medicines as aforesaid; or such that understand nothing of
the matter; that speak ignorantly by hearsay and vulgar report, and through
timorousness are apt to believe and credit it: or else if more knowing, are
biassed by profit, and interessed in the adverse, rigid Galenick party, either
as Professors thereof, or appertainers to them. But pick out a knowing man not
interessed in the Profession; as there are persons of honor and Gentlemen in
this Kingdom that delight in the Study of Physic, and well understand what a
Chemical and Galenick Medicine is: I am confident he will give the right hand
and pre-eminence to Chemical Medicines; nor did I ever meet with any such yet,
but did prefer the Chemical far above the Galenick preparations.

Some there are that foolishly imagine Chemical Medicines so far to differ from
the Galenick, as not to be made of the same matter with them; but of some
dangerous Minerals, and venomous Drugs, that they are afraid such Medicines
should come into their bodies: now herein they are much mistaken, and abused in
their judgment; for Chemical and Galenick Medicines are made of the same
Ingredients and Drugs, they only differ praeparationis modo, in the manner of
handling and preparing them: but it is a hard thing to make some doting people
believe this; and some the more ingenious sort, are very suspicious of a
Chemical Medicine ^o nomine. Dr. Thomson was very sensible of this as he
declares himself in these words: What difficulties some of us have undergone to
persuade some prepossessed against us (that have imbibed the exitious Precepts
of the Galenists) to admit of those Chemical Remedies (when we know they would
save their lives) is well known to those that have been made sensible of their
errors herein: Galeno^^ale
for the very name Chemical did sound so deadly in their ears, that many in
those places (where we practiced) did apprehend that he who dealt in such
Medicines had a design to destroy them; and that he was a Necromancer, and one
that busied himself in some unlawful Art. So far had prevailed the ill reports
of ignorance, envy and slander, that this most laudable Art, and the true
professors have suffered much, and lie low in the opinion of some people: but
time will open their eyes that they may fee their error.

You say Chemical Medicines are dangerous; so is a Sword in a mad man's hand;
but when a wise man has it, it is his safety and defense, because he knows how
to use it. Some Chemical medicines are more acute and vigorous in operation,
and therefore are more cautiously to be dealt with, I grant you: therefore take
good instructions from a Physician that knows well the medicine, being present
at its operation, and well understands for what he gives it you, and then the
danger is past; else any other medicine is injurious also.

You say Chemical medicines are dangerous; I say it is dangerous to be without
them; these are the medicines that must help in the time of need; when the
nauseous loading Drenches, Apozems, Juleps, and the Languid Syrups can do no
good: the Chemical medicines must step in to save the man; then a noble
spirituous tincture, or rich cordial essence, or highly graduated Elixir, that
operates briskly, cheerfully and friendly with nature, that expands it self in
the body instantaneously; raises the drooping spirits, inlivens and comforts
all the faculties; this is the medicine that gives speedy help to a
languishing, tired Patient.

You say Chemical medicines are dangerous; I say Galenick medicines are more
dangerous; for, by trifling away the time with sluggish dull medicines; many
times the opportunity of curing slips away, and is not to be recovered by the
best of medicines, but the Patient must die for it. This I have often seen; and
sometimes I have known the tired Patient, receive help and comfort from
efficacious Chemical medicines, that could find none in the other. For Patients
to desert Galenick medicines, and have recourse to the Chemical is common: but
to leave the Chemical and apply to Galenick Physic, is very rare. You shall
hardly meet with a Patient that has tried both, but commends Chemical
medicines above the other; as being much easier and pleasanter to take, as
kindly in operation, and more effectual for their purposes intended; if a true
Chemical Physician have had the managing of their sickness.

You say Chemical medicines are dangerous; and if I ask you wherein, you
presently tell me of Antimony and Mercury, as if Chemical Pharmacy was confined
to these Minerals, and all Chymimical medicines were Antimonial and Mercurial,
and these were the whole Materia Medica that a Chemist works upon: no, the
Chemical Physician is no more bound up to Antimony and Mercury then the
Galenist is to Hellebore, Elaterium and Colloquintida, churlish Drugs if not
well prepared. As for Antimony and Mercury (though of good use) if these were
not in nature, the Chemical Physician would be sufficiently supplied from other
Minerals, and out of the family of Vegetables and Animals, to do his business.
Do you think the Chemist does not make as much use, and better use of all
Plants then others? I am sure he knows them better, will give you a more
satisfactory account of what he uses, then any other that depends only upon
the Herbal; that is a traditional account, not well examined nor corrected, but
remains full of errors; not is there any firm basis assigned to ground the
virtues of those Plants upon, and from which they do assurge; but praise them
for this and for that (many times at random) collected from one Author to
another successively: but the Chemist does anatomize the Plant, separates its
parts and will make you sensibly discern the difference between this Plant and
that; discovering their several proprieties in these artificial retextures;
then your reason being informed by sense, may easily judge and certainly
determine, for what purpose this is for, and what that; and not be beholden or
rely upon the dubious reports of Authors, that never made such experiments to
demonstrate the verity of their opinions. But whereas you fall upon Antimony
and Mercury with a prejudicate opinion as if they deserved to be banished from
medicinal employment; you must know that these Minerals are of good use in
Physic, when an able Artist has the handling of them; but being abused by
Bunglers and Quacks, these Minerals lie under a reproach.

You say Chemical medicines are dangerous, and therefore they are appointed to
be taken by drops and grains; else they might be given in a larger quantity as
Galenick medicines are, half a pint, or a pint at a Dose. Here is a fallacious
scandal; you call that dangerous, which is only of great power and efficacy,
that is acute and brisk in operation; that is reduced to a small quantity for
the benefit and ease of the Patient; that a drop compriseth as much virtue, as
a spoonful of another medicine: It Is true, these Medicines are not to be played
with, as Children lick Syrup; but discreetly to be used: and therefore if a
Chemical medicine be said to be dangerous, it is not so in su^ natura, but in
usu malo; not in its own nature, but by the imprudent use and abuse of it. It Is
dangerous for Children to play with knifes; but when Wise men use them, there
is no danger: so the danger of a Chemical Medicine is in the unskilful,
careless use of it: dangerous in the hands of fools, and received from the
hands of such; but prudently taken from the hands of a Physician that knows
the preparation of the medicine, none is more safe; none so safe, because they
surpass all other in amicable operation and good effects.

Chemical Medicines, you say, are not so mild and gentle as the Galenick, which
are more familiar to Nature, and may more freely be used: But the Chemical is
not to be used but upon extraordinary occasions, and desperate cases; according
to the Proverb, A desperate Disease must have a desperate Remedy. I answer, You
are much mistaken in your Opinion and Censure: Medicines Chymically prepared by
a true Philosophical Artist and rational Physician, are as gentle and benign
in their operation as any Medicines in the World; and if it happen otherwise,
it does arise from the insufficiency of the Artist, or the imprudence of the
Patient: And such miscarriages as these happen in the Galenick Practice, and is
common to Galenick Medicines as often as Chemical: But cast your Eye upon both
sorts of Medicines, prepared according to the rules of either Art, and the best
Pharmacopoeia's of both Sects; and you may pick out as churlish medicines in
the one as the other. I shall not defend all Chemical Medicines that stand upon
Record in Chemical Authors; and you I think will not justify all the Galenick;
but have recourse to one that is Chymiatros (...), a true Chemical Physician,
Judicious and Expert in Chemical Pharmacy; he will produce you such Medicines
of his own preparation, that you may confide in, for the grand purposes and
intentions of Cure, Emetick, Cathartick, Diaphoretick, Diuretic, Cardiack,
etc. as nothing can operate with more facility and amicably with Nature, in her
weakest Condition, and in the tenderest age: and therefore not in desperate
cases only, but in all cases the Chemical medicines are of excellent use;
benign and friendly to Nature, various in their Kinds as well vegetable and
Animal, as Mineral; so that the Chemical Physician has his choice to appoint,
this or that pro re nata as the case requires: Moreover, herein lies the
excellency of Chemistry, that it can tame the greatest Poison, and make it good
Medicament, if there be occasion for it: Herein lies the Excellency of
Chymicall preparation, that the faeculent drossie part is separated from the
pure and virtuous; the excelling parts are drawn forth and preserved, the
inutile and unuseful are rejected and sequestered. Hence the noble tinctures,
and reviving Elixerated Spirits and Essences are drawn: the Quintessence of all
things is commanded by the skilful Chemist, and none but he searches the
Treasury of Nature. Is there any thing good in Nature attainable, that he
cannot acquire and possess? Is there any thing so bad that he cannot correct
and alter? If not he, then no man.

Dr. Primrose, Primrose de Vulg. Err. li. 4. ca 1.
though a Friend to the Galenick method and practice; yet in his Book of Vulgar
Errors, takes notice of the unjust Censure that Common People pass upon
Chemical Medicines; Additae igitur fuerunt operationes Chymicae, ad aegrorum
solatium, artis decus et ornatum, non quidem absolute, sed ut melius et
commodius Medici Mederentur. Quaedam tamen deterrent plurimos aegrotantes ab
horum remediorum usu: Primum est quod putent omnia Chymicorum remedia esse
valentissima, Curare statim vel occidere, et esse remedia, ut vocant,
desperata, cito quidem and jucunde opus suum perficere, sed minus tuto, et
quandam post sese labem in visceribus relinquere, quae nunquam, aut vix postea
eluatur. Satius autem esse putant, tardius Curari, modo tuta et secura sanitas
succedat; sat cito, inquit proverbium, si sat been. Verum haec en ignorantia
istius artis originem habent, et quorundam nebulonum audacia, qui solum
vehementissimis utuntur, et praepostera operatione praeparatis, non enim
quaelibet Chymica praeparatio cuilibet Medicamento convenit, Mercurio dulci
utimur innoxie, codem sublimato aut praecipitato, non nisi cum vitae
discrimine. Plurima enim habent Chymici Medicamenta valde benign, minimumque
violenta: eadem siquidem est materia medica Pharmacopoei Chymici et vulgaris,
ex vegetabilibus, animalibus, mineralibus et omnibus tam benignis quam
violentis, quae in usum medicum venire solent. Praeparatio ^utem Chymica in
violentis quae noxia sunt, emendat, aut tollit, securiora ea gratioraque
efficit: Quin etiam Cardiaca et roborantia habent Chymici quam plurima,
vulgaribus saepe elegantiora.

This Author though a Galenist in Doctrine and Method of Practice; Eodem Cap.
yet confesses Chemical medicines to be the most excellent, most pleasant, and
very safe; Cum igitur Medici Officium sit ut cito, tuto, jucunde curet, hand
dubie id melius faciet instructus Chymicis Medicamentis, quorum efficacia
major, et praeparationis elegantia ad jucunditatem faciunt. Here he says, for
speed, safety and pleasantness of Curing, the Chemical Physician is best
accommodated for that purpose.

But the very name Chemical, is a desperate word, and imports strange things in
the Opinion of some people, which affrights them from all medicines that bear
that denomination: Truly if I knew any such concealed mischief under it, as you
do imagine, I should be as ready to inform you, as now to convince you of your
error; and to warn you of it, as now to remove that prejudice and suspicion
which you unjustly conceive and harbor; were Chemical Medicines desperate
Physic as you imagine, so many famous Physicians would not have used them, nor
stood up for them: and although Hypocrates nor Galen was not so happy as to be
acquainted with these medicines; yet their Disciples that embrace their
doctrine and precepts, applaud and use Chemical Medicines.

Crato Physician to 3. I^ Co^sil. a Schol. Edit.
Emperors, very much commends Chemical Medicines, and professes to use them.
And Erastus though a great Anti-Paracelsian, In praefat. ^per. Antiparacelsitor.
confesses he does not disapprove of the Chemical preparation of Physic, but
praises and approves it. Greg. Horstius Fernelius, Heurnius, these Worthy
Authors (approved and followed by all the Galenists) do the like. And Sennertus
a moderate man, endeavoring to reconcile these two grand dissenting parties,
gives the pre-eminence to Chemical Medicines; but allows of both in the
practice of Physic to be of good use. And Maebius a late Writer and favourer
of Galenick Doctrine, speaking of the several sects of Physicians, makes some
Exceptions against Chemical Principles, but the Chemists medicines, he cannot
but extol and confesses, Fundament. Medicin.
In praeparatione Medicamentorum tamen palmam veterum Medicinae praecipiunt.
But in the preparation of medicines (says he) the Chemists win the Garland.

Many such testimonies as these I might give concerning Chymicall medicines of
their efficacy and safety from very approved Authors of the Galenists: I
suppose now you will entertain a better opinion of Chymicall medicines; you
will not think them dangerous, having the approbation of so many learned men
and the most eminent Physicians of the Galenic party (to let pass the testimony
of the most experienced Doctors and Operators in Chemistry) and indeed there is
scarce any Physician of known parts now, but do freely admit of and practice
with Chymicall medicines; and very often you take Chymicall preparations though
prescribed by a Galenic Doctor, and coming out of an Apothecaries shop; which
you do not perceive, because admixed with Galenick Physic: and if you can
take Chymicall Physic at this rate, when the Physician has not been privy to
the preparation, nor the Apothecary; but bought of some Shop Chemist or other
whose honesty and care they trust; you may with great confidence then take them
from the hands of a Chymicall Physician and skillful Operator; whose great
business it is to prepare choice medicines for his own practice, with great
care and exactness, for his reputation is engaged for every default, nor can he
shift it off and throw it upon another, because he undertakes the whole work.
Nor does he aim at the sale of medicines herein, but to effect difficult
cures, and to be satisfied in the curiosity of medicines which puts him upon
this trouble for the good of his Patients; and therefore I need say no more of
his medicines; nor answer farther to clear this objection against Chymicall
medicines, that they are dangerous: Sennert. cons. and dis. Chym. cum Galen. c.
18.
only remember what Sennertus says, interest multum in Chymicis medicamentis,
quis ca praeparavit, it behooves you to know well the artist that prepares them;
and being given by a skillful hand you need not fear the use of them; but
expect as much then as Art and Medicine can perform.

Chymicall medicines some say are a new invention, and therefore not to be
esteemed equal with the old Galenick medicines.

Antiquity or novelty is no sufficient argument to prove the goodness of one
thing above another, except in Theological truths. But in Phylosophical, if
either invites to adhere, I should think new inventions might more persuade,
upon the score of reason, to be embraced and followed then the old: but
understand what I mean by new inventions; not the fancy of light roving wits,
and the conceits of giddybrains affecting novelties; but the solid inventions
and improvements of judicious Artists, sufficiently experimented and approved.
Look back upon all arts and sciences in former ages, and you will see how rude
and inartificiall they were then to what they are now; how polite and exquisite
now, how much completed, by revisings and additions, to what they were
formerly in their rough draughts: you will then be convinced that the later
inventions and contrivances by learned ingenious men, do far exceed the first
exemplars; and that arts and sciences are daily improved by new additions and
ingenious alterations. And it were a shame to us if it were not so: shall other
men in all ages have their inventions, and not we ours? why must we be tied up
from invention? I do not see a perfection yet: there is a plus ultra: had
there been such a restraint and check upon our Predecessors (to be derided for
sick-brain novelists and fantastic Innovators) and they timorously had stood
in awe of the rash Censure of foolish or envious people; where had all our
knowledge been? we now should be groaping in the darkness of Error and
Ignorance, wanting their Labors and Lights; and we had now been but laying a
foundation in Arts and Sciences, whereas (thanks to the great Endeavors and
Ingenious Improvements and Additions of Learned Men in their several Ages) we
are now upon Ornament, and the finishing part, in most of them; and the hardest
knotty work is past.

But I have not done with this Objection yet: You say Chemical Medicines are
Novel Inventions; What then? Physic is not perfected yet; there is room enough
for invention: there is a great deal to be corrected and altered, and there is
much to be added before the Art be complete. Pertinent to this point we are
upon, Sennert. Cons. et diff. Chym. cum Gal.
is that place of Sennertus, where he says, The Antiquity alone of common
medicines does not detract from the Chemical in the least, nor is the Chemical
for their Novelty to be accounted inferior to the Galenical. It Is a foolish
thing to eat Acorns, when we have gotten good Corn; And who now does not use
printed Books which the Ancients wanted, and yet were learned. And they
themselves, which despise Chemical medicines for their novelty do use Rhubarb,
Mechoacan, Cassia, Guajacum, Sassafras, Sarsaperilla, Bezoar stone, and many
more which were unknown to Hypocrates and Galen. And they which lived before
Hypocrates and Galens time, lived well also: notwithstanding therefore the
works of Hypocrates and Galen are not to be thrown away. How many most
profitable observations of learned Physicians are now extant? also how many the
best compositions of Medicines, which were unknown in the time of Hypocrates
and Galen, with which now the art of Physic is much adorned? all things have
their beginnings, increase, and perfection: and nothing is invented and
perfected at one time. And therefore it is our parts to labor, not only to
defend the inventions of the Ancients, but also as much as in us lies to
prosecute those beginnings, to enlarge and bring them to perfection. And
therefore Antiquity alone is not sufficient to prefer the Common Medicines
above the Chemical

You have the opinion of this learned man, a moderator between the Galenist and
the Chemical Physician; and he determines very justly, that Antiquity does not
give the prehemince to Galenick Physic; but rather that it should give place
to later discoveries of Medicines; these being the Revises, Compleatments and
mature productions of Art; much to be preferred before the antiquated
Medicines; being but rude experiments, and an induction only to greater and
more artificial operations and trials.

But I have heard some Physicians say, that they prescribe no medicine but what
has been tried and used 500 or a 1000 years: and except you bring the authority
of so many years, a medicine is not esteemed nor hardly allowed by such: truly,
I like their medicines never the better for their antiquity, but the worse: not
therefore, despising antiquiquity; but therefore, because their medicines were
unpolished, rude and churlish, to what they are now. Our rational way of
correction and preparation of medicines, does far surpass the Ancients. They
went upon experiments altogether at first; and those experiments were not to be
called rational as ours now, but at a venture: for they had not Analogy to
direct them. But it is not so with us now; and therefore our experiments and
inventions are guided by strong reason and collateral experiments; and we are
able to set a probatum est to any new medicine, to give it credit in the world
after satisfaction from our own trials of use; and it is as authentic as a
thousand years practice, in the judgment and opinion of knowing men; that can
compare the maturity of our knowledge in these later days, with their
indigested notions of former ages.

You say you prescribe no Medicine but of a thousand years standing: if any one
should say I used any Medicine of a thousand years standing (not corrected and
altered) I should take it as a disparagement: but you think it is a safe way of
practice, to have the authority of a thousand years to back you, much good may
it do you, per me licet; but I shall use none of your old Medicines. Truly I
am so far from adhering to old medicines, that I may say, every year I practice
with new medicines; that is in part; not wholly new, but altered, corrected and
improved: and by such trials of preparation and alteration, medicines
gradually receive their perfection, and the Artist a more exact knowledge.

But some may object; if you are continually altering of medicines, what
certainty is there in your medicines, when you are always upon experiments and
changing? to this I answer; much certainty I find and satisfaction in these
trials of alteration; for thereby I fully understand what my medicine is and
the nature of all the ingredients are better discovered: I see how to correct,
to improve, and each time to advance a medicine to a greater perfection and
excellency of operation. He is no Artist that either bounds himself within the
prescription of any author, or wants ingeny to improve and meliorate his first
contrivance and invention of medicine.

It is in medicines, as in all other artificial works and inventions: let an
artist design any piece of work, when he has made it, and surveys the
contrivance of it in all its parts; though it be well and ingeniously done, yet
he sees where it might be mended; Secundae cogitationes sunt meliores; and when
he comes to make it a second time, and a third; he will not make it as it was
at first, but he alters and varies much; his Fancy is still working to give it
greater perfection, to make it more advantageous and commodious for the
purposes intended. Shall any one blame this Man, and accuse him with levity and
uncertainty, for giving liberty to his Invention and rational contrivance,
dictated to him by the revising of his former Labors? Will any one say, This
man goes upon uncertain Experiments and Alterations? No, he works more
certainly the second time, then the first; and third more certain then the
second: he sees a fault and mends it the next time; he sees where his first
inventions failed him; he finds by the use and daily trial of it, where and how
to make it more fit, useful and exact for the purpose the next time: So that
Industry and Time makes new discoveries and inventions to give every thing a
greater excellency and worth, and thus have all Arts and artificial works
increased and improved, by the ingenious inventions and additional Contrivances
of Industrious men, successively in all Ages: But they that lazily dote upon
Antiquity; foolishly or wilfully supposing their Copies to be perfect, and
requires nothing but our imitation; have gotten a fair pretense to be drones,
and live upon other men's labor.

He is not so much a Doctor of Physic as a Scholar in Physic, that practices
altogether by the Book; that dare not trust his own Abilities, but must have
the precept or example of an Author to follow, and tie himself up to a Pattern,
that he dare not alter: He that is a Complete Artist, that has the Canons and
Reason of the Art grounded in him by Study and Practice, he is able and
sufficient to manage and contrive his business, if all Books were burnt: But do
not mistake me, as if I slighted Books and Authors; they preserve Learning and
Arts alive from one Generation to another, else they would dye and wither away:
And by these helps we have attained to what Learning and Ingenuity we now call
our own; for which I honor the memorable worth of them. But, being once made
masters of their works, sufficiently grounded and exercised in any Art: Such a
man then is his own guide, he is swayed by nothing but Reason and Experience;
that is the Basis and Principles that he is grounded on; Authority prevails not
with him, he is able then to contradict the greatest reputed authority that
has gone before him.

When first I came acquainted with Dr. Starky (an Expert Chemist) and finding
him a very acute Philosopher and experienced Physician; I had a desire to see
his Library, and what Authors he conversed with: In his Chamber there lay Van
Helmonts Works, and 2. or 3. small Books, which was all that ever I saw, or
that he owned to have. Upon Conference afterward and more intimate Friendship,
we fell upon discourse of Physical Writers and Chemical Pharmacopoeia's; and as
I remember, the result of his discourse was to this purpose; That to initiate
and ground a Physician in the study and practice of Physic, those helps were
necessary to instruct and guide him, until he had acquired such a Knowledge
and Experience, as made him master of his Art: Then he is no longer under the
tutorage of Authors, but relyes upon his own Reason and Experiments; he is then
able to correct Authors, and find out their failings.

I question not but he had read as many Books as other men, to satisfy his
Curiosity, and had sucked the marrow out of the best; had fortified his own
Reason, and laid a good foundation within himself, by Practice and Experiments;
did then stand upon his own legs, had not recourse to this or that Author, but
was able to resolve himself in difficult cases; by the Analogy of his own
Experiments, and strength of his own reason; was then a Tutor and Guide to
himself; able to proceed and make a fair progress, where other men sat down,
as their ne plus ultra, being the utmost extent of their Book information, and
farther they cannot go: but this Artist was continually upon projection and
invention of Medicinal preparations, and he had a very subtle head for that
purpose: he relied not upon Authors in the process of his Medicines, but his
own reason and the Analogy of former trials, lead him from one experiment to
another. And thus does the Philosophical ingenious Artist, who is adeptus, is
also adespotus, or he is but a dull Chemist, that can proceed no farther then
his Book teaches.

But to my purpose, from whence discourse has led me: You say, Chemical
Medicines are Novell Inventions: That I deny, except you call Novelties of 2000
years standing, as it may be proved from the Writings of credible Authors. And
what if Chemistry were a new Invention, that would not derogate from the
Excellency and worth of it; Sennert. Cons. et diss. Chym. cum Gal.
as Sennertus says, Licet hodie primum Chymia inventa esset; dignitati tamen
ejus id nihil detraheret: Sat enim antiquum quod sat bonum: nihilque invenire
est quod non aliquando novum fuerit; et multa pro novis habentur, quae sunt
antiquissima. But Chemical Medicines stand upon a very ancient foundation, and
the professors thereof have been Men renowned in their Generations, and famous
to all posterity. But were there not that Antiquity to plead for them; yet the
Experience of later times, the proofs and trials which have been made in our
own times, of these excellent Medicines, what they have done, when others have
failed; (of which we are witnesses and can attest) are sufficient to give a
confidence in and relyance upon them, as the most pleasant, efficacious and
wholesome Medicines in the World.

TRACT. XII. The Virtues of Catholic, Specific and Appropriate Medicines
examined; and compared with each other, in their Efficacy, Safety and Certainty
of Operation.
Amongst the Writings of some Eminent Physicians and the best Philosophers,
both Ancient and Modern, we find them to make mention of, and to distinguish
Medicines by these Titles of Catholic, Specific and Appropriate: and
therefore I think it worthy of our consideration and debate, rightly to
understand the verity and reason of this distinction, and the advantages that
it may afford us by a due examination. And the rather, because the Catholic
Medicine has been much abused by some Pretenders of mean abilities; is thereby
defamed, and become dis-esteemed and slighted in the opinion and acceptance of
the People.

most pet here are that wholly deny any such thing in Nature or Art, as a
Catholic, Universal Medicine: Others plead very high for it; and those, Men of
no small account, but of great Learning and Reputation in the World. But to
wave the Authorities of Famous Men on both sides, we will dive into the reason
and probability of the thing, and prove it that way; as being more prevalent
and more satisfactory, then the Reports and Testimonies of Authors affirming
it. And first I shall lay open the terms, and show you what is meant by
Catholic, Specific, and Appropriate Medicines. Catholic is Universal, and in
the full latitude and extent of the word, a Medicine curing all Diseases in all
persons is signified thereby, and so understood by many: A Specific Medicine
is proper and peculiar for the Cure of one disease only, and in all persons.
An Appropriate Medicine is narrower then that, and restrained; being adapted to
one individual person, for this or that Disease or complicated Diseases,
designed for his case alone, and not fit for another. But Catholic is not to
be taken in the largest sense before named, when I assert the Catholic
Medicine; nor is it the meaning and intent of the most solid and grave Writers;
that stand up for the excellency of a Catholic Medicine: But by Catholic, is
understood by them, (and it is my own sense) Medicamentum Poluchreston; a
Medicine of a general use, profitable in various cases and in diverse persons;
so that Catholic or Universal is not meant absolutely, but secundum quid, and
is restrained to some general intentions of Cure useful in diverse cases and
diseases; and for distinction sake, to difference this more general Medicine
from the Specific and Appropriate, that are restrained and limited in their
power to particular cases and persons. And further, a Medicine may be called
Catholic, though it do not cure all diseases; yet may be of necessray use in
all diseases: as such a Medicine that fortifies Nature radically in her
principles (being well designed and curiously prepared) that gives assistance
and strength to all the faculties; such a Medicine is Catholic and of general
use, and may very profitably be exhibited in all declensions, and struglings of
Nature contending with any disease, be it this or that: Nor does this Medicine
undertake the whole Cure and exclude the use of other Medicines, though it be a
Catholic Medicine. But other Medicines (and Catholic also) may come in and
bear their part in the Cure, as the skilful Physician shall appoint and think
fit in their due course and order. And therefore you are not to think that
there is but one Catholic Medicine, but a plurality of them is allowed, and
that rationally according to our present sense and meaning. In Purgation, that
Medicine which cleanses the Body of all impurity and superfluous humors, be
they of this fort or that sort; that discharges Nature of all noxious matter
that resides in those parts to be carried off this way; working so, not only
in one body but diverse, of various and different diseases, performing its
operation with facility, ease and gentleness; this Medicine is Catholic, and
may be entitled universal in this Classis of operation.

So likewise in transpiration; such a Medicine as excites the Archaeus to a
more vigorous action; that puts the blood upon fermentation and separation of
any impure heterogene admixture, and invigorates the expulsive faculty; that
opens the pores of the body, and penetrates through all the parts, breathing
out and dis-lodging degenerate stinking humors; that is Balsamic, resists
corruption, purifies and sweetens the body: and all this by a friendly
Diaphoretick operation in diverse Bodies, differently affected and degenerated;
and yet successfully performed withal; (at least so much as can be expected in
the power of Medicine; considering the capacities of the Subjects) this may
deservedly be called a Universal Diaphoretick Medicine: and such Catholic or
general Medicines as these, are attainable by art and diligent labor in
Medicinal Preparations; and these are the most excellent, safe and certain
Medicines: And to prove what I have said, That there are such Medicines as I
have now deciphered, I can produce them of my own preparation, to convince the
incredulous.

You see now what is meant by a Catholic Medicine; at least what is my meaning
in the term: and a Catholic Medicine thus understood and so limited, is the
Medicine I ground my Discourse on, and make comparison with the Specific and
Appropriate Medicines; whether is more safe, more certain of operation, and
efficacious in curing; the true Catholic Medicine, or the Specific and
Appropriate, that is particularly designed and appointed for each person and
different case.

To manifest the rational designment of Catholic Medicines, and to show you
upon what grounds and considerations the true Philosophical Artist does
contrive and perfect them; take notice that he well knows and considers the
body of Man, and all the internal operations subservient to each other in a
state of sanity and health: he considers also the functions of the body
disordered and depraved; the digestions vitiated and weak; (the springs of most
diseases, from whence the vital streams are impure and defiled.) He determines
aright concerning the Archoeus, as dominus fac totum in the economy and
government of the body; how to be fortified when weak and feeble, how to be
pacified and calmed when furious, raging and extravagant. He considers how many
ways Nature has to help her self in the discharge of any morbifick matter;
per vomitum, per aluum, per ductus urinarios, per cutis poros. From such
considerations as these, as general Rules and Directions, the Rational
Physician proposes certain scopes and intentions to be aimed at in the
designing of his Catholic Medicines without respect to this or that
individ^um, but levelling at the specific nature of man's body.

And for a prosecution of these intentions, he electeth such and such
Ingredients proper for these several operations; he corrects, prepares and fits
them, operates upon them according to Art, and forms them into several distinct
Medicines, answering the several purposes aforesaid. He tries them upon several
persons, and different cases; (but requiring the same manner of operation,
whether it be purging, sweating, provoking Urine, Anodine, or the like.) They
do not please him at first, because they work variously and uncertainly,
discordantly with some bodies: he then begins to cast about in his mind, where
the faults may be in such a medicine; whether in the matter, or manof
preparation: and thus by examination of each particular, how congruous, how
effectual and operative, how amicable such and such Ingredients are, being so
corrected and prepared; and by this projection and scrutiny; he begins to see
where and how these medicines may be mended, Nihil est simul and inventum ac
perfectum.
and altered for the better. He falls to work again, contriues a better way,
and perhaps better Drugs, more fit and excellent for these purposes; as time
and experience by trials will dictate to him. And now he makes them more
artificially, and improves his Medicines, taking out and putting in, and
variously altering as his ingenuity and reason does prompt him. He uses and
tryes them again and again, in several cases; and thus continues altering and
making, until by length of time and constant endeavors, he advances these
Medicines to be radical and universal; that they shall perform their several
distinct operations, in diverse bodies and different diseases, with great
facility and advantage to all, that require such an operation in their Cures.

Now you see what a Catholic Medicine is, how designed and contrived, and how
it gains the desired perfection of universality: Let us now compare this
Medicine with the Specific and Appropriate, and then you shall judge whether
is more safe, certain, and effectual in curing.

Some stand up for Specific Medicines peculiar for every disease, and proper
for that only; and these say they are the the brave Medicines: I do not deny
the bounty of Nature, in affording variety of Specificks; that there may be
such in Nature; but the difficulty and uncertainty is in finding them out: for
those Medicines so accounted, we find them to sail and deceive our expectation
oftentimes, as others do; and therefore they are either not rightly known, or
not well used. Besides what every Physician finds in his own practice daily; we
read in several Authors publishing their own Therapeutick Experiments; how many
Specificks so accounted, they have given in several Diseases that have taken no
effect: one commends one thing, another prefers another in the same disease:
and the same Specific given to one with success, has been given to another
without any benefit. And this uncertainty not my own experience only urges; but
also the reports and relations of credible Authors in the history of their
Cures do confirm it.

I do not speak this to lessen the bounty and goodness of Nature; or to
discourage an industrious Enquirer from pursuing after the knowledge of
Specificks, but until we be better satisfied in them, let us value the true
Catholic Medicine as most certain to rely upon, because we expect from it what
is manifest in it, and frequently proved.

But farther; in granting your Specific Medicines for every disease, there is
some difficulty in the admission according to the common acceptance of
Specificks and Appropriate Medicines: for admit there be a Plant proper for
every disease, which you call Specificks; yet how are these Specificks fit for
every individuum, that has such a disease? Here you must allow of their
Protean nature to vary and agree with every individual Propriety: or you must
deny the necessity of Appropriating Medicines to every single person: or you
must acknowledge these Specificks to work congruously and generally as
Universals, so as to apply fitly to every individuum, and then they are
Catholic Medicines.

Now concerning Appropriate Medicines, which are adapted pro re nata for every
particular case; we will enquire into their worth and certainty of operation,
what may be expected from their peculiar appointment, above what a Catholic
Medicine is likely to effect. And here I must premise by way of Thesis: That
the certainty of operation in any Medicine must be grounded upon the certain
knowledge of the Patient, and a certain knowledge of the Medicine: both which
fall short in your appropriation of Medicines; therefore no certainty in such
Medicines; at least not so certain as a true Catholic Medicine. First, no
certainty in your peculiar Appropriate Medicine; because this Medicine so
compounded and prepared peculiarly for your Specifical case, was never
experimonted and tried; therefore as likely to disagree, nay more likely then
to agree: because variety of composition, this with that, so far alters every
particular ingredient in its virtue and propriety, that it is not altogether
the same in this, as it was before in another composition; not can the best
guesser tell what will be the result of this new invented Medicine, and
conjunction of ingredients; who act upon each other in their association to
alter each others Proprieties and single nature, that the product Medicine is
not to be known but after trial. Secondly, No certainty of knowledge in the
person you design it for; in as much as no individual and idio-syncratical
propriety is known (in point of agreement and operation of Medicine) farther
then the Specific nature; but presumed and supposed at random, until the
trial of such bodies with that particular Medicine; and then the difference
appears.

These things granted (as true they are) what certainty is there in your
Appropriate Medicine, particularly appointed for this or that body, before
trial and use? what confidence can you have in it? it is but conjecturally
designed; you never tried it; it may as likely disgust and disagree with this
particular body, as otherwise: What is your hopes? You will say this for the
reason of your proceedings; That you have tried all these Ingredients, you know
them to be amicable and agreeable to Nature so prepared; you have found them to
do good in the like cases, with others; and therefore hope that they will do
well in this new composition, for this particular person. Pray what does this
differ from the reasons of a Catholic Medicine that is designed to agree with
the Specific nature of Man? Your hopes is grounded upon the same reasons and
probability, that a Universal Medicine is; but here is the great difference;
the Catholic has been often proved and approved; yours never; because a
peculiar new Medicine. Therefore, since Appropriate Medicines, never tried,
have no more certainty, then a probability of agreement, drawn from the
Specific nature of Man, and their general use in other persons and other
compositions; then you must unavoidably allow the Catholic Medicine being
exquisitely prepared and gradually perfected, frequently tried and approved; to
be more safe, certain in operation, and efficacious for its designed purpose,
then any ex tempore appropriate unknown medicine.

And is not there greater hopes in a Catholic Medicine that is known and
sufficiently tried to operate well and effectually with many in that way of
operation it is designed; then in a Medicine that was never tried, and
conjecturally contrived to agree with an individual Nature which is occult and
unknown? Therefore say I, and it is but reason; that it is more safe to be led
and ruled in the designment of Medicines, by the Specific Nature of Man, then
by the individual unknown propriety: And for satisfaction herein, take a true
Catholic known Medicine, and ten peculiar appropriate Medicines for the same
operation, never tried in the persons for whom they are appointed; and you will
find that the Catholic Medicine (if true and not counterfeit) shall better
agree, have less miscarriages, and take better effect in the ten several
persons, then the peculiarly appropriate Medicines for each: So that a good
Catholic Medicine is as well and rationally designed for 20. or a hundred
persons, as your single medicine is for one person, be as circumspect as you
can, and is as likely, or more likely to do the business intended: And if you
desire to see the experiment of this; prescribe and prepare you ten appropriate
Medicines for ten persons in different cases or diseases; requiring one and the
same manner of operation or intention of Cure at that time; whether it be
purging, sweating, strengthening, etc. and I shall produce one Catholic
Medicine of single operation in the same Classis; and we will go to trial
whether performs best.



this was the most probable Medicine to do it before trial; this is more
certain in operation, this seldomer fails then any other: nor is there any
Medicine in the world that cures all, or never misseth its wonted success.
Optandum potius quam sperandum tale medicamentum, says Sennertus: such a
Medicine may be desired, but we have no hopes to expect it; if such Medicines
were, Providence would be resisted, Sickness would be slighted, and Mortality
baffled: but there is nothing in nature or art, that always and infallibly can
free mortals from their languishings and infirmities.

Non est in medico semper relevetur ut aeger;
Interdum docta plus valet art ma lum.
The best medicine in the world may fail sometimes and be frustrated of its
wonted success: and therefore this does not defame or derogate from the
Catholic Medicine; since there is no Medicine but does, will and must fail
sometimes; but this as seldom as any; nay, more certain in operation then any,
and more to be relied on.

If a Catholic Medicine be the most certain, Qu^^.
efficacious and best Medicine; then where a Catholic Medicine can do no good,
there is no hopes in any other medicine, but the Patient must languish under
his disease.

The best Medicine in the world may sail sometimes; Solution.
and a more inferior may do what that could not in some particular cases and
bodies. I have known a true Catholic Medicine to miss in its common success
and excellency of operation in some one person now and then: one in a hundred
perhaps shall not receive that benefit and advantage which all the rest have:
what is to be done then? Is this person to be given over for desperate? No, I
have then appropriated a Medicine which I thought might better agree with such
a particular body; avoiding what I thought might be disgusting or disagreeing
with that peculiar nature; or something else to be added which this special
case might require, as the operation of the first Medicine has hinted and
dictated to me; and then a much inferior medicine in point of art, has done
that in some bodies and complicated diseases, which a more excellent medicine
could not effect. And this particular propriety of body, no man can give a
sufficient reason for it; nor perhaps well understand why the one medicine
failed, and why the other had success: so mysterious and hidden are the
operations of nature in their causes sometimes, that the (...) is apparent, the
(...) very obscure and conjectural; and there is no way to find out peculiar
different proprieties of bodies in such cases, but by variation of medicines
and rational trials.

He that practices with Catholic medicines of his own preparation is not tied
up to them, that he cannot go farther in Cures then they will carry him, nor
alter if there be occasion: he that can rightly design and work medicines up to
their Catholic operation; knows how to appropriate medicines (if there be
occasion) for any special case and person, as well as any man whatever: and if
I should say better, the assertion is rational and easy to be proved: for, his
experiments are so many in his various trials of preparation and use, before
his medicines be Catholic and radical; that he receives more satisfaction in
the nature and virtues of all medicinal Ingredients, then any other, that is
but a speculator in medicines, no operator: he sees and knows their various
proprieties both genuine and artificial; their discord and concord, and Protean
natures in several preparations and vatious associations this with that; which
knowledge furnishes him with variety of medicines for all occasions whatever;
that he is never at a loss for medicines, and carries a better Pharmacopoeia in
his head, then another has in his Library: and he being not only a
Pharmacopaeian and Operator in medicinal preparations, but also a Complete
Physician; knows what to aim at in every particular and special case; he can
adapt a medicine proper and peculiar (where his Catholic Medicines fail) and
is as ready at this practice, for contriving and designing special and peculiar
Medicines, according to such and such indications, with as much reason and
facility, as any Professor in this Faculty. He is not like the Emperick, that a
has few common Medicines, and can do no more then that stock of Medicines he
has picked up can enable him: the Complete Physician is not limited or tied to
any set forms of Medicines, Catholic or other; but he is an ex temporo man if
need be; he can and does vary upon all occasions necessary requiring it: but
otherwise, he preferrs the Catholic Medicines; in whose distinct operations he
places much confidence, as most safe and certain, to make the first onset, and
progress in their due order, for the eradicating of a contumacious disease.

Catholic Medicines, but it seems strange to me that one Medicine can apply
fitly to several differently diseased, and of different Constitutions; some are
Choleric, some Phlegmatic, some Melancholic; that which is good for one is
not good for another, one must have a Medicine to purge Phlegm, another to
purge Choler, etc. as the diversity of humors abound, and is the cause of this
or that disease.

symptomatical appearances; but notwithstanding, a good radical medicine
carries all this matter off, be it this or that; not respecting the diversity
of its nature: (if it lie within spear of its activity; that is if it lie in
such a region of the body; where this Medicine discharges its operation,) for,
evacuating or purging Medicines do not work elective by attracting this or that
humor paricularly, as you imagine, and as the world is made to believe: but
purgers operate excitative, fermamentive and abstersive; by excitation and
provocation of nature to expulsion; by putting nature upon fermentation and
separation of the pure from the impure; and by stmulating abstersive
properties: and this is the nature and effect of a true purgative Medicine; so
that there is no particular purger for this or that humor; some for Phlegm,
and others for Melancholy, and some for Choler; this is a great mistake; and
those purgets that are so accounted and supposed peculiar attractives; as
Senna, Agarick, Coloquintida, Hellebore, Rhubarb, Scammony, etc. most in use;
are of a deleterious and virulent quality, that operate per modum veneni,
having a laxative venom that stimulates nature to expulsion; they do not
attract this or that humor particularly, nor is purgation performed after that
manner. From what has been said, you may reasonably judge that the Catholic
purgative medicine is not weakened at all, nor limited in its power by this
objection; but remains advantageous for variety of bodies, and diverse diseases,
requiring purgation.

The Emperick is much pleased at this discourse, and thinks it makes well for
him and his Panpharmacum; and that his practice is as rational as the best: but
he is much mistaken; he nor his pretended Universal Medicine is not concerned
here in the least; nor does this discourse favor the ignorant practice and
bold pretensions of such men; we are speaking of higher things, such as the
greatest Philosophers and Physicians have labored for, and diligently sought
after; nor can any man rightly design and endeavor to bring Medicines to
universality of operation, but he must be a complete Physician, a solid
practiser and diligent operator in Medicinal preparations and trials; and the
practice by universal Medicines, is the perfection and highest pitch that a
Physician can attain to: nor are such Medicines attained but by great labor,
found knowledge, and much experience. Catholic Medicines are so far from
derogating from the Learned Doctors; that they are the perfection and
accomplishment of the Medicinal Art: And we read of such Arcana's
aenigmatically and darkly discovered or discoursed of in the Writings of the
most Eminent Physicians Pharmacopoeians.

I remember the Counsel of an able Physician and expert Chemist, Dr. Starky, my
acquaintance and friend, who dyed in the last Visitation of the Plague; we
discoursing how a Physician might fit himself completely with a stock of
Medicines to serve his practice upon all occasions. His Judgment and Advice was
thus much; That a Physician need not clogg and trouble himself with a multitude
of single appropriate Medicines for all occasions; but improve the quality of a
few grand Medicines, distinct in operation, and work them to as great a
universality and large extent of operation as is possible; and such will be
applicable in diverse cases.

He was a man that had used and was acquainted with as many Medicines as most
men in this profession; being a diligent labourer in Chemical Pharmacy,
indefatigable in various trials and preparations: he saw the unnecessary
trouble of many medicines; he had but a few in his custody, but those were
excellent, and he labored to improve them in universality, that they might
serve in all cases requiring such an operation. But if occasion required, he
was not tied up to these, but could vary, and specificate his Medicines for
this or that purpose, at his pleasure.

The Catholic Medicines which a Physician ought principally to labor for are
these: Cathartick, Diaphoretick, Diuretic, Anodyne, Bezoardick, and
Restaurative. The first cleanses and evacuates by stool; the second by or
through all the pores of the body; the third by Urine; the fourth mitigates
pains, allures the Archeus to rest, and bridles his exorbitant motions, which
are many and frequent; the fifth resists malignity and venenous assaults; the
sixth roborates and restores the vital principles. And these are the grand and
chief Classes of Medicinal operations, wherein a complete Pharmacopoeian
Physician forms his Medicines and Labors by various Experiments and gradual
Improvements, that they may be adequate and answer the full intent of each
Classical distinct operation in all Bodies: and such being made Catholic and
Radical, are standing. Medicines as Treasuries and Stores, from whence a solid
Physician may deduct and adapt peculiar Medicines (if need be) out of these;
forming variety of Medicines, appropriating them for this or that special Case
to answer several indications Cathartick and Anodyne; Diuretic and
Diaphoretick; Diuretic and Anodine; Diaphoretick and Bezoardick; Anodine and
Diaphoretick; Anodine and Bezoardick, etc. as his reason prore nata shall
dictate to him.

The Complete Physician is not tied up to his Medicines that he cannot alter or
vary in his practice; but he is confined to these Classes of operation, which
are proper intentions and mediums to effect a Cure by, in a thousand Diseases:
Medicines may be hundreds or thousands; but the known ways by which Nature
will receive help, are but few; and although your Medicines be never so many
and various, yet they must all be ranked in a few Classes, they must look the
same way, and have respect to the same intention and manner of operation: Now
where one Medicine can satisfy the intention and scope of such a Classis of
operation, it is needless and a perplexity to multiply many: Frustra fit per
plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora.

Nor is this practice with Catholic medicines Emperical and amethodical, as
some may foolishly suppose, or others enviously scandalize; but most rationally
founded upon the safest and best rules of Art, having a due regard to necessary
indications, and the requisite circumstances of curing. But take notice, he
that practices with radical medicines need not regard, must not observe so
many indications as is set down in the Methodus medendi, the common Galenick
Method of curing.

The Complete Physician in designing his medicines, has his Eye upon the
Specific Nature of humane Bodies (not individual proprieties which are
occult), and forms his Medicines according to the fundamental principles of our
Nature in specie, and the order of design of government of each function in
Man's Body: And the reason why his indications for Cure are fewer is, because
his medicines are radical, and respect the vital and fundamental principles
primo intentionaliter; not humors, temperaments, qualities, and the various
Phaenomena's or symptoms of Diseases from thence; save only Consequenter:
These Medicines apply to the springs of Diseases, and Cure fontaliter; they are
designed, and formed with their faces toward the vital and fundamental
principles of our nature, from whence as these are affected and according to
the state and condition they are in, whether in fortitude, debility or
declension; in rectitude or deviation; humors, temperaments and qualities vary
and alter; and diverse symptoms from thence appear in several parts of the
body, and again disappear; being the result and products depending upon the
former in generation and continuance. And therefore he that manageth these
Catholic Medicines, which cure a priori et in radice; regards not the
multiplicity of symptomatical and various productions in several parts of the
body; farther then as Characters and marks to know where and how the principles
of our Nature swerve from integrity: such fall of course, and are cut down by
the stroke of a Radical Medicine, as many branches depending upon one toot.

Now Galenick appropriate Medicines which apply a posteriori, to these products
and symptomatical appearances being various, they also must be many and diverse;
and yet but Palliative and uncertain; they lop off, but not eradicate; they may
carry off and abate something of the producted vicious matter; but the disease
remains behind in the principles of nature untoucht, that generates, de novo
the like matter, or something worse. The Axiom is true; natura est morborum
medicatrix: it is nature that cures; and you must apply to nature; how is that?
to assist the vital principles, to set all things right there; the rest follows
of course; humors and temperaments and qualities depend here, have their
subsistence from hence. You must not object the diversity of Constitutions (as
you call them) against Catholic medicines; that apply a priori to the
fundamentals, to the springs of diseases; because Galenick, Appropriate
medicines that apply a posteriori to humors and qualities are bound to observe
these distinctions and many indications which the other radical medicines has
no regard to. He that cures radically, does not regard humors; but the humor
of the Archaeus which is dominus vitae he well observes, and takes notice what
humor and mood he is in; whether brisk and cheerful, or melancholy; whether
vigorous and strong, or laboring, weak and declining; whether in a state of
rectitude in the government of all the functions, or extravagant and enormous.

From what has been said we may rationally conclude; that to contract the
practice of Physic, into certain Classes of operation, with some excellent
radical medicine adapted thereto is the complete practice of Physic and well
becomes the greatest Doctor in this Faculty: and he that has purchased
Catholic medicines in these several Classes of operation by his own design,
labor and experiments (which presupposes and necessarily comprehends all
other accomplishments of a Physician) is bottomed upon his own reason and
certain experiments, is not overruled by any Authority but is (...); has the
whole design and mystery of Physic in his head; is a rule to himself, a Master
of this Art, and a Complete Physician.

I might have enlarged my self much more upon this subject, but I must draw to
a conclusion, and sum up the whole of this discourse in these following
Corollaries.

That since specificks are rare, Corollary.
obscure and difficult to know, the Catholic medicines are best to rely on,
and will do a Physician the greatest service in the generality of his practice.

Classes of operation, by so much the more noble and of excelling virtue.

Catholic Medicines of manifest operation, are most certain and safe: for,
having undergone so many trials of preparation and use to give them their
latitude and perfection; are Medicines so proved and approved, that we may
confide in and expect much, from former experiences and success.

conjectural appropriate medicine before trial, has that probability of
success and certainty of operation as a Catholic Medicine.

Appropriate or Specific Medicine to work a good effect in this or that
special Case; is drawn from the Analogy of former Experiments, and the
Catholic Virtues of the Ingredients operating (...) in like manner.

Catholic Medicine of known Virtue and Worth, excellent in that operation it
is intended and designed for; is the safest and most hopeful Medicine in any
Disease where such an operation is required.

adapting of them to peculiar cases; is but by way of probation, not any
certainty above a Catholic until trial; and may as likely disgust as agree.

Catholic and Radical Medicine is as rationally and according to the truest
Rules of Medical Art, designed to operate as amicably, safely and successfully
with an hundred several persons and cases (requiring such an operation) as an
appropriate medicine is for one person and case.

That humors, indicate variation of Medicines; but the different propriety of
individual and fundamental principles, forces a Physician to alteration and
diversity of Medicines.

Catholic Medicine not having its wonted and usual operation in some
particular person of difficult and dissenting propriety of body; requires some
alteration to make it more congruous, or another medicine.



Postscript.
I Intended one Tract more to be added to this Work; in answer to a pernicious
Position and irrational Tenent (lately in print): namely, that it is for the
good of Mankind there should be a liberty allowed in the Profession of Physic.

And this is carried on under a specious pretense of advancing and enlarging
the Art: whereas on the contrary, by such a strange Prostitution, we should
have such a monstrous Brood of Illiterate Practisers spawned by this
Adulteration; that in a short time, by this discountenance and discouragement
to Learning; by their pragmatick Insolences and upbraiding men of the Gown;
The whole Profession would fall into the Captivity of rude Mechanic Invaders.

And this most Learned Art, wither away and perish in the hands of illiterate
and unskilful men, to the dishonor of our Nation, and great prejudice to all
people.

But I am prevented at present, by intervening occasions; that I cannot discuss
this matter as it ought, and lay open the evil consequents that would attend
it; but must wait the next opportunity for a prosecution.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for the Booksellers of London.
MOrbus Polyrhizos and Polymorphaeus

A Treatise of the Scurvy.

Examining opinions and errors concerning the nature and cure of this Disease.

Prescribing

A due course for Prevention and Cure: The third Edition, with Practical
Observations. By Dr. Mainwaringe.

A Treatise of Consumptions Scorbutic Atrophies Tabes Anglica Hectic Fevers
Phthisick Spermatick and venereous wasting.


Radically demonstrating their Nature and Cures from vital and morbifick
causes. The second Edition, by the same Author.

Tutela Sanitatis.

The protection of long life, and detection of its brevity from diaetetick
causes and customs.

With a Discourse of Fontinels or Issues. By the same Author.

Solamen Aegrorum Sive

Ternarius Medicamentorum Chymico rum, ad omnes fere morbos curandum ( Galenica
remedia (...) eludentes) faelicissime inventa Remedia

Studio and opera ejusdem Authoris.

These remarkable errors of the Press the Reader is desired more especially to
take notice of.

In page 6. of the Epist. Dedicat. l. 23. Read a^;is. Page 6. Epist. to the
Reader, l. 1. utut. Page 44. l. 3. Process. Page 35. l. 16. operators. Page 54.
l. 2. lawful. Page 80. l. 14. pristine vigor. Page 91. from l. 4. to l. 14.
should be in roman letters. Page 114. from l. 22. the Comma's down the side
should be out. Page 138, l. 18. some other.

