A SERMON AGAINST SCHISM: OR, The SEPERATIONS of these TIMES.

Preached in the Church of Wattlington in Oxfordshire, with some Interruption,
September 11. 1652.

At a public dispute held there, Between JASPER MAIN, D.D. And one --

MAT. 13.47. (...).

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1652.

THE PREFACE.
IF you please to turn to the 19. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and to
read from the 24. to the 33. verse of that Chapter, there is there mention made
of a great Assembly, and concurse of people; Who upon the Instigation of one
Demetrius, a Silver-Smith, were confusedly drawn together into a public
Theater. And when they were met there, the Confusion was so great, that the
Theater for the time, was quite changed into a Babel; there was a perfect
Division of speech, and Tongues among them, scarce any two spoke the same
Language; For some cried out one Thing, and some cried out Another, as you may
read at the 32. v. of that Chap. Rudeness, Clamor, Tumult, Noise, was all
that issued from them. Nay 'twas a Meeting so confused, so wholly void of
Reason, that the greatest part knew not why they were come together, as you may
read in the end, and close of that verse. And hence it is, that when Saint Paul
would have engaged himself among them, and would have preached to them to
convert and turn them from their Error, It Is said at the 31. verse of that
Chapter, That some of the chief of Asia, who were his Friends, sent to him, and
desired him, that he would not adventure himself among such a rude,
Tempestuous rout of people.

And now, if you desire to know why I have said this to you, it is to let you
see, First, That this has partly been my case, I have been sent, nay spoken
to, by some persons of Quality and Honor, not to engage my self among such a
mixed Multitude as this; where my Affronts may be great, but my success, and
Harvest small: And to speak truth to you, if I had been left to the
peaceablenesse of my own quiet Temper, (which never did delight in storms,
nor to dispute with Fire.) If the fierce, and eager Importunity of some who
have provokt me, had not drawn me from my Judgment, I should have followed
their Advice, this Meeting had not been. Nay, I should have looked upon my
Appearance here, as a Distemper, like to theirs, who have provokt and called me
hither. For my cool and wiser Thoughts have still suggested to me, that to
dispute of Truth with those who do not understand it, is such a piece of
Madness, as if I should dispute of Colors with a Blind man, of Music with a
Deaf, or of the Sent of Flowers with One borne without a Smell.

Next, therefore, having so far departed from my Reason, as to submit to a
Dispute in this great public Meeting, lest it should prove such a confused
Meeting, as I described to you before; A Meeting where my Logic must fight
Duels with Men made of Rudeness, Tumult, Noise; Or lest it should prove a
Meeting where Men who can speak naught but English, shall yet speak diverse
Tongues; And where some shall cry out one Thing, and some shall cry another, I
have made it my humble suit to some persons of Honor here present, that by
their presence they will free the place from all such wild Confusions. And
that, if I must dispute, I may dispute with civil men, and not undergo Saint
Paul's misfortune, who fought with Beast's at Ephesus.

Thirdly, lest this Meeting should prove like the confused Meeting, which I
mentioned to you before, in one particular more; That is, lest the greatest
part of you should not know why you are this day come together. Before I enter
upon a full pursuit, or handling of this Text, it will be needful that I tell
you the occasion of this Meeting, which that I may the better do, I shall
desire you to believe, that it is not a Meeting of my projection or Contrivance.
I appear not here to raise a Faction, or to draw a party after me, nor to add
to the Rents of the Country, which are too wide already. Nor am I come hither
to revenge my self in the Pulpit, or to speak ill of those who have most
lewdly railed at me. Let them wallow themselves, as much as they please, in
their own gross filth, and mire; let them, if they please, Jude 13.
be those raging Waves of the Sea, which Saint Jude speaks of, which are
always foming out their own shame, when they have steept their Tongues in
Gall, and spewd forth all their Venom, They shall not make me change my
Opinion; which is, that to cast dirt for dirt, or to return Ill-Language for
Ill-Language, is a course so unreasonable, as if two Men should fight a Duel,
and choose a Dunghill for their weapon. As therefore, I am not come hither to
show my self Malicious, so I am not come hither to gain Applause, or
Reputation by this Meeting. No thirst of Fame, no affection of Victory has
drawn me from my Study to step into this Pulpit. I understand my own
Infirmities too well to be so selfe-conceited. Or if my Abilities were far
greater then they are, yet I have always looked on Fame thus got, to be so
slight a Thing, as if a Man should feed on Air, or make a meal of shaddows.

Not to hold you therefore any longer in suspense, if you, who know it not
already, desire to know the true o^casion of this Meeting, it is briefly this;
I have for some years (even with Tears in my eyes) seen one of the saddest
curses of the Scripture fulfilled upon this Nation: With a bleeding Heart I
speak it, I have seen, not only three Kingdoms, but our Cities, Towns, and
Villages, nay even our private Familyes divided against themselves. I have
seen the Father differing in opinion from the Son, and I have seen the
Son differing in opinion from the Father. I have seen the Mother broken from
the Daughter, and I have seen the Daughter divided from the Mother. Nay, our
very Marriage-Beds have not escaped the curse of Separation. Like Jacob and Esau
issuing from the same womb, I have seen two Twins of Separation rise from
between the same Curtains. I have seen the Wedlock knot quite untyed in
Religion; I have seen the Husband in opposition to the Wife* go to one, and I
have seen the Wife in opposition to her Husband, for many years together, go
to another Congregation. In a Word (my Brethren,) the Church of Christ among
us, which was once as Seamelesse as his Coat, is now so rent by Schisms, so
torn by Separations, that it is become like the Coat of Joseph which you read
of in the 37. Chapter of Genesis, at the 3. verse, scarce one piece is colored
like another; And I pray God it prove not like the Coat of Joseph in one
particular more; I pray God the Weaker be not sold by his Brethren, and his
Coat be not once more dyed red, once more imbrued in Blood. This, you will
say, is very sad, and yet this is not all; That which extremely add to the
Misery of our Rents, and Separations, is, that the wisest cannot hope they will
ere be peeced, or reconciled. For the persons who thus Separate, are so far
from believing themselves to be in an Error, that they strongly think all
Others err who separate not too; They think themselves bound in Conscience to
do as they do. Nay, zealous Arguments are urged, and Texts of Scripture
quoted, to prove that it is a damning sin not to go on in Separation. The
Churches where their Neighbors met ere now contemned, and Scorned: Nay, I have
with mine own Ears heard a Dining Room, a Chamber, a Meeting under Trees; Nay,
I have heard a Hog-stye, a B^rne, called places more sanctified then they. In a
word, one of the great Reasons which they urge, why they thus forsake our
Churches, and make divided Congregations, is, because (They say) the people
which assemble there are so wicked, so profane, that they turn Gods House of
prayer into a den of Thieves. To keep this infection from spreading in my
Parish, and to keep this piece of Leaven from souring the whole Lump; And
withal to satisfy one, whom I look upon as a well-meaning, though a seduced,
and erring person, who has engaged her self by promise, that if I can take
the mist from her Eyes, and clearly let her see her Error, she will return
back to the Church, from which she has for some years gone astray; and being
invited to do this in a way of Christian challenge, which has raised a great
expectation in the Country, I have taken up the Gauntlet, and here present my
self before you; and before I enter the Lists, to let you all see the Justice
of the Cause which I here stand to defend, I have chosen this Text for my
shield; where He, who wrote this Epistle to the Hebrews says, Let us consider
one another to provoke one another to love and to Good works, not forsaking the
Assembling of our selve^ together, as the manner of some is.

The Division.
IN which words, the only point which I shall insist upon, as the fittest, and
most seasonable to be preached to this divided Congregation, shall be the point
of Schism; or, in plain English, Separation, as it is expressed to us in these
Words, Let us not forsake the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is. In the pursuit and handling of which words, I will proceed by these
two plain and easy steps. First, I will prove to you, by Arguments, which
have a sun-beame for their parent, That the Rent or Separation which is now
made in the Church, is a very grievous sin: Indeed, a sin so grievous, that
I scarce know whether Christians can be guilty of a greater. Next, I will
Examine and answer their Arguments, and Texts of Scripture; who do persuade
themselves and others that their separation is no sin; Nay, that would be a
grievous sin not to separate as they do. In the mean time I beseech you to
lend me a quiet and favorable Attention, whilst I begin with the first of
th^se parts, and that shall be to prove to you, that the separations of our
Times, are great and grievous sins.

Among the other Characters and Descriptions which have been made of us Men, we
have been called, (...). That is, a Creature borne and made, and created for
Society. Toward the preservation and maintenance whereof God at the Beginning,
ordered his Creation of us so, that whereas other Creatures take their
Original and Birth from a Diversity of parents. He made us Men to spring from
one, undivided, single pair. One Adam, and one Eve were the two joined parents
of Mankind. And the Reason of this was, That there might not only be among us
one common Kindred and Alliance, but that we might hold a firm, and constant
League and Friendship with each other too. And hence it is we see, that without
any other Teacher but their own Natural Instinct, Men in all Ages have
avoided separation, by gathering themselves into formed Bodies of Cittyes,
Towns and Commonwealths. Neighborhood, Society, mutual help, and
Conversation, being one of the great Ends for which God made us Men. And upon
this Ground it has been disputed, whether a Hermit, or Monastic man, break
not the Law of Nature, because he separates himself from the company of Men?
And it is clearly stated by some great Casuists, That if he separate from others
for no End but separation, if he retire himself into a Cave or Wilderness, or
Desert, (as some of the Ancient Hermits did) not for Devotion, but out of a
hatred, or distaste of the rest of Mankind; In that particular he cannot well
be called a Man, but some wilder Creature, made to dwell in Caves, Deserts,
Forests, Dens.

As then, the Law of Nature does require us to preserve society and Friendship,
so the Law of Christ has tied, and woven this knot much faster. We are all of
Kin by Nature, but we are all Brethren as Christians: Men allied to one
another by one common Hope, one common Faith, one common Savior, one common
God, and Lord, and Father of us all. And upon this Ground, when one Christian
shall divide or forsake the society of Another, unless it be upon a just
principle of Conscience, and to avoid a sin, the Scripture calls it not
barely Separation, but Separation which is Schism. That is, such a Separation
as is a Gospel-sinne ^.

Which, that you may the more clearly understand, give me leave to ask you in
truth what is Schism? Why the best Definition of it that was ever yet given is
this, That Schism is nothing else, but a separation of Christians from that
part of the Visible Church, of which they were once Members, upon mere
fancyed, slight, unnecessary Grounds. In which Definition of Schism, three
things do offer themselves to your serious observation, to make it formal
Schism, or a sign of Separation. First it must be a separation of Christians
from some part of the Visible Church, of which they were once Members; That is,
(according to the Definition, a visible Church as it concerns this present
purpose) it must be a Denial of Communion with that Congregation of
Christians, with whom they were once united under a rightly-constituted Pastor.
Next, they who thus separate, must betake themselves to some other Teacher,
whom, in opposition to the former, they choose to be their Guide, and so make
themselves his Followers.

Thirdly, they must erect a New Assembly, or place of Congregation, as a New
Church distinct from that from which they do divide.

Lastly, This choice of a New Guide, and Separation from the Old, this Erection
of a New Church, and Division from the former must be upon slight unnecessary
Grounds; For if the Cause, or Ground of their Separation be needless, vain,
unnecessary, if it spring more out of Humor, Pride, desire of change, or
Hatred of their Brethren, then out of any Christian love to keep themselves
from sins; It Is in the Scripture Language Schism, That is, a sin of
Separation.

Or if you will hear me express my self in the language of a very learned Man
(who has contrived a clue to lead us through this Labyrinth) This breach of
Communion, This separation from a Church rightly constituted; This choice of a
New Guide, New Teacher, New Instructor. Lastly, This setting up of a New
Congregation, or place of private Meetings, is the same sin in Religion*
which Sedition, or Rebellion is in the Commonwealth or State. For upon a right
examination of the matter 'twill be found, That Schism is a Religious, or
Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition in the State is a civil, Lay-schisme.

Which two sins, though they appear to the World in diverse shapes, the one
with a Sword, the other with a Bible in his Hand; yet they both agree in this,
that they both disturb the public peace. The one of the State, where men are
tied by Laws as Men; The other of the Church, where men should be tied by Love
as Christians.

To let you yet farther see, what a grievous sin this sin of Schism or
Separation is; If the time would give me leave, I might here raise the
Schoolmen, Ancient Fathers, and General Counsels from the dead, and make
them preach to you from this Pulpit against the sin of Separation. I might
tell you, that in the purest Times of the Church, a Schismatic, and Heretic
were looked upon as Twins; The one as an Enemy to the Faith, the other to
Communion. But because in our dark Times, learning is so grown out of date,
that to quote an Ancient Father, is thought a piece of Superstition; And to
cite a General Council is to speak words to our New Gifted men unknown, I
will say nothing of this sin, but what the Scripture says before me.

First, then, I shall desire you to hear what S. Paul says in this case, in
the last Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans at the 17. verse. Turn to the
place, and mark it well I beseech you. Now I beseech you, brethren, says he
there, Mark them which cause Divisions, and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them: That is, in other words, Separate your
selves from them. And then he gives you a Character, and Description of those
Separaters at the 18. verse of that Chapter; And says, For they that are such,
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly. And by good words and
fair speeches deceive the Hearts of the simple.

In which words, Four things are so exactly drawn to life, as makes them a
perfect Prophecye, or rather picture of our Times* The first is, that there
were some in S. Paul's days, who caused Divisions in the Church; Men, who in a
way of Schism, and Separation, made themselves the Heads and Leaders of
divided Congregations.

Next, The Ground upon which they built their Separation; 'twas not upon any
just, true, lawful, Scripture- Ground. For the Text says, 'Twas contrary to
the Doctrine which the Apostles taught, and preached. But the true cause, or
Ground, why they thus caused Separations, was merely self-Interest; And that
they might gain by their Divisions. Nay, 'twas such a poor, base, unworthy
selfe-Interest, that it is there said, they did it in compliance to their Belly.

The third thing which will deserve your observation, is, the cunning Art they
used to draw the weak to be their Followers. It Is there said, that by good
Words and fair Speeches, they deceived the Hearts of the simple, especially
the simple of the weaker sex. And who these were, S. Paul, in other words, but
to the same purpose tells you, in the 3. Chapter of his second Epistle to
Timothy at the 5, 6, 7. verses of that Chapter. Where speaking of such
Coseners, he says, they had a Form of Godliness, an outward seeming
Holiness to deceive and cosen by; And that under this Form of Godliness they
crept into Houses, and there led Captive silly Women, laden with sins, and
drawn away with diverse Lusts. Women so unable to distinguish Right from Wrong,
that they were always learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth.

And certainly, my Brethren, it is no new thing under the sun, to see the
weaker sex misled by holy Forms, and Shows. It Is no new thing, I say, under
the Sun, for a man that makes long prayers, to eat up a Widows House; Or for
a cunning Angler to catch the sillyer sort, with a hook bayted with Religion.
'Twas so in our Saviors time, and 'twas so in S. Paul's. And whether their
demure looks, their precise carriage, their long prayers, their good words and
fair speeches, be not the Hook, and snare, by which weak people are caught
now; whether the feasting of, their Bellyes, or the making Gain of Godliness;
Or whether the Itch and pride of being the Leaders of a Faction; Or whether the
vain Ambition of being thought more holy or more gifted than the rest, be not
the true end of those, who do now cause Separations, I will not rashly
censure, but I have some reason to suspect* But this is not all.

The fourth, and last thing, which most deserves your observation, is, that
Separation in that place is such a Scripture-sinne, that S. Paul commands us to
separate from those, who do thus cause Separations. Hear the place, I pray,
once more repeated to you, I beseech you, Brethren, says he, Mark them who
cause Divisions among you, and avoid them. That is, as I said before, Separate
your selves from them. If they, who upon no just cause do Separate, must be
Separated from, I hope you will all confess that Separation is a sin.

And what sin think you is this sin of Separation? Why, I know some of you
will think it strange if I should say, it is a sin of the Flesh. And yet S.
Paul says, that it is a sin of the Flesh, in the 3. Chapter of his first
Epistle to the Corinthians. Mark I beseech you what he says in that place.
Are ye not carnal? says he there. For whereas there are among you Envyings,
and Strifes, and Divisions; Are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Says He at
the 3. verse. Again, when one says, I am Paul; And when another says, I am
of Apollos; Are ye not carnal? says he at the 4. v. of that Chapter. If to
divide and separate from the Followers of S. Paul, and to make themselves the
Followers, and Disciples of Apollos; or if by way of Separation to make
themselves the marks of several Churches, to which Apostles were the Guides,
were a sin of Carnality; (as S. Paul says it was) what shall we say of some
people of our Times? who instead of several Apostles to divide themselves by,
do choose to themselves Guides so mean, so unlearned, so liable to Error,
that they perfectly make between them the picture of Mistakes: The Blind
leading the Blind, and both fallen into a Ditch? It Is not now, as 'twas then.
When some said, we are of Paul, and when others said, we are of Cephas, and
when others said, we are of Apollos; Others, we are of Christ. Though to make
the Names of Christ, or Paul, or Cephas, names of Fiction, was a sin. But we
are fallen on Times so made of Separation, that people do divide themselves by
Teachers, whose second Trade is Teaching. Teachers so obscure, so bred to
manual Occupations; Teachers so sprung up from the basest of the people.
Lastly, Teachers, so accustomed to the Trewell, Forge, and Anvill, that I
almost blush to name them in the Pulpit. It Is not now sa^d, we are of Paul, And
we are of Apollos; But we are of Wat Tyler; We are of Jack Cade; We are of
Alexander the Coporsmith; We are of Tom the Mason; and we are of Dicke the
Gelder. And whether to Divide and Separate under such vulgar Names as These, be
no a sin of the Flesh, I leave to every one of you, who have read S. Paul, to
judge.

And here, now, if Time were not a Winged Thing, or if it would but stay my
leisure, I might lay before you many other places of the Scripture, which
clearly do demonstrate that Separation is a sin. For though, like the Ghost
of Samuel, which you read of in the Scripture, it usually appear clothed in
the Mantle of a Prophet, though it were Holiness in the Tongue, And
preciseness in the Face; yet to let you see what an Apple of Sodom it is; How
it looks with a Virgin check without, and is naught but Rottenness within, I
shall once more desire y^u to hear what S. Paul says of it, In the 5. Chapter
of the Galatians at the 19. and 20. verses of that chapter, Where he once more
reckons it among the sins of the Flesh. As for Example, The Works of the
Flesh are manifest, says he, which are these* Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Haeresies, says our English* Translation.
But the words in the Original Greek, (which are the true Word of God) will
bear it thus. (...), That is, Divisions, Sects, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like. Of the which I tell you before, says
he, As I have told you in Times past, That They which do such Things shall not
Inherit the Kingdom of God. Where you see Seditions, Sects, and Schisms, as
well as Adultery, and Murder, are there listed by S. Paul among those works
of the Flesh, which do shut men out of Heaven, and exclude them from salvation.

Many such like places of the Scripture I might lay before you. But I will
content my self with one Argument more; which shall not only prove to you,
That Separation is a sin; But one of the Greatest sins, of which Christians
can be guilty.

To make this clear to you, and beyond all Dispute, or Question. That which I
will say to you (and mark it well) is this. It Is a Rule in Divinity, (and it is a
Rule infallible) That those sins are the Greatest, which are most contrary,
and do most oppose the greatest Christian virtues. Now the Three Great
Christian virtues which do make and constitute a Christian, are set down by
S. Paul, in the 13. chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, at the
last verse, where he says, Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity; But the
Greatest of these is Charity. Thus, then, stands the case. Distrust in Gods
promises, or an unbelief in his power, is a very great sin. For it is a sin
which does oppose and quite cut off the wings of Hope. Haeresie, or the strife,
and obstinate Defense, and persisting in a known Error, is a far greater
sin. For it is a sin against Faith, a sin which strives to draw a Cloud
about the Beams of Truth. But if it be true what S. Paul says, (as most
certainly it is) If it be true that Charity is greater then either Faith, or
Hope, Then 'twill follow by Good Logic and all the Consequence of Reason; That
that sin which does untie, and break the Bond of peace; That sin which
destroys Christian Friendship, and Communion; Lastly, That sin which rends,
and tears the Cords of Charity asunder, is a far greater sin then
unbelief or Haeresie. And the sin which does all this is the sin of Separation.

First it is a greater sin in it self, and the very formality of the sin.
As being the worst Extreme to the best, and greatest virtue, Namely, The virtue
of Love; By which Christ would have his Followers distinguished from the rest of
Mankinds. For by this shall all men know, says he, that you are my Disciples,
if ye love one another. As you may read in the 13. chapter of John at the 35.
verse. And agreeable to this is that which is delivered here in this Text,
where the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews says, Let us consider one
another to provoke one another to Love. And not forsake the Assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is.

And as Schism, or Separation upon a slight, or needless Ground is in it
self one of the greatest sins; So it is one of the greatest sins too, in its
dangerous Effects. Besides the Hatred, Envy, Strife, which it begets among Men
of divided Interests, and Minds, It Is many times the Coal which sets whole
States and Commonwealths on fire. It pretends, indeed, very much to the
Spirit, And at first clothes it self in the Dress of Humility and Meekn^sse;
But they who have written the Chronicles of the Church can tell you, That those
pretenses to the Spirit have no sooner gathered strength, but they have
proceeded to bloody Battles, and pitched fields. Where the Meek persons have
thrown aside their Bibles; and have changed the Sword of the Spirit into the
Sword of War. The proceedings of the Donatists in Affricke, and of the
Iohn-of Leyden-Men at Munster are two sad Examples of the truth of what I say.

The Grounds of Separation examined.
BUt here, perhaps, will some of you, who hear me this day, say, What Is all
this to us? In saying this which you have hitherto said, like those who wrote
Romances, you have but created an Adversary out of your own fancy, and then
foiled him; or like the man in Aristotle who drove his shadow before him, you
first frame a man of Air, and then cry he flies from you. But if this be to
conquer, one of our Gifted Men who is at all no Scholar, can as well triumph
over men of Air, and shadows, as your self. To let you see, therefore, that
I am one of those, who desire not to fight Duels with naked unarmed Men, nor to
meet any in the Field, before we have agreed upon the just length of our
Weapons: If your patience will hold out so long, who come disinterested hither,
This second part of this Sermon shall be spent in the pursuit of that, which
Master Deane of Christ-church just now very seasonably noted as a Defect in our
present way of Arguing, and Dispute, which was, that the Grounds were not
examined upon which the present Separations of these Times, do build
themselves. These Grounds, therefore, I shall now in the next place call to
some reckoning and Account, And in the doing of this, I will hang up a pair of
Scales before you, you shall see their Arguments placed in One Scale, and my
Answers in the Other: And because no Moderatour sits in the Chair to judge
(which was a thing foreseen by me, but could not well be compast) I shall make
you the Judges who hear me this day. And because the Rudeness, and
Ill-language of those who have disturbed me in this Pulpit, has made me stand
before you here like a man arraigned for Error, I will freely cast my self
upon God, and you the Country. Thus, then, I shall proceed.

Here (as I said before) may some of the Separating party, say to me, How does
the former part of your Sermon concern us? We separate, it is true, But not on
those false Grounds which you have all this while described. We grant, indeed,
That if we broke Communion with you out of Faction, or Selfe-Interest, or
Pride, or desire of Gain, or mere Love of Separation, you might well call us
Schismatics; and we should well deserve that Name. But the Ground on which we
separate from you, is, because you are not fit to be Assembled with, you are
sinners; wicked, lewd, profane, notorious sinners. The places where you meet
breathe nothing but Infection. Your Teachers preach false Doctrine; and your
people practice Lies. In a word, we cannot with the safety of our Conscience
frequent your Congregations. Since to appear there would be an enterprise as
dangerous, as if we should make Visits to a Pesthouse* and there hope to escape
the Plague.

This you will say (good people) is very hard language. And How, think you, do
they prove it? why, as they think by two clear places of the Scripture, which
no man can oppose* and not make War with Heaven. Two places of Scripture, I
say, have been produced, and quoted to me, like Sampson and Achilles, with
Invincible Lances in their Hands. Places which do not only allow, but command
a separation; Nay, they command it so fully, that if they should not separate,
or forsake our Congregations, they say they should sin greatly, and disobey
the Scripture. And what are these two places?

The first you shall find set down in the 5. last verses of the 6. Chapter,
of the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where the words run thus.
Be ye not unequally yokt together with unbeleevers. For what Fellowship has
Righteousness with unrighteousness? And what Communion has Light with
Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God; Levit. 26.11.
As God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; And I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate, Esaias 52.11.
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. This
is their first great place, which they urge for separation. Will you now hear
their second? That you shall find set down in the 4. first verses of the 18.
Chapter of the Revelations. Where the words run thus, After these things, says
S. John there, I saw another Angel come down from Heaven, having great power;
and the Earth was lightened with his Glory. And he cried mightily, with a strong
voice, saying, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
Habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spirit; And the Cage of
every unclean, and hateful Bird. For all Nations have drunk of the wine of
the wrath of her Fornications; And the Kings of the Earth have committed
Fornication with her. And the Merchants of the Earth are waxed rich, through
the Abundance of her Delicacyes. And I heard Another voice from heaven, (says
he) saying; Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues.

These two places of Scripture (if you will hear me express my self in the
threadbare Language of the Times) They say, do hold Forth themselves so
clearly, that I may sooner quench the sun than find an Answer to them. Nay,
to deal freely with you, these two places, and these only are a piece of the
Challenge which has occasioned this Dispute. For I am promised by Her, whom I
here come to undeceive, that if I can answer these two places, she will be my
Convert; And will separate from these who do now make separations.

I take her at her word, and do thus contrive, and shape my Answers; Mark
them I beseech you. As for the first place in the 6. Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians; you are to understand, that when S. Paul wrote that
Epistle, The City of Corinth was not wholly converted to the Faith, but was
divided in Religions, some were yet Heathens, and sacrificed to (...): Others
did embrace the Gospel, and gave up their Names to Christ.

N^verthelesse, they were not so divided in Religions, but that dwelling
together in the same City, certain Neighbourly Civillities, and Acts of
kindness past between them. As for Example, when a Heathen or Unbeliever
offered a sacrifice to his Idol, 'twas usual, for old Acquaintance sake, to
invite his Christian Friends to be Guests to his sacrifice; And to eat of his
meat which was offered to his Idol, As you may read, 1 Cor. 10.27, 28. And the
place where the sacrifice was eaten, and where the Feast was made, was, for the
most part in the Temple of the Idol, As you may read, 1 Cor. 8.10. Now, this
mingling of Religions; This meeting of Christians with Heathens, at a Heathen
Feast; Nay, at a Feast where the Meat was first offered to an Idol, Nay in that
Idol was offered to the Devils, as you may read, 1 Cor. 10.20. Nay, this
meeting of Christians with Heathens at an Idol sacrifice, and their eating with
them of that sacrifice in the very Temple of the Idol, was a thing so
dangerous, so apt to call weak Christians back again to their former
Idolatry, That Saint Paul thought it high time to say, Be not thus unequally
jokt with unbeleevers. In which expression he does cast an eye upon that Law of
God, which you may read set down in the 22 Chapter of Deuteronomye, at the 9,
10, 11. verses of that Chapter. Where God says, Thou shall not sow thy
Vineyard with diverse seeds; Nor shall thou plough thy field with an Ox, and
an Ass yokt together; Nor shall thou wear a Garment of diverse sorts, Namely,
of Linen, and Woollen woven together in one piece. To the Mystical meaning of
which Law, S. Paul here alludes, when he says, Be not unequally yokt with
Unbelievers. For a Christian mingling with a Heathen, in a Heathen
Congregation: Nay, a Christian mingling with a Heathen in the Temple of an
Idol, was a more disproportioned sight, then to see an Ox yokt with an Ass in
the same Plough; Or th^n to see Corn sown with Grapes in the same Field; Or
then to see Wool mixed with Linen in the same Garment. In a Word, the Idolatry
of the Heathens was so inconsistent with the Religion of the Christians, that
S. Paul proceeds, and says, that they might as well reconcile Light to
Darkn^sse, or contrive a League between Christ and Belial; Or tie a Marriage
knot between Righteousness and sin, as make it hold in fitness; That
Christians who are the Temples of God, and of his holy Spirit, should mere, and
eat, and bear a part in the Idol Temples of the Heathens. And these Infidels,
these Heathens, who did not believe in Christ; These Corinthians unconverted,
These Worshippers of Idols, who strived to draw the Christians back to their
former Superstitions, were they from whom S. Paul bids his New Converts
separate themselves. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says he, at
the 17. verse of that Chapter. O, (in the Language of the place) Come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you. Which words are but a string struck by the
Prophet Esaias 52.11.
Esaias first, and spoken by him, of the separation of the Jews, from the then
Idolatryes of the Heathens. And that this is the true Interpretation of this
place, will appear to any who shall compare, what S. Paul here says, with
that which he says, in the 10. Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Co^inthians, from the 19. to the 30. verse of that Chapter.

This then, being so, Let me ask the zealous persons, who thus delight in
Separation, are They from whom they separate such Infidells, such Heathens,
such Worshippers of Idols, as S. Paul does here describe? Do they see any Gods
of Gold, erected in our Temples? Or do they see any Images of Silver adored,
and sacrificed to by our Congregations? Do any of us make prayer* to a stock?
Or do any of us burn Incense to a Stone? Nay, let them (if they please)
examine us by their private-meeting. Catechism. Do we not confess the same
God that they do? Do we not believe in the same Jesus Christ? Do we preach
another Gospel? Or hope to be saved by any other Name but His? Are not our
Congregations built on the Scripture-Rock? Is not Christ our Corner Stone, and
his Apostles our Foundation? Do we not agree with them in all things, but
where they differ from the Scripture? As for Example, we do maintain, and
say, that separation is a sin. They do maintain and say, That it is a
Christian Duty; We urge that Text which says, One Lord, One Faith, One
Baptism; They urge no Text, which says, Men must be twice Baptized. We say,
that if a Child of God do break Gods Laws, a Child of God sins. Some of
them say that God beholds no sin in his Children. Lastly, we say of the
Scripture, as 2 Pet. 3.16,
S. Peter said of S. Paul's Epistles; That there be some things in seem, very
hard to be understood, which they who are unlearned w^^st to their own
Destruction. They say unlearned Gifted Me are the best Expounders of the
Scripture; What they mean by Gifted Men I will not here examine. But that
which I will say is this, because We differ in Opinions to divide themselves
from us; Nay to apply such a reproachful place of Scripture to us, as makes us
no better then Infidels, and Heathens, and Worshippers of Idols, is to revile
us with the Word of God, and to Libell us with Scripture.

Would They take it well, if we should apply to Them that place which says;
Woe to you, ye Hypocrites, ye Blind Leaders of the Blind; you who strain at
Gnats, and yet securely swallow Camels? Would They take it well, if we should
quote a place of Scripture, and make it call Them whited Sepulchers; which
show fair and beautiful without, and hold naught but stink, and Rottenness
within? Again, would They take it well if we should apply to them, that place
which speaks of Men, who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the power
thereof? Men, who like the old Pharisees, with a long prayer in their Mouth,
creep into Houses, and there lead Captive silly Women? Lastly, would They take
it well if we should apply that place to Them, which says; That as Iannes, and
Iambres withstood Moses, so do these men resi^t the Truth? Men of corrupt
Minds; Reprobate concerning the Faith? (as it is in the Greek, and the Margin
of your Bibles) (...), Men purblinde, void of Judgment concerning the true
knowledge of the Faith? If they would not take it well, why do they not
observe the Rule of Equity, and Justice, which is, To do to us, but as They
would have us do to them?

But here perhaps, will some of you who hear me this day, say; We do not
separate from you, because you are outright unbeleevers, Pagans, Infidels, or
Heathens; But because you wear the Names of Christians, and yet live the Lives
of Heathens. Though you do not worship Idols, yet there is Covetousness among
you, which S. Paul calls Col. 3.5.
Idolatry. And though you d^^ ^^^fesse Christ, yet you walk disorderly; And
do commit (...) sins which they who denied Christ did. Though we see no Gods
of Gold nor Silver in your Temples, yet if we came there, we might see a
Congregation of such people as S. Paul in other places bids us Separate from.
As for Example, turn to the 3. Chapter of his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, and the 6 verse. Does he not there command us In the name of the
Lord Jesus to withdraw our selves from every Brother, who walks disorderly,
and not according to the Traditions which he taught? Or if this place be not
clear enough, turn to the 5. Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, and to the 11. verse, Does he not there say, that if Any man that
is called a Brother, be a Fornicatour, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a
Rayler, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one we are not to keep
Company, No, not to eat?

I grant, indeed, S. Paul says so, and do think it very fit that S. Paul
should be obeyed. But how does this prove that they are to forsake our
Congregations? That there are such men among us, as S. Paul does there
describe, is a Truth too clear to be denied. But are our whole Congregations
composed of such men? Are all Drunkards? Are all Fornicatours? Are all Raylers?
Are all Extortioners? Are all, both Priests and People so like one another,
that when they meet they make not a Church. Assembly, but a Congregation of
such sinners? Or are they only some? And they, perhaps, the lesser part who
are guilty of those sins? Nay suppose they should be far the greater part,
who are guilty of these sins; yet you know out Mat. 13.
Savior Christ compares the Church to a Field sown with good seed; But then
he tells us too. That to the Worlds end, among the good seed there shall still
grow Weeds, and Tares. Again, in the 13. chapter of S. Matthew at the 47. and
48. verses of that Chapter, he compares the Kingdom of God here in this World,
to a Net cast into the Sea, which enclosed Fishes of all sorts, Bad as well as
Good. And what the meaning of this draught of mingled Fishes is, I shall desire
you to read at the 49. and 50. verses of that chapter, where he says; That at
the End of the world, and not till then, the Angles shall go forth, and shall
separate the wicked from among the Just: (...), says the Original Greek, They
shall separate the wicked fro the midst of the Just, which clearly does prove
to us, That till this fi^all Separation, in the Church of God here on earth,
there will always be a mixture: To divide or separate, therefore, from the
whole Congregation, because some wicked men are in it, is a course so
unreasonable, as if they should refuse a Field of Corn because there grew some
weeds, or should renounce a Field of Wheat because it bears some Tares.

Besides, I would feign know, how far they will extend the meaning of that
Text, where S. Paul says, That they are not to eat with a Brother, who is a
Drunkard, or Adulterer, or Rayler, or Extortioner. Will they extend it to all
sorts of persons who are such? If they will, Then if a Woman have a Drunkard to
her Husband, she must separate from him because he is a Drunkard, if she do
not, every time she eats with him, she disobeyes S. Paul; and in every meals
she makes with him she commits a Scripture sin. By the same reason also, If
the Son have a Drunkard to his Father, he must remove Tables, and not diet
with his Father. And so there will be one Division more then those the
Scripture speaks of: For that only tells us that the time shall come when the
Son shall be divided from the Father, and the Mother from the Daughter. But
if this Interpretation be true, the Wife must divide and break her self from
her distempered Husband too.

Nay give me leave to go one step farther yet. If the sins of a part be a
just sufficient Ground to separate from the whole, Why do not they who
separate, divide and fall assu^d^r? For here let me ask them, and let me ask
without offense; Are they all so Innocent, so pure, so free, so void of sin,
that there is not one disorderly Brother among them? Is their place of private
Meetings so much the New Jerusalem, That no Drunkard, no Adulterer, nor Rayler
enters there? I wish there did not, my Brethren. We Ministers should not then
so often be called Dumb Dogs, Idol shepherds, Limbs of Antichrist, Baals
Priests, by Tongues, Jam. 3.6.
which if S. James say true, are set on fire of Hell.

If then, it be not the meaning of S. Paul in that place, that we should
separate from all because some of those All are wicked, upon what other just
Ground do they break Communion with us? Is it because we preach in Churches?
They are Gods House of prayer. Made his by the Piety, and Devotion of our
Fathers, who if they lived now would hardly call them Saints, who prefer a
Barn, nay a Hog-stye before a consecrated Temple. Or is it because there is
Haeresie or Superstition mixed with our once Common Form of prayer? If there
had been, you see that scandal is removed. Or do we persecute, or force, or
drive them from our Congregations? We are so far from that, that you see,
they are ready to require that our public Congregations, should stoop, and
bow the Knee to their private Meetings. What other secret reason it is which thus
divides them from us, I can by no means think, unless it be wrapped up in the
Mystery and cloud of the 18. chap. of the Revelations, which is their other
strong Herculean place of Scripture, which has been urged to me to make good
their Separation. From which dark place of Scripture when I have removed the
veyle and Curtain, I will put a period, and conclusion to this Sermon.

It Is there said, that S. John heard an Angel proclaim aloud, and say, Babylon
the Great is fallen, is fallen; and is becomes Habitation of Devils, the Hold
of every unclean Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean, and hateful Bird; As
you may read at the 2. verse of that chapter. It Is farther said, That he heard
another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. As you may
read at the 4. verse of that chapter, where by Babylon fallen, they understand
the Church of England fal^e. By the Habitation of Devils, the Hold of foul
Spirits, and Cage of unclean Birds. They understand our Parish Churches, and
Congregations which meet there; which, they say, are so much a Cage of unclean
Birds, places so corrupt, so full of wickedness, and sin, that God, by his
Spirit, as it were, by a voice from the Clouds, has said unto them, Come out
of them, my people, divide your selves from them, lest ye be partakers of this
sins, and go sharers in their plagues. This is, or must be that
Interpretation of that place; or else 'twill no way serve to uphold their
Separation. If, I say, by the Habitation of Devils, and Cage of unclean Birds
be not meant our Church Assemblyes, from which they do divide, they do but
build a House of straw, and choose the sand for a Foundation. I am sure I have
been told that this was the very Interpretation which the Gentleman gave of
this place* who just now disputed with me, at a dispute which not long since he
had with Mr. Gibson of Chinner.

But now will you hear my censure of this wild Interpretation? Take it then,
thus. Among the several Expounders of the Revelation, I once met with one, who
when he came to interpret the Seven Angels, which blew the Seven Trumpets. He
said that by one of those Angels was meant Luther, by another Queen Elizabeth.
And when he came to give the meaning of the Locusts which ascended from the
Bottomless pit, with Crowns on their Heads, by the Locusts, He understood
Scholars of the University; And by the Crowns on their Heads, He understood
Square Caps. Methinkes, these kind of people deal just so with this place of
the Revelation. They see strange visions in it which S. John never saw; Namely,
they see Babylon in our Churches, and unclean Birds in our Assemblyes. Nay,
though the Devils being Spirits are too invisible to be seen, yet, by the
benefit of a New-light, they can see sights which no other Eyes can see without
being present in the place to which soul Spirits do resort, (as if they had
borrowed one of Galilaeo's Glasses) they can see Devils take Notes at our
Sermons. But whether in Shorthand, or at length, S. John has not revealed.

Pardon me, I beseech you, you who are of the more grave and nobler sort, that
I am thus pleasant in the pulpit; I am compelled to be so when I meet with
people who deal with the Scripture, as men of melancholy Fancyes use to deal
with the Clouds. For as I have known some Hypocondriack men, who have feigned
to themselves flying Horses, winged Troops, and Ships sailing in the Air; Nay,
as I have known some, who, like the Melancholy man, who thought himself a
urinall, have thought they have seen two Armies in the Sky; and have mistaken
Clouds, and Meteors for Soldiers, Trumpets, Drums, and Cannons; So I do not
wonder that our Gifted, thinking people should so mistake the Revelation as
they do; or that they should see Monsters in the Scripture Clouds. Where the
Scripture is most clear, they hardly understand it; How then should they find
out the Key to such da^ke prophecies as this?

But here may some man say to me, if they mistake this place, what is your
Interpretation of it? Why, my Interpretation is the very same which S. John
Himself delivers, Rev. 14.8. Where the Angel expresses himself in the very
same words. And says, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; That great City which made
all Nations drink of the Wine of the Wrath of her Abominations. And what was
that Great City? Why the City built on seven Hills; As it is described in
another place of the Revelation. That Great City which was the Queen of
Nations; Namely, the City of Rome, when 'twas the seat of Heathen Emperors.
Lastly, that Great City, which gave Laws to all the World, to worship her False
Gods, and to partake of her Idolatryes. And this was that Great City, which S.
John calls Babylon; either, because speaking of the Fall and Ruin of it, He
thought it not safe to call it Rome, or by its right and proper Name; Lest, if
he had done so, he might draw persecution on the Christians. Or else, Because as
Babylon was the Head City of the Persian Monarchy, so Rome was then the Head
City of the Roman. In a word, this is that Great City, which was then the great
Court of Idolatry* the Queen of Superstitions; And therefore, justly called by
the Angel which spoke to S. John, The Habitation of Devils, and Cage of
unclean Birds. And from this Babylon, this Rome, the then City of confusion,
the Angel of God bid the Christians of those Times to come forth, and separate
themselves; lest they should be partakers of her sins, and go sharers in her
plagues. But to say as they do, that the Church of England is that Babylon the
great; or that our Parish Congregations from which they do divide themselves,
are the Habitation of Devils, the Hold of foul spirits, and Cage of unclean
Birds here mentioned in this chap. is such a piece of Ignorance, as well as
zealous slander, that they will never be able to prove it, till they can make
the Capitol of Rome stand in our London streets, or till they can make the
River Tiber run, where now our Thames does; or till they can change the
Countries in our Mapps, and make the Mid-land Sea flow on our English shore.
And farther then this I will not trespass on your patience; or enlarge my
self to prove to you that Separation is a Sin.

THE END.

