Mr. Maynards SPEECH BEFORE BOTH Houses in Parliament, upon Wednesday the
xxiiijth. of March, in reply upon the Earl of Straffords Answer to his
Articles at the Bar.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

Mr. MAINARDS SPEECH BEfore both Houses in Parliament, on Wednesday the xxiiij.
of March, in reply upon the Earl of Straffords answer to his Articles at the
Bar.
My Lords:
I Shall repeat little of that which has bin said, only this: That whereas my
Lord of Strafford, did answer to many particulars; yet he did not answer to
that which was particularly objected against him; that is, you were to hear
the complaints of the whole Kingdom: now the particular of our aim, is to
take off the vizard, which my Lord has put on; wherein the truth and honor
which is due to his Majesty, he would attribute to himself.

My Lords, there is one thing which I desire your Lordships to remember, it
being the maine of our complaints.

The alteration of the face of government, and traduceing of his own Laws;
and this is the burden upon all the Lords and Commons of Ireland. Concerning
the breach of Parliament, he would put it on Sir George Ratcliffe; but i am
sure, he cannot put off himself: for Sir George Ratcliffe was not the man
alone, but others joined with him in that Assembly, and I am sure my Lord of
Strafford moved it for the breach of Parliament.

I shall address my self to the body of his answer: Now give me leave my
Lords, that J may open the nature of this great offense.

My Lords, it is a charge of Treason, which is a Treason not ended, or expired
by one single Act; but a trade envied by this Lord of Strafford, ever since the
Kings favor has bin bestowed upon him.

My Lords, it has two parts to deprive us that which was good. And secondly,
to bring in a Tyrannical government, it takes away the laws of the land, and
it has an arbbitrary government, bounded by no law, but what my Lord of
Strafford pleases.

It is the law, my Lords, which we reverence, and cheerfully render to our
gracious Sovereign: The Law as it is the ground of our liberty, so it is the
distribution of Justice.

My Lords, in all this; my Lord of Strafford has endeavored to make them
incapable of any benefit: It is true, my Lords; that Treason against the person
of a Prince is high Treason, and the highest Treason that can be to man; but it
falls short of this Treason against the State.

When blessed King James was taken to heaven, he commended the laws to his
Son, our gracious Sovereign. But my Lords, if such a design as this should
take effect, that the law of Justice should be taken from the Throne, we are
without hope of ever seeing happy days, power is not so easily laid down,
unless it be by so good and just a Prince as we have.

My Lord of Straffords accusation is conveyed into twenty eight Articles, and J
shall but touch the heads, that we shall insist upon, and I think the best
way to this, is to consider what he did before he went into Ireland, what then,
and what since.

He has encroached jurisdiction, where none was, taking upon him a power to
repel the laws, and to make new laws, and in domineering over the lives and
goods, and what ever else was the subjects.

My Lords, this he has notdone only upone the meaner sort but upon the
Peers and ancient Nobility and what may your Lordships expect, but the same
measure at his hands, here as they have found there when he committed any to
prison, if a habeas Corpus were granted the Oficers must not obey, and if any
Fine were put upon the Officer, for refusing them, there was a command that he
should be discharged: so that he did not only take power to himself, but the
Scepter of Justice out of the Kings hand.

When he was a member of the house of Commons, it was his own motion, all
Ministers of State should serve the King, according to the laws which he has
broken himself.

He does as much as say, that Fines shall not be paid by Officers, if in this
they fulfill his commands, but those that release a prisoner upon a habeas
corpus shall find his displeasure.

My Lords, if this had been a single Act, we should not have accused him of
high Treason, but this has been his Common course, and this we present to your
Lordships consideration.

The next thing is, that in the North the people attending for Justice, you
shall see what a dishonor he flung upon the sacred Majesty of the King, that
did advance him: some of the Justices (says he) are all for Law but they shall
find that the Kings little finger is heavier then the Loins of the Law.

My Lords, what a sad Speech was this, and what sad Accidents happened upon it,
you all know, and he said in a solemn speech; That Ireland was a Conqaered
Nation, and that the King might do with them what he would, their Charters
were nothing worth, they did bind the King no longer then he pleased. Surely
you may see what he would do if he had power, but we hope never such Counsel
shall have acceptance in so gracious an Ear as our Sovereigns, and be does
not stay in words but proceeds to Actions, when a Peer of the Kingdom was
expelled the Kingdom for suing at Law for recovering of his Right, he says,
he would-have Ireland know that neither Law nor Lawyers should question any
thing that he ordered.

My Lords, he goes higher, for when there was an occasion to speak of an Act
of State, he said it shoutd be as binding as an Act of Parliament.

My Lords, he cannot go higher then this he tells them in Parliament; they were
a Conquered Nation, and they must expect the usage of a Counquered Nation.

The Lord Mountnorr is for a few words that fell from his mouth spoken privately
at his Table, had a Counsel of War called against him and was judged to
death.

My Lords, it is no marvel that he say; That the Kings little finger should
be so heavy, when his little toe was so heavy to tread down a Peer under his
foot.

My Lords, he makes Laws of himself, and he makes a difference in matters
of Justice between the poor and the rich, but when he has executed his
power upon the poor, he will fall upon the rich.

My Lords, he has made that which was worth but five shillings to be valued at
twenty, and my Lords, by this he does in effect take away what ere this
commodity is worth, he says he does it for the Kings gain, but we shall make
it appear, that the Crown has lost, and he has gained.

And for the Commodity of Flax my Lords, it is but a Woman's Commodity, but yet
it is the Staple Commodity of Ireland.

Now my Lords, this Commodity he has gotten wholly into his own hands, for he
made such a Proclamation, that it should be used in such ways as the Women
could not do it, and if it were not used in such ways that it should be
seized upon, no he does not only put impositious upon the Subject, but take
away the goods too, and thus he has levied war against the Kings Subjects,
and this is his course that if a Decree were made by him and not obeyed, there
issued a warrant to Soldiers, that they should make garrison, and that they
should go to the houses of those that were pretended to be disobedient.

My Lords, they have killed their Sheep and their Oxen, and bound their horses
and took them Captives till they have rendered obedience, which is expressly
contrary to Law, for it says; If any man set horse or foot upon the Kings
Subjects in a Military way, it is high Treason.

My Lords, it does not only oppress them in their estates, but provoke and
incite his Majesty to lay down his mercy and goodness, and to fall into an
offensive war against his Subjects, and say they are Rebels and Traitors.

He tells his Counsel that the Parliament having forsaken the King, and the
King having tried the Parliament, he might use other ways to procure money to
supply his necessities.

My Lords, the same day that the Parliament was broken, he tells the King, he
had 8000 foot and 1000 horse, to reduce this Kingdom to obedience.

My Lords, consider in what a sad time this man took to infuse this sad
Counsel into the Kings ear.

My Lords, he does advise the King that he was absolved from all rules of
government, but if no rule of government, what rule of obedience; Surely he
meant to reduce us to a Chaos and confusion, etc. would have us without all
rule of government or obedience.

My Lords, those that he would have brought to reduce us were Papists, Enemies
of our Religion. This strikes us near, my Lords, and is the grief of our
hearts; that an Irish Army should be brought into England to reduce us.

My Lords, I hope we were nere so far gone, as to need an Army to reduce us to
obedience.

My Lords, he had raised this Army, and if such Counsel should have taken
effect in his Majesty's ear, he, like proud Haman, would have thought to have
been General of the Army.

And thus my Lords, you see this Lord of Strafford falls upon a Counsel, which
might make an irreconciliable difference to subdue us by his power.

FINIS.

