TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS The DUKE OF YORK.
On our late Sea Fight.
WAR, the Supreme Decider of a Cause
Where wrongs are grown too bold, and strong for Laws;
And where no power of Justice can prevail,
Less then an armed Fleet, and conquering Sail,
Engaged our English Oaks (which long had stood
The peaceful shades, and Glories of the Wood,
And whose large ribs afforded harmless Beams
For other Buildings, then what float on streams)
In Nobler, and more Hostile shapes to meet,
A far more numerous but ignobler Fleet.
And, having first appealed to Heaven, did fight
Their Countries sufferings with their Princes might.
Both Navies, when they sirst appeared in view,
Looked like two Forests which in Waters grew.
But when their threatening Wings by Winds inspired,
Drew near, they looked like guarded Castles fired.
The Wide-mouth Canons loud Defiance spoke,
Like burning AEtna's which from Broadsides broke.
Or like Vesuvius, whose Sulphureous-Breath
Did vomit flames wrapped up in Clouds of Death.
The Engineer, who first found out the skill
Of teaching powder, like the Plague, to kill;
And to the furious Sword, by which Men fall,
Added new ways of Death, the murdring Ball,
Might here his horrid Wit, and Art admire,
By seeing Bullets shot from ranks of Fire.
Destruction managed by strict rules, and forms,
And Ruin caught to fly in leaden storms.
Slaughters for slaughters in straight Lines returned,
And Ships by Ships in well set order burned.
Each Vessel with a steering Pilot sunk,
But where the steerer was Hollandicke drunk.
Never did horror in more various dress
The several Fates of dying men express.
They, whom their wooden Walls secured a while,
Found their Defense changed to their funeral pile.
The greedy Ocean in his ravenous Womb,
Swallowed a Caper like a flaming Tomb.
Where the enclosed did by two deaths expire,
At once drowned by the Sea, and burnt by fire.
Bodies dismembered did the Hatches spread,
Here lay a Leg shot off, there Arm, and Head.
At the last Day 'twould pose a Schoolmans Wit,
How Limbs thus scattered should unite, and knit.
The Sea was dreadful, on whose trembling waves
The living swamme for Life, the dead for Graves.
The Waters which once drowned a numerous Host,
In waves of blood on the Arabian coast,
Were not more red, the floating bodies such,
Only Egyptians were here turned to Dutch.
Ships, which had oftvyed Travels with the Sun,
Out-sail'd his lines, beyond his Tropicks run,
And measured all the distance of the way,
Where East begins, and West shuts up the Day,
From the Worlds adverse Hemispheres did here
To fight the Empire of the Sea appear.
Opposing Reparation against Stealth,
And Monarchy against a Commonwealth.
The English Courage which with bended Yew
At Agincourt vast Legions overthrew,
And with their feathered shafts, sent from a string,
At Poictiers conquered France, and took their King,
Like Valor of Inheritance, which runs
From Warlike parents in the breast of sons,
Possessed our Seamens Hearts, who did far more
Then their bold Fathers on the land and shore.
There Archers, with their Bows, maintained the fight.
Here Cannons might the greatest Courage fright.
Yet our men, like true Soldiers of the blood,
Outfac'd the danger, and untrembling stood.
Nay with the same Alacrity did fight,
As Bridegrooms feast upon their Marriage night.
Despised their Wounds, and for more Wounds did cry,
And called it conquest for their Prince to die.
Nor did they owe this Courage to the Vine,
Or take their Inspiration from their Wine.
No Zealand Liquor brewed at Amsterdam,
VVarm'd their cold hearts with Artificial flame:
Our sober valors beat their drunken, who
Came doubly Armed with Guns and Brandee too;
And who compelled to fight against their will,
Made their Recruits of Courage from the Still.
The Battle of Lepanto was a Theme
For vulgar Wits, a Sea Fight in a Dream:
Where the Corinthian and the Afric shores
Saw Christian Boats engage with Turkish Oars.
Like children of the Sea, the Belgicke powers,
United in one strength, here fronted ours.
The Timber of all Nations here did meet
Like all Religions in this Belgicke Fleet.
The Duca Oak, and French, nay English Wood,
Against our Oak in Opposition stood
Trees bought of Traitors in rebellious times
Added new Treason to the sellers Crimes,
And fallen from their first Loyalty did bring
Sides which bore Arms against their Native King.
Forgetting, like their New-made States aboard,
What Country Trees they were, or who their Lord.
The Clouds above, where Thunders are begot
Heard greater Thunders from our Cannons shot.
And seeing other Clouds put out the light,
Wondered to see Noone thus transformed to Night.
Taking at once from the Speactators Eye
The sight both of the Fighters and the Sky.
This Darkness, which did from black Lightnings Spring
Made conquest hover with a doubtful Wing.
Whilst in this Smoke confusion, fears did rise
How to distinguish Friends from Enemies.
But when the silent Guns left off to play,
And parting Mists once more recalled the Day,
Bright Victory came to our Sea-mens view,
Whose work was not to fight now, but pursue,
And chase the theevish-Fleet, or flying rout
Home to their Den from whence they Thieves came out:
Great Providence, whose Justice long did sleep,
On this great day showed Wonders in the Deep.
It was a day of Judgment, where the guilt
Of English blood at sad Amboina spilt,
The Robberies at Guinye, and Bantam,
With all the Villainies of Amsterdam,
(Whose Piracies did through the Ocean run,
As far as VVindes blow, or Eyes see the Sun,
And where the States by plundered Merchants Wealth
Grew to be High and Mighty Lords in stealth)
For satisfaction, and Revenge did call,
In every sir'd Ship, and sunk Admiral.
Old Thefts committed on the Indian shoares
Here paid their public Debts, and cleared their scores.
Mean time, to show the Justice of our Cause,
Who fought with those who broke all Nations Laws,
The Elements did on our side conspire,
Like Seas in pension, or like listed Fire.
The Stars fought in their Courses, and the Wind
Helped to assist the Quarrel of Mankind.
O Royal Charles, whose Territories lie
Both in your Subjects Hearts, and in the Sky!
Since, like your other Subjects kept in pay,
Where you command the Winds, and Seas Obey!
Base Dutch, whose Lineage is the same with Frogs,
Created out of mists, and hatched from Boggs,
Could you believe the Elements were made,
To serve as Engines to your cousening Trade?
Or that the Waters were at your Command,
Whorobb'd the Fish of Water, Sea of Land?
Whose very Dwellings stand on pilfer'd Ground,
Your Country one great Theft, which Seas once drowned?
Or that the breath of Heaven would be confined
To swell your Sails, and be Piraticke Wind?
How durst you thus all Countries rights invade,
And call your Thefts, and Usurpations Trade?
You might as well Monopolize the Skies,
And claim the Sunbeams, as your Merchandise;
Forbid the Tides to roll, or winds to blow,
But where your Capers sail, or long Boats row,
As thus bind up the Worlds great Rode in Chains,
And make the Sea a servant to your Gains.
And now, Great Prince, whose celebrated Name
Filled France and Flanders with your early Fame,
Which did deserve the style of General,
Even then when Ladies might you Lady call:
Had the great Prince of Poets, ( Homer,) seen
This Sea Fight you had his Achilles been,
And held a place among his Warlike Kings,
Whose lasting Quill immortal Battles sings.
Or had Augustus, when from Actium fleet
He rode in Triumph through the Roman street,
Leading his Captives through a shining Arch,
Through which Himself did, crowned with Laurel, march,
Seen this days Fight, which Actium did outdoe,
He had resigned his Arch, and Bays to you.
Who by your Conquest set the Waters free,
And saved the Ocean from Captivity.
Cured Trade, and Merchants of the Dutch Disease,
And crowned your Brother Monarch of the Seas.
Whose new Dominions now will reach as far
As the Pole-artick, and Ant-artick star.
And your great Actions will as far be told,
As Menfetch Eastern Spice, or Western Gold.
The End.
OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL for RIC: DAVIS, 1665.


