A SERMON AGAINST FALSE PROPHETS PREACHED In St. MARY'S CHVRCH In OXFORD,
shortly after the Surrender of that Garrison.

By JASPER MAINE, D. D. and one of the Students of Christ. Church, OXON.

IER. 23. 16. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the
Prophets that prophecy unto you; They make you vain; they speak a vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

Printed in the Year, M DC XLVII.

A SERMON AGAINST FALSE PROPHETS.
EZEKIEL. 22. 28. Her Prophets have daubed them with untempered Mortar, seeing
vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says the Lord God, when the
Lord has not spoken.
THE PREFACE.
THat which the best Orator said of Oratorie put to the worst use, Nihil est
tam horridum, tam incultum, quod non splendesc^t oratione, That there is
nothing so deformed, or rude, which may not be made amiable by Speech, has
always been verified of Religion too. No one thing has, in all Ages, been
more abused, to paint and disguise foul actions. It has been made the Art to
cozen people with their own Devot^ons, and to make them, in the mean time,
think sacredly of their seducers. Conspiracies, and Insurrections, dressed in
these colors have been called holy Associations and Leagues: And the
Ambitious, to work the more securely on the credulity of the simple, have not
only presented evil to them growing on the Tree of Good, but have proceeded
thus much farther in the fallacy, that they have still made forbidden fruits
seem pleasant to the eye. And the false colors under which they have seemed
pleasant, have always been taken from Religion. Thus in these Heathen States,
where they first made their own gods, and then worshipped them, never plot was
hatched to disturb the Commonwealth, but the writings of some Sybill, or
other, were entitled to that plot; And never any design was laid to destroy
the Roman Empire, but some Augur, or Priest was taken in, whose part 't was, to
make the Entrails, and Liver of his sacrifice, give credit to the ambition of
the design. And thus among the Jews, some ambitious men, the better to gild
over their proceedings, still entitled God to them. Who, as if he had been one
of those Tutelar, changeable Deities, which used to be enticed, and called over
from one side to another, they still entertained the people, that they who most
zealously pretended to him, had him most. And that however he be the God of
Order, and Justice, and Agreement among men, yet in favor of his own Cause,
he would for a while be content to change his nature, and become the God of
Injustice, Disorder, and Confusion too.

The better to work this persuasion into the minds of the Multitude, their
first piece of policy was to draw the Prophets into their Faction This is
expressed to us in the 25. verse of this Chapter. Where it is said of Jerusalem,
There is a conspiracy of her Prophets, in the midst thereof. And truly, 'twas
a Conspiracy so unfit for Prophets, that the resemblance of it was never yet
found in any but those Men of a much unholier style, of whom the Historian
says, Est aliquod etiam inter Latrones and Sicarios foedus, that Thieves and
Robbers hold League and friendship amongst themselves. For it is said in the
following words of that verse, that 'twas a Conspiracy like the roaring of a
Lion, ravening the prey. A Conspiracy, by which they devoured Souls, and took
to themselves the Treasure and precious things of the Land. And because pillage
of this public Nature, could hardly be gained without the Death, and Murder
of the Owners, it is said in the close of that verse, That they made her many
Widows in the midst thereof. To which if the Scripture had added these two
words of pity, the Fatherless and Orphane too, nothing could have been added
to the calamity of the Description.

Nor is there a much more favorable Character stuck by the holy Ghost, upon
the Priests of those times. For by that which is said at the 26 verse of this
Chapter, (And it is well worth your marking) you may perceive that the Disorder
to which things were brought in the State, sprung first from the Disorder, to
which things were brought in the Church. For it is there said, That The Priests
had violated the Law, and profaned the holy Things; That they did put no
difference between the Holy, and Profane, nor made any Distinction between the
unclean, and the clean. In brief, the Legal, well established Service, and
Worship of God was at a kind of loss, and Indifferency. 'Twas referred to
every man's Fancy, to make to himself his own Religion. Blemished, and
unblemisht Sacrifices began to be sacred alike. And the Scripture of another
Prophet, became quite altered; He that offered a Swine, was thought as
religious as he that slew an Ox; And he that cut off a Dogs neck, was thought
as liberal a Sacrificer, as he that brought a Lamb to the Altar.

Next, having taken the Prophets, and Priests, so far into their plot, as to
mingle and confound the Services of the Church, they made it one part of their
policy, more, to make them lend Reputation, to their proceedings in the State.
This is plainly intimated to us, by that which is said at the 27. verse of this
chapter, cohering with that which is said in the words of my Text. For there
mention is made of certain (...), or Princes, or chief men, who are there
said to be like Wolves ravening the prey; Yet there wanted not some Prophets
(as you may gather from my Text) who presented these Wolves to the people in
Sheeps clothing. It Is said too that they had this property of Wolves, that
they took pleasure to shed blood; yet there wanted not Priests, who called
Blood thus spilt Sacrifice. It Is said too that they did shed Blood that they
might get to themselves dishonest Gain; yet there wanted not some, who called
even that dishonest gain, godliness. If you will have all this ^^mbed to you
in one short Draught and picture, how cruel soever, and destructive to the
common safety, the Projects, and proceedings of some men powerful in the then
State of the Jews were, there wanted not Prophets who dawbed them with
untempered Mortar; seeing vanity, and divining ly^s unto them, saying, thus
says the Lord God, when the Lord had not spoken. The division.


Which words are a History of the worst Times, in the then worst State. In
which we have these considerable parts. 1. An irreligious Compliance, or rather
Collusion, of Spiritual men with Lay. Some there were, (as you have them
described in the precedent verse) whose design 'twas, to make their Co^ntrey
their Prey; Others there were, whose part it was, to make them seem Good
patriots, and Protectors of their Country. Some destroyed Souls in the way to
their Ambitious Ends, Others made it their business to put Holy colors on
their Slaughters. Or if you will have me express my self in the Language of both
Texts, some there were who did Shed blood, that they might get to themselves
Dishonest gain; And some Prophets there, were, who to make their proceedings
seem specious, did put religious pretenses to them, and with these pretenses
did disguise, and dawbe them.

Next, we have here, the Frailty, and Weakness, and Deceiveable nature of such
pretenses. How plausible soever they seemed to the deluded vulgar, and however
they might a while, not only serve to cover, and veil foul purposes, but to
set them off with a Beauty, and Lustretoo, yet this could not be lasting.
Dishonest projects thus adorned were but so many painted Rui^es. And therefore,
the Prophets, who thus disguised them, are here said to Dawbe them with
untempered Mortar.

Thirdly, for the effecting of this, we have here a very strange abuse of their
Ministry and Function, set down to us in three Expressions, having every one
of them something of the Form, but nothing of the Reality of a Prophet in
them. First, they are here said to be Seers. But as for the things they saw,
they were of that foolish empty nature, that the Scripture has not vouchsafed
to call them Dreams. We may call them visions, perhaps; But such as AEneas in
Virgil saw among the Shades. So void of Weight, and Body, and Substance, so far
from Sense and Reason, as well as Revelation, that as the fittest word which
could be found for them, they are here in this place called Vanity. Next, they
are here said to Divine, or (...). But it is added withal, that they foretold
not Things, but lies. As many untruths as (...) fell from them. And their
predictions had only thus much of Divination in them, that some time was
required for men to prove them false; And to perceive, that, contrary to all
true predictions, they would never come to pass. Lastly, (which was the third,
and great abuse of their office and function) they were not afraid to entitle
God to their vanities and lies. As often as they were pleased to deceive the
people, he was cited, and quoted, as the inspirer of the deceit. And this bold,
insolent sin was committed against the holy Ghost, that the vain, foolish,
groundless conj^ctures of the Prophets, were called his Inspirations: who, to
make their falsehoods take the stronglier, still uttered them in the holy,
Prophetical style of Truths, saying, Thus faith the Lord God, when the Lord
had not spoken. All which contracted into a narrow room, the Irreligious
Compliance of Spiritual men with Lay, the weakn^sse of their pretenses, the
abuse of their Calling, by uttering their own vanities for i^spirations, and
and their own Fictions for Truths, together with the injury offered to God, by
entitling Him to all this, shall be the parts on which I will build my future
Discourse. In the ordering of which, I will begin with the Compliance or
Combination. Some there were among the Jews (as you have them decyphered in the
former verse) who did shed blood, that they might get to themselves dishonest
gain; and some false Prophets there were, who, to go sharers in that gain, by
the Holiness of their Function, did disguise and dawbe them.

It was well said of a virtuous man in the praise of Virtue, Si 1: The
compliance.
oculis cerneretur, If it could be seen, or could be put into Limbs or
Colors, nothing would more inflame, or ravish the Beholders. And he had
spoken as well in the dispraise of Vice, had he said, Si oculis cerneretur, if
it could be made visible, or put into Colors, nothing would appear more
deformed, or loathsome. To speak of it, as it deserves, there is so little
Beauty or Amiablenesse in Dishonest actions, that to be disliked, and abhorred,
it has always been sufficient for them to be understood. None but the Father
of mischief, ever loved mischief for it self: And none but the Children of
such a parent, have found out a comeliness of Evil, merely as it is Evil. Of
all other men, who have not quite lost their Reason with their Innocence, and
over whose understandings darkness and Error have not so prevailed, as to
present vice and virtue to them, as one and the same thing, the saying of the
Po^t has always held true, Exemplo quodo^nque malo committitur ips^ displicet
Authori; Bad actions are so far from pleasing others, that they never yet
pleas^ themselves. Nor can I persuade my self, that ^ver any man could so
(...) his Conscience, or force it, (like some compelled to enter into un
willing contracts) to embrace a Bad Design, but he for that time divided
himself between his Design, and his Hatred. An^ the advantages which have
accompanied the foulen^sse of the Enterprise, have never been so great, but
that the poor co^ened offender, at the same time sinned, and lothed himself.
But then, as some either borne, or grown deformed, have found our certain arts
to hide their deformities; As some I say, of a withered, ill-shaped complexion,
have by the help of their pencill, turned yellow into red, and pale into white,
and by the same help, have placed a Rose there, where there was before a decay;
And so have bestowed, not only an Artificial beauty, but an Art^ficiall youth
upon themselves, and in this borrowed shape have flattered themselves, and
deceived others: So f^w bad men have been so unpolitick, not to hide their
Deformities by painting too. And this cunning use has been made of virtue,
that it has always been made the color, to adorn, and cover vice. A thing
the more easy to be effected, because that saying of the Philospher has
always been true, Difficile est Nonnulla vitia a virtutibus secernere, adeo
p^udentes nonnunquam fallunt, some vices are so nearely allied to some virtues,
that wise men have frequently mistaken them for Twins. ^hus Rashness with
success has past for valor, and cowardice with discretion has past for
Counsel. Covetousness well ordered has worn the shape of Thrift; and Riot
has put on the name of Magnificence, and a large mind. But where this
Neighborhood between good and evil is not, other helps have been taken in;
And a virtue of one shape has been made to disguise the fowlenesse of a vice
of another. Thus among the Jews in our Savior Christ's time, there were some
who tithed Mint, that they might withhold Justice, and some paid Cummin, that
they might keep back the weightier matters of the Law. Some made long prayers,
that they might devour Widows Houses, and some wore br^ad Phylacteries that
they might swallow Orphans goods. And thus in this Prophet Ezechiels time, some
disguised their rapine by a Prophet, and their slaughters by a Priest; their
Covetousness by a Seer, and their Oppressions by a Man of God. Between whom
the parts were so speciously carried, that, as if there had been no such things
in Nature, as Right or Wrong, Justice or Injustice, but only as Holy men would
please to call them, the one devoured the prey, the other gave a Blessing to
it; The one destroyed Souls, the other excused the Murder; The one committed
Sacrilege, the other made it Pla^sible. Or if you will have me express my
self to the true Historical Importance of this Text, the one grinded the
faces of the poor, and polluted themselves both with private and and public
Oppressions; the other gilded, and palliated, and veyled, and dawbed them.
Complanabant, says one, Gypsabant, says another Translation. The Prophets did
smooth, and sleek, and put a fair crust upon them. The words are diverse, but
have all one Sense.

For first, whether we express their palliation of Sins by dawbing, (which
is the word here used by our English Translators, and answers to Saint Jeromes
Obliniebant in the Latin, and the Septuagint (...) in the Greek) it is a Word
(if a learned Interpreter, well skilled in the Original, have not deceived me)
taken from those who deal in Ointments. And the meaning of the place is, That
as some, skilled in such Confections have at times been hired to disguise
deadly Receipts in fragrant Smells and so have co^veyed poison in a perfume, and
clothed Death in the Breath and Air of an Odoriferous Sent; so these Prophets
here in the Text, among the other Abuses of their Calling, changed one of
Solomon's best Proverbs into one of the worst Compliances: Which was, that by
the Opinion of their Holinesle among the people, they made some men's Ill names
pass, as it is there said of Good, like a precious Ointment powered forth.
Perfumes and Odours were put upon Ambition and Avarice. And Gods Laws were a
while taught to forget their style; And those Commandments were made most to
defend the men, who did most violate, transgress, and break them. Or next,
whether we use the word sleeke, (...) smooth, it is a word taken from those who
use the poli^hing tool, or file. And the meaning of the place will be, That,
as such Artifi^ers do ordinarily file ^ude, rough, misshapen matters, into
decent figures and fo^mes, and by the Repetition of their instrument, and
application of it artificially to the same place, do raise a Glass and Luster
there, where there was before only a deformity and shade; so these Prophets
dealt with the public Sins of their times. Rapines, and Oppressions were
filed, and polisht, into the soster names of just levyes and supplies. Murders
also and Bloud-sheds, together with the Cries of Widows, and Tears of
Orphans were smoothed and glazed into the milder appearances, perhaps, of
public Utility and necessity of State. In brief, these Prophets here in the
Text, dealt with some men's vices, as the Philospher would have us deal with
ou^ Affections, transformed and wrought them into Ornaments, and virtues. Or
lastly, whether we use the word Gypsabant, it is a word taken from those who
deal in plaster. And the meaning of the place will be, That as such
Artificers, by laying a new Crust upon old Decays, do many times make a
falling building seem strong, and to the certain danger of the dweller, do so
veil, and cover aged Walls, as to disguise Rottenness, and make a ruin seem
habitable; So these Prophets dealt with the sins of their times. They whited
Sepulchers, and adorned Rottenness, and putrefaction. Wicked designs had a
fair crust put upon them; And ruinous projects were supported with splendid,
holy Colors. If you will have me speak more home to the mind of the Text,
some ambitious men built Houses on the Sand, and some flattering, servile
Prophets dawbed them with weak, untempered mortar. Which discovers to us the
frailty and uns^undnesse of all such proceedings as are not built upon Justice,
or Truth, those two immovable Rocks of the Scripture; And leads us on to the
next part of the Text.

For the clearer understanding and interpretation of which (...) The ^railty of
bad designs.
words, it will be necessary, that I once more briefly reconcile the several
Translations of them. That which we in English do read untempered mortar, a
very Classical Interpreter of the Bible reads thus: Prophetae ejus linebant
eos insulso, Her Prophets have dawbed them with a thing which is insipid, or
which has no salt in it. From whence some have made this exposition of the
place. That though the thing with which these Prophets disguised the foul
actions of their times were Holiness, and Religion; and though it be true,
that we may say of Religion, as Christ said of the Teachers of it, that it is
the salt of the world, yet this salt sprinkled upon forbidden enterprises,
leaves off to be salt, and loses its savor. To speak yet more plainly to you;
Holiness it self applied to wicked designs, leaves off to be Holiness. And
they who put sanctity to that vile use, to serve only as the paint to make the
unlawful projects of others seem fair, add thus much guilt of their own to
the others, that they turn Religion it self into their crime. And I may
confidently say, that they had been much more innocent, if in such forbidden
cases they had been less holy.

Saint Jerome translates the words thus: Propheta oblini^bant eos absque
temperamento, The Prophets dawbed them with a thing which would not piece, or
unite, or make a mixture. From whence some have given this Interpretation of
the place, That however religious pretenses may be found out to m^sk
irreligious deeds, and however Holiness may be made the ver^lion to impiety,
yet there can never such a mixture, or composition pass between them, that it
shall cease to be Impiety, because it has piety joined to it. But rather as
gilt upon false coin makes it so much the more counterfeit; or as Tin
silvered over is so much the more Treason, because it is silvered over; and
Copper so much the more deserves hanging, because it wears the Kings Image,
and the Inscription on it is written in golden Letters: So it is with bad
actions silvered over with Religion; they are so far from becoming good,
that they double their iniquity, and become so much the more counterfeit. And
as the spirit of Delusion is so much the more the spirit of Delusion, when he
transformes himself into an Angel of Light; so foul projects are never
fouler, then when there is a glory and luster put upon them. In all such
disproportioned Commixtures, where the wor^e is sure to vitiate, and corrupt
the better, we may not only ask the Question, What agreement there can be
between light and darkness, or what fellowship Christ can have with Belial?
but we may boldly pronounce, that light thus joined with darkness, loses its
rays, and becomes darkness. And that Christ thus joined and matched with
B^lial, degenerates into a Deceiver, and becomes Bel^al too.

The third and last translation of this place, (which our English Translators
have followed) is that of Vatablus, who renders the words thus, (...) ejus
lin^bant eos Into infirm^, Her Prophets (that is, the Prophets of Jerusalem)
have dawbed them with infirm, untempered mortar: That is, as Dyonisiu^
Carthusianus, very fully expounds the Metaphor, Confirmabant eos in errore
persuasionibus non solidis, sed fucatis: The Prophets confirmed them in their
errors with weak, untempered Reasons. All which several Interpretations do
agree in this one and the same undeniable sense; That such is the conscious,
guilty, unjustifiable nature of sin, so suspicious and fear full it is to be
seen publicly in its own shape, that it not only deals with all sinners,
as it did with the first two, upon a mutual sight, and discovery of
themselves, shows them ashamed, and naked to one another; but to cover and
veyle their nakedness and shame, sends them to such poor, f^aile,
unprofitable shelters, as Bushes, and Fig Leaves: which though they should grow
in Paradise it self, or should be gathered from the same holy ground, in which
Innocence, and the Tree of Life were planted together, yet applied to hide an
oppression, or plucked to cover a sacrilege, they will still retain the fading,
transitory nature of l^aves, which is to decay, and wither, between the hands
of the Gatherer, and lose their color and freshness in the very laying on;
and to every well rectified, religiously judging eye, instead of being a veyle
to hide, will become one of the ways to betray a nakedness.

To speak yet more plainly to you, and to lay it as home as I can to every one
of your consciences, who hear me this day; If the design and project be
unlawful, and contrary to Gods Commandments, let there be a Prophet found to
pronounce it holy, let there be a Statist found to pronounce it convenient, let
Reason of State be joined to Religion, and public utility to quotations of
Scripture; Lastly, let it be adorned with all the varnishes and paintings taken
either from Policy or Christianity, which may render it fair and amiable to
the deluded multitude, yet such is the deceiveable nature of such projects,
such a worm, such a self destroyer grows up with them, that, like Jonas
Gourd, something cleaves to their ro^t, which makes their very foundation
ruinous, and fatal to them. At best they are but painted Tabe^nacles of clay,
or palaces built with (...) mortar. The first discovery of their hypocrisy
turns them into heaps, and the fate of the scarlet whore in the Revelation
befalls them, whose filthiness and abominations were no sooner opened and
divulged, but she was dismembered, and torn in pieces by her own Idolaters and
Lovers.

Here then, if any expect that I should apply what has been said to our
times, and that I should take the liberty of some of our Modern Prophets, who
have by their rude Invectives from the Pulpit ma^e whatever Names are High, and
Great, and Sacred, and Venerable among us, cheap, and vile, and odious in the
ears of the people; If any, I say, expect that by way of parallel of one
people with another, I should here audaciously undertake to show that what ever
Arts were used to make bad projects seem plausible, and holy in this Prophets
time, have been practiced to make the like bad projects appear plausible, and
holy now; Or that in our times the like Irreligious Compliance, has past
between some Spiritual men, and Lay, to cast things into the present
Confusion, I hope they will not take it ill, if I deceive their Expectation.
For my own part, as long as there is such a piece of Scripture as this, Exodus
22. 28.
Diis non maledices, thou shall not revile the Gods, (that is, thou shall not
only not defame them by lying, but shall not speak all truths of them which
may turn to their Infamy, and reproach;) I shall always observe it as a piece
of obligatory Religion, not to speak evil, no not of offending dignities. Much
less shall I adventure to shoot from this sacred place my own ill-built
Jealousies, and Suspicions, for Realities and Truths: Which if I should do,
'twould certainly favor too much of his Spirit of Detraction, who having lost
his modesty, as well as Religion and Obedience, to the Scandal and just
offense of all loyal E^res here present, was not afraid to forget the other
part of that Text, which says, Nec maledices principi in populo meo, Thou
shall not reproach the Ruler of my people.

Yet because so many strange Prophets, of our wild, licentious times, have
preached up almost five years Commotion for a Holy war; And because, in truth,
no war can be Holy whose cause is not justifiable; If I should grant them
what they have procla^ed from so many Pulpits, that the Cause for which they
have all this while, some of them, so zealously fought, as well as preached,
has been Liberty of Conscience; or, in other terms, for the Reformation of a
corrupted, degenerated Church; Or to speak yet more like themselves, for the
Restitution of the Protestant Religion grown Popish; if I say, all this should
be granted them, yet certainly, if Scripture, Gospel Fathers, Schoolmen,
Protestant Divines of the most reverend, and sober mark, and Reason it self
have not deceived me, all Sermons which make Religion, how pure soever, to be
^ just cause of a War, do but dawb the undertakers with untempered Mortar.

For however it be an Article in the Turkish Creed, that they may propagate
their Law by their Spear; yet for us who are Christians, to be of this
Mahumetane perswaston, were to transfer a piece of the Alcoran into a piece of
the Gospel. And to make Christ not only the Author of all those Massacres,
which from his time to ours, have worn that Holy Impression, but 'twere to
make him over-litterally guilty of his own saying, that he came not to send
peace, but a Sword into the World For though it be to be granted, that nothing
can more conduce to the future happiness of men, then to be of the true
Religion; yet I do not ^inde that Christ has given power to any to compel
men to be happy; or commanded, that ^orce should be used for the collation of
such a Benefit. All the ways more proportioned for the atchieving of such an
end, he has in his Gospel prescribed, namely preaching, and persuasion, and
Holy example of life. He bade his Apostles go, and teach all Nations; not stir
up one Nation against another, or divide Kingdoms against themselves, if they
would not receive the Gospel. This had been plainly to join the Sword of the
flesh, to the Sword of the Spirit. Which to save their Lives, and Fortunes,
might perhaps, have made some Hypocrites, and dissemblers without, who would
nevertheless, have remained Pagans and Infidels within. In short, some things
in the Excellency, and (...) of the Doctrines of Christian Religion being no
way (...) from Humane principles, but depending for the cred^t, and evidence of
their truth upon the Authority of Christ's miracles, conveyed along in Tradition
and Story, cannot in a natural way of Argumentation force assent. Since, as
long as there is such a thing in men, as ^berty of understanding, all
arguments, even in a Preaching, and persuasive way, which carry not necessity
of demonstration in their Forehead, may reasonably be rejected. Much less have
I met with it in all my progress of D^vinity or Philosophy, convincingly
maintained, that men upon every slight disagreement, or dissent in Religion,
are to be whipped, or beaten into a Consent; or that the plunder of men's Estates
is a fit medium to beget a Belief or persuasion in their Minds.

Here then, should I once more grant the charge of these Prophets to be true (a
very heavy one I confess) that the Protest an^ Religion among us, had very
far taken wing, and had almost resigned its place in this Island to the
Romish Superstition. Nay, suppose (which is yet far worse) that a great, and
considerable part of this Kingdom, had through the Corruption of the (...),
not only relapst from the Protestant Religion in particular, but from the
Christian Faith in general; suppose, I say, (which is the (...) that can be
supposed) that they who have so frequently of late been branded for Papists,
had outright turned Infidels, however in such a case, that War which fights
against the Errors of men thus lost, and proposes to it self no other end
but their Repentance and Conversion, may to some perhaps, seem to wear the
Helmet of their Salvation, and the Army which thus strives to save men by the
sword, may to some seem an Army of Apostles, yet I do not find that to come
into the field with an armed Gospel, is the way chosen by Christ to make
Proselites. The Scripture indeed, tells us of some who took the Kingdom of
Heaven by violence; But of any, who by violence may have it imposed upon them,
us no where recorded. But alas, my Brethren, (if I may speak freely to you in
the defense of that defamed Religion, in which I was borne and to which I
should account it one of the greatest blessings that God can bestow upon me, if
I might, with the Holy Fathers of our Reformation, fall a Sacrifice) that which
these men call Idolatry, and Superstition, and by names yet more odious, was so
far from having shrined it self in our Church; So little of that dross, and
Ore, and tin, which has lately filled our best Assemblies with so much noise
and Clamor, was to be found among us, that with the same unfainednesse that I
would confess my sins to God, and hope to obtain pardon for them, I do
profess, that I cannot think the Sun, in all his heavenly course, for so many
years, beheld a Church more blessed with purity of Religion for the Doctrines of
it, or better established for the Government, and Discipline of it, then ours
was. And therefore, if I were presently to enter into dispute with the greatest
Patriarch among these Prophets, who, even against the Testimony of sense it
self, will yet perversely strive to prove that our Church stood in such need
of Reformation, that the growing Superstitions of it could not possibly be
exptated but by so much Civi^ War. I should not doubt with modesty enough to
prove back again to him, that all such weak, irrational Arguments as have
only his zeal for their Logic, are not only composed of untempered Mortar;
But that in seeing those spots and blemishes in our Church, which no good
Protestants else could ever see, 'twill be no unreasonable inference to
conclude him in the number of those erroneous Prophe^s here in the Text. Who to
the great Scandal and abuse of their Office, and Function, did not only
palliate, and gild over the public sins of their times, but did it like
Prophets, and saw Vanity too. Which is the next part of the Text; And is next
to succeed in your attentions.

If the Phil^sophers rule be true, that things admit of definitions 3. The
first abuse of their function.
according to their essences, and that the nearer they approach to nothing, the
nearer they d^aw to no Description; to go about to give you an exact
definition of a thing impossible to be defined, or to endeavor to describe a
thing to you, which has been so much disputed whether it be a thing, were to
be like those Pr^phets here in the Text; first, to see Vanity my self, and
then to persuade you that there is a Reality, and Substance in it. Yet to let
you see by the best lights I can, what is here meant by Vanity, I will join an
inspi^ed to a Heathen Philosopher. Selomon, (whose whole Book of Ecclesiastes
is but a Tract of Vanty) as we may gather from the instances there set down,
places vanity, in mutability, and change. And because all things of this lower
world consist in vicissitude, and change (so far, that as Seneca said of
Rivers, B^s in idem flumen non descendi^us, we cannot step twice into the same
stream; so we may say of most Sublun^rie things, whose very beings do so
resemble str^ams, ut vix idem bis conspiciamus, that we can scarce behold some
things twice) that wisest among the sons of men, whose Philosophy was as
spacious as there were things in nature to be known, calls all things under
the Sun, vanity, because all things under the Sun are so liable to
inconstancy and change, that they s^eet away, and vanish, whilst they are
considered; and hasten to their decay whilst we are in the Contemplation of
them.

Aristotle desines vanity to be (...), Every thing which has not some
reasonable end or purpose belonging to it. For this reason, he calls
emptiness, and vacuity, vanity; Because there is so little use of it in
nature, that to expel it, things have an inclination placed in them to
perform actions against their kind. Earth to shut out a vacuity, is taught to
fly up like fire; and fire to destroy emptiness, is taught to fall down like
earth. And for this reason, another Philosopher has said, that colors, had
there not been made eyes to see them, and sounds, had there not been ears
made to hear them, had been vanities, and to no purpose. And what they said of
sounds, and colors, we may say of all things else; not only all things under
the Sun, but the Sun it self, who is the great (...), the eye of the world,
without another eye to behold him, or to know him to be so, had been one of
Aristotle's vanities.

As then in Nature those things have deserved the name of vanities, which
either have no reasonable end, or purpose belonging to them, or else are
altogether subject to Mutability, and change, so it is in policy, and Religion
too. To do things by weak, unreasonable, inconstant principles, principles
altogether unable to support, and upold the weight, and structure of public
business built upon them; or to do things, with no true substantial, solid,
useful, but a mere imaginary good end belonging to them; As for example, to
alter the whole frame and Government of a State, not that things may be mended,
but that they may run in another course then they did before; or to change the
universally received Government of a Church merely for change sake, and that
things may be new, not that they may be better, is a vanity, of which I know
not whether these Prophets, here in the Text, were guilty; but when I consider
the unreasonable changes already procured, and the yet farther endless changes
as unreasonably still pursued by the Prophets of our times, I find so much
vacuity, and emptiness in their desires, so much interested zeal, and so
little dis-interested reason, so much novelty mistaken for reformation, and
withal so much confusion preferred before so much decency, and order, that I
cannot but apply the Wise man's Ingemination to them, and call their proceedings
Vanity of vanities.

For if we may call weak, groundless, improbable surmises and conjectures,
vanities, have not these Prophets dealt with the minds of vulgar people, as
Melancholy men use to deal with the clouds, raised monstrous forms and shapes
to fright them, where no fear was? Have they not presented strange visions to
them? Idolatry in a Church window, Superstition in a white Surplice, Mass in
our Common Prayer Book, and Antichrist in our Bishops? Have they not also to
make things seem hideous in the State, cast them into strange, fantastical,
Chymera figures? And have they not, like the fabulous, walking Spirits we read
of, created imaginary Apparitions to the people from such things, slight,
unsolid melting Bodies as Air? And for all this if you enquire upon what true
stable principle, or ground, either taken from reason (which is now preached to
be a saecular, profane, heathen thing) or from Scripture, (which is now made
to submit to the more unerring rule of fancy) they have proceeded; or what has
been the true cause, of their so vain imaginations, you will find, that
(contrary to all the rules of right judgment, either common to men, or
Christians) they have been guided merely by that Causa per accidens, that
fallible, erroneous, accident all cause, which has always been the mother of
mistakes. Socrate ambulante coruscavit; Because it lightened when Socrates took
the Air, one in the company thought that his walking was the occasion of the
flash: this certainly, was a very vain and foolish inference; yet not more
vain and foolish then theirs, who have taught people to conclude, that all
pictures in Church-windowes are Idols, because some out of a misguided
devotion, have worshipped them; or that Surplices, and the like Church Vestures
are superstitious, because some superstitious men wear them; or that our
Common prayer book is Popery, because part of it is to be found in the
Rubricks of that Church; or that the government of the Church by Bishops is
Antichristian, because in their belief, Antichrist already is, or, when he
comes into the world, shall be a Bishop.

For here, if I should press them in a rational, logical way, (unless they
will call Argument, and Logic, and Syllogism, Superstition too, and banish
Reason as well as Liturgy out of the Church) to think (as they do) that
Churches are unhallowed by reason of their ornaments, or to persuade people to
refrain them, because some out of a blind zeal have paid worship to the
Windows, is to me a fear as unreasonable, as theirs was, who refused to go to
Sea, because there was a Painter in the City, who limned Shipwracks. For
certainly, if that be all the reason they have to banish Images out of the
Church, because some (if yet there have been any so stupid) have made them
Idols; by the same reason, we should not now have a Sun, or Moon, or Stars in
the Firmament, but they should long since have dropped from Heaven, because some
of the del^ded Heathens worshipped them. And if that be all the reason they have
to prove Surplices, or white vestments superstitious, because Papists wear
them, (pardon the meanneste of the subject, I beseech you, which is scarce
worthy of a confutation) why do not they also conclude Linen to be
superstitious, because Papists shift, and so make clean^nesse to be as
unlawful as Surplices or Copes? Thirdly, to say our Commonprayer-booke is
Popish, because it is so good, that some in the Church of Rome have praised it,
is to me an accusation as senseless, as theirs, who accused the General of
their Army of treason against the State, because his enemies out of the
admiration of his virtues, erected a Statue to him. Lastly, to call the
government of our Church by Bishops, Antichristian, because that Church which
they make to be the seat of Antichrist is so governed, is to me such a weak
Imputation, as by the same reason makes all the Christian Governments of the
world pagan. And therefore to be utterly extirpated, and banished out of the
world, because in some points of Government they resemble the Commonwealths of
Insidets. To all which vain, unlearned, impotent, shallow objections, raised
against the Church, when I have added their vain, improbable conjectures, and
objections raised against the State too; Where things possible, nay in a
civil, politic way, almost impossible, have been urged, and cited as things
present, and done; Where, because some Princes have been Tyrants, and grievous
to their Subjects, people in s^rene, easy, halcyon times, have bin made
believe that an ^gyptian bondage, and Thraldom was ready to fallupon them; And
where, because there was a time when a bunch of Grapes or two extraordinary was
gathered for the public, people, after so many reparations, so many acts of
recompense, have been entertained, that those few, irregular Grapes were but
the prologues, and forerunners to the intended rap^ which should in time have
been committed upon the whole future, following vine, I cannot look upon the
Prophets who have thus preached vanity to them, thus amnzed them with false,
imaginary dangers, but under that description which the Prophet Jeremy has
made of them, in his 23. chap. at the 26. verse; where he calls them Prophets
of the deceit of their own hearts, Seers who coy^ their own visions. Men who
relying wholly upon the uncertain illumination of their own fancies, which
they call the Spirit, and having never acquainted themselves with the true
ways, and principles either of reason, or Religion, which should clear their
minds, and take of^ the gross filme which beclouds their understandings, make
it their business and profession to deceive themselves, and others. Building
false conclusions upon weak, irrational pr^misses; and supporting improbable
conjectures, by fictions, and untruths, Which suggests to me the second abuse
of the Ministry, and function of these Prophe^s here in the Text. Which was,
that they not only saw vanity, but divined lies to^.

The thing in nature which makes the expression hold true, that 4. (...) a
(...) their (...).
man is (...), a sociable creature, is that we are able to repay conversation
with conversation; and have a privilege bestowed upon us, beyond that of
beasts, that we can unite, and join our selves to one another by speech.
Without which, we, who now make rational assemblies, and Commonwealths, had
been only a rude, discomposed multitude, and Herd of-men. Nay, without Language
to express our selves, and to associate our selves to one another in
Discourse, every man had been thus like the first, that he had been alone, and
solitary in the world. For where commerce and intercourse, and exchange of
minds is denied, and where all that passes between us of men is that we are
Alter alteri spectaculum, only a dumb, speechl^sse show, and spectacle to one
another; meetings, and numerous Assemblies are but so many unpeopled
Wildernesses and deserts. And where all that we enjoy of one another company
is only the dull sight, and presence, every one of us may reckon himself
single in a full theatr^ and crowd.

As ^peech, then, was at first bestowed upon us that we might hold
conversation, and discourse with one another, so there was a Law imposed upon
us too, that we should not deceive one another by our ^ppeech. (...)
(...). It Is Aristotle's definition of speech, which has a piece of commutative
Justice i^ it. Words, says he, are the images of thoughts. That is, says the
Divine, they always ought, or should be so. The mind is thereby enabled to
walk forth of the Body, and to make visits to another separated, divided mind.
Our Souls, also, assisted by Speech, are able to meet, and converse, and hold
intercourse with other Souls. Nay, you must not wonder at the expression, if I
say, that as God at first conveyed our m^nds, and Souls into us by breathing
into us the breath of Life, so by Speech he has enabled us, as often as we
discourse, to breath them reciprocally back again into each other. For never
man yet spoke Truth to another, and heard that other speak Truth back again
to him, but for that time the saying of Minutius Felix was fulfilled, Crederes
duas esse animas in ^odem corpore, there were enterchangeably two ^ndes in one
Body.

But this (as I said before) is only when Truth is spoken. Otherwise, as the
Question was asked of fire, Igne quid utilius? What more useful gift did God
ever bestow upon us then Fire? And yet the same Poet tells us, that some have
employed it to burn Houses. So we may say of Words, Sermon quid utilius? What
more be^eficiall gift of nature did God ever bestow upon us then Speech? It Is
the thing which does outwardly distinguish us from Beasts, and which renders
us, like the Angels, (who discourse by the mere Acts and Revelation of their
wills) transparent and Crystal to one another. But then Speech mis-imployed,
and put to a deceitful use, may turn Crystal into Jet. And put into a Lie,
may raise a shade, and cloud of Discourse, and Obscurity there, where there
should be only a Transluccncy and clearenesse. In short, some men, like the
Fish which blacks the stream in which it swims, and casts an Ink from its
bowels to hide it self from being seen, make Words, which were ordained to
reveal their Though s, disguise them: And so like the Father of lies, deal
with their hearers, as ^e dealt with our first Parents, appear to them, not in
their own, but in a false, and borrowed Shape; And thereby make them embrace
an Imposture and Falsehood, in the figure, and Appearance of a Reality and Truth.

An offense so fit to be banished out of the World that after I have said, that
two thus talking, and deceitfully mingling Speech, are some thing more then
Absent to one another; After I have said, that the ly^ is injurious to things,
as well as persons; Which carry the same proportion to our mind:, as Colors
do to our eyes; And have a natural aptness in them to be understood as they
are, but are for that time not understood, because not rightly represented: I
must say too that there is injustice done to humane society. Since in every
untruth that is told, and believed, one man's Lie, becomes another man's Error,
whereby a piece of his natural Right is taken from him; which Right is by the
Casuists called Judicandi libertas. He is disabled to make a Right judgment
of what he hears. His belief betraies him: And the Speaker thus fallaciously
conversing with him, is not for that time, his companion, but his deceiver.

But when Religion shall be joined to a lie, and when a Falsehood shall be
attired, and clothed with Holiness; When they, whose profession it is to
convey Embassies, and Messages, and voices from Heaven, shall convey only
cheats, and delusions, and impostures from thence; though I cannot much blame
the credulity of the Simple, who suffer themselves to be thus religiously
abused, and like men who see Juglers, think their money best spent, where they
are best cosened; yet, certainly, the deceivers themselves do add this over
and above to the sin of Lying, that whereas others hold only the Truth of
things, these men hold the Truth of God in unrighteousn^sse.

And such it seems, were these Prophets here in the Text. Who the better to
comply with the Public s^nnes of their times, did put untruths, and falsehoods
to the same holy use, that others did sacred Inspirations, and Dreams.
Fictions, the bastard creatures of their own corrupt fancies, were delivered
as Prophecies infused into them from Heaven, and he who fained most, and could
lie with the most religious Art, was thought to have the greatest measure of
the Spirit. Prosperous successes were foretold to wicked undertakings, and the
Prophets dealt with the people, as some bold Almanac makers deal with us;
coined foul, or fair weather as they pleased to set the times, and then
referred it to casualty, and chance to come to pass*

And can I pass over this part of the Text, and not say that there have been
such Prophets among us in our times? Unless things should come about again,
that the devil should the second time get a Commission to become a lying
Spirit in the mouth of the Prophets, with a promise from the Almighty, that he
should prevail too, were it possible that so much cosenage should so long
pass, for so much Truth? Have we not seen the Prophet Micah's prophetical
curse fulfilled upon this Kingdom? It Is in his 2. Chap. at the 11. ver. where
he says, that if a man walking in the Spirit, and falsehood, do l^e, he shall
be the Prophet of this people. Certainly, my Brethren, when I consider how much
Romance, how much Gazette, how much Legend has for some years past for
Sermon; When I consider (even with tears in my eyes) the many false aspersions
stuck upon our defamed, wronged University, by some, who (even against the
light of their eyes as well as Consciences) have charged the Breasts that gave
them suck with infected poisoned milk; And have belyed their spotless Mother,
as if she were turned Strumpet; or as if 'twere grown a place from whence
piety, and gif^s and true Religion, have long since taken flight; a place
which needs Conversion, and which affords nothing but dangerous education; of
which crime, I confess, I know not whether ^he be guilty, unless it be for
bringing forth such abortive lying Sonn^s, who thus make it part of their
Religion to revile Her; when I farther consider, that they have not spared
Majesty it self, though clothed, and armed by God with all the sacred Guards
which should protect it from the venom of such disloyal, slanderous mouths;
when I yet farther consider the seeming sanctity of the persons that do this,
with what Holy passion, what inspired zeal, what composure of face, what
contention of voice, what earnest Rhetoric of hand, what Language of Saints,
they do this; Lastly, when I consider how many there are, who, driving a
gainful Trade in fictions, (fictions as strange as his, who wrote of Virgins
transformed to Bay-trees) use to lie as devoutly from such holy ground as this,
as others use to pray; And when withal I do observe that there is sprung up a
certain Sect of Hearers among us, who as zealously lend attention to ly^s, as
their Preachers utter them; I cannot but take the Philosophers liberty to my
self, and pronounce of such Congregations, as he did of Markets; that they are
places where people meet to deceive, and be deceived.

And as in Shops, and Markets, Religion is sometimes put to help out fa^lty
Ware, and the name of God is cited to make up measure and weight, and part of
the false light by which the Buyer is over-reacht, is the seeming sanctity of
the Seller: So it is here. A certain religious, holy, sacramental cozenage
passes between Preacher and People. And that they may the more solemnly be
cozened, these Prophets deal with their Fictions, as the Devil dealt with his
temptations, when he would have persuaded our Savior Christ to cast himself
down from a Pinnacle, cloth them with Scripture, saying, Thus it is written,
and, thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has not spoken; which brings me to
the third, and last a^use of their Profession, and Ministerial Function. Which
is to entitle God to their vanities, and lies. To which I shall only add
somebriefe Application of some things in this Sermon to our selves, and so
commend you to God.

Lucian, I remember in his (...). or false Prophet, tells us of 5. The Injury
offered to God.
a certain Mountebanke Cheater, who the more artificially to deceive the
People, did set up an Oracle of his own Fancying, and contrivance; in which he
was both the God, and Priest to the People who came to enquire. And, like the
Priests of those other true Oracles, which we read of, where the Sybill never
gave answers till she was first entranced, and felt a kind of sacred fury, and
possession within her self; so he, (as often as he pleased to delude the
People) had his sacred ragings, and trances too; and appeared to those who came
to consult with him, filled with a kind of holy fury, and possessed with the God
that spoke through him.

Me thinks, these Prophets here in this Text, were just such Juglers, who, in
preaching their own F^ncies for Gods dictates, did not only set up a false
Oracle, in which they were to the People, both the Deity, and the Priest; but
they divined ^ntruths to them, in the same holy, solemn, Prophetical form
and way, as others did truths. Lies had a kind of holy trance, and ecstasy,
and rapture put to them; and Falsehoods came from them in a kind of sacred
madness, and possession. As often as they had a mind to deceive the People,
they could presently raise to themselves their own inspirations; and as often
as a Plot, or Project was to be brought about, they could pres^ntly snatch
themselves up into the third Heaven; and could return from thence as full of
holy fiction, and imposture, as S^. Paul did of astonishment, and wonder. In
the delivery of which Fictions to the People, there was thus much holy cozenage
more added, that the Lips of the Reporters seemed for that time to be touched
with a Coal^ from the Altar; and God by the secret insi^ence and instinct of
his holy Spirit, was thought to be the kindler of that Coal.

An injury of that ( (...), shall I say? or rather) bold, presumptuous,
impudent nature, that when I have spoken of it the most gently I can, I must
say it is something more the^ the breach of the third Commandment. For there we
are only bid not to take Gods name in vain^; that is, not to mingle him with
our ordinary, rash, light, unpremeditated discourses, or not to forswear our
selves by him, or cite him to be a witness to our perjuries. But they who
speak falsely in his name, and vent their own sinister Plots for his
inspirations; they, who, when they should be the messengers of truth, and the
reprovers of sin, shall stand as the messengers of of falsehood, and
encouragers of public wrongs, between him, and the people; do not only take
his name in vain, and (as much as in them lies) draw a cheapnesse, and
contempt upon it; but do commit a sin worse then perjury, for that only calls
him to testify, and bear witness, but these men make him the Principal, and
first Author of a Lie: And so stick the reproach of a weak, impotent vice upon
him, common to none, but base, servile, perfideous natures, and slaves.

You may read in the old Testament, that the Priest of those times, among his
other Ornaments, wore two precious Stones in his Br^st-plate, called the Uri^
and Thummim. Through which, according as they did at times cast a bright, or
dimmer luster, God revealed his pleasure, or displeasure to the People; and
spoke to them by the sparkle of a Jewel, as he did at other times by the mouth
of a Prophet. You may read too, that after the Tabernacle was set up. God had a
Throne, or Mercy-seat placed for him, between the Wings of two Cherubims, which
veiled it; from whence at certain times he sent forth Oracles. Here then, let
me put this case to you.

Suppose the Priest, who wore the Breast Plate, should have belyed his Jewels,
and when the people came to enquire of him, should have interpreted a pale, for
a bright Ray to the people; or suppose, he should have taken out the true, and
have placed two false counterfeit Jewels in his Breast Plate; and should have
taught them, by a kind of secret conspiracy, not to sparkle by the certainty,
and holiness of their own impartial Fires, but according to the desires, and
Plot, and Stratagem of the Consulters; had not this been ^lainly to set up an
illegitimate Anti-urim, and Thummim, which should have cast a false, as the
other did a (...) luster? Nay, had not this been to make God, who used to
appear, and reveal himself in these Jewels, as he did to Moses in the Bush,
in a flame of Fire, to become like one of those erraticall, uncertain, wandering
night-fires, of which Aristotl^ speaks in his Meteors; Fires, which shine only
to lead Travelers out of the way?

Once more put the case, that the Priest should have usurped the Throne, and
Mercy-seat of God, and when the people came to enquire, should have placed
himself between the Cherubins, and should srom thence have uttered such false,
pleasing Oracles, as he knew would most suite, and comply with the humor, and
Interest of the Inquirers; Had not this been most insolently, to thrust
himself into the place of God, and for that time to depose him from his (...)
or holy Place, and to assume his business and peculiar Office to himself?
Nay, had not this been the way in time, to draw the same bad report upon him,
which once passed upon the Oracle at Delphos, Apud Apollinem ut mihi videtur,
mendacia e^untur, men paid for lies at Delphos, and sacrificed to Apollo to be
cozened and deceived?

That this was the sin of these Prophets here in the Text is evident from the
words of it, and from their coherence with the rest of the Chapter. Who, (as if
they had entered into the same secret compact with God, as they had with their
other Complotters of those times) made no other use of their profession, but
only to humor great men, and to make Sale and Gain of their Prophecies.
Enthusiasmes, and Visions, and Dreams, and Revelations, were uttered, as some
M^chanick men utter their Commo^ities, to him that would give most. The
Sanctuary, in plain terms, was made a place of Merchandise; only the VVare
was Spiritual. And the difference between Simon Magus's bargain with the
Apostles, and the Bargain here in the Text, was only this, that here both
parties consented; The one sinisterly bought, the other sinisterly sold the
holy Ghost.

An offense, my Brethren, so directly against the Truth, and ^eracity, and
Majesty of God, so near, (^if not outright) that never to be pardoned sin
against the holy Ghost, that I am sorry I must say, that all the d^fence that
can be made for it, is, that our (...) have brought forth prophets who have
taken the same course.

For now, as if the Scripture were in a perverse, preposterou^ sense the second
tim^ to be fulfilled, that the Foolish things of the world shall confound the
wise, and that lies, and fictions, and things that are not, shall bring to
naught Realities, and Truths, and things that are, he is not only thought to
be the holiest man, who can lie most in a holy Cause, but he thrives best, and
makes the best spiritual Markets, who most belyes God to his Glory. To what
unweighed, a^ry scruples, and vanities, is he entitled? How is his Scripture,
for want of learning to understand it aright, abused, and made the bellows to
blow a fire, fit rather to be quenched by the repentance, and tears of the
Incendiaries, and feeders of it? How many are there who daily urge text for
Bloodshed, and undertake to prove the slaughter of their Brethren; (I had
almost said of their lawful Prince and Sovereign too) warrantable by the
Word of God? What bold Libell, or Pamphlet has not for some years railed in
a holy style? And what Sermons have not been spiced with a a holy sedition?
Has it not (even to the ruin of one of the most flourishing Kingdoms of the
world) been made a piece of Religion to divide it against it self, and to
divorce a King from his People, and his people from their peace? Have not men
been taught that they cannot give God his due, if they give Caesar his? And
that the only way left to preserve in themselves, the grace and favor of the
one, is quite to deface and blot out the image and superscription of the other?
And have not the Teachers of these strange, unchristian Doctrines, delivered
them to the people in the holy style of Prophets? Have they not called a most
unnatural, civil War, the burden of the Lord? Have they not quite inverted
the injunction of the Apostle* and turning his affirmative into their negative,
have they not (directly contrary to his word) said, Thus says the Lord, honor
not the King?

My brethren, let me speak freely to you, as in the presence of God, who
knows that I hate the sin of these Prophets here in the Text, too much to
flatter. Or if I would be so irreligiously servile, you your selves know that
the present condition of things is at too low an ebb, for me or any man else
to hope to thrive by such a false Engine. If there be such a thing as a Waking
providence over the actions of men, (which, I confess, an unresolved man in
such irregular times as these might be tempted to question) or if there be
such a thing in nature as Truth, with a promise annexed to it by the God of
Truth, that first or last it shall prevail, unless by a timely, and
seasonable repentance of their abuse of the Name of God, and of their many bold
reproaches thrown upon his Anointed, they divert their punishment: Something,
me thinks, whispers to me, (I dare not be so confident of my own infallible
sanctity, as to call it the Spirit of God) but something whispers to me, and
bids me in the Prophet Ezechiels words in another place, Prophecy against
these Prophets; and say, E^ek. 13. 3. 22.
We to the foolish Prophets who have followed their own spirit, and have
seen nothing. Because with lies they have made the heart of the Righteous sad,
whom the Lord has not made sad; and have strengthened the hands of the wicked,
that he should not return from his evil way.

Or if this will not awake them, but that they will still be guilty of the
sin of these Prophets here in the Text, they must not take it ill, if, not I,
but the holy Ghost (which they so much ^oast of, and by whom they so
confidently pretend to speak) pass this sad sentence on them and their
complyers, by the mouth of two other Prophets. 1. As for their complyers (if
any such there have been) who have said to the Esaias 30. 10.
Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things, but
speak to us smooth things, Prophecy deceit; let them hear with trembling
what the Prophet Esaias says in his 30. Chapter at the 12. and 13. Verses.
Because (says he) ye despise my word, and trust in oppression, and
perverseness, and stay thereon; Therefore, thus says the holy one of Israel,
This iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a
high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, at an instant. The meaning of which
prophetical judgment will be easily understood of any, who shall
consideringly mark the beginning and progress of the Chapter to the context
where it is uttered and denounced.

Next, as for the Prophets themselves, who for poor, low, earthly interests,
and respects, have suffered themselves to be misled, let them with confusion
of face, hear what the Prophet Jeremy says in the 23 Chapter, at the 32.
verse. A place no less remarkable then the former. As for those, says he, who
do prophecy false dreams, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by
their lies, and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them;
behold, I am against them, says the Lord, and they shall not profit this
people at all, says the Lord God.

The conclusion then of this Sermon, shall be this. Fathers, and The conclusion.
brethren of this University: I presume it could not but seem strange to you,
to hear your Manners, and Religion, as well as Studies, and Learning not long
since publicly reproved, and preached against out of this Pulpit, by men, who
profess themselves, indeed, to be Prophets, but discovering to you so little,
as they did of the abilities of Prophets sons, could not but seem to you very
unfit Reformers, or instructers of this place. I presume also, that with a
serious grief of heart, you cannot but resent, that there should be thought
to be such a dearth, and scarcity of able, virtuous men among us, that the
Great Council of this Kingdom, in pity to our wants, should think it
needful to send us men better gifted, to teach us how to preach. What the
negligence, or sloth, or want of industry, in this place has been, which
should deserve this great exprobration of our Studies from them; or how one of
the most famous Springs of Learning, which of late Europe knew, should by the
mis-representation of any false reporting men among us, fall so low in the
esteem of that great Assembly, as to be thought to need a Tutor, I know not:
Nor will I here over-curiously enquire into the ungiftednesse of the persons,
who have drawn this reproof upon us, or say that some of us, perhaps might
have made better use of our time; ^d of the bounty of our Founders, then by
wrapping up our Talent in a Napkin, to draw the same reproach upon our
Colleges, which once passed upon Monasteries, which grew at length to be a
Proverb of Idleness. But that which I would say to you, is this: Solomon, in
one of his Proverbs, sends the sluggish man to the Spider, to learn diligence.
Take it not ill, I beseech you, if I send some of you (for this is a piece of
exhortation which does concern very few) who have been less industrious to
these vain, but active Prophets, which I have all this while preached against.
Mistake me not, I do not send you to them, to learn knowledge of them. For
you know it is a received axiom among most of them, that any unlearned,
unstudied man, assisted with the Spirit, and his English Bible, is sufficiently
gifted for a Preacher. Nor do I send you to them to be taught their bad Arts,
or that you should learn of them to dawbe the public sins of your times; or
comply with the insatiable, itching Ears of those whom St. Paul describes in
the fourth Chapter of his second Epistle to Timothy, at the third verse, where
he says, that the time should come, when men should not endure sound Doctrine,
but after their own lusts, should heap to themselves teachers. A prophecy,
which I wish were not too truly come to pass among us; where Studies and
learning, and all those other excellent helps, which tend to the right
understanding of the Scripture, and thereby to the preaching of sound Doctrine,
are thought so unnecessary by some Mechanicke, vulgar men, that no Teachers
suit with their sick, queasie Palats, who preach not that stuff, for which
all good Sch^llers deservedly count them mad: I do not, I say, send you to them
for any of these reasons. But certainly, something there is which you may
learn of them; which St. Paul himself commends to you, in the second verse of
the forementioned Chapter. If you desire to know what it is, it is an
unwearied, frequent, sedulous diligence of Preaching the Word of God, if need
be, as they do: In season, out of season, with reproof of sin, where ever you
find it, and with exhortation to goodness where ever you find it too; and
this to be done at all times, though not in all places. For certainly, as long
as there are Churches to be had, I cannot think the next heap of Tu^fes, or
the next pil^ of Stones, to be a very decent Pulpit; or the next Rabble of
People, who will find ears to such a Pulpit, to be a very seemly
Congregation. For let me tell you my brethren, that the power of these m^s
industries, never defatigated, has been so great, that I cannot think the
mild Conqueror (whose Captives we now are, and to whose praise, for his
civil usage of this afflicted University, I as the unworthiest member of it,
cannot but apply that Epithet) owes more to the Sword,, and courage of all his
other Soldiers, for the obtaining of this, o^ any other Garrison, then to the
Sweats, and active Tongues of these doubly armed Prophets; who have never
failed to hold a Sword in one hand, and a Bible in the other. There remain
then, but one way for us to take off the present reproach, and imputation
thrown upon us, Which is to confute all sly, sinister, clancular reports, and
to out-doe these active men hereafter in their own industrious way. To preach
Truth and Peace, and sound Doctrine to the People, with the same sedulity, and
care, as they preach Discord, Variance and Strife. If this course be taken, and
be with fidelity pursued, it will not only be in our power to dis-inchant the
People, (who of late (by what Spell, or Charm I know not) have unawares begun
to entertain a piece of Popery amongst them, and to think, ignorance the only
Mother of Devotion) But it will be no hard matter for us, (toward the
effecting of so charitable a work, as the undeceiving of so many well-minded,
but mis-guided Souls) to make our true Arts deal with their false, as the Rod
of Moses dealt with the Magicians Serpents, first, show them to be only so
much fantastical Form, and Air, then consume and eat them up, in the
presence of their Believers. To which (for a conclusion of all) I shall only
add this, That if this course be taken, and be reduced to practice, assisted
with those great advantages (which are to most of them unknown) of Study,
Learning, Tongues, the use of Libraries, and Books, besides those other helps
of opportunity, time, and leisure, to render our selves able, (which they too
immaturely engaged to a Family, or Fortune, cannot have) we shall not only
comply with the ends and intentions of those Founders, who built us Colleges:
(which they, certainly, intended should be Schools of virtue, not Nurseries of
sloth) but our despised Mother, the University, shall reap more honor by us,
our Country more service, and God more glory. To whom with his Son, and the
Holy Spirit of truth, be ascribed all honor and praise.

Amen.
FINIS.

