MOFFET-WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyricall description of the Mineral Wells,
at Moffet in Annandale of Scotland.

Translated, and much enlarged, by the Author MATTHEW MACKAILE,
Chyrurgo-Medicine.

As also, The OYLY-WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyricall description of the
Oyly-well, at St. Catharines Chapel in the Paroch of Libberton.

To these is subjoyned, A CHARACTER of Mr. Culpeper and his Writings; by the
same Author.

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Edinburgh, Printed for Robert
Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the
north-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRULY NOBLE, WILLIAM Earl of MORTON, Lord
Dalkeeth, one of the Members of His Majesty's Honorable Privy Council in
Scotland.
Right Honorable,
WHen I do usurp the memory of your Lordships most undeserved courtesy, in
admitting me into the number of your Lordships favorites, by appointing me to
attend the Sheriffdom of Orkney, as a public servant unto your Lordship and
the Gentlemen there; I am persuaded to believe, that since your Lordship has
condescended to own me in so considerable a manner already, I shall also be
patronized in publishing those following discourses, (although they contain
many fragile conceptions, and such things as will avert all popular Euges in
this age, wherein Mr. Culpeper has been, by the ignorant, more highly esteemed
than both Hypocrates and Galen) and be indempnified for demanding the same;
your Lordship being the fittest person upon whom I could pitch for patronizing
of them, (the first being a Translation and enlargement of the description of
Moffet Well, which I performed since I was dignified to do service to your
Lordship) but more especially, of a description of a Well, which was so highly
esteemed of by His Majesty, King James the sixth of blessed memory; and of a
reprehensory discourse, of most unchristian and treasonable expressions, which
were penned by Mr. Culpeper in the hour of darkness and rebellion: because
descended of the most ancient and noble Family of the Douglass, (which has
ever been most fertile of magnanimous souls, whose signal and singular loyalty
and courage, did evect them unto the highest pitch of honor, both at home and
abroad, throughout all ages, since ever they were known by that name; so that
Fame does glory in having that name listed in her Legend) and of your Lordships
most exact corresponding the most sincere loyalty of your immediate Ancestors;
at this time, when the demolished MONARCHY of Great Britain has been a
re-edifying. I will, in the next place, add this most cordial wish, that it
would please the Almighty to preserve your Lordship, in those your younger
years, and to prolong your days to the utmost extent of possibility; and that
all the Honor and noble Enduements of your Predecessors, being multiplied upon
your Lordship, your Fame may never know another season than a spring. In the
mean time, all that I beg, is your Lordships favorable acceptance of this poor
offering, from him who is most zealously ambitious, with all the circumstances
of gratitude and possible observances, to make good the Title of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and unfeigned servant, Matthew Mackaile.
Kirkwall, Apr. 22. 1664.
The Author, his APOLOGY For the TRANSLATION.
Courteous Reader,
THe multiplied regrates of some, and reiterated solicitations of others, who
were desirous to understand those mysteries of Art and Nature, which we had
wrapped up (as they conceived) in an inexplicable Idiom of a foreign Language
(because of the deficiency of Dictionaries, as to the vocables of Art) have
been the main, if not the only incitement which made us set about this
Translation; which w^ have not performed superstitiously, translating all the
Sentences thereof ad verbum; but so, as the meanest capacity might understand,
that which was (possibly) more obscurely expressed in the Original: such as is
that Sentence, Page 15. Menstruum Rhabarbaro assusum, etc. which a young
Gentleman (being employed by a Chyrurgian, equally versed in all Languages
excepting his vernacular, to translate the Original into English) who was newly
dignified to be a Master of Arts, translated thus, When Rubarbe touches a
woman's courses. Moreover, we have in several places made additions, which were
furnished by our (...), the Architect in rearing this new pile upon the old
foundation. It being an opinion long ago proseminated amongst the Vulgars, That
Translations present the life of their Text at as great a disadvantage of
dissimilitude, as the backside of Hangings exhibit the story inter-woven, (as
I remember Dr. Carleton says in his Epistle prefixed to his Translation of the
Magnetic cure of Wounds) we are confident, that the too accute severity of
some, who have not been hitherto deficient to infest the tender buds of our
former intentions and actions for the bettering of others, with the virulent
blasts of detraction (which proceed from the most corrosive Zone of envy) will
afford no better entertainment unto these slender adumbrations, then it did
unto their first draughts with Roman Oil. But having attained unto a firm
resolution of undervaluing the censures of such malevolent Critics, we have
been much allicited to communicate this Translation, (sending it forth -- in
dias luminis auras) by some, whose innate candor did not only afford, unto the
Original, such approbation as did obstetricat it into the world; but also did
nutricat it with sincere acceptance. This Infant therefore having attained
unto more years and a bigger stature, we have given it a new suit of ordinary
Scottish Livery, that it might not (being in a better equipage) decline the
doing of service to the meanest of our Countrymen who should require the same:
and this is the unfeigned desire of,

Thy Servant, M. M.

To his worthy and much honored friend Patrick Hepburn, the most skillful
Apothecary, at Edinburgh.
Worthy Sir,
THe first seeds of Spagyrical Pharmacie, being sown by you into the field of
my understanding, I do most humbly consecrate unto you (who have been
practicing Chemistry these sixty years) these their first fruits (which are
most justly yours) as a perpetual testimony of my due gratitude and observance;
desiring most earnestly, that you would cheerfully accept this little offering,
and permit your reverend Name to be thus inserted at it is beginning; that, as
an Amulet, it may banish envy, and aprase malice. In the mean time, I shall
pray, that the Almighty would be pleased to prolong your life for the good of
your Relations, and of His own people; and that at length, when you shall be
full of days, He would crown you with glory and immortality. Farewell.

Your most observant friend and servant, Matthew Mackaile.
Edinburgh, Feb. 4. 1659.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
Seeing these delectable things which follow, were learned only from the
operations of art and nature, I have permitted them to take their flight from
the dungeon of silence, into the luminous air of public view; that (if it be
possible) they may prove profitable unto others; at least, that they may excite
such as are more experimented in this art, to essay an inquiry into the natures
of the rest of the mineral Wells, with which our Country is abundantly
furnished, and much adorned; they giving no small ground to suspect, that the
earth is replenished with variety of minerals. And seeing the earnest desire I
have after promoving the knowledge of truth, and the good of others, did
obstetricat these first labors into the world, I do earnestly entreat for a
cheerful acceptance of them, and that you would swadle them in a favorable
construction, and not expose them to the brumal sharpness of mockery or
detraction: For they contain the rudiments of that nature-imitating-art Chymie,
being only taken from the resolutory part, which is subservient to medicine;
and make no mention of the Transmutation of Metals, Potable Gold, and the
Philosophers Stone, etc. Concerning which many things which are false,
ridiculous and inconsistent with reason, have been spoken by some, and with
which others did, and yet do, egregiously deceive the world: For which some
have been deservedly forced to finish their days upon Gibbets. And this is the
reason for which, Artists are by some called d^ceivers, and by others fools; as
appears in Florentius Schoonhovious his Emblem concerning Chemists, (to which
he subjoyneth this verse; Dum certis incerta sequor, rem prodigus omnem
Converti in fumos and miseros cincres.
That is, Whilst that by things most sure, such as uncertain are
I seek, by smoke and ashes I Am deceived far)


And in its commentary in these words, Alchymie, that amiable madness (whose
sure companion is poverty and labor in vain) familiar to the curious, its
vanity does hence appear, even in promising such things as nature can neither
suffer nor attain unto, whilst it labors to over-turn the natures of things,
by making a Philosophers Stone (as they call it) which will forth with change
all bodies into Gold or Silver, at their touching it. -- The miserable
Alcumist, who has spent all his days in trying of experiments, when all that
he had is spent, and converted into smoke and ashes, in his old age he becomes
raged, covetous, always favoring of Sulphur, and Paralytick, through his
continual handling of Mercury, getting nothing but painful and sorrowful
sighs; because his labors has produced nothing but error, loss and shame.
But I hope, that it shall afterward clearly appear to all ( Momus and Zoilus
only excepted) how wrongously these things are asserted concerning all
Alcumists. Lastly, seeing we do not profess our selves to live without the
confines of humane fallibility, we do humbly entreat all such, as know any
things of greater worth, and more consonant to truth, than what we have set
down hereafter (for, two eyes or more, will see better then one) that they would
upon the same account, communicate them unto others. If thus our labors shall
work upon such, we shall (possibly) be thereby excited to set about some other
task, no less profitable to others. For we believe, that all good endeavors
are praiseworthy, although their events be uncertain. Farewell.

Mome favere decet, prodesse volentibus: ergo
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
That is, Mome it does become thee well,
To favor such as would do well:
Then either give to others yours,
Or cease to carp and censure ours.
Ad Lectores. Omnibus haec animae conamina prima modestae.
Grata superveniant, quos nova scire juvat.
That is. I. W. These first essays which the modest mind has offert.
Accepted be, by such as novels covet.


To his most accomplished Friend and worthy Comrade, Mr. Matthew Mackaile, upon
his elaborat description of the Moffet and St. Catharines Wells.
INgenious soul, who will not admire thy skill?
Who thus anatomisest with a quill,
Dame natures hidden cabin, and displayes
Treasures, beyond the conquest of the bays.
Such sovereign wealth, as miracles performs;
Restoring death to life, and calming storms,
Raised by intemperance: Thy waterbrooks
Refresh the panting heart and fainting looks
Of anxious valetudinaries, thou
Constrain'st the Peasant rude to make a vow.
And from earths hidden cavern, then do bring
Him health and strength to pay his vow and sing.
Thy Lynx-cy'd intellect receives no stop
From intermedes; but thou, that well stor'd-shop.
Survey can in a minut; and from thence,
Bring sovereign Antidotes with small expense:
And from things despicable, like the Be,
Sweet remedies prepare; strange industry!
And yet more strange the bounty of thine hand,
To straw such treasures up and down our land;
And in such form, that every vulgar Eye,
From hence may learn profound Philosophy:
Whereas their sole Monopoly were able,
To bring thee fame and wealth inestimable.
What inspiration moved thee to make
Poor mortals of their Makers skill partake?
Is It not enough that they His footstool tread?
But must they also know how He it made?
Sure, providence reserved has these displayes,
To give them life in these our halcyon days;
And has designed thee likewise to be
Her message-bearer to posterity.
O may thy virtuous soul receive the fruit!
Of those the labors, and of thy wit acute!
And may each barking Momus blush to see
The luster of thy ingenuity,
That so thy nimble Pen may never sall,
Till myriads of pens thy loss bewail.
In amoris testimonium sic conatus est. I. A.

THE PREFACE.
THat the following description of Moffet-wells may be the better understood,
we thought it necessary to premise some things concerning the elements of
Chymie.

1. There are six simple (though Physically, of the four elements composed)
bodies, whereof every Animal, Vegetable and Mineral body is composed, and into
which they are resolved, by destillation and calcination; and they are these.
1. Earth. 2. Phlegm, or the insipide Liquor. 3. Mercury, or the acide Spirit.
4. Sulphur, or the combustible Liquor. 5. Volatile-salt, which cannot endure
the fire, but flies from it. 6. Fixed-salt, which resists the strongest of
Vulcan's fury (his vitrifying heat only excepted) without any damage. The last
four only are called Elements (by way of excellency above the rest) because
they only are endued with medicinal virtues.

2. The foresaid bodies are called simple; because they connot be resolved into
heterogeneal parts, by destillation, without the adding of a heterogeneal body.

3. Mercury, Sulphur, Salt-volatile and Fixed-salt, are called the elements of
all the foresaid Bodies, because they are composed of them; but not because all
of them can be extracted out of any body, and made obvious to the senses: for,
there can but a little Volatile-salt be extracted out of some things, and very
little Fixed-salt out of others. In the Original we asserted, that there can no
Volatile-salt be extracted out of man's Blood: but having since attained a more
exact manner of destilling the blood of Animals, and separated some
Volatile-salt (which attacheth it self to the sides of the recipient, like
Spiders webs) from them, we do retract that assertion; having in the Epistle to
the Reader professed, that we did not live, without the confines of humane
fallibility. But it is ordinarily, in greater abundance, extracted out of the
horns, feathers, etc. of living Creatures. Likewise, there can be but very
little Fixed-salt extracted out of these, unless they be taken in great
quantities, and put to a trial: for, where the Volatile-salt does abound, there
is little of the Fixed-salt, and contrariwise.

4. The Earth (which they call the dead head) is, as it were, the subject of
the foresaid Elements, and is of no use or virtue, when the Elements are
separated from it.

5. Phlegm is only the carrier of nourishment to the Elements. As for example,
water is only the carrier of that aliment, which Vegetables and Minerals do
suck out of the Earth for their nutrition; and it is the carrier also of that
nourishment, which living Creatures do extract out of the parts of Vegetables
and Minerals, as the Phlegm of Wine is, only the carrier (or chariot) of those
active Spirits, which do exhilerate the heart of man.

6. It is not only certain, from the Chemical resolution of bodies, that the
forementioned Elements have a real existence in nature, but it is also
naturally known to all Cooks; for in their dressing of Meats, they labor to
supply the penury of Sulphur, Mercury and Salt, by adding Butter, Vinegar and
Common-salt, in making of Sauces.

7. In the resolution of any natural Body (that is in a natural estate) by
destilling, the Phlegm exstilleth first; 2. the Mercury; 3. Sulphur; 4.
Salt-volatile; and, 5. the Fixed-salt remains in the earthly part, from which
it is to be extracted by calcination, solution, filtration and coagulation.
Neither does this falsify what has been said, that in the destilling of
fermented Wine (that is, which has stood one, two, or more days, after i'ts
being pressed out of the Grapes) the sulphurous Spirit exstilleth before the
rest: for this comes to pass, because the sulphurous Spirit (which is
Volatile of it self) is separated from the rest of the Elements by
fermentation, and is in an unnatural estate. Neither does any more of this
Spirit exstill, then is separated from the Salt, etc. by fermentation. And in
the destilling of new Wine, the sulphurous Spirit begins to exstill, before
that the Phlegm is altogether separated; because of the sudden fermentation
of the Wine, which causes the sulphurous and volatile spirit reject that bond
and tie, under which it was formerly: For all bodies, when they are in their
natural condition, are always resolved by art, after one and the same manner:
that is to say, their elements are still separated in the same order. So that
it is probable, that in the destilling of not-fermented Wine, the Vinegar or
mercurial-part (which is the true spirit of the Wine: For spirit is first, and
most properly, attributed to Mercury, and in the next place only to Sulphur)
would exstill before the sulphurous spirit, if the fermentation of Wine could
be impeded whilst it is a destilling.

You would here take notice of the reason, why the simple spirit of Wine, does
pass sooner and more facilely through the stomach, and occasion less unpleasant
eructations from it, than when it is impregnat with the sulphurous spirits of
Cinnamon, or other Spices. We conceive that this comes to pass, because the
spirit of Wine is a most homogencal body, which debateth less with the natural
heat and flatulent vapors, which are contained in the slomach, than when it is
associat to the sulphurous spirits of Spices: for the more sorts there be of
them, there is the greater confusion and debate amongst them, and betwixt them
and the forementioned flatulent vapors, when they begin to be altered and
concocted by the natural heat; and therefore the eructations occasioned by this
strife, cannot but be more frequent and noysom to the pallat, than such as
proceed from a less confused and violent debate.

8. The Mercury, or acide Spirit, is the ferment of the forementioned bodies.

9. Ferment in general, is either natural or artificial; and each of these, is
either simple or composed.

1. The natural and simple ferment, is the proper mercury of any simple body
(as of Wine, Milk, etc.) which being incited by external heat, does produce a
swelling of the body (whose it is) and a separation of its heterogeneal parts
or elements, as the mercury or vinegar of Wine causes it to swell, and
produces a separation of the sulphur from itself, as also of the salt
(contained in the tartar, which does attach it self to the sides of the vessel)
from both.

2. The natural and composed ferment, is made up of the praper mercuries of
several simple bodies (as of Cinnamon, Opium, etc. whereof Treacle is composed)
and produces a swelling of it, and a conjunction of the several elements and
qualities (of the many different bodies) as it were, into one new nature; and
that by fermentation, concerning which you shall have more hereafter.

Here you may observe, that a simple body, which has been fermented, by its
simple and proper mercury, may be thus also, as it were, fermented. As, well
fermented Wine, being put into a glass (hermetically sealed, or well stopped
with a Cork) and exposed to the Sun his beams, in the Canicular-dayes, its
mercury or fixed spirit, will alter the sulphurous and volatile spirit, and
change it into its proper nature, by fixing it; and the sulphurous and
volatile spirit, will in some measure volatilise the fixed spirit: for Vinegar
thus prepared, is the best and strongest. And hence it appears, that the
spirit which does first exstill, in the abstraction of such Vinegar from
Metals, which have been dissolved by it (and which is commonly called the
burning spirit of the metal, and by Angelus Sala in his seventh Aphorism of
the first Sect, a part of the Vinegar converted into a burning spirit, like to
the spirit of Wine, and the very spirit of Vinegar) is not so much the spirit
of Vinegar, as either a part of the sulphurous and volatile spirit of the
Wine, which revivifieth, as it were, by defermentation (if we may thus speak)
for it was fixed by the fixed spirit of Vinegar, and is now for saken, when it
begins to operat upon the metal which it dissolveth; or that part of the
sulphurous spirit, which the mercurial had not fixed completely. The verity of
this is proven by another operation like unto it, viz. in the destilling of the
Butter of Antimony out of equal parts of Antimony: and
Corrosive-sublimed-Mercury, the salinous spirit of the sublimat, which had
before corroded, and united to themselves the Mercury, when they are commoved
by a new heat, they begin to corrod the Antimony, and do forsake the Mercury,
which they did formerly corrod: for when the fire is augmented, the revivified
Mercury exstilleth toward the end of the destillation. Yea, the Butter of
Antimony, is nothing else but the salts of the sublimat, by corrosion impregnat
with the Reguleal part of Antimony. For we did convert the Emetick powder
(which is made of the Butter of Antimony) into the Regulus of Antimony; and in
this operation we perceived no sign of the revivifying of any parts of the
Mercury, although it was done by the great violence of fire.

3. The artificial and simple ferment, is the proper and natural ferment of any
simple body, which produces a fermentation, in any simple or composed body, to
which it is artificially applied. As when the juice of a Lemmon, Wine, or the
proper Mercury of the stomach of a beast do produce the fermentation of Milk.

4. The artificial and composed ferment, is a ferment made of many others, as
the common Earning (which is made of the stomach of a beast, etc.) by which
Milk is ordinarily fermented, or curded.

Here observe, 1. that the natural ferment does sometimes produce a more exact
fermentation, than the artificial. As when the natural ferment of Milk does
produce a more exact separation of the sulphur from the rest (when it causes
it pass to the superior part in the Cream, although that separation must be
afterward perfected by motion, in reducing it to Butter) than the artificial
ferment, whether simple (as the juice of a Lemmon) or composed (as the common
Earning or Runnet) which do not so exactly separat the Butter from the earthy
part, etc. of which the Cheese is composed. for both the Cheese and the Whey
are most capable of further fermentation, whereby their heterogeneal parts will
be exactly separated from each other. 2. It is the Mercury, which is excited by
external heat, that produces the fermentation of a body, as does appear in
Milk, which being sufficiently fermented (that is, whose sulphur, etc. are
sufficiently separated from each other) contracteth a sharp and mercurial taste
which is gradually augmented, according to the different hours and days of its
fermentation, as is known to every Rustic, that makes Butter. Likewise Ale
(which is sweet before that it be fermented) does contract the very like taste
(which does reside into the Mercury, excited by external heat, and permeating
all the liquor, and fixing some of the sulphurous parts; for a great external
cold will impede the fermentation or working of Ale) when it is fermented. To
these you may add, that the Bilious humor contained in the body of a living
creature, is in two respects, as it were, a ferment. 1. In respect of the
Chyle, it is a natural and simple ferment (for it is generated of the natural
and proper ferments of meat and drink) which produces a separation of it self
from the blood, Melancholic humor and Phlegm, and of these from each other,
by fermentation. And in this resolution of Chyle, Blood answers to Sulphur,
Choler or the bilious humor to Mercury, Urine (though impregnat with some
Volatile and Fixed-salts) to Phlegm, and Melancholy to the Fixed-salt
contained in the earthy part. 2. In respect of the whole body: for it is
commonly (yet deservedly) called a natural Clyster, which does irritat the
expultrix faculty of the Intestines (into which it daily sloweth, out of its
natural receptacle, the Gall) for the purging forth, and separation of, the
excrements.

From the premises, you may collect the manner how some purgatives do open the
belly. For when purgatives are put into the stomach (as into a Retort which
has a stroup arising from its upper part, serving for the re-affusion of that
liquor, which did once exstill by the other, that it may be re-destilled: For
the Wezand or Oesophage answers to that stroup in the Retort) they are
altered by its heat, and by the heat of the circum-jacent parts, and their
proper Mercuries, which do exstill by the nether orifice of the stomach, called
the Pylorus which answers to the common stroup of the Retort) do produce a
commotion and fermentation of the humors in the Intestines, and thereafter (in
the progress of this destillation-like operation) the Sulphur and Volatile-salt
being commoved and exstilled, they do (by a certain occult quality, which is
only known to God the Creator, and to which the creatures of this
Allknowing-God must have their recourse, seeing that we know only in part)
excite and irritat the expultrix faculty to expel; and when the strength of
the purging Medicine, is proportionat to the strength of the body, the bad
humors only (which are onerous and most hurtful to nature) are purged forth.
For then nature retains the good and useful humors, although they be
commoved with the rest. But if the Medicine be in its strength disproportionat
to the constitution and strength of the body, then the good, as well as the
bad, are promiscuously purged forth, and that painfully: Because that such
things only as should, are not excerned, as said Hippoc. lib. 1. Aphor. 2. I
said, 1. that the occult quality of the Sulphur and Volatile-salt, did irritate
the expultrix faculty: the first Liquor only wherein Rubarb has been infused,
does purge by irritating the expultrix faculty; because the Sulphur and
Volatile-salt are dissolved in it. 2. That this irritation of the expultrix
faculty, ought to be ascribed unto an occult quality (seeing the Sulphur and
Volatile-salt of Lamer, are neither purgative nor vomitive) because the Sulphur
and Volatile-salt of Rubarb are simple Bodies, which cannot be (by Art)
resolved into heterogeneal parts, that the causes of these effects which they
produce, might be known.

But when a Medicine made of Antimony, or suchlike, is exhibited, vomiting
proceeds purging by stool; because the abounding humors in the Stomach, which
are volatile, (not that they contain Volatile-salt, but only because bilious
for the most part, which do occasion a nauseating, by their spontaneous tending
upwards, as a bird in flying) are suddenly commoved by the Sulphur, etc. of the
Antimony, etc. And not finding, a facile egress by the nether Orifice, they
are, by nature, forced upwards.

I shall add this assertion to what has been said, and endeavor to render
it is verity indubitable.

The knowledge of fermentation is the great key of Nature, which the Former of
all things, has put into the hands of man, for the unlocking of her secret
Cabins, that he might the more clearly behold her greatest mysteries.

The truth of this will become unquestionable, if you will but consider, 1.
that thereby he is greatly enabled, to resolve the Bodies of Animals and
Vegetables: for such are best resolved, when fermentation is premitted, As when
fermented Barley affoardeth a most subtle, active, and ardent sulphurous
Spirit, which it would exhibit under a grosser and oleaginous form, if it
should be destilled, without a previous fermentation. And Milk is better
resolved into Wig, (which, by destillation, may be converted into an insipid
Water and a Mercurial Spirit) Butter and Curds by fermentation in a Churn, then
into unpleasant water, etc. by destillation: because of the empyreuma
accompanying them:

2. The knowledge of fermentation discovers the reason, why all meats,
(whether they be made of Animals or Vegetables) which are fermented, are more
easily digested and do nourish better, than such as are not fermented. As for
example, fermented Bread ( i. e. soured) is more castly digested and yields
better nourishment, than any other does; because it is sulphurous part is
subtilized and loosed by fermentation, which makes it to be the more easily
and quickly separated from the Bread, whilst it is a concocting in the
Stomach. And (for the same reason) the fleshes of all sorts of Animals are
fittest for being eaten, the second or third day after their mactation, as the
practice of all does prove. Moreover, do we not delay the drinking of Wine,
Sider, Ale, Beer, etc. until they be fermented? for then they do nourish most,
and are of a most facile digestion, because their alimentary parts (especially
the Sulphur) are, by fermentation, loosed from the terrestrial and gross
subject, wherein they did formerly reside, and are subtilized and evected to a
more subtle and spirituous consistence, which rendereth them more pliable to
the operation of the natural heat; and are not these subtilized alimentary
parts, the thing which does inebriat a weak Brain, for a little time held over
the Vessel wherein Wine, or Ale, etc. are fermenting. It is, certainly,
undeniable; because, if Wine or Ale were put into a Still (artificially
adjusted) when the fermentation begins to appear, you should (without the
assistance of Vulcan) at the end, find some of those subtle Spirits condensed
into an ardent Liquor in the receiver.

In the Medico-Philosophical discourses of Dr. Thomas Wills, (a Physician at
Oxford, the perfection of whose Learning, my quill is not able to describe) you
will find many things concerning fermentation which were never heard of before,
and which are (for the most part) consonant to what is here; all which were but
lately published in Latin and came to our hands, two months after these, and
what follows, were written. And in them is the nature of fermentation more
exactly described then ever.

10. The differences of Colors do proceed from the different degrees of the
concoction of the Sulphur; as the colors of Red-roses, Gillofers, Violets,
etc. do (without doubt) proceed from th Sulphur which is concocted, until it
contract a red, blew, or the like color, whereof it was destitute, when
impregnat only with viridity in the juyces which nourished the Flowers. For,
when the Salt of a Vegetable, containing perfectly concocted Sulphur, (as of
Wormwood, Fincle, the Vine, etc.) is mixed with the tinctures of those
Flowers, they do presently contract a green color; because the Salt produces
an indigestion and recrudescence of the Sulphur. For, the first color of any
Vegetable is green, which proceeds from the crudity and imperfect digestion
of the Sulphur, which becomes red or blew, etc. when it is further concocted
by nature, as it happens in the forementioned Flowers, and in the leaves of
many Vegetables, as of Trees, etc. which become yellow, etc. when they attain
unto maturity. I said, 1. The salt of a Vegetable; because no Minerall-salt (as
Nitre, Amoniack, etc.) does render the Vegetable Sulphur indigested. 2. The
Salt of a Vegetable, which contains perfectly concocted Sulphur; because the
Salt of Scurvy Grass (which is a Vegetable, not containing perfectly concocted
Sulphur) or such like, do not render the foresaid Sulphur indigested. You may
observe by the way, that the Spirits of Nitre, Common-salt, Vitriol and
Brimstone, do perfect the foresaid tinctures which were made green, by
re-investing them with their former colors; although the same Spirit of
Brimstone, ascending from it in smoke, when it is inflamed (for the foresaid
Spirit of Brimstone is nothing else, but the smoke which ascends from
inflamed Brimstone, and is afterward condensed into a Liquor, as you shall
hear) does albisie a recent Red-Rose; and the Oil of Tartar will invest it with
greenness, if it be a little broken and infused in the Oil. We acknowledge,
that we have never, as yet, attained to the knowledge of the causes of these
rare and wonderful effects; especially seeing we are of opinion, that the
forementioned Liquors and all Salts are not hot, but cold, as shall appear
hereafter.

We said before, That the differences of Colors do proceed from the different
degrees of the concoction of the Sulphur; or from the alterations produced in
the Sulphur, by the actions of corrosive bodies: the truth of which assertion
we will further essay to demonstrat, by showing (according to our own opinion)
the manner how Blood, the different sorts of Bile and Melancholy, do acquire
their different colors.

It is vulgarly asserted by Physicians, that excrementitious Bile is of four
kinds, viz. 1. Bilis Vitellina, which is general of yellow Bile. 2. Porracea,
which takes it is original from the Vitelline. 3. Aeruginosa, proceeding from
the Porraceous. 4. Glastea, which owes it is original to the Aeruginous; all
which they affirm, Majori semper adustione generari, and plures caloris gradus
acquirere. And concerning Melancholy they write thus; Dum Melancholia
excrementitia praeter naturam se habet, atra Bilis apellatur, quae
ferventissima est, and acerrima; and ex Melancholia naturali, Bile flava,
sanguine, v^l pituita salsa generatur.

We humbly decline the giving of our assent unto those opinions, though
generally received by the ablest of Physicians; and will in the like manner
offer our own, to which we will premit these two assertions: 1. Salt, and all
bodies wherein it does predomine, are cold and moist; as will afterward be
proven by several arguments. 2. Every Liquor is salt, acide or sharp (i. e.
acris) because of the admistion of Salt:


These things being premised, we are of opinion, that Blood contains Sulphur,
Salt, Spirit, etc. but more Spirit and Salt, or Salinous Spirit than Sulphur,
when the Chyle is first converted into blood in the second concoction, because
this Salinous Spirit is to serve for other uses, than the alimenting of any
part: for, in the second concoction, it is the chief agent in producing the red
color of Blood, by it is action upon the Sulphur of the Chyle. Moreover,
another part of it, by operating after another manner upon some other part of
the Sulphur, produces the yellow color in Bile; which being generat, is sent
to the Gall, that it is gradual emanation from thence, may (like a natural
Clyster) irritat the expultrix faculty of the Intestines. Lastly, another
portion of it, by altering a third portion of the Sulphur, produces the
blackish color in the Melancholic humor, which Nature makes retire to the
Splen, that by it is crasser parts, it may aliment the Parenchymatous substance
thereof; and by it is more subtle and penetrating parts, it may promove the
digestion of the Stomach, etc.

The truth of these things will easily appear, to any who will be at the pains
to observe the destillation of Honey, and the gradual alterations of the
colors in the Liquors exstilling; to which operation of Art, this of Nature (
viz. the generation of Blood, Bile and Melancholy) may be well compared,
because of the great resemblance which is betwixt them.

Moreover, none will question the truth of our former assertion, if they will
but consider, that as of the juice of Celledon (which is of the color of Bilis
vitellina) the green leaves of it are made, when it is further concocted by
nature, and thereby it is Sulphur does suffer a new alteration, by the action of
it is acide spirit upon it, whereby the Vitelline (or yellow) color in the
juice, is converted into a green in the leaves. Likewise, the Mercurial, Acide
and fermentative part of Bilis slava, by producing a new alteration upon the
Sulphur, it deposes it is first yellow color, and acquireth a Vitelline, which
is a darker yellow. As also, the green juice of a Leek is generat of the white
juice contained in it is root, then it is greener leaves, inclining to an
Aeruginous color, likewise it is whitish Flowers; So is the Porraceous Bile
generat of the Vitelline, the Aeruginous of the Porraceous, the Glasteous of
the Aeruginous, and the black or Atra Bilis of the Glasteous, and that without
any adustion: For, wood which is a little burned, becomes black Char-coal, and
when it is fully burnt, it is converted into white ashes. Should he not
deservedly be termed the most ridiculous of Naturalists, who would affirm, that
the redish color of Copper and yellow color of Brass, are, by adustion,
converted into a green color? when they contract their green rust (which is
commonly called Aerugo) by reason of the action of Vinegar upon them. Likewise,
that the brounish color of the tincture of Nut-galls, is, by adustion,
converted into a black color, when Vitriol is mixed with it in making of Ink.
This is so well known to Dyers, who (not by ustion, but (by the admistion of
Salinous Bodies, which do so operate upon the Sulphurs of others, that they
change them from one color into another, and so communicate diverse colors unto
one and the same Cloth; that if any of them did understand the actions of
acide Spirits upon sulphurous Bodies, they would affirm that opinion,
concerning the transmutation of colors by ustion, to be cachinno dignam.

Here we cannot but mention two considerable things, and offer our opinion
concerning their causes. The one is concerning some Vegetables in general, and
the other concerning the Hous-leek in particular.

As to the first, it is vulgarly known, that there are many Vegetables, (as the
Housleek, Ivy, etc.) whose leaves do not fade or wither in the Harvest or
Winter, but do remain as green and succulent then, as they were in the Summer.
We conceive the cause of this perennal viridity is twofold. 1. The imperfect
concoction of their Sulphur, which (as you read a little before) perpetually
accompanies viridity in Vegetables, and is not capable of evaporation (as is
the Sulphur of other Vegetables when they come to maturity; that is, when their
seeds are ripe) so long as the Vegetative life is not extinguished; because of
it is more strict union with their salts, which do detain it, and so prohibiteth
it is avolation. 2. The salt of those Herbs, being more nitrous than the salt of
other Herbs, it is more firmly united to the Sulphur, (which in such, is still
more resinous, as in the Fir Tree, etc.) and therefore does more strongly
detain, not only the Sulphur, but also the aqueous humidity from evaporating.

As to the second, it is well known, that the Hous-leek, being suspended in the
air with it is roots, does not at first wither, as Wormwood, etc. but accress to
a greater bigness, shooting forth new leaves and a stem. Before we offer our
opinion concerning the reason of this, we will first acknowledge, that this
accretion is not a proper growth, (as when the roots received aliment from the
earth) because, as one or two leaves do pullulat from the top, as many at the
root fade and become dry. These leaves therefore which do germinat from it is
center, do not spring forth because of any nourishment which the root does
receive from the ambient air; but, because the juice of the root and former
leaves does ^ede into new leaves and a stem: for they do wither more then if
they had been separated from one another, and dried apart. But in progress of
time, all the Herb fades and cease to germinat any more, by reason of the
total exhalation of the vegetative Spirits and their aliment, by insensible
transpiration. For the same reasons, the Onion, being preserved in a convenient
place all the Winter, fades but little, and being suspended in the air, in the
Spring it shoots forth new leaves, which are alimented by the remainders of
the subtle Sulphur and Volatile-salt, which has not been exhausted by
evaporation.

From what has been said, it appears impossible to make the magisterial
Powders of all Vegetables, according to Dr. John Zuelfer (who did lately reform
the Augustan Dispensatory by his Animadversions thereupon) his Prescript, in
these words, contained in his Animadversions upon the composed and simple
Balsams. Take (says he) of the leaves of Rue or Red-Roses, most richly endued
with their native colors, as much as you please; and boil them in water,
adding a sufficient quantity of the Oil of Tartar: Add to the strained
decoction water impregnat with Allom, and a thick matter like Pulse will
precipitat or fall to the bottom; and if the Herb was green, it will be green,
and if red, it will be red, as in Roses and such like Flowers: because the Oil
of Tartar is the salt of the Vine converted into an Oil by deliquation: neither
does the dissolved Allom reduce the green tincture unto redness.

These are the things which we thought expedient to premise; and concerning
which we must acknowledge, that there were but some of them at first intended,
and the others occurring unto us as consequences from the rest, or worthy the
inserting, have made this Preface of a bigness disproportionat to the following
Book (...) Concerning which, some rigid Momus will possibly say, as Diogenes
Laertius de vita Philosophi, lib. 6. affirms the Cynick Diogenes to have
said, when he came to the City Myndus, and saw a little City and magnificent
Ports, viz. Viri Myndii, Portas claudite, ne Urbs vestra egrediatur (...) You
Myndians, shut your gates, lest your Town run out by them. I answer, that it is
sometimes most expedient, that it be so in some rustic Buildings (such as this
is) especially where there are much Corns and Hay to be carried home upon
great Wagons; And therefore I do entreat the courteous Reader, not to censure
me too much, seeing I have been necessitated to take in considerable store ou^
of all the three Families of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals: And in
confidence thereof, I will now set about the describing of the Wells.

MOFFET WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyricall description of the Mineral Wells
at Moffet, in Annandale of Scotland.
WE thought it fitting to present you first with a Topographical delineation of
the Wells, and to declare the manner of their becoming not our unto men; and
then to subjoyn the Spagyricall description of them.

Six years ago, a valetudenary Rustic (as I was credibly informed) who was
accustomed to make an anniversary it neration to the Wells at Bramtton, as he
was traveling through Annandale, he felt a smell like to that of Brampton
wells, which made him walk contrary to the wind, following the smell brought
thereby; and then, upon the top of a little Rock (which nature has situated
north-wards, and at the distance of one mile from Moffet) which was covered
with mire and clay, he discovered two little Spring-wells, the nether and
biggest whereof, is distant from the steep Rock (by whose side runs a little
Burn, into which the Water descends) about two or three foot, and the upper
about six or seven. When experience had induced him to believe, that these
Waters, were, in their qualities and operations, most like unto the Waters of
Brampton, he recommended them to his friends and acquaintance, asserting that
they were enriched with the like and many other virtues; So that within twelve
months after, all sorts of sick persons did begin to resort unto them, and
that from all places of the Country. The manifold commendations which I did
every where hear uttered, concerning their virtues and effects, did beget in me
a longing desire after a sight and trial of them; especially seeing I could
never hear from any, of a reason for the vulgar opinion concerning them.

Two years are not yet expired, since the Earl of Hartfield, (to whose former
titles of honor, His Majesty, since His happy restoration to the Government of
this His ancient Kingdom, has added the Title of Annnadale, because of his
Lordship and his Ancestors, their singular Loyalty) was pleased to command the
dressing of the Wells; So that the entry into them is much bettered, and their
diversity is made more perspicuous, by the removal of the clay, and the
surrounding of them with a wall.

The stones of the upper Well are white and crystalline, and the nether has
blackish stones, not much unlike unto the markasite of Antimony. Thus you have
the Topographicall description: Let us proceed unto the Spagyricall.

The limpide Waters of the Wells of Moffet are impregnat with the putide
Sulphur of Antimony, Nitre, and natural Salt-Amoniack.

We shall, 1. illustrat this assertion; 2. Prove it is verity by the strength of
reason and experiments; 3. We shall manifest the falsehood of the common
opinion; 4. answer some objections; and, 5, give some rules concerning the use
of the Water.

And first of all we say, that water which is impregnat with Nitre does extract
the Sulphur of Antimony, whilst it passes through an Antimomonial Mine. 2. As
this water which is impregnat with the Sulphur of Antimony, passes through
other veins of the Earth, it encountreth some Salt-Amoniack (or Salt, which by
coagulation comes of the Urines of the (almost) innumerable Beasts, which live
in the circum-jacent Moors: for, the artificial Salt-Amoniack is made of the
Urine^ of Beasts) which produces a precipitation, indigestion and putide smell
into the Sulphur, through it is sudden fermentation.

I will now prove the verity of the assertion. And, 1. I say, that the
assertion is most probable; because the water wherewith the Saffran of Metals
(Cr^cus Metallorum) which is Antimony calcined with Nitre, was washed, that is,
wherein it was for a long time boiled, has the same smell that the Water of
Moffet-Wells has, when some drops of Aqua-regia (which is made of Aquafortis
and Salt-amoniack) are instilled into it. Now the smell of the water of the
Wells, is most like to the smell of the dross of powder, which remains in
Guns which have been often shot. 2. This artificial Water tinctureth Silver, as
the water of the Wells do. 3. In this water precipitateth the putide Sulphur of
Antimony, which is redish-yellow; or rather the Antimonial atoms, wherein the
foresaid Sulphur does reside. And the stones of the Upper-well are covered with
a matter, very much resembling the same. 4. The stones of the Neather-well are
a little colored like Antimony, and some of them do contain a metallic like
matter, which does scintillat almost like unto Antimony. 5. As the Water of the
Neather-well descends into the preterlabent rivolet, a matter whitish and
salinous (and without doubt Nitrous wherein the diuretic virtue of the Water
resideth) does attach it self unto the rocks. 6. There appears no such matter
upon the rocks, by which the water of the Upper-well descends; because the
saltish and scintillating stones) of the Well have already detained and
separated the same from the Water. 7. It is hence probable, that the Sulphur of
the Upper-well will evaporat sooner, then that of the Nether; because it is
Water contains but little salt, which should detain the evaporating Sulphur:
for salt detaineth Sulphur, and the smell proceeds from the evaporating
Sulphur, as shall afterward be proven. 8. Before the evaporation of the
Sulphur, the water does not depose its salt upon the rocks; else it would be
attached to the very inmost stones of the Neather-well (which is false) as well
as to the outmost. 9. The whitish stones of the Upper-well are nitrous and
Antimonial: for when their double quantity of Nitre is added to them, and they
afterward calcined in a Mortar, they take flame after the same manner, that
Antimony calcined with Nitre does, and become like unto Diaphoretick Antimony.
10. Whilst this mixture is a calcining, it melts and boileth as Allom cast
upon a hot Iron, and contracteth great saltness and acrimony. 11. When I was
calcining one of those white stones (gifted by a friend) with its anatick
quantity of Nitre, and when I had caused pulverize the same, and mixed it with
fountain water, there did immediately arise a smell most like to that of the
Wells. 12. When a little destilled Vinegar is instilled into the water
wherewith the Saffran of Metals was washed, the like smell and precipitation
are produced; and this mixture does inquinat Silver with the color of Copper.
13. The putide sulphur of the water of Moffet-Wells does still evaporat; so
that within few days the most limpide water is left destitute of all smell.
14. The putide sulphur of the artificial water does likewise evaporat; yea, the
simple water (without Vinegar) wherewith the Saffran of Metals was washed,
becomes destitute of all putide sulphur, when it is preserved for the space of
three or four months: because it does evaporat out of the alien humide body,
and relinquisheth the antimonial atoms (wherein it did reside) separable by
precipitation, upon the copious affusion of fountain water. 15. From whence
proceeds the vomitive and purgative virtue of the water, if not from Antimony?


We do therefore reject the common opinion, viz. That the forementioned water
runs through mineral sulphur or Brimstone, and that it borrows its putide
smell from it.

But seeing Dr. Andrew Baccius (a Roman Physician, in his fourth Book of hot
Baths, and sixth Chapter, entitled, Concerning places or water that are
abominable, in either taste or smell) says, that there are two general causes
of all the stink of terrestrial things, whereof the one is p^se, as they say,
by the mixture of a thing naturally putide; and the other accidental, and by
way of rottenness; and does presently subjoy^ That almost the whole substance
of Sulphur (by which, me thinks, he can understand no other thing than
Brimstone) consists in a rotten smell; and that the mixture of it with earth
or water, is the first and general cause of all abominable smell and taste (
yea, of natural rottenness, as he writes a little after) but that the second
cause of any stink is putrefaction, which is contrary to digestion and
concoction, as says Aristotle, viz. the corruption and indigestion of the
proper and natural temperament, caused by external heat. In answer to which, we
reply,

1. There is no body naturally putide: For, that stinking smell which is called
putor, is the ingrate smell which proceeds originally from the foresaid
rottenness or putrefaction wherein the substance of Brimstone cannot consist;
seeing that putor is only a quality and accident of a body: Now nature did never
produce any kind of body naturally stained with any such spot as rottenness is;
But that the loathsome smell, called putor, does proceed only from rottenness
(by the Latins called putrede) and that the name putor is only given to its
ingrate smell, hence appears; in that the multitude of Authors do call
bodies, which are naturally endued with an ingrate smell, nor putide, but
fetide, as Assa foetida, Atriplex foetida, etc. whose foetor or stink, is a
good and medicinal quality, by nature conferred upon them, and not a quality
consisting in the corruption and indigestion of their natural and proper
temperaments, by external heat. But they call Ulcers (whose ingrate smell
proceeds from the corruption of the natural temperament by putrefaction)
putid^, and never fetide, as does Senuertus, Tom. 3. lib. 5. page 2. chap. 5.
at the beginning, and through the whole Chapter, he calls these Ulcers, which
he describes, putride, and never fetide. And Weckerus, Syntax. Medic.
utriusque lib. 3. page 743. concerning the curing of external diseases, and, in
particular, of the sordide and putride Ulcer. He calls an Ulcer that
putrifieth the member, sordide, putrified, and putride; although he says, that
from such an Ulcer arises a fetide and cadaverous smell, which we think
improperly called fetide, seeing it is not natural, but has its original from
putrefaction.

2. Brimstone that is not inflamed, has scarcely any smell; and that smell
which it has, is not ingrate. Therefore the whole substance almost of
Brimstone, does not consist in an natural stink called foetor, much less in a
preter-natural called putor; especially seeing it is a natural and terrestrial
mixed body; and a proper species or kind, intended by nature, as the same
Author confesses in the beginning of the second Chapter of the same Book.

3. We shall hermetically explain the forementioned putrefaction, which the
Author has aristotelically described, by saying, that the putrefaction of any
body takes its rise from the fermentation thereof. As for example, When the
recent Urine of a man, or Flesh which has never been salted, or kept for the
space of one month (...) longer, whilst they are fermenting, they putrify;
that is, the d^gested or concocted Sulphur, being by the internal Mercury, and
the external heat inciting it, solved from the rest of the Elements, it
begins to become indigested, and to evaporat; that is, to evanish, and then
begins putrefaction and the putide smell, from the action of the Air, upon
the evaporating and recrudescing Sulphur: for, where there is almost no
combustible, or perfectly digested Sulphur, as in some Minerals and Metals,
there is no fermentation nor putrefaction.

From what has been said, it may appear, that fermentation is twofold, 1. When
by the strength of the internal Mercury and external heat, the confused and
naturally mixed elements of a body, existing in its natural estate (as of
recent Urine, and such like) are solved and separated from one another: For,
the solved, recrudescing and evaporating Sulphur of fermented Urine and Flesh,
savoureth unpleasantly. And the sulphurous spirit of fermented Wine is
separated from the salt, contained in the Tartar; and the Tartar is separated
from the rest, when it is attached to the sides of the vessel: And fermented
Wine savoureth, because of the evaporating Sulphur, whereas Wine, whilst it is
in the Grapes, savoureth not, because it is not fermented, neither contains
eveporating Sulphur.

2. When many bodies, fermented, as before, are united by an humide body, they
are by the strength of the internal composed Mercury, and of the external heat,
brought under one dominion and power; and all their qualities and properties
(which are naturally distinct) do, by a new fermentation unite (as it were) in
one new quality, (which nevertheless may afterward be separated by
defermentation, whilst the body is putrefying) as when different meats and
drinks are changed into Chyle, and when of so many simple^ (fermented as
before) sudorifick Treacle is made, which in process of time will putrify:
For, the virtues of the ingredients of recent Treacle, are really distinct, and
each of them attempteth operation, after their proper manners, before
fermentation; and then Treacle is exhibited with less success then afterward,
when it is sufficiently fermented. And this was the reason why Bander^n
asserteth, that within ten years the frigidity of Opium and Hyosciamus, is
overcome by the calidity of the rest of the medicaments. And therefore
Philonium Romanum (whose composition they enter) is of little or no virtue. And
the Opiat, called Aurea Alexandrina, should not be made use of, until it be six
months old; because the strength of the Opium does predomine, and the
fermentation is not yet ended. You will find these things in his Pharmacopoeia.
But you would observe by the way, that putrefaction does not arise in every
fermentation, but in that only wherein is, 1. much recrudescing Sulphur, as in
Electuaries, both liquid and solid, whose compositions Almonds, the greater
Cold seeds (commonly so called, but which yet are really, though temperatly
hot; for there is nothing cold wherein Sulphur does abound: And that the truth
of this may be unquestionable, I shall only add this, that the intense heat of
Mustard, does mainly, if not only, exist in its abundant Sulphur or Oil,
whereof it contains so much as will in few days wet a sheet of paper (as if
it were dipped in Oil) wherein its powder is kept; and the difference betwixt
the taste of this Sulphur, and that of the forementioned seeds, proceeds only
from the different degrees of heat proceeding from the different degrees of
concoction) and such like do enter: for such become soon rancide, and do
putrify, because they contain almost no Salt for fixing of the Sulphur, and
prohibiting its recrudescence. 2. Or where there is much superfluous humidity,
which inquinateth the Sulphur, as in the fermentation of fresh Fleshes. 3. Or
where there is not a free egress given to the superfluous (though not
abounding) humidity; as when a green herb, or piece of flesh, wrapped up in a
two or threefold cloth, does putrify, whereas it would have been fermented
and dried without putrefaction, if it had been hung up in the open air.

4. All savor or smell (whether pleasant or unpleasant) proceeds from the
evaporating Sulphur; for such things as are most sulphurous, are most
odoriferous, whilst the Sulphur is evaporating, as Camphire, Turpeutine, etc.
But Stones, Metals, etc. which are almost destitute of all combustible
Sulphur, are likewise also destitute of smell. And there be many very
sulphurous bodies which are void of smell before the Sulphur begin to
evaporat, as the recent Urine of a Man, and the flesh of new mactat animals,
which smell most abominably whilst their Sulphur is evaporating in their
fermentation. And yellow Lamer, which is void of all smell, contains a most
odoriferus Oil, as appears when it is destilled or inflamed.

5. Salt detaineth Sulphur, and to its power prohibiteth its evaporation. And
this is the reason why the recent Urine of a Man smells not: For whenever
the Salt of the Urine (which also stinketh, because of a little Sulphur which
it detaineth united to its self) begins to be separated from it, and affixed
to the sides of the Matule, the Sulphur begins to evaporat, and the
loathsome smell arises. Likewise fresh fleshes, for the same reason, have no
abominable smell, and the future putide and loathsome savor is prevented by
the admistion of Salt: For the Sulphur of salted fleshes is fixed and detained
by the Salt, so that it cannot recrudesce, nor evaporat abundantly, with any
abominable savor; and the putrefaction is also exiled by the Salt, which does
not absume (as some do ridiculously affirm) but contemperat the supersluous
humidity as before.

6. Brimstone, not inflamed, does scarcely emit any savor; because its
combustible Sulphur is by its Salts ( fixed as well as volatile) detained from
evaporating. Now that Brimstone contains salts fixed and volatile, is hence
proven, that out of its dross, after the separation or consumption of its
combustible Sulphur, the former is extracted by lixiviation; and it is the
latter, which being resolved into smoke, and ascending into the vitreous
campane, is by the humide air resolved into a most sharp spirit, or spiritous
liquour, which falls down into the other campane, which is the receiver; and
it is called the Oil or spirit of Brimstone by the Campane or Bell.

7. The quality of the vapors of inflamed Brimstone, which affects the
Nostrils, is not so much a smell as a corrosive quality, existing in the
Volatile-salt, resolved into smoke, as was said, which does mordicat the tender
skin of the Nostrils, penetrateth into the brain, perturbeth it, and deceives
the sense, and sometimes kills, as is demonstrat by its killing of Bees; for
all smell proceeds from the evaporating combustible Sulphur, as was formerly
proven: but the combustible Sulphur of Brimstone does not evaporat when it is
inflamed; because it is totally converted into flame and consumed, and none of
it does evaporat, or is converted into smoke with the volatile salt: for, if
from inflamed Brimstone, sulphurous smoke does ascend, with the salinous, into
the vitreous campane, why are not the former condensed into a sulphurous, as
the latter are into a salinous liquor? Moreover, no sulphurous body, which is
void of volatile salt, emitteth smoke when it is inflamed, unless it be blown
upon by wind, and so a little of the flame be extinguished and converted into
smoke; as Sheeps-tallow, etc. But the smoke of Lamer Camphire, and such like
inflamed bod^es, is only the volatile salt resolved into smoke; which any man
will confess when he shall, in vain, have sought for a sulphurous and
combustible liquor amongst the foresaid condensed smoaks, which become either a
salt only, or a spiritous liquor, as was said concerning the volatile salt of
Brimstone, Likewise, no sixed salt does emit any salinous vapors, when it is
melted by the fire; and therefore in the destilling of such salts (as of Nitre,
Sea Salt, etc.) the double quantity of some Earth (as of Bole of Armenia,
calcined Allom, Sand, etc.) is usually mixed with them; that their fusion may
be hindered: for the heat of the fire does sooner convert the atoms of the salt,
which are separate from one another, by being mixed with the atoms of the
Earth, into a spirit, then if they were united into a liquor by fusion (for
united virtue or strength, is stronger for operating or resisting, and
contrariwise) and the atoms of the Earth do impede the union of the salinous
which are melted by the heat, and converted into a spiritous vapor. But some
perchance will say, if the quality of inflamed Brimstone, which affects the
nostrils, were only a corrosive quality, existing in the volatile- salt, then
the forementioned spirit of Brimstone (which is its volatile- salt dissolved
into a liquor by the humide air) cast upon burning coals, would emit a smoke
endued with a corrosive quality, which would affect the nostrils, trouble the
brain, and deceive the sense, as before. To this I answer, that this comes not
to pass, because the volatile- salt (in which only the corrosive quality does
exist) is detained by the fixed- salt of the coals, which does prohibit its
evaporation with the humide air, which was first converted into water, and is
again resolved into smoke. The truth of these things will afterward better
appear in the answers to the first and second Objections.

8. From the premises we conclude, that the whole substance almost of
Brimstone consists not in a rotten smell, and that it cannot, in a natural
manner, communicate to any earth or water, an unsavory smell, whether natural
(called foetor) or unnatural, called putor. For only the salts of Tartar and
Lime can produce the solution in water, and ind^gestion (from whence proceeds
the putide smell, which it communicates to water) of the combustible Sulphur
of Brimstone; as in the composition of Lac sulphuris: For when Brimstone is
boiled in water, with the salt of Tartar, the combustible Sulphur with the
salts (being by boiling associated to the salt of Tartar) becomes dissolved in
the water, which (before its fermentation) smells no otherwise than
Brintstone which is not inflamed. Now the fermentation of this water, thus
impregnat, is, 1. subitaneous, when some drops of destilled Vinegar are
instilled into it; for then the salt of Tartar does associat it self to its
like (according to the proverb) viz. the salt of Vinegar; both which have their
original from Wine. And after the precipitation of the powder, it relinquisheth
some of the combustible Sulphur, mixed with the water, which incontinent
becomes indigested, and begins to evaporat, because it is dissolved in a
strange humide body, and is associated to a strange salt, which cannot hinder
its evaporation, from whence proceeds the unpleasant smell (most like to that
of the yoke of a hard boiled Egg; and most unlike to the smells of not-inflamed
Brimstone, and Moffet-Wells) which argues the indigestion of the combustible
Sulphur. 2. Or slow, because the salts, etc. of the Brimstone and Tartar, do
within few hours assix themselves to the sides and bottom of the vessel wherein
they were boiled, and then begins the forementioned loathsome smell, as was
said concerning the fermentation of Urine. Now that the relics of the
combustible Sulphur, which are mixed with the water, do recrudesce, appears
hence; that this putide water does extinguish fire, and its relicts do not take
flame as does the Sulphur which is by the salts detained into the precipitated
powder. The same comes to pass when the double quantity of the powder of Lime
is mixed with Brimstone, and both are destilled together: for, then some few
drops only of (almost) insipide (but stinking) Phlegm, (like the
forementioned water, impregnat with the combustible Sulphur of Brimstone and
Salt of Tartar) do exstill, although you should augment the fire unto the
liquefaction o^ the Glass Retort: thus was I cheated, in seeking after
Schroderus his Oleum Sulphuris rubrum described in his Pharmacop. Med. Chym.
lib. (...) cap. 28. Here you may take notice, that it is inpossible to extract
out of Brimstone, a sulphureors and combustible ^uor, without mixing with it
some other body, containing a combustible Sulphur; because the combustible
Sulphur of Brimstone is so united to it is salts, and so detained by them, that
it cannot be separated from them without the actual touch of fire; and when it
is so touched, it becomes presently inflamed and consumes totally, as was
asserted. We said, 1. that Brimstone could not, in a natural manner, communicate
to earth or water, any putide smell. 2. That by the salts only of Tartar, or of
Lime, the solution in water and indigestion of the combustible Sulphur of
Brimstone can be produced; because neither Nitre, Salt-Amoniack, nor
Sal-Gemmae, (which only are true Mineral-salts) can produce the solution in
water, or indigestion of the foresaid Sulphur: Neither will the longest
infusion or decoction of Brimstone in water, produce the solution and
indigestion of it is combustible Sulphur; because it is most strictly united to
it is proper Salts. Seeing these things are collected from our own proper
experiments only, w^ are of opinion, that from them may be concluded that it is
most probable, that the water of Moffe^ Wells passes not through Brimstone,
seeing the ^he solution in water, and indigestion of it is com^ustible Sulphur,
cannot be caused by any true m^ ^eral Salt; and the Salts of Tartar and Lime
(by which only the forementioned effects can be pro^ced) neither were, nor
ever can be, found is the veins of the earth, through which the wate^ do run.

The forementioned Author, (otherwise most learned) in the beginning of his
9. chap. of h^ 4. Book of hot Baths, judges also amiss, in saying that the
cause of fervide Fountains is an actual fire, in these words: Seeing the waters
do spring abroad very fervide or hot, we must of necessity confess, that an
actual fire, above all degrees of heat, is beneath them: for, the very waters
themselves, do bewray the very substance of fire it self, a most hot quality,
and the operations likewise of fire; they burn, (observe here, that the Author
uses two words, incendunt and urunt; by the former of which, if he do mean,
that they do inflame or kindle, he is yet further in the wrong^ for, there is
no solid body more easily set on fire then Gunpowder is, nor is there any
liquide body of a more facile inflammation, then the rectified spirit of Wine
is; and yet neither of these could ever be inflamed by any such waters as he
mentions, neither by the most rectified Aquafortis, which according to his
judgment, has as many degrees of hear, as any of these waters of which he
writes) vesicat, destroy sense, expilat whatsoever Animals are cast into them,
then excoriat a little, and at length do consume the flesh, and enervat to the
very bones; all which, are the effects of fire.

These things are spoken amiss, 1. because the very contrary effects are at
some times produced by bodies which are most hot; as when the most rectified
spirit of Wine, and all sulphurous Oils which are drawn out of Spices, as
also the Oil of Lamer, do not destroy sense, but revivifie it when it is
destroyed, and, as it were, dead, as in the Palsy. 2. There be two bodies,
viz. Iron (which no man did ever call more hot then cold) and Aquafortis,
(which is composed of Nitre and the Salt of Vitriol, which are really cold)
radically frigide; the mixture of which (in a Glase Cucurbite covered with it is
Still) produces a great heat, ebullition and destillation, and that without
the external adhibiting of the heat of fire. Now this heat arises not from
actual fire (seeing the forementioned bodies are not fiery nor hot) but rather
from the motion of the corrosive Aquafortis, whilst it operateth upon the
Iron, for dissolving of it: for, motion produces heat, as when a piece of Lead
(which is of it self most cold) contracteth heat, being beaten by an Iron
Pestill or Hammor, which also are naturally cold. That actual fire is in
neither of these two bodies; and that it produces not this heat, appears
hence, that the most rectified Spirit of Wine (which is most easily inflamed)
when mixed with Aquafortis, whilst it is dissolving Iron, conceives not
flame, but does debilitat the action, and totally prohibit it for a time: But
we shall easily show, that Aquafortis and every acide Spirit (as the Spirits
of Vitriol, Nitre, Brimstone, etc.) which do vesicat, burn, as it were, etc.
are not hot but cold; by proving, that every Salt (especially the fixed) is
cold, seeing the forementioned Spirits and water, are only Salts converted into
Liquors, either by the heat of the fire or humide air.

Arg. 1. And, 1. we say, that all Physicians (both Hermetical and Galenical) do
acknowledge, that Nitre, the Spirit of Vitriol (which Angelus Sala in his 6.
chap. concerning the nature of the spirit of Vitriol, asserteth to be borrowed
from Brimstone, and to have the same virtues and properties with the spirit of
Brimstone, and which in the 10. chap. he acknowledges to be hot in the fourth
degree) the Spirit of Brimstone, etc. do refrigerat, although they do say, that
they do it accidentally only, and by de-obstruating. As for example, when some
drops of the Spirit of Vitriol (which they call hot) by de-obstruating the
pores of the body, do conciliat a more facile entry to the refrigerating water.
I do acknowledge, that it is not admirable, that this opinion, thus masked with
the specious dress of probability, and vulgarly believed, because established
by the authority of Antiquity, has hitherto inclined the reasons of all men to
an assent and conformity unto it; but yet, upon the evidence of hope, we dare
promise to our selves, that our not understanding, how actual cold, and (an
effectually cooling quality, can consist with radical heat, will avert from us
the odious attribute of presumption, and conciliat a favorable construction to
this our singularity and non-adherence to Antiquity: because that distinction
never was, nor could be, applied to any (without controversy) hot body not
salinous; as to the spirit of Wine, Oil of Cloves, Cinnamon, Mustard, etc. any
of which, being mixed with the most cooling liquor, will, without controversy,
diminish its frigidity.

2. Aqua fortis, the spirits of Vitriol and Brimstone, the spirit of common
Salt, the Oil of Tartar by deliquation (which is the Salt of Tartar dissolved
into a liquor by the humide air in a cold or subterrancal place) the Oil of
common Salt by deliquation, etc, do extinguish the fire as does the coldest
water. Therefore they are, in their first qualities, heterogeneal to fire: for
such bodies only are (and ought to be) vulgarly called homogeneal to fire in
their first qualities, which do contain some matter which becomes nourishment
unto fire ( Salts and Salinous bodies only excepted) and that is only Sulphur,
it from if it be almost insipide (as the Sulphur ^r Oils of sweet Almonds,
Olives, etc. before they become rancide) then the body which contains it, is
not called hot, but temperat in heat; but if the Sulphur b^ very sapide, and do
affect the taste much, the body wherein it does reside is called hot; and its
degree^ of heat are commensurat by the degrees of its sapidity. Now every pure
Salt is altogether destitute of such matter. Moreover, the frigidity of bodie^
which are estimat cold, should likewise be measure^ by their different degrees
of sapidity; as Cichory is colder than Lettice, and the juice of a Limon is
colder than either, and the spirit of Vitriol is the coldest of all the four,
etc. Neither is this contrary to the common saying of Ph^losphers, viz. that
water is the coldest of all bodies; for that is only to be asserted of the pute
elementary water, which is not to be found amongst us, and unto which (without
all controversy) frigidity in the highest degree is as proper as siccity,
humidity and calidity, are unto the Elements of Earth, Air and Fire: So that it
is more then probable, that as the refrigerating cold of some springing waters
does hugely surpass the same quality in common fountain water, so likewise the
frigidity of the elementary water does surpass that of the spirit of Vitriol,
and springing water, as far as the strength of Aqua fortis, does the strength
of the juice of Limons in dissolving of Pearls; both which do operat after the
same manner, only dissolving them into powder, without (...) I roying their
natural temperaments, which five does, when it dissolveth them, or any thing
(...); all which do undeniably evince this, that Corrosives are not of a fiery
and hot temperament.

3. Every Fixed-salt does naturally attract those things which are cold and
humide, as Water and Air: therefore it is in its first qualities (frigidity and
humidity) homogeneal to them. Moreover, as the action of the spirit of Wine,
Aquavitae, etc. upon Oils, whereby they dissolve them, and unite them unto
themselves, does argue the Oils ( viz. of Cinnamon, Anise, etc.) and spirits to
be homogeneal; so likewise we do most probably conceive, that the dissolution
of Salts by water, does demonstrat the homogeneity of their natures. For no
natural body, which is in its natural estate, does naturally appetize or
attract its contrary. Nor is it contrary unto this, that an animal whose
stomach is, distempered with calidity and siccity, naturally desires a humide
and refrigerating body; because that stomach is not in its natural estate;
neither is it the stomach, but the Animal, (whose the stomach is) which
desires the curation of the morbifick distemper, by a humide and refrigerating
body.

You would here take notice, that the cause of Thirst which is by Aristotle, in
his second Book of the Soul, called, a desire after a humide and frigide body)
is twofold, external and internal; each whereof is either hot, or corrosive
and cold: For corrosives are really different from such things as are hot, as
shall afterward appear, from what has been, and is to be said. 1. The
internal hot cause of thirst, is a hot distemper of the whole body (as in a
Fever) or of some part of it, as of the Stomach, Liver, etc. 2. The external
hot cause of thirst, is the radical heat of meat or drink, existing in their
sulphurous parts, which produces a hot distemper in the stomach, etc. 3. The
internal corrosive cause of thirst, is a bilious, salt, and corrosive humor,
which corrodeth the skin of the stomach, and by motion, in the solution of
continuity, conciliateth heat in the corroded part only, whereas the heat of
meat and drink do sometimes produce a hot distemper in the whole body, each of
whose parts, after the concoctions, it permeateth. 4. The external corrosive
cause of thirst, is the corrosive salts of meat and drink, which do corrode the
stomach, as before. For the cure of thirst, proceeding from a hot cause
(whether external or internal) a body radically and actually cold and humide,
is necessarily required. But for the cure of thirst proceeding from a corrosive
cause, a humide body, radically only (though not actually) cold, is sufficient,
wherein the Salts may be dissolved; which being done in a copious humide body,
they become so debilitat, that they cannot any more corrode the skin of the
stomach: for disjoined virtue or strength is weaker. Now this solution is more
easily effectuat in a humide body which is actually hot, than in one which is
cold. This sort of thirst is curable also by Pearls, Coral, etc. For when such
things are put into the stomach, the Salt of the corrosive humor does affix it
self to the atoms of the Pearls, Coral, etc. and so the humor is dulcified (as
is Vinegar, when affused to Corals, Red-lead, etc.) and loses its corrosive
quality, and then the thirst cease.

Here we cannot but inquire after the cause and cure of that common and
troublesome distemper, vulgarly called the Heart-scade. We conceive that it is
caused by acide and corrosive humors, which being congested into the stomach,
do irritat its expultrix faculty, so that they are constrained to mount upwards
to the throat, where the greatest pain and trouble is found; because the
corrosive humor having excoriat the Oesophage or Wezand, it is still most
sensible of the mordication of the humor, which is most active upon the
uppermost part, upon which it beats with violence: So this may be called an
imperfect vomiting; because there is but little or nothing expelled at the
mouth, the humor descending again into the stomach. The cure of this turbulent
distemper consists, 1. either in the evacuation of the peccant humor, (which
is the perfect cure) or, 2. in the correcting of its corrosive quality by
dulcisication; or, 3. in prohibiting this ascension of it to the throat, which
are palliative cures: As to the first, the only best way for evacuating of the
peccant humor is vomiting: for Art ought to imitat Nature, and assist her in
her attempts which tend to the good of the creature. The second sort of cure by
dulcisication is (as we conceive) threefold; 1. by drinking of the purest
fountain water in the morning, and at five of the clock in the afternoon, when
the stomach is empty. I am confident that the water of Mosset-Wells will cede
to none for this use; because it will not only dulcifie the corrosive humor,
but also help to expel it by stool. The person may drink more or less,
according to his, or her age. 2. By Corals, Pearls, and such like, as was said
a little before concerning the cure of thirst. 3. By the using of Salts, either
purely natural, as Sea Salt, or which have been by art extracted out of
vegetables, as Wormwood, etc. This will certainly appear as a great Paradox
(if not a falsehood) to all who are ignorant of our Spagyrical art, and
particularly of the operations of salts of different properties, upon one
another. But for the evincing of the truth of what has been said, I will first
relate a story, and then give the reason of the effect. A near friend of mine
own, who was as much molested with this distemper as any other ever was,
essayed all the cures which were known to any with whom he had discoursed
concerning that disease, but the most sovereign of all, he found to be the
cating of a little of the saltest Beef in the morning; after doing of which, he
was not at all assaulted by the distemper that day. Now the reason of this
effect is evident, to be none other than the operation of the salt of the Beef,
upon the salt of the corrosive humor, by which it was dulcified. As in the
making of Tartar-Vitriolat, the Oils of Tartar and Vitrial (which are most
salt, sharp and corrosive) being mixed, do produce a liquor altogether in^pide.
The third way of curing this disease is by prohibiting the ascension of the
humor to the throat. This is done by the drinking of the spirit of Wine, or
Aqua-vita, which do prohibit the ebulition of the humor, and consequently the
ascension of it, or of vapors from it, unto the throat: For either of these
being mixed with Aquafortis, when it is dissolving Iron, will prohibit and
hinder the action and ebullition of the corrosive liquor. This is the worst of
all cures; for although the person will get present ease, yet the distemper
will recidivat more violently than before; because the corrosive liquor is not
only by the remedy augmented in its quantity, but also in the degrees of its
corrosive quality: for the corrosive liquor in the stomach does six the
volatile spirits of the Wine and Aqua-vitae, and so converteth them almost into
its own nature; as you read before in the Preface, concerning the natural
composed ferment. I will add a fourth way of curing this distemper, viz. the
taking of such things as will imbibe the corrosive humor in the stomach, and
carry it unto the intestines. I mention this, because I was informed, that one
who was molested with this distemper, used to eat a great quantity or number of
Groats made of Oats, and so was eased. The ordinary cure by drinking of sweet
Milk, cannot but be reprehended: for though it ease a little at first, yet it
causes a recidivation when it is fermented into the stomach, and becomes
acide, as in a Churn, when reserved for making of Butter.

4. Every pure fixed salt is radically humide, without the admistion of any
sulphurous and combustible matter, (for by fusory calcination it is converted
into a Liquor) therefore it is also radically cold. I said, without the
admistion, etc. because every sulphurous substance is also radically humide.

5. Such bodies as contain more perfectly concocted and combustible sulphur
then others, are commonly (and deservedly) called hot; as are these Spices,
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, etc. and the sulphurous spirit of Wine: and contrariwise,
such as contain less of the foresaid sulphur than others, are said to be cold,
as Lettice, Purselaine, Cichory (whose great bitterness proceeds from salt
and sulphur) etc. and the corrosive parts of many Vegetables (so called,
because they dissolve Pearls, Coral, etc.) as Vinegar, the juice of Lemmons,
etc. are cold, without all controversy. Now we desire to know, why such as
acknowledge Vinegar, etc. to be cold, do deny the salts of Tartar, etc. (which
are altogether void of sulphur) to be also cold, seeing they are of the same
nature? For, the acidity and corrosive quality of the Vinegar, do exist in it is
salt, which albisieth the atoms of the Coral, Lead, etc. which are dissolved by
it, (for every purified salt is white) and this salt is the very self same salt
of Tartar so dissolved in an aqueous body, that it is inseparable by
destillation, without the addition of some other body: for, the acide Liquor of
every body, which is commonly called Mercury, is nothing else but a little of
the salt (especially) fixed of the same body, dissolved in the aqueous part;
which appears hence, that in the abstraction of destilled Vinegar from Lead
or Coral which it dissolved, whenever the sulphurous Spirit (of which in the
Preface) exstilleth, the next ensuing Liquor is almost insipide, as water;
because it is salt (which did formerly render it acide) has forsaken it, and
betaken it self to the atoms of the body which it dissolved, and now does
albisie. Moreover, there is no corrosive body which is not saltish, neither any
saltish body which is not corrosive; neither does the sulphurous Spirit of
Wine, it is extraction of the resine out of Jalap, falsisie this; for it
extracteth it not by a corrosive quality (because it is void of salt, and
therefore corrodeth not the terrestrial part of Jalap, dividing it into atoms,
as Vinegar does Lead) but by a real fiery heat, which liquifieth the Refine, and
existeth in the sulphurous and inslamable Spirit, and from thence proceeds
the mutation of the color; for, the Spirit of Wine which is impregnat with the
Refine of Jalap, is almost tinctured with redness.

It does hence appear, that the frigidity of Nitre may be questioned, seeing it
contains much sulphur, though indigested; as appears hence, 1. Nitre cannot
be dissolved by deliquation, as the rest of salts which are void of sulphur,
before that the sulphur be separated from it by calcination. 2. A dram of
Brimstone being injected upon Nitre which is liquified by the fire, flameth
longer then if it had been cast upon burning coals; because of the sulphur of
the Nitre which also conceives flame, and consequently prolongeth the burning.
Here observe, that it it is only the crudity or indigestion of the nitrous
sulphur, which hinders it is inflammation, when it is not associat to sulphur
that is perfectly digested, and which is inflamable of it self, (of which fort
are the fulphureous parts of Brimstone and Coals) because the salt which
detaineth the sulphur cannot prohibit it is inflammation, seeing the most abundant
salts of Brimstone do not hinder the inflammation of it is combustible sulphur.

6. Aquafortis, destilled Vinegar, etc. do not burn, therefore they are
neither hot nor fiery; for, such things as are burned or consumed by fire,
cannot be refuscitated, and their proper temperaments are destroyed, (as when
Stones, Salts, Iron, Antimony, etc. are vitrified by fire) but such things as
are dissolved, as it were, burned and annihilated by Aquafortis, destilled
Vinegar, etc. their proper temperament is not destroyed, and they can be
resusitated: for, what is the precipitation of Coral and of such like, who have
been dissolved by the forementioned Liquors, but their resuscitation? And when
they are resuscitated, they are endued with the same virtues wherewith they
were enriched before their solution, as is confessed by all Physicians, who
prescribe this manner of their preparation; and then make use of them, as more
effectual then formerly. But some, perchance, will say, they are not entirely
resuscitated, nor can they be reduced to their pristine estate. As for example,
it is impossible to convert Lead which was dissolved by destilled Vinegar (and
afterward separated from it by precipitation, and converted into Ceruss) into
Lead again as it was. I did truly essay this, but to no purpose; for this
matter cannot be liquified, without the most intense heat of the fire, and then
it is only converted into a matter, like unto the litharge of Gold; the reason
whereof is most probably thus, viz that the corrosive salt of Vinegar, which
has affixed it self unto the atoms of the Lead, can never be separated from
them (for which consult the Animadversions of Dr. John Zuelfer, upon the
Magisterial gouder, described in the Augustan Pharmacopoeia) and prohibiteth
the liquation of those atoms (which of themselves are most easily melted)
before that it self be melted, which requires a most intense degree of heat:
for it is of the same nature with the salt of Tartar, as was said, which is nor
easily melted. These things are most true, and being calculated according to
their seeming altitude in the meridian of reason, would appear to be nearer the
Zenith of truth, than our sixth argument; But the contrary will evidently
appear, if you consider, that it happens not so in all; for although you
should a thousand times dissolve, and, as it were, annihilat Quicksilver, by
the strongest corrosives and causticks (as they call them) yet a little heat
will revivify it again, and cause it recuperat its pristine form, Proteus-like.
And yet the self same Quicksilver, which is most impatient of the heat of fire
(for it flies from its vesicating and depilating degree, and far more rather
its actual touch, by which it is quite dissipated) esheweth not the most
intense (somniat) heat of corrofive bodies, nor is it dissipated thereby, but
only converted into most minute atoms, and that without the destruction of its
proper and natural temperament. Therefore, such things as are (as it were)
burned by corrosives, are not burned and destroyed by any fiery and hot
substance, but only converted into most small atoms, by a corrosive and cold
one, without the destruction of their proper and natural temperaments.

It is no small ground of admiration to me, that no Chymicall writer which I
have seen or heard of, did ever expressly assign unto their Principles or
Elements, first qualities; as did the Peripatetick Philosophers, who attributed
heat to fire, hismidity to air, frigidity to water, and siccity to earth. I
will therefore further attempt the proving of Salt to be radically cold, and
Sulphur hot, from the most learned assertions of the most admirably ingenious
Physician Dr. Thomas Willis. I will begin with the last, being least
controverted, and soonest dispatched.

In his Diatriba Medico-Philosophico de fermentatione, cap. 2. (cui Titulus,
Chymicorum Principiorum descriptio, little; proprietates and assertiones) where
writing of Sulphur, he asserteth thus: Rei cujusque temperies, quoad calorem,
consistentiam, and amabilem texturam, a sulphur imprimis dependet. i. e. The
temperature of every thing, as to heat, consistence and lovely texture, does
originally depend upon Sulphur.

As to the first, that salt is radically cold, in that 2. chap. of salt he
writes thus: Rebus compactionem and soliditatem, nec non pondus and durationem
largitur, corporum dissolutiones retardat, congelationes and coagulationes
promovet; putredini, corruptioni, and inflamabilitati plurimum resistit. The
knowledge of those things pertaining only to such, whose literature does
capacitat them to understand them, as they are here set down; and it being
impossible to express them so significantly in Scots, I will not molest the
Reader with a Translation, but only deduce my consequence from them.

I am confident, that none, who have any knowledge of Nature and her admirable
works, will deny, that the most compact, ( Diamond) solid, ( Gold) ponderous, (
Lead) durable ( Silver) bodies, are radically cold; the existence of which
quality in them, is further demonstrat by their long resisting the violence of
fire (which is the most violent and agile dissolver of the natural unity of
Bodies) their congelation and coagulation, whereby they are capacitat to deny
obedience to the greatest violence (excepting that of malleation) when thereby
required to alter their natural circum-scription, by their own supersicies; as
also, by their incapacity of being putrified, corrupted or inflamed. If then
the most compact, solid, ponderous and durable bodies, etc. be radically cold,
it is undeniable, that that from which they have these properties is far more
such; for, propter quod unum-quodque est tale, id ipsum est magis tale.
Moreover, does not, only their resisting of the violence of fire, demonstrat
their natural qualities to be opposite to those of fire. Whatever shall be said
to the contrary of this, I am most confident that it is most undeniable in all
other things.

Further, our forementioned Author (whose ingeniosity shall never be
sufficiently admired) in his Diatriba de Febribus, cap. 3. he writes thus.
Rigoris aut frigoris, calori praecedanei, in febribus intermittentibus, causa,
est succi nutritii portio, quae insignem acorem contraxit, quo parts nervosas
valde pungit and vellicat, atque frigoris sensum incutit (non secus ac Cervisia
novella, quae utribus inclusa, a dulci in acidum, and nitrosum saporem transit,
ut prae acore and frigiditate vix deglutiri poterit) cum hujusmodi crudi succi
particulae nitroso acore praeditae, in fluore esse incipiunt, spiritus vitales
acore suo primo obtundunt, and calorem nonnihil obruunt: quare sanguis
frigidior existit, and tardius circulatur, quin and ob caloris defectum, sensus
frigoris in toto corpore percipitur.

Ex praedictis (ni fallor) manifest sequitur.

1. Sanguinem in statu naturali existentem esse calidum propter spirituum
vitalium (quos sulphureos esse, nemo insiciabitur) abundantiam and vigorem;
Cervisiam etiam esse calldam, propter spiritus sulphureos. 2. Sanguinem and
Cervisiam novellam, a coliditate gradatim debiscere, prout ipsorum parts
salinae, sulphureis praepollere incipiunt, viz. cum sluorem adipiscuntur, ut
ait D. Willis. 3. Sanguinis parts salinas, frigoris ant rigoris sensum, nervis
incutere, in febre intermittente; ut Cervisiae acidae sal, sluorem adeptus,
linguae and fancibus tantam frigiaitatem infligit, ut deglutitionem ferme
prohibit. 4. Sal radicaliter and natura sua frigidum esse.
Prius dictum est, admiratione dignum esse, Medicum asserere, Acetum, Limonii
succum, and similia refrigerare; Aquam fortem autem Vitrioli spiritum, etc.
urere, and calefacere, cum gradualiter differant, tan tum in frigiditate, u^
globus ferreus, it a tantum calefactus, ut manu contrectari possit, and ipsi
frigido calorem communicet, in caliditate differt ab alio intensissime ignito,
qui incendere, urere, etc. potest; qui tamen, si aquae quantitati
proportionatae immittatur, ei cacaloris gradum communicabit, qui nativum
animalis calorem non destruet, sea tantum fovebit, ut Vitrioli spiritus, qui,
ignis instar, vesicas excitat, sensum destruit, animalia expilat, calorem
sebrilem, praeternaturalem amice repellit, cum Julepis refrigerantibus guttatim
permiscetur* Audent etiam nonnulli impudenter asserere, Limoni succum esse
calidum; quod si^ver um sit, quodnam quaeso medicamentum dicetur frigidum?

Ostendamus nunc quomodo differant salsum, acidum, acre, and amarum, idque
latin etiam: Quia voces vernaculae congrua non suppetunt. Ex. gra. fall marinus
decrepitatus, est simplciter salsus; decrepitationem vero ante, acidus potius
dicendus est, ut and Nitrum, Vitriolum, Tartarum, instar Aceti, Limonii succi,
and similium, qua acida sunt, propter Sulphur in quantitate exigua admistum,
quod salsedini, dulcedinis quasi gradum unum ina^cit; ideoque Tartarum ac^dum,
cum calcinatur sit salsum; and Acetum acidum cum Plumbi atomis, Sulphur
continentibus, impraegnatur, dulcedinem quasi acquirit. Denique idem sal
marinus decrep^tatus ( ut and Nitrum, Vitriolum, and quodlibet sal fixum)
cumignis violentia, destillandum inter, in liquorem resolvitur, salsedinem
amittit, and acredinem contrabit. Itaque salsedo and acredo, in hoc tantum
differunt, quod salsedo sit qualitas corporis salsi dens^oris, and minus
activi; acredo autem, rarioris, ideoque majoris activitatis; quod hinc ulterius
patet. Salis etenim spiritus praeuictus acris, sali novo decrepitato affusus,
in vase circulatorio, cum post debitas circulationes fixatur, and sali
decrepitato unitur, acredinem amittit, and salsedinem contrabit.

De amarore autem dicimus, ipsum causari a mistione (form anatica) Sulphuris
and salis volatilis, aut salis alcati nitrosi, quod cum Sulphuris quid
contineat, Ol^o firmiter a^haeret, quod id ipsum secum rapit, dum in
calcinatione deflagrat, aut menstruo mediante extrahitur; atque Sulphuris haec
extractio a sale praedicto promovetur: cum etenim in humore aqueo dissolvi
incipit Sal, secum copiosius trahit Sulphur, idcoque Sennae uncia semis in
aquae unciis sex, cum Tartari dram una infusa, colatura erit magis
purgativa, quam si Tartarum non adderetur. Atque haec de Alo^, Colocynthide,
Opio, Absinthio, Carduo benedicto, etc. quorum omnium sal pure fixum, terrae
firmiter adhaeret, antequam slucrem adipiscitur in fermentatione, aut per
lixiviationem e cineribus extrahatur.

From the premises scriously considered, these consequences do manifestly
result; 1. that it is necessary to distinguish betwixt hot and corrosive, as
betwixt hot and cold. 2. That the intense heat of waters that boil in
fountains, ought not always to be attributed unto fire (as said Dr. Andrew
Baccius) but rather to the action of a corrosive body, as of Nitre, Vitriol,
etc. being not far distant from the fountain.

Obj. 1. Some will possibly object, 1. If there were any salt Ammoniack mixed
with the water of Moffet-Wells, without all doubt, it would assix it self with
the Nitre, unto the white and salinous stones, from which it might afterward
be separated by sublimation, seeing it is by nature most volatile, but so it is,
that nothing can be separated from them by sublimation, as our own experience
did testify. To this we answer, 1. that a very little quantity of salt
Amoniack, produces the forementioned precipitation, as appears in every
precipitation. 2. The salt amoniack is fixed, by the fixed salt of the Nitre
and stones, so that it cannot be separated from them by sublimation; and this
is most probable, if it be considered, that salt ammoniack is commonly sixed,
when it is by stratification calcined with the powder of Lime: For then the
sixed salt of the Coals, which has by calcination affixed it self unto the
earth and sixed salt of the stones, does six the salt amoniack, and rendereth
it dissolvable into an Oil (improperly so called, because not sulphurous) by
deliquation. 3. Or rather (because most probable) the volatile salt ammoniack,
being dissolved in a strange humide and aqueous body ( viz. the water of the
Wells) does evanish with the evaporating Sulphur: for, in every d^stillation
(which evaporation does still preceed) the volatile salt does follow the
Sulphur, and extilleth after it, as was already said in the Preface.

2. If the water were sufficiently impregnat with Nitre, for the dissolving of
Antimony, the water of the Wells would not be sweet to the taste, as they are:
for a very great quantity of Nitre would scarcely be sufficient for the
operation. It is answered, that the water does almost totally loss its
saltness, by its action upon the Antimony, and afterward it deposes the
relicts of its salt upon the stones, as appears from what has been said. No
man will question the truth of this, if these two experiments be considered; 1.
That Aquafortis loses much of its strength by operating upon Iron. 2. The
Oils of Tartar and Vitriol (which are most salt, sharp and corrosive) when
mixed (as in the composition of vitriolated Tartar) do produce a liquor
altogether insipide: for we extracted such an one from them, when we were
coagulating vitriolated Tartar.

3. Others will possibly say, that this is a new and unheard of manner of
anatomizing, a mineral water: for it should have been examined by destillation,
evaporation, calcination, etc. that thereby the foresaid assertion might have
been proven. I answer, 1. there is here no need of destillation: for the water
of the Wells is only impregnat with Nitre and the pntide Sulphur of Antimony;
the former whereof is proven by nature, seeing the Nitre does affix it self to
the rocks, by which the water descends, and the latter is already shown by an
experiment. 2. Seeing our Spagyrical art (the most excellent imitatrix of
nature) and nature her self, do excellently and evidently prove the assertion,
operations should not be multiplied, without necessity. 3. The destilling of
the water would prove a finstraneous action; 1. because it would require a vast
quantity of water, for to acquire but a very little of the salt: for there is
but little of it contained in the water, as appears by the rocks; for there
is but very little salt, as yet, attached unto them. 2. Unless the vessels were
hermetically sealed, the water that would extill, would be destitue of all
taste and smell; because its Sulphur does constantly evanish, so that in a
short time, it leaves it quite destitute of smell, although it be kept in a
vessel most closly stopped with a cork.

Concerning the use of the water.

EXperience having taught, that many have gotten much good by the use of this
water, and that others have reaped more harm, and finished their miserable
lives soon after their making use of it; the difficulty of describing its
virtues, is beyond controversy, as also that it were a most difficult task, to
show who should make use of it, and at what time; because some have been
bettered (yes cured) by it at one time, and wronged at another, when they have
addressed themselves unto it, for prevention only of that disease, which had
once been cured by it. Therefore I shall only propose some general rules,
concerning its internal and external use: For no man can prescribe to all sorts
of persons particular rules, for using it internally, unless he had been an
eyewitness for two or three years, to its different operations, upon persons
of different constitutions. Now the rules are these, 1. The water of the Wells
of Mosset would be most warily used, seeing it does sometimes produce as sad
symptoms, as Antimony it self does. 2. No man should use this water internally,
who does not (by vomiting, urine, or stool) evacuat as much as he does drink,
especially if he be hydropick. 3. It conduces to the cure of almost all Ulcers
and external diseases, and pains of the joints, etc. when it is only externally
applied. 4. It is very duretick; and the water of the neather-well, more than
that of the upper, because it is more salinous, as was proven. 5. In the
autumnal months, it is enriched with the most and best of its strength and
virtues, the earth being at that time most dry: for, in the winter and spring
times, it is debilitat and vitiat by rain. 6. Such as are of a more robust
constitution than others, would take an antimonial vomitory, for lousing of
their humors, before they make use of the water: for then the water will be of
a more facile operation, though in a lesser dose. 7. Since the printing of this
little Treatise in Latin, it is by many, more considently reported, than ever,
that this water has often made the barren womb fruitful; which we cannot
contradict, having been greatly convinced of its certainty, by the effects
which the water has produced in some persons, which have been afflicted with
that lamentable infirmity. And being rationally induced to believe, that such a
putide water will prove an excellent hystorick (the most part whereof are such)
for purging out all impurities (the most ordinary rem^ras of generation) from
the microcosmicall habitation of man. 8. Experience has testified to many,
that it is good for the Scurvy, being used both externally and internally; and
paralytick persons also have been much bettered by using it, after the same
manner. 9. This water deleteth the spots of cloth, when it is washed with it.


Such as are, and ever have been, prejudicat against Antimony, and its use,
will (no doubt) also condemn the using of this antimonial water, though
composed by God himself, the Former of all things, and the best Chemist, who
has created every thing for the benefit of man. Therefore I will mention, and
answer, some expressions of D. A -- Parisiis Neapolitanus, in rationibus sui^
contra Antim^nii, cum crudi, tum praeparati, usum, which he subjoyneth to his
Consilia medicinalia de conservanda sanitate, printed and published by him at
Edinburgh, anno. 1620. He writes thus, cap. 2. Andernacus, Antimonium refert
inter fossilia, quae primordia generationis suae ex Aqua ducunt, and inter
illa, ei principalem locum assignat: quae sententia nobis etiam placet. -- Plus
aqueae natura in stibio reperiri quam terreae, convinci potest ex not is boni
stibii, quas Avicenna, lib. canonis sui, c. 7. tract. 2. refert.

Cap. 4. Ab Avicenna stimmi frigidum scribitur in primo, and siccum in secundo
gradu --. Ab ^acobo Graminio, in tractatu suo de Antimonio, rectius adhuc ad
tertium completum frigiditatis ordinem refertur, quod ipsum and illius vires
probant. -- Miscetur cum Minio and C^russa, ad consolidanda ulcuscula, a
comburente flamma excitata. -- Gulielinus Varignana, in secretis suis, pulverem
ejus Cancro depascenti ac phagedaenico ulceri inspargit. -- Tantum de
temperamento and facultatibus crudi stibii, nunc ad adustum, p^aeparatumve,
scrmo pertranseat. Collocatur autem a nonnullis doctissimis viris,
quomodocunque calcinatum, in quarto caliditatis and siccitatis gradu. Ratio
est, quia ex mente illius aureoli Paracelsi Chymicorum principis (docente
Arnaldo de Villanova, in Rosario suo philosophico) quae calcinantur and
uruntur, ad quartum caliditatis gradum perducuntur. Actiones etiam sen
operationes ejus, nobis adstipulantur. Quia omnibus putridis and gangrenosis
ulceribus, majorem in modum prodest, quod citra insignem ac prevalentem
siccitatem and caliditatem fieri nequit.

This Author relates only the opinions of others (and sometime from the second
hand, as in that of Paracelsus his opinion, docente Arnalde, etc.) and then
assenteth to what he conceives most probable, yet without giving any good
reason for their asserting, or his own assenting. It being the most difficult
task which a naturalist can take in hand, to determine the temperatures of
bod^es, either as to their qualities or their degrees; I will only humbly offer
my opinion, with as much reason as I can, in these two assertions. 1. Antimony
contains much earth and salt, from which it (and all other bodies) has its
solidity and ponderosity. 2. Antimony contains much inflamable Sulphur (from
which it, and the glass made of it, have their colors) as is most evident in
its calcination, either alone, or with Nitre.


From these, and what has been formerly said, concerning the natures of
Sulphur and Salt, let each person infer what they please, concerning the
temperature of Antimony. For my own part, I am of opinion, that the vomitive
and purgative faculties of Antimony, do not proceed from its temperament (seeing
there are many other bodies of the same temperature with it, according to
Authors, which have usurped this determining power, which yet have none of
these faculties of Antimony) but from its natural form, which the Creator of
all things has bestowed upon it.

As for that opinion of this Author, viz. that crude or natural Antimony, being
cold in the third degree, and dry in the second, is by burning or preparing it
any way, so metamorphosed, that it becomes hot and dry in the fourth degree
(which he foundeth upon the opinion of others, and so infirm a reason of his
own) I cannot sufficiently admire it; because I conceive it to be without the
reach of any created being, to induce the fourth degree of any of the first
qualities (which are by Philosophers attributed to the pure Elements only) upon
any composed body, such as is Antimony; far less at all to alter their
essential properties (such as are heat, cold, etc.) which proceed from their
natural forms, without destroying the natural forms, and producing in them, not
only new forms, but also new properties proceeding from them, at least the
destruction of their former properties, as when Salt, Sea-ware, etc. are
converted into Glass. But here you have a Philosopher and Physician asserting
the contrary concerning Antimony, to which he assigns the same properties,
before and after its preparation, which he affirms to operat so strongly upon
it, that it alters its first quality, cold in the third degree, beyond
contrariety, to hot in the fourth degree.

In his fifth Chapter he labors to prove Quod Antimonium neque crudum, neque
praeparaetum, intracorpus ullo pacto adhiberi debeat. And his only argument is
this, Si Antimonium tota sua substantia est venenum, omnibus modis erit humanae
naturae adversarium. Ergo Antimonium ut caeterae venena destruere naturam
nostram, absque controversia patet. Venenum tribus rationibus esse ostenditur.
1. Per similitudinem ejus cum Plumbo. 2. Per malignitatem ejus. 3. Per
imperfectam correctionem ejus.

Similitudo and cognatio ei cum Plumbo (quod inter venena annumerandum esse,
neminem ignorare censeo) maxima est.

Quod ad malignitatem at^inet, odorem emittit virulentum ac insuavem (dum
crematur) auripigmenti venesicam e^halationem proxime repraesentans. Hinc ab to
fumo, dum calcinatur, tanquam a praesentissimo veneno, Chymici cavere, and
nares diligenter obstruere jubent. Imperfecta est ejus correctio: quia Petrus
Matthiolus, super, 5. cap. Dioscoridis, ad tollendam ejus venenatam facultatem
in coctione, Chrysocollam seu Boracem ei misceri jubet, vel Theriacam: etiam
Cornu Monocerotis, and species Diamoschi, atque id genus alia alexipharmaca, ei
commisceri ab aliis jubentur. Taceo jam purgationes, convulsiones, atque alia
gravissima symptomata, co utentibut incidentia. -- Stimmi non aliquem proprium
and discretum humorem purgat, sed promiscue omnes humores per alvum exturbat.
Ergo similitudin^ essentiae seu formae non purgabit, ut reliqua medicamenta
quae forma similitudine purgant proprios, and discretos humores, secundum
Hippocratem, lib. de natura humana. Asseveramus itaque Antimonium calcinatum,
exitiosa sua (naturae humanae and praesertim cordi) tum substantia, tum etiam
qualitatibus, molestissime naturam, irritantibus, communi quadam traductione,
non solum pravos, sed etiam optimos expellere succos -- fit ergo haec purgatio,
non per se, sed ex accidente. -- Concludimus praeterea, crudum omnino non
purgare: calcinatum vero, non nisi per adhaerentem, and vi ignis exaltatam
potentiam veneficam, commoventem spiritus, and humores in toto corpore
violenter concitantem; itaque neque crudum, neque quomodocunque ustum, intra
corpus sumi debere, cum venenum sit, and statim, vel non ita multo post ^psius
receptionem gravissima apportet symptomata, quae hominent in extreman^
deturbant perniciem.

I will not here molest the Reader with a tedious translation of these words,
but only reduce them unto these assertions, to which I shall return particular
answers. 1. Antimony in its whole substance is poison, and therefore ought not
to be made use of by men, whose natures (as other poisons do) it destroys. 2.
It is poison because of its similitude to lead, which (as all men know) ought
to be reckoned amongst poisons. 3. It is poison, because of its malignity: For
whilst it is a calcining, it emitteth a virulent and venomous smell and
exhalation, like that of orpament, from which (as from present poison) Chemists
do advise to preserve the Nose. 4. It is poison, because of its imperfect
^rection: for Petrus Matthiolus upon the fifth Chapter of Dioscorides, bids
boil it with Borax to take away its venomous faculty, or add Treacle to it;
also the horn of the Unicorn, and species Diamoschi, and such like
alexipharmicks are by others advised to be mixed with it. 5. The purgations,
convulsions, and other sad symptoms, which are incident unto the users of it,
declare it to be poison; which incontinently, or not long after the receiving
of it, redacteth man to extreme ruin. 6. Antimony purges not any particular
humor, but promiscuously all, both good and bad; as other purgatives do not,
which purge by similitude of their essence or form, and do therefore purge
their proper humors, according to Hippocrates, in his book de natura humana. 7.
Calcined Antimony, by its whole substance and faculties (which are most
destructive of humane nature, and most inimical to the heart in particular)
purges not at all of its self, but accidentally: for it having most fearfully
awaked the humors, and irritated the expultrix faculty, they are confusedly
expelled. 8. Crude or natural and unprepared Antimony, purges not at all. 9.
Calcined Antimony purges not, but by an adherent, and by the strength of fire,
exalted venomous power, which violently commoveth all the spirits and humor of
the body.


As to the first, which consists of an antecedent and consequent. By the
antecedent, he will have Antimony to be one of those venemout things, quae
corrumpunt complexionem humanam, non sola qualitate, sed propriatate, which is
the only definition competent unto such as Sennertus terms Venena
praesentanea (as Arsenick) and which we do deny at all to belong unto Antimony.
1. Because crude Antimony does produce in man, none of those lamentable
accidents which other venomous things do, as vomiting (as this Author
confesses) purging, convulsions, etc. before it be prepared by art. 2.
Antimony prepared (whereby its vomitive and purgative faculties are awaked)
does (when skilfully prepared and exhibited) handsomely evacuat bad humors,
which, if they should be retained, would prove most corruptive of the humane
complexion. 3. Antimony Diaphoretick (which is neither vomitive nor purgative)
does excellently expel by sweating, all venenosity. 4. If Venenum be defined
(as Sennertus also does) id omne quod aptum est nobis vehementer nocere, per
occultam agendi rationem, it is undeniable that Antimony is one of those: as
also Wine (immoderatly and unseasonably taken) Saffran, and what not. Yea,
Sennertus relates a story of a Merchant ( Medicinae pract, lib. 6. part 5.
cap. 1. de natura veneni) who did eat at supper flesh wherewith much Saffran
was boiled, and immediately thereafter, he had almost died through laughter. It
were superfluous to ad more to this purpose, seeing the practice of all
Physicians) who have any knowledge of Chemistry) does demonstrat, that
Antimonial medicaments (externally or internally used) do operat as innocently,
as any others.

As to the second (which is a most confident assertion, destitute of probation,
and most unbeseeming a Physician, who for each of his assertions, ought to have
in promptu causam) I do first deny Lead to be poison, in any other respect,
than I have conceded Antimony, Wine and S^ssran to be such, in the fourth
answer. And secondly, I deny the consequence: for similitude of external
forms, can never infer a similitude of internals, especially when the effects
flowing from both the internal forms, are most discrepant, as in Antimony and
Lead.

For the third, that it emitteth a virulent and venomous smell and exhalation,
like that of orpament, from which (as from present poison) Chemists do advise
to preserve the nose. I answer first, that neither of these exhalations are
poisonous: for I have often breathed the air, that was vitiat with both (and
oftest that of Orpament, yea, of Arsenick itself, when burned) yet was never
prejudiced.

2. Though it were true, that the exhalation of Antimony is poisonous, does it
argue that Antimony, after calcination (whereby it is freed from that poisonous
exhalation) is still venomous? It does certainly demonstrat the contrary (as in
Antimony Diaphoretick) or at least, that its venenosity is much diminished, as
in Crocus Metallorum. Moreover, is not the flesh of vipers, an excellent
Alexipharmick or antidot against poison, when the head and gall (wherein its
venom does reside, according to Schroderus) are separated from it?

To the fourth, viz. that it is imperfectly corrected by Borax, Treacle, etc.)
I answer, 1. this Author should have evinced by reason, that none of those
mentioned Alexipharmicks, were capable to correct the venenosity of Antimony,
and not have given his nudam assertionem for it. 2. Although he and his
informers could never attain the skill of preparing it, so as that it would not
produce any of those sad symptoms; should others who have attained it, be by
him, or any, prohibited to use it; when frequent experience has discovered
unto them the innocence and usefulness of its operation.

As for the fifth, the sad and lamentable symptoms which it produces. I
answer, that I never found the like, save once, notwithstanding of which I have
still made use of it, with good success; and therefore every one would make use
of it, as he shall find encouragment, from its peaceable behavior.

Concerning the sixth (viz. that it purges not elective, as they say, any
peculiar humor, as others do, viz. Bile, Melancholy, etc. but promiscuously
all, both good and bad) I answer, 1. that it is well asserted, but ill proven.
2. I will not contradict that opinion so generally received by the learned,
that some medicaments are Cholagoga, other Melanagoga, etc. but only declare,
that though I be by experience convinced, that some have a natural aptitude to
purge B^e more then any other humor, and another sort for purging of
Melanch^ly, etc. Yet whenever a potion composed of either sort is exhibited
to any person, it does promiscuously evacuat a part of each of those humors
which it encountereth; and this is undeniable by my who have been diligent
observers of the eges^a, which (in valetudinary persons) is as necessary, as
the noticeing of the ingesta. 3. The assertion may be denied: for I have known
an Antimonial potion evacuat a pound of Bilis porracea, which was the only
cause of a constant vomiting two or three hours after meat, all that the person
had taken at the last meal; as also another pound of Bilis Vitellina, mixed
with pituita salsa; wherewith the internal wrinckled superfice of the stomach,
being, as it were, daubed, it and the other humor occasioned an indigestion of
the meat: and in others produces either a lienteria (when meat is evacuated by
stool, without being at all altered by the stomach, which being slippery,
cannot retain it; as when its wrinckles were not daubed with the humor) or
Coelica passio, wherein meat is excerned after being but a little altered.

Seventhly, he affirms, that Antimony purges not of it self (as other
purgatives do) but accidentally. This is all one as if he had said, that
Antimony purges, as drink, fruits, etc. (which are not purgative of
themselves) do, when a person has taken a surfeit of them, whereby nature being
oppressed, it does impetuously expel them and other humors, both good and bad,
with them. The falsity of this is so palpable, that it were folly to set about
the refuting of it.

The eighth is an irrefragable truth.

The ninth does not well express the Authors meaning, which I conceive was (at
least should have been) this, that so long as the natural mistion of the
constituent parts of Antimony, is not altered by fire, the vomitive and
purgative faculties of it, do not discover themselves, but so soon as the
Sulphur is freed in some measure from the bonds of salt, by which it was
formerly fettered, it does communicate it self unto the affused liquor, and
draws along with it the nitrous volatile salt, in both which resideth the
vomitive and purgative virtues of Antimony.

I shall add (for a Colophon) the reason why the foresaid water works not,
but when it is taken by pounds, viz. because it is impregnat only with the
putide Sulphur of Antimony: for if it were enriched with the Earth, volatile
salt, and best Sulphur (that is, such as is not become putide, by recrudescing
in fermentation) of Antimony, as is Spanish Wine, wherein the Saffran of
Metals has been infused, it would, by ounces (as this does) commove and purge
out the humors, and contain such a matter as would be precipitable by some
liquor: for the earth of Antimony (wherein do exist the Sulphur and volatile
salt, which commove and purge out the humors) does by precipitation separat it
self from Spanish Wine, when some drops of Aquafortis are mixed with it. But
the water of the Wells contains no precipitable matter. Now that the vomitive
and purgative qualities of Antimony, existeth in the Sulphur and volatile salt,
is hence proven, that Diaphoretick Antimony (which is Antimony that is totally
deprived of Sulphur and volatile salt, by calcination) is neither purgative nor
vomitive; and the sublimed flowers of Antimony, are most purgative and
vomitive. And hence it appears, that in Diaphoretick Antimony, the virtue of
Antimony, which attracteth and purges humors, is not imprisoned, but banished,
by Nitre.

Courteous Reader these are the things which we learned from the operations of
Art and Nature; but if any shall (from the same or like principles) prove, that
the forementioned water runs through Brimstone, or Vitriol, etc. we shall
most wilingly acknowledge an error; in the interim, In magnis voluisse sat
est. -- That is, In things of great excellency,
Let the endeavor satisfy.


And upon this account, we will plead for pardon: for there is no man

APANTA SOPHOS I. E. Omniscient.
AN APPENDIX, Concerning the saltness of the SEA, etc.
THat the truth of what has been said may shine more clearly, we must refull
some opinions of D. John French; who in the 2. Chapter and 22. page of his
Book, entitled, the Yorkshire Spau, asserteth, That there can no other reason
be given for h^t springs; than the fire which burns in the very cavities and
caverns of them, the cavities themselves consisting of (or rather being
replenished with) a Bituminous matter. For Bitumen, and these things which are
made of it, being kindled, burn in water (as Camphire also does) a very long
time; which could not be, unless it were fed by the moisture of the water,
which it did attract and convert into its own nature. And in the 14. Chapter,
concerning the putid^ Sulpher-well, about the middle of page 107. The stinking
odor thereof, I suppose, is caused from the vapor^ of the burning Bitumen; and
adust terreness mixed therewith, which lie nor far from the head of the Will.
And page 106. the ^aliness of the Sea proceeds from the Salt of the burnt
Bitumen, which is dissolved in the water, that ran^ through these veins of the
earth, wherein it was; which ( page 106. and 107.) he confirms by the example
of the Lake, called Asphaltites. And in the beginning of the 108. page, he
asserteth, That it cannot be rationally conceived, that the whole Sea received
all its salt into its self at one time, after a natural way, and therefore
being such a great body, must become sultish by little and little, even
insensibly. The falsehood of these opinions will manifestly appear by
considering,

1. That it is more like an untruth than a truth^ that there is a perpetual
subterraneal fire (of burning Bitumen) which does naturally heat the wawater.
1. Because it is not probable, that there was ever so much Bitumen in any
subterraneal place, as would, by it^ flame, have heated the waters, which do
every where spring out of hot fountains. 2. Neither is it probable, that there
is so much air in any cavity of the earth, as would necessarily (for to avoid
the penetration of dimensions) give place to so much flame, as would hear so
much water. 3. If the inflamed Bitumen, did produc^ the, foresaid heat, then
the fire would change (...) place, when it follows its aliment, and so the
water of the fountains would not be always impregnat with the same degree of
heat; because the fire which heateth them, would not always be equidistant
from the fountains. In the 25. page of the forementioned Book, the Author
answers to this argument, saying, that flame is nourished two ways; 1. When
it follows its food, as in the burning of wood. 2. When the food follows
the flame, as does Oil in a Lamp: and thus (says he) is the flame of the
Bitumen nourished; neither is this falsified by the flame of Brimstone, which
follows the matter. For (says he) the Bitumen is melted by the great heat,
and so it follows the flame, and continues the flame in the same place. But
I reply, 1. That flame does always follow its food, neither does Oil follow
the flame in a Lamp; but one part of the Oil being continuous to another, does
follow it, whilst it is a consuming by the flame. That you may the better
understand this, you would take notice of the reason, why some sulphurous
bodies (as Camphire, Turpentine, etc.) do of themselves take and conserve
flame; when others (as Tallow, Beeswax, Oil of Olives, etc.) do neither take
nor conserve it, but by the help of others, as of Linen cloth, Paper, Rushes,
etc. The cause of these things we conceive, yea affirm, to be this, that the
first sort are bodies which contain much Salt (for they are very sapide) which
does still detain the Sulphur, even when it is converted into flame; and the
last sort are bodies almost void of Salt (because insipide almost) which do not
take flame; because they cannot conserve it, unless they be associat to the
Sulphur of another body (containing much Salt, which detaineth its proper
Sulphur) and so take flame with it. From these things it does appear, that
flame does always follow its food; especially seeing the threeds of the Candle
and Lamp, do wast and consume by the flame, whilst it follows the Sulphur of
the threeds, which is its food, whose consumption is retarded by the Tallow in
the Candle, and Oil in the Lamp, which do nourish it. 2. It is not probable,
that all the Bitumen is liquified, 1. Because the flame of the kindled Bitumen,
liquifieth only the parts which are nearest to its self, as happens in a
Candle, Brimstone, red Wax, etc. 2. Whosoever will say, that the Bitumen
follows the flame, because it is melted, he must also confess, that there is
some other sire beneath or above the Bitumen, which melts it; and this would
infer the absurd progress in infinitum. 3. Nor can the flame of the kindled
Bitumen, by heating the caverns of the earth, liquifie the rest of the Bitumen:
because (as was said) it is not probable, that there is a place in the bowels
of the earth, which would contain so much flame, as would, by its heat,
liquifie all the Bitumen which is within four, five, or six miles unto it; the
contrary whereof must of necessity, be confessed, by him who will assert, that
the flame of the kind led Bitumen, changes not its place, by following its
food.

2. It is most fal^, that Bitumen, Camphire, and such like, which burn in
water, do retain their flame longer, than if they were out of the water,
because they convert it into their own nature, by which means it becomes food
to the flame; but the cause of their longer burning in the water, is rather,
because their external supersices (the uppermost only excepted) are humected by
the water, which prohibiteth the flame to seize upon all their external parts
(as happens when they are inflamed out of the water) and so they burn longer;
because a few only of their parts are inflamed. No man, who will be at the
pains to put a little inflamed Camphire into water, will question the truth of
this: For he will see the flame excavat the Camphire, and at length
extinguished, when it penetrateth unto the external parts, into which the water
has insinuat it self.

3. Although the flame of Bitumen were in the veins of the earth, yet its
vapors could not communicate any putide smell unto the water. 1. Because of the
forementioned reasons, when we wrote of inflamed Brimstone. 2. Because they
contain no terrestrial adust matter: For, 1. no such matter (capable to
communicate such a smell) does ascend from any body whilst it is a destilling,
and far less therefore whilst it is a burning. 2. Because smell proceeds only
from Sulphur; whereof, such earth (which did pass through the sire) would be
most destitute. It were therefore more consonant to reason and truth to say,
that the p^tide smell of the fountain (of which this Author writes) does
proceed from the Sulphur of Bitumen (or of any other thing) which is
recrudescing and evaporating, whilst it is a fermenting.

4. Seeing the Sea is a great body, it is more probable, that all its salt was
concreated with it, in the very instant of its creation, than that its saltness
was, by little and little, communicated unto it by the salt of the Bitumen,
which was burned in the caverns of the earth. For, 1. seeing, sea salt (which
nature coagulateth in many places, as at the Rochel in France, and in many
places of Spain) is such an useful and necessary thing for man, it is
incredible, that God (who created so great a variety of creatures for the use
of man) did not, at the beginning, creat it with the rest, than many of which
it is more useful. 2. Seeing every pound of Seawater contains about a
drachin of salt; and the Asphaltick 'Bitumen (which is found upon the shore of
the Lake Asphaltites, which is called eminently saltish) scarcely contains
any saltness that is perceptible by the taste; it is probable, that a mass of
Bitumen (though calcined, and equiponderating the terrestrial Globe, could not
communicate so great and perceptible saltness, to so great a body as the Sea is.
Moreover, the ashes of the Asphaltick Bitumen (from which the Sulphur is
separated by burning) do scarcely contain any saltness; for it is a sulphurous
body, which, of it self, will hardly take or retain flame, unless it be
associat to the Sulphur of burning coals. 3. Seeing it is most probable, that
the saltness of the Asphaltick lake proceeds not from the Bitumen which is
not dissolved in the water, but swimmeth only above upon it, and is thereby at
length ejected upon the shore^ it is more probable, that neither the fastness
of the Occan is communicated unto it, by the Bittimen, seeing it contains no
such matter. 4. Seeing, 1. the L^k^ Aspha^es is in the same place, where were
Sod^m, Gomorrah, and the valley which was full of bitumenous, or slymie (Genes.
14.10.) and salt ( See the English Annotations on Joshua, 15.62.) p^ts. 2.
Seeing then the foresaid Cities and v^lley were calcined (or incinerat) by Fire
and Brimstone (which we proved to be most faltish) which came down from heaven.
Gone. 19.24,25. 3. Seeing the ashes of all calcined bodies, do contain a fixed
salt, which naturally attracteth the humide air, that so it may be dissolved by
di^quation; without all doubt, the great saltness of that Lake (which is called
eminently saltish) proceeds only from the ash^s of those things which were
then calcined, whose salt did attract the humidt air, which did convert it into
a liquor, which was afterward augmented by Rain and the Rivulets, which ran
that way. So that it is probable, that that water is (...) for no other cause;
seeing there are many great Lakes, whose sweet waters do peretrat, as far into
the bowels of the earth, as the waters of the Asphaltick-lake, and many bays
of the Sea do. Moreover, this continual attraction of the air (because of the
Salino-sulphurcous spirit, that is diffused through it) produces in the air, a
perpetual circulation of su^phureous and sal^nous spirits (for the fixed salt
of the water attracteth the salinesulphureous spirit; and the more volau^e
parts, whether salinous or sulphurous, which are dissolved in the strange
humide body, do constantly attempt an avolation) which renders the birds
valetu ^inary, when they transvolat the Lake, and at length kills them. And
it is the very-like circulation of spirits, which causes persons (who are not
accustomed to navigation upon the S^a) nauseat or vomit, when these salinous
and su^phureous spirits, which are in their circulatory, motion, do enter the
body with the air. Now that there is such a salino-sulphureous spirit (which is
the universal (yet subservient to the first) cause of generation) really
existing in nature, is sufficiently proven by these four not ordinary arguments.

1. The earth which was within the limits of the flux and re^ux of the Sea,
remains barren for a time, after that the Sea deserteth it; viz. until that
Salino-sulphureous spirit have insinuat it self into it: for whenever this
comes to pass, then all sorts of vegetables (whose seeds or roots, were
seminated or planted there, or brought thither by the rain, from circum-j^cent
places) begin to germinat in it.

2 It is the very Salino sulphurous spirit, which insinuates it self into the
earth that is almost most barren, and makes it more fertile, when it is not
manured for two or three years: and the penetration of this spirit into the
ground, is promoved by the relicts of its proper Salt, which attracteth it. But
when earth, that has not been manured for a long time, becomes barren (which
happens sometimes, as I was informed by one skillful in Agriculture) that
ought to be ascribed unto the super-abundance of spirits (which does often
impede generation: for a woman immediately before her menstrual flux, does
seldom conceive. For which look the second These. that was disputed in medicinal
School at Paris, Nov. 23. 1656.) or to some other disease known, perchance, to
Husbandmen.

3. It is the very Salino-sulphureous spirit, which is diffused through the
air, that makes Heathy, wild, and almost barren, places, more fertile, when
it is attracted by the Lime which they cast upon the ground; for, the fixed
Salt of the ^ials, which is united to the earth of the stones, by calcination
(when the Lime is a making) promoveth the attraction of the foresaid spirit;
and so the earth is rendered more apt for the generation of Vegetables, which
require more Salinous and sulphurous spirits.

4. In the Isles of Orkney, the attraction of this Salino sulphurous spirit,
is greatly promoved by the salt of the Sea-ware, and ashes of Peats, wherewith
the inhabitants are accustomed to dung their lands, which are also much fatned
by the abundant Sulphur of the same vegetable.

Here I will acquaint you with an observation, which by many reiterated
experiments, I know to be most certain: And it is this, when Logh-leeches; are
applied to the inhabitants of Orkney, they fall off sooner, and suck less
blood, than when they are applied to such as live in the South-parts of the
Kingdom. I conceive the reason of this to be, the saltness and acrimony of
their blood, which makes those Animals, constantly to desist, long^ they be
full of blood; and this acrimony or saltness, does (without all doubt) proceed
from the salt of the forementioned Sea-ware, which causes the Barley and Oats
(the only Corus which grow there) to be more salt then in other places, where
the earth is not dunged with the foresaid vegetable and ashes. This also, with
the much eating of salted Fishes by the vulgars there, is the cause why
multitudes of them, are molested with Ulcers of all sorts, Caucers especially.
I do acknowledge, that elsewhere, Logh-leeches will sometimes fall off ere they
be full: But the cause of this is, the exuberancy of blood, which comes so
impetuously upon them, that it is like to choke them, for which they desist
from sucking; as children ordinarily do, when the Nurse her milk does molest
them, after the same manner. For the same reason also, the most part of
strangers, who go to reside in the Isles of Orkney, are at first molested with
a Diarrhaea or Flux; the acrimonious saltness of the bread and drink,
irritating the expultrix faculty, more than ordinary, until it be accustomed
with the same. This also is the reason, why the inhabitants there (for the most
part) do require a far stronger dose, of any purgative or vomitive medicine,
than those who live in the South; because their expultrix faculty, being
accustomed with the acrimony of bread and drink, which will prove purgative
unto others, who are not accustomed unto it, requires a stronger medicinal
exciter.

We thought it not unworthy of our pains, to offer unto the consideration of
Naturalists and Mathematicians, our opinion concerning the flux and reflux of
the Sea, before that we should have put a close to these things concerning the
Sea; and it is thus, seeing the Moon does by her presence refrigerat all
sublunary bodies, especially the air; and seeing fixed salt does attract the
cold air sooner and better than the hot, we conceive, that the fixed salt,
which was concreated with the Sea, and dissolved in its water, does abundantly
attract the air that was cooled (or so disposed by some other quality, that it
might be the more easily attracted by the salt) by the presence of the^ Moon,
or of the opposite point in its sphere; and so the quantity of the water is
greatly augmented, and the water is again by little and little converted into
air, when the air loses its foresaid quality, by the departure of the Moon, or
of its opposite point, from the meridian. This opinion is sufficiently proven by
this argument; viz. that Sea-stones, which are most saltish, do attract the
air, when it is altered, as was said, and do become so wet, that water droppeth
down from them: But when the air loses its foresaid alteration, then the water
is again converted into air, and the stones become dry like others. Moreover,
this humectation of the stones, does, as it were, observe the set times of the
flux and reflux of the Sea. It is true, that in very moist weather, these
stones will be constantly wet; because of the frigidity of the air: but yet
they are more wet when the Moon is in the meridiau, than at other times; so
that this does not in the least render our opinion improbable.

From what has been said, it may probably be concluded; 1. that the Seawater
is not so saltish, when the Tide is at the height, as when it is a Low Water;
because then its salt is dissolved in a greater quantity of water. 2. That
Seawater, taken from the Ocean, would observe the set times of the increase
and decrease of the Sea, if it were put into a Weather-glass (or a glass of the
same fashion, hermetically sealed) seeing it is impregnat with an active
principle (Salt) whereof common water is destitute, which nevertheless does
alter, according to the mutations of the air, by occupying of a larger place at
sometimes, and a lesser at another.

Having, since the publication of this opinion in Latin, more seriously
considered it, we conceive it needful now to declare, that we do not believe
this most real transmutation of air and water to be the adequat and only cause
of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, but that it is not one of the least
considerable causes of this most admirable effect, the full and exact knowledge
of whose causes, it seems the Almighty has reserved unto himself.

These things we do freely offer unto all, to be censured according to the
difference of opinions concerning them.

Some Spagyrical operations of nature, added in stead of a Conclusion.
THe first is Destillation. For vapors being elevated into the second region of
the air (which is cold, as the head of a Still) are there condensed, and do
from thence fall down in drops. 2. Sublimation (as it were) of Snow. 3.
Chrystallization of Sal-Gemmae, Ice and Hail. 4. Coagulation of Sea Salt, by
the heat of the Sun. 5. Calcination of Horse-hones (and of other animals, which
die in the fields) by the solar rays. 6. Filtration of water through the veins
of the earth: for it is most limpide which comes out of fountains. 7.
Dulcification of Seawater, whilst it passes through the bowels of the earth:
for it is the very same (being sweetened) which springs in fountains,
Ecclesiastes, 1.7. 8. Circulation of Salino-Sulphureous spirits in thesu
perfice of the Sea, of which before. The transmutation of the Elements also, is
a kind of circulation. 9. Salification of Nitre, in the concavities of Caves
and Vaults. 10. Fermentation, which does always preceed generation: for there
is no corruption, without an antecedent fermentation, as appears from the
premises. 11. Solution of Minerals by water, which is impregnat with some
corrosive salt, as was said concerning Antimony, in the description of
Moffet-Well. 12. Conflagration of Thunder. 13. Aurification in the veins of the
earth, which many Spagiricks have, in vain, essayed to imitat upon its
superfice.
Therefore the Spagyrical Art, is a most excellent imitatrix of Nature, from
whose principles and operations, we may collect, most probable causes for
(almost) all effects, whether natural or artificial.

THE OYLY-WELL: OR, A Topographico Spagyricall description of the Oyly-Well, at
St. Catharines-chappel, in the Paroch of Libberton.

To this is subjoyned, MONSTRUM CATHANESIENSE: OR, A description, etc.

BY MATTHEW MACKAILE, Chyrurgo-Medicine.

Edinburgh, Printed for Robert Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Sun, on the north-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I have yet again adventured to lanch forth into the Ocean of the World in this
little Vessel, which does not deserve the observation of any (where so many
others, more excellent and stately do appear, adorned with the sinest sails of
rational discourses, supported by the surest experiments, and furnished with
most irresistible arguments, which do conclude only the weightiest of truths,
for the routing and sinking into silence, of those irrational Pirates, who do
what they can, altogether to hinder our arrival at the haven of verity) were it
not because of the rarity and usefulness of the commodities which she carries:
For surely they will be delectable to some, and useful to all, who have had so
great a benefit by Nature conferred upon them, as is, understanding not to
abuse that, which might prove useful for them. They are such things as have
passed through the Refrigeratory of my vulgar Brain, and which I offer to be
rectified through the Serpens of a wiser; that the World may be presented with
a Destillatum, which may prove magis restaurativum of truth, than this will:
For the world had never more need of such a medicine, than in this our age,
which has (too too well) nursed so many Charletans, as betake themselves to no
other employment than cheating all men, with some one medicine or other (as
Coffe, Chocolat, or Jacolata, etc.) to each of which they ascribe more virtues,
than any ten can have, and give them to all such, as will be so foolish, as to
hazard the disturbance of the aeconomy of their bodies, in the hands of those,
who are as ignorant of the nature of the instrument wherewith they do it, as
are the vessels which contain them, and far more of the way of restoring the
greatly disturbed body, to its pristine healthful condition. Such Cheaters are
those, who fill the public places of every Town they come to with Programs for
the end foresaid; or else arrogantly do assume to themselves the skill of
curing, first, some particular diseases infallibly, and then all others curable
by art, at a cheaper rate, than any other; and to these they add many
detracting expressions, which may prove derogatory to the reputations of the
Physicians of the place, though never so learned; all which are the most
infallible marks of a Cheater. Yea, their wandering all the world over, does
undenyably argue them to be such: for when people do perceive, that their
medicine has scarcely any one of those virtues which they ascribed unto it,
and that their skill in curing is only palliative, they cease to employ them
any more, and thereby they are constrained to begin, and to set up in another
place, for getting of a new recruit of money, which they would have got to
excess, in any one considerable Town or Country, if they or their medicine,
could have cured the Gout, Chollick, Stone, etc. Such blades are pleased
sometimes to erect Stage Plays in the Macrocosme, that by their skill in
those, they may allicite men to permit them, to erect the like in their
Microcosmes; which they often do, to the sad lamentation of some. I have let
fly this Broadside of exclamations at those of our age, who are most guilty of
such actions; as also at such as have been so foolish as to believe, that every
far fetched fowl has fair and so have been very ingrate to their Maker, who
has furnished their native Country with such an abundance of most able and
skillful Physicians, and remedies of all sorts ( purgatives and spices only
excepted) as might (with very little help from our neighbors) serve in the
greatest necessities; as also to those well-deserving Countrymen, who have
spent the most and best of their time and means (and in traveling have
ventured their lives) for the good of their Country. I hope the Echo of these
exclamations will prove, in time coming, a warning-piece to all such as have
been so wise to bear off, and not to go near such Pirates, who rob so many not
only of their money, but also of their healths; and that the most part of those
children who have been burned by them, will (in time-coming) dread their fire.
I shall only add an earnest desire, that you would accept this, and what
follows, with as charitible a mind to me, as mine is wel-wishing to you, and
make such a good use of them as you may; in doing of which, you shall neither
wrong your self, nor him, who is, and will still be

Yours, as he shall have reason, M. M.

THE OYLY-WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyrical description of the Oyly-Well, at
St. Catharines-chappel in the Paroch of Libberton.
IN the Paroch of Libberton (the Church whereof lies two miles southward from
Edinburgh) there is a Well at the Chapel of St. Catharine, which is distant
from the Church, about a quarter of a mile, and is situat toward the
South-west) whose profundity equalleth the length of a Pike, and is always
replet with water; and at the bottom of it there remains a great quantity of
black Oil, in some veins of the earth.

His Majesty King James the sixth, the first Monarch of Great Britain, of
blessed memory, had such a great estimation of this rate Well, that when he
returned from England, to visit this His ancient Kingdom of Scotland, in anno.
1617. he went in person to see it, and ordered, that it should be built with
stones from the bottom to the top, and that a door and a pair of stairs should
be made for it, that men might have the more easy access unto its bottom, for
getting of the Oil. This royal command being obeyed, the Well was adorned and
preserved, until the year, 1650, when that execrable Regicide and Usurper,
Oliver Cromwell, with his rebellious and sacrilegious accomplices, did invade
this Kingdom; and not only deface such rare and ancient monuments of Natures
hand-work, but also the Synagogues of the God of Nature.

Before that we proceed any further, let us inquire from whence the water of
all Springs (such especially as are most frequently deprehended upon, or near
unto, the tops of high mountains) do proceed. The opinions of Philosophers
concerning this affair, are these three, which are mentioned by Frambesarius in
his natural history, and Dr. Andrew Baccius de Thermis, lib. 1. cap, 2. and by
Dr. John French, in his Yorkshire Span, chap. 2.

The first is Aristotle's, viz. That these waters are generat of vapors (which
are contained in the caverns of the earth) and of air (insinuating it self into
them, by the conduits it encountreth) which are condensed into water, by the
frididity of the earth.

The second is, that these waters are only Rainwater, which having insinuat it
self into the veins of the earth, makes way for its own egress, by the most
convenient passages.

The third is, that these waters come from the Sea, through the veins of the
earth; according to that saying of Solomon's (Ecclesiastes, 1.7. All rivers run
into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers
come, thither they return again) who was the wisest of all mere men, who were
before or should be after him, 1 Kings, 3.12. and that not only in spirituals,
but also in naturals: For the Scripture (1 Kings, 4.33) says, that he spoke
(by which you may well understand writing also) of Animals and Vegetables. He
was also, no doubt, as skillful in the art of Navigation, and knew well the
natures of Minerals, seeing (1 Kings, 9.26,27,28. and 10.22.) he made Navies of
ships, which he sent with his servants, that had knowledge of the Sea, unto
Ophir and Tarshish, from whence he brought gold and silver, in so great
abundance, that in his days silver was nothing accounted of, 1 Kings, 10.21.
He was also no less skillful in Agriculture, as may appear from Ecclesiastes,
2.5. And his making of Pools of water ( ver. 6.) demonstrateth his dexterous
skill, in finding out the subterraneal passages of water.

As to the first of these opinions, we cannot embrace it, because of these
reasons, 1. It is most improbable, that there are such large caverns in the
earth, as will contain so great a quantity of vapors and air, as, being
condensed, would afford so much water, as does daily scaturiat in springs,
which are upon high mountains: For ten Gallons of air will scarcely afford one
Gallon of water, as all will acknowledge. We will make use of this argument,
not only in relation to such springs, as proceed from the tops of high
mountains, but also in relation to some which are in lower places, and
environed with mountains; one whereof we will instance, which perpetually,
every moment yields many Scots quarts of water; and it is that known Well in
Carrick, at the Wel-tries, near to Maybol, unto which Well, no man (who knows
the Country betwixt it and the Sea westwards) will deny its original to be from
thence. 2. If the water, which does scaturiat from, or near unto the top of an
high mountain, does proceed from vapors, which have been condensed in the
caverns of the same mountains, these caverns being (of necessity) below the
caverns from which the water issues, it seems impossible, that the water can
naturally ascend, from the lower unto the higher parts of these caverns, which
are at the tops of the mountains; because water does naturally ascend no
further, than it did descend. We will notwithstanding acknowledge, 1. that
there may be some springs upon, or near unto the tops of some mountains, which
do not proceed from the Sea immediately, but rather from some Logh, whose
superfice is more distant from the Center of the earth, than the springs, and
whose water comes from the Sea immediately, after that manner, of which you
shall be informed afterward. 2. When water issues slowly from the lower part
of a mountain (as from St. Authonies Well, at Arthurs seat) it may proceed from
vapors and air, which have been condensed in the caverns of that same mountain
which are above the place out of of which it issues.

The second opinion is no less improbable; because it is incredible, that the
Rainwater, which does at sometimes only fall upon mountains and valleys, can
be the only water, which does perpetually scaturiat in all fountains; and that
as abundantly from some, after a long summers drought, as after the greatest
abundance of brumal showers.

We will here likewise admit, that there be many springs issuing from
mountains, which are furnished with no other water, than the bottles of the
clouds do afford unto some valleys, whose superfices are further from the
center of the earth, than the foresaid springs, whose waters are perpetually
increased by Rain, and diminished (totally sometimes) by drought. But these are
not the springs, concerning the original of whose waters we are inquiring; and
therefore all arguments which are, or may be taken from them, can conclude
nothing against Solomon his forementioned assertion.

The third opinion, which (as was said) is founded upon Solomon his assertion,
is also dubitable; because it does necessarily infer this improbable
conclusion, viz. that the supersice of the Sea, is higher (that is, further
distant from the center of the earth) than the orifices of these subterraneal
veins, from which its water is alleged to issue forth upon, or near unto the
tops of mountains, though never so high; and that because of the forementioned
Axiom, viz. Water does naturally ascend no further then it did descend; as is
ordinarily demonstrat, by a stroup of white Iron, which is bowed at the middle.

The verity of the opinion, and validity of the consequence will evidently
appear, by proving the conclusion to be a certain truth; for the doing of of
which, take these undeniable Propositions, from which we shall manifestly
infer, that the waters of the most part of springs do come from the Sea,
through the subterraneal veins; because of the altitude of its superfice,
beyond that of the highest mountains from which water springs.

Proposition 1. In the evening of the first day of the worlds creation, the
four elements did surround one another, that is, the water did completely
surround the earth (Psalm. 104.5,6.) the air surrounded the water end the earth,
and the element of fire (if there was or is such a thing) did contain within
its concavity, all the three.

The truth of this is evident from, Genesis 1.1,2. For in the first verse it is
expressly said, that in the beginning (that is, in the first day of the creation
as ver. 5.) God created the heaven and the earth; and in the second verse, the
earth was without form and void; that is, the form of the earth did not appear,
because it was completely covered with the waters, which upon the third day of
the creation, God did gather unto one place, that the dry land might appear, as
ver. 9.

Proposition 2. Before the gathering of the waters unto one place, the earth
and the waters did constitute one rotund Globe, and never since, but when God
commanded them, for drowning of the world, to return unto that their first
position or ^ituation, wherein their superfice was fifteen cubits above the top
of the highest mountain (Genes. 7.19.20.) And that, 1. through the fountains of
the great deep (Genesis 7.11.) or veins of the earth (as Job, 38.8.) the latter
half of which verse, does, without controversy, relate to the flood of Noah.
2. Through the bottles of the clouds (unto which they had ascended into vapors,
and) from which they did descend, for malaxing of the hard earth, that the
subterraneal waters might the more easily conciliat a more facile egress unto
themselves, by new passages, through the superfice of the same.

Proposition 3. From the third day of the worlds creation, until the flood of
Noah, and since that after the flood, the waters returned from off the face of
the earth (Genesis 8.3.) and the dry land appeared (ver. 5.11,12) the middle of
the superfice of the Ocean (which we conceive most probably to be beneath the
Arctick or North Pole) has been, and is further distant from the center of the
earth, than the top of the highest mountain. This Proposition is undeniable:
for, if when the waters surrounded the whole earth, their superfice was fifteen
cubits higher than the top of the highest mountain, far more is it higher now,
and has been ever since they returned from off the earth; and that (no doubt)
unto one (yea their former) place, unto which they were at first gathered, Genesis
1.9. Moreover, its truth is clearly evinced from Job. 38.10. I brake up for it
my decreed place, and set bars and doors, ver. 11. And said, hither to shall
thou come and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. For these
verses, and the first words of ver. 8. of the same Chapter, and Job, 28. ver.
11. ( He binds the floods from over-slowing, etc.) do no doubt relate unto
the third day of the creation, whereon God did gather the waters unto one place
(Genesis 1.9.) or unto the returning of the waters from off the earth (Genesis 8.3.)
or both, which is most probable.

This third Proposition is also proven, by Psalm. 104.5. Who laid the
foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever, ver. 6. Thou
covered'st it with the deep, as with a garment, the waters stood above the
mountains, ver. 7. at thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder they
hasted away, ver. 8. they go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys,
uno the place which thou have founded for them, ver. 9. Thou have set a bound
that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth; ver.
10. he sends his springs (that is, permits the springs to pass) among the
hills. And, Prove. 8.28. When he strengthened the fountains of the deep, ver.
29. when he gvae to the Sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his
commandment. Seeing it is most evident, from these places of Scripture
(especially from Psalm. 104.9,10. and Job, 28.11. and 38.8.10,11.) that the Sea
has a natural and perpetual inclination unto turning again to cover the earth
(whereby all the parts of its supeefice, may be equidistant from the center of
the earth) and that by the omnipotency only of God it is detained in that
situation, wherein now it is, we do from them and the foresaid propositions
conclude, that the waters of all springs (even such as do scaturiat upon the
tops of the highest mountains) which run perpetually, do proceed from the Sea,
through the subterraneal veins.

For further probation of this opinion, consider, that if the superfice of the
Sea, where any of its water does enter into the veins of the earth by which it
is conveyed to the tops of high mountains, were not further distant from the
center of the earth than the tops of those mountains, it could never ascend
unto them, no more than the water which issued from the top of an high
mountain, could move in a natural manner (as it does) toward the Seashore, if
the place from whence it proceeds, were not further distant from the center
of the earth than the shore.

Here we cannot but take notice, how Dr. John French, in his Yorkshire Span,
chap. 2. page 10, 11, 12. denies, that the middle superfice of the Ocean is
higher than the shore, and that there are such veins in the earth, as the water
would pass through, unto the tops of mountains where springs are; because the
veins in the bowels of the earth, are not wholly and throughout full, as of
necessity they must be, before water will ascend through them, for preservation
of its continuity, and the avaiding of a vacuum, as those crooked pipes are, by
which Wine-coopers use to draw Wine out of our vessel into another. For answer,
in consideration of our former reasons, we will as confidently affirm, as he
does deny, that the middle superfice of the Ocean is not only higher than the
shore, but also higher than the highest mountain; and that these veins of the
earth, are wholly, and throughout, full of water; because if they were not so,
the Seawater could never scaturiat from the tops of high mountains.

The foresaid Author having (as he thinks) sufficiently refuted that opinion,
which asserteth the ascent of the waters by the subterranea veins, which are in
the mountains (though it be according to the express Word of God, Psalm. 140.8.)
They go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys, unto the place which
thou have founded for them) sets down his own ( page 15.16.) which is this,
the water which proceeds from the tops of mountains, is only the vapors of
the waters contained in the caverns of the earth, which the subterraneal heat (
of the burning Bitumen, as page 22.) did elevat unto the heads of the springs,
where they are condensed into water, a^ water is elevated from the Sea unto the
middle region of the air, where it is condensed into water. Having into our
Appendix unto Moffet-Well, showed the improbability (if not the impossibility)
of that his subteraneal fire; for refuration of this opinion, I shall only make
use of the words of his own 2. Arg. (page 2.) whereby he refuteth the opinion
of Seneca, (viz. That springs are generated chiefly of earth, changed into
water) changing only the words air and corrupted, and putting vapor and
converted for them, thus, It is to be wondered at, that seeing ten parts of
vapor, if not more, serve for the making of one part of water, containable in
the same space, there should be so much space in the earth for containing so
much vapor, as serves the making of such a quantity of water, as springs daily
out of the earth, how is it possible that so much vapor can be converted in
such a moment? Moreover, as it is most probable (as he there writes) that the
whole elementary air, being of its own nature most subtle, and not being
sufficient to make such abundance of water, as all the springs of the earth
will amount to; so it is most like, that though there were such a subterraneal
fire, occasioning the elevation of such vapors, yet all these would not be
sufficient, to yield so much water, as does daily proceed from all the springs
that are upon the earth.

Let us here applaud the most ingenious opinion of the most famous Philosopher
Renatus Des Carres, princip. Philosoph. part 4. Parag. 65. Vt animalium
sanguis in eorum venis and arteriis, sic aqua in terrae venis circulariter
fluit. Because thereby appears one great resemblance, which is betwixt the
Macrocosme, and the choicest of Animals, Man, called the Microcosme. Not that
we think, that the similitude holds in all things, but that because of its
reality, the foresaid Author, is much to be admired and respected for his
ingenious observation.

In the next place, we shall first give you that description of the Well, which
we find in J. Monipeny his Memorial of the rare and wonderful things of
Scotland, at the end of his Abridgement of the Scottish Chronicles. 2. We shall
show, in what things this description is faulty. 3. Describe the manner of
collecting this Oil, and add such things as we have observed in the Well. 4.
Prove, that the fore cited Author his opinion, concerning the Oil, is most
probable. 5. Set down the manner of its separation from the Coals. 6. Describe
the Virtues, which undoubtedly it has, or in probability may be ascribed to
it. 7. Propose and answer three questions.

As to to the first, viz. I. M. his description of the Well, these are his
words. In Louthian, two miles from Edinburgh, is a Wellspring, called St.
Catharines Well, flowing perpetually with a kind of black fatness or Oil above
the water, preceding (as is thought) of the Parret coal, bring frequent in
these parts. This fatness is of a mavelous nature; for as the coal whereof it
proceeds, is judain to conceive fire or flame, So is this Oil of a sudain
operation, to heal all salt-scabs and humors, that trouble the outward skin of
man; commonly the head and hands are quickly healed by the virtue of this Oil.
It renders a mavelous sweet smell. Dr. Ja. Heart also makes mention of it, to
the same purpose, in his Diet of the diseased, Book 3 chap. 19. at the end.

The Author of the forementioned description is mistaken; 1. In saying, that
the Oil flows perpetually above the water; 2. In asserting, that it has a
mavelous sweet smell.

As to the latter assertion, it favors of misinformation, because the smell
of the Oil is most like unto the smell of the smoke of Coals, and their Oil,
which are no ways grateful or sweet; and the first assertion is also of the
same nature: For the Oil remains in the veins of the earth, which are near
unto the bottom of the Well, and does never ascend unto the superfice of the
water, but by drops only, and that when the water is commoved; because some
drops of the Oil, are then separated from the rest, which are detained in the
veins of the earth, through their viscosity, by which they are attached unto
the earth.

3. The manner of collecting the Oil is this, the water of the Well being
exhausted by buckets, until the superfice of that which remains, be as low
as the orifices of those veins, in which the Oil is absconded, when the
superfice of the water is often moved by a convenient vessel, from the side of
the Well, where these orifices are, unto the middle, the Oil comes forth of
the veins, and floateth upon the water, from which it is separated, as Cream
from Milk.

Here you would take notice, 1. that when the Well is full of water, there
appears sometimes: scum upon it, which is most delicatly vatiegat with these
colors, blue, red, green, purple, etc. (and Chamelion-like) changes all these
colors, according to the variation of its position unto your eyes, either by
your moving, from one place unto another, round about the Well, or by its
moving its place upon the water, by motion. The reason of this variation of
colors, we conceive to be the different ways of reflecting the rays of
light, by by the foresaid scum, seeing it is not altered by any other physical
agent. 2. The water of the Well is scarcely affected with the taste of the Oil,
so that it may be justly esteemed as destitute of its other virtues. The reason
of this is, because its taste (and consequently its parts, wherein its virtues
do confist) cannot be communicated unto the water, without the mediation of its
salt, either fixed or volatile: But so it is, that the fixed-salt of the Coals,
remains inseparable from them, before they be calcined; and the volatile,
being nitrous, is drawn along with the resinous oil, whereby its solution in
the water is prohibited.

If it shall be demanded, what this Scum is? We answer, that it is nothing
else, but one or more drops of the forementioned oil, which have been by
agitation of the water, first separated from tho rest, which lurketh in the
subterraneal veins at the bottom of the Well, and then by a further commotion,
extended over as much of the waters superfice, as it could cover, when
converted into a thin pellicule or scum. The truth of this is easily demonstrat
by this experiment; take one drop of the forementioned oil, and instill it
into a large vessel full of water, and then agitat the water with a stick, and
you shall presently perceive the like scum, which will vary its colors, as was
said. The Chemical Oil of Wormwood will do so also.

4. It is most probable, that the foresaid oil, is the oil of Coals: for
proving of which, consider, 1. that this oil is most like, in color, smell and
taste, unto the oil, which is by the Spagyrical Art extracted out of Coals,
save only in that it is not so strong; because it was not extracted by the
violence of fire, as this, whose strength existeth in its most active spirits,
which the fire has separated from the Coals. 2. The artificial oil of Coals,
is impregnat with the same virtue (but in a more eminent degree) which the
Author ascribes unto the oil of the Well, as experience has often testified
unto me. 3. A drop of the artificial oil of Coals, being instilled into a large
vessel full of water, by agitation it will be converted into a scum, which will
vary its colors, after the same manner that the scum of the Well does. 4. The
adjacent ground, south-wards, is full of Coal-pits and Lime-stones, which we
conceive do tend unto the nature of Coals, and do differ only from them, as
Silver differs from Gold; and this difference is easily collected from that
Axiom, Metallizationis finis est aurificatio. Moreover, Lime-stones are always
found near to Coals, as we are credibly informed,

Having already afferted, that this oil is the oil of Coals, we cannot but also
confess, that we are of opinion, that it is the very oil of the Parretcoal;
because this is the most sulphurous Coal, whose copious Sulphur, is of a most
facile separation, by the abluent water, as it passes through the veins of the
earth, in which this sort of Coal is contained.

5. Whilst the water of the Well passes through the veins of the Earth, where
the Coals are, it carries along with it, as much of the oil, as serves to
make an unctuous scum upon its superfice; and when it passes through other
veins of the earth into the Well, it encountereth some dryer parts, to which it
attacheth it self, until it is converted into an oil, by the contraction of
its parts, and continual accession of more pellicules. This is sufficiently
proven by the forementioned experiment: For if one drop of the oil be
convertible into an unctuous scum (as was proven) why should any doubt, that
the unctuous scum may be again converted into oil, by having its parts more
strictly united?

We hope that none will question the separation of this oil from Coals, which
are a most sulphurous mineral, seeing many vegetables (less or no more
sulphurous) do daily sacrimat sulphurous Gums, as Turpentine, Mastick, etc.

The virtues of the oil.

6. THe only virtues which, as yet, are ascribunto this oil, are, 1. Its
singular curing of the Scab, by the forementioned Author. 2. A power of healing
all aching of the Bones; by our learned Countryman Dr. Anderson, in his
Cold-spring of Kinghorn.

But we conceive, that these following virtues may, upon a most rational
account, be attributed unto it, and to the artificial oil of Coals. 1. It is
very probable, that these are excellent Anti-podagrick and Anti-paralytick
oils; because of the intense calidity wherewith they are endued. 2. They are
good Anti-hysterick oils, for internal, as well as external use; because of the
fetide smell, wherewith they are impregnat. 3. They will prove good
Ant-asthmatick oils; because of the aperitive quality, wherewith they seem to
be enriched, by reason of the acrimony of their taste, resembling that of the
Balsam of Brimstone, which is esteemed one of the best Ant-asthmatick medicines
which we have; and is best known unto our Aesculapian sons and servants, by the
name of Dr. Macullochs Balsam; because that learned and expert Physician (to
his Majesty King James the sixth, of glorious memory) was the inventer of its
more terss preparation (whereof the ancients were ignorant, and) which he left
behind him, unto us his Countrymen.


7. We shall propose and answer three questions, one whereof is concerning
Coals, and the rest are concerning Oils.

Quest. 1. Why do not Coals yield a sixed salt, when exposed to spagyrical
resolution? seeing they are one of the kinds of minerals, which do most abound
in salt. It is answered, 1. that because they do not render this kind of salt,
it is not to be supposed, that therefore they contain none of it; for the
whiteness of their ashes, and their intense corrosive quality, when converted
into Lime, by calcination, with stones of their own nature (as was said) do
sufficiently demonstrat the contrary. ^. They do not yield any fixed-salt;
because, when they are calcined, their fixed-salt does so corrode the metallic
earth, which they contain, that it converteth the same, with its self, into a
magisterial powder; from which (as from the magisterial pouders of Pearls,
Coral, Lead, etc.) experience teaches the impossibility of separating the
corrosive salt. 3. They afford no fixed-salt; because they are of the nature of
Lime-stones, from which (when converted into the most corrosive Lime) it is
impossible to extract any fixed-salt. Test Zuelfero, Chymico expertissimo, in
Animaadversionibus suis, in Appendice in Antidotorum Classem, de salibus
Theriacalibus, Pharmacopoeiae Augustanae, ab ipso ingeniosissime reformatae,
page 276. colum. 2.

Quest. 2. Why do some oils perpetually descend unto the bottom of the water,
as some oils which are destilled by descension? Ans. These oils being more crass
than others, are also more ponderous, and therefore cannot be supported by
water, which is endued with more tenuity of parts; but when these oils are (by
reiterated destillations) rectified, and so deprived of these craster parts,
the water will support them.

Quest. 3. Why do the most part of (if not all) oils descend unto the lowest
parts of sulphurous spirits (as of Wine, Barley, etc,) of an aqueous
consistence. Ans. The tenuity of the spirit is the undeniable cause, why it
cannot support the more crass oil (unless it be in a most exile quantity) which
is most participant of its nature and properties: For, if you will mix some
crass water with such a spirit, it will then support the oil, to which it
formerly denied that service.

Seeing the curious Former of all things, has much embellished the superfice of
our Scottish ground, with so many mineral springs of different natures, and
richly enambled its bowels with such a variety of metallic markasites (as is
well known) it is much to be regrated, that so few have attempted the
discovering of their natures, or (having made some progress in that) adventured
to expose their conceptions, concerning either of them, unto Fames fingering. I
know not if any of our Countrymen have published any thing concerning our
Metals; and it is to be feared, that there will be little, or nothing done to
this purpose in haste, seeing it has pleased the Almighty, to put an end unto
the days of that most learned and ingenious Mineralogist, the Lord Hopton, who
died Dec. 1662. And (according to my best knowledge) there are only three, who
have written concerning our Mineral Springs.

The first is Dr. Moor, present Professor of Medicine, in the University of
Aberdeen; who published a little book, concerning the Well of Peterhead, in the
year, 1636. from which it is manifest, that then (though a student only of
Medicine) he was privy to many of the most excellent actions of Art and Nature.

The second is Dr. Anderson, who wrote most learnedly upon the Cold-spring of
King-horn, in anno. 1618. and in that his book, mentions many rare springs
(wherewith Scotland is replenished, and) which we will here insert, because
that book is rare to be found. The first is the spring which issues from the
top of Rattray-cave, in the Barony of Slains, whose water does, in a short
time, congele into a hard stone, as says our forecited Author also, in his
memorial of the most rare and wonderful things of Scotland. Our learned and
ingenious Countryman, Dr. Sylvester Rattray, does also make mention of this
water in his book, entitled, Aditus novus, ad occult as sympathiae, and
Antipathiae causas inveniendaes. Here you would take cotice of a story, which
will convince you of the possibility of this. A Scottish Gentleman, having been
in France, and there acquainted with another of that Country, who (it seems)
was curious to know the various and (almost) miraculous operations of Nature,
did inform him, by writing, concerning this Well, and its water. The French man
returned him this answer, I am sorry, that you should think me such a fool, as
to believe such a Paradox as this is, that water should, in a short time, be
converted into a stone. Whereupon our Countryman fearing least the other
should think this a mere fiction, he took the pains, to set a glass under the
droping water, until it became full, and then he sent the glass unto him, the
water therein contained, being converted into a stone. A very ingenious
argument, for convincing so confident a Gain-sayer. Secondly, a spring of the
same nature, which himself did see in one of the vaults (which were most
curiously hewed out of a solid rock) of Roslain-castle. Thirdly, two Wells in
the Castle of Dumbarton, distant two or three foots, the one from the other;
the uppermost whereof, springing from north to south, yields a very salt
water; the other running from south to north, exhibiteth fresh water. Fourthly,
the Mud-earth wells of Menteith. Fifthly, the Lady-well of Strathearn. Sixthly,
the Lady-well of Ruthven-Seventhly, this Oyly-well at St. Catharines Chapel.

The third is Mr. William Barclay, whom Dr. Anderson styles, his very learned
friend, and old Parisien acquaintance, and of whom he writes, that he would
have all the effects of the Coldspring of King-horn to proceed from Tinn, etc.
So it is very probable, that that Gentleman, has written something concerning
that, or some other spring.

And seeing there are very many rare and admirable springs, in several places of
this Kingdom, far distant from one another, concerning which none has, as yet,
put pen to paper, such as live near to any one of them, would do well to
attempt the discovering of their natures and virtues, and then publish them for
the good of others; by the doing of which, they would purchase unto themselves
further access into natures Cabin, where they would find greater discoveries of
her manifold and great mysteries, with the knowledge of which, Providence has
decreed to enrich none, but the diligent searchers after them.

MONSTRUM CATHANESIENSE: OR, A drscription of a monstrous Child, born and
living in Caithness.
IN the Sheriffdome of Caithness, at the Church of Lathron, there is a child
(named Donald Sutherland) who upon the seventh day of May, 1663. was eighteen
months and fourteen days old; yet as tall as any ordinary child of three years
old; in describing of whom, we shall inform you of these following particulars.
1. He is so big, that a string of three quarters in length (wanting one inch)
will only surround him at the middle, when all his clothes are off. 2. His
Head, Arms and Legs, are so suitable to his body, that he may be called the true
pourtraicture of Bacchus; because most like unto him, as he is ordinarily
pourtrayed. 3. He is of a most fair and ruddy complexion having a comely
countenance and pleasant skin. 4. Yet it is to be feared, that he shall never
b^ instrumental, in producing another like to himself; nature having decreed
him an Eunuch from the womb: For his Scrotum is empty, and s^ fashioned, that
to the touch (without accurat i^spection) it would argue him to be an
Herm^phroditc. Moreover, his Yard is destitute of (...) Glans; and the
Praeputium is attached to the extremity, or entry to the Vrachus, on al^ sides.
5. He has sixteen Teeth (eight above and eight below) most orderly and
decently set; yet he is most unwilling to cat any bread, but loves only soft
meats. 6. His appetite to meat is so admirable, that upon the forementioned
day, when he had eaten to the admiration of all who were by him, ere half an
hour was expired, and dinner being prepared for us who were newly lighted from
off our Horses, he did eat three har^-boyled Eggs, and six or seven ounces of
new Cheese, and then would have eaten some boiled Fishes, if we had not
restrained him. 7. There is upon him such a burden of Beef, that, standing, he
resembles a drunken man, whose head is giddy: so that he can hardly walk,
unless he be led by the hand: But he will go very fast upon his hands and feet
together. Moreover, when he essayeth to rise from off the ground, he blows,
and makes a noise, as one having a burden upon him. 8. His body is adorned (or
rather deformed) with many lirks, by reason of the great quantity of flesh. He
has two lirks in his Neck, three upon every side, four upon every Arm, betwixt
the Armpits and Thumbs; two upon each Thigh, betwixt the lirk of the Lisk and
the Knee; and those were so deep, that a sixpence being put into the uppermost,
it did abscond or cover the half of it. He has also a lirk beneath every Knee,
and a little above his Ancles. 9. His wrests (immediately above the lirks) are
more than seven inches in compass; and the brans of his Legs are three inches
bigger. 10. His excrements are suitable to his age, but not to his cating: so
excellent is the digestive faculty of his stomach, and the attractive of his
lacteous vessels, that they permit nothing to be eliminat by the expultrix
faculty, which can cede into aliment. The reason of this may, probably, be the
superlative vigor of the ferment of the stomach (the great instrument in
chylification) which is occasioned by the deficiency of that ferment, which is
the great spermato-poetick agent: For the Former of all things uses mercifully
to repair the natural defects of some members, by enabling others to exerce
their natural offices, more extraordinarily, than naturally they use to do. As
when one born blind, has a most exquisite sense of hearing, feeling, or a good
memory, etc. As was manifest in the person of Alexander Cushny, who lived near
to the house of Drum, at the water of Dee, and being altogether blind, did (as
I was informed by an Eyewitness) take asunder a house Clock of the ordinary
size, belonging to the Earl Marshal of Scotland, and having mundified all the
wheels thereof, did set them together again in their due order. The goodness of
his digestion is, doubtless, the cause of his excessive growing. 11. The
persons who keep him did inform, that he was born of no bigger stature, than
any other child uses to be; and that he began not to grow to that monstrous
bigness, until he was six months old; and that he had lost much of his flesh
since he was weaned, which had been done only fourteen days before. 12. His
strength is such, that being displeased, he will easily break spoons made of
Horn. 13. He is only learning to speak the High-land language; but
understands much of it. 14. The weight of his body (which could not be
measured, because of the want of weights) is so great, that he is thereby
rendered so lazy, that a Girl of twelve or thirteen years old must carry him
from place to place, his arms being about her ^eck; and when she arises with
him from the ground, she must be assisted. 15. He is of so hot a complexion,
that a shirt suffices him for clothing. 16. His Parents are poor people, of
the middle stature, and somewhat inclining to the lesser sort. 17. To conclude,
he is such a person as might be a Present for a Prince, who would be careful
of dyeting him aright; which if it shall be neglected, will either occasion a
short life, or make him a Buffle-head, destitute of understanding; or else
occasion his not continuing to accress unto a preter-natural bigness, as he
increases in years.


CVLPEPER'S CHARACTER: OR, A CHARACTER of Mr. Culpeper and his Writings.

BY MATTHEW MACKAILE, Chyrurgo-Medicine.

Prove. 26.5. Answer a fool according to his solly, lest he be wise in his own
conceit.

Edinburgh, Printed for Robert Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Sun, on the north-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IT is too too probable, that the disciples of Mr. Culpeper, will not a little
censure this attempt, and most furiously (after his manner) challenge me, as
designing, 1. to condemn not only him, but all others, for publishing any thing
relating to Medicine in the English tongue, and so tax me of envying the
propagation of the knowledge of the Art amongst the vulgars. But such would
know, that I ever had a great estimation of all, who have written soberly (as
all have done, that ever I saw, Mr. Culpeper excepted) and to demonstrat the
truth of this, to the most incredulous of that crew, I have done the like my
self; being confident, that what ever has been written in English, will tend
to the honor of the Art and Artists; because improved to the best use, by
persons of understanding. And when such as are destitute of this director, do
any harm, by presumptuous meddling with such writings, they, at least others,
will be taught to make their address unto those who are the licenced and
qualified professors of the Art. 2. They will, no doubt, much resent my writing
against a dead Man, who is unable to answer for himself, and so challenge me of
baseness. To this I answer, that it appears, Mr. Culpeper, having
astrologically foreseen, that some would write against him after his death, did
pen that Pamphlet, entitled Culpepers Ghost, generously to excuse any that
intended to do it, and to excite others who inclined not to it; and that he
might not come short of them in the like work: For it is impossible to exult so
much over him, after his death, as he does in that Pamphlet, and others of his
writings, over others, who were gone hence before his own birth. Others will
possibly condemn my noticeing and answering such scurrilous, profane and
unchristian expressions, as are found in his writings, and which no sober or
wise man will care-for. To these I answer, that though it be impossible, that
he, by being answered according to his folly, can be rendered capable of being
impeded from becoming wise in his own conceit, yet such as survive him, and are
daily, in his name, printing books, stuffed with such expressions, as were
familiar unto him, may be taught this lesson.

It ought to be the lamentation of all, who have any knowledge of the
mysterious operations of sagacious Nature, that there are so few who make it
their study, to discover more of her mysteries; and that such as have made some
progress in this work, are so sparing in communicating their knowledge unto
others, especially in this age, wherein there are so many, who (as Mr. Culpeper
ever did) offer nothing to the most delicat pallats, but crambe recocta, that
is ov'r-nights Keal. It is most probable, that if Mr. Culpeper had been so far
favored by the heavenly powers, as to have been made the first discoverer of
the circulation of the blood (as was the most learned and famous Dr. Harvey) he
would have made Aurum Potabile of it, that is, written of it to no purpose. I
am confident, that the learned Dr. Thomas Willis, considering the most laudable
practices of Dr. Harvey, in writing de Generatione Animalium, and Circulatione
sanguinis; and of Dr. Glisson in writing de Rachitide; and that there are too
many books already in the world, written concerning all subjects, as they are
already known, did defer to employ the Press, until he had prepared something,
which would (as all intelligent persons will acknowledge) merit no small
acceptance ( viz. his Diatribae duae Medico-Philosophicae, de fermentatione
and febribus, and his dissertatio epistolica de urinis, which do demonstrat,
that he is one, who makes it his great study ingeniously to discover, and
candidely to communicate the knowledge of the mysteries of Art and Nature)
because, a vulgari sententia, tanquam via maxim trita paulisper recedens, and
minus calcato insistens tramiti, as he writes in his Preface, to his Diatriba
de febribus. But least this Epistle should become disproportionat to that, to
which it is presixed, I will sum up all that I have to say, in this request,
that you would put a favorable construction upon this attempt, in doing of
which, you shall obliege,

Your cordial Well-wisher, M. M.

CULPEPER'S CHARACTER: OR, A CHARACTER of Mr. Culpeper and his Writings.
IT was by some reported of Cato, that he never spoke a word of which he had
cause to repent; and there are (no doubt) not a few, who will say little less
concerning what Mr. Culpeper has wrote. But such as believe what Solomon said
(Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin) will easily be
convinced, that he who made so many motions, in so many volumns which he wrote,
could not but make some trippings. If Bishop Latimer was more cautious of what
he said, before his examiners, when he heard the pen of another writing behind
the hangings (because literascripta manet, and nescit vox missa reverti) how
much more cautious should Mr. Culpeper have been, in writing with his own hand,
and thereafter publishing in print, such things as were most reprehendible, by
any sober man, as you will annon be convinced. I will first mention such of his
expressions as are most derogatory to the glory of God, and prejudicial to his
servants.

In the Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to his book, entitled, A directory for
Mid-wives, he writes thus, In this world the devil has his agents, and their
actions are to keep you in darkness. Who are our jaylors? I say Scholars; and
thus I begin to prove it; in divinity they have given us a translation of the
Bible (such a one as it is) all the proper names in Scripture they have given
you in pure Hebrew names, in an English character. Pray do so much as read the
four or five first Chapters of the first book of Chronicles, and see what
instruction you can find there. And a little after he writes of the Scripture
thus, When you want knowledge, you know whether to go for it; not to an idle
Priest, but to one that will not upbraid you far your labor. Besides all this,
whole sentences in Scripture, are so translated, that ^t would make a man sick
to see them -- Had not the Priests formerly absconded the mysteries of the
truth from us, Sermons would have been cried about the streets for three
halfpence a dozen.

By these expressions you may know, how the pulse of his soul did beat at the
writing of them: For Solomon has said Prove. 21.23. Who so keeps his tongue,
keeps his soul. Surely then, when the tongue raileth against God himself and
his servants, it argues the soul (at that time) to be in a lamentable estate,
by reason of most depraved principles. Without transgressing against the rules
of charity, Mr. Culpeper (no doubt) may be called the most audacious Momus of
this our age, wherein he lived, in daring to vilisie that most exact
translation of the holy Scriptures in such a parenthized expression; and also
to speak the worst of evils concerning Dignities, as you shall hear hereafter.
I am confident, that if he had been more diligent in searching the Scriptures
(like the Bereans, Act. 17.11.) for edification, he would have found more
instruction from these Chapters in the first book of Chronicles; for by
comparing them and the like places, with Matthew. 1. and Luke, 3. he might
(according to the judgment of all Divines) have understood, that they were
penned by the Holy Ghost, chiefly for this end, that it might appear to the
Church in after-ages, that Jesus Christ our Savior was lineally descended of
Abraham and David; and not only that we might be instructed by the etymological
interpretations of the names; else the Spirit of God would have set down the
interpretations of them all in the Text, as He did (for reasons known to
Himself) of many in several places, some whereof we will here insert. Araham,
Genesis 17.5. A father of a great multitude, or many nations. Asher, Genesis 30.13.
Blessedness. Babell, Genesis 19.9. Confusion. Ben-oni, Genesis 35.18. Son of sorrow.
Beaula, Isaiah, 62.4. Married. Cephas, John, 1.42. A stone. Dan, Genesis 30.6. A
judgment. El-beth-el, Genesis 35.7. Elymas, Acts 13.8. A Sorcerer. Ephraim,, Genesis
41.52. Fruitful. Gad, Genesis 30.11. A troup, or band. Hephzibah, Isaiah, 62.4.
My delight in her. Ichabod, 1 Samuel 4.21. Where is the glory? Jedidiah, 2 Samuel
12.24,25. Beloved of the Lord. Jerubbaal, Judge. 6.32. Let Baal avenge. Joseph,
Genesis 30.24. Increasing. Issachar, Genesis 30.18. An hire. Ishmael, Genesis 16.11. God
has beard. Israel, Genesis 32.28. A prevailing with God. Levi, Genesis 29.36.
Joined. Loammi, Hos. 1.9. Not my people. Loruhamah, Hos. 1.6. Not having
obtained mercy. Melchizedeck, Genesis 14.18. and Heb. 7.2. King of righteousness
and peace. Moses, Exodus 2.10. Drawn out. Naphtali, Genesis 30.8. Wrestling. Seth,
Gen 24.25. Simeon, Genesis 29.33. Hearing. Zebulun, Genesis 30.20. Dwelling.


Moreover, the pious and learned Interpreters, being most zealous to advance
the knowledge of God and of the Scriptures, did, upon the margents of many
Bibles, set down the interpretations of the most part of the proper names.

I shall only add, that Mr. Culpeper, his censure of those Chapters in the
Chronicles, savoureth of no less presumptuous impiety, than, first, the taxing
of Almighty God, His Wisdom and Will, in not authorizing the holy Penmen of
the Scriptures to explicat all the proper names, as they did the most
considerable. Secondly, that he would have had the Interpreters to have added
unto the Scriptures, the explications of those proper names, which are not
explicat in the original text; by doing of which, they should have made
themselves the object of that dreadful threatening. Revel. 22.18.

As for that expression of his, Whole sentences in Scripture are so translated,
that it would make a man sick to see them, I shall only say this of it, that no
ingenuous and rational man, would have so impudently asserted so great a
paradox and untruth, without instancing some particular sentence for proving of
his assertion. It is one of Mr. Culpeper, his own physical sentences, that
physic without a reason, is like a pudding without fat; the like whereof may
very well be said of this his extravagant assertion, destitute of probation.

It is admirable, that Mr. Culpeper, who (in his Epistle prefixed to his
Translation of the London Dispensatory) assumeth unto himself, fellowship with
Christ and his Apostles, and likeness to God, did not take the pains to
translate, or correct some of those Scriptures which he reprehended. But his
surviving wife (in her Epistle prefixed to his Treatise of Aurum potabile)
seems to give a sufficient reason for this omission, in these words, My
husband left seventy nine books, of his own making or translating, in my hands
-- Also my Husband left seventeen books, completely perfected, in the hands of
Mr. Cole, for which he paid my Husband in his lifetime. Let the sober and
judicious Reader judge of the probability of this, considering that he had not
above nine years for this work and his astrological studies also (for he began
not to write till the year, 1648. or 1649. and he died, 1654. or 1655.) and
whether or not many books have been printed in his name, since his death, which
were not written some years after the same; particularly that book, entitled,
Arts Masterpiece; or the beautifying part of physic; whereby all defects of
nature in both sexes are amended, age renewed, youth continued, and all
imperfections fairly remedied -- Never before extant, though long since
promised by Mr. Nic. Culpeper, but now published by B. T. Doctor in physic.
London, printed, 1660. Concerning this book I have these six things to acquaint
you with. 1. That it is most probable Mr. Culpeper never wrote it, else his
Relict had published it, as she has done other books, since his death. 2. The
publisher of it in the Title Page, puts B. T. for his name, but at the end
of his Epistle to all truly virtuous Ladies, ^e sets L. D. which
discrepancy, reflecteth not a little upon the Publisher, as well as upon the
Printer. 3. In the Title Page he affirms these Experiments to be so far
discovered, that every man may be his own Apothecary: but it is most probable,
that the Penner of them, was as ignorant of the knowledge of that ingenious
art, as a Mole is destitute of the visible faculty: for, page 71. he orders
the making of an Ointment, without Oil, or any unctuous liquid body. 4. Many
(if not the most part) of the prescriptions contain, 1. either such things as
are most costly, as that Ointment (page 70. to cause a beard) for the making of
which he prescribes three ounces of Musk. 2. Or such things as cannot easily
be gotten, as, page 71. the blood of a Batt, for making of an Ointment, for
hindering the growth of hair. And, page 73. the turd of a Mole, for making of
another Ointment, to the same purpose. And, page 77. the blood of a Tortoise,
for making an Ointment to take away the hair. 3. Or else such things as are
ridiculous; because not seconded with reason. As, page 79. the Gall of a white
Ox, for making of a liniment to whiten the hair; as if the Gall of a red or
black Ox, would not serve as well. And, page 100 Grass-plantane, the rine taken
off, and washed nine days in spring water, for making an ointment, for leprous
faces. Those nine days of purification, might be sufficient for bleetching
both the herb and the face into other colors. 5. Frustra sit per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora: That is, there might be, from amongst the
Tautological farrago of those prescriptions, some few composed of the choicest
simples, for every several distemper there mentioned, which would prove more
useful, than any of these which are so confusedly set down. 6. The book is no
ways answerable to its promising Title Page; which may give just ground to
suspect, that the effects of those remedies will be as disproportionable to the
expense that men must be at in trying of the experiments.


It is a most infallible token of ignorance, cheating and foolish ostentation,
for a man to prefix a most flourishing Title Page to his book which does
scarcely deserve any at all; such as is that book, entitled: A discovery of
subterraneal treasure, viz. of all manner of Mines and Minerals, from the Gold
to the Coal; with plain directions and rules for the finding of them, in all
Kingdoms and Countries. And also the art of melting, refining and essaying of
them is plainly declared, so that every man that is indifferently capacious,
may with small charge, presently try the value of such ears, as shall be
found, either by rule or by accident. As also a way to try what color any
berry, leaf, flower, stalk, root, fruit, seed, bark, or wood will give; with a
perfect way to make colors that they shall not stain, nor fade like ordinary
colors. London, Printed, 1653. and are to be sold by Humphrey Mosley at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

This book consists of nine sheets only, and is so miserably defective in
performing any thing promised in the Title Page, that the world can hardly
produce another like it; so that the old saying, Parturiunt montes (which
contain those Mines and Minerals) may be the motto of its Frontispiece, and
Nascitur ridiculus mus, its Postscript.

Before I pass from this purpose, I will give you a taste of Mr. Culpeper, his
found divinity and abilities, in applying and interpreting of some passages of
the holy Scriptures. As, 1. in his Treatise of Aurum Potabile, page 3. he
writes thus, Truly we considering how mysteriously God by his Spirit has
penned the Scripture to the sons of men, that none but his own chosen ones
understand the mysteries of it, have ceased to question the integrity of
Philosophers, in penning such ridles (meaning their writings concerning the
Philosophers stone, Aurum potabile, etc.) that prophecy Isa. 6.9,10. which is
so often repeated in the New Testament, must be verified; Go unto this people
and say: hearing you shall hear, but not understand, and seeing you shall see,
but not perceive, etc. Let the judicious Readers, who have any knowledge of the
Scriptures, consider, whether or not that Prophecy was penned only, or at all,
in relation to the writings of these Philosophers, (as his words do clearly
import) especially, seeing the Apostle Paul applies them more (yea only)
spiritually, Act. 28.25,26,27.

2. Page 9. of the same Book, from these words, ( Genesis 3.22,23,24.) The Lord
turned man out of the garden, lest he should eat of the tree of life, and live
for ever; and he placed in the garden cherubims, and a flaming sword, which
turns every way to keep the tree of life; he infers as very probable,
these conclusions: 1. That the place of the garden is still probably remaining,
(and sure he means, in it is primitive integrity) because Angels had been but
a feeble guard, if they could not have kept out a little water, (viz. at the
flood of Noah, when all the high hills that were under heaven, were covered
fifteen cubits upward, Genesis 7.19,20. 2. That the bodies of Enoch and Elias may
be there, It is admirable, that he would not give Moses a place amongst them,
(possibly, because, being the only chief Magistrate amongst the Israelites, he
looked too like to a King) but it is more probable, that if the garden of Eden
was the Coemitery of Enoch and Elias, that there also God buried Moses, and
that the valley in the land of Moab, over against Bethpeor, where God buried
Moses (Deuteronomy. 34,6.) was the garden, But, it becomes no man to study wisdom in
the matters of God, above what is written; and far less did it beseem Mr.
Culpeper to doubt (if not contradict) those Scriptures, 2 King 2.11. at the
end. And Elijah went up by a whirlewind into heaven. Heb. 11.5. Enoch was
translated, that he should not see death.

3. Page 11. He writes thus, We read, Genesis 5.3. that Adam begat a son in his
own likeness; that is, as we understand, not of pure and temperat Elements, of
which he was created, but of corrupted and mixed Elements (as if at his first
creation of temperat Elements, they had not been mixed) and therefore mortal.
This rare Divine, allows no spiritual meaning unto those words. It is more
probable, than any of these his opinions, that an Assembly of the most ignorant
Divines (in the English Commonwealth, wherein he lived, and which licenced his
impudent Pen to scrible) would have rejected him, as insufficient, for
translating, or interpreting of the Scriptures unto them.

In the next place, take notice of his treasonable and scandalous expressions,
whereby he spoke evil of Dignities, mocking at their afflictions, in the day of
their calamity; and so, in a superlative manner transgressing that command,
Obadiah 13. I shall pass by with silence, those of them, with which he larded
his Almanacks (when the Sunlike glory of Monarchy was eclipsed by the opacous
Republican Parliament, whose inconsiderable and base constituent atoms, had no
splendour, but what was communicate unto them at first, by the King, the fountain
of all honor) and desire you only to notice such of them, as were his most
christian and charitable meditations, in relation to the fifth Commandment,
when he was bidding farewell to the world; viz. when he was penning that
Pamphlet, which he entitled Culpepers Ghost; In the second and twelfth pages
whereof, he writes such unchristian, treasonable and scandalous expressions,
as cannot be mentioned, without committing the like crimes; and therefore I
must forbear to insert them here, referring you to his own writings; and in
these few words only give you my verdict of them.

Notwithstanding that Solomon (the wisest of men) who was inspired by the
Spirit of God, did affirm, Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a land, many
are the Princes thereof; and, chap. 30.21. When a servant reigns, the earth
is disquieted, and cannot bear it; yet Mr. Culpeper was so foolish and hasty in
his words. ( Prove. 29.20.) as to mock at the father of the state ( Prove.
30.17.) and not be afraid of the judgment there threatened.

The Supreme Magistrate of the Universe, having put an happy end unto the long
and Cimmerian dark night of Anarchy, wherein such fiery meteors did appear, in
our British Horizon, but were not able to change the coats (and far less the
hearts) of one truly loyal person, I shall not determine their altitude in the
region of Rebellion, but only offer unto you some of the sanctuaries measuring
Reeds, by which you may do it your selves Titus, 3.1,2. Put them in mind to be
subject to principalities and powers, and to obey Magistrates, etc. Exodus,
22.28. Acts, 23.5. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.
Ecclesiastes, 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, etc, 2 Peter,
2.9,10,11,12,13. 1 Peter, 3.10. James, 3. to ver. 11.


I shall conclude this purpose, with those three sentences of Gods Word, which
a good Poet might convert into a most pertinent Epitaph upon Mr. Culpeper.
Prove. 21.24, Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath.
Pov. 10.31. But the froward tongue shall be cut off. Pro. 12.19 But a lying
tongue is but for a moment.


Take now some of his most christian and charitable complements, which he
passed upon the Physicians of the College of London; of whom many, for their
singular abilities, and diligence in their business, were honored to stand
before the King and Princes of the ^and. In the second page of his Epistle to
the Midwives, of England he calls the Physiceans a company of lazy Doctors,
most of whose covetousness outweighs their wits, as much as a Mil-stone
outweighs a feather.

And in the Epistle to the Reader of that same book, who are they that cry out
against Empyricks? who? The College of Physicians* And why do they so? they
kill men for wa^ of judgment; and who is the cause of this? themselves
forsooth: for if they taught men the true rules of physic, is any man so madd
as to practice false ones? I may now join them both together, like Simeon and
Levi, brethren in evil.

I will not instance any thing more to this purpose (though there might be
found as much of this sort of stuff in his writings, as many sheets would not
be able to contain) only read his Translation of the London Dispensatory, where
you will find most bitter railings against the College; and in the close of
his Epistle to the Reader, he takes the heaven and all the powers thereof to
record, that he never received the least prejudice from any of them, that would
have extracted revenge from a melancholy breast. It appears that Mr. Culpeper
would have wiped off the aspersion of hatred toward the College, by these
last words; but in so doing he resembles one, who with inky hands would do
away a black spot from off his own face, and thereby he rendereth himself a
most proper object of the censures of all ingenuously-minded persons, who ever
were, and will be, most ready to acknowledge with honor and love, the virtues
of their very enemies, and detest that superlative baseness of envying and
detracting from the deserved elogies of such as never did them wrong. Caesar
caused re-edifie the demolished statues of Pompey, though his enemy, and gave
this most generous reason for it, Least the honor of so brave a Commander
should have bled and languished under mine eye. Doubtless the ground of this
his implacable and unparallelable hatred, was only the merit of those
Aesculapian worthies, whose deserved estimation should not have been envyed;
especially, seeing the Almighty God, did inhibit the very envying of evil men,
Prove. 24.1,19. and the Prophet David did reprehend himself for being envious at
the prosperity of the wicked, Ps. 73.3. The most charitable censure which can
be put upon Mr. Culpeper for those expessions, is that of Solomon's, Prove.
11.12. He that is void of wisdom, despises his neighbor, but a man of
understanding holds his peace.

I will now inquire, if Mr. Culpeper had any knowledge or estimation of the
most excellent Art, Chymistrie. Surely the vulgars will censure me, as most
ridiculously uncharitable, in doubting of either; seeing he has written (as
they say) a most learned Treatise of Aurum Potabile, and Chemical Institutions,
in his School of physic, printed, anno. 1659. For determining of this
controversy, I will only propose some Querees, according to which the
judicious Reader may conclude as he pleases.

Quer. 1. Is it probable, that if Mr. Culpeper had understood any thing of the
art called Chymic, in anno. 1648. or 1649. (at which time he began to write)
would he not have manifested some what of it in his Translation of the London
Dispensatory, when he came to the Chemical prescriptions (seeing he did censure
many of their other prescriptions, as informal, etc.) and not have translated
them verbatim, without any animaadversions; neither, at the beginning (when
writing of the Oil of Wormwood) have given this advice? Your best way to learn
to Still Chemical Oils, is to learn at an Alchymist: for I rest consident, the
greatest part of the College had no more skill in Chymistrie, than I have in
building houses.

Quer. 2. If he had understood this ingenious and useful art, would he have,
in the close of his days (when he penned his Ghost) given it such a slender
and detracting commendatory testimony, as he did page fifth and sixth, in these
words. And as for Chymistric, of which I had a mighty high opinion in my
lifetime, I must confess, though I still acknowledge the Art to be very
ingenious and useful to search into the mysteries of nature, and the best key
of natural Philosophy, and that by help thereof, some very useful medicaments
are daily made, as my Aurum Potabile, of which I left a Treatise, yet I do do
now much doubt, whether a general supply of medicaments, for all cases obvious
in practice, can by Chymistrie be afforded, better than the often approved, and
by experience confirmed, Galenical and a Hippocratical remedies? It is too too
evident, that if he had not left that Treatise of Aurum Potabile, (which is the
only useful medicament which he acknowledges to be made by Chymistric) to
have been published in his own name, the most excellent Art, would not have
been so favorably mentioned.

Quer, 3. If Mr. Culpeper had been it structed in the principles of this art,
as would have beseemed one, in whose name Chemical Institutions and a Treatise
of Aurum Potabile, were to be published, would he have, in those Institutions,
begun with, and (for the most part) proceeded in the practical part of the art,
and that only according as it had been written of by others, above twenty
times, before he saw the light of the Sun? Surely, when he penned those
Institutions, he did forget, that the learned Sennertus, and all others who
ever wrote Institutions to any Art, did confine themselves unto the the
cretical part, describing only the necessary pracognita, before the practical
should be attempted.

I will here give you a taste of his great skill in this Art, by mentioning
some of his expressions in the ninth Chapter of those Institutions, where
writing of the Quintessence of every simple matter; he describes it thus,
Quintessence is the fifth part of every thing having form and substance, and a
most subtle spirit drawn from its body, etc. And a little after, Quintessence
-- solely by its self, has none of the four qualities in it, viz. watery, airy,
fiery or earthly, which could be discerned or discovered, by the judicious
inquisition of the most skillful Philosophers. -- Therefore, for a conclusion
observe, that it is neither hot nor cold, nor moist nor dry, but is a thing of
a temperate nature, exceeding all the Elements which are under heaven. Then he
affirms, that it is chiefly to be understood of Wine, the spirit whereof he
calls the Quintessence, and shows the vulgar manner of destilling it, chap.
10 and bids lute the vessels, that the animal and vegetable Virtue may not
exhale out of the Wine. Is it not admirable, that Mr. Culpeper, (upon whose
Diet, Schooling and being at the University of Cambridge, four hundred pounds
were spent, as is affirmed by that most adulatory Penner of his life, prefixed
to his School of Physic, should affirm such paradoxes, and never give one
reason (wise or foolish) for proving of any of them. As, 1. That any part of a
Body, composed of the four Physical Elements, is not composed of the same
principles, and does not partake of the same qualities with that Body, of which
it was a constituent part. If he had proved it by sure demonstrations, he had
truly deserved the title of Magnus Appollo, to which he was busily aspiring in
this age. 2. That the spirit of Wine, Aqua vitae, etc. are not at all hot. 3.
That Wine contains animal virtue. These two being so ridiculous, need no
other anima-adversions, than what a critical Divine said once of another
writings, vidi and risi. Those Institutions, which contain such doctrine, so
methodically disposed, do challenge to the Author of them, the very same
testimony, which Mr. Culpeper (though undeservedly) gave to the most part of
the College of Physicians at London, viz. that they had no more skill in
Chymistrie, than Mr. Culpeper had in building houses; especially seeing he is
such a fool, as to contradict what he wrote formerly, in his Key to Galens
method of physic, Sect. 1. when writing of Medicines temperat, thus -- It is
impossible that any medicine can be temperat.

Quer. 4. If Mr. Culpeper had been instructed in the principles of this worthy
Art, would he not have discovered some of that sort of knowledge, in some of
his other writings? I do declare, that (according to my best remembrance) I
never read any thing in any of his writings concerning this Art, saving what
has been just now mentioned, and some few lines in his Epistle to the Reader,
prefixed to his Directory for Midwives, wherein he, who pretended to be the
greatest and most zealous promoter of the knowledge of natural and medicinal
things, for the good of his Country (as may appear from those ridiculous words
in his Ghost, page 13. I dare say I have been a greater teacher of physic, and
have had incomparably more disciples in that Art, than all the fellows of Amen
College, since old King Hary gave them their Charter does scoff at, and
vilipend natures key, and rail against that learned and skillful operator to
the College, Mr. William Johnson, demonstrating, that his great zeal was void
of the knowledge of nature, and that his chief designs were, 1. the acquiring
of money from the Printers, for buying of Beer and Tobacco; for proving of
which, take notice of these words, which the Authors of the Preface, prefixed
to the complete Midwives practice enlarged, in their Preface write thus -- Its
almost a miracle to us, that Mr. Culpeper, a man whom we otherwise respect,
should descend so low, as to borrow his imperfect Treatise from those wretched
volumnes, some of which are before mentioned; and we must deal faithfully with
you, that that small piece of his, entitled, the Directory for Midwives, is
the most desperately deficient of them all, except he writ it for necessity, he
could certainly have never been so sinful to have exposed it to light.

2. The erecting of the Trophies of his own fame, upon the ruins of others,
whom he was still decrying. His words are these, When the Temple of Disna was
on fire, ont jumps the image that fell down from Jupiter, from Ephesus to
England at one leap, whom all the world adore (some few children of my mother
Nature excepted) and silver shrines must be made for her still, Demetrins the
Silversmith having taken him a shop in Amen-Corner.

The judicious Reader of these things, will surely think himself obliged to
ascribe the penning of that Treatise of Aurum potabile, only to Dr. Freeman,
whom Mr. Culpepers Relict (in her Epistle prefixed to the said Treatise)
acknowledged to have studied, and attained to the perfection of it, jointly
with her Husband.

Be pleased to take a view of some things in his book, entitled, The English
Physician, etc. and first of its Title Page, wherein are these three things
reprehendible; 1. He calls it a complete (fearing least others would not)
Method of physic; whereas it contains only a confused (saving that it is
alphabetically almost disposed) description of English Herbs, and their
virtues, without any physical precepts, either methodically or confusedly
ordered. For, by a Method of physic, nothing can be understood, but a
methodical description of the Art of Physic, containing the causes, signs and
cures of diseases, such as is Philip Barrough, his method of physic. 2. He
promises, thereby to teach a man to preserve his body in health, or cure
himself, being sick, with threepence charge, with such things only as grow
(...) England. And yet in the description of the first Herb, Amara dulcis and
its virtues (and through the whole book almost) he prescribes three pynts of
white Wine, for to boil the wood and leaves into. Surely the most favorable
construction which can be put upon this discrepancy, is, that to cause the book
fell well, it behooved to have that blazing and dazzling promise upon its
Frontispiece. But, Vine vendibili non opus est Hedera,
That is, Wine that is recent in the Seller,
Needs not an Ivy for its Banner.


Moreover, it is evident from these words, that Mr. Culpeper thought, that this
book of his, would be sufficient to inform any man concerning the nature and
cure of his disease, (though it contains nothing of the principles of
Medicine; at least, that any man being informed of the natures of Remedies, is
instantly enabled to cure a disease. Was not this a most speedy and effectual
course which he did undertake, for multiplying and patronizing the number of
ignorant Doctors (who usurp the title, and have not so much Latin as would buy
a loaf to a Dog) and Empiricks of both Sexes, who are not able to distinguish
one disease from another. It will not be amiss to insert some stories,
concerning some such persons, as first,

One who pretended to have some skill in physic, used to give these five
rules, as the most excellent, for preserving of health. 1. Fear God. 2. Purge
melancholy. 3. Live temperatly. 4. Extortion not your stomach. 5. Keep a good
diet.

Secondly, There is a Doctrix, concerning whom I will relate unto you these
most certain stories.

1. She desired a Gentleman, going for London, to bring home to her some Oils.
When he desired to know what kinds of Oils, there being Oils of different
natures and operations, she replied, Any Oils, because I intend to try
conclusions.

2. A sickly Rustic came unto her, complaining of a pain in his neck, and
betwixt his shoulders. She affirmed his disease to be the Ripples in his neck,
and essayed to cure him thus; every morning he got a good draught of warm Ale,
with some Ginger; and so soon as he had drunk that, she put him into the Barn
to thresh a Barley stack of her own. Thus continued he under physic till the
stack was threshed.

A Rustic woman came unto her, to get her advice concerning the Gravel,
wherewith she was much troubled. The Doctrix gave her this advice, for causing
the stone fall down into the neck of the bladder, You must stand leaning
forwards with your two hands, upon the arms of a great chair, setting your feet
far asunder; then let your Husband take a broad shovel, and give you four or
five good clanks or strokes upon the buttocks with it. In my own audience she
confessed this story to be true, unto several considerable persons.

4. A valetudinary Rustic came unto her, and desired some things for his
health; to whom (after some discourse, and steadfast looking into his
countenance) she gave this answer, truly friend you will die. The person then
(with a more melancholy aspect demanded how she did know that? But she declined
to give him a reason for her prognostic, affirming, that it was not for him to
know that: For (said she) it is sufficient that I know it. At length, being
further pressed, she told him, that he had drunk a fou^ or unclean drink. The
Rustic answered, Mistress, you know, that we who are country people, drink
nothing but small drink, or clean water -- No no (said she) but you have drunk
a drink into which the Moon has shined. Mistress (said he) you know we use to
go to the Well at night, and drink water though the Moon be shining. But (said
she) the Moon has shined into the cup wherein your drink has been.
Notwithstanding of this discourse, the simple fellow condescended to take from
her some potion or other. The reason of this ridiculous expression concerning
the moon, is none other than this; she having (to my certain knowledge) Mr.
Culpepers English Physician or Herbal, has read in it, that some herbs are
herbs of the Moon, others herbs of the Sun, and others herbs of Mars, etc. and
do cause such and such diseases, and cure others; and having some rude and
ignorant conceptions, concerning such things, did utter that ridiculous
prognostic and reason. It is not much to be admired, that a silly woman had
such shallow imaginations, seeing the most learned and famous Mr. Culpeper was
so presumptuous, as to enslave all vegetables to a necessary and unavoidable
dependence, upon the influences of the Stars, which were not created until the
fourth day of the creation, which was the day after the creation of vegetables.
The consideration of which, made the truly most learned and pious Dr. Thomas
Fuller (in his 18. Scripture observation, in his book, entitled, Good thoughts
in bad times) resolve, hereafter to admire God more, and fear Astrologers less.

It is most certain, that there are many ignorant Empiricks, who (by such books
as Mr. Culpepers English Physician is) know as many medicaments and their
virtues, as the ablest of Physicians; and yet they are, and will still be, most
unsuccessefull in their enterprises: because ignorant how to make use of them
in due season. The consideration of this made famous Hippocrates begin his
Aphorisms thus, Vita brevis, Art longa, occasio volucris, experientia
periculosa, judicium difficile, etc. id est, secundum Heurnium, Nemo presentem
agnoscit occasionem, nisi ille qui judicio, and experientia excellit. Such
ignorant fellows, have often reason either to bewail their blind precipitancy,
or to ruminat upon that old Proverb, Front capillata, post est occasio calva.

An able Physician, considering the presumptuousness of such persons, said
well, Multa dantur Medicamenta, nulla remedia; nam solus medicus prudens and
sapiens, ex medicamentis, remedia facit. Medicamenti etenim anima, est occasto
ipsum exhibendi. That is, there be many Medicaments, but no Remedies: for only
the prudent and wise Physician makes Remedies of Medicaments: for the soul of
a Medicament, is the season of applying it.

The Christian Readers of Mr. Culpepers writings, which contain such excellent
stuff, as you have here before mentioned, may consider whether or not, the
Publishers, Re-printers and Sellers of his writings (or other men's in his name)
have not reason to take to themselves that most excellent advice of Mr.
Culpepers (being the last words of his Ghost, which was the last of his
writings) which he left in Legacy to the Printer of the book, entitled,
Culpepers last Legacy, without his own knowledge, in these words, If he leave
not off such tricks, I would advise him to pull down the sign of the Angel, and
hang up the Devil, or the sign of his Clovenfoot, in stead thereof, that people
may guess by the sign, what commodities he deals in, and know where to have
them, without seeking any further about the Town. For when they see the father
of lies and impostors, or his mitred foot hanged up, they may be sure that love
lies and sophisticated forgeries (as too many do) where to have their turn
served.

3. In the Title Page also, he promises to show the time of gathering all
herbs, both vulgarly and astrologically; but when he comes to treat of
gathering roots ( page 382. and 383) he only controverteth a little concerning
descending of the sap to the root in Autumn, and its ascending in the Spring,
and laughs at it as a tradition. At length, he determines the controversy
thus, The truth is, when the Sun declines from the Tropic of Cancer, the sap
begins to congeal both in root and branch; when it touches the Tropic of
Capricorn, and ascends to us ward it begins to wax thin again, and by
degrees, as it congealed. This is an assertion of Mr. Culpepers, which he
wrote, after that he had consulted (as he writes in his Epistle to the Reader)
with his two brothers, Dr. Reason and Dr. Experience, and that after his voyage
taken to visit his mother Nature. Likewise after his asserting, that neither
Gerard nor Perkinson, nor any that ever wrote in the like nature, gave ever one
wise reason for what they wrote, but trained up young novices in the school of
Tradition, and did teach them, just as a Parrot is taught to speak.

From this assertion of Mr. Culpepers, it is most evident, that he has been of
opinion, 1. that the natural withering of herbs in autumn, whilst they are not
cut down, proceeds only from the congealing of their sap: because of the Suns
declination from the Tropic of Cancer. The assertion he learned from Dr.
Tradition, and his pretended Dr. Reason inferred from it this opinion; to which
I oppose this, as savouring of more natural reason, and less reasonless
tradition. The root of the herb, having in the Summertime, furnished the
stems, etc. with vegetative spirits, which it conveyeth by the aqueous
humidity, these spirits being distributed amongst the leaves, flowers and
seeds, provident nature appoints the evaporation or exhalation of the same,
by the Suns heat, as an enemy to their conservation, and a great accelerator of
their putrefaction. 2. He has thought, that the sap of the roots of herbs, is
not so thin in the middle of winter (when the earth, about them, is most
succulent or wet) as in the middle of summer, when the ground is not half so
wet. But if he had required the judgment of Dr. Reason concerning this affair,
he would have told him, that the vegetative soul, remaining in the root, does,
in the winter time, attract more sap to it, than it had at the end of autumn,
for nourishing and strengthening it, the better to resist the brumal cold,
which would be ready to kill it, after the loss of so many spirits, as it has
communicated unto the seeds, and other parts, which it sent forth in the Summer
and Autumn, and after the great cold is gone, it begins to operat upon that
sap, sending it forth into new leaves, stems, etc. which it alimenteth
afterward with new sap, which it attracteth from the ambient earth.

Hence it appears, that the most convenient season for collecting of roots,
is the Springtime, immediately before they put forth new leaves or stems. And I
am confident, that Mr. Culpeper never eated Parsneeps, but in winter, though he
did it not for this reason. Let the judicious Reader consider, if this be not a
very clear hinting at the reason of that assertion of Mr. Culpepers (chap. 1.
of leaves of herbs or trees) which he (who wrote as before, in the Epistle)
does most impudently set down, without any reason, subjoyned unto it, in these
words. The leaves of such herbs as run up to seed, are not so good when they
are in slower as before, some few excepted, the leaves of which are seldom or
never used. But here Mr. Culpeper seems to answer for such omissions, in that
learned and complete Method of Physic, by these words, concerning the book, in
his Epistle to the Reader; In mine, if you view it with the eye of reason, you
shall see a reason for every thing that is written. But these words, do rather
pre-require more reason in the Reader, than is in the book.

In the second place take notice, how he commends this his book. You read
before, that in the Title Page he calls it A complete method of physic; and
in the Epistle to the Reader, he writes thus; The prosit and benefits arising
from it, or that may accreu unto a wise man from it, are many; so many, that
should I sum up all the particulars, the Epistle would be a^ big a^ the Book;
and then he reduces all to three general heads, which no man, but he who has
the forementioned eye of reason, and can bring-but that which is not
there-benn, will be able to discover. Mr. Culpeper, his sounding forth his own
praises, after this manner, and his frequent satirical reflections upon others,
does directly transgress that excellent precept, which Dionysius Cate gave to
his Son. Officium alterius multis narrare memento,
Atque aliis, cum tu beneseceris, ipse siteto.


As also the more considerable sentences of the holy Ghost, Prove. 27.2. Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, 2 Cor. 10.18. For not he that
commends himself is approved. If he had remembered, that the coats and
garments, which Dorcas made in her lifetime, did commend her frugality most
after her death ( Acts, 9.39.) he would have been more sparing in penning, and
causing print such commendations of his own writings in his lifetime, and
rather have reserved them for to have been enlargements, or flesh and sinews to
his (...) like Ghost, which was printed after his death.

In the third place take notice, that though Mr. Culpeper, in his Epistle to
the Reader, did reprehend Gerard, Perkinson, etc. for never giving one wise
reason for what they wrote, etc. yet all along through the book, he does most
confidently take upon him to determine the degrees of heat and coldness, or
dryness and moistness of herbs, according as did the most fabulous writers, who
were the first authors of such like traditions. Take this one instance, as the
most considerable (because a part of that discourse, which in the Epistle he
calls the Key of the whole book) which savoureth of most presumptuous
considence, and reasonless tradition; and it is concerning Wormwood, of which
he writes thus, it is hot and dry in the first degree, viz. just as hot as
your blood, and no hotter. Should such a Critic have so peremptorily asserted,
without giving any reason for it? at least, should he not have prefixed to his
book a rational rule for discovering the temperaments of herbs in general,
seeing all others who wrote before him, concerning herbs, did assert the like,
and never gave the least shadow of reason for it. Surely he had a good
opportunity for the doing of this, in his Key to Galens method of physic,
(subjoyned to his Translation of the London Dispensatory) sect. 1. where he
writes of the temperature of Medicines in general, and where he has a
discourse, not exceeding eight lines in 8vo, neither assording two grains of
instruction to the Reader.

Fourthly, let the judicious Reader consider what he has written at large
concerning Wormwood (which discourse, he called the Key of the whole book; and
in the close of it, he calls it a Jewel, more worth than a Diamond; and
asserteth, that in the words of it, lies a Key which will unlock the cabinet of
Physic) for (as Mr. Culpeper wrote concerning some places of Scripture,
translated into English) It would make a man sick to see it, being a discourse
stuffed with variety of most ridiculous impertinencies; particularly where he
says, that where Dr. Reason dwells not, Dr. Madness dwells, and Dr. Madness
brings in Dr. Ignorance; Dr. Felly, Dr. Sickness and Dr. Death.

You must excuse my not meddling with any thing in his writings which is
astrological: For I acknowledge my self not to be sufficiently acquainted with
the principles of that Art, and therefore do refer him unto others. Only I will
say this, that if his Astrology in Medicinals be no better than it (and the
Astrology of others more famous than he) was in Politics, in the time of the
Commonwealth (when Monarchy was said to be eternally exiled from Great Britain,
by all the powers of the heavens) they will mis-spend their time, who will take
the pains to read.

Concerning his great skill in the Pharmacopoetical art, which he endeavors
to manifest in his Translation of the London Dispensatory, and Chapters
subjoyned unto his English Physician, I will only say this, that whosoever
shall compare those his writings, with the ingenious and learned Animadversions
of Dr. John Zuelfer, upon the Augustan Dispensatory, will be soon convinced,
that an Apprentice of one years standing would have written as well, if not
better than he did.

Take now a demonstration of his matchless impudence; which is this, in his
Translation of the London Dispensatory, when he describes the virtues of the
Vinegar of Squills, prefixing his own name to them, he does it, according to
Galen his words, which he had stolen, either out of Galens own works, or else
from the Augustan Dispensatory. Yet notwithstanding of this, he had so much
impudent confidence, as (a little after) to challenge the learned Physicians of
London, for stealing the prescript of the Lochoch of Purslain, from Ausberg;
and then adds these ridiculous and scurrilous words, you shall shortly hear
the Augustan Physicians come, with how and cry after the College, and cry,
stop thieves. Let others remember this proverb, which he forgot. Turpe est
doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

Before I conclude, I will acquaint you with this true story: An able Physician
of our Nation, being demanded, by one of Mr. Culpepers disciples if he had read
any of Mr. Culpepers works? answered, I tha^k God, I never had so much leisure
as to do it. It having been my misfortune to have some leisure, for that end, I
have given you a taste only, of what I found in such of his writings, as
providence did throw into my hands. And all that ever I learned from them is
this, which I look upon as the Corollary of this discourse.

Mr. Culpepers writings, are only either other men's writings which he has
translated into English, or collections out of other men's works, which he has
deformed with malicious, scurrilous, detracting and railing expressions, and
studied to beautify with some ridiculous, and (sometimes) impertinent jests.

So that that sentence (which you will find in the Epistle to the Reader,
prefixed to his Translation of the London Dispensatory) may be most pertinently
applied unto himself, mutatis mutandis; A Physician riding (passing) in Plush
(Print) and not one grain of wit, more than was printed before he was born. By
these words he does well condemn those, who rest satisfied with what is already
discovered and known unto all, and press not forward unto new discoveries,
which ought to be the only exercise of the Scholars (especially Physicians) of
our age, wherein is abundance of most excellent books already published,
concerning all subjects; and yet there was never a scribler in the world, which
made the Press ruminat more, to little or no purpose, than he did.

For a conclusion to this discourse, I will answer one great objection,
wherewith I will, very probably, be troubled hereafter; which is this, since
Mr. Culpeper his death, his relict, Mrs. Alice Culpeper, has in print, by way
of Epistle, renounced many books of her Husbands, printed in his lifetime, one
whereof, called Culpepers last Legacy, etc, she denies to have been written by
him: because it is not written according to her Husbands lofty and masculine
style -- and in such a solemn valediction, he could not, possibly, have forgot
his wonted respects to the College (some whereof we have mentioned before) to
whom he did so frequently address himself in ^ivers of his writings; and others
of them are in Epistles subscribed by him self (viz. the English Physician, and
Directory for Midwives, which I have seen) alleged to be very falsely printed,
and to contain many gross mistakes. So that those passages, which I have before
mentioned, out of his writings (and particularly that ridiculous assertion
concerning Barrenness, in his Directory for Midwives, Book, 3. Sect. 3. at the
end, printed, 1652. but left out of those which were since printed. The words
are these, I will tell you no more than I have known tried, the cure is easy,
and was done by the man only, who could not give his wife due benevolence,
making water through his wives wedding Ring, so there was one superstition
helped another.) may possibly be alleged to be such mistakes, as he, or rather
she, in his name, did dis-own. For answer, 1. I conceive that it is a gross
reslection, upon her Husband, to make people believe, that he was such a fool,
as could not keep his papers, till they had gone to the Press, with his own
knowledge. 2. It is probable, that when Mistress Culpeper shall die, some of her
relations will, in her name, renounce that Epistle of hers (which I found
prefixed to the English Physician, the Treatise of Aurum Potabile, and the
Directory for Midwives, all reprinted, 1656, after his death) because she would
not have been so much unchristian, as to have denied that book ( Culpepers last
Legacy) to be her Husbands, especially because it contains none of his wonted
respects to the College; which were nothing, but most unchristian and
scurrilous railings against men, by serving of whom, he would have been
honored, but he was ever so foolish as to forsake this mercy.

Having called to remembrance, that Distichon of Cato's. Contra verbosos, noli
contendere verbis.
Sermo datur cunctis, animi sapientia pa^cis.


I will proceed no further. Farewell.

POSTSCRIPT TO CULPEPERS GHOST.
Animula vagula.
I am confident, that since thy arrival at the Elysian fields, and conference
with so many able scrutators of natures mysteries, as are mentioned in thy
book, entitled, Culpepers Ghost, thou have attained the knowledge of such
things, as thou wast not well acquainted with in this world (as appears from
thy expressions, page 5. and 6. concerning Chymistrie) and therefore I will
propose unto thee some Querees, to which I desire thee to return answers with
the first Post.

Quer. 1. What is it in the Netle, which at the first touch offends a man's
hand, and sudainly vesicateth the skin? seeing Cantharides do vesicat as
strongly, though not so soon. All that you have said of this in your English
Physician (which in the Epistle to the Reader, you assirmed to contain a reason
for every thing, that is written) is this, Nettles are so well known, that they
need no description at all; they may be found by feeling, in the darkest night.
Quer. 2. Why Cantharides, which do vesicat but slowly, are so prejudicial to
nature, when immoderatly used, not only internally, but also externally (as
appears from their inimical operation upon the Bladder) and yet Nettles,
which vesicat so sudainly, do no harm, when used as a good Pot-herb? Quer. 3.
Why the decoction of Nettles provokes the Menstrua; seeing the juice of the
leaves stays bleeding at the mouth? as you affirmed in your English
Physician, without giving any reason, for averting the challenge of
improbability. Quer. 4. Why the sensitive plant, contracteth it self at the
touch of man? Quer. 5. Why recent Red Roses, being boiled amongst Oil, do not
communicate their redness unto the Oil, as Chamomel does its greenness? Quer, 6.
Why the eyes of a Cat, and the flesh of many fishes, ar^ luminous in the dark,
seeing the most scintillent Diamond is defficient in this? Quer. 7. Why the
flesh of fresh water fishes, are not at all luminous in the dark? Quer. 8. Why
the spirits of Sulphur and Vitriol, do intend the redness of the Tincture of
Roses, when extracted by warm water. Quer. 9. Why the smoke of inflamed
Brimstone, makes a recent Red-rose of a white color, when held unto it? Quer.
10. Why the Oil of Tartar, being instilled into the said Tincture, or put upon
the whitned Rose, destroys the redness of the one, and makes both contract a
green color? Quer. 11. Why the Tincture of Red-roses, having a little Alum
dissolved into it, and tasted by a man, makes his spittle of a green color,
seeing the Alum did not alter the color of the Tincture? Quer. 12. Why Dogs
which take much pleasure in killing of wild fowls (or in serving such as kill
them with Guns) as Plivers, etc. will eat none of their flesh or bones? Quer.
13. Why does not the Sugar of Syrups, made of acide juyces (as of Limons,
Sorrel, etc.) crystallize (after they have been boiled too much) as the Sugar
of other Syrups, viz. the Syrup of Violets, pale Roses, etc. Quer. 14. What is
it in Aloe which is so eminently astringent, and stops the slux of blood,
when externally applied to wounds, seeing it is very purgative, when taken
internally, and is denied to haemoptoical persons, because of its opening of
veins, making orifices upon them, as if it were corrosive? Quer. 15. Why does
the weather of every Moon, exactly correspond to the weather of the Thursday
before the change? That is, if the Thursday before the change of the Moon
(whether she change upon Wednesday, Friday, or any other) be a fair day, such
will the weather be all the next Moon. If there be rain, wind, snow, hail, etc,
in the morning, before-noon, afternoon, or at night, such will the weather be
at those times of the Moon, answering such times of the day. This I have often
observed never to fail, excepting three times in the year, viz. 1. at the end
of March, the three last days whereof are commonly called the borrowing days,
and use to be tempestuous. 2. In May, when there uses to be two or three days
of bad weather (according to the proverb, Come it soon come it late, in May
comes the Cow-quake) which are so cold, that the Kine do tremble. 3. At the
beginning of August, when there are much rains, which cause the Lammess-flood.
Surely thy skill in Astrology will soon afford a reason for this?

Quer. 16. Why Autimony being vitrisied, not only retains its vomitive
quality, but also enjoys it in a superlative degree? seeing all other things
almost, do loss their primitive qualities, when reduced into Glass, by reason
of the destruction of their seminal forms. Quer. 17. What is it in the yoke of
an Egg, which is the best (if not the only) mean, by which Turpentine is
rendered dissolvable by an aqucous body? Quer. 18. Why cannot Quicksilver,
being once dissolved by the strongest corrosives, be detained in that condition
when exposed to the heat of fire, seeing Lead and all other minerals, being once
so dissolved, are inseparable, by the greatest violence of Vulcan? Quer. 19.
From whence proceed Worms, which are sound in green Pees? for it is improbable,
that they proceed from the sperm of such like animals, deposed upon the husk,
containing them, seeing there appears no blemish upon it, nor passage through
it. And far less is it probable, that they are engendered in the Pees
themselves; seeing it is most certain, that omne Ens gignit sibi simile, except
there be a degeneration; because of an aberration of nature, as when a more
noble creature degenerateth into a less noble, of the same kind, as when Barley
degenerateth into Oats, or when Worms, etc. do breed in the bodies of animals,
or in their carcases after death, secundum Harveum de Generatione animalium,
Exercitat. 1. Quer. 20. Why the feet of a Swan are so black, seeing all her
feathers are most white? In answering to this, have a care, lest (reflecting
upon your often approved, and by experience confirmed, Galenical remedies (as
you wrote in your Ghost) and Method of physic, to which you made a Key of the
softest metal, and exposed it to sale, adorned with the roust of Ignorance and
Tradition, particularly, chap. 6.) you attribute this blackness, to the
melancholic humor, which nature has secerned to her feet. For I hope, that
you, who was a Translator of Anatomists, will not so much injure the Splen,
which was Galen his receptacle of Melancholy, neither ascribe the yellowness of
her bill unto Choler, lest you offend the Gall. Quer. 21. Why does the Heron
bow its neck when it flies; seeing the Swan (which has a greater body, and a
longer neck) does extend its neck to its full length in flying. Surely if you
shall allege, that the blackness of the Swans feet proceeds from melancholy,
you will be persuaded, that the Swan should rather bow its neck, for fear of
receiving prejudice by extending it: For (according to Gaelen) melancholy
causes fearfulness. Quer. 22. Why the Sheep of England have no horns, but
tails which reach the ground? seeing the Oxen and Kine have horns of superlative
bigness. Quer. 23. Why wild fowls of one kind are all of one color, seeing
tame fowls are of most different colors? Quer. 24. Why a man ganteth when he
sees another man do so? yea, I heard of one, who could not forbear ganting, if
the lid, or cover of a Stoup had been moved once or twice up and down before
him. Quer. 25. What is it in Oat-bread, which being smelled at by one who is
taken by the Nose by Mustard, eases the trouble? Quer. 26. Why does the
feathers of Doves spoil the feathers of all other birds, with which they are
mixed? Quer. 27. Why Coneys do repair most frequently out of their holes, to
feed, only whilst the Sea is ebbing? Quer. 28. Is this opinion of the vulgars
true, viz. that the treading of water-fowls out of the water, does not
foecundat their Eggs? And if it be certain, what is the reason of it? Quer. 29.
Why a Plivers breast (which is white in Harvest and Winter) becomes black in
the Spring, and continues so all the Summer? Quer. 30. Why the Ewes in Orkney
(where the North Pole is elevated about sixty degrees) have ordinarily two
Lambs, frequently three, and sometimes four? As I was informed by a Gentleman
there, who had an Ewe, which at one time brought forth four Lambs, three
whereof were lame in the forelegs, and went on their knees. Quer. 31. Why the
North Wind does not commove the Sea, so greatly as other winds do? Quer. 32.
Why the West-wind does still calm at night: when the air is not cloudy? Quer.
33. Why persons which have had the Ter^an-feaver are still distempered before
stormy weather; and whilst the East Wind blows? Quer. 34. Why Sea-fowls
extend their legs toward their tails, in flying; and Land-fowls (the Heron
and Lap-wing excepted) do contract their legs? Quer. 35. Why are there no Moles
in Ireland? or rather, why does the earth of Ireland kill Moles? For which
reason some of the inhabitants of the South-west parts of Scotland, have
brought earth from Ireland, to put into their Gardens, for that end. Quer. 36.
Why in the Canicular days only a man cannot see the vapor which proceeds
from his own, or another mouth or nostrils, in breathing, when the Sun shines
upon him? Quer. 37. Why persons who die not violent deaths use to expire at the
Full-sea, or at a lowwater? This I have observed, seldom, or never to fail, and
that within four or five minutes of these times. Quer. 38. Why the strongest
Corrosives will not operat upon common Glass; seeing Spanish or French Wines do
operat upon the Glass of Antimony? Quer. 39. Why the bottom of a Pot, which
contains a boiling liquor, is tractable by a man's hand; but becomes
untractable when the liquor is poured out? Quer. 40. What is the irrefragable
reason of the Echo, its once or twice repeating a man's words articulatly? Quer.
41. Why in Fairay-Sound (betwix the Isles of Fairay and Etha in Orkney) the Sea
runs north-east for the space only of three hours in slowing, and nine hours
south-west in ebbing? This is the course of the Tide only in the middle of the
Sound, which is but one mile broad. Quer. 42. Is it true that black Wool will
admit of no other color? And if so, what is the reason of it? Quer. 43. Why
the Jaundize is cured by medicines of a yellow color? as Rubarb, the juice and
flowers of Celledon, Saffron, etc. Quer. 44. Why the males of birds of Prey are
less than the females? Quer. 45. Why are not children, under two years old,
sick at Sea?
If thou shall give rational answers unto these Querees, I am confident, thou
shall gain more estimation, than by all thy labors under the Sun; and an act
of indemnity for the many transgressions of thy Pen, which was only busied
about things, the knowledge of which (as thou did rescribe) was so stale in
the world, before thou came into it thy self, that no delicat pallat would have
used it, when such Clusters of Grapes, might have been had, out of which, a
more rational and rare Elixir, might have been extracted, for refreshing of the
stomachs surfeted with such musty and rancide fare, as you did always set
before them.

FINIS.

