Two Sticks made One: OR, THE EXCELLENCY OF UNITY. BEING A SERMON Preached by
the Appointment of the Ministers of the Congregational and Presbyterian
Persuasion, at their Happy UNION. On the Sixth Day of April, 1691. Which was a
Day set apart by them, partly to bewail former Divisions, and partly as a
Thanksgiving to God for their present Agreement. And now at their Unanimous
Request made Public.

By MATTHEW MEAD, Pastor of a Church of Christ at Stepney.

Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity.

Si virtutum finis ille sit maximus qui plurimorum spectat profectum, moderatio
omnium pulcherrima est. Ambr.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel. 1691.

THE Excellency of Unity: A SERMON preached by the Appointment of the Ministers
of the Congregational and Presbyterian Persuasion at their Happy Union: On the
Sixth Day of April, 1691.

By MATTHEW MEAD, Pastor of a Church of Christ at Stepney.

To the Reverend THE Dissenting Ministers OF LONDON, Formerly called
Congregational and Presbyterian, But now known by the Name of United Brethren
Reverend, and much honored in the Lord,
AS this Sermon had not been Preached, so nor had it been made public, but in
obedience to your Call; which I the more willingly complied with, that I might
thereby give Testimony to my readiness of promoting that good Design abroad,
which you have made so happy a progress in at home.

You no sooner had appointed me to this Work, but God pointed me to the Text;
which I found so suitable to the Occasion, that I resolved to do the utmost my
short Arm could reach to, in improving it to the blessed ends of Love and
Union, that I might thereby show my self to be not only (...), but (...); and
endeavor with all my might that the Heaven below might be made like the Heaven
above, a quiet and peaceable Habitation.

To intermeddle in Matters of Strife is in common Cases deemed a thankless
Office, and he often times feels most Fists who steps in to part the Fray. Naz.
Orat. de Pace.
(...). But the Goodness of this Undertaking is such, as will richly Recompense
for the greatest Inconvenience that can attend the Attempt; and if it should
not find Success among Men, I am satisfied that it will not want a Blessing
from God.

None can, with any color of Reason, be prejudiced at this happy Undertaking
of yours, which is not in the least intended to countenance any Carnal or
Worldly Design, but to serve the great Interests of our Lord Jesus, and promote
that Kingdom of his which is not of this World.

Many there are who call every kind of Compliance baseness, and a betraying of
Principles; but so long as our Consciences tell us, that what we do is in
Obedience to the Command of Christ, the peace we shall find within will more
then pay the Charge of all unjust Censures from without. Men of such rough and
sour Spirits are ready to think God to be such a one as themselves; As the
Lacedaemonians, being a Warlike People, represented their Gods all in Armor.
But God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Who does not desire to see the Church of Christ in a flourishing state? It was
one of Austin's wishes, to see Romam in flore. And should it not be every good
Man's wish, to see Ecclesiam in flore? When the Temple is purged, and a
Separation made between the Sanctuary and the profane Place, (Ezekiel. 41.20.)
then the Glory of the Lord will fill the House, Ezekiel. 43.5.

God has eminently appeared among you hitherto in carrying on this blessed
Work, therefore it greatly concerns us to hold him fast by Endeavoring to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, lest this Silence in Heaven
should be but for the space of half an hour.

How should the consideration of the Coming of the Lord, which now draws very
nigh, put us all upon promoting this Work. Will it not be a very uncomfortable
thing to be found in our Divisions in that day? Therefore we ought not to stand
at a distance, but upon such Reasons as will justify our dissent, and be
approved of by the impartial Judge.

The Lord pour out a richer measure of the Spirit of Love upon all that fear
his Name, and show to them that (...) which none can find, but they who are
taught of God. The Inquiry after which, in order to walking therein, was the
chief Design of this Discourse. Such as it is it is now yours, not only by my
Act in the Dedication, but by your own in the Publication. And therefore as it
humbly begs your Patronage because it needs it, so it earnestly calls for your
Observance because of the importance of the Design of it, which is to
strengthen the Staff of Bands now put into your hands by God; and this nothing
can do but a constant and conscientious practice of those Principles upon which
your Union stands.

And now Brethren, as that Rod out of the Stem of Jesse (upon whom the Spirit
of the Lord rests, the Girdle of whose Reins is Faithfulness) has so far
fulfilled that comfortable Promise, as to cause the Wolf to dwell with the
Lamb; let it also appear that he has bowed your Spirits to such an entire
Resignation to Truth, as that a Child may lead you. And then the Counsels here
given will be as readily embraced, and as carefully practiced, as they were
faithfully tendered by him who greatly rejoices to be known by the pleasing
Title of one (tho the meanest) of the united Brethren, and

Your most faithful Servant, Matthew Mead.

Two Sticks made One.
EZEKIEL. XXXVII. 19. Say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold I will take
the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the Tribes of Israel
his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make
them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.


WHat our Lord Christ said in Luke 4.21. upon his reading that of the Prophet
Isaiah, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach good tidings to the meek, etc. This day, says he, this Scripture is
fulfilled in your ears. The same I may say of this Scripture now read to you,
God has in a great measure this day fulfilled it among you.

A Scripture which seems exactly fitted to this Days Design, which is partly
for humbling in regard of former Divisions; and partly for rejoicing with
respect to the present Union.

Accordingly you have in the Text two Sticks, Isa. 9.21.
The stick in the hand of Ephraim, and the stick of Judah: that is, Ephraim
against Judah, and Judah against Ephraim. This is matter of mourning. But then
you have these two sticks made one in the hand of the Lord, and that is cause
of rejoicing.

As in the Body Natural, Health is the Salt of all Mercies, so in Bodies
Politic, and Ecclesiastical, the Salt of all Mercies is Peace and Union,
without which no good can be long preserved, or comfortably enjoyed. And
therefore our Lord has put them together, Mark 9. ult. Have salt in your
selves, and have peace one with another.

The desirableness of Peace and Union cannot be better set out, then by
reflecting upon the direful Mischiefs of Discord and Division. One says,
Numerus binarius est infamis, quia primo ausus est ab unitate discedere.

It is an accursed number, as first departing from Unity. I am sure the
departing from that Unity which we are called of God to keep, Ephesians. 4.3.
viz. The unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace, is a very cursed thing.

Jerome calls Divisions, Amicorum dispendia, inimicorum compendia, divinae irae
incendia. So that we may say of them, what Austin says of Original Sin,
Peccatum, causa peccati, poena peccati. They are not only sin, and the cause of
sin, but the punishment of sin too, so that they are nothing but a heap of sin.

Divisions in a Kingdom, in a City, in a Family are very sad, and have sad
effects; Christ says, they cannot stand where these are, ( Mat. 12.25.) but no
Divisions so sad as they that happen among the People of God. For the divisions
of Reuben there were sad thoughts of heart, Judge. 5.15.

When Brethren are divided, and the Fire is kindled in our own Bowels, rising
from our selves, this is sad indeed. As the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 19.14. Fire is
gone out of a rod of her branches, which has devoured her fruit, so that she
has no strong rod to be a scepter to rule, this is a lamentation, and shall be
for a lamentation.

And this was the very case of the People in the Text, a long and sad division
had been among them from the time of Jeroboam, not only as they were a State,
but as they were a Church too; Civil division brought in Ecclesiastical; they
could not agree in one Government, nor in one way of Worship. Two Tribes cleave
to the Worship of the Temple, but the rest of them must have their Calves at
Dan and Bethel. So that they were not only divided as a State; but which is
more sad, they were divided as a Church of God.

Now hear God promises to heal their Divisions, and to make them one; they
shall be one in my hand. In the whole Chapter you have two Prophecies, in which
are contained two great Promises, excellently suited to two great Evils this
People were now under, viz. Division, and Desolation.

Their Desolation is set out in the former part of the Chapter, under the Type
of a Valley of dry Bones, verse. 1, 2.

The Thing God promises is Redemption, under the Type of making dry Bones live.
This you have from the third verse to the fourteenth.

Their Division is set out by the Type of two Sticks, the Promise God makes is
to cure their Divisions, and unite them again, and this under the Type of
making two Sticks one, and not only so, but to bring them into a firmer Union
then ever.

They shall be united to be one People, verse. 22. They shall be no more two
Nations, I will make them one upon the Mountains of Israel.

They shall be united in one God, verse. 23. They shall be my People, and I will
be their God.

They shall be united under one King, verse. 24. David my Servant shall be King
over them, and they shall have one Shepherd.

They shall be united in one way of Repentance, verse. 23. They shall not defile
themselves any more with their Idols, nor with their detestable Things, nor
with any of their Transgressions.

They shall be united in one way of Reformation, verse. 24. They shall walk in
my Judgments, and observe my Statutes, and do them.

They shall be united in one Covenant, verse. 26. I will make a Covenant of
Peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant.

They shall be united in one way of Worship, verse. 26, 27. I will set my
Sanctuary in the midst of them for ever, my Tabernacle also shall be with them.

Now such a Union as this, for a People to be made one in One God, under one
King, in one way of Repentance and Reformation, in one Covenant, and in one way
of Worship; what a firm, what a spiritual, what a complete, and consequently
what a blessed Union must this be.

Concerning which, in the whole of this Prophecy, wherein it is contained, you
may observe four things.

1. Here is the Subject Matter of this Union described, and that both in the
Type (as I may call it) and in the Antitype. In the Type it is two Sticks. In
the Antitype it is the Church of God in two parts. This is in the sixteenth
verse.

2. Here is a Writing to be inscribed; which is not only commanded, but the
words of the Writing dictated. Write upon one Stick, for Judah, and for the
House of Israel his Companions: i. e. the Tribe of Benjamin, and all the rest
that joined with them in their way of worship.

And write upon the other Stick, for Joseph, the Stick of Ephraim, and all the
House of Israel, his Companions. That is, the the other Ten Tribes, who were
joined under Jeroboam in his way of Worship.

3. Here is the Way and Manner of this Union directed. Join them one to another
into one Stick, verse. 17.

4. Here is the meaning of all unridled and explained, in the words of the
Text, Behold, I will take the Stick of Joseph which is in the hand of Ephraim,
and the Tribes of Israel his Fellows, and will put them with him, even with the
Stick of Judah, and make them one Stick, and they shall be one in my hand.

To attempt the explaining the Nature, or Kind, or Meaning of these Sticks,
when the thing intended by them is so fully expressed, would be but trifling
with the Text, which I shall endeavor to improve to more useful purposes.

There is only one thing that I shall remark upon in the words, before I come
to what I intend. And that is, the Form of the Promise in which this Union is
wrapped up.

I will make them one Stick, and they shall be one in my hand.

1. What Oneness is this that is here promised? 2. What is intended by this
doubling the Promise? 3. What is employed by being one in God's hand?
1. What Oneness is this that is here promised and pointed at? Wherein does it
especially consist?

There are several sorts of Oneness in Scripture.

There is an Oneness of diverse Persons in one Nature.

There is an Oneness of differing Natures in One Person.

And there is an Oneness of sundry Natures and Persons in one Quality.

In the first is One God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. In the second is One Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6.
In the third is one Church. Cant. 6.9. My Undefiled is but One. Acts 4.32. The
multitude of them that believed were of One heart, and of One soul.
This is an Ecclesiastical Oneness, and it is that which the Text chiefly
points at.

Bellarmine speaks of a sixfold Oneness in the Church.

1. In respect of God who calls, but this makes the Church not so much una,
as sub uno, one, as under one.

2. In respect of the end, the Salvation to which it is called, but this makes
the Church not so much one, as ad unum.

3. In respect of the means, as Word, Faith, and Sacraments. But thus the
Church is rather by one, than one.

4. In respect of the Spirit as a separated Governor.

5. In respect of Christ as a conjoined Head.

6. In respect of the connection of the members among themselves; and in these
two last respects (says he) it is most properly one.

So that this Oneness is such in the inward principles, and outward practice of
Religion, as concerns the people of God jointly and reciprocally in their
Church State, as joint Members of Christ, and one of another.

And this is the Oneness here promised, I will make them one stick, and they
shall be one in my hand.

But 2. what is intended in the doubling this promise? I will make them one,
and they shall be one.

1. It may point at a twofold Union, Passive, and Active. He makes them one;
that is a passive union, God is alone in it. They shall be one, that is more
active, there is the operation of Man in it.

As it is in the union betwixt Christ and the Christian; it is first passive,
and then active. There is the operation of the spirit uniting, and then the act
of Faith in closing; we are apprehended of Christ, before we can apprehend
Christ, Philip. 3.12.

Unition, as some calls it, is in order of nature before union, and so it is in
this union in the Text, between Christian and Christian, Believer and Believer,
Church and Church. God is first in it. Uniting Graces must precede uniting
acts, and if God thus make us one, then we shall be one. For,

2. The doubling the promise, imports the certainty of the accomplishment. As
Pharaohs dreams were doubled, so the promise is here repeated, Genesis 41.32.
because the thing is established by God, and he will surely bring it to pass.
I will make them one, and they shall be one. Isa. 43.13.
Q. d. None shall be able to hinder it. I work, and who shall let it? Sometimes
God divides a people, and then none can unite them; Judges 9.23.
God sent an evil spirit between Abimelich, and the men of Shechem.

So when God unites, none can divide; if he makes the two sticks one, Job 34.29.
they shall be one. When he gives peace, who then can make trouble?

3. It implys such a union, as shall be both inward and outward, in principle
and practice, in affection and action. I will make them one; that is, in
Judgment and Principle. And they shall be one; i. e. in Worship and Practice.
For it is explained by that in Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me for ever. One heart without one way is unfruitful.
And one way without one heart is hypocritical; but one heart, and one way is no
less then Angelical, for thereby his will is done on earth as it is in Heaven.

So that a full and complete Union between, his People is here pointed at. I
will make them one; that is, I will give them one heart. And they shall be one;
that is, they shall walk in one way. Romans 15.6.
And so with one mind, and one mouth they shall glorify God.

But thirdly, What is intended by being one in his hand? I will make them one
stick, and they shall be one in my hand.

1. It points to the influencing power of God in bringing this oneness about.
The Hand in Scripture is frequently put for Power. So Deuteronomy. 32.36. The Lord
shall repent himself for his servants, when he sees that their powers are gone
((...)) that their hand is gone, Dan. 6.27. He has delivered Daniel from the
power of the lions, ((...)) so the Chaldee, from the hand of the lions. Isa.
11.11.25.10.
So here the hand of God implys his power; and indeed the curing the divisions
of his people, is a work that calls for a mighty power. Odia religionum
acerbissima. Solomon says, The contentions of brethren are like the bars of a
castle, Prove. 18.19. It is so of such as are brethren by place or race, and it
is so much more (the more is the pity) among such as are brethren by grace;
corruption optimi pessima. It made Strigelius weary of living, Melch. Adam. in
vita.
and wish to depart out of the world, that he might be freed ab immanibus and
implacabilibus odiis Theologorum. Therefore Solomon compares them to the bars
of a castle, very strong, and hardly bowed or broken. None can do it but God;
and when he by the power of the spirit of love and union breaks these bars in
sunder, then they become one in the hand of the Lord.

2. It implies a union in the Truth; every union is not a being one in Gods
hand. There may be union in sin, a union in error. All the world wondered
after the beast; Rev. 13.3.
a union to support the Antichristian Interest. It is said of the ten horns,
these have one mind, and shall give their power and strength to the beast,
Revel. 13.12, 13. Now this is so far from being a union in the hand of God,
that it is the quite contrary, it is union in the hand of Satan. If we are not
united in the truth, whatever our union may be, yet we cannot be said to be one
in the hand of the Lord.

3. It implys the reality and cordialness of this union, a love without
dissimulation; you read of an 144000 which stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion,
Revel. 14.1. And here are two things mentioned concerning them to our purpose;
their unity, and their sincerity: oneness and uprightness.

Here is their unity in Doctrine pointed at in their number, 144000, which is a
number rooted in twelve, to show that they were all built upon that one
foundation of the twelve Apostles, of which Christ was the corner stone, and
that their Doctrine and worship is pure and Apostolical.

Then here is their unity in Profession; they have all one name, Ver. 1.
written in one place, they have his fathers name written in their foreheads;
that is, they make the same open and visible profession of their subjection and
obedience to the same authority, Government, Laws, and Ordinances of God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Then here is their unitedness in blessing and praising God. This is intimated
by their having the same Instruments, and the sameness of their Song. Ver. 2.
They all harp upon their harps, and they all sung as it were a new Song before
the Throne.

Then here is mention of their Oneness in keeping their Consciences pure from
all Idolatrous Worship, and Antichristian pollutions. Ver. 4.
These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins.

To name no more, here is their Unity in true Worship. These are they which
follow the Lamb whither ever he goes. Ver. 4.


And that which crowns all, and puts a Glory upon this blessed Union is, 2 Cor.
1.12.
that it is done in simplicity and godly sincerity, without any antichristian
equivocations, or mental reservations. Therefore it is said, ver. 5. In their
mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault before the Throne of God.

My Brethren, if our Union be of this kind, without guile if it be founded in
sincerity, and uprightness of heart to God, then are we without fault before
the Throne, and one in the hand of God.

4. Such a Union will be an abiding, enduring Union. And so much is implied in
the words, wherein there seems to be a double promise of it intimated. God does
not only say, I will make them one, which imports a Union for the present; but
they shall be one; which secures this Union for the future, it shall abide when
once effected; for therefore he adds, They shall be one in my hand, q. d. The
same power that has accomplished, and brought it to pass, shall also preserve
and maintain it.

That which is made one in the hand of the Lord shall be always one, None shall
pluck them out of my hand. And v. 23. They shall no more defile themselves with
any of their transgressions, of which their discords and divisions were none of
the least; and therefore he adds in the same verse, So shall they be my people,
and I will be their God.

They were his People, and he was their God before: but here he renews his
Covenant with them, as brought into a state of union. This is implied in this
(So), So shall they be my people, and I will be their God. His Covenant is
renewed with them, not only as glorying in their union, for now he is not
ashamed to be called their God; but also as confirming of it.

5. Here is also implied the extensiveness of this Union. They shall be one in
my hand. Who are intended by this They? It reaches to all, at home and abroad,
in City and Country. One stick is to be written upon, not only for Judah, but
for all his Companions. And the other stick not only for Ephraim, but for all
the House of Israel his Companions. Ver. 16.
These are They of whom God says, I will make them one, and they shall be one
in my hand. It shall be an extensive Union. So it is explained, v. 21. I will
gather them on every side. And v. 22. One King shall be King to them all. And
v. 24. They all shall have one Shepherd.

When God undertakes to unite his People, he will make it a complete Work.

It shall be a Union in the Truth. It shall be a Union in Principle and
Practice. It shall be a cordial and sincere Union. It shall be an extensive
Union. And it shall be an abiding Union.
And this may suffice for the opening the Terms. Many useful Truths might be
deduced from the words; but the only thing I shall pitch upon, and speak
briefly to, shall be this.

That it is God alone who can heal the Divisions, Doct.
and unite the hearts of his People, and whenever he does do it, it is a great
mercy.

I shall speak to the Point under two Heads.

I. It is God alone who can heal the Divisions which are among his People, and
make them one.

II. When God is pleased to heal the Divisions of his People, and make the two
sticks one, it is a great mercy.

1. It is God alone that can heal the Divisions that are among his People, and
make them One. And this will be evident, if

1. We do but consider the Source of their Divisions, from whence they spring.
The Roots which produce and nourish them.

(1.) One is from the Malice of Satan. He is the envious One that sows these
Tares. He is the great Incendiary, that uses all Arts to divide and separate
the People of God. He loves to set his cloven foot in the place of God's feet.
So the Church is called, Isa. 60.15.

Now no Power but that of God can bind him and cast him out, Rev. 20.2.

(2.) From difference of Apprehension. Good men may agree in one Aim, and yet
not in one way; the End may be the same, tho the Means vary. It is difference
of Light that causes difference of Judgment; and that works to divide the
Affections, and then all is on a flame. Ye read Revel. 15.2. of them that had
gotten the Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and mark, and number of
his Name, and yet they stand upon a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire.

And this is such a Fire as none but God can quench.

(3.) They spring from corrupt Principles and Lusts within. What the Apostle
says of worldly Contentions, we may say of spiritual. Whence come wars and
fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your Lusts that war in your
Members? James 4.1. There are some Lusts especially that make good men a burden
to each other. Such as Pride, and Vain glory, Love of the World, Ambition, and
desire of Precedence, envy at another Repute, irregular Zeal, and such like;
these make us very touchy, and to become Pricking briers, and grieving Thorns
among our selves. There has been too much experience of this in these Dog Days
of the Church, wherein so many have been barking and biting at one another.

Man's Nature is so prone to Discords through the influence of these remaining
Lusts, that they would no more unite then crumbs of Sand, did not God bring it
about, and make them One in his hand. Therefore it is said, I will make them
One, and they shall be One in my hand.

2. It is a Prerogative peculiar to God. The Text intimates so much, they shall
be one in my hand. No Oneness if God has not a hand in it. Men may use means,
and contrive methods for Union, but it is not the policy or skill of all the
Reconcilers in the World can bring it about, without God.

How many have brought their Buckets to quench the Churches Flames. Many
Antidotes have been prescribed, many Rules and pacific Means have been
commended by wise and good men for the Cure of our Divisions. But (...), there
wants a Divine Power within.

Men may take two Sticks and tie them together, or glue them to each other. But
nothing will make them one Stick, but the hand of God. Hence he is called the
God of Peace, Hebr. 13.20. and he is said to create Peace, Isa. 45.7. Now you
know Creation is making something out of nothing. And indeed so is this. Look
throughout this whole transaction, from first to last, and you cannot find any
thing out of which this Union should be formed. Either Wisdom, or Power, or
Strength, or Policy, or any thing else. It is a pure Creation, for it is out of
nothing. And this you have in your Preface expressed a due sense of, in giving
to him the glory of his Power, by ascribing the Success of these Attempts to
the signal Presence of God.

3. If the Breaches and Divisions that at any time fall out among the Lord's
People be a Judgment from the Lord, then he alone can make them One. For who
can remove a Judgment that comes from God, but God himself? the same hand that
wounds, must heal. He has smitten, and he will bind us up. Hos. 6.1.


Now the Divisions that are among Gods People, tho they proceed from sin
originally, yet there is a Judicial Dispensation in them. Hear, O ye Mountains,
the Lord's Controversy, Mich. 6.2. All their intestine Divisions are the Lords
Controversy. This is one way by which God avenges the quarrel of his Covenant,
Lev. 26.25. When his People break with him, then he breaks them one against
another. Jer. 13.13, 14. I will fill all the Inhabitants of the Land, the
Kings, the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem with
drunkenness, and I will dash them one against another. So Zech. 11, 14. I cut
asunder my Staff of Bands, that I might break the Brotherhood between Judah and
Israel. Ye read in Isa. 9.21. of Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against
Manasseh, and they together against Judah. And this is said to be from the
Wrath of the Lord of Hosts, verse. 19. And what Wisdom or Skill of Men can
quench this Wrath of God? it must be God himself. As fire is said to fetch out
fire, so nothing can extinguish this fire of God's Anger, but the kindling of
his own Repentings. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? Hos. 11.8.
my heart is turned within me, and my repentings are kindled together. And he
is said to repent himself for his servants when he sees their power is gone,
Deuteronomy. 32.36. When their Wound is incurable for want of healing Medicines, then
God will plead their Cause, and the Wound shall be bound up. For he glories in
this Title, I am the Lord that heals thee, Jer. 30.13.
Exodus 15.26.

4. This will further appear, if you consider the Season of this blessed Cure.
Usually it is when his People are brought very low. The virtue of his Medicines
is best known when the Wound is desperate, and to the eye of Sense, past
healing.

God reserves the speaking of this Comfort till the Church is brought into a
Wilderness. Hos. 2.14.
How is it that the Bones are brought together, bone to his bone, but by the
Breath of the Lord? and when did this breath enter into them, but when they
were scattered in the open Valley, Ezekiel. 37.2.
and Lo they were very dry? No Life, no expectation, no hope of Union; Behold,
they say our Bones are dried, Ver. 11. Ver. 7.
our hope is lost. Then behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to
his bone. And when does God command the Prophet to write upon Judah and
Ephraim, but when they were in a very low, and hopeless Condition? and
therefore he must write upon two Sticks. A Stick is a dead thing, a dry thing,
a withered thing; a fit Emblem of the low Condition they were in. Dan. 5.25.
And what is the writing upon your Sticks at this time? Not a Mean tekel
upharsin. No, blessed be God, but the quite contrary: Heads of Agreement,
united Brethren. A blessed Handwriting; and if it be not written upon dry
Sticks judge you. So that none could have caused this to be written, if God had
not said to us, as he did to the Prophet, Son of Man, write upon them. And
therefore what the Apostle says in another case, I may say in this, Ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.3.
written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God.

2. When God is pleased thus to heal the divisions of his people, and make the
two sticks one in his hand, it is a great mercy. For

1. When God does this, it is to accomplish the promise, and every promise
travels with mercy; there can be nothing but mercy in the promise; therefore
when ever it brings forth, the birth must be mercy.

Now God has made great promises concerning the peace and oneness of his
people. The envy of Ephraim shall depart, he shall not envy Judah, and Judah
shall not vex Ephraim, Isa. 11.13. v. 6. The wolf shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid. The Cow and the Bear shall feed,
their young ones shall lie down together. The meaning is, that all sourness,
and fierceness, and bitterness of spirit shall cease among the subjects of
Christ, and a spirit of love and sweetness shall take place, and heal all.

Ye have many promises of this kind, and some that have a more direct aspect to
the last times, and therefore look wishly upon us. Such is that in, Zeph. 3.9.
Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may call upon the
Name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent. So Zech. 13.19. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
In that day the Lord shall be one, and his Name one. But is not his Name one
now? yea, in itself it is. He is the God of truth, that is his Name. But while
there are different ways of profession, and each party intitles God to his
particular way, this gives him many Names; the differing claims that divided
interests make to God, give him many Names. But in that day his Name shall be
one; differing ways and modes of Worship shall cease, all his people shall be
united in the same mind and judgment, and shall own God in the same truth, and
the same way of worship, and so his Name shall be one.

But this day is said to be when Christ shall be King over all the earth,
Christ shall be King over all the earth, and in that day the Lord shall be one,
and his Name one.

This is that Christ promises in the New Testament, John 10.16. There shall be
one fold, and one shepard.

2. It is a great mercy in that the ruin of their enemies follows upon it. You
seldom read of any great healing among the Churches and people of God, but
their enemies have soon felt the effects of it. It is no sooner said in Isa.
11.13. The envy of Ephraim shall depart, but the next words are, The
adversaries of Judab shallbe cut off. His work is no sooner performed upon
Mount Sion, but the next work is the pulling down the Assyrian, Is. 10.12. and
in Is. 15.10. No sooner are Gods people one in his hand, but his enemies are
trod under his feet, as straw is trodden down for the dunghill. And 1 Revel.
19.14. the Saints are said to follow Christ clothed in fine linen, clean and
white; their clothing shows their holiness, and their following him, shows
their oneness; and when they follow him thus clothed, then you read of his
sharp sword, and his iron rod, and his treading the wine press of the wrath of
God upon his enemies, v. 15. all which is explained in the following words, to
the end of the Chapter, where you have the Battle of Armageddon fought, and the
Beast and false Prophet, and all the rest of the Churches Enemies destroyed.
And if the destruction of the Churches Enemies be a consequent of their Union,
then when God makes the two sticks one, it is a great Mercy.

I might add,

3. The notice that God would have to be taken of it, speaks out the greatness
of the mercy. That they may know from the rising of the Sun to the West, that
there is none besides me; I am the Lord, and there is none else; I make peace,
and create evil, Isa. 45.6.

4. The blessings and prosperity that flow from this Union speak the greatness
of the mercy. Psalm. 122.7.
When peace is within Jerusalem 's walls, there will be prosperity within her
Palaces.

But I pass these, and shall insist only on this one thing, which will
sufficiently set forth the greatness of this Mercy and Union, and that is,

5. The Evils and Divisions among God's People. Their Name is Legion, they are
so many. Nothing thrives where this Wolf sets his foot. Where envy and strife
is, there is confusion, and every evil work, James 3.16. It is the root of many
bitter fruits. We read Genesis 38. that Pharez was the Son of Tamar. Pharez
signifies Fraction and Division, Tamar signifies a Palm Tree. Ab amaritudine,
say some, from bitterness. Pagnine.
Division comes from bitterness, and brings forth bitter fruits. Deuteronomy. 32.31.
The grapes of it are grapes of gall, the clusters are bitter.

For instance:

Your Divisions are very dishonorable to Jesus Christ, they cause his Name to
be blasphemed in the World, Romans 2.24. Nay, it is an implicit denying him to
be come in the flesh. For when he comes, this is to be one effect of it, Isa.
11 6.
The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, etc.

It is one Argument the Jews have against Christ's being come, because this
Prophecy is not fulfilled.

My Brethren, Is the Lord Christ come into the World, or is he not? If not, why
do ye own it? If he is, why don't ye manifest it? It is your Union that must
prove Christ's Mission.

Christ prays for the Oneness of his Disciples for this very end, John 17.21.
That they all may be one, that the world may believe that thou have sent me.
And again, v. 23. Let them be perfect in one, that the world may know that thou
have sent me: As if Christ should say, the World will never believe, that thou
have sent me, that my Doctrine is true, if they that profess it live not in the
power of it, and are not made one by it. Thou art Love, and what shall convince
the World that I came out of the Bosom of the Father's love, when my Disciples
hate one another? Oh how dishonorable to Christ must this be!

2. Divisions are a great grief to the Spirit of God, and we are commanded not
to grieve him, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God. Have ye not your
light and life from the Spirit? Did not he convince, and convert, and draw you
to Christ? Was it not he that lead you into the Secrets of God? that revealed
the Mysteries of the Kingdom, the deep Things of God, and Eternal Life to you?
Your Calling had never been effectual, if the Spirit had not been in it, to
make it so. Are not your Parts, 2 Cor. 12.4.
and Gifts, and various Seize, all from the Spirit? And is not every
Grace, and every Degree of Grace in you, the Workmanship of the Spirit? And is
it not the Spirit that quickens you in Duties, and maintains in you a frame of
heart for communion with God? Who is it that comforts your Souls in troubles, 1
Cor. 1.4.
and that teaches you to comfort others? that helps you against Corruptions
within, and Temptations without? that conquers your Difficulties, and inables
you to rejoice in Tribulation? Is it not the Spirit? Is not he the earnest of
your inheritance? Ephesians. 1.14. Ephesians. 4.30.
Has he not sealed you to the day of redemption? and will you grieve this
Spirit? Oh what an evil is this!

3. There is nothing more contrary to Christianity; and yet we cover our
Divisions under the cloak of Religion, the very Name whereof carries Union with
it. Religio a religando: It is the Bond of God upon the Soul, that binds us all
to himself, and one to another. As God is the God of Peace, Christ the Prince
of Peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
the Holy Ghost the Spirit of Peace, his Children the Children of Peace; so the
Gospel you profess, and preach, is the Gospel of Peace, full of Precepts of
Peace; you are, Romans 12.18. Mark 9.50.
if it be possible, and as much as in you lies, to live peaceably with all men,
much more to have peace one with another; else you violate your Baptismal
Covenant, 1 Cor. 12.13.
For by one spirit we are are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, bond or free. And what an evil is this? It is Death to force a
Virgin, what is it then to defile a pure and holy Religion?

4. Divisions are the causes of much sin. Shake a Glass of Water that has
dregs in the bottom, and the shaking stirs it, and spreads it all over. I have
often thought of that Counsel of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.26. Let not the sun go
down upon your wrath. It must be speedily suppressed, for if we lie down in our
heats, we shall be apt to burn all the Night. It was a Custom formerly in this
Nation, that every Night at the 8th hour, a Bell was rung, and then every
Family was obliged to put out their Fire; and this was called the Curfew Bell.

We have need of such a Monition every hour to cover the Fire of our Passions,
least they kindle, and burn up all. Behold how great a matter a little fire
kindles, Jam. 3.5.

5. Divisions are against Love, as Error is against Faith: It (...) asunder the
bond of Peace. Amos 6.11.
The great house is smitten with breaches, and the little house with clefts.
Not only Kingdoms, but Churches are destroyed when their Guides and Leaders are
divided in opinion, and affection. One carps at another Gifts, decries
another Ministry, stands in the way of another Honor; like men in a Boat,
one justies another, till among them they sink the Boat it self. O the evil of
Divisions! It was not therefore without most cogent Reason that Christ prays
for his own Apostles, (Joh. 17.11.) that they may be one.

6. Divisions are the fruits of the Flesh. The Apostle tells us The fruits of
the Spirit are love, peace, gentleness and meekness, Gal. 5.22. but the fruits
of the Flesh are hatred, variance, emulation, strife, and envyings; ver. 20. So
that a man cannot evidence himself to be in the Flesh, and destitute of the
Spirit of God in any thing more than by a contentious dividing Spirit. The
Apostle says so, 1 Cor. 3.3. If their be envyings, and strifes, and divisions
among you, are ye not carnal? They are Salamanders that can live only in this
Fire. And then I may ask, but who is their Father? For the Wisdom that is from
beneath is sensual, and devilish, the Mother of strife and division. Jam. 3.15.
Ver. 17.
But the wisdom that is from above is pure, and peaceable. O how sad is it when
the Flesh thus reigns in the Children of the Spirit.

7. Division naturally runs into Tumult and Confusion. It makes Zion to become
a Babel. It so confounds the Language of Christians, that one cannot understand
another. As when a House is on Fire, some call for Water, some for Ladders,
some for pulling down the House: Such is the confusion where this Fire breaks
out in the House of God.

8. Nothing more obstructs the flourishing of Religion. And how sad is it, that
the Interest and concerns of Christ should wither under our hands.

9. Nothing becomes a greater stumbling block to turn others out of the way of
God. Division in the Church begets Atheism in the World. Men charge all the
faults of Professors upon the Religion they profess, and thereby contract such
prejudices against it as can never be rooted out. O what an evil is this!

10. Nothing becomes a greater Joy to our Adversaries, nor gives them a greater
advantage to undermine and destroy us. While two Birds are pecking one at
another, the Kite comes and soops away both. Our Contentions make us first a
laughing stock, then a prey to our Enemies; and therefore they are a sad
forerunner of ruin. Hoc Ithacus vetit, etc.
When Abraham went to Sacrifies his Isaac, he found a Ram entangled in the
Briars, which God had prepared for a Sacrifice; and if we are entangled in
these Briars, we may justly fear we are prepared to be a Sacrifice.

These are some of the many Evils which might be reckoned up, that are in the
divisions of Gods People, which may serve to set forth the blessing, and
advantage of Union. And therefore when God binds up the breaches of his People,
and makes the two sticks one, it is a great mercy.

Shall I not make a little Application of this? I know to whom I speak, which
makes it needless; but for Sions sake I will not hold my peace. Isa. 62.1.


This Text affords two Uses that suit the end of this days appointment, which
you have set apart, partly for Humbling, and partly for rejoicing.

Here is matter of Humbling, that the people of God should be two sticks.
Here is matter of Rejoicing that God has made the two sticks one.
1. Let us Humble our selves before the Lord for our former Divisions. Is their
not a Cause? when God calls to contend by Fire, Hos. 7.4. Isa. 19.2.
it is a Token of his Anger. It is in favor to Israel when he sets the
Egyptians against the Egyptians; but when Ephraim, and Manasseh are divided,
Isa. 9.21.
there is the Anger of God in it, and that should be matter of Mourning. And
indeed the only way to a firm Union is to lay the foundation of it in shame and
tears for past Divisions. Even in this sense God lays the beams of his chambers
in the waters, Psalm. 104.3.
and makes the clouds his chariot. There is no building without Mortar to hold
the stones together, and there it no Mortar without Water. When Israel and
Judah come out of Babylon, and inquire the way to Sion, and join in a Covenant
Union, it is all done in Tears, Jer. 50.4, 5. In those days, and in that time,
says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of
Judah together, going and weeping, they shall go and seek the Lord their God.
They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, let
us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be
forgotten.

They use in Faggotting either to twist the bands with some sap in them, or to
lay them for a time in water, for when dry, they will snap; but they will bend and
hold the twisting when well soaked. So the deeper your Humiliation is, the more
durable will your Union be. Their is much cause of Humbling on this account.

For the Pride of our hearts, only by pride comes contention.

For the dishonor done to God by these differences.

For the reproach brought upon his ways.

For the offenses and scandals given to many, whereby their Souls have been
eternally hazarded: And should not the sense of this affect us? Some diseases
are called opprobria medicorum, I am sure these are opprobria Theologorum. O
let us join in this one thing, to mourn together, till we have dissolved our
hearts into tears, and see if they will cun one into another, and let us resolve
that nothing shall comfort them, but peace with God, and peace with one another.

Use. 2. When we have thus passed through the valley of Baca, Psalm. 84.6.
and in this sense made it a well, we may then go on to Berachah, and sit down
there, blessing and rejoicing in God, who has made the two sticks one in his
hand. If any thing should affect us, the great appearance of God should,
wherein he has put forth so much of his Power, Wisdom, Love, and Mercy.

Is it not a mercy you have long desired and prayed for? And God has this day
returned your prayers, like Noah's Dove, with an Olive Branch in the mouth. How
long did our Fathers sow in Tears for this Harvest, and God has reserved the
reaping time for us their Children? Isa. 9.3.
And therefore let us joy before him according to the joy in Harvest.

This day has the Lord rolled away our reproach, Josh. 5.9.
for what has been the reproach we have been silled with? Is it not that we
have been a divided people, crumbling into Factions and Parties, filled with
mutual animosities and jarrs, envying and hating one another? Now God has
brought us to Gilgal, for this day is the reproach rolled away; and shall not
God have the glory of this?

You have this day made up one great Breach at which Judgment used to enter.
Ezekiel. 13.5.
Ye have gone up into the gaps, and made up the hedge for the house of Israel.
You have this day recovered your strength. Division is a weakening thing: A
Kingdom, a House, a Church divided cannot stand. Untwist a Cable and it is
easily broken. Divide the strongest Current into many streams, and it becomes
shallow and weak.

You know the story of Scilurus who had Eighty Sons, on his Deathbed he caused
a bundle of Arrows to be brought, and given to them, and bids them break it;
when they had tried successively, they answered, that it was not to be done. He
bids them take them one by one, and then the work was easy. Thereupon he tells
his Sons, if ye agree together you will be strong, and invincible; but if you
divide, you will be weak, and easily overcome. God has in this agreement bundled
up his Arrows together; he has made the two sticks one; and this is your
strength in the hand of the Lord. Therefore he that glories let him glory in
the Lord.

You have done that in this agreement that promises great advantage and comfort
to our brethren abroad; it is like the beams of the Sun which diffuse light and
heat to thousands at once. And what can please and rejoice you, who are by
calling, by Duty, by Affection, Men of public Spirits and Aims, more than to
be made such a blessing to the whole Interest of Christ through the Nation?

In this Union you have showed a high Conformity to Christ, He is all for
union. There is a union between him and the Father, a union between him and the
Spirit, a union between him and the humane Nature, a union between him and all
Believers. And it is such a union as admits of no disunion or dissolution.
Nothing can untie it: not faults and failures, not blots or blemishes, no sins
or swervings. Ah how many infirmities, neglects, omissions, how many
weaknesses, wants, and wanderings does Christ see in us, and yet the union
remains. Now when we are like minded one to another according to Christ Jesus.
This highly glorifies God

This union is an hopeful means to reconcile others to Religion, and bring them
into the ways of Christ. It is said of the Primitive Christians, They walked
with one accord; (...), and what fruit had it? the Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved. Acts 2.46, 47. How many have estranged
themselves from Religion, and cast it off, because of the feuds, and heats of
its Professors; afraid to touch it lest they burn their Fingers in the fiery
contentions that are kindled by reason of it.

Mr. Cotton, on the 2d. Cant. 7. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by
the Roes and by the Hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love
till he please; senseth the words thus: By the Roes and Hinds are meant young
beginners, persons under some preparatory work toward Conversion, who are as
shy and fearful as Roes and Hinds, who are affrighted, and run at the barking
of a Dog; so will these at any offenses in the Churches of Christ. O how many
have fallen and been turned out of the way, by the fatal stumbling blocks,
which our divisions have laid in the way of their Conversion. Now God has this
day taken away the stumbling block, by making the two sticks one in his hand.
And should we not bless God for this?

God has entitled you by this agreement to the many and great blessings that
are promised in this Chapter to this work. Do but see what promises God makes
as a consequent of it.

1. It shall be an abiding union. When God unites his people; who or what can
divide them? Unions made by the policy and arts of Men for carnal ends and
interests, may be broken; but a union made by God and his Spirit shall not be
broken. Therefore it is promised, ver. 22. They shall be no more two Nations,
neither shall they be divided any more at all. That is one Mercy promised.

2. It shall be attended with a peculiar sanctifying work of the Spirit, ver.
23. Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their detestable things,
for I will cleanse them. I know how these detestable things are interpreted.
But may we not understand them of their divisions too, and the sins caused
thereby? I am sure these are detestable things to God, Ezekiel. 16.61, 63.
and when his people are made one, they shall become so to them, working to
shame and self-lothing, and when they become so, they shall be no more
defiling. For I will cleanse them, says God. This is another Mercy promised.

3. It shall issue in a closer walking in all the ways and appointments of God.
So ver. 24. They shall walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do
them. They shall consult Divine Institutions, and frame their Worship and Ways
according to them. And this is another Mercy promised.

4. It shall have its effect in a closer Covenant union to God* When his people
are made one, he will renew his Covenant with them, make it more manifest that
God and they are one. A thing is said to be then done in Scripture, when it is
made more manifest. Therefore it is said ver. 23. So shall they be my people,
and I will be their God. q. d. I will make it appear to all the World that
these are the people of God, and that I am the God of this people. That is
another Mercy promised.

5. It shall issue in a great advantage, and advance to the Kingdom of Christ.
And has not Christ gained a great point among you in this union? I know you
cannot but see it, and say it. Division shuts Christ out, union lets him in.
This is a door opened in Heaven, Rev. 4.1. Psalm. 24.7.
for so the Church is called. The everlasting doors are lifted up for the King
of glory to come in. You have prepared the way of the Lord to his Throne, and
given him an abundance entrance into his Kingdom by this thing.

Then the Lord Christ Reigns indeed when his Church and People serve him with
one consent, in one way, and in one Spirit. And therefore when the two sticks
are made one, it is said, ver. 24. David my servant shall be king over them. i.
e. shall reign in the Church more visibly, more powerfully, more gloriously
than ever.

And therefore brethren, lift up your heads, and look for great things to
result from this great work of making the two sticks one. I am well persuaded
that God has a great design in this thing, and that it will have a farther
extent than you can foresee. Heb. 12.27.
How far it may reach to hasten the removal of all made things, all false
Worship, all humane devisings, who can tell? This is plain in Scripture, that
Zions building, Rev. 19.7, 20.
and Babylons ruin; the Lambs Marrying, and the Whores Burning, do go
together. The Church Militant and Malignant are like a pair of Balances, or
the Buckets of a Well, as one goes up, the other goes down.

The Spirit of the Lord cannot be quieted till the white horses have fetched his
people out of Babylon, Zech. 6.6, 8.
and the black horses have speeded her destruction. Rev. 18.4, 8.
When the voice from Heaven once calls Gods people out of her, wrath from
Heaven will quickly fall upon her.

But whatever the effect of this Dispensation of God be without, I am persuaded
it will be great within. And therefore look for some glorious appearance of
Christ both in your Churches, and Ministry, as the result and blessed fruit of
it. For,

6. It shall be attended with great Church Mercies. So it is said, ver. 26, 27.
I will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them, my Tabernacle also shall be with
them. What is this Sanctuary? the Septuagint render it (...), my holy things.
It imports Purity of Gospel Worship. That in Ezekiel. 43.11. explains it. Show
them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the going out, and the
comings in thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the Laws thereof,
and write it in their sight that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all
the ordinances thereof, and do them. This is setting his Sanctuary and
Tabernacle in the midst of us: And this receives farther light from that of
John, Rev. 21.2, 3. When he saw new Jerusalem coming down from God, then he
heard a voice out of heaven saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them. Are not these great Mercies?

7. Nay it is such a Union as shall have its effect in a great increase.
Division is a scattering judgment; Genesis 49.7.
I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. But union and concord
are blessed with increase. When were the Churches multiplied? but when they
were at peace and walked together in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort
of the holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. Therefore God here does not only promise to make
them one, but so to make them out, that they shall thereby be many, ver. 26. I
will multiply them. And therefore sing O barren, thou that did not bear, Isa.
^4.1, 3.
for thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left, and thy seed
shall make the desolate Cities to be inhabited. And this is another Mercy here
promised.

O the many Mercies that are the birth of this one Mercy! And therefore if the
two sticks are made one, give the glory to him who has made them one, and has
said they shall be one in his hand. Psalm. 118.23.
For it the Lords doing, and should be mavelous in our eyes. And that the
wonderful work of God may be to you matter of lasting joy, give me leave to
direct about it a little.

1. Labor to manifest this union. If God has made the two Sticks one, let it
appear that they are one. Make it evident by seeking each others welfare,
rejoice in the gifts, and graces, and successes of others, as if they were our
own; contributing your counsels, assistance, sympathy, and prayers for the
common good. When we live and act as they that have but one Essence and
Interest, this makes the union manifest, and shows that we are in a sense one,
as God and Christ are one.

2. Use all means to preserve the union. God has made the two sticks one, and
he looks you should preserve the oneness. You come hardly by it, Non minor est
virtus, etc.
don t let it go; it has cost many prayers to obtain it, and therefore we
should spare no cost to preserve it. What is hardly got, should not be easily
lost: It is as much a Duty to endeavor to keep it, as it was to seek it.
Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.3.


Need I use any Motives to press this?

Motive
1. How many unities does the Apostle urge as Arguments for the maintaining this
Unity? All things in Religion are reduced to one, that the people of God may be
one, and abide one, Ephesians. 4 4. There is one body, and one spirit, one hope of
your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in you all. How many Ones are here to move
the People of God to be one.

[1. There is one Body.] As Christ had but one natural Body, so he has but one
Mystical. Christ has many Members, but he has but one body, and all that
believe in Christ are that one body. Now how monstrous is it for the Members of
the same Body to fight one against another, to rend and tare one another; for
the Hand to pluck out the Eye, the Mouth to tear the Hand, etc.

What nearer then Members of the same Body? Brethren that have been (...); out
of the same Womb, have been divided in Interest and Affections, and have
defaced all feelings of Nature. You have instances of this in Cain and Abel,
Jacob and Esau. 1 Cor. 12.25.
But it is not so with Members of the same Body: They care one for another, and
perform their several Offices for the common good. Now ye are not only Friends
and Brethren, but Members of one Body.

2. There is one Spirit.] As all the natural Members of the same Body have but
one and the same Soul, so all the Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, have
one and the same Spirit. One Spirit to inlighten and teach, one Spirit to
sanctify, and one Spirit to direct and lead. Why then should they not have one
heart, and one way, when they are taught and led by one Spirit? Is he not the
Spirit of Love and Meekness?

3. There is one hope of our Calling;] i. e. One Heaven, our hoped for Glory,
to which all are called. There is one Inheritance for all the Saints; and why
should theer not be one Heart in them that have one Inheritance.

4. There Is one Lord,] and that is the Lord Christ, whom we all worship and
serve: And shall fellow Servants differ that have the same Lord? Is Christ
divided? 1 Cor. 1.13.


5. There is one Faith.] One Systeme of Christian Doctrine; and if their be but
one Faith, why should we not be united therein in one judgment?

6. There is one Baptism.] This is that Sacrament whereby we are distinguished
from the unbelieving World, and incorporated into the Body of Christ. As many
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And shall we by our
discords unbaptize our selves, by dividing from that Body into which we were
baptized?

7. There is one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in all] All these are to be restrained to the Church. Father of all, by
Regeneration; above all, by his Dominion; through all, by his Presence and
special Providence; in all, by his Spirit and Grace.

And shall not we be one that have one God? Shall he be over us, and through
us, and in us, and should not this be an Argument to preserve Union among us?

Motive 2. This is one great end of all Christ's undertakings.

It was one end of his coming into the World; That in the fullness of time he
might gather together in one, all things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.10.

It was one end of his Ministry; and therefore he does so frequently inculcate
it. These things I command you, that ye love one another, John 15.17. and John
13.34, 35.

It was much the matter of his Prayer for Believers, That they all may be one.
He urges it again and again, no less then four times in three Verses, John
17.21, 21, 23.

It was one end of his Death, to gather together in one the children of God
that are scattered abroad. John 11.50. See Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16.

It was one end of his ascension, and pouring out of his Spirit. It was not
only to unite us to God, but to one another. He is the great uniting principle;
therefore the oneness of Believers is called the unity of the Spirit. Ephesians. 4.3.


You see how much the Heart of Christ was set upon this oneness among his
People. Is this no motive?

3. This is an evident badge, a manifest character of our Discipleship to
Christ. John 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
love one another. But if ye do not, whose Disciples will ye be known to be then?

4. Let that of the Psalmist be a motive. How good and pleasant it is for
brethren to live together in unity. Some things are good, but they are not
pleasant; as Afflictions. Some things are pleasant, but they are not good; as
Sins and Corruptions. Some things are neither good, nor pleasant; as Envy and
Malice: But Unity among Brethren is good and pleasant; and so has in it a
double excellency, for which it should be sought and embraced.

5. It is an evidence that God is accomplishing the latter day promises upon
you. Zeph. 3.9 Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may
call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. And Zech. 14.9.
In that day shall the Lord be one, and his name one. What day is that? When the
Lord shall be King over all the Earth.

6. Nothing puts a greater beauty and glory upon you in the eyes of others,
then this: Cant. 6.9. My dove, my undefied is but one, she is the only one of
her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. And what follows? The
daughters saw her, and blessed her, yea, the Queens, and Concubines, and they
praised her. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners.

7. This is that which secures the presence of God with you. Live in peace, and
the God of love and peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13.11.


These are some of the many Motives I might urge for the preserving this Union,
which is so great a Duty upon all the Churches; but more especially upon you,
that are their guides and leaders; you are to go before them in it as the he
goats of the Flock.

Therefore you should be the great examples of it. The Faces of the Cherubims
in the Temple looked one toward another: Which some think signified the
agreement that should be among the Ministers of the Gospel. Exodus 15.31, 32.
So the six branches of the golden Candlestick joined all in one; which
intimates that they who hold out the light of Truth to others should be one
among themselves.

Your Place, Calling, Office and Work, wherewith God has be trusted you, do
with a loud voice call you to this: More then the saving your own Souls lies
upon your hands. The Glory of Christ, the promoting his Name and Interest, the
building up his Church, the enlarging his Kingdom and Dominion, are the great
part committed to you.

Are not your Names among the Angels who are to pour out the Vials upon the
Earth? For it is the vengeance of the Temple, and the Vials are in the hands of
the Angels that come out of the Temple. Now I pray mark how they are clothed,
in pure and white linen, and their breasts girded with golden girdles. Rev.
15.6. This denotes Purity, Peace and Unity. And how must these Vials be poured
out? By Preaching the everlasting Gospel. And pray mind, the Preaching the
everlasting Gospel is said to be the work but of one Angel, Rev. 14.6. and, yet
the pouring out the Vials is the work of seven; to show their unitedness in the
Gospel, and cause of Christ against Antichrist.

Brethren, What design God may have to honor you in making use of your Gifts,
and Learning, and Zeal for dethroning the Beast, and promoting the Kingdom of
Christ, who can tell? But this I can tell, that it can never be done, but by a
Spirit of Love and Union; and should we not labor to preserve it?

Quest. I but how shall it be done.

Answ. 1. Labor to remove all the causes of division. Look back and see what
root our discords sprang from? James 4.1.
Come they not hence, even of our lusts? Whatever you find to have been the
cause of them; whether Spiritual Pride, or a Contentious Disposition, or an
affectation of Singularity, or error of Opinion, or admiration of Men's
Persons, or a sourness of Spirit, or an ambition of drawing Disciples after us.
Let the cause be what it will, it must be removed, if you would have the Union
preserved.

2. Take heed of passing rigorous Censures on every light occasion, and making
the worst of matters. In weighing the Actions of others, be sure always to
cast in the allowance of Humane Frailty; because it is that which you expect
many grains of for your self, when another holds the scale. This austerity and
sourness of Spirit, is usually attended with a double mischief; it hinders
Union where it is endeavored, and it often breaks it where it is attained.
Those (...) that examine all things by the rigid rule of extreme right, are
neither just nor wise. They are not just to the Rule, which requires
Moderation, and bearing and forbearing, where the case needs it. Nor are they
wise for themselves: For such, Solomon says, trouble their own flesh. Prove.
11.17.


3. Take heed of impropriating Christ to a party. A common evil; but a great
one. It was the sin of the Church of Corinth; Every one of you says, I am of
Paul, 1 Cor. 1.12.
and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Now the Apostle reproves
them all, as well them that said I am of Christ, as any of the rest.

But why did he reprove them? Is it not a Duty to be of Christ, and to own him
above all? Yes, in a way of Union and Communion, but not in a way of Faction
and Division. We are to own Christ in a way of preference above all, but not in
opposition to any. We are to exalt him as the Author of our Faith, but not so
as to flight the instruments of our Faith, which is the sin the Apostle here
reproves. They were for prefering one Minister to the contempt of another. One
was for Paul against Apollo, another for Apollo against Paul; a third for Peter
against them both; a fourth was neither for one nor the other, but for Christ
against them all; i. e. they cried down all Humane Ministry, and were for the
immediate teachings of Christ without any means or instruments. Now thus to
say, I am of Christ, is a sin.

For as we must not make a Christ of Means, by resting upon them, so nor may we
lay aside Means, expecting Christ should do all without them.

Be so for Christ as not to despise Ministry. Be so for the Ministry of one, as
not to despise another. Do not impropriate Christ to any party. It is a
dividing Spirit to say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ. Matthew. 24.23
It is to unfaint the whole World to Consecrate our own way. And this is a
provoking thing, and must needs stir up strife and envy; for every man is
concerned when his right and title is called in question.

The Apostle discovers another Spirit, and more truly Catholic, when he writes
to this Church, 1 Cor. 1.2. To the saints at Corinth, and to all that in every
place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both yours and ours. He
seems to check that proud and envious humor which would so enclose Christ to a
party, as to deny and defeat all other claims. Jesus Christ, both theirs and
ours. Like that of Christ, My father and your father, my God and your God. John
20.17.

4. See that your Union be laid in Truth and Holiness.

Zech. 3.19.
(1.) In Truth: That must have the first place, love the truth and peace. Union
in Errors, in false Principles, is no better than a confederacy against
Christ. Isa. 8.12.
And say not a confederacy. That is a cursed accommodation that is made to the
disservice of Religion; because while we thus make peace with Men, we make a
breach with God.

(2.) Let your Union be founded in Holiness. It will not stand if it be not
upon this bottom. Loose Zeal is not unity, but compliance. Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness; without which no man shall see the
Lord. A Man may see God without Peace, but he cannot see God without Holiness.

Peace is a sort of provision that will not keep if it be not well salted:
Therefore our Lord Christ has taught you how to preserve it: Mark 9.50. Have
salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.

(...). Col. 3.14.
5. Keep Love in constant exercise. This is a true principle of Union. It is not
only the knot that ties it, but the bond that holds it. It is the cement that
holds the stones of Christ's Spiritual Temple together. This was the sacred
sodder which united the Primitive Christians so firmly of old, that they were
of one heart, Acts 4.32.
and one soul.

We are united to Christ by Faith, but to one another by Love: And we should be
careful to strengthen both the bands, that neither of them be broken. The true
Mother would rather lose the Child, then see it divided. Among the Romans they
had a Temple dedicated Jovi depositorio, because there they laid aside their
quarrels and differences before they entered into the Senate. Shall Heathens
lay aside their mutual jars for common good, and shall not the Ministers of the
Gospel do it much more for the Churches safety?

6. Pray much for that wisdom that is from above, which is pure, peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated. Jam. 3.17.

3. Endeavor what in you lies to perfect this Union. Nothing less then this
will fully answer the Prayer of Christ. He does not only pray that his people
may be made one, but that they may be made perfect in one. John 17.23. And if
Christ prays for it, ought not we to endeavor it; that we may be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, 1 Cor. 1.10.
and in the same judgment?

And because the oneness can never be fully perfected here, therefore let us
long for Heaven, where this Blessing shall be complete. Here we enjoy it by way
of initiation, their it will be in consummation. All partition Walls shall then
be destroyed. There all contrary Opinions, and differing Sentiments shall
cease. Their Luther and Zuinglius, Hooper and Ridley, shall be all of a mind.
Many Spiritual Gifts and Graces shall cease there; whether there be prophecies,
they shall fail, or whether there be tongues, they shall cease. Nay Faith,
Hope, Repentance, etc. they shall cease too; but Charity never fails. 1 Cor.
13.8.
Love and Union shall go with you to Heaven, and shall be a part of the Saints
felicity for ever. It shall no more be said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, but
God shall be all in all.

I will conclude all with a short Exhortation, and a Prayer as short. The
Exhortation is in Philip. 2. five first Verses. If their be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through
strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better
then themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.
That is the Exhortation.

The Prayer is in Romans 15.5, 6. Now the God of patience and consolation grant
you to be like minded one toward (...) according to Christ Jesus, that ye may
with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Then will the Two Sticks be One in the hand of the Lord.

Ephesians. 3.21.
To him be glory in all the Churches by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages. AMEN.

FINIS.
These four Books are Published by Mr. Matthew Mead, and sold by Tho. Parkhurst
in Cheapside, viz.

Spiritual wisdom Improved against Temptation, in a Sermon at Stepney,
September 16th. 1660.

The Almost Christian Discovered, or the false Professor tried and Cast, in
seven Sermons.

The Good of Early Obedience or the Advantage of Bearing the Yoke of Christ
betimes.

The Vision of the Wheel seen by the Prophet Ezekiel opened and Applied, partly
at the Merchants Lecture in Broad-street, and partly at Stepney on January
31th. 168^ being the day of thanksgiving to God for the great Deliverance of
the Kingdom from Popery and Slavery.


