A SERMON PREACHED to the SOCIETY, FOR Reformation of Manners; AT Kingstone
upon Thames, On July 17th 1700.

Published at the Request of the Society.

By DANIEL MAYO, M. A. Minister of the Gospel in that Town.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry, MDCC.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the WORSHIPFUL Mr. Thomas Edmonds. Bailiff. Mr.
John Lamb. Bailiff. Mr. Charles Salter. Mr. Nathanael Brandling,
Justices of the Peace in the Town and Corporation of Kingston upon Thames.
Gentlemen;
I Was the more Willing, when Desired, to Publish the following Discourse,
Because I thought I might thereby have an Opportunity of giving a Public
Testimony of your Cheerful Concurrence with, and Encouragement of, those
Persons, who are United in a Society, in order to Assist you in the Necessary
Work of Reforming such as are Enemies, not only to themselves; But also to the
Town and Corporation in which God has Placed you, for a Time, in the Highest
Station: And also, that I might take this Fair Occasion Faithfully to put you
in Mind of your Duty.

'Twas the Saying of Solon, That in his Time, there were many Good Laws made;
But there wanted One more, to make 'em put those in Execution. It Is too
evident, the Good and Wholesome Laws of this Realm against Immorality and
Profaneness, are not put in Execution. Where the Blame does Principally lie, I
will not, at present, Enquire; But rather Pray, that Foreigners may have no
Occasion any more, to Accuse our Famous Nation, of Being the Best in the World
to ^ake Laws, and Worse than any to Execute them: And that you in particular
may not be found (...) in this Respect, when you are called to Give an Account
of your Stewardship.

Let the Censures of Cri^^cal Readers be never so many, or severe, either
concerning my Discourse it self, or the Publication thereof; I have this to
Comfort me, That my Sincere Desire, and Endeavor also (though never so mean) was
to Promote the Common Good: And if you can say so, when your Public Office is
ended with the Year; or if before that, Death should bring you a Quietus est,
and summons you to give up your Accounts, you will do it with Joy, and not with
Grief.

Though you have not the Sword as well as the Mace, born before you in State, as
some other Magistrates have; yet you have a Sword put into Your Hands by God
Himself, which you must not Bear in vain; But therewith Protect the Good, and
Punish the Bad. The Worldly Honor and Profits that you Reap by Virtue of your
Office, will only serve to aggravate your shame and loss in the end; If when
God weighs you in the Balances of his Justice, you are found wanting, and it
shall appear that you have made no use or a bad one, of all your Interest and
Authority.

The Laws of the Land Oblige you, under Great Penalties, Impartially to Punish
such Crimes a^ you your Selves are Witnesses of And you cannot refuse to take
the Information of Others: But if you have no Better Principle than Fear of a
Pecuniary Mulct, to Influence you, The Common Good is not Likely to be much
Promoted by you. Consider therefore the Oath of God is upon you. The End and
Usefulness of your Office, The Welfare of your Neighbors, and Your own
Safety, are Obligations upon you to Prevent, or if that cannot be, to Punish
such sins as are Destructive to private persons, and Whole Communities.

Give me leave to desire your Serious Perusal of the First Direction, toward
the End of the ensuing Discourse, p. 10. Particularly, beware of such sins your
Selves, that you cannot Avoid punishing Others for, if any Call for Justice.
And, methinks, it must be with an Aching Heart, and a Trembling Hand, that a
Vicious Magistrate Signs a Warrant for the punishment of those Vices he Loves
and Lives in himself.

Let your Zeal for God Provoke and Encourage Others: And as you have the Praise
of Good Men, and, I hope, the Approbation of God, which is far greater; For the
Good you, or any of you have done already: So let your Efforts against Vice,
toward the Conclusion of your Office, be the strongest.

That God would please to Bless and Prosper this Whole Town and Corporation;
and, in particular, your Persons and Families, is, and shall be, the Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your Faithful Servant, especially in the Work of the Gospel, Daniel
Mayo

PROVE. xxix. 1. He that being often Reproved, Hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly
be Destroyed, and that without Remedy.


In which Words you may Observe Three Parts.
I. A Duty and a Privilege implied, viz. Frequent Reproof; in these words, He
that being often reproved.

II. An heinous Sin supposed, viz. Obstinacy and Incorrigibleness; in these
words, hardneth his neck.

III. A Dreadful Threatening denounced against such Sinners, and for this Sin,
viz. Sudden and Remediless Destruction; in these words, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy.

I shall Treat of each of these Points distinctly, and then Conclude with such
an Application as is suited to my present Auditory, and the Occasion of this
Assembly.

I. There is a Duty and a Privilege implied, viz. Frequent Reproof I say a Duty
and a Privilege, for it is both the one and the other: For I shall make it
appear, it is the Duty of some Frequently to Reprove, and the Privilege of
others to be frequently Reproved. And I am obliged to take notice of this
Frequent Reproof, in an Active and Passive signification; Because, in the
Original it is, (...) Verl. Septuag. (...)
as in the Margin of your Bibles, A Man of Reproofs, etc. So that the meaning
of the Text may be this, He that frequently Reproves others, and, at the same
time, is, and remains Guilty himself, shall be suddenly destroyed, and that
without Remedy. And this is an Undoubted Truth, and what I shall again take
notice of in the Application. Though I rather think the Meaning of the Text is,
as our Translators Render it, and as the Generality of Expositors understand
it. That the Offender that remains Obstinate, and Unreformed, notwithstanding
he has enjoyed the Privilege of being Frequently Reproved, shall certainly and
suddenly be destroyed.

That we may the better Understand whose Duty it is to Reprove, and how it
appears that it is a Privilege to be Reproved; We must take notice of a Twofold
Reproof; Fraternal, and Authoritative.

1. There is a Fraternal Reproof; which is, A certain Censure of a Brother's
Evil Words or Actions, either by our Speech or Behavior; whereby the Guilty
Party may be made sensible of, and brought to Repentance for his Sin, and
Induced to a Future Amendment.

This is the Duty of every one, when there is Just Occasion. It Is one Precept
of the Law of Kindness; and, a Branch of that Love, which is the fulfilling of
the Law. Without this we cannot Acquit our selves, as having Faithfully
Discharged our Duty, which requires us to Love our Neighbor as our selves:
And, Be not Deceived; It is Impossible to Love God with all our Heart and Soul,
Mat. 22.37-40.1 Joh. 4.20.
and Mind and Strength, if we do not Love our Brother also.

Now, if we do not Reprove our Offending Brother, we do not Love him; nay, we
Hate him in our Hearts. For so much is plainly Implied in that Text, where the
Duty I am speaking of, is plainly Commanded, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate
thy Brother in thine Heart; Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor, and
not suffer Sin upon him. There is no difficulty to understand who are Obliged
by this Command; For it concerns every single person. Nor is it hard to know,
who are to be Reproved. It Is our Offending Brother, called also in the Latter
Part of the Verse, our Neighbor. But if any should go about to Excuse
Themselves, as the Lawyer endeavored to Justify himself by Asking, Who is my
Neighbor? I refer him, for an Answer, to our Blessed Savior, That Teacher
come from God, Mat. 10.30-37.

Our Savior himself says, Iuk. 17.3.
If thy Brother Trespass against Thee, Rebuke him. And, it is certainly no less
your Duty, if he Trespass against God or his own Soul. And therefore, in other
places of Scripture, this Duty is more Generally laid down, in such Expressions
as these.

Warn the unruly: 1 These. 5.14. Colos. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, with all Wisdom, Teaching and
Admonishing one another.

This Duty may be performed by our Words, though, ordinarily, it is most
Efficacious when it is done by our Actions: And perhaps that may be the Meaning
of the Apostle, when he Exhorts the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.11.
To have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness; But rather to
reprove them this way, viz. By abstaining from them themselves. St. Peter gives
this Honorable Testimony of Righteous Lot; That he Living among the Sinners of
SODOM and GOMORRHA, 2 Pet. 2.8.
vexed his Righteous Soul from day to day with their Unlawful Deeds. And, it is
not to be questioned, But that his Righteous Words, and Actions too, Reproved
their Wicked Deeds, or else, though he might have been a Preacher, he would not
have been a Practicer of Righteousness.

But, although this Fraternal Reproof b^ our Duty Commanded by God, in order to
the Good of our Neighbor, and is a Part or Testimony of our Love to an
Offending Brother; yet it is to be performed only where there is just occasion.
And, withal, it is a Positive Command; which, although it is an Abiding
Obligation upon us, to perform the Duty Commanded, yet does it not require the
Performance thereof at all times. And there is one Time, or Season, to name no
more, when this Duty of Fraternal Reproof is not to be performed, or at least
not Alone: Before I Name it, Let me beseech you not to make an Ill Use of it,
either to Countenance your Cowardice, or Incharitableness. The Time, I mean, is
this: When there is Evident Reason to Conclude, 'twill do the Party Reproved no
Good; and the Reprover much Hurt. Then the Advice of the Wise Man takes Place;
Prove. 9.7, 8.
Not to Reprove a Scorner, least he hate thee. For he that Reproves a Scorner,
gets to himself shame: and he that rebukes a Wicked Man, gets himself a
Blot.

There are such Swine, before whom this Pearl is not to be cast: For, if you
do, they will show they have the Rage and Cruelty of a Wild Bore, as well as the
Fierceness of an ordinary Swine, and turn again and Rent you; or, at least, do
their Utmost to Destroy you: And, to such Snarling Dogs, This Holy Thing is not
to be Given. I Speak no harder words then our Savior did, as you may find,
Mat. 7.9.

It Is also the Precept of our Lord, though too often Abused; Matthew. 10.16.
That we should not only be as harmless as Doves; But also, as wise as
Serpents. And this Direction of our Savior, will Justify and Commend the
Custom of Magistrates; who, in Compliance with the Reasonable Request of this
and other-like Societies, do ordinarily conceal their Names, who Inform them of
the Scandalous Crimes of such, who do, by their Enormities, seem to say, They
do not Regard Man; as it is evident, they do not Fear God.

In such Sad Cases there is need of another sort of Reproof, viz. That which is,

2. An Authoritative One. And, if we may observe any Contexture in this Chapter
of the Proverbs of Solomon, where my Text lies; This sort of Reproof seems to
be intended: Because the Beginning of this Chapter contains Observations
concerning Public Government, as the Contents of the Chapter in our Bibles
tells us.

This sort of Reproof differs from the former; Inasmuch as it is the Duty of
some Persons only, and not of all: And it is to be managed in another way and
manner than the other sort should be.

1. I say, This Authoritative Reproof is the Duty of some Persons only, and not
of all: And it is easy to know of whom, viz. Such as are in Authority in any
Society, whether Sacred or Civil.

In Sacred Societies, otherwise called Churches, there must be a part in
Authority, and a part under that Authority; A part that is to Govern, and a
part that is to be Governed, otherwise it is no Society, nor does it deserve
the Name of a Church, any more than that Mixed Multitude, which caused an Uproar
at Ephesus, of which you Read in the 19th Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.

In those Societies there are Officers of Divine Appointment, and their Work,
as well as Commission, is from Heaven; which is, not only to Teach, but to
Admonish also.

And, though this is evident by Reason, and the Light of Nature; yet, because
some are apt to think, it is a hard saying, and will not easily bear it; Read
the Particular Direction, for this purpose, to all the Ministers of Christ,
given immediately indeed to Titus. Tit. 2.15
These things speak and exhort, and REBVKE with all Authority. Let no Man
despise thee. This is one of the things that St. Paul gives in Charge, even to
young Timothy, in a most Solemn Manner; Even as in the presence of God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the Quick and the Dead at his Appearing, and
in his Kingdom; not only, that he Preach the Word, and be instant therein, even
in Season and out of Season; But also, that he REPROVE, and REBVKE, as well as
Exhort, with all Long-Suffering and Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.


A Just Decorum indeed is to be observed, as he Directs elsewhere 1 Timothy 5.1, 2.
; But not to the Prejudice either of his Faithfulness to God, or the Souls of
Men, or the Authority he was Invested with. And therefore he is Directed, in
some Cases, Tim. 5 23.
Publicly, or Before All, to Rebuke them that Sin, that Others may Fear. ^t.
1.13.
And Titus is Exhorted, to Rebuke some Sharply.

And so also in Civil Societies; This Authoritative Reproof is a Duty Incumbent
on the Governors thereof, whether they be Magistrates, in a Nation, City, or
any Corporation; or Parents and Governors of a Family.

The very End of Magisiracy is, that there might be some Authorized, and
Empowered to be a Terror to Evil Doers, and a Praise to them that Do Well. For
this GOOD they are designed and appointed by God, 1 Pet. 2.13 14
as his Ministers and Vicegerents For this very Reason we are bound to be
Subject to them for Conscience sake: Romans 13.3
And therefore also Tribute is Due to them: Because they do, or should attend
con^^^^ally on this VERY thing. And though I will not say, if this their Duty be
by them neglected, Inferiors may, or should Deny the Honor and Subjection, or
withold that Tribute, which is otherwise, undoubtedly, their Due: Yet I will be
bold to say, such Magistrates as do manifestly and utterly pervert the very
Design of their Institution, do take from their Inferiors that, which, in
God's Account, is not due to 'em.

As to Parents and Governors of Families; Their Authority, as it is not denied
by any, so it is also designed for the same End. And, at present, I only Entreat
all such, that they would resolve upon such a Behavior in their Houses, as
David resolves upon in the 101 Psalm. Throughout.

Thus have I shown, this is the Duty of some, viz. Such as are in Authority:
Let me add, it is the Duty of others also; yea, of all, in their several Places,
to endeavor, that this sort of Reproof may be Administered by those, whose
proper Office it is. An Argument this is, That has been several Times well
Discoursed on to such Societies as this Vid. The Sermons of Mr. D. Williams,
and Mr. J. Shower.
. And therefore I pass it now.

As this Authoritative Reproof differs from that which is Fraternal, inasmuch
as it is the Duty only of some, and not of all: So also,

2. This sort is to be Managed in a way and manner different from the other. As
might be shown in several particulars; To Instance in one only, i. e. It ought
to be accompanied with proper Impartial Punishments.

These Punishments are to be Inflicted according to the Nature of the Offense,
and of the Authority or Office, that he is Entrusted, or Invested with, that
does, or ought to Inflict it.

Every little Fault ought not to be Punished as if it were a Capital Crime. Nor
should the Great Enormities be passed by with a slight Rebuke, as if they were
but Peccadillo's.

The Parent, or Master of a Family, may not Punish as the Magistrate does: But,
in some Sad Cases, Parents must call in the Aid of the Magistrates, or Call for
Justice against their own Children. And because the Text will not only Justify
your Proceedings, but may serve to make you Impartial in your Resorming-Work,
Read it, as you may find it, Deuteronomy. 21.18-22. If a Man have a Stubborn and
Rebellious Son, which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of
his Mother, and that when they have chasten'd him, will not hearken to them:
Then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto
the Elders of the City, etc.

And the Punishment in the Church of Christ are different from either.

The Magistrate has a Sword put into his Hand by God Himself: Which he must
not bear in vain; But must Use in such Cases, and for such Ends, as the Law of
God and the Land Directs. And if the Magistracy be Dishonored, or Despised,
the Magistrate may, if he pleases, easily Vindicate the Honor of his Office.

The Ministers of Christ, in his Church, have a Sword too; I do not mean a
Temporal one; But that which is more Terrible, if rightly used, viz. The
Authority committed to them by Christ himself, whereby Obstinate Offenders are
to be Cut Off, and cast out of the Visible Church and Kingdom of Christ, and
Society of Christians. And it is this, I doubt not, the Apostle means in his
Direction to Titus, Chap. 1.13. Rebuke them sarply. You have the (...).
Word used, once more, evidently in this sense, 2 Cor. 13.10. The Apostle
Alludes to the Practice of Surgeons; who, at first, indeed, should Search the
Sore, and try to Heal it. But, if Gentler Methods fail, must Cut away the
Proud, and Dead, and Rotten Flesh: yea, and the Corrupt Member too, that the
Whole Body may be kept from perishing. And, to this end, does the Solemn
Ordinance of Christ, called Excommunication, serve: Which I mention the rather,
because, how Blessed might the Effects be; If whilst some are endeavoring to
Reform the Nation; Those, who are more nearly concerned, would Concur with
their Attempts, to Reform the Churches of Christ therein!

Thus have I Explained the Duty, and Proved, that it is the Duty of All, to
Administer Fraternal Reproof; and, of Some, to Administer Authoritative Reproof
also, as occasion requires.

Let me Briefly show, that it is a Privilege to be Reproved, and so I will
conclude the First General Propounded.

Many are the Advantages that accrue by Fraternal Reproof; by which it appears
to be a Privilege: Certainly there is hardly any greater felicity than a
Faithful Friend; who will, with Tenderness and Fidelity, admonish us,
concerning those Errors and Miscarriages, which Self-Love is apt to hide, from
our own Observance; or, to excuse either, as to fact, or fault, or both. The
Wise Man tells us, Prove. 27.5, 6.
That, Open Rebuke is better than Secret Love. Faithful are the Wounds of a
Friend; But the Kisses (or Flattery) of an Enemy are Deceitful; and they are
hurtful too. Who, of us, can take up Holy David's Words? who, though he was a
King, said, Let the Righteous Smite me; (For he dare not Slander and Backbite;
but) in a Friendly manner give me a Faithful Wound (though it be a deep one) and
it shall be (not only Designed by him but Esteemed by me) a Kindness. A^^iet
him Reprove me, it shall be an Excellent (Odoriferous and Healing) O^ which
shall not hreak my Head; But ^^al my Soul: And, Psalm. 141.5.
such as these I will not return upon with Recrimination, or Rage; But, my
Prayer shall (...), for them, in their Calamities; though, ^erhaps, by reason of
the same Fault they Reprove in me. Eccles. 4.9, 10.
Two are better (...) one; For, if they fall, the one will lift up his Fellow:
but woe to him that is alone, when he falls; For he has (...) another to
help him up.

Upon this Account, It is not good that Man should be alone; which the ^^btil
and Malicious Tempter knows very well; and therefore, it is more than probable,
he took the Advantage of our Common Mother's being Absent from her Husband,
when he Tempted her to Eat the Forbidden Fruit. And the Victory of the Captain
of our Salvation, the Seed of the Woman, was the more Giorious, By how much the
place of Combat was, on the I empters side, more Advantageous, viz. In a
Solitary Wilderness.

How great also is the Benefit that Accrues by Authoritative Reproof! And that
not only to the Party Reproved, but to others also.

1. Others receive Benefit thereby; Inasmuch as it is a means to preserve the
Innocence and Safety of the Whole Community.

When the Sins of others, as well as of our selves, Eccles. 8.11.
go Unpunished; and Sentence against an Evil Work is not speedily executed;
Therefore the heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do evil. But on
the contrary, wh^^ the Judgments of the Lord, (either by his more Immediate
Hand, Isa. 26.9.
or by his Ministers) are in the Earth, the In^^bitants of the World will,
sometimes, learn Righteousness thereby. One great End of Punishment (in this
World at least) is to deter others from the like Wicked Practices, Deuteronomy.
13.11.17.13.19.20.
That other may hear and fear, and do no more (...) such Wickedness; or
presumptuousty, i. e. Presuming upon the account of the present Impunity.

Moreover, hereby the Innocence of the Whole Community is preserved; in that
the Evil of the Sin (as well as of the Punishment) is, in some Sense, put away
from the Society, (Deuteronomy. 19 19.)

The Crime of a Private Person is no longer the Sin of the Public, when the
Governor does Oppose and Punish it: Whereas, on the contrary, Though Iniquity be
not Established by a Law; ^ay, though Good Laws be made against it; yet, if Sin
be Encouraged, by the Neglect of putting those Good Laws in Execution; The
Crimes of Private Persons, and Inferiors, do thereby become the Crimes of
Superiors, and the Sins of the Public; And the Punishment also will reach
Further than the Private Offender. For, as Innocence and Safety; so Guilt and
Punishment, are things, which God has joined together, and which none can put
asunder.

2. And especially this Reproof may be Beneficial to the Party Reproved: And
therefore is a Privilege. For, to Instance in no more Particulars, it is a
Remedy to prevent his Sin and Ruin.

It Is Appointed by God himself, as a Means, in order to this End, and is
accompanied with his Promise. What is said to Parents, may be applied to other
Governors; Prove. 19.18.23.13, 14.
Chasten thy So^^ while there is hope, and let not thy So^^ spare for his
crying. Withold not Correction from the Child: For if thou beatest him with the
Rod he shall not (...) Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his
soul from Hell. And you know the Reason, why the Incestuous Corinthian was to
be cast o^^ of the Kingdom, 1 Cor. 5.5.
or Church of Christ to be delivered to Satan; 'twas for the Destruction of the
Flesh, and that (...) Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Moreover, as this is a Means ap^inted by God, in order to this happend; so, in
its own Nature, it has Tendency thereunto; For, Prove. 29.15.
the Rod (...) Reproof give Wisdom: Inasmuch (...) the Rod of God has a Voice,
that ^eaks as Loud, and as Plain sometimes, as his Word, and which we are ^ound
to hear, Micah 6.9.

Afflictions and Punishments, in the General, have a Tendency, if not to
Soften, yet to Break the Stony Hearts of Sinners, and Prepare the Way for
Instruction. It is not altogether a New, and Unheard of Thing, Isa. 48.10.
if God should Choose a Sinner in the Furnace of Afflictions.

If any one should Ask you, What does it signify to lead a Profane Fool to the
Correction of the Stocks? You may Answer, Who knows but when his Feet are
Fastened there, God may ^^e Merciful unto him, as to Manasseh; who, when he was
took among the Thorns, and bound with Fetters, did, in his Affliction, Beseech
the Lord, and humbled himself greatly: As you may Read more at large, 2 Chronicles.
33. In all this I have only spoke the Sentiments of Elihu, Job 33.

And we may the rather hope for this Good Event, when there is no need for Men
very narrowly to Enquire; nor is it Difficult to Know, wherefore the Lord, in
his Providence, does Contend with them But the Sin is very Notorious by the
Punishment.

I Proceed to the Consideration of the Second Part of my Text, wherein you have,

II. An heinous sin supposed, viz. Obstinacy and Inc^^rigibleness. Which sin is
set forth by this Expression, Hardens his Neck.

A Metaphor taken from Unruly Beasts, suppose Horses, that are impatient of
restraint. St. James tells us, the Tongue is such an unruly Evil, James 3.8.
th^^ no Man can Tame: And there are some Evil-Talkers, and Evildoers, which,
like Wild, and Headstrong Horses, refuse to be Bettered, or Managed, though the
Bridle and Whip are both used. Let it not seem Uncivil to Compare such to
Beasts; For the Wise Man tells us, He that hates Reproof is Brutish. Prove.
12.14


By Consequence this Sin must be very heinous; And will appear to be so, If you
consider;

It Is a Sin against Knowledge. Ignorance, though it does not wholly Excuse, yet,
it does, in part, Extenuate a Crime, provided it be not Affected. But when a
Man sins against Light and Knowledge, his Crime is Aggravated, and himself
Rendered altogether Inexcusable. If the Faults we commit, are, in their own
Nature, heinous; yet, if they are done Ignorantly, we have more ground to hope
we may obtain Mercy. But then are our Deeds very Evil, when we hate the Light,
that is manifested, and choose, 1 Timothy 1.13.
or prefer Darkness before it, and Live in the Practice of the Deeds of
Darkness, which are Reproved by the Light. John 3.19, 20.


Besides, this Sin must be Heinous; Because the Transgressor Offends against,
and after Correction: In Opposition to the Means or Remedy, that is Appointed,
and Used, in Order to his Amendment.

It plainly Argues Pride of Heart; Contempt of God and his Ordinances: It shows
he has rendered himself like Pharaoh, who was resolved upon his Sin; and, it is
a Sad Sign that he is appointed for Destruction. When sinners arrive to this
Pitch of Wickedness, It seems somewhat necessary that God should say, Rev.
22.11.
Let them be Filthy still: That since they will not retain God in their
Knowledge, God should give them up to vile Affections, Romans 1.
and to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things which are not Convenient: And then
will the Arrows, and Instruments of Death, which the Righteous and Angry Judge
has Prepared; Psalm. 7.11, 12.13.
The Sword of Divine Vengeance, which he has whet, be used for the Certain,
Speedy, Total, Final Overthrow of such Sinners.

This brings me to the

III. And Last Part of my Text, which contains a Dreadful Threating, denounced
against such Sinners, and for this Sin. They shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without Remedy.

Observe the Evil it self that is Threatened; and then the Properties or
Aggravations of it.

1. Observe the Evil it self that is Threatened, which is Total and Final.
Overthrow. He that being often reproved hardneth his Neck, shall be destroyed
utterly, or broken all in pieces. The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; He that
hates Reproof shall Dye. Prove. 15.10.


When Amaziah, King of Judah, turned to Idolatry, and bid the Prophet forbear
Reproving him; Then says the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 25, 16.
Now I know that God has determined to destroy thee, Because thou have done
this, and have not hearkened to my Counsel. And since the Canon of Scripture is
Complete, There is no need of a Spirit of Prophecy to know, that the Nation,
City, Town, or Private Person, which remains Unreform'd, notwithstanding all
Reproofs, will be Destroyed.

I have often thought, that such Societies as yours, so Generally Spread over
this Kingdom, is one of the Best Omens that we have at this day. But if the
Wicked prevail, and you be disheartened, and the Design Defeated and Attempts
prove Ineffectual, and the Profane Remain Incorrigible, and Unreformed, and the
Contagion of Iniquity do spread, (which God, (...) Infinite Mercy, prevent.)
Then prepare to meet thy God, O England, in way of Judgment, more Terrible,
perhaps, Amos 4.12.
than ever thou wast yet Visit with.

If this do not Affect you; Let particular Sinners Remember, That if they
despise This Mercy, and the Riches of God's Goodness and Forbearance, and
Long-Suffering, and still harden their Impenitent Hearts; They do but Treasure
up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment
of God. Romans 4.4, 5.


The Wise Man says, It is better to hear the Rebuke of the Wise, than for a
Man to hear the Song of Fools. Eccl. 7.5.
O what happy days do the Profane and Wicked (which are Fools in the Wise Man's
Language and Esteem,) The Swearer, The Drunkard, The Debauched, The Sabbath
breaker, think we should have, if they might be allowed to Sin without
control! If there were no more Preaching against Profaneness and Immorality,
nor Punishment for it! Whereas there is no more Sure Sign of Approaching
Destruction, than this, When God says to his Ministers, as to the Prophet
Ezekiel; You shall be dumb, E^ek. 3.26.
and shall not be a Reprover to them, For they are a Rebellious House.

You may be sure that God has (...) Controversy with the Land, when there is
no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in it: But it is filled with Swearing
and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery; and, when these
sins break out, when they don't lie hid, when they overcome opposition, when
sinners act with a Forehead of Brass, and go on till blood touches blood, and
one sin causes more; no doubt, I say. But such a Land shall Mourn, and the
Dwellers therein languish; Especially if God say, Let no Man Strive, nor
Reprove another, Hos. 4.1-4.
in order to his Ameadment.

2. Observe the Properties, or Aggravations of the Evil that is Threatened; It Is
sudden and remediless.

It Is sudden Destruction: such sinners may be cut off with swift Vengeance. So
sudden, perhaps, shall the Stroke be, as was the Earthquake at Port Royal in
Jamaica; when, if such an Absurdity were true, that the bare Crying, God have
Mercy upon them, would save their Lives, or their Souls, they should not have
time enough allowed even for that. Their sins tend to this, and the Threatening
is plain; For however they may slatter themselves with Peace and Safety, sudden
Destruction shall come upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child, 1 These.
5.3. And they shall not eseape.

For, as their Punishment shall be Sudden, it shall be Remediless too. Alas!
What will Sinners fly, or trust to then? What can they have, or propose, as a
ground of hope, or safety, in the midst of their Overwhelming Fears; when
Desolation, Destruction, Distress and Anguish shall seize them, with the
surprising force of a Whirlwind? Will they be so Consident then, as now, to
Dishonor and Affront the Mercy of God, by pretending to trust thereto? no;
their very Dope shall perish: and yet, if it did remain, 'twill then appear to
be, what indeed it always was, Groundless, Presumptuous and Vain For God will
Laugh at them when th^^ howl and weep; He will Mock them in Derision who
despised his Reproo^ And those that refused to hear when Go^ called, and did
not regard, though Go^ stretched out his Willing and Almighty hand of Mercy to
Save them; shall then call and cry, but in vain; and though they seek God early,
he will not be found of them: As you may find, if you Read Prove. 1. from v. 24.
to the End.

Now, that I may Conclude, with such an Application, as may be most Profitable,
and Suited also to this Present Assembly, and the Occasion there of: Let me
Seriously Address my self,

First, To all in General; having also a more Particular regard to such as do,
or may need, and meet with Reproof. And,

Secondly. To such of you as are United in a Society, in order to Reprove that
so you may REFORM Offenders.

1. More General; If what you have heard is true, Let me Beseech all Persons
to look with a Favorable Eye upon the Laudable Undertaking of those among us;
who, from a Sense of their Duty, and in hopes of doing Good, are Engaged in a
Design, and do Actually Endeavor the Reformation of such, as are Enemies to
God and the Public Safety, as well as highly injurious to their own Souls and
Bodies and Families.

Nay, my Request is not only, that you would Approve of their Design, But
Assist them als; By your Ready and Hearty Joining your selves unto them; or, at
least, by your Serious Frequent Prayer for them, and the Success of their
Attempts. Let your Tongues be employed in their Vindication, and your utmost
Endeavors used for their Encouragement.

And as to such who need, and may meet with Reproof and Punishment for their
Sins; They should look upon these Persons as the most Beneficial Members of the
Town and Corporation and in Particular their Best Friends.

No Man can, with any Color of Honesty, or Charity, Accuse 'em of Aiming at
any Private Worldly Advantage, in this their Hazardous Attempt. It Is the Vilest
and most Uncharitable Censure, to Charge 'em with Hypocrisy. Your own
Conscences must Witness to this; That those who are Engaged herein, are some of
the most Peaceable, Just, and Virtuous Persons in all the Neighborhood. (Not
that I Accuse others, who, as yet, Decline the Joining themselves to their
Society, provide^ they wish well to the Work thereof. How hearty is their Love
to your How commendable is their Love to one another? Their Union, I trust, ^^
firm in the Best, i. e. Common-Christian Cause; and such, I am Persuaded, as
will not be broken, by Reason of such Circumstantials in Religion; as have,
ever since the Reformation, Deliverance from Popish-Ignorance and Idolatry,
been the Bones of Contention among us in these Lands; and have caused so many
Irreligious Contentions in the Church, and so ^uch Mischief, with respect to
our Civil Interests and Concerns. The Amiable and Amicable Agreement, which is
so apparent among them, and all such Societies as theirs; not only in the
Vigorous Efforts against the Common Enemy, and Chief, if ^ot the only Cause of
Divisions; I mean Licentiousness and Ungodliness: But also their Consent to
Meet together for the Pure Worship of the Undivided Trinity; will, I doubt not,
be an Evident and Permanent Confutation of ^he most Senseless of all the
Objections that were ever made against them and their Design; That Faction and
Schism is in Danger to be Promoted ^^ereby.

The Work these Persons Engage in, is always Necessary, and it is more
especially so at this Day in our Land. The Method they have taken, which is, by
Acting in Conjunction with, and i^ Assisting one another; Having Formed
themselves into a Society for the Good End; cannot, with any Reason be spoken
against.

It Is the most likely way to accomplish the Designed End: Especially
considering the Combination of Devils with Wicked Men against 'em And that (to
the Reproach of ou^ Christian Nation) Atheists and Scosfers, with other Profane
Persons, have their constant Clubs, and Hellish Meetings, to defeat their
attempts.

Moreover, this Method is approved by many of the Nobility, and Bishops, and
Judges of Both the Kingdoms of England and Ireland. Yo^ may see their Names, to
the Number of Seventy Two, in the Book Entitled, An Account of the Societi^^
for Reformation of Manners in England and Ireland, etc.

And it is not only Approved by these; ^ut Actually Promoted by the Interest and
Authority, by the Power and Purse ^f the Inferior Magistrates, and such ^s are
the Wisest and Best throughout the Kingdom. I speak this, That their Zeal might
Provoke others to this Branch of Love, and Good Works.

2. Let me Address my self to those among you, That are United in a Society, in
Order to Reprove, and so Reform Offenders. And what I have to say to you, shall
be by way of Encouragement and Counsel.

1. By way of Encouragement. Discouragements I know you have met with, and do
Daily find; But you have more to Encourage you: I presume, when you at first
Resolved, and Entered upon this Work, you did not think, That if you were
Active, the Devil and his Agents would be Idle. You could never Imagine the
Enemy would quit the Field, and his Possessions too, without Blows: That the
Lusts of Men, which are so Powerful of themselves, would be restrained without
Reluctance. Ephesians. 2.2.
That the Devil, w^^^ Rules in the Children of Disobedience; and with the
greatest Precipitance Leads, yea Drives them to Destruction; would abandon his
Strong Holds, upon the First Summons, and make no Resistance. No; my Brethren:
As Good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, you must Expect and Prepare to Endure
Hardship. But do not Faint in your Minds. Give no place to the Devil. Be strong
in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might.

To Encourage you, Consider your General. Look unto Jesus the Captain of our
Salvation. Remember h^^ is the Lord of Hosts, The Lord strong and mighty, The
Lord mighty ^^ Battle.

You Fight under his Banner, th^^ is, of Invincible Courage and Power, of
Infallible Wisdom and Conduct. Your Enemies are overcome already by him in
Fight; and therefore being Defeated, are, in some measure, disheartened. There
are more for you ^en against you; if not in Number^, ^^^ in Power. Greater is
he that is ^^ you, than he that is in the World. ^^ a Word; There is no
Possibility of your Losing the Victory, but by your Cowardice or Revolt.

Persist therefore in your Attempts. ^f you Die in the Quarrel, if you Fall in
the Engagement, you have this to Comfort you Now and then; You Act according to
your Commanded Duty, in pursuance of your Baptismal ^ow; And also in Compliance
with ^^e Enacted Laws of the Land; and the Frequent Addresses of one part of
the Legislative, and Repeated Procla^^tions of the Supreme Executive ^ower of
this Kingdom. You do that, without which, the Magistrate, in a very great
Measure, is unable to perform his Duty.

The Obloquy of Malicious an^ Wicked Men, whose commendation is sometimes a
Discredit, should no^ affect you. For, Believe it, it is you^ Honor to be
engaged with so good Company as you have in so Good a Work as yours is. You
are, in a Sense Co-workers with God himself, and i^ you succeed, may be called
the Preserves of your Country.

If you neglect this your Duty, you are Partners in your Neighbors S^^ and
likely to be Sharers in their Punishment. If you persist with Wisdom and
Fidelity, you perform an Act ^ the Best Neighborhood and true^ Love. If you
succeed, you gain you^ Brother, and turn a Sinner from the Error of his Ways,
and save a S^^ from Death. However this may ^^ God will account of you
accord^^^ to your Sincere Endeavors, and not according to your Success.

And whilst he Rains down Curses on Flatterers and Backbiters, your Prayers,
and this your Labor of Love, shall, at the least, return into your own Bosom:
He that says unto the Wicked, Thou art Righteous; him shall the People Curse;
Nations shall abhor him: But, Prove. 24.24, 25.
to them that Rebuke him, shall be Delight, and a good Blessing shall come upon
them.

You may hope, that you, and your Posterity shall dwell in the Land, as in a
Quiet Habitation: But, if all the Methods God has taken with us, and this of
Raising up so many to plead for him against the Evil Doers; among the rest, do
prove Ineffectual; and God do come out of his Place, to Punish the Inhabitants
of the Earth; you, perhaps, shall be gathered to your Graves in Peace, 2 Chronicles.
34.27, 28.
neither shall your Eyes see all the Evil that God will bring upon this Place,
and the Inhabitants of the same: As God dealt with Good Josiah King of Judah,
who Attempted a Work of Reformation in his Days. Or else it is probable, you
shall be hid in some other of God's Chanbers, Isa. 26.20.
till his Indignation be over-past. For those that Sigh and Cry for all the
Abominations that are done in the Land: having also Endeavored, though in vain,
to Prevent them; shall have a Mar^ set upon their Foreheads, which the
Destroying Angel shall Regard; and to such he shall not come near to hurt 'em,
when his Commission is, Ezekiel. 9.4, 5, 6.
to go through a Nation, City, or Town, and Smite and Slay utterly Old and
Young.

But that your Attempts may have the Desired more abundant Success, suffer now,
I beseech you, the Word of Exhortation; And therefore,

2. By way of Counsel. Let me desire you often to Read and Consider those
Directions that were at first given in Writing to your Society; which, being so
Ample, I have the less need to say very much here. All that I shall add
further, shall be under these Two Generals.

Direct. 1. Beware of such things ^s will either Prevent, or Frustrate your
Attempts, in order to Reform Offenders by Due Reproof. Which things, among
others, are such as these.

1. Self-Guiltiness. When the Reprover is Guilty of the same Crime, or another
as bad, for which he does Reprove. It Is very Natural and Common to say,
Physician heal thy ^^lf. This one thing seems to be the ^reat Cause, why
Reformation is Rearded, and Attempts, in order thereunto, are hindered. No
wonder that be Plague of Heart does break out ^ Scandalously in the Life, and
that one Sinner Infects another, by his Profane Breath and Converse; wh^^ our
Physicians themselves are Sick, and, instead of Administering Re^^^dies, do
Propagate the Contagion.

If a Man that is Guilty himself, does Reprove or Punish another, for the same
Fault; It looks as if this Man Designed the Applause of Men, and not the Favor
or Approbation ^^ God. It looks as if he were Affected with the Itch of
Meddling in other Men's Matters, which makes him Restless and Uneasy. It Is
plain, he is no Enemy to the Sin, for he Love it, and Lives in it himself: T^
World therefore will think, which does is out of Ill Will to the Offender's
Person. Our Blessed Savior tells us, He that goes about to p^^out the Mote that
is in his Brothe^ Eye, Mat. 7.3, 4, 5. Romans 2.1.
and has a Beam in his ov^^ Eye, is a Hypocrite. And such Practice will Render
you Inexcus^^ and you will be Condemned by you own Words and Actions, as well
as by the Law and Sentence of God. And, upon such accounts as these, it is true,
if not the Truth of my Text, as I told you in the beginning of this Discourse.
That he that often Reproves another, and remains Obdurate, and Unreformed
himself, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy.

2. Beware of Selsishness and Covetousness. A Man that is of such a mean
Spirit, will have all his Thoughts and Actions confined within the narrow
compass of his little self. With a Detestable Neglect of the Common Good he
will venture the Divine Displeasure, rather than endure the Angry Look of a
Customer or Benefactor.

3. Beware of Slothfulness and Sinful Cowardice. Men never attempt the Good of
others, or fail therein, Because, whatever their Good Wishes are, Their hands
refuse to Labor; Or else, some are of a Servile Complying Temper, that will
say as others say, and do as others do; or, as others would have 'em say or do;
because else they shall Offend, and Displease one or other, which they are
afraid of. And Sinful Cowardice, and Meanness of Spirit, is the true Name of
this Temper, though some would Adorn it with the Venerable Names of Meeknefs
and Moderation.

Direct. 2. When you have Opportunity, and any good hopes of Success, try
Milder Methods at first, and use Fraternal Reproof, before Authoritative be
called for. Tell him his fault between him and thee alone. This is the
Direction of our Blessed Savior, Mat. 18.17. If he be not an Accustomed,
Hardened Sinner, perhaps, this will prove the best way to gain him And it is the
Reformation of Offenders, that ought to be your End: By consequence therefore,
it is your Duty and Wisdom, both to Propose and Prosecute, the Best Means in
order hereunto.

Now, that you may use this Method to a Good Purpose, Colos. 3.16.
Let the Word of Christ dwell richly in you, with all Wisdom. Endeavor to
Persuade those you Reprove, that you Act from Affection to them, and that you
Design their Advantage. Be sure that you Reprove for a Fault, and be able to
Prove both the Fact and the Fault, least the Party you Reprove deny either the
one or the other; and you be found either a False Accuser of your Brethren, or
else one that sets up his own Fancy, as the Rule of Sin and Duty.

Accommodate your Selves to the Age, Condition, Quality and Relation of the
Party you Reprove. Choose Proper Seasons for this Work. 1 Samuel 25.36, 37.
Abigail deferred her Reproof of Nabal, till his Drunkenness with Wine was
over; and it is as Unfit a Season, when a Man is Drunk with Passion: For, even
Jonah, at such a Time, Jonah 4.9.
told God himself, He did well to be Angry even to the Death.

If you Reprove another immediately after he has Reproved you, your Reproof,
it is likely, will be Esteemed Recrimination, or Revenge. If you Reprove another
in Company, when it may be done as well, or, perhaps, better in Private; it will
look more like the Reproach of an Enemy, than the Reproof of a Friend; or, as
if you intended rather to DEFAME, than REFORM him.

Moreover, if the Offenders be Inferiors, such as Children, or Servants; It is
Advisable, many times that you Acquaint the Parents, o^ Masters, before you
Inform the Magistrate. And, it may be, the Reroof of a Godly Minister of
Christ, may, in some Cases, do more good, man the Pecuniary Mulcts, or Corporal
Punishments Inflicted by the Magistrate.

In a Word; Remember your Design; it is the Advantage and Future Innocence of
such as Offend: In order thereunto, Study to know, and Labor to Practice the
Best Methods you can.

And, because you are no more than Instruments in the hand of God, upon him you
must Depend for Assistance, from him you may expect Success.

But, at the same time, Romans 12.11, 12
Be ye not slothful in Business, But Fervent in Spirit. Serving the Lord.
Rejoicing in Hope: Patient in Tribulation: Continuing Instant in Prayer;

And the God of all Grace, who has called us unto his Eternal Glory by Jesus
Christ, after that ye have suffered a while, make you Perfect, Stablish,
Strengthen, Settle you.

To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1700.
MR. Poole's English Annotations on the whole Bible, wherein the Sacred Text is
inserted, together with the various Readings, and Parallel Scriptures, etc. In
Two Volumes, Folio.

The Works of the late Reverend Divine Mr. Stephen Charnock. In Two Volumes,
Folio.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, with the History of the Times he
lived in, Written by himself, and Published by Mr. Matthew Sylvester, in Folio.

A Funeral Sermon occasioned by the Death of the Reverend Mr. Nathanael
Vincent, late Minister of the Gospel in Southwark: Quarto. By Mr. Nath. Tailor.

Mr. Lorrimer's Apology for the Ministers, who subscribed unto the stating of
the Truths and Errors in Mr. VVilliams's Book, of Gospel Truth stated, from the
Exceptions made against them by Mr. Trail, Quarto.

-- His Remarks on Mr. Tho. Goodwin's Discourse of the Gospel, proving that the
Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace, and Answering the Objections to the
contrary, etc. Quarto.

Mr. Showers Thanksgiving Sermon on the discovery of the Assassination Plot,
April 1696. Quarto.

Mr. Stephens of Sutton in Surry, his Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of London, at St. Mary le Bow, January 30. 1693. Quarto.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon at the discovery of the Assassination Plot,
Preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at St. Mary le Bow, April 1696.
Quarto.

Mr. Slater's Thanksgiving Sermon October 27. 1692. And his several Funcral
Sermons for Mr. John Reynolds, Mr. Fincher and Mr. George Day Ministers of the
Gospel, Quarto.

Mr. Sam. Clarke of Wickham, his Sermon Preached at the Ordination of Mr.
Gatton of Aylsbury, Quarto.

Mr. Gibbons Sermon on Justification, Oto.

Mr. John Howards Sermon on Trinity Sunday, 1700. at St. Paul's before the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, in defense of the Trinity. Quarto.

An Effort, against Bigottry, and for Christian Catholicism, by Mr. Henry
Chandler, Quarto.

A Preservative against Deism, showing the Great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the Two great Points, Pardon of Sin and a Future State of Happiness.
With an Appendix in Answer to a Letter of (...) W. against Revealed Religion,
in the Oracles of Reason. In Octavo. By Nath. Tailor. (...)

A Discourse of the Nature and Necessity of Faith in Jesus Christ. With an
Answer, to the Pleas of our modern Unitarians for the Sufficiency of bare
Morality or mere Charity to Salvation. In Octavo.

Mr. Shower's Mourners Companion: or, Funeral Discouurses on several Texts. The
second Edition in Two Parts. Octavo.

-- His Sermons on Jsa. 55.7, 8, 9. God's Thoughts and Ways above Ours,
especially in the Forgiveness of Sins, in Octavo.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Nath Oldfield, December. 31. 1696. in Octa.

Catholicism without Popery: An Essay to render the Church of England, a means
and pattern of Union to the Christian World, By a Person of Quality, Octavo.

Dr. Burton of Barnes in Surrey his Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance,
seeking first the Kingdom of God, etc. published with a Preface, by Dr. John
Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury, in Two Volumes. Octavo.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, Also a Defense of the said Remarks,
against his Admonition. By J. Boyse of Dublin. Octavo.

Bishop VVilkins's Discourses of the Gift of Prayer and Preaching, the latter
much enlarged by the Bishops of Nor^^ch and Chichester. Octavo.

Mr. Slater's Call to Family Religion being the Substance of 18 Sermons. Octavo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia, or the Art of Short-writing completed in a far more
Compendious Method than any yet Extant. Octavo.

-- His Bible with singing-Psalms in the same Shorthand. Octavo.

Cambridge Phrases. By A. Robinson. Octavo.

The Cursed Family: Or, a short Tract, showing the pernicious Influence of
wicked Prayerless Houses, upon this Church and Kingdom. Humbly tendered by way
Subserviency to his Majesty's Royal Proclamations, and Acts of Parliament for
preventing and punishing Immorality and Profaneness. By Tho. Risley, M. A.
sometime Fellow of Pembrook-Colledge in Oxford. With a Recommendatory Epistle,
by the Reverend Mr. John How. Octavo.

The History of the Conquest of Florida by the Spaniards. Octavo.

Mr. William Scoffin's Help to True Spelling and Reading; or a very Easy
Method for Teaching Children or Elder Persons rightly to Spell, and exactly to
Read English; with a Scripture Catechism, in Octavo.

Monro's Latin Grammar, Octavo.

Clavis Grammatica: Or, The ready way to the Latin Tongue, containing most
plain Demonstrations, for the regular Translation of English into Latin.
Octavo.

Mr. Hamond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral, Octavo.

Mr. Alsop's Faithful Rebuke to a false Report, and his Vindication of it
against Mr. Lobb, Octavo.

Mr. Aikin's English Grammar: Or, The English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules, composed for the Use of the English Schools. Octavo.

Sir Robert Howard's Free Discourse, wherein the Doctrines that make for
Tytanny are Displayed; and the Title of our Lawful and Rightful King William
Vindicated, etc. In Octavo.

Mr. Woodhouse's Sermon at Mrs. Papillon's Funeral, Octavo.

Mr. Shower's Account of the Life of Mr. Henry Gearing, in Twelves.

-- His Family Religion, in Diverse Letters, Twelves.

-- His Discourse of Tempting Christ. Twelves.

The whole Duty of Man. Epitomized for the Benesit of the poor, with select
Prayers on every Partition, in Twenty fours. Price 6 d.

Mr. Woodhouse, Mr. Shower, Mr. ^liams, Mr. Alsop and Mr. Calamy's Ser^ before
the Societies for Reformation of (...) ners. In Octavo.

A Brief Discourse of Infant-Ba^ delivered at the Public Baptism of an (...) at
Kingston upon Thames, June 23, (...) by the Reverend Mr. Nathanael Published
with the Author's Cons^^^ Daniel Mayo.

FINIS.

