CERTAIN SERMONS AND LETTERS of DEFENSE AND RESOLUTION, TO Some of the late
CONTROVERSIES OF OUR TIMES.

By JAS: MAIN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1653.

THE CONTENTS.
I. A Sermon against Schism, or the Separations of these Times, on Heb. 10.
24, 25. II. A Sermon. concerning Unity and Agreement, on 1 Cor. 1. 10. III. A
Sermon against False Prophets, on Ezekiel. 22. 28. IV. The Sermon. against False
Prophets, Vindicated by Letter. V. The Peoples War examined, according to the
Principles of Scripture and Reason.
A SERMON AGAINST SCHISM: OR, The SEPERATIONS of these TIMES. Preached in the
Church of Wattlington in Oxfordshire, with some Interruption, September 11.
1652.

At a public dispute held there, Between JASPER MAIN, D. D. And one -- --

MAT. 13. 47. (...).

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1652.

THE PREFACE.
IF you please to turn to the 19. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and to
read from the 24. to the 33. verse of that Chapter, there is there mention made
of a great Assembly, and concurse of people; Who upon the Instigation of one
Demetrius, a Silver-Smith, were confusedly drawn together into a public
Theater. And when they were met there, the Confusion was so great, that the
Theater for the time, was quite changed into a Babel; there was a perfect
Division of speech, and Tongues among them, scarce any two spoke the same
Language; For some cried out one Thing, and some cried out Another, as you may
read at the 32. v. of that Chap. Rudeness, Clamor, Tumult, Noise, was all
that issued from them. Nay 'twas a Meeting so confused, so wholly void of
Reason, that the greatest part knew not why they were come together, as you may
read in the end, and close of that verse. And hence it is, that when Saint Paul
would have engaged himself among them, and would have preached to them to
convert and turn them from their Error, It Is said at the 31. verse of that
Chapter, That some of the chief of Asia, who were his Friends, sent to him, and
desired him, that he would not adventure himself among such a rude,
Tempestuous rout of people.

And now, if you desire to know why I have said this to you, it is to let you
see, First, That this has partly been my case, I have been sent, nay spoken
to, by some persons of Quality and Honor, not to engage my self among such a
mixed Multitude as this; where my Affronts may be great, but my success, and
Harvest small: And to speak truth to you, if I had been left to the
peaceablenesse of my own quiet Temper, (which never did delight in storms,
nor to dispute with Fire.) If the fierce, and eager Importunity of some who
have provokt me, had not drawn me from my Judgment, I should have followed
their Advice, this Meeting had not been. Nay, I should have looked upon my
Appearance here, as a Distemper, like to theirs, who have provokt and called me
hither. For my cool and wiser Thoughts have still suggested to me, that to
dispute of Truth with those who do not understand it, is such a piece of
Madness, as if I should dispute of Colors with a Blind man, of Music with a
Deaf, or of the Sent of Flowers with One borne without a Smell.

Next, therefore, having so far departed from my Reason, as to submit to a
Dispute in this great public Meeting, lest it should prove such a confused
Meeting, as I described to you before; A Meeting where my Logic must fight
Duels with Men made of Rudeness, Tumult, Noise; Or lest it should prove a
Meeting where Men who can speak naught but English, shall yet speak diverse
Tongues; And where some shall cry out one Thing, and some shall cry another, I
have made it my humble suit to some persons of Honor here present, that by
their presence they will free the place from all such wild Confusions. And
that, if I must dispute, I may dispute with civil men, and not undergo Saint
Paul's misfortune, who fought with Beasts at Ephesus.

Thirdly, lest this Meeting should prove like the confused Meeting, which I
mentioned to you before, in one particular more; That is, lest the greatest
part of you should not know why you are this day come together. Before I enter
upon a full pursuit, or handling of this Text, it will be needful that I tell
you the occasion of this Meeting, which that I may the better do, I shall
desire you to believe, that it is not a Meeting of my projection or Contrivance.
I appear not here to raise a Faction, or to draw a party after me, nor to add
to the Rents of the Country, which are too wide already. Nor am I come hither
to revenge my self in the Pulpit, or to speak ill of those who have most
lewdly railed at me. Let them wallow themselves, as much as they please, in
their own gross filth, and mire; let them, if they please, be those raging
Waves of the Sea, which Saint Jude speaks of, which are always foming out
their own shame, when Jude 13.
they have steept their Tongues in Gall, and spewd forth all their Venom, They
shall not make me change my Opinion; which is, that to cast dirt for dirt, or
to return Ill-Language for Ill-Language, is a course so unreasonable, as if
two Men should fight a Duel, and choose a Dunghill for their weapon. As
therefore, I am not come hither to show my self Malicious, so I am not come
hither to gain Applause, or Reputation by this Meeting. No thirst of Fame, no
affection of Victory has drawn me from my Study to step into this Pulpit.
I understand my own Infirmities too well to be so selfe-conceited. Or if my
Abilities were far greater then they are, yet I have always looked on Fame
thus got, to be so slight a Thing, as if a Man should feed on Air, or make a
meal of shaddows.

Not to hold you therefore any longer in suspense, if you, who know it not
already, desire to know the true occasion of this Meeting, it is briefly this;
I have for some years (even with Tears in my eyes) seen one of the saddest
curses of the Scripture fulfilled upon this Nation: With a bleeding Heart I
speak it, I have seen, not only three Kingdoms, but our Cities, Towns, and
Villages, nay even our private Familyes divided against themselves. I have
seen the Father differing in opinion from the Son, and I have seen the
Son differing in opinion from the Father. I have seen the Mother broken from
the Daughter, and I have seen the Daughter divided from the Mother. Nay, our
very Marriage-Beds have not escaped the curse of Separation. Like Jacob and Esau
issuing from the same womb, I have seen two Twins of Separation rise from
between the same Curtains. I have seen the Wedlock knot quite untyed in
Religion; I have seen the Husband in opposition to the Wife, go to one, and I
have seen the Wife in opposition to her Husband, for many years together, go
to another Congregation. In a Word (my Brethren,) the Church of Christ among
us, which was once as Seamelesse as his Coat, is now so rent by Schisms, so
torn by Separations, that it is become like the Coat of Joseph which you read
of in the 37. Chapter of Genesis, at the 3. verse, scarce one piece is colored
like another; And I pray God it prove not like the Coat of Joseph in one
particular more; I pray God the Weaker be not sold by his Brethren, and his
Coat be not once more dyed red, once more imbrued in Blood. This, you will
say, is very sad, and yet this is not all; That which extremely adds to the
Misery of our Rents, and Separations, is, that the wisest cannot hope they will
ere be peeced, or reconciled. For the persons who thus Separate, are so far
from believing themselves to be in an Error, that they strongly think all
Others err who separate not too; They think themselves bound in Conscience to
do as they do. Nay, zealous Arguments are urged, and Texts of Scripture
quoted, to prove that it is a damning sin not to go on in Separation. The
Churches where their Neighbors met are now contemned, and Scorned: Nay, I have
with mine own Ears heard a Dining Room, a Chamber, a Meeting under Trees; Nay,
I have heard a Hog-stye, a B^rne, called places more sanctified then they. In a
word, one of the great Reasons which they urge, why they thus forsake our
Churches, and make divided Congregations, is, because (They say) the people
which assemble there are so wicked, so profane, that they turn Gods House of
prayer into a den of Thieves. To keep this infection from spreading in my
Parish, and to keep this piece of Leaven from sowring the whole Lump; And
withal to satisfy one, whom I look upon as a well-meaning, though a seduced,
and erring person, who has engaged her self by promise, that if I can take
the mist from her Eyes, and clearly let her see her Error, she will return
back to the Church, from which she has for some years gone astray; and being
invited to do this in a way of Christian challenge, which has raised a great
expectation in the Country, I have taken up the Gauntlet, and here present my
self before you; and before I enter the Lists, to let you all see the Justice
of the Cause which I here stand to defend, I have chosen this Text for my
shield; where He, who wrote this Epistle to the Hebrews says, Let us consider
one another to provoke one another to love and to Good works, not forsaking the
Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is.

The Division.
IN which words, the only point which I shall insist upon, as the fittest, and
most seasonable to be preached to this divided Congregation, shall be the point
of Schism; or, in plain English, Separation, as it is expressed to us in these
Words, Let us not forsake the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is. In the pursuit and handling of which words, I will proceed by these
two plain and easy steps. First, I will prove to you, by Arguments, which
have a sun-beame for their parent, That the Rent or Separation which is now
made in the Church, is a very grievous sin: Indeed, a sin so grievous, that
I scarce know whether Christians can be guilty of a greater. Next, I will
Examine and answer their Arguments, and Texts of Scripture; who do persuade
themselves and others that their separation is no sin; Nay, that would be a
grievous sin not to separate as they do. In the mean time I beseech you to
lend me a quiet and favorable Attention, whilst I begin with the first of
these parts, and that shall be to prove to you, that the separations of our
Times, are great and grievous sins.

Among the other Characters and Descriptions which have been made of us Men, we
have been called, (...). That is, a Creature borne and made, and created for
Society. Toward the preservation and maintenance whereof God at the Beginning,
ordered his Creation of us so, that whereas other Creatures take their
Original and Birth from a Diversity of parents. He made us Men to spring from
one, undivided, single pair. One Adam, and one Eve were the two joined parents
of Mankind. And the Reason of this was, That there might not only be among us
one common Kindred and Alliance, but that we might hold a firm, and constant
League and Friendship with each other too. And hence it is we see, that without
any other Teacher but their own Natural Instinct, Men in all Ages have
avoided separation, by gathering themselves into formed Bodies of Cittyes,
Towns and Commonwealths. Neighborhood, Society, mutual help, and
Conversation, being one of the great Ends for which God made us Men. And upon
this Ground it has been disputed, whether a Hermit, or Monastic man, break
not the Law of Nature, because he separates himself from the company of Men?
And it is clearly stated by some great Casuists, That if he separate from others
for no End but separation, if he retire himself into a Cave or Wilderness, or
Desert, (as some of the Ancient Hermits did) not for Devotion, but out of a
hatred, or distaste of the rest of Mankind; In that particular he cannot well
be called a Man, but some wilder Creature, made to dwell in Caves, Deserts,
Forests, Dens.

As then, the Law of Nature does require us to preserve society and Friendship,
so the Law of Christ has tied, and woven this knot much faster. We are all of
Kin by Nature, but we are all Brethren as Christians: Men allied to one
another by one common Hope, one common Faith, one common Savior, one common
God, and Lord, and Father of us all. And upon this Ground, when one Christian
shall divide or forsake the society of Another, unless it be upon a just
principle of Conscience, and to avoid a sin, the Scripture calls it not
barely Separation, but Separation which is Schism. That is, such a Separation
as is a Gospel-sinne too.

Which, that you may the more clearly understand, give me leave to ask you in
truth what is Schism? Why the best Definition of it that was ever yet given is
this, That Schism is nothing else, but a separation of Christians from that
part of the Visible Church, of which they were once Members, upon mere
fancyed, slight, unnecessary Grounds. In which Definition of Schism, three
things do offer themselves to your serious observation, to make it formal
Schism, or a sign of Separation. First it must be a separation of Christians
from some part of the Visible Church, of which they were once Members; That is,
(according to the Definition, a visible Church as it concerns this present
purpose) it must be a Denial of Communion with that Congregation of
Christians, with whom they were once united under a rightly-constituted Pastor.
Next, they who thus separate, must betake themselves to some other Teacher,
whom, in opposition to the former, they choose to be their Guide, and so make
themselves his Followers.

Thirdly, they must erect a New Assembly, or place of Congregation, as a New
Church distinct from that from which they do divide.

Lastly, This choice of a New Guide, and Separation from the Old, this Erection
of a New Church, and Division from the former must be upon slight unnecessary
Grounds; For if the Cause, or Ground of their Separation be needless, vain,
unnecessary, if it spring more out of Humor, Pride, desire of change, or
Hatred of their Brethren, then out of any Christian love to keep themselves
from sins; It Is in the Scripture Language Schism, That is, a sin of
Separation.

Or if you will hear me express my self in the language of a very learned Man
(who has contrived a clue to lead us through this Labyrinth) This breach of
Communion, This separation from a Church rightly constituted; This choice of a
New Guide, New Teacher, New Instructor. Lastly, This setting up of a New
Congregation, or place of private Meetings, is the same sin in Religion,
which Sedition, or Rebellion is in the Commonwealth or State. For upon a right
examination of the matter 'twill be found, That Schism is a Religious, or
Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition in the State is a civil, Lay-schisme.

Which two sins, though they appear to the World in diverse shapes, the one
with a Sword, the other with a Bible in his H^nd; yet they both agree in this,
that they both disturb the public peace. The one of the State, where men are
tied by Laws as Men; The other of the Church, where men should be tied by Love
as Christians.

To let you yet farther see, what a grievous sin this sin of Schism or
Separation is; If the time would give me leave, I might here raise the
Schoolmen, Ancient Fathers, and General Counsels from the dead, and make
them preach to you from this Pulpit against the sin of Separation. I might
tell you, that in the purest Times of the Church, a Schismatic, and Heretic
were looked upon as Twins; The one as an Enemy to the Faith, the other to
Communion. But because in our dark Times, learning is so grown out of date,
that to quote an Ancient Father, is thought a piece of Superstition; And to
cite a General Council is to speak words to our New Gifted men unknown, I
will say nothing of this sin, but what the Scripture says before me.

First, then, I shall desire you to hear what S. Paul says in this case, in
the last Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans at the 17. verse. Turn to the
place, and mark it well I beseech you. Now I beseech you, brethren, says he
there, Mark them which cause Divisions, and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which ^e have learned, and avoid them: That is, in other words, Separate your
selves from them. And then he gives you a Character, and Description of those
Separaters at the 18. verse of that Chapter; And says, For they that are such,
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly. And by good words and
fair speeches deceive the Hearts of the simple.

In which words, Four things are so exactly drawn to life, as makes them a
perfect Prophecye, or rather picture of our Times. The first is, that there
were some in S. Paul's days, who caused Divisions in the Church; Men, who in a
way of Schism, and Separation, made themselves the Heads and Leaders of
divided Congregations.

Next, The Ground upon which they built their Separation; 'twas not upon any
just, true, lawful, Scripture- Ground. For the Text says, 'Twas contrary to
the Doctrine which the Apostles taught, and preached. But the true cause, or
Ground, why they thus caused Separations, was merely self-Interest; And that
they might gain by their Divisions. Nay, 'twas such a poor, base, unworthy
selfe-Interest, that it is there said, they did it in compliance to their Belly.

The third thing which will deserve your observation, is, the cunning Art they
used to draw the weaks to be their Followers. It Is there said, that by good
Words and fair Speeches, they deceived the Hearts of the simple, especially
the simple of the weaker sex. And who these were, S. Paul, in other words, but
to the same purpose tells you, in the 3. Chapter of his second ^pistle to
Timothy at the 5, 6, 7. verses of that Chapter. Where speaking of such
Coseners, he says, they had a Form of Godliness, an outward seeming
Holiness to deceive and cosen by; And that under this Form of Godliness they
crept into Houses, and there led Captive silly Women, laden with sins, and
drawn away with diverse Lusts. Women so unable to distinguish Right from Wrong,
that they were always learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth.

And certainly, my Brethren, it is no new thing under the sun, to see the
weaker sex misled by holy Forms, and Shows. It Is no new thing, I say, under
the Sun, for a man that makes long prayers, to eat up a Widows House; Or for
a cunning Angler to catch the fillyer sort, with a hook bayted with Religion.
'Twas so in our Saviors time, and 'twas so in S. Paul's. And whether their
demure looks, their precise carriage, their long prayers, their good words and
fair speeches, be not the Hook, and snare, by which weak people are caught
now; whether the feasting of their Bellyes, or the making Gain of Godliness;
Or whether the Itch and pride of being the Leaders of a Faction; Or whether the
vain Ambition of being thought more holy or more gifted than the rest, be not
the true end of those, who do now cause Separations, I will not rashly
censure, but I have some reason to suspect. But this is not all.

The fourth, and last thing, which most deserves your observation, is, that
Separation in that place is such a Scripture-sinne, that S. Paul commands us to
separate from those, who do thus cause Separations. Hear the place, I pray,
once more repeated to you, I beseech you, Brethren, says he, Mark them who
cause Divisions among you, and avoid them. That is, as I said before, Separate
your selves from them. If they, who upon no just cause do Separate, must be
Separated from, I hope you will all confess that Separation is a sin.

And what sin think you is this sin of Separation? Why, I know some of you
will think it strange if I should say, it is a sin of the Flesh. And yet S.
Paul says, that it is a sin of the Flesh, in the 3. Chapter of his first
Epistle to the Corinthians. Mark I beseech you what he says in that place.
Are ye not carnal? says he there. For whereas there are among you Envyings,
and Strifes, and Divisions; Are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Says He at
the 3. verse. Again, when one says, I am Paul; And when another says, I am
of Apollos; Are ye not carnal? says he at the 4. v. of that Chapter. If to
divide and separate from the Followers of S. Paul, and to make themselves the
Followers, and Disciples of Apollos; or if by way of Separation to make
themselves the marks of several Churches to which Apostles were the Guides,
were a sin of Carn^lity; (as S. Paul says it was) what shall we say of some
people of our Times? who instead of several Apostles to divide themselves by,
do choose to themselves Guides so mean, so unlearned, so liable to Error,
that they perfectly make between them the picture of Mistakes: The Blind
leading the Blind, and both fallen into a Ditch? It Is not now, as 'twas then.
When some said, we are of Paul, and when others said, we are of Cephas, and
when others said, we are of Apollos; Others, we are of Christ. Though to make
the Names of Christ, or Paul, or Cephas, names of Faction, was a sin. But we
are fallen on Times so made of Separation, that people do divide themselves by
Teachers, whose second Trade is Teaching. Teachers so obscure, so bred to
manual Occupations; Teachers so sprung up from the basest of the people.
Lastly, Teachers, so accustomed to the Trewell, Forge, and Anvill, that I
almost blush to name them in the Pulpit. It Is not now sa^d, we are of Paul, And
we are of Apollos; But we are of Wat Tyler; We are of Jack Cade; We are of
Alexander the Coporsmith; We are of Tom the Mason; and we are of Dicke the
Gelder. And whether to Divide and Separate under such vulgar Names as These, be
no a sin of the Flesh, I leave to every one of you, who have read S. Paul, to
judge.

And here, now, if Time were not a Winged Thing, or if it would but stay my
leisure, I might lay before you many other places of the Scripture, which
clearly do demonstrate that Separation is a sin. For though, like the Ghost
of Samuel, which you read of in the Scripture, it usually appear clothed in
the Mantle of a Prophet, though it were Holiness in the Tongue, And
preciseness in the Face; yet to let you see what an Apple of Sodom it is; How
it looks with a Virgin cheek without, and is naught but Rottenness within, I
shall once more desire you to hear what S. Paul says of it, In the 5. Chapter
of the Galatians at the 19. and 20. verses of that chapter, Where he once more
reckons it among the sins of the Flesh. As for Example, The Works of the
Flesh are manifest, says he, which are these. Adultery, Fernication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Haeresies, says our English Translation.
But the words in the Original Greek, (which are the true Word of God) will
bear it thus. (...), That is, Divisions, Sects, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like. Of the which I tell you before, says
he, As I have told you in Times past, That They which do such Things shall not
Inherit the Kingdom of God. Where you see Seditions, Sects, and Schisms, as
well as Adultery, and Murder, are there listed by S. Paul among those works
of the Flesh, which do shut men out of Heaven, and exclude them from salvation.

Many such like places of the Scripture I might lay before you. But I will
content my self with one Argument more; which shall not only prove to you,
That Separation is a sin; But one of the Greatest sins, of which Christians
can be guilty.

To make this clear to you, and beyond all Dispute, or Question. That which I
will say to you (and mark it well) is this. It Is a Rule in Divinity, (and it is a
Rule infallible) That those sins are the Greatest, which are most contrary,
and do most oppose the greatest Christian virtues. Now the Three Great
Christian virtues which do make and constitute a Christian, are set down by
S. Paul, in the 13. chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, at the
last verse, where he says, Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity; But the
Greatest of these is Charity. Thus, then, stands the case. Distrust in Gods
promises, or an unbelief in his power, is a very great sin. For it is a sin
which does oppose and quite cut off the wings of Hope. Haeresie, or the strife,
and obstinate Defense, and persisting in a known Error, is a far greater
sin. For it is a sin against Faith, a sin which strives to draw a Cloud
about the Beams of Truth. But if it be true what S. Paul says, (as most
certainly it is) If it be true that Charity is greater then either Faith, or
Hope, Then 'twill follow by Good Logic and all the Consequence of Reason; That
that sin which does untie, and break the Bond of peace; That sin which
destroys Christian Friendship, and Communion; Lastly, That sin which rends,
and tears the Cords of Charity asunder, is a far greater sin then
unbelief or Haeresie. And the sin which does all this is the sin of Separation.

First it is a greater sin in it self, and the very formality of the sin.
As being the worst Extreme to the best, and greatest virtue, Namely, The virtue
of Love; By which Christ would have his Followers distinguished from the rest of
Mankind. For by this shall all men know, says he, that you are my Disciples,
if ye love one another. As you may read in the 13. chapter of John at the 35.
verse. And agreeable to this is that which is delivered here in this Text,
where the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews says, Let us consider one
another to provoke one another to Love. And not forsake the Assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is.

And as Schism, or Separation upon a slight, or needless Ground is in it
self one of the greatest sins; So it is one of the greatest sins too, in its
dangerous Effects. Besides the Hatred, Envy, Strife, which it begets among Men
of divided Interests, and Minds, It Is many times the Coal which sets whole
States and Commonwealths on fire. It pretends, indeed, very much to the
Spirit, And at first clothes it self in the Dress of Humility and Meekness;
But they who have written the Chronicles of the Church can tell you, That those
pretenses to the Spirit have no sooner gathered strength, but they have
proceeded to bloody Battles, and pitched fields. Where the Meek persons have
thrown aside their Bibles; and have changed the Sword of the Spirit into the
Sword of War. The proceedings of the Donatists in Affricke, and of the
Iohn-of Leyden-Men at Munster are two sad Examples of the truth of what I say.

The Grounds of Separation examined.
BUt here, perhaps, will some of you, who hear me this day, 2.
say, What Is all this to us? In saying this which you have hitherto said, like
those who wrote Romances, you have but created an Adversary out of your own
fancy, and then foiled him; or like the man in Aristotle who drove his shadow
before him, you first frame a man of Air, and then cry he flies from you. But
if this be to conquer, one of our Gifted Men who is at all no Scholar, can as
well triumph over men of Air, and shadows, as your self. To let you see,
therefore, that I am one of those, who desire not to fight Duels with naked
unarmed Men, nor to meet any in the Field, before we have agreed upon the just
length of our Weapons: If your patience will hold out so long, who come
dis-interested hither, This second part of this Sermon shall be spent in the
pursuit of that, which Master Deane of Christ-church just now very seasonably
noted as a Defect in our present way of Arguing, and Dispute, which was, that
the Grounds were not examined upon which the present Separations of these
Times, do build themselves. These Grounds, therefore, I shall now in the next
place call to some reckoning and Account, And in the doing of this, I will hang
up a pair of Scales before you, you shall see their Arguments placed in One
Scale, and my Answers in the Other: And because no Moderatour sits in the
Chair to judge (which was a thing foreseen by me, but could not well be
compast) I shall make you the Judges who hear me this day. And because the
Rudeness, and Ill-language of those who have disturbed me in this Pulpit, has
made me stand before you here like a man arraigned for Error, I will freely
cast my self upon God, and you the Country. Thus, then, I shall proceed.

Here (as I said before) may some of the Separating party, say to me, How does
the former part of your Sermon concern us? We separate, it is true, But not on
those false Grounds which you have all this while described. We grant, indeed,
That if we broke Communion with you out of Faction, or Selfe-Interest, or
Pride, or desire of Gain, or mere Love of Separation, you might well call us
Schismatics; and we should well deserve that Name. But the Ground on which we
separate from you, is, because you are not fit to be Assembled with, you are
sinners; wicked, lewd, profane, notorious sinners. The places where you meet
breathe nothing but Infection. Your Teachers preach false Doctrine; and your
people practice Lies. In a word, we cannot with the safety of our Conscience
frequent your Congregations. Since to appear there would be an enterprise as
dangerous, as if we should make Visits to a Pesthouse, and there hope to escape
the Plague.

This you will say (good people) is very hard language. And How, think you, do
they prove it? why, as they think by two clear places of the Scripture, which
no man can oppose, and not make War with Heaven. Two places of Scripture, I
say, have been produced, and quoted to me, like Sampson and Achilles, with
Invincible Lances in their Hands. Places which do not only allow, but command
a separation; Nay, they command it so fully, that if they should not separate,
or forsake our Congregations, they say they should sin greatly, and disobey
the Scripture. And what are these two places?

The first you shall find set down in the 5. last verses of the 6. Chapter,
of the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where the words run thus.
Be ye not unequally yokt together with unbeleevers. For what Fellowship has
Righteousness with unrighteousness? And what Communion has Light with
Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God; Levit. 26. 12.
As God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; And I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate, Esaias 52. 11.
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. This
is their first great place, which they urge for separation. Will you now hear
their second? That you shall find set down in the 4. first verses of the 18.
Chapter of the Revelations. Where the words run thus, After these things, says
S. John there, I saw another Angel come down from Heaven, having great power;
and the Earth was lightened with his Glory. And he cried mightily, with a strong
voice, saying, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
Habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spirit; And the Cage of
every unclean, and hateful Bird. For all Nations have drunk of the wine of
the wrath of her Fornications; And the Kings of the Earth have committed
Fornication with her. And the Merchants of the Earth are waxed rich, through
the Abundance of her Delicacyes. And I heard Another voice from heaven, (says
he) saying; Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues.

These two places of Scripture (if you will hear me express my self in the
threadbare Lunguage of the Times) They say, do hold Forth themselves so
clearly, that I may sooner quench the sun than find an Answer to them. Nay,
to deal freely with you, these two places, and these only are a piece of the
Challenge which has occasioned this Dispute. For I am promised by Her, whom I
here come to undeceive, that if I can answer these two places, she will be my
Convert; And will soparate from these who do now make separations.

I take her at her word, and do thus contrive, and shape my Answers; Mark
them I beseech you. As for the first place in the 6. Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians; you are to understand, that when S. Paul wrote that
Epistle, The City of Corinth was not wholly converted to the Faith, but was
divided in Religions, some were yet Heathens, and sacrificed to Idols: Others
did embrace the Gospel, and gave up their Names to Christ.

Nevertheless, they were not so divided in Religions, but that dwelling
together in the same City, certain Neighbourly Civillities, and Acts of
kindness past between them. As for Example, when a Heathen or Unbeleever
offered a sacrifice to his Idol, 'twas usual, for old Acquaintance sake, to
invite his Christian Friends to be Guests to his sacrifice; And to eat of his
meat which was offered to his Idol, As you may read, 1 Cor. 10. 27, 28. And
the place where the sacrifice was eaten, and where the Feast was made, was, for
the most part in the Temple of the Idol, As you may read, 1 Cor. 8. 10. Now,
this mingling of Religions; This meeting of Christians with Heathens, at a
Heathen Feast; Nay, at a Feast where the Meat was first offered to an Idol, Nay
in that Idol was offered to the Devils, as you may read, 1 Cor. 10. 20. Nay,
this meeting of Christians with Heathens at an Idol sacrifice, and their eating
with them of that sacrifice in the very Temple of the Idol, was a thing so
dangerous, so apt to call weak Christians back again to their former
Idolatry, That Saint Paul thought it high time to say, Be not thus unequally
yokt with unbeleevers. In which expression he does cast an eye upon that Law of
God, which you may read set down in the 22. Chapter of Deuteronomye, at the 9,
10, 11. verses of that Chapter. Where God says, Thou shall not sow thy
Vineyard with diverse seeds; Nor shall thou plough thy field with an Ox, and
an Ass yokt together; Nor shall thou wear a Garment of diverse sorts, Namely,
of Linen, and Woollen woven together in one piece. To the Mystical meaning of
which Law, S. Paul here alludes, when he says, Be not unequally yokt with
Unbeleevers. For a Christian mingling with a Heathen, in a Heathen
Congregation: Nay, a Christian mingling with a Heathen in the Temple of an
Idol, was a more disproportioned sight, then to see an Ox yokt with an Ass in
the same Plough; Or then to see Corn sown with Grapes in the same Field; Or
then to see Wool mixed with Linen in the same Garment. In a Word, the Idolatry
of the Heathens was so inconsistent with the Religion of the Christians, that
S. Paul proceeds, and says, that they might as well reconcile Light to
Darkness, or contrive a League between Christ and Belial; Or tie a Marriage
knot between Righteousness and sin, as make it hold in fitness; That
Christians who are the Temples of God, and of his holy Spirit, should meet, and
eat, and bear a part in the Idol Temples of the Heathens. And these Infidels,
these Heathens, who did not believe in Christ; These Corinthians unconverted,
These Worshippers of Idols, who strived to draw the Christians back to their
former Superstitions, were they from whom S. Paul bids his New Converts
separate themselves. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says he, at
the 17. verse of that Chapter. O^, (in the Language of the place) Come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you. Which words are but a string struck by the
Prophet Esaias 52. 11.
Esaias first, and spoken by him, of the separation of the Jews, from the then
Idolatryes of the Heathens. And that this is the true Interpretation of this
place, will appear to any who shall compare, what S. Paul here says, with
that which he says, in the 10. Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, from the 19. to the 30. verse of that Chapter.

This then, being so, Let me ask the zealous persons, who thus delight in
Separation, are They from whom they separate such Infidells, such Heathens,
such Worshippers of Idols, as S. Paul does here describe? Do they see any Gods
of Gold, erected in our Temples? Or do they see any Images of Silver adored,
and sacrificed to by our Congregations? Do any of us make prayers to a stock?
Or do any of us burn Incense to a Stone? Nay, let them (if they please)
examine us by their private-meeting-Catechisme. Do we not confess the same
God that they do? Do we not believe in the same Jesus Christ? Do we preach
another Gospel? Or hope to be saved by any other Name but His? Are not our
Congregations built on the Scripture-Rock? Is not Christ our Corner Stone, and
his Apostles our Foundation? Do we not agree with them in all things, but
where they differ from the Scripture? As for Example, we do maintain, and
say, that separation is a sin. They do maintain and say, That it is a
Christian Duty; We urge that Text which says, One Lord, One Faith, One
Baptism; They urge no Text, which says, Men must be twice Baptized. We say,
that if a Child of God do break Gods Laws, a Child of God sins. Some of
them say that God beholds no sin in his Children. Lastly, we say of the
Scripture, as 2 Pet. 3. 16.
S. Peter said of S. Paul's Epistles; That there be some things in them, very
hard to be understood, which they who are unlearned wrest to their own
Destruction. They say unlearned Gifted Men are the best Expounders of the
Scripture; What they mean by Gifted Men I will not here examine. But that
which I will say is this, because We differ in Opinions to divide themselves
from us; Nay to apply such a reproachful place of Scripture to us, as makes us
no better then Infidels, and Heathens, and Worshippers of Idols, is to revile
us with the Word of God, and to Libell us with Scripture.

Would They take it well, if we should apply to Them that place which says;
Woe to you, ye Hypocrites, ye Blind Leaders of the Blind; you who strain at
Gnats, and yet securely swallow Camels? Would They take it well, if we should
quote a place of Scripture, and make it call Them Whited Sepulchers; which
show fair and beautiful without, and hold naught but stink, and Rottenness
within? Again, would They take it well if we should apply to them, that place
which speaks of Men, who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the power
thereof? Men, who like the old Pharisees, with a long prayer in their Mouth,
creep into Houses, and there lead Captive silly Women? Lastly, would They take
it well if we should apply that place to Them, which says; That as Iannes, and
Iambres withstood Moses, so do these men resist the Truth? Men of corrupt
Minds; Reprobate concerning the Faith? (as it is in the Greek, and the Margin
of your Bibles) (...), Men purblinde, void of Judgment concerning the true
knowledge of the Faith? If they would not take it well, why do they not
observe the Rule of Equity, and Justice, which is, To do to us, but as They
would have us do to them?

But here perhaps, will some of you who hear me this day, say; We do not
separate from you, because you are outright unbeleevers, Pagans, Infidels, or
Heathens; But because you wear the Names of Christians, and yet live the Lives
of Heathens. Though you do not worship Idols, yet there is Covetousness among
you, which S. Paul calls Col. 3. 5.
Idolatry. And though you do profess Christ, yet you walk disorderly; And
do commit those sins which they who denied Christ did. Though we see no Gods
of Gold nor Silver in your Temples, yet if we came there, we might see a
Congregation of such people as S. Paul in other places bids us Separate from.
As for Example, turn to the 3. Chapter of his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, and the 6. verse. Does he not there command us In the name of
the Lord Jesus to withdraw our selves from every Brother, who walks
disorderly, and not according to the Traditions which he taught? Or if this
place be not clear enough, turn to the 5. Chapter of the first Epistle of S.
Paul to the Corinthians, and to the 11. verse, Does he not there say, that if
Any man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicatour, or Covetous, or an
Idolater, or a Rayler, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one we are
not to keep Company, No, not to eat?

I grant, indeed, S. Paul says so, and do think it very fit that S. Paul
should be obeyed. But how does this prove that they are to forsake our
Congregations? That there are such men among us, as S. Paul does there
describe, is a Truth too clear to be denied. But are our whole Congregations
composed of such men? Are all Drunkards? Are all Fornicatours? Are all Raylers?
Are all Extortioners? Are all, both Priests and People so like one another,
that when they meet they make not a Church. Assembly, but a Congregation of
such sinners? Or are they only some? And they, perhaps, the lesser part who
are guilty of those sins? Nay suppose they should be far the greater part,
who are guilty of these sins; yet you know our Mat. 13.
Savior Christ compares the Church to a Field sown with good seed; But then
he tells us too, That to the Worlds end, among the good seed there shall still
grow Weeds, and Tares. Again, in the 13. chapter of S. Matthew at the 47. and
48. verses of that Chapter, he compares the Kingdom of God here in this World,
to a Net cast into the Sea, which enclosed Fishes of all sorts, Bad as well as
Good. And what the meaning of this draught of mingled Fishes is, I shall desire
you to read at the 49. and 50. verses of that chapter, where he says; That at
the End of the world, and not till then, the Angels shall go forth, and shall
separate the wicked from among the Just: (...), says the Original Greek, They
shall separate the wicked from the midst of the Just, which clearly does prove
to us, That till this final Separation, in the Church of God here on earth,
there will always be a mixture: To divide or separate, therefore, from the
whole Congregation, because some wicked men are in it, is a course so
unreasonable, as if they should refuse a Field of Corn because there grew some
weeds, or should renounce a Field of Wheat because it bears some Tares.

Besides, I would feign know, how far they will extend the meaning of that
Text, where S. Paul says, That they are not to eat with a Brother, who is a
Drunkard, or Adulterer, or Rayler, or Extortioner. Will they extend it to all
sorts of persons who are such? If they will, Then if a Woman have a Drunkard to
her Husband, she must separate from him because he is a Drunkard, if she do
not, every time she eats with him, she disobeyes S. Paul; and in every meal
she makes with him she commits a Scripture sin. By the same reason also, If
the Son have a Drunkard to his Father, he must remove Tables, and not diet
with his Father. And so there will be one Division more then those the
Scripture speaks of: For that only tells us that the time shall come when the
Son shall be divided from the Father, and the Mother from the Daughter. But
if this Interpretation be true, the Wife must divide and break her self from
her distempered Husband too.

Nay give me leave to go one step farther yet. If the sins of a part be a
just sufficient Ground to separate from the whole, Why do not they who
separate, divide and fall assunder? For here let me ask them, and let me ask
without offense; Are they all so Innocent, so pure, so free, so void of sin,
that there is not one disorderly Brother among them? Is their place of private
Meetings so much the New Jerusalem, That no Drunkard, no Adulterer, nor Rayler
enters there? I wish there did not, my Brethren. We Ministers should not then
so often be called Dumb Dogs, Idol shepherds, Limbs of Antichrist, Baals
Priests, by Tongues, which if S. James say true, are set on fire of Hell.

If then, it be not the meaning of S. Paul in that place, that ^am. 3. 6.
we should separate from all because some of those All are wicked, upon what
other just Ground do they break Communion with us? Is it because we preach in
Churches? They are Gods House of prayer. Made his by the Piety, and Devotion of
our Fathers, who if they lived now would hardly call them Saints, who prefer
a Barn, nay a Hog-stye before a consecrated Temple. Or is it because there is
Haeresie or Superstition mixed with our once Common Form of prayer? If there
had been, you see that scandal is removed. Or do we persecute, or force, or
drive them from our Congregations? We are so far from that, that you see,
they are ready to require that our public Congregations, should stoop, and
bow the Knee to their private Meetings. What other secret reason it is which thus
divides them from us, I can by no means think, unless it be wrapped up in the
Mystery and cloud of the 18. chap. of the Revelations, which is their other
strong Herculean place of Scripture, which has been urged to me to make good
their Separation. From which dark place of Scripture when I have removed the
veyle and Curtain, I will put a period, and conclusion to this Sermon.

It Is there said, that S. John heard an Angel proclaim aloud, and say, Babylon
the Great is fallen, is fallen; and is become the Habitation of Devils, the
Hold of every unclean Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean, and hateful Bird;
As you may read at the 2. verse of that chapter. It Is farther said, That he
heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. As you may
read at the 4. verse of that chapter, where by Babylon fallen, they understand
the Church of England fallen, By the Habitation of Devils, the Hold of foul
Spirits, and Cage of unclean Birds. They understand our Parish Churches, and
Congregations which meet there; which, they say, are so much a Cage of unclean
Birds, places so corrupt, so full of wickedness, and sin, that God, by his
Spirit, as it were, by a voice from the Clouds, has said unto them, Come out
of them, my people, divide your selves from them, lest ye be partakers of their
sins, and go sharers in their plagues. This is, or must be their
Interpretation of that place; or else 'twill no way serve to uphold their
Separation. If, I say, by the Habitation of Devils, and Cage of unclean Birds
be not meant our Church Assemblyes, from which they do divide, they do but
build a House of straw, and choose the sand for a Foundation. I am sure I have
been told that this was the very Interpretation which the Gentleman gave of
this place, who just now disputed with me, at a dispute which not long since he
had with Mr. Gibson of Chinner.

But now will you hear my censure of this wild Interpretation? Take it then,
thus. Among the several Expounders of the Revelation, I once met with one, who
when he came to interpret the Seven Angels, which blew the Seven Trumpets, He
said that by one of those Angels was meant Luther, by another Queen Elizabeth.
And when he came to give the meaning of the Locusts which ascended from the
Bottomless pit, with Crowns on their Heads, by the Locusts, He understood
Scholars of the Universitie; And by the Crowns on their Heads, He understood
Square Caps. Methinkes, these kind of people deal just so with this place of
the Revelation. They see strange visions in it which S. John never saw; Namely,
they see Babylon in our Churches, and unclean Birds in our Assemblyes. Nay,
though the Devils being Spirits are too invisible to be seen, yet, by the
benefit of a Newlight, they can see sights which no other Eyes can see without
being present in the place to which foul Spirits do resort, (as if they had
borrowed one of Galilaeo's Glasses) they can see Devils take Notes at our
Sermons. But whether in Shorthand, or at length, S. John has not revealed.

Pardon me, I beseech you, you who are of the more grave and nobler sort, that
I am thus pleasant in the pulpit; I am compelled to be so when I meet with
people who deal with the Scripture, as men of melancholy Fancyes use to deal
with the Clouds. For as I have known some Hypocondriack men, who have feigned
to themselves flying Horses, winged Troops, and Skips sailing in the Air; Nay,
as I have known some, who, like the Melancholy man, who thought himself a
urinall, have thought they have seen two Armies in the Sky; and have mistaken
Clouds, and Meteors for Soldiers, Trumpets, Drums, and Cannons; So I do not
wonder that our Gifted, thinking people should so mistake the Revelation as
they do; or that they should see Monsters in the Scripture Clouds. Where the
Scripture is most clear, they hardly understand it; How then, should they
find out the Key to such dark prophecies as this?

But here may some man say to me, if they mistake this place, what is your
Interpretation of it? Why, my Interpretation is the very same which S. John
Himself delivers, Rev. 14. 8. Where the Angel expresses himself in the very
same words, And says, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; That great City which made
all Nations drink of the Wine of the Wrath of her Abominations. And what was
that Great City? Why the City built on seven Hills; As it is described in
another place of the Revelation. That Great City which was the Queen of
Nations; Namely, the City of Rome, when 'twas the seat of Heathen Emperors.
Lastly, that Great City, which gave Laws to all the World, to worship her False
Gods, and to partake of her Idolatryes. And this was that Great City, which S.
John calls Babylon; either, because speaking of the Fall and Ruin of it, He
thought it not safe to call it Rome, or by its right and proper Name; Lest, if
he had done so, he might draw persecution on the Christians. Or else, Because as
Babylon was the Head City of the Persian Monarchy, so Rome was then the Head
City of the Roman. In a word, this is that Great City, which was then the great
Court of Idolatry, the Queen of Superstitions; And therefore, justly called by
the Angel which spoke to S. John, The Habitation of Devils, and Cage of
unclean Birds. And from this Babylon, this Rome, the then City of confusion,
the Angel of God bid the Christians of those Times to come forth, and separate
themselves; lest they should be partakers of her sins, and go sharers in her
plagues. But to say as they do, that the Church of England is that Babylon the
great; or that cut Parish Congregations, from which they do divide themselves,
are the Habitation of Devils, the Hold of foul spirits, and Cage of unclean
Birds here mentioned in this chap. is such a piece of Ignorance, as well as
zealous slander, that they will never be able to prove it, till they can make
the Capitol of Rome stand in our London streets, or till they can make the
River Tiber run, where now our Thames does; or till they can change the
Countries in our Mapps, and make the Mid-lana Sea flow on our English shore.
And farther then this I will not trespass on your patience; or enlarge my
self to prove to you that Separation is a Sin.

THE END.
A SERMON CONCERNING Unity and Agreement. PREACHED AT CARFAX CHURCH in OXFORD,
August 9. 1646.

By JASPER MAINE, D. D. and one of the Students of Christ-Church, OXON.

ROMANS 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.

Printed in the Year, M D C XLVII.

A SERMON CONCERNING UNITY and AGREEMENT.
1 COR. 1. 10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions
among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment.
THough Truth, from what mouth soever it be spoken, or in what shape or dress
soever it appear, be but one and the same; and where it is rightly understood,
carries this uniting, peaceful quality with it, that it makes all its
followers of one consent, and mind too; yet I know not from what mist, or
impotence, lodged in our nature, with whom errors and mistakes do for the most
part prevail more then Arguments or Demonstrations; and with whom our own
mis-conceipts (conveyed into us from such whom we think too holy to deceive us,
or too learned to deceive themselves) do for the most part stick so deeply,
and take such root and impression in us, that it is not in the power of truth
it self to remove them: This one, uniting, peaceful Bond of minds, this Ray
of our Souls, according to the several Teachers of it, and according to the
several forms and shapes, into which they have cast it, has always been
looked on as so many several Truths; And to the discredit, and disadvantage of
it, has in all Ages been as severally entertained and followed. Thus among the
Heathen Plilosophers, we find the number of Sects, to be much greater then the
number of Sciences. Every new famous Teacher, who professed severity in his
looks, and austerity in his man ners, had the power to draw a cloud of
Disciples after him, and to erect a new Truth with a new School. And thus in
the very Church of God it self, the Gospel no sooner began to be preached to
the world, but it began to have its Sects and Schisms, and sidings too. The
Apostles taught but one Faith, one Baptism, one Christ, one plain, open way
of salvation to men; yet they were mis-understood by some, as if they had
preached many: Or as if the numbers of their several Doctrines, had equalled
the number of their several persons, and they had (every one where he went)
scattered a several Gospel.

To speak yet more plainly to you, and nearer home to the History of this
Text; The Corinthians (to whom this Epistle was written) as if from every new
Teacher that came thither, they had learned a new Religion, began at length to
have as many Religions among them as they had heard Teachers. You might have
distinguished diverse Churches in the same City, and have divided their Beleefs
and Creeds by their Families and streets. Where, by a fallacy and deceit of the
ear, judging of the things taught, by their affection to the Teacher, and not
judging of the Teacher by the things which he taught, every one chose to
himself the name of his Minister to make a Side and faction by. One (as you
read at the 12. Verse, of this Chapter) said, I am of Paul, another, I am of
Apollos, a third, I am of Cephas, a fourth, I am of Christ: As if Christ had
either been divided, or else were to stand with the rest as the name of a
distinct Religion; Or at least, as if the Gospel (which at first sprung from
him) like streams broken off from their springhead, were no longer to retain
the name of the Fountain from whence it rose, but were to wear the style of
the several pipes and channells, by which it was conveyed abroad into the
world.

This diversity of names, and sides, grew at first from their diversity of
opinions, and minds. When the unlearned wresting the Scripture which they had
heard preached to an Apostles sense, would presume to impose that sense, which
was indeed, not an Apostles, on others. And those others, equally as unlearned,
thought it as reasonable, so they could entitle it to another Apostle, to
impose their interpretation of Scripture on the first.

This diversity of minds, proceeded at length to diversity of language and
speech. Congregation spoke censoriously of Congregation, as if none had been in
the right, but they only who most vehemently could charge others with being in
the wrong. Saint Paul was urged, and quoted against Saint Peter, and Apollos
against both, and Christ against all three. Whose Sermons, like those
changeable figures which melancholy men frame to themselves in the clouds,
were made to wear the shape and form, which every man's zeal and fancy
suggested to him.

Hence, in time, from difference and disagreement in minds and speech, they
grew to difference and disagreement in society and conversation too. Difference
of opinion bred separation of companies; and that which was at first but a
neighbourly dispute, by degrees took flame, and grew to be mortal hatred,
division and schism. Men of the next door were no longer neighbors to one
another. All the bonds of Charity became utterly broken. All Christian
intercourse, and familiarity and commerce ceast between them. He was thought to
be false, and to betray his side, who offered to show himself affable or
civil to one of another party.

In short, the breach became so wide, that he was thought to be the only
religious man who could most enlarge the rent, and could bring most fuel to
the present combustion which was thus unhappily kindled among them. To compose
these differences the refore, (differences not unlike those of our miserable,
distracted times) and to make the Knot and Reconciliation as fast and strong,
as the disagreement and rent was large and wide, S. Paul here in this Text,
prescribes a several Cure, for every particular and several breach. First, to
remove the discord which rose among them, by calling themselves by several
names, and to banish the ill consequences of all such factious compellations,
which for the most part are bitter Invectives, and sharp arrows of detraction
hurld at one another, he persuades them to unity of language and speech, and
exhorts them to call themselves all by the same name, in these words, Now I
beseech you Brethren, that ye al speak the same thing. Next, to remove their
want of meetings, and Communion together in the same place of Gods Worship, he
persuades them to unity of Assemblies, and Congregation, in these words, Now I
beseech you, Brethren, that there be no divisions, That is, (as I shall in the
progress of this Sermon, make it clear to you from the Original) that there be
no separations, that is, (as our English word does well express it) that there
be no private sequestered meetings, no such things as Conventicles among you.
Thirdly, to remove the root, and spring of all these uncharitable strifes, and
divisions, and separations, he persuades them to unity of opinions and minds,
in these words, Now I beseech you, Brethren, that you be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Lastly, that he might
with the greater success do this, and (like a skillful reconciler) might win
upon all sides, he for a while lays aside the Authority of his Apostleship;
and mingling Request and Conjuration, with Exhortation and Advice, he acts the
part of an Apostle, in the form of a Petitioner, in these words, Now I beseech
you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Upon these parts, the
Apostles mild insinuation, and address of himself, and the several Degrees
of unity and concord, in speech, in Assemblies, and in Opinions, to which he
here exhorts the Corinthians, I will build my future discourse. In the ordering
of which, I will begin with the Apostles submissive insinuation, or address of
himself, in these words, Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

For the clearer and more useful handling of this part of the Text, First, it
will be necessary that I speak something to you of ^1. (...) qualifi
Saint Paul's person, the Preacher here in the Text, and of his calling to the
Ministry; which well considered, will conduce very much to the removal of a
certain dangerous error received of late into the minds of too many unlearned,
vulgar men among us: Which is, That Universities, and Books, and Studies, and
Learning are so far from being necessary preparations to make a Preacher of
the Gospel, that any Layman, though perhaps brought up to a manual Trade, or
a vocation of Husbandry, or attendance upon Cattle, if he find by himself
that he is called by the Spirit of God, may put himself into Orders, and take
the Ministry upon him. And thus enabled from above, without the form of
Ordination, or those other slow, tedious, lazy helps, of sitting twenty years
in a College to understand the Bible, may in the few minutes of a powerful
Inspiration spring up an Apostle, and go forth a Preacher of the Word of God.

To this persuasion they have been invited by two sorts of Examples in the
Scripture; one in the Old Testament, the other in the New, In the Old
Testament, Do you not read, say they, that God called Elisha from the Plough
to be a Prophet? And does not Amos tell you in the 7. Chapter of his Prophecy,
at the 14. Verse, that he was a Herdman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruit? Then
for examples in the New Testament, pray what were the Apostles? were they great
Scholars? or did Christ send to Athens for them? were they not Fishermen, men
altogether unlettered, men called from mending nets to preach the Gospel? If
this were so, That God according to his good pleasure, without any
consideration of study, or height of parts, chose simple, unlearned, unstudied
men, to be Prophets and Apostles, and Teachers, then why should any think he
has so confined, or entailed his free Spirit, or vocation of men, upon great
parts, and studies, that he may not, if he please call the like unstudied,
simple men from the Plough or Fisher-boat, or Stall, or Shop-board, to be
Ministers of his Gospel, and Teachers of his people now?

My Brethren, you see I have not prevaricated, or diminished ought of the
strength of the Argument which is urged in favor of Laymens preaching. In
answer to which, laying aside all partiality to my self, and prejudice against
them, I shall with the same spirit of meekness and Candor, with which Saint
Paul here in this Text bespoke his Corinthians, beseech you, who hear me this
day, to observe, and weigh, and consider well this which I shall say for a
Reply?

First, Far, far be it from me so to flatter the place of my Education, or so
to biass my belief, by any false ovevarluing of humane Industry, or great parts
that I should pinion, as it were, or put limits to the power of the Almighty;
Or should be so irreligiously bold, as to gainsay that piece of his Gospel
which compares his holy Spirit to the Wind, which blows where it lists. If
they who thus pretend to a private Inspiration do mean, that whatever God did
in the times heretofore, he is able to do now, I shall easily grant it; And
here in the presence of you all, confess my self to be of their opinion. Nor
shall I make any doubt or scruple at all, to say, that, if we look upon what
God is able to do, by the same power by which he was able to raise up Children
to Abraham out of stones, or (to speak yet more nearly to the Argument in
hand) by the same power that he was able to make a Herd-man a Prophet, or a
Fisherman an Apostle, he is able, in our times also, if he please, to make the
meanest Tradesman one of the greatest Luminaries of his Church. Since to an
Omnipotent Agent, whose gifts are merely Arbitrary, and depend wholly upon the
pleasure of his own will, the greatest endowments of men, and the least, are
alike easy. But though he be able to do this, and in the ancient times of the
Scripture have imparted his Gifts without respect of Persons, yet whether he
now will, or whether in our times he does still thus extraordinarily raise up
Teachers to himself, is extremely to be doubted. For here with all the
Christian gentleness and reason, which may possibly conduce to the clearing of
this doubt, were I to argue this Controversy with one of those men who invade
our function, and from gathering of Sycamore fruit step up into the Pulpit, I
would only ask him this question; What Commission he has thus to usurp upon
our Office; Or who signed him his patent; Since the Apostle tells us in the
fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, at the fourth Verse, (A place
well worth your marking, my Brethren) That no man takes this honor of a
Priest to himself, But he who is called of God, as was Aaron? I know his
common answer will be, that God has called him to this Office by the secret
Instinct, and Motion of his Holy Spirit. But, then, he must not take it ill, if
I yet farther ask him, by what signs, or marks, or testimonies, or tokens,
he can either man it reasonably appear to himself, or others, that God has
dealt with him as he dealt with some of the Prophets, or Apostles; called him
from his Trade by such a motion of his Spirit? Elisha we know, made Iron swim,
and knew men's Closet-discourses in a far Country, which was a sure and
certain sign that God had called him to be a Prophet. The Apostles also we
know, wrought many of Christ's miracles, which was a most infallible sign that
God had chosen them to be Apostles. If any of these men, who derive their
warrant from the same sacred spring, can make Iron swim, or like Elisha,
remaining here in their own. Israel, can tell us what the King of Syria says
in his Bedchamber; Or if like Saint Peter they can cure fevers and diseases by
their bare shadows passing over them; Or if, like the rest of the Apostles,
having never before known Letters, they can of a sudden speak all Languages,
the Controversy is at an end; It would be a very great sin against the
Spirit of God to deny, that he is in them of a Truth. But if all the proof
and sign they can give us that they have him, be only a strong persuasion of
themselves; Nay, if by an infallible Illumination they could assure themselves,
that they have him, yet as many as have not the like infallible Illumination to
assure them so too, will not be guilty of an unpardonable offense, if they
suspect they have him not. For here, I must once more repeat my former
Question, and ask by what effects, or signs of the Spirit, men shall know
them to be called? By what? will some man say, why? Do you not hear them
preach, expound Scripture, unfold Prophecies, interpret Parables; nay pluck
the veil and cloud from the Book of Mysteries it self, the very Revelation?
Can any of you great Scholars, with all your study of Philosophers, Fathers,
Counsels, Schoolmen, Historians, Orators, Poets, either hold your
Congregations longer, or send them away more edified? And will you yet ask
Questions? Or doubt of the certainty of their vocation? I must not dissemble
with you, if I could meet with an unlearned Handicraft-man, who without study,
can do this to the same height, and measure of Truth, as those unjustly-cryed
down, learned, and well-studied men do, I should begin to alter my opinion;
And should reckon him as he deserves, in the number of the inspired. But alas,
my Brethren, as I am not come hither to disparage the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
in what person soever I find them, or to persuade that Scripture rightly
expounded, is not one, and the same, from the mouth of a Priest, or an inspired
Layman; so this I must freely say to you, That as many of those strange
Teachers as I have heard, have expounded Scripture indeed, and have ventured
upon some of the hardest places of the Prophets. But, then, if all my studies
of the Bible, assisted with all those holy, uncorrupted learned helps, which
might enable me to understand it aright, have not deceived me, their
expositions, and Sermons, how passionately delivered, or how long soever, are
evident proofs to me that they have not the Spirit. If they had, they would
never, certainly, expound Scripture so directly contrary to his meaning; Or
make the writings of the Prophets or Apostles, wear only that present shape,
not which the holy Ghost has imprinted and stamped upon them, but which tends
to the division of a Kingdom, and the confusion of a Church; Nor would they, as
they do, what ever the Text be, press that sense from it, not which is
genuine, and natural, but which tends most to the destruction of a party, or
the fomentation of a most unnatural Civil War. Saint Paul tells us in the
fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, at the 22, and 23. Verses, that
the fruits, or effects of the Spirit, are love, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, meekness, temperance. He uses to speak to men in the voice, and
figure of a Dove: But to entitle him to all those forbidden works of the
flesh, of variance, hatred, sedition, heresies, envyings, murders, and the
like, there reckoned up in the precedent Verses of that Chapter, is to make him
speak with the voice of a Raven.

In short, my Brethren, the Holy Ghost is not the Author of such Doctrines as
break Gods Commandments in the Pulpit. Nor is it a long Prayer, or a zealous
two-houres reviling of the footsteps of the Lords Anointed, their lawful
Sovereign, which can make their Sermons to be any other then so much Libell,
or holy Detractation; Or which can make their Intrepretations of the Word of
God, how moderate soever in other cases, if they be not agreeable to the scope,
and mind, and intention of the Holy Ghost, to be any more then so many zealous
mistakes, and so many illegitimate births, and creatures of their own deluded
fancies.

Next, in pursuit of this seasonable Argument, give me leave, I pray, with all
the plainness I can, (for I well know where I am, and to what Auditorie I
speak) to make it yet farther evident to you, that if I should grant what
these (...), as S. Basil calls them, these Saints of a days growth, challenge
to themselves, who think that all that is required to make a Minister of the
Gospel, is (...), only to be willing, and to start up a Preacher. If, I say,
it should be granted them, that they have the inward calling of the Spirit, yet
God is so much the God of order, that unless they will enter themselves into
his service, by undergoing those Rites of Consecration and Imposition of Hands,
which God has prescribed in his Church, to stand for ever as the outward
forms and signs of their vocation too, every act of the Ministry which they
perform, is but a sacrifice like theirs who offered strange fire before the
Lord, and miserably perished by their own forbidden Censors. Or if you will
have me express the danger of it by a judgment as terrible. Thus to put their
hand to the Arc, thus to support it, if 'twere ready to fall, is such an
unwarranted piece of officiousness, as will (certainly) unrepented, at some
time or other, draw the punishment of Uzzrah upon them, provoke the abused
Almighty to break forth in a flame of fire upon them, and consume them for
their unnecessarie diligence. For here, all the Scripture examples which
imbolden them to this work, do return upon them, as so many instances and
proofs of their incroachment on our office. For here let me once more ask
them, How was Elisha called to be a Prophet? merely by the secret, unknown
whisper and instinct of the holy Ghost? Truly, if he had, yet this would not
make much for them; because God never tied himself precisely to those outward
forms in the choice of a Prophet, which he then did, and still does in the
choice of his Priests. Yet the calling of this Prophet was not without its
visible sign. Go, says God to Elias, in the 19. Chap. of the first book of
Kings, at the 16. Verse, Anoint Elisha the Son of Shaphat to be Prophet in thy
room. And whether the like Ceremony of pouring oil on his head, were not also
performed by some elder Prophet upon Amos as the younger, as it is not affirmed,
so it is not denied in Scripture, but left probable. In the Consecration of the
Priests of those times, the case is much more evident: Read at your leisure the
29. Chapter of Exodus, there you shall find, that before God would receive
them into that sacred function, first, diverse Sacrifices were to be offered
for them; then they were to be brought to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and there to be washed; then the Priests Garments, the Coat, the
Ephod, the Breast Plate, and Mitre, were to be put upon them. Lastly, followed
the anointing oil, which was powered upon their heads: And this was the
Consecration of the Priests of those times.

The Ceremonies of Consecration in the New Testament, were different, I
confess, from those of the Old; but yet equivalent, and answerable to them in
their kind. These were, a public meeting of the Church together, a
presentation there made of the person to be made a Priest; solemn prayers and
supplications put up to God, to make him useful to his Church: and for a seal
of all the rest, the Imposition of the Bishops hands, assisted by his
Presbyters. Now, my Brethren, apply this to the strange Priests of our times,
who with unwasht feet thrust themselves into the Tabernacle; not a sacrifice,
not so much as a handful of meal, or grain of Incense, or drop of oil spent
toward their Consecration; No solemn assembly, no presentation of themselves
made to God, no imposition of hands, not so much as a short Prayer, or
benediction, or God speed you, used toward their setting forth into the Lords
Vineyard, and you will find that these are the thieves and robbers (pardon the
hardness of the language, I cannot make the Scripture speak mildlier then it
does) which our Savior Christ speaks of in the 10. Chapter of S. John at the
first Verse, Men who enter not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climb
up some other way. In brief, men, whose Sermons and Doctrines correspond to
their consecrations. By stealth they enter into the Ministry, and by stealth
they exercise it. And whereas the mark and Character of all the true Ministers
of the Gospel is to stand, having their feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, these men wander, and go about, having their feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel (...). 5, 15.
of strife. Men, who never think themselves sufficiently Apostles, till all the
world do call them the sons of thunder too. Men who speak fire, and throw
lightning among the people; and think they have then only done the work, and
business of an Apostle, when they have cast the Congregation which they leave
behind them into a cumbustion and flame. I shall trouble your patience but with
one Objection, which may possibly be made against what I have hitherto said;
that is this: Here, some one of these modern, selfe-inspiring Teachers may
say, Sir, you tell us of Ceremonies and Consecrations, and I know not what,
Imposition of hands; but either you have forgot your self, or wisely
dissembled the vocation of the Apostles. Were not they without your formality
of laying on of hands, without all this ado of conveying orders, and the holy
Ghost by fingers, immediately called by Christ? What imposition of hands went
to change S. Peter from a Fisherman into an Apostle? or what Bishops
Ceremonies past to make S. Paul (in whose person you have all this while
preached against us) of a persecutor of the Church to become a Doctor of the
Gentiles? Does no^ your own Tertullian say, Nonne and Laici Sacerdotes sumus,
That any Layman, if he please, may be a Priest?

To this I reply; first, As for the Apostles, it is true, indeed, we do not
read that they were consecrated to their Ministry by such Rites and
Imposition of hands, as were afterward received and practiced in the Church.
Yet something answerable to the Imposition of hands went to their Consecration,
before they were invested with full Authority to preach the Gospel to the
world. For besides their first vocation by Christ to be his Disciples, from
whom they learnt that Gospel which they afterward preached, what says the
Scripture? Tarry ye at Jerusalem, says Christ to them, after his
Resurrection, till I send the promise of my Father upon Luke 2^.
you, and ye be endued with power from above. And, pray, what was that
promise, and what was this power? Certainly, that which you read of in the
second Chapter of the Acts, where at the time prefixed by Christ, the Holy Ghost
descended on them. And how did he descend? in a still, soft, secret, invisible
persuasion of the Fancy? Or in the silent whisper of an unperceived
Illumination? No such matter, Quod Episcopus aliis, Spiritus sanctus Apostolis,
says a learned man. The holy Ghost here supplied the Office of a Bishop,
descended upon them in an audible rushing wind, which signified his election of
them to the ear; And sat upon their heads in the shape of cloven Tongues of
fire; which signified his election of them to the eye. Hi ritus, haec
impositio; These were his Ceremonies, this his Imposition of hands, says that
Author. So that all the difference between the Admission of the Apostles to
the Ministry, and others, was only this: In other Consecrations the Bishop
only granted the power to preach, but bestowed not the Gifts; Here the Holy
Ghost bestowed both. He first by visible, outward signs, testified to the
world whom he had chosen, and to whom they were to hearken; And then furnished
them with Tongues, and Languages, and knowledge, and parts, fit to be the
Guides and great Instructers of the world. Let these men make it appear to me,
that the Holy Ghost has thus descended upon them, thus furnished them with
parts, and I will most willingly resign my place to them in the Pulpit.

Next, as for S. Paul, it is clear by the story of his Conversion, that he
received not his Commission to preach from that which Christ spoke to him
immediately from Heaven. But what says the place? After he was fallen to the
Earth blind, Arise, says Christ Acts 9.
to him, and go into the City, and there it shall be told thee what thou must
do. When he came into the City, a certain Disciple named Ananias,
pre-instructed by Christ in a vision, was sent to him, who putting his hands on
him, says the Text, said to him, Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus that
appeared to thee in the way) has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight,
and be filled with the Holy Ghost. Till his Imposition of hands, the holy Ghost
was not bestowed upon him. And when he was bestowed upon him, yet he had not
his full Commission; he was but yet a Disciple consecrated by a Disciple. To
make him an outright Apostle, a higher, second, and more solemn consecration
past upon him, which you may read in the 13. Chapter of the Acts, where, says
the Holy Ghost to the Trophets, and Teachers of the Church of Antioch, Separate
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, Ver. 2. And
how were they separated I pray? The third Verse tells you, When the Prophets
and Teachers (there mentioned) had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, says the Text, they sent them away, till then they wanted power. To
which passage of this vocation, or calling to the Ministry, give me leave to
add this for his parts. That in a humane way of acquired Learning, he was the
greatest Scholar of his time, bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, a great Doctor
of Law, spoke more Tongues, attained by his own Industry, then all the other
Apostles, which had almost all Languages instilled into them by infusion. In
short, he was verst, and read, and studied, not only in the Scripture, but in
the highest parts of secular learning; In the writings of Menander, Epimenides,
and Aratus, Heathen Poets. Which is sure sign to us, that studies, and
learning, and parts acquired in Universities, ar^ no hindrances, or
impediments, if not helps to the Ministry. Lastly, as for that saying of
Tertullian, that Laymen may be Priests, he tells you, in the following words,
in what case this is to be understood. Ubi Ecclesiastici ordinis non est
consessus; Where the condition of the time and place is such, that
Ecclesiastical orders cannot be had; If a Christian Layman should come into a
Pagan Island, or into a Country of Heathen people, where there is no true
Minister, here Tinguis, and offers, and sacerdos es, every man is a Priest,
and may baptize, and adminster the Sacrament, and preach as much of the Gospel
as he knows. But where this necessity is not, to snatch the Sermon out of the
mouth, or the Sacrament out of the hands or the child out of the arms of the
true Minister, is certainly to to be in the number of those uncalled Teachers,
of whom God complains in the 23. Chapter of Jeremy, at the 21. Verse, where he
says, I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ^an; I have not spoken to them,
yet they prophesied. And farther then this I will not pursue the first thing I
proposed to you; which was by occasion of Saint Paul's calling to be an Apostle,
to remove an error of late taken into the minds of some, that crafts-men may
exercise the place and function of a Priest.

The next thing I shall observe to you, is, the holy art and insinuation The a^
insinua himself
which S. Paul here uses to win upon the minds of his disagreeing Corinthians.
Though he profess, in the beginning of the next Chapter, that he came not to
them with that part of an Orator about him, which consists in the excellency of
speech, or the entising words of man's wisdom, (lest if he had done so, he
might perhaps, have gained much glory to himself, but then his Master must
have been in danger to lose his, and so the Gospel have suffered from his
Eloquence; and his Epistles might, perhaps, have past for a good piece of
Rhetoric, but not for good Sermons) yet he every where carried this other,
equally prevailing part of a good Orator with him, that by complying with the
affections of those to whom he wrote, he first transformed himself into their
shapes, and became all things to all men, that he might the better transform
them into his, and make all men become like himself. Thus to the Jews he
became as a Jew; and put himself a while with them under the Law, that by
insensible degrees he might take their yoke from them, and might beget their
liking, and entertainment of the Gospel. And thus to the Gentiles, who were
without the Law, he became as a Gentile, without the Law too, that he might
unite them to the Jews. If I may speak of him, by his own description of
himself, (and certainly, in that description of himself, he was inspired to
speak truth as well as in his other writings) as he was not chosen, like the
rest of the Apostles, out of Fishermen, or men unlearned, nor called to preach
the Gospel from mending Nets; But as there was a concurrence of natural,
acquired, and infused abilities in him, which rendered him though not one of the
twelve, yet of equal gifts and endowments to them all. Lastly, as his task
and patent to preach the Gospel was much larger then the rest, as much larger,
as the rest of mankind was larger then the Nation of the Jews; So in the
performance of his task, he never failed to express all this. Like the beast,
of which Pliny speaks, which puts on the likeness of every thing next it, and
shows like a flower before a flower, like a stream before a stream, and like
a flame before a flame; so 'twas a piece of this Apostles (Art shall I say? or)
holy commission, to be all things to all men. Strong with the strong, and weak
with the weak. To part with his Liberty to the scrupulous, and to use it with
the indifferent. To eat all things wtth those that did eat all things, and with
those that did not, to keep himself to herbs. Will you hear him in all these
particulars express himself? Turn to the ninth Chapt. of this Epistle, and
to the nineteen Verse, where setting down the end, and aim, which he
proposed to all his holy Arts, he says, Though I be free from all men, that
is, no way obliged to do as I do, but for my Masters ser^ice, yet have I made
my self a servant to all, that I might win the more. Now if humility, and the
casting of himself below himself; if to beseech, and entreat, and petition
there, where he had sufficient authority and commission to enjoyne and command,
be to wear the form of a servant; and if all discreet behaviors, compliances,
and applications, take their measure, and use, and praise, from the good end to
which they are directed, and the good success which they are likely to
procure, in all his Epistles I find not this Apostle more expediently making
use of his Art in the form of a suppliant, then in this Text. For consider
these Corinthians, to whom he here applies himself, divided, and broken into
Factions; and these Factions severally deriving themselves, some from him,
others from Cephas, others from Apollos, (Names in their opinions, as holy, and
great as his) and to have dealt imperiously with them, or to have used his
Apostolical power, and to have commanded them to agreement, had not been to
make peace, but to animate, and inflame that party which called themselves his
side. It had been too, to call up opposition, and disdain in the others, who
were not of that side. Who citing Apollos, or Saint Peter against him, and
thinking it to be some confession of their error and weakness to yield first,
or to go over to them who said they were of Paul, it being as reasonable that
they should come over to them, who said they were of Cephas or Apollos, might
have asked the same question which the striving Israelite asked Moses, Who made
thee a Judge over us? And might have seconded this question with another, and
have asked him, how one interested, and engaged, nay the head (as they
conceived) of a Faction, could be presumed to be an impartial reconciler? The
better therefore, to establish a peace and concord among them, S. Paul in this
Chap. proceeds by three conducible ways of Reconciliation. At the 13. Ver. he
cleares himself from all interest and engagement to a side; and equally
blaming those who said they were of Paul, as those who said they were of
Cephas, or Apollos; he asks them how it came to pass, that they dealt with
the Gospel of Christ, which was entire and seamlesse, like his Coat, as the
Soldiers did with his other Garments, divided it by a kind of blind Lottery
among them, and every one take his share? Is Christ divided? Says he. Was Paul
crucified for you? Or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? If you were not,
why do you raise a Sect, and Faction from him? Why do you call your selves
by way of mark and distinction, Paulists? And so turn the name of your
Preacher and Apostle, into the name of a Schism and side?

Next, as he well knew that the readyest way to reconcile all sides, was to
manifest himself to be of none; so he well knew too, that he that would knit,
and reunite disagreeing minds, was not to deal roughly, or magisterially
with them, (for that were to lose both; and to turn the enmity and hatred
which they held between themselves, upon the Reconciler, who strived to make
them friends) but was to quench such discords with soft language, and to cure
such rents and wounds of the Church by pouring oil into them. Though,
therefore, being armed with the authority of Christ himself, he might, with
justice enough, have made Decrees and Ordinances to bind them to agreement, yet
he rather chooses to reconcile them to one another with their own consents.
In a mild, and humble address of himself; therefore, not entitling himself
more to one side then anonher, he equally beseeches them all, that he might
the more regardfully be listened to by all. And he beseeches them for things
which little concerned himself, but for their own good. He petitions them
that they would be saved, and spends entreaties that they would vouchsafe to
go to heaven. He requests them that they would not be worse Christians, that
is, Schismatiques and Seperatists, then they were Heathens, that is, unanimous
Idolaters.

Lastly, he begs of them that they would once more be a Church and City; that
is, a place of communion, and society, and Christian conversation. And that he
might the more prevailingly obtain this of them, he addresseth himself to
them in a style and compellation of the greatest and gentlest persuasion to
peace that can be used, and calls them Brethren. A word, which to remove all
opinion of better or worse, or of inferior or superior, (the usuail grounds
of discord) not only signifies an equality between the beseecher and the
beseeched, and the beseeched among themsevles; (For Esse Fratres est relatio
inter aequales, says the Lawyer as well as the Logician; to be brethren,
carries a reference of equality to one another) but it implies all the natural
and religious grounds for which men ought to maintain League and Agreement,
and Peace with one another. For in calling them Brethren, he called them men of
the same fociable kind, equally descended from the same common Original and
stock, and equally wearing in their nature one and the same common Image of
God. And therefore, for this they were not to disagree, or quarrel with one
another: Since likeness of kind maintains agreement between savage beasts and
Tigers. Leonum feritas inter se non dimicat, serpentum morsus non petunt
serpents; Who ever heard of a Lion devovred by a Lion? Or who ever heard of a
Serpent stung by a Serpent? much less should men then, bite and devour, and
prey upon one another.

Again, in calling them Brethren, besides the natural affinity that was
between them as men, he put them in mind of their spiritual alliance, as they
were Christians too. That is, men allied to one another by one common Faith,
one common Hope, one common Redemption, and therefore to meet in one common
bond of Peace and Charity too. Rixari, and se invicem convitiis lacessere
Infidelium est; It Is for Infidells, and men not converted to the Faith, to
provoke, or brawle, or quarrel with one another.

Thirdly, lest all this sweetness of address and language should not
prevail, he joins Conjuration to Petition, but vailes it in the style and
form of a Petition too, and beseeches them to unity by the name of his, and
their Lord Jesus Christ. A name, by which as he had before dispossessed Devils,
cured sicknesses, and restored the dead to life again, so he repuests that he
may dispossess opinions, cure divisions, and restore agreement by it too. It
being that name into which they were all baptized, and to which they had all
past their promises, and vows. Lastly, a name by which they were all to be
saved; and by which they, by whose names (to the blemish and disparagement of
this) they called themselves, were, with them, equally to be called, that is,
Christians.

Here then, 'twere much to be wished, that the Preachers of our times would
deal with their disagreeing flocks, as this Apostle dealt with his: That is,
that they would employ their holy, and religious arts and endeavors, by
sweetness of language, and indifferency of behavior to all parties, to
reconcile them. For since it may be truly said of Preachers, what was once said
of Orators, that the people are the waters, and they the winds that move
them; to be thus the winds to them, as to speak, and move, and blow them into
waves and billows, which shall roll, and strike, and dash, and break
themselves against each other; Or to be thus the winds to them, as to rob them
of their calm, and to trouble the peaceful course, and stream of things well
settled, and to raise a storm and tempest there, where they should compose and
allay one, is not to act the part of an Apostle, or of a Preacher of the
Gospel, but of an Erynnis, or Fury, who ascending from hell with a firebrand
in her hand, and snakes on her head, scatters wars, and strifes, and hatreds,
and murders, and treasons, and betrayings of one another as she passes. Every
hair of her head hurld among the people becomes a sedition, and serpent; and
every shaking of her Torch sets Villages, and Towns, and Cities and Kingdoms,
and Empires in a Combustion.

Alas, my brethren, how many such furies, rather then Preachers, have for some
years walked among us? Men who speaking to the people in a whirle-winde, and
breathing nothing but pitcht-fields, and sieges, and slaughters of their
Brethren, do profess no Sermon to be a Sermon, which rends not the Rocks and
the Mountains before it: forgetting that God rather dwells in still, soft
voices. It Is true indeed, the Holy Ghost once assumed the shape of cloven
Tongues of fire: But that was not from thence to beget Incendiaries of the
Church; Teachers whose Doctrine should be cloven too; and which should tend
only to divide their Congregations.

If I should ask you, from whence have sprung our present distractions? Or,
who are they who keep the wounds of our divided Kingdom bleeding? Are they not
certain tempestuous, uncharitable active men, who make it their work and
business to rob men of the greatest temporal blessing of the Scripture, and to
preach every man out of the shade of his own Vine, and out of the fruit of his
own Fig Tree, and out of the water of his own Cisterne? Are they not men who
will stone you for your Vineyard, and then urge Scripture for it? And will take
away your field, your possession, your daily bread from you, and then repay you
with a piece of Esaias or Ezekiel, or one of the Prophets, and call this melting,
and reformation? Are they not men who do only profess to have the art not to
heal, or close, or reconcile, but to inflame, and kindle sides? Men who blow a
Trumpet in the Pulpit, and there breath nothing but thunder, and ruin, and
desolation, and destruction, Whose followers call themselves Brethren, indeed,
and boast much of their charity; But they call only such as are of their own
confederacy, Brethren: and make no other use of the word which was at first
imposed by Christ, to be the style and mark of agreement and peace, then to
be the word and mark to know a faction by, and make no other use of their
charity, which should extend it self to all men, even to their very enemies,
but only to keep themselves together in a separation and conspiracy.

Lastly, these are the men, who when they should strive to quench the present
flame with their tears, do conjure as earnestly by the name of Christ to
discord and confusion, as S. Paul here in this Text does to order and
agreement. Men who call it prophecy, and edification, and building up of the
people, when they break and divide them into Sects and Factions. As zealously
exhorting them to speak diverse things, as S. Paul here exhorts them to speak
all the same. Which is the next thing to be considered; and the first step
toward the reconciliation, and peace, here petitioned for, which is unity and
agreement in compellations and names in these words, Now I beseech you
Brethren, that ye all speak the same thing.

Whether the dispersion of men, after the building of the Tower of Babell, over
the face of the whole earth, were a punishment or a blessing to mankind, I
shall not in this Auditory examine or dispute. Only thus much we learn from
the History of that place, that the occasion of that dispersion and separation
of men from one another, sprung first from the confusion which God threw among
them, and that confusion sprung from their diversity of speech. For as speech
was at first bestowed upon us by God, that we might hold league and society,
and friendship with one another: so you may read in the 11. Chapter of Genesis,
that as long as all the world was of one language, and of one speech, they
lived unanimously together like men of one family and house. One heart, one
soul seemed to move in them all. But when they once ceast to be unius labii
homines, men of the same lip and speech, when as many languages were thrown
among them, as they afterward possessed Countries, then society, and
co-habitation, and brotherhood ceast among them too. They were scattered abroad
upon the face of all the earth, says the Scripture. They who were before
children of the same common Ancestors, and derived themselves from the same
common parentage and stock, as if they had been borne in the adverse
Hemispheres of the world, or had taken their beginning from as many several
Parents, as they afterward found Islands, of one great Family and Kindred,
became so many divided Nations.

As this diversity of Tongues at first broke the world into the several
crumbles and portions of men, who from that time to this have divided it among
them; so there is not any one thing which has so fatally divided Kingdoms,
and States, and Churches against themselves, sometimes to an utter extirpation,
many times to an eternal breach, and Irreconciliation, as diversity of
Language. I do not mean when men speak diverse tongues of several dialects,
and significations, (as when they at the building of Babell spoke some of them
Hebrew perhaps, some of them Greek) but my meaning is, that nothing more
directly tends to the division of a State, or Church, then for several
companies of men to distinguish, and divide and separate themselves from one
another by certain words and names of mark and difference, especially if they
be words of disgrace, and scandal, and reproach, mutually imposed, and stuck
upon each other; Or words of faction, and combination, assumed and taken by
themselves. Then, if hatred of person, or difference of Religion do accompany
such words of distinction, that for the most part befalls them, which befell
the men of the old world, they break society and Communion, and crumble
asunder; and of one people become so many divided Nations, and Churches to each
other. This is an Engine which the Devil and wicked Politicians have in all
ages of the world made use of, to disturb the peace, and trouble the happiness
of Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Making holy, virtuous words and names, many
times the partition wall of separation; And the device, and incitement, not
only to divide Kingdoms but Corporations, and private Families against
themselves. As long as the Jews called themselves by one and the same common
name of their Father Jacob, Israelites, they made but one State, one
Commonwealth among them. But when once ten Tribes engrossed that name to
themselves, and the other two for distinction sake called themselves by the
name of the Tribe of Judah, the most united, happiest, neerliest allied people
in the world, a people of one blood, as well as one language, fell asunder, and
divided themselves, like Jacob and Esau, into two hostile, irreconcilable,
never more to be united Kingdoms. And this was the case of these disagreeing
Corinthians, to whom S. Paul directed this Text. As long as they called
themselves by one, and the same common name of Christians, they made but one
City, one Church, one place of Concord. But when they once began to distinguish
themselves by their several Teachers, when some said, We are of Paul, others,
we are of Cephas: A third sort, we are of Apollos; And only a fourth sort,
more Orthodox then the rest, we are of Christ; Then, then indeed, as if Christ
had been divided, or had been the Author of several Religions, preached among
them by several Apostles, they became broken, and rent, and torn asunder,
into several Churches and Congregations. Where their usual custom was, not
only to oppose Sermon against Sermon, and Gospel against Gospel, and Teacher
against Teacher, but every one in the defense of their own Teacher, and his
Gospel, thought it part of their Religion to extol, and quote, and urge the
purity and infallibility of the one, to the depression, and disgrace, and
contempt of the other: Till at length it came to pass, (as I told you before)
that that which begun in Religion, proceeded to bad manners, and ill behavior.
Marks and words of distinction, and difference, grew to bitter invectives, and
mutual reproaches of one another. They who were the followers of Saint Paul's
Doctrine, called those who followed Apollos, by way of mark and infamy,
Apolonists. And they who were the followers of Apollos, by way of retaliation,
and brand, called the followers of Saint Paul, Paulists, though Saint Paul and
Apollos preach both the same Doctrine. Hard censures flew between them in as
hard language; who ever was not of a party, nor enrolled of a side, was thought
to be without the pale of the Church. The gates of heaven were shut against
him, and nothing but reprobation, and the lot of the damned, and hell fire were
allowed to be his portion.

Here then, my Brethren, let me make my appeal to eyery one of you, who hear
me this day, has not this been our very case? I must with sorrow of heart
confess to you, that as often as I have for some years, made to my self a
contemplative survey of this unhappie Kingdom, I have been able to discover no
cause so pernicious for the many alienations of mind, or the many separations
of Congregation from Congregation, heightened at length into the tragedy of an
over-spreading Civil War, as certain vain, ridiculous, empty words, and names
of distinction among us; which have sprung from some men's stricter or looser
carriage of themselves in their profession of the same Religion. They of the
more free, and open carriage and behavior, who call a severe regularity and
strictness of life, preciseness, and an abridgement of Christian liberty,
have called those of a more reserved, and locked up, and demure conversation,
Puritans, and Roundheads, and I know not what other names of contumely, and
reproach. And they of the more strict behavior, have equally as faulty, called
those of a freer, and less composed conversation, Libertines, and Papists; the
usual words of infamy made to signify a Cavalier. These two words my
Brethren, have almost destroyed a flourishing Kingdom between them.

To this, I cannot but add one most pernicious cause of our present divisions
more, which people have derived to themselves from making themselves followers
too much of several Teachers; and affecting too much to be called after their
names: whilst one says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Cephas, a third, I am
of Apollos, only a few neutrall men, We are of Christ. Nay, if we needs must
go several ways, I could wish we had such sacred names as S. Paul, or S.
Peter, or Apollos to divide us. I know not whether it will be seasonable for me
to speak it in this Assembly: But we for some late years have chosen to our
selves names more modern, and fallible to divide our selves by; whilst some
have said, We are of Calvin, others, We are of Arminius, others, We are of
Socinus. These, to the blemish, and reproach of Christian Religion, have been
made names of strife and faction. Yet they have been great and learned names;
though some of them, I must confess, have been liable to humane Errors. But
if you consider the many rents and separations into which the ordinary sort of
people have for some years divided themselves, either you will find no names at
all for them, or names so unlearned, so obscure, so altogether mechanic, and
unconsiderable, that it will be your wonder how such vulgar, rude, untaught
Teachers should draw Disciples after them. It would pose me very much to tell
you by any Monument of learning, or piety, which he has left behind him to be
known by, who was the Father, or first bringer up of the Sect of the
Brownists; or who was the first Author of the Sect of the Anabaptists. I know
there were Anabaptists in diverse of the Fathers times; and I know too, that the
Parent of that Sect then, though he were an Heretic, yet he was a Scholar.
But as for the Author of the Sect of the Anabaptists of our times, I cannot
well say what he was. One who has written the History of their wild
proceedings at Munster, (where they begun with the Reformation of the Church of
Jesus Christ, and proceeded at length to three wives a piece) says, he was a
Dutch Botcher; one who repaird old Germents under a stall at Leyden in the
Low Countries; Another says, he was a Garmane Cobbler; A third, that he was a
Westphalia Needle-maker; But another controlls that, and says he was a
Westphalia Baker. But whatever he were, have not we in our times seen
Patriarchs and Prophets, as vulgar and mechanic, as unlearned and base as he?
Men who have invaded the Pulpit. I will not say, from mending old breeches, or
cobling old shoes, (pardon the homeliness of the expression I beseech you, it
is but the Historians Latin translated into my English) but from Trades so
mean, so dis-ingenuous, so illiberall, that I should defile your ears, and
the Pulpit to describe them: And yet, have not these modern shades of Muntzer,
John of Leyden, Rotman, Knippenburge, Knipperdolling, Melchior Hoffman, the
great Enthusiasts, and disturbers of Germany, to the Astonishment of all
Judging men, drawn Disciples after them, I wish I could only say, as mean, and
base, and vulgar as themselves? Certainly, my brethren, consider the parallel
well between the inspired Troublers of our Kingdom, and those, who by their
wild Doctrines did set Westphalia, Saxony, Munster, and all the noblest parts
of the Germane Empire in a flame, and you will find, that in this sad Eclipse
of Monarchy among us, there wants only a Sarcinator, or botcher, to assume to
himself the Crown, and to be called by a Sanedrim or privy Council of the
like Trades, Rex Iustitiae, and novae Jerusalem Imperator, King of
Righteousness, and Emperor of the new Jerusalem, to make our case the very
same with theirs.

Again, in this diversity of Guides and pastors, (Pastors scarce fit to be
Overseers of unreasonable Flocks) do we not also hear as great a diversity of
language spoken? The Lay-Preacher accuses the University-man with want of the
Spirit; and we of the University do back again account such Laymen mad. Nay
among us Scholars, they who pretend to Calvin's Doctrine, do banish all those
out of the state of salvation, who deny absolute Predestination; Or hold not,
that from all eternity without any respect of their works or actions, whether
they be good or bad, God has past this sad irreversible sentence and decree,
That some shall necessarily be saved, others shall as necessarily be damned.
They who think this a piece of Stoicisme, or a Doctrine brought into the world
to drive People to despair, do equally banish those from the state of
salvation, who thus uncharitably banish others. But what speak I to you of
this Congregation of such high, schollarly dissentions? or discourse to you of
disputes and controversies, not in the power of Scripture, Synods, or General
Counsels to decide? That which has more troubled the peace of our distracted
Kingdom, has been a strife of words about things as small as Cummin, or
Annise: And about that part of the Kingdom of heaven, which lies not wrapped up
in an unsearchable Decree, or an eternal sentence of Gods concealed Will, but
in a grain of mustard seed: A little, slight indifferent Ceremony, or piece of
Church Discipline. One has called it an Idolatry to make an obeisance in the
Church; another has called it a piece of Gods outward worship to do so. One
has styled the Cross in Baptism a sign of Superstition; another has styled
it the mark, and badge, and emblem of his Christianity and profession. One
calls all Pictures in Church windows, Idols; another looks on them as so much
holy story, brought into Imagery and Colors. The very garments we wear have
not escaped contradiction. One calls the Surplice a Romish vesture; another
calls it a white robe of Innocence, and Decency. Nay our very Prayers and
Devotions have not been free from quarrels. Whilst some have called the Lords
Prayer, A perfect form, enjoined by Christ to be said as it is; others most
irreverently have called it a Tailors Measure, fit only to cut out other
Petitions by.

In this miserable diversity of sides, th^n, where Countrymen, and men of the
same speech, do so ordinarily speak diverse languages, What way is there left
to beget a peace and union among us?

Truly, my brethren, I know none so fit as that which Saint Paul here
prescribes in this Text; a way, which if it were well practiced, or if men
would either have more charity, or less gall in them, would in time beget an
union and agreement between all Churches; that is, (...), that we all speak
the same thing. That is, first, that we lay aside all those odious, hateful
names and words of reproach, which serve only to Provoke and engender strifes,
and to beget a dislike of one man's conversation with another; that the honest,
strict, regular, heedfull, conscientious man, be no longer called a Puritan,
nor his wife a holy Sister; Nor the free, sociable, affable, open, harmlesly
unscrupulous man, be any longer called a Papist, or Atheist, or by way of
reproach, a Cavallier. I speak not now of the adulterous, swearing, riotous,
lying, drinking, covetous man; these are such, that one of the ways to reform
them, is to call them by their right names.

Next, that we no longer, as our interest, or affections, or prejudices, or
education, or customs sway us, pin our belief or faith upon any one
Particular Guide or Teacher, so irremoveably, as without comparison or
examination to reject and despise al others. I am of opinion we should quickly
make one Church again, if those newborn names and words of Independent and
Presbyter did not divide us. And I am also Persuaded, that our several
Disciplines and Doctrines have not kept the Church of Rome at a greater
distance with us, then the style and compellation of Protestant and Papist

Thirdly, that we Scholars, in those high mysterious points which have equal
argument and proof on both sides, and which both sides (for ought I know) may
hold yet meet in heaven, do factiously or peremptorily betake our selves to
neither; But either lay them aside, as things of mere contemplation, not of
practice or use; or else speak of them to the people, only in that general
sense wherein all sides agree, and as that general sense is laid down to us
in the Scripture.

Lastly, that in matters of Ceremony and form, things either altogether
indifferent, or at most, neither enjoined, nor forbidden in the Scripture, that
our carriage and words be always as indifferent: That we call not that
scandalous which is decent; or that decent which is scandalous: That we press
not things as necessary, which are merely ornamentall; nor impose ornaments as
things of necessity. That where no well-establisht Law is broken by it, both in
Actions and Language, where ever we come, we conform our selves to the
harmless (though to us unusual) custom of the place: Herein imitating that
sure example of S. Paul, by being strong with the strong, and weak with the
weak, as near as we can, to become all things to all men. In things merely
Ceremonial, to part with our Christian liberty, and peaceably to yield to
those, who, being otherwise persuaded, will contentiously refuse to part with
theirs. And where our salvation, or the salvation of our neighbor is not
concerned, charitably to comply, and sort with their infirmities; neither
crossing them by our practice, though perhaps the better, nor perplexing them
with our disputes, though perhaps the more rational: But if it be possible, as
much as lies in us, not only to have peace with all men in words and speech,
but in society, and conversation, and Church Assemblies too: Which is the next
degree of Unity here petitioned for, that is, an unity of meeting together in
the same house of God, set down in these words, I beseech you Brethren, that
there be no divisions among you.

That I may the clearlier proceed in the interpretation of this 4. Unity of
blies.
part of the Text, I shall desire you to observe, that the word which we here
in English do translate Divisions, is in the Original Greek (by which we are
to order our exposition) (...): A word which signifies not every kind of rent,
or division, or disagreement among men; but such a division only as is
accompanied with a perverse, unreasonable denial of society and communion
together in the same Church. A division which carries with it an obstinate
separation upon unnecessary grounds. Which unnecessary separation upon weak,
slight grounds, is that which Saint Paul here in this Text, by way of
difference and distinction from lighter Rents, calls (...), Schisms. A sin, my
Brethren, of which if I should discourse to you at large, and should show you
the hainousness of it, by its dangerous effects; I might tell you that it is
not only a sin against the sociable nature of men, who are borne for Communion
and Commerce, and the mutual help of one another; but it is a sin directly
against that unity and peace, which Christ, as his last Legacy bequeathed to
his Church. A sin, which (besides the uncharitable opinion which accompanies
it, which is, that they who are separated from, must therefore be separated
from, because they are wicked, deplorably wicked men, men reprobated, and
utterly lost in the ways of Error, and with whom all communion is destructive
to our Salvation) does not always confine it self within the retired,
sequestered limits of a bare separation. But that which at first began from a
scruple, has many times proceeded to a Tragedy and massacre. They who at first
causelessly separated themselves from their Brethren, because they were wicked,
have many times, as their strength and numbers have encouraged them, and as the
time has favored their Reformation (as they have called it) proceeded from
the rectifying of men's Errors, to the lessening of their fortunes. And they
only have at length been called the wicked, who have been rich, and have had
estates to lose.

That only which I shall further say to you of it, is this: Separation is a
sin which has always veyl'd it self in the disguise of sanctity. Thus
Montanus, and his followers broke off Communion with the whole Christian Church
then in the world, because, forsooth, 'twas revealed to them by divine
illumination, that the Holy Ghost was no where to be found but in their
Conventicle. An Heresy, which beginning in Schism proceeded at length to this
monstrous conceit among them, That only the house of Montanus was the true.
Church, and that Montanus himself* was the Holy Ghost. Thus also the Donatists
(an over-scrupulous Sect of men) divided themselves from the then Catholic
Church, because it was not pure enough for such sanctified Communicants; nor
complied with the inspired doctrines of the Father of that Sect. And this, it
seems, was the fault of these Corinthians here in this Text; who having
entitled themselves to several Teachers, proceeded by degrees to divide
themselves into several Churches and Congregations: every one of which
challenging to themselves the true and right Religion, and charging the others
with the name of the false, thought at length that no way was left to keep
themselves pure and unspotted, but by breaking off all Religious, nay Civil
Commerce and Communion with each other. Hence, for fear of infection, it was
held a crime for any but the Righteous, to assemble, or converse with any but
the Righteous; or for any to meet together at a spiritual Exercise, but such
who first agreed in the same purity of Opinions.

Here, then, if I may once more take the liberty to parallel one people with
another; is not this our very case? Has it not been the practice of many, many
years, for those who call themselves the godly, the righteous, the children of
the most High, to break off society and communion, nay almost neighbourly
civility, with those whom they call the wicked? As there were among the Jews
certain unclean places, and things, and persons, which whosoever touched were
for that time unclean too; so, has not the like opinion past among us, that
there have been certain unholy, unsanctified places, and persons, which make
those who touch, or approach near them unholy too? Have not some Pulpits been
thought unsanctified, because, forsooth, the Preacher has been ungifted? And
wherein, I pray, has his ungiftedness appeared? Because he has not expressed
himself in that light, fluent, running, passionate, zealous style, which should
make him for that time seem religiously distracted, or beside himself? Or
because his Prayer or Sermon has been premeditated, and has not flowne from
him in such an Ex-tempore loose careere of devout emptinesses and nothings, as
serve only to entertain the people, as Bubbles do children, with a thin,
unsolid, brittle, painted blast of wind and air? Or because, perhaps, the
sands of his Glass have not fleeted for two tedious hours together with
nothing but the bold insolent defamation and reviling of his Prince?

Again, have there not been some who have thought our Temples unholy, because
the Common Prayer Book has been read there? And have renounced the
Congregation, where part of the Service has been tuned through an Organ? Has
not a dumb Picture in the window driven some from the Church? And in exchange
of the Oratories, have not some in the heat and zeal of their Separation,
turned their Parlours, Chambers, and Diningroomes into Temples, and Houses of
Prayer? Nay, has not Christ been worshipped in places yet more vile and mean? In
places, which have reduced him the second time to a Stable? If I should ask
the people of both Sexes, who are thus given to separation, and with whom a
Repetition in a Chamber edifies more then a learned Sermon in the Church, upon
what religious grounds, or motives either taken from the Word of God, (which is
so much in their mouths) or from reason, (which is so little in their
practice) they thus affect to single and divide themselves from others: I
believe it would pose them very much to give a satisfying Answer. Is it because
the persons from whom they thus separate themselves, are irreligious, wicked
men? Men who are Christians only in form, and whose conversation carries
nothing but evil example and pollution with it? If I should grant this to be
true, and should allow them to be outright what they call themselves, The
Elect, and Godly, and Holy ones of the earth; and other men to be outright what
they call them, The Reprobate, the wicked, the ungodly and profane, yet is not
this warrant enough to divide or separate themselves from them. Nor are they
competent Judges of this, but God only, who by the mouth of his Son, has told
us in the Parable, that the wheat and corn is not to be separated from the
chafe and tares when we list, but that both are to grow together till the
great harvest of the world. Till then it is a piece of the building of it, that
there be a commixture of good and bad.

Besides, let me put this Christian Dilemma to them: either the persons from
whom they divide themselves are holy or unholy: If they be holy, they are not
to separate themselves from them, because they are like themselves; If they be
unholy, they are in charity to converse with them, that they may reform and
make them better. Did not our Savior Christ (and certainly his example is too
great to be refused) usually converse with Publicans and sinners? Did he
forsake the Table, because a Pharisee made the Feast? Or did he refuse a
perfume, because a harlot powered it on his head? Or did he refuse to go up
into the Temple, because buyers and sellers were there, men who had turned it
into a den of Thieves? Certainly my Brethren, we may, like Christ, keep
company with Harlots, and Hypocrites, and Publicans and Sinners, and yet
retain our innocence. It Is a weak excuse to say, I will never consort my
self with a swearer, lest I learn to blaspheme: Or, I will utterly renounce
all familiarity and acquaintance with such and such an Adulterer, or with such
and such a Drunkard, lest I learn to commit Fornication from the one, or
Intemperance from the other. In all such conversations, we are to imitate the
Sun, who shines into the foulest puddles, and yet returns from thence with a
pure untainted Ray. If men's vices then, and corruptions, be not a sufficient
cause to warrant a separation, what else can be? Is it the place of meeting, or
Church, or the things done there, which has made them shun our ordinary
Congregations? Yes, say some, we have held it very unlawful (as we conceive)
to assemble in such a place, where we have seen Altars, and Windows
worshipped, superstitious garments worn, and have heard the more superstitious
Common Prayer Book read, that great bolster to slothful Ministers, and
twin-brother to the Mass, and Liturgy of Rome.

Were this Charge true, (a very heavy one, I confess) had there been any among
us so unreasonably stupid, as to spend their devotion on a pane of glass, or
pay worship to the dumb senseless creature of the Painter, or adore the
Communion Table, the wooden issue of the Axe and Carpenter, (as I think there
were none) had there (I say) been very Idolaters among us, yet unless they
would have compelled them to be Idolaters too, I (after all the impartial
Objections which my weak understanding can frame) can see no reason why they
should not communicate with them in other things wherein they were no
Idolaters. I am sure, if S. Paul had not kept company with Idolaters, we to
this day (for ought I know) had remained Infidels.

My Brethren, deceive not your selves with a fallacy, which every child is able
to discover. If such superstitio ns had been publicly practiced among us, it
is not necessary that every one that is a spectator to another man's sin,
should presently be an offender. Nor are all offenses so like the Pestilence,
that he that comes within the breath and air of them, must needs depart
infected. Thou see one, out of a blind zeal, pay reverence to a picture, he
has the more to answer for. But why do thou, out of a zeal altogether as
blind, think thy self so interested in his error, as to think thy self a
partaker of his fault, unless thou excommunicate thy self from his
conversation.

Again, tell me thou, who call Separation security; what see thou in a
Surplice, or hear in the Common Prayer Book, which should make thee
forbear the Congregation where these are retained? Is it the web, or matter,
or color, or fashion of the garment, or is it the frame or form, or
indevotion of the Book which offends thee? Or art thou troubled because they
have both been borrowed from the Church of Rome? That indeed is the great
argument of exception; which under the style of Popery, has almost turned
Religion it self out of the Church. But, then, it is so weak, so accidental,
so vulgar an Argument, an Argument so fit for none to urge but silly women,
with whom the first impression of things always takes strongliest, that I must
say in reply to it, That by the same reason, that thou poor,
tender-conscienc'd man, (who art not yet past milk, or the food of infants in
the Church) make such an innocent, decent vesture as Surplices, unlawful,
because Papists wear them, thou may make eating and drinking unlawful,
because Papists dine and sup. The subject is not high or noble enough to
deserve a more serious confutation. That therefore, which I shall say by way of
Repetition, is only this: If to wear or do, whatever Papists wear or do be
unlawful, as it will presently concern us all to throw off our garments and
turn Adamites, so it will very nearly concern us too, to lay aside our
Tables, and betake our selves to fasting, as the ready way to famine. Then to
reject the Common Prayer Book, because some of the Prayers in it resemble the
Prayers in the Romish Liturgy, is as unreasonable, as if thou should make
piety and devotion in general unlawful, because Papists say their Prayers.
And so, in opposition to whatever they do, should think thou art to turn
Athiest, because most in that Church do confess there is a God.

The time will not give me leave to say much in the defense of that excellent
Book; Or, if I should, it is in any thing, I presume, which can fall from my
imperfect mouth, which will be able to recover the use of it back again into
this Church. Yet thus much, out of the just sense, and apprehension which I
have of the wisdom, as well as piety, and devotion of it, I shall adventure
to say. That I cannot think, that ever any Christian Church, since the time
that that name first came into the world, had a public form of Gods Worship,
more Primitively pure, more Religiously grave, and more agreeable in all points
to the Scripture, then that is.

To which I shall only add this one praise of it more, that there is not any
Ancient, Classically condemned Heresy, to be found in the Records of
Counsels, Church-Histories, or the Confutations of Fathers, which is not by
some clause or other in that most Orthodox Book excluded.

Here, then, if there be any in this Assembly of that il-perswaded mind, that
he would not at this present make one of the Congregation, if the
Common Prayers were read, let me once more ask him, what that great Antipathie
between him, and that admirable Book is, which should make them quarrel one
another out of the Church: Is it because it prescribes a Ring i^ marriage, or a
Cross in Baptism? over-scrupulous man! who would rather choose to make a
rent and schism, and division in the Church, then be spectatour to things so
harmless, and indifferent. But thy weak Conscience is wounded. Weak, indeed,
when a piece of marriage-Gold, or a little water sprinkled in the sign, and
figure of a cross, the Type, and Emblem of thy Christianity, shall drive thee
from the Church. I must confess to you freely, if such things, as the
veneration of images, or adorations of Altars, or sacrifices for the dead, or
the worshipping of the Host, or the Mass Book, with all the unsignificant Ave
Maryes, and superstitious prayers, which use to travel round the Circle of a
numerous set of Beads, had been established among us by public Authority; And
had be^n enforced upon the practice, and Consciences of men, and no Liberty of
person, or freedom of estates allowed them, unless they would conform to the
present Golden Calf of superstition set up before them, a separation had not
only been allowable, but necessary. We would have offended God very much to be
partakers of such dross. And our best Answer would have been the Answer of the
Three Children, when the King would have had them fall down to the huge image,
and Colossus which he had set up, O King, we are (...). 3. 16.
not careful to observe thee in this matter. But where no such things were
enjoined, where every one was left to the full use and exercise of his
Christian liberty, where nothing was blameable among us, but the ridiculous,
over-acted postures and gestures of some few busy, fantastical men, whose
Popery lay in making discreet men laugh, to see them so artificially devout,
and so affectedly ceremonious, to divide, and separate, or to give us over for
a lost Church, because the Psalms of David, after his own Musical way, used
to be sung to an Organ; As innocently, certainly, as if they had been tuned
through his own loud Cymball, or had more softly been sung, and vowell'd to his
Harp: Or to renounce our solemn Assemblies, for such slight, indifferent
things, as a piece of holy story in a glass window, or because the Minister
wears white, or because married people come together by a Ring, or because the
Lords Prayer is more then once repeated, is not only Schism, and I may safely
say, Schism upon scandal taken, not given, but it is directly contrary to S
Paul's advice, here in this Text; who is so far from tolerating any such
needless divisions, and separations of presences and bodies, that he will not
allow in the same Church and Congregation the least dissent or division of
minds; But makes it the least part of his Petition to his disagreeing
Corinthians, that they would not only meet together in the same place of Gods
Worship, but that they would be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and
in the same judg-ment, which is the last part of the Text. To which I shall
only add some brief Application of some things in this Sermon to you my
hearers, and so commend you to God.

'Twas well said of one of the Philosophers, (which saying of his has since
almost grown into a Proverb of truth) Nihil est in Intellectu, 5. ^ty of minds
quod non fuit prius in sensu; That there is nothing in the understanding, or
mind within, which was not first in the sense without. It Is as great, and
measured a Truth, that there is nothing in our speech, or words, or actions
without, which was not first in our mind, or will, or affections within. For
what our Savior Christ said, that Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, thefts, false witness, blasphemies, and the like; to
every Mat. 15. 1
one of which sins without, belongs some secret, invisible spring within. As, I
say, to every Adultery without, belongs some hidden lust within; and the
uncleanness of the body is but the foul issue, and offspring of the soul; And
as to every murder without, belongs some secret envy, or hatred, or thirst of
revenge within; and the rancour of the heart only clothes it self in the
violence and bloodshed of the hand: so we may say of our Divisions, and
Disagreements too. All those odious words, and names of mutual infamy and
reproach; all those perverse crossings, and thwartings, and contradictions of
speech; all this duel, and skirmish, and quarrelsomeness of language; Lastly,
all this shunning and lothing of one another company; all this separation, and
denial of communion, which we so ordinarily see exercised, and practiced
without, are but so many unchristian behaviors, which take their original and
birth from as unchristian grudges, and prejudices, and jealousies, and
mis-apprehensions within. Never man yet dissented from another in speech, but
he first dissented from him in opinion: And never man yet separated from
another in communion, but he first separated from him in affection and will. To
remove, therefore, the root and spring of all disagreements, as well as the
current and stream; and to beget a peace, and concord, and reconciliation
without, Saint Paul, like a skillful Artist, who reserves the hardest part for
the last, proceeds from men's words and actions, to their opinions and thoughts:
and like those who set Watches, and Clocks, where the Hand upon the Dyall
without, cannot move regularly, unless the weights and springs which guide it,
move orderly within; the better to make us go all alike, and strike the same
time, he endeavors to setle and compose those inward wheels, by which our words
and behaviors without, are to be ruled and governed.

The thing then for which he here so earnestly Petitions, is Unity, and
Agreement, and Consent of minds. Which, in plain terms, is to exhort us, that
as we are all men of one and the same reasonable kind, formed and created like
one another in the shape and figure of our body, so that we would approve our
selves to be men of one and the same reasonable kind, in the Music and
Harmony of our souls too. Which would then come to pa^s, if every one of us
would by the impartial search, and examination of his own mind, dislodg those
mists and clouds of error, which blind him toward himself, and benight him
toward others. Or, if he cannot do this by the strength and diligence of his
own natural Forces, that he would have recourse to t^ose who are most able to
pluck this beam out of his eye; and whose work and business it is so to apply
their Cures, as by proposing that one, constant, immutable, eternal, Divine
Truth to his mind, in which it is possible for all minds well enlightened to
concenter and agree, by degrees to reduce him from his bli^dness and error,
and to make him not only speak, but conceive, and think the same things with
him that taught him.

It was well said of him, who compared our minds to Looking-glasses, or
Mirrours; For certainly if we could but keep them open, and unclouded, they
carry this property of Mirrours with them, not only to return the images, and
shapes, and truths of things, which pass before them as they are; but all minds
in a clearer, or less clear degree, have a capacity to receive into them the
truth of the same things alike. As a thousand Glasses, if they be true,
successively looked in, will show us the same faces: But then, as Glasses, if
they be false, will cast false resemblances; or if they be discolored, will
transform all things which flow into them into their own die: So it is with us. I
know not how it comes to pass, or whether I may ascribe the fault to Education,
or Custom, or to our parents, or to our Affections, too much knit, and wedded
to the Religion, or Doctrine, or Opinion, or Teacher, which most complyes with
our Fancies; but there are certain ill-cut, false-reporting minds, which look
upon men, and things, in another size and figure then they are. Other minds
there are stained and died (as it were) with certain weak prejudices, and
corrupt opinions; through which, as through so many deceiving colors, they
discern no truths which wear not that hue. As he that looks through a green
Glass, takes all things for green; and he that looks through a blew Glass,
takes all things for azure. And this was the very case of these Corinthians
here in the Text. They first addicted themselves over-partially to several
Teachers; and from their several Teachers, took in several apprehensions, as
they pleased to like or affect him above others, whose Disciples they called
themselves. Some, though they did not well understand what they held, resolved
(without any examination what they were) to be only of Saint Paul's opinions:
Others resolved to hold only what had been taught them by Apollos: Others
resolved to hold only what had been preached by S. Peter. All which three taught
and preached one and the same Gospel; yet that Gospel was not alike entertained
by all hearers. Whilst some disliked it in S. Paul, because 2 Cor. 10.
(as himself complains) he was of an humble presence, and of an ungrateful
utterance. Others dislike it, perhaps, in the mouth of Apollos, because it came
Rhetorically from him, and he was guilty of that unedifying crime, forsooth, of
being eloquent in the Pulpit. Others perhaps entertained it coldly from S.
Peter, because he had not been bred up in the School of Demosthenes, nor tasted
of the finer Arts and educations of Greece.

In short, one and the same saving Truth, for want of a little right judgment
in the Hearers to compare it, coming from several mouths, past into diverse
opinions first; and then these opinions broke forth into diverse factions. And
is not this, my Brethereu, our very case? Do but consider the present
distempers of our poor, divided Kingdom; and, pray, what has been the true
root and spring of so much variance, and hatred, and heart-burning among us?
what has crumbled us asunder, and turned one of the purest, and most
flourishing Churches of the world, into a heap of Heresies and confusion? Has
it not been the very word of God it self? In which all minds, I confess, should
agree, and which should be the rule to compose all our strifes; and before
whose decisions the greatest Scholars Disputes, and the meanest man's Doubts,
should fall down, and mutually embrace, and kiss each other. How comes it then
to pass, that Religion, which was ordained by God to be the oil to cure our
wounds, should prove only the oil to feed, and nourish our combustions? Whence
is it, that the Scripture, that Sword of the Spirit, should prove to us only
(...), a two-edged sword, and that no other use should be made of it by us, but
only to be the weapon of our Conflicts, by committing the edges, and making
them enter duel, and combat with each other? Truly, my brethren, all the
reason that I can give you for this, is, That some (perhaps well minded people,
but not of understandings either strong, or learned enough to reach the true
sense and meaning of some places) have stepped beyond their measure; and have
presumed to interpret more then they have well understood. Others, of a more
modest, but credulous composition, have thought that only to be the right
meaning of the Word of God, which they have heard from the mouth of the
Preacher which they most affect. Others, of a more dangerous policy, finding
that the Scripture rightly expounded would extremely make against the plot of
their dark proceedings, and that the holy Ghost cannot be bribed to find Texts
to make covetousness, sedition, or the slaughter of their Brethren, or
Rebellion against their Prince, lawful; have, with some formal helps of
piety, and zeal, put to their expositions, made the Scripture speak only those
plausible untruthes, which most complied with their ends, and the peoples
Fancy. Hence, the better to arrive to their Estates, by the distractions of
their minds, they have dealt with them as cunning Anglers do with silly fishes,
troubled the stream, and blinded them, and then made them their prey. The way
to do this was to affront, and disgrace, clamor down all the primitive Truths
for some Generations taught among them; and to recall from their sepulchers,
and dust, all the old, intricate, long since buried Opinions, which were the
madness of their own times, and the Civil War of ours. With which opinions
they have dealt, as the Witch of Endor dealt with her Familiar, raised them up
to the people clothed in a long mantle, and speaking to them in the shape and
voice of a Prophet. Hence come those several acceptions, and interpretations
among you, even in your ordinary discourses, of one and the same plain, but
sinisterly understood places of Scripture. One, following the practice of all
the purest ages of the Church, thinks the Sacrament of Baptism is to be
administered to Infants. Others, (who would certainly be a strange fight to the
Congregation, if they should appear the second time at the Font) of late are
taught to think that none are to be baptized, but such as are old enough to be
their own Godfathers, and can enter into Covenant with God, and promise for
themselves. Some, because it has been called a binding of the spirit, to
fetter their devotions in a set form of Prayer, have banished that Prayer,
which Christ prescribed to his Apostles, out of their Closets, as well as
Temples. Others, of as rectified a piety, think no Prayer so likely to find
acceptance with God, as that which was conceived, and put into form by his
Son. I should tire your patience too much to give you an exact Catalogue of
all the rotten opinions which at this present swarm among us. One who has
computed the Heresies, which have sprung up in this Kingdom within these five
years, says, they have doubled the number of those which were in Saint Austins
time; and then they were very near fourscore. One is a Chiliast, and holds the
personal Reign of Christ upon Earth. Another is a Corporealist, and holds the
death of the Soul with the Body. Nay, as it is said in Afric, a Lion will
couple with a Tiger, from whence will spring a Libbard; so certain strange,
unheard of, double-sex't Heresies are sprung up among us: not able to
understand what he would hold himself. You shall have an Arrian and Sabellian
lodged together in the same person. Nay, (which is yet worse) whatever Celsus
spoke in scorn, and Origin in vindication of our Redeemer, Christ and his
Mother, has of late trodden the Stage again, and appeared to disturb the
World. One (I tremble to speak it) has called the Virgin Maryes chastity into
question; And others have spoken of the Savior of the World so suspiciously as
if he had been a thing, of a stolen, unlawful Birth. In short, there want only
some of those Munster men among us, of whom Sleydan writes, where one calls
himself. God the Father, another God the Son, A third Paraclete, or God the
holy Ghost, to make our Babel and confusion of wild opinions at the height. In
this miserable distraction, then, where Heresy, and Error, has almost eaten
up the true Religion; And where all the light of the Gospel, which shines among
us, is but like that imperfect light at the Creation, which shined before the
Sun was placed in the firmament; A light creeping forth of a dark Chaos and
blind mass, and strifefull heap of jarring Elements: In this thick fogge of
strange Doctrines, I say, which has condenst it self into a cloud, which has
almost overspread this whole Kingdom, from which Truth seems to have taken
flight, and made way for Ignorance to style it self once more the Mother of
devotion, what way is there left to reconcile our minds, or to beget one right
knowledge, and understanding of the ways of God among us? Truly, I know none
but that which Saint Paul here prescribes in the Text; which is, that we
endeavor as near as we can, to be of one mind, and of one judgment.

But how shall this be brought to pass, unless all judgments were alike clear,
and unbiassed? Or, unless, laying apart all partiality, and affection to their
own side, and all prejudice, and hatred against those from whom they differ,
men would submit themselves to him, who is best able to instruct them; Or who
can bring with him the most saving Truths into the Pulpit? Besides, (may some
one say) if people should bring minds prepared to entertain the Truth, where is
that instructor so infallible, or so opinionated of the strength of his own
gifts and knowledge, that another pretending to the same Truth, may not
challenge to himself the like infallibility? who shall be the Judge of
Controversies? or who shall present Truth to us with such known marks and notes
about it, that as soon as it is presented, every congregation (of what mean
capacities soever) shall presently acknowledge, and entertain it? Will you, Sir,
who have all this while thus bemoaningly pitied our divisions? we are bound to
thank you for your charity to us; and should be desirous enough to embrace a
truth of your description. But you are a Scholar, whose parts and abilities lie
in the humane model, and building of your own secular studies. We are
therefore bid to doubt very much, whether you have the Spirit; and are told by
some who profess themselves inspired, that all your Readings, and Studyings,
and tyrings of your self over a difficult piece of Scripture, at midnight
perhaps, when all others sleep, by a lone, solitary, dumb candle, are but so
many labors in vain, Since it is impossible for any to understand the Scripture
aright, but such only who have it revealed to them by the same holy Spirit that
wrote it.

My Brethren, what shall I say to you? Modesty, and the knowledge I have of my
own imperfections, will not allow me to say peremptorily, that I have the Spirit
of God. Or if I could distinguish his secret influences and assistances from
the operations of my own soul, or could certainly say I have him, (which S,
Paul himself durst not say definitively) yet 'twould not become me so to
confine him to my frail, narrow parts, as to deny him to all others more
learned then my self.

For the settling therefore, and composing of your divided minds, I will not
take upon me to be the Judge of Controversies, but you your selves shall be.
Only the better to enable you to peforme this charitable office to your
selves, and for your better direction how not to be out in your judgment, as a
sure clue to guide you through the perplexed windings of that labyrinth into
which some of you are fallen, so fallen, that they seem to me quite lost in a
wood of mistakes, where every path is a guide, and every guide is an error,
give me leave to commend to you that seasonable advice of Saint John, which he
delivers in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle, at the first verse, where
(as if he had prophesied of our times) he says, Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God: because many false Prophets
are gone out into the world. In which words; you have two of the best Rules
assigned you to go by, that can possibly be prescribed for the settlement of
minds.

First, be not too credulous; Do not presently believe every man that says he
has the Spirit; nor suffer your selves to be tossed and carried about with every
wind of doctrine: For that is not the way to be all of one, but of as many
several minds as the art or cunning of several Teachers shall please to work
upon you. I am persuaded this easiness of belief, this credulity, or (as the
Apostle calls it) this admiration, this overvaluing of some men's persons, has
been one of the great parents of our present dissentions: whilst some weak, but
yet well-minded people, building their judgment merely upon the outward
appearances of men, have mistaken the zeal and strict life of their Preacher
for his sufficiency. And taking their Logic from the preciseness of his
behavior, have framed these charitable, but false conclusions to themselves:
He is a man of a composed countenance, of a reserved speech, of a grave
carriage, and of a devout elocution, therefore surely he is a holy man. And
because he is a holy man, therefore whatever he says, shall be to us Oracle;
as coming from the mouth of one, so much in the favor of God, that it is
impossible he should deceive us, or speak that which is not right.

My Brethren, I have no design or purpose to bring Holiness into contempt;
nor can I be so injurious to piety or a good life, where ever I find it, as to
expose it to the scorn of the licentious, by not giving it its due. I am so
far also from lending encouragement to the lives of vicious Teachers,
(Teachers who are the shame of their Mother, and the scandal of their Flock)
that I could wish that every Congregation in England were furnished with such
an exemplary Minister, that his life as well as preaching, might be Sermon to
the people. Nay, give me leave, I beseech you, to extend my charity yet one
degree farther. I am so far from disliking holiness either in Preacher or
people, that I wish we all made but one united Kingdom of Priests. Or, if you
will have me express my self in the words of one of the holiest and meekest
men of the earth, I could wish that all the Lords People were Prophets. But,
^b. 11. 29.
then, you must give me leave to say too, That holiness and strictness, and
austerity of life, are no infallible signs that the Preacher may not err. Nor
has God so annexed the understanding of his Word to the unstudied, unlearned
piety, or sober carriage of the Expounder, that he that is most zealous shall
still be most in the right. As long as that saying of S. Paul remains upon
record, That we hold this treasure; this knowledge of Gods Will (...) ^r. 4. 7.
(...), in earthen vessels; As long as the Preacher, how holy soever he be, is
so much one of the people, as to dwell in a frail, weak Tabernacle of clay;
Lastly, as long as men are men, they will be liable to men's infirmities. And
as the learned scandalous Preacher may be sometimes in the right; so it is
possible that the ignorant, zealous, holy Preacher may be often in the wrong.
How to know this, and how to distinguish them, therefore, you are to make use
of the next Rule prescribed to you by Saint John; that is, when you hear an
Exposition, or a Sermon, or a new Doctrine preached to you, not rashly, without
distinction or choice to consent to it, till you have past the impartial
sentence of a clear judgment on it; compared and weighed Sermon with Sermon,
and Preacher with Preacher; called every Doctrine, every Proof, every
confident Assertion to the touchstone, and measured it by some plain evident
place of Scripture; and examined whether the Holy Ghost, or his own vain,
popular ambition, have for that time inspired the speaker; or whether his
Sermon have had some dissembled, secular end, or Gods glory for its mark. And
this Saint John calls, ^ying of the spirits; which is then done, when (as I
said before) you reduce what you hear spoken by the Preacher to the infallible
Rule of Truth, the Word of God; and make that, well considered, the scales to
weigh his Doctrine in. Does he preach charity, and banish strife from his
Pulpit? Does he not flatter Vice, though he find it clothed in Purple, nor
speak neglectfully of Virtue, though he find it clothed in rags? Does he
strive to plant the fear and love of God in his Auditory, the forgiveness of
their enemies, and pity toward the poor? Dares he arraigne a public sin,
though never so fortunate? or speak in defense of afflicted Innocence, though
over-borne by oppression? Dares he maintain his Christian courage in
Tyrannical, doubtful times? And dares he call prosperous Sedition, but a more
successful mischief? Lastly, does he preach such Christian Truths for which
some holy men have died, and to which he himself would not be afraid to fall
a sacrifice? This, this man is to be hearkened to; this man is fit to be
obeyed. And this man speaking the same things which God himself does in the
Scripture, (whatever his gifts of pleasing, or not pleasing sick, fastidious,
delicate fancies be) is thus at least to be thought of, That though he speak
not by the Spirit, (as a thing entailed upon him) yet, for that time, the
Spirit speaks by him, which ought to be all one to you. On the contrary, does
the Preachers Sanctity and Religion consist merely in the devout composure of
his looks and carriage? Does he strive to preach down Learning, or does he
call Study a humane folly? Does he choose his Text out of the Bible, and make
the Sermon out of his Fancy? Does he reprove Adultery, but preach up discord?
Is he passionate against Superstition, but mild and calm toward Sacrilege?
Does he inveigh and rail at Popery, and at the same time imitate the worst of
Papists, Jesuits, urge Texts for the Rebellion of Subjects against their
Prince, and quote Scripture for the deposing, and Butchery of Kings? Does he
startle at a dumb picture in a Church-window, and at the same time preach all
good order and right Discipline out of the Church? Does an Oath provoke his
zeal, yet does he count lying in the godly no sin? Lastly, does he preach
separation upon weak untemper'd grounds? Or does labor to divide the minds,
which he should strive to reconcile? Let him bring what demureness or
composure of countenance he please into the Pulpit; Let him, if he please,
join sanctity of deportment to earnestness of zeal; Let him never so
devoutly bewail the calamities of his Country, which he has helped to make
miserable; Or let him weep never so passionately over the Congregation, which
he has broken into factions; In short, how seemingly holy, how precise, how
unprophane soever his behavior be; though the Scripture do so continually
overflow in his mouth, that he will neither eat, nor drink, nor speak, nor
scarce sleep but in that phrase, yet as long as he thus forgets his Charity,
thus Preaches strife, thus Division, I shall so far mistrust whether he have
the Spirit, that I shall not doubt to reckon him in the number of those false
Prophets which S. John says are gone out into the world.

The Conclusion then of this Sermon shall be this. Men and brethren, I have
with all the sincerity and plainness which might benefit your souls, preached
Truth, and Concord, and mutual Charity to you. I have also for some years,
not been so sleepy an Observer, but that I have perceived some of you (who have
thought your selves more Religious then the rest) to be guilty of the (I might
say Crime, but I will rather say of the) mis-guided Zeal of these Corinthians
here in my Text. There have been certain Divisions, and I know not what
separations among you. I have farther observed, that certain false, causlesse
prejudices and aspersions have been raised upon our University, which to the
grief of this famous Nursery of Gods Church at home, and the reproach of it
abroad, are still kept waking against us by some of you, as if Conscience and
Religion, as well as Learning and Gifts, had so far forsaken us, that all the
Schools of the Prophets cannot afford you a set of able, virtuous men, fit to
be the Lecturers to this soule-famisht Parish. How we should deserve to be thus
mistaken by you, or why you should under-value those able Teachers which you
have already, or refuse to take your supply from so many Colleges which here
stand present and ready to afford you choice: or why you should supplicate to
the great Council of this Kingdom, in pity to your souls, to send you Godly
Teachers, (which, perhaps, is but a well-meaning Petition from you, but
certainly it is agreat scandal, and Libell against us) I know not. But whatever
the mysterious cause be, I am confident, that unless they will sleep over
their infamy and reproach, it will always be in the power of our despised
University-Divines, to make it appear, even to those whom you intend to
petition, That this is but a zealous error in you: And that they are as able
to edify you, certainly, as he, whose occupation it was to repair the old
shoes of the Prophets. I should shame some of you too much, who were the
Disciples of that Apostle, if I should discribe him to you by a larger
character.

Instead therefore of a farther vindication of the reproach thrown upon us,
that which I shall say of more near concernment to you, is this: If I have in
the progress of this Sermon, ripped open any wounds among you, it has not been
with a purpose, to enlarge, or make them bleed, but to power wine and Oil into
them, and to heal, and close them up.

Next, If I have cleared any of your sights, or enabled you at length to
discern, that the reason why the mote in your brothers eye seemed so big, was,
because an over-scrupulous zeal had placed a beam in your own; and that in
contributing to the ruin of one of the purest Religions in the world, the
reason why you have swallowed so many monstrous Camels, has been, because at
first you made scruple, and strained at gnats, I have what I intended: Which
was to let you see, that to divide and separate your selves from the communion
of our Church, if it had been guilty of a mole or two, is as unreasonable, as
if you should quarrel the Moon out of her Orb, or think her unworthy of the
skies, because she wears a spot or two writ on a glorious ball of light.

Lastly, if I have said any thing in the reproof of discord, or the praise of
charity, which may reunite your minds, and make you all men of the same heart
and belief, as well as of the same City and Corporation, I shall think I
have done the work and business of a just Divider of the Word of God toward
you, and of a faithful Servant and Steward toward my heavenly Master. Whose
blessing of peace be upon you all, together with the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost. To which glorious Trinity, be
ascribed all Honor, Praise, Dominion and Power, for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.
A SERMON AGAINST FALSE PROPHETS. PREACHED In St. MARY'S CHVRCH In OXFORD,
shortly after the Surrender of that Garrison.

By JASPER MAINE, D. D. and one of the Students of Christ-Church, OXON.

IER. 23. 16. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the
Prophets that prophecy unto you; They make you vain; they speak a vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

Printed in the Year, M D C XLVII.

A SERMON AGAINST FALSE PROPHETS.
EZEKIEL. 22. 28. Her Prophets have daubed them with untempered Mortar, seeing
vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says the Lord God, when the
Lord has not spoken.
THE PREFACE.
THat which the best Orator said of Oratorie put to the worst use, Nihil est
tam horridum, tam incultum, quod non splendesent oratione, That there is
nothing so deformed, or rude, which may not be made amiable by Speech, has
always been verified of Religion too. No one thing has, in all Ages, been
more abused, to paint and disguise foul actions. It has been made the Art to
cozen people with their own Devotions, and to make them, in the mean time,
think sacredly of their seducers. Conspiracies, and Insurrections, dressed in
these colors have been called holy Associations and Leagues: And the
Ambitious, to work the more securely on the credulity of the simple, have not
only presented evil to them growing on the Tree of Good, but have proceeded
thus much farther in the fallacy, that they have still made forbidden fruits
seem pleasant to the eye. And the false colors under which they have seemed
pleasant, have always been taken from Religion. Thus in these Heathen States,
where they first made their own gods, and then worshipped them, never plot was
hatched to disturb the Commonwealth, but the writings of some Sybill, or
other, were entitled to that plot; And never any design was laid to destroy
the Roman Empire, but some Augur, or Priest was taken in, whose part 'twas, to
make the Entrails, and Liver of his sacrifice, give credit to the ambition of
the design. And thus among the Jews, some ambitious men, the better to gild
over their proceedings, still entitled God to them. Who, as if he had been one
of those Tutelar, changeable Deities, which used to be enticed, and called over
from one side to another, they still entertained the people, that they who most
zealously pretended to him, had him most. And that however he be the God of
Order, and Justice, and Agreement among men, yet in favor of his own Cause,
he would for a while be content to change his nature, and become the God of
Injustice, Disorder, and Confusion too.

The better to work this persuasion into the minds of the Multitude, their
first piece of policy was to draw the Prophets into their Faction. This is
expressed to us in the 25. verse of this Chapter. Where it is said of Jerusalem,
There is a conspiracy of her Prophets, in the midst thereof. And truly, 'twas
a Conspiracy so unfit for Prophets that the resemblance of it was never yet
found in any but those Men of a much unholier style, of whom the Historian
says, Est aliquod etiam inter Latrones and Sicarios foedus, that Thieves and
Robbers hold League and friendship amongst themselves. For it is said in the
following words of that verse, that 'twas a Conspiracy like the roaring of a
Lion, ravening the prey. A Conspiracy, by which they devoured Souls, and took
to themselves the Treasure, and precious things of the Land. And because
pillage of this public Nature, could hardly be gained without the Death, and
Murder of the Owners, it is said in the close of that verse, That they made her
many Widows in the midst thereof. To which if the Scripture had added these
two words of pity, the Fatherless and Orphane too, nothing could have been
added to the calamity of the Description.

Nor is there a much more favorable Character stuck by the holy Ghost, upon
the Priests of those times. For by that which is said at the 26. verse of this
Chapter, (And it is well worth your marking) you may perceive that the Disorder
to which things were brought in the State, sprung first from the Disorder, to
which things were brought in the Church. For it is there said, That The Priests
had violated the Law, and profaned the holy Things; That they did put no
difference between the Holy, and Profane, nor made any Distinction between the
unclean, and the clean. In brief, the Legal, well established Service, and
Worship of God was at a kind of loss, and Indifferency. 'Twas referred to
every man's Fancy, to make to himself his own Religion, Blemished, and
unblemisht Sacrifices began to be sacred alike. And the Scripture of another
Prophet, became quite altered; He that offered a Swine, was thought as
religious as he that slew an Ox; And he that ^t off a Dogs neck, was thought
as liberal a Sacrificer, as he that brought a Lamb to the Altar.

Next, having taken the Prophets, and Priests, so far into their plot, as to
mingle and confound the Services of the Church, they made it one part of their
policy, more, to make them lend Reputation, to their proceedings in the State.
This is plainly intimated to us, by that which is said at the 27. verse of this
chapter, cohering with that which is said in the words of my Text. For there
mention is made of certain (...), or Princes, or chief men, who are there
said to be like Wolves ravening the prey; Yet there wanted not some Prophets
(as you may gather from my Text) who presented these Wolves to the people in
Sheeps clothing. It Is said too that they had this property of Wolves, that
they took pleasure to shed blood; yet there wanted not Priests, who called
Blond thus spilt Sacrifice. It Is said too that they did shed Blood that they
might get to themselves dishonest Gain; yet there wanted not some, who called
even that dishonest gain, godliness. If you will have all this limbed to you
in one short Draught and picture, how cruel soever, and destructive to the
common safety, the Projects, and proceedings of some men powerful in the then
State of the Jews were, there wanted not Prophets who dawbed them with
untempered Mortar; seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, thus
says the Lord God, when the Lord had not spoken.

Which words are a History of the worst Times, in the then worst division.
State. In which we have these considerable parts. 1. An irreligious
Compliance, or rather Collusion, of Spiritual men with Lay. Some there were,
(as you have them described in the precedent verse) whose design 'twas, to
make their Country their Prey; Others there were, whose part it was, to make
them seem Good patriots, and Protectors of their Country. Some destroyed
Souls in the way to their Ambitious Ends, Others made it their business to
put Holy colors on their Slaughters. Or if you will have me express my self in
the Language of both Texts, some there were who did Shed blood, that they might
get to themselves Dishonest gain; And some Prophets there, were, who to make
their proceedings seem specious, did put religious pretenses to them, and with
these pretenses did disguise, and dawbe them.

Next, we have here, the Frailty, and Weakness, and Deceiveable nature of such
pretenses. How plausible soever they seemed to the deluded vulgar, and however
they might a while, not only serve to cover, and veil foul purposes, but to
set them off with a Beauty, and Luster too, yet this could not be lasting.
Dishonest projects thus adorned were but so many painted Ruins. And therefore,
the Prophets, who thus disguised them, are here said to Dawbe them with
untempered Mortar.

Thirdly, for the effecting of this, we have here a very strange abuse of their
Ministry and Function, set down to us in three Expressions, having every one
of them something of the Form, but nothing of the Reality of a Prophet in
them. First, they are here said to be S^ers. But as for the things they saw,
they were of that foolish empty nature, that the Scripture has not vouchsafed
to call them Dreams. We may call them visions, perhaps; But such as Aene as in
Virgil saw among the Shades. So void of Weight, and Body, and Substance, so far
from Sense and Reason, as well as Revelation, that as the fittest word which
could be found for them, they are here in this place called Vanity. Next, they
are here said to Divine, or foretell. But it is added withal, that they
foretold not Things, but lies. As many untruths as Prophecies fell from them.
And their predictions had only thus much of Divination in them, that some time
was required for men to prove them false; And to perceive, that, contrary to
all true predictions, they would never come to pass. Lastly, (which was the
third, and great abuse of their office and function) they were not afraid to
entitle God to their vanities and lies. As often as they were pleased to
deceive the people, he was cited, and quoted, as the inspirer of the deceit.
And this bold, insolent sin was committed against the holy Ghost, that the
vain, foolish, groundless conjectures of the Prophets, were called his
Inspirations: who, to make their falsehoods take the stronglier, still uttered
them in the holy, Prophetical style of Truths, saying, Thus says the Lord
God, when the Lord had not spoken. All which contracted into a narrow room, the
Irreligious Compliance of Spiritual men with Lay, the weakness of their
pretenses, the abuse of their Calling, by uttering their own vanities for
inspirations, and and their own Fictions for Truths, together with the injury
offered to God, by entitling Him to all this, shall be the parts on which I
will build my future Discourse. In the ordering of which, I will begin with the
Compliance or Combination. Some there were among the Jews (as you have them
decyphered in the former verse) who did shed blood, that they might get to
themselves dishonest gain; and some false Prophets there were, who, to go
sharers in that gain, by the Holiness of their Function, did disguise and
dawbe them.

It was well said of a virtuous man in the praise of Virtue, Si 1: The com^ance.
oculis cerneretur, If it could be seen, or could be put into Limbs or
Colors, nothing would more inflame, or ravish the Beholders. And he had
spoken as well in the dispraise of Vice, had he said, Si oculis cerneretur, if
it could be made visible, or put into Colors, nothing would appear more
deformed, or loathsome. To speak of it, as it deserves, there is so little
Beauty or Amiablenesse in Dishonest actions, that to be disliked, and abhorred,
it has always been sufficient for them to be understood. None but the Father
of mischief, ever loved mischief for it self: And none but the Children of
such a parent, have found out a comeliness of Evil, merely as it is Evil. Of
all other men, who have not quite lost their Reason with their Innocence, and
over whose understandings darkness and Error have not so prevailed, as to
present vice and virtue to them, as one and the same thing, the saying of the
Poet has always held true, Exemplo quod^unque malo committitur ipsi displ^cet
Authori; Bad actions are so far from pleasing others, that they never yet
pleased themselves. Nor can I persuade my self, that ever any man could so
stifle his Conscience, or force it, (like some compelled to enter into
unwilling contracts) to embrace a Bad Design, but he for that time divided
himself between his Design, and his Hatred. And the advantages which have
accompanied the foulness of the Enterprise, have never been so great, but
that the poor cosened offender, at the same time sinned, and lothed himself.
But then, as some either borne, or grown deformed, have found out certain arts
to hide their deformities; As some I say, of a withered, ill-shaped complexion,
have by the help of their pencill, turned yellow into red, and pale into white,
and by the same help, have placed a Rose there, where there was before a decay;
And so have bestowed, not only an Artificial beauty, but an Artificial youth
upon themselves, and in this borrowed shape have flattered themselves, and
deceived others: So few bad men have been so unpolitick, not to hide their
Deformities by painting too. And this cunning use has been made of virtue,
that it has always been made the color, to adorn, and cover vice. A thing
the more easy to be effected, because that saying of the Philospher has
always been true, Difficile est Nonnulla vitia a virtut^bus secernere, adeo
prudentes nonnunquam fallunt, some vices are so nearely allied to some virtues,
that wise men have frequently mistaken them for Twins. Thus Rashness with
success has past for valor, and cowardice with discretion has past for
Counsel. Covetousness well ordered has worn the shape of Thrift; and Riot
has put on the name of Magnificence, and a large m^e But where this
Neighborhood between good and evil is not, ot^ helps have been taken in; And
a virtue of one shape has (...) (...) (...) disguise the fowlenesse of a vice
of another. Thus among the Jews in our Savior Christ's time, there were some
who tithed Mint, the they might wi^hhold Justice, and some pa^ ^min, that they
might keep back the weightier matters of the (...) ^ome made long prayers, that
they might devour Widows ^ouses, and some wore broad Phylacteries that they
might swallow Orphans goods. And thus in this Prophet Ezechiels time, some
disguised their rapine by a Prophet, and their slaughters by a Priest; their
Covetousness by a Seer, and their Oppressions by a Man of God. Between whom
the parts were so speciously carried, that, as if there had been no such things
in Nature, as Right or Wrong, Justice or Injustice, but only as Holy men would
please to call them, the one devoured the prey, the other gave a Blessing to
it; The one destroyed Souls, the other excused the Murder; The one committed
Sacrilege, the other made it plausible. Or if you will have me express my
self to the true Historical Importance of this Text, the one grinded the
faces of the poor, and polluted themselves both with private and and public
Oppressions; the other gilded, and palliated, and veyled, and dawbed them.
Complana^ant, says one, Gypsabant, says another Translation. The Prophets did
smooth, and sleek, and put a fair crust upon them. The words are diverse, but
have all one Sense.

For first, whether we express their palliation of Sins by dawbing, (which
is the word here used by our English Translators, and answers to Saint Ieromes
Obliniebant in the Latin, and the Septuagint (...) in the Greek) it is a Word
(if a learned Interpreter, well skilled in the Original, have not deceived me)
taken from those who deal in Ointments. And the meaning of the place is, That
as some, skilled in such Confections, have at times been hired to disguise
deadly Receipts in fragrant Smells, and so have conveyed poison in a perfume,
and clothed Death in the Breath and Air of an Odoriferous Sent; so these
Prophets here in the Text, among the other Abuses of their Calling, changed one
of Solomon's best Proverbs into one of the worst Compliances: Which was, that by
the Opinion of their Holinesle among the people, they made some men's Illnames
pass, as it is there said of Good, like a precious Ointment powered forth.
Perfumes and Odours were put upon Ambition and Avarice. And Gods Laws were a
while taught to forget their style; And those Commandments were made most to
defend the men, who did most violate, transgress, and break them. Or next,
whether we use the word sleeke, or smooth, it is a word taken from those who use
the polishing tool, or file. And the meaning of the place will be, That, as
such Artificers do ordinarily file rude, rough, misshapen matters, into decent
figures and forms, and by the Repetition of their instrument, and application
of it artificially to the same place, do raise a Glass and Luster there,
where there was before only a deformity and shade; so these Prophets dealt
with the public Sins of their times. Rapines, and Oppressions were filed, and
polisht, into the softer names of just levyes and supplies. Murders also and
Bloud-sheds, together with the Cries of Widows, and Tears of Orphans were
smoothed and glazed into the milder appearances, perhaps, of public Utility
and necessity of State. In brief, these Prophets here in the Text, dealt with
some men's vices, as the Philospher would have us deal with our Affections,
transformed and wrought them into Ornaments, and virtues. Or lastly, whether we
use the word Gypsabant, it is a word taken from those who deal in plaster. And
the meaning of the place will be, That as such Artificers, by laying a new
Crust upon old Decays, do many times make a falling building seem strong, and
to the certain danger of the dweller, do so veil, and cover aged Walls, as
to disguise Rottenness, and make a ruin seem habitable; So these Prophets
dealt with the sins of their times. They whited Sepulchers and adorned
Rottenness, and putrefaction. Wicked designs had a fair crust put upon them;
And ruinous projects were supported with splendid, holy Colors. If you will
have me speak more home to the mind of the Text, some ambitious men built
Houses on the Sand, and some flattering, servile Prophets dawbed them with
weak, untempered mortar. Which discovers to us the frailty and unsoundnesse of
all such proceedings as are not built upon Justice, or Truth, those two
immovable Rocks of the Scripture; And leads us on to the next part of the Text.

For the clearer understanding and interpretation of which (...) ^he frailty of
^d designs.
words, it will be necessary, that I once more briefly reconcile the several
Translations of them. That which we in English do read untempered mortar, a
very Classical Interpreter of the Bible reads thus: Prophetae ejus linebant
eos insulso, Her Prophets have dawbed them with a thing which is insipid, or
which has no salt in it. From whence some have made this exposition of the
place. That though the thing with which these Prophets disguised the soul
actions of their times were Holiness, and Religion; and though it be true,
that we may say of Religion, as Christ said of the Teachers of it, that it is
the salt of the world, yet this salt sprinkled upon forbidden enterprises,
leaves off to be sale, and loses its savor. To speak yet more plainly to you;
Holiness it self applied to wicked designs, leaves off to be Holiness. And
they who put sanctity to that vile use, to serve only as the paint to make the
unlawful projects of others seem fair, add thus much guilt of their own to
the others, that they turn Religion it self into their crime. And I may
confidently say, that they had been much more innocent, if in such forbidden
cases they had been less holy.

Saint Jerome translates the words thus: Propheta obliniebant eos absque
temperamento, The Prophets dawbed them with a thing which would not piece, or
unite, or make a mixture. From whence some have given this Interpretation of
the place, That however religious pretenses may be found out to mask
irreligious deeds, and however Holiness may be made the vermilion to impiety,
yet there can never such a mixture, or composition pass between them, that it
shall cease to be Impiety, because it has piety joined to it. But rather as
gilt upon false coins makes it so much the more counterfeit; or as Tin
silvered over is so much the more Treason, because it is silvered over; and
Copper so much the more deserves hanging, because it wears the Kings Image,
and the Inscription on it is written in golden Letters: So it is with bad
actions silvered over with Religion; they are so far from becoming good,
that they double their iniquity, and become so much the more counterfeit. And
as the spirit of Delusion is so much the more the spirit of Delusion, when he
transformes himself into an Angel of Light; so foul projects are never
fouler, then when there is a glory and luster put upon them. In all such
disproportioned Commixtures, where the worse is sure to vitiate, and corrupt
the better, we may not only ask the Question, What agreement there can be
between light and darkness, or what fellowship Christ can have with Belial?
but we may boldly pronounce, that light thus joined with darkness, loses its
rays, and becomes darkness. And that Christ thus joined and matched with
Belial, degenerates into a Deceiver, and becomes Belial too.

The third and last translation of this place, (which our English Translators
have followed) is that of Va^ablus, who renders the words thus, Prophetae ejus
linebant eos luto infirmo, Her Prophets (that is, the Prophets of Jerusalem)
have dawbed them with infirm, untempered mortar: That is, as Dyonisius
Carthusianus, very fully expounds the Metaphor, Confirmabant eos in errore
persuasionibus non solidis, sed fucatis: The Prophets confirmed them in their
errors with weak, untempered Reasons. All which several Interpretations do
agree in this one and the same undeniable sense; That such is the conscious,
guilty, unjustifiable nature of sin, so suspicious and fearful it is to be
seen publicly in its own shape, that it not only deals with all sinners,
as it did with the first two, upon a mutual sight, and discovery of
themselves, shows them ashamed, and naked to one another; but to cover and
veyle their nakedness and shame, sends them to such poor, frail,
unprofitable shelters, as Bushes, and Fig Leaves: which though they should grow
in Paradise it self, or should be gathered from the same holy ground, in which
Innocence, and the Tree of Life were planted together, yet applied to hide an
oppression, or plucked to cover a sacrilege, they will still retain the fading,
transitory nature of leaves, which is to decay, and wither, between the hands
of the Gatherer, and lose their color and freshness in the very laying on;
and to every well rectified, religiously judging eye, instead of being a veyle
to hide, will become one of the ways to betray a nakedness.

To speak yet more plainly to you, and to lay it as home as I can to every one
of your consciences, who hear me this day; If the design and project be
unlawful, and contrary to Gods Commandments, let there be a Prophet found to
pronounce it holy, let there be a Statist found to pronounce it convenient, let
Reason of State be joined to Religion, and public utility to quotations of
Scripture; Lastly, let it be adorned with all the varnishes and paintings taken
either from Policy or Christianity, which may render it fair and amiable to
the deluded multitude, yet such is the deceiveable nature of such projects,
such a worm, such a self destroyer grows up with them, that, like Jonas
Gourd, something cleaves to their root, which makes their very foundation
ruinous, and fatal to them. At best they are but painted Tabernacles of clay,
o^ palaces built with untemp red mortar. The first discovery of their
hypocrisy turns them into heaps, and the fate of the scarlet whore in the
Revelation befalls them, whose filthiness and abominations were no sooner
opened and divulged, but she was dismembered, and torn in pieces by her own
Idolaters and Lovers.

Here then, if any expect that I should apply what has been said to our
times, and that I should take the liberty of some of our Modern Prophets, who
have by their rude Invectives from the Pulpit made what ever Names are High,
and Great, and Sacred, and Venerable among us, cheap, and vile, and odious in
the ears of the people; If any, I say, expect that by way of parallel of one
people with another, I should here audaciously undertake to show that what ever
Arts were used to make bad projects seem plausible, and holy in this Prophets
time, have been practiced to make the like bad projects appear plausible, and
holy now; Or that in our times the like Irreligious Compliance, has past
between some Spiritual men, and Lay, to cast things into the present
Confusion, I hope they will not take it ill, if I deceive their Expectation.
For my own part, as long as there is such a piece of Scripture as this, Exodus
Diis non maledices, thou shall not revile the Gods, (that is, thou shall not
only not defame them by lying, but shall not speak all truths of them which
may turn to their Infamy, and reproach;) I shall always observe it as a piece
of obligatory Religion, not to speak evil, no not of offending dignities. Much
less shall I adventure to shoot from this sacred place my own ill-built
Iealousies, and Suspicions, for Realities and Truths: Which if I should do,
'twould certainly savor too much of his Spirit of Detraction, who having lost
his modesty, as well as Religion and Obedience, to the Scandal and just
offense of all loyal Ears here present, was not afraid to forget the other
part of that Text, which says, Nec maledices principi in populo meo, Thou
shall not reproach the Ruler of my people.

Yet because so many strange Prophets, of our wild, licentious times, have
preached up almost five years Commotion for a Holy war; And because, in truth,
no war can be Holy whose cause is not justifiable; If I should grant them
what they have proclaimed from so many Pulpits, that the Cause for which they
have all this while, some of them, so zealously fought, as well as preached,
has been Liberty of Conscience; or, in other terms, for the Reformation of a
corrupted, degenerated Church; Or to speak yet more like themselves, for the
Restitution of the Protestant Religion grown Popish; if I say, all this should
be granted them, yet certainly, if Scripture, Gospel Fathers, Schoolmen,
Protestant Divines of the most reverend, and sober mark, and Reason it self
have not deceived me, all Sermons which make Religion, how pure soever, to be
a just cause of a War, do but dawb the undertakers with untempered Mortar.

For however it be an Article in the Turkish Creed, that they may propagate
their Law by their Spear; yet for us who are Christians, to be of this
Mahumetane persuasion, were to transfer a piece of the Alcoran into a piece of
the Gospel. And to make Christ not only the Author of all those Massacres,
which from his time to ours, have worn that Holy Impression, but 'twere to
make him over-litterally guilty of his own saying, that he came not to send
peace, but a Sword into the World For though it be to be granted, that nothing
can more conduce to the future happiness of men, then to be of the true
Religion; yet I do not find that Christ has given power to any to compel
men to be happy; or commanded, that force should be used for the collation of
such a Benefit. All the ways more proportioned for the atchieving of such an
end, he has in his Gospel prescribed, namely preaching, and persuasion, and
Holy example of life. He bade his Apostles go, and teach all Nations; not stir
up one Nation against another, or divide Kingdoms against themselves, if they
would not receive the Gospel. This had been plainly to join the Sword of the
flesh, to the Sword of the Spirit. Which to save their Lives, and Fortunes,
might perhaps, have made some Hypocrites, and dissemblers without, who would
nevertheless, have remained Pagans, and Infidels within. In short, some things
in the Excell^ncy, and Height of the Doctrines of Christian Religion being no
way demonstrable from Humane principles, but depending for the credit, and
evidence of their truth upon the Authority of Christ's miracles, conveyed along
in Tradition and Story, cannot in a natural way of Argumentation force assent.
Since, as long as there is such a thing in men, as liberty of understanding,
all arguments, even in a Preaching, and persuasive way, which carry not
necessity of demonstration in their Forehead, may reasonably (...) rejected.
Much less have I met with it in all my progress of D^vinity or Philosophy,
convincingly maintained, that men upon every slight disagreement, or dissent in
Religion, are to be whipped, or beaten into a Consent; or that the plunde of men's
Estates is a fit medium to beget a Belief or persuasion in their Minds.

Here then, should I once more grant the charge of these Prophets to be true (a
very heavy one I confess) that the Protestant Religion among us, had very
far taken wing, and had almost resigned its place in this Island to the
Romish Superstition. Nay, suppose (which is yet far worse) that a great, and
considerable part of this Kingdom, had through the Corruption of the times,
not only relapst from the Protestant Religion in particular, but from the
Christian Faith in general; suppose, I say, (which is the worst that can be
supposed) that they who have so frequently of late been branded for Papists,
had outright turned Infidels, however in such a case, that War which fights
against the Errors of men thus lost, and proposes to it self no other end
but their Repentance, and Conversion, may to some perhaps, seem to wear the
Helmet of their Salvation, and the Army which thus strives to save men by the
sword, may to some seem an Army of Apostles, yet I do not find that to come
into the field with an armed Gospel, is the way chosen by Christ to make
Proselites. The Scripture indeed, tells us of some who took the Kingdom of
Heaven by violence; But of any, who by violence may have it imposed upon them,
it is no where recorded. But alas, my Brethren, (if I may speak freely to you in
the defense of that defamed Religion, in which I was borne and to which I
should account it one of the greatest blessings that God can bestow upon me, if
I might, with the Holy Fathers of our Reformation, fall a Sacrifice) that which
these men call Idolatry, and Superstition, and by names yet more odious, was to
far from having shrined it self in our Church; So little of that dross, and
Ore, and tin, which has lately filled our best Assemblies with so much noise
and Clamor, was to be found among us, that with the same unfainednesse that I
would confess my sins to God, and hope to obtain pardon for them. I do
profess, that I cannot think the Sun, in all his heavenly course, for so many
years, beheld a Church more blessed with purity of Religion for the Doctrines of
it, or better established for the Government, and Discipline of it, then ours
was. And therefore, if I were presently to enter into dispute with the greatest
Patriarch among these Prophets, who, even against the Testimony of sense it
self, will yet perversely strive to prove that our Church stood in such need
of Reformation, that the growing Superstitions of it could not possibly be
expiated but by so much Civil War. I should not doubt with modesty enough to
prove back again to him, that all such weak, irrational Arguments as have
only his zeal for their Logic, are not only composed of untempered Mortar;
But that in seeing those spots and blemishes in our Church, which no good
Protestants else could ever see, 'twill be no unreasonable inference to
conclude him in the number of those erroneous Prophets here in the Text. Who to
the great Scandal and abuse of their Office, and Function, did not only
palliate, and gild over the public sins of their times, but did it like
Prophets, and saw Vanity too. Which is the next part of the Text; And is next
to succeed in your attentions.

If the Phil^sophers rule be true, that things admit of definitions according
to their essences, and that the nearer they approach to 3. (...) first abuse
^eir functi
nothing, the nearer they d^aw to no Description; to go about to give you an
exact definition of a thing impossible to be defined, or to endeavor to
describe a thing to you, which has been so much disputed whether it be a
thing, were to be like those Prophets here in the Text; first, to see Vanity my
self, and then to persuade you that there is a Reality, and Substance in it.
Yet to let you see by the best lights I can, what is here meant by Vanity, I
will join an inspired to a Heathen Philosopher. Solomon, (whose whole Book of
Ecclesiastes is but a Tract of Vanity) as we may gather from the instances
there set down, places vanity, in mutability, and change. And because all
things of this lower world consist in vicissitude, and change (so far, that
as Seneca said of Rivers, Bis in idem flumen non descendimus, we cannot step
twice into the same stream; so we may say of most Sublunarie things, whose very
beings do so resemble streams, ut vix idem bis conspiciamus, that we can scarce
behold some things twice) that wisest among the sons of men, whose Philosophy
was as spacious as there were things in nature to be known, calls all things
under the Sun, vanity, because all things under the Sun are so liable to
inconstancy and change, that they fleet away, and vanish, whilst they are
considered; and hasten to their decay whilst we are in the Contemplation of
them.

Aristotle desines vanity to be (...), Every thing which has not some
reasonable end or purpose belonging to it. For this reason, he calls
emptiness, and vacuity, vanity; Because there is so little use of it in
nature, that to expel it, things have an inclination placed in them to
perform actions against their kind. Earth to shut out a vacuity, is taught to
fly up like fire; and fire to destroy emptiness, is taught to fall down like
earth. And for this reason, another Philosopher has said, that colors, had
there not been made eyes to see them, and sounds, had there not been ears
made to hear them, had been vanities, and to no purpose. And what they said of
sounds, and colors, we may say of all things else; not only all things under
the Sun, but the Sun it self, who is the great (...), the eye of the world,
without another eye to behold him, or to know him to be so, had been one of
Aristotle's vanities.

As then in Nature those things have deserved the name of vanities, which
either have no reasonable end, or purpose belonging to them, or else are
altogether subject to Mutability, and change, so it is in policy, and Religion
too. To do things by weak, unreasonable, inconstant principles, principles
altogether unable to support, and upold the weight, and structure of public
business built upon them; or to do things, with no true substantial, solid,
useful, but a mere imaginary good end belonging to them; As for example, to
alter the whole frame and Government of a State, not that things may be mended,
but that they may run in another course then they did before; or to change the
universally received Government of a Church merely for change sake, and that
things may be new, not that they may be better, is a vanity, of which I know
not whether these Prophets, here in the Text, were guilty; but when I consider
the unreasonable changes already procured, and the yet farther endless changes
as unreasonably still pursued by the Prophets of our times, I find so much
vacuity, and emptiness in their desires, so much interested zeal, and so
little dis-interested reason, so much novelty mistaken for reformation, and
withal so much confusion preferred before so much decency, and order, that I
cannot but apply the Wise man's Ingemination to them and call their proceedings
Vanity of vanities.

For if we may call weak, groundless, improbable surmises and conjectures,
vanities, have not these Prophets dealt with the minds of vu^gar people, as
Melancholy men use to deal with the clouds, raised monstrous forms and shapes
to fright them, where no fear was? Have they not presented strange visions to
them? Idolatry in a Church window, Superstition in a white Surplice, Mass in
our Common Prayer Book, and Antichrist in our Bishops? Have they not also to
make things seem hideous in the State, cast them into strange, fantastical,
Chymera figures? And have they not, like the fabulous, walking Spirits we read
of, created imaginary Apparitions to the people from such things, flight,
unsolid melting Bodies as Air? And for all this if you enquire upon what true
stable principle, or ground, either taken from reason (which is now preached to
be a saecular, profane, heathen thing) or from Scripture, (which is now made
to submit to the more unerring rule of fancy) they have proceeded; or what has
been the true cause, of their so vain imaginations, you will find, that
(contrary to all the rules of right judgment, either common to men, or
Christians) they have been guided merely by that Causa per accidens, that
fallible, erroneous, accidental cause, which has always been the mother of
mistakes. Socrate ambulante coruscavit; Because it lightened when Socrates took
the Air, one in the company thought that his walking was the occasion of the
flash: this certainly, was a very vain and foolish inference; yet not more
vain and foolish then theirs, who have ^right people to conclude, that all
pictures in Church-windowes are ^dols, because some out of a misguided
devotion, have worshipped them; or that Surplices, and the like Church Vestures
are superstitious, because some superstitious men wear them; or that our Comm^
^rayer book is Popery, because part of it is to be found in the (...) of
that Church; or that the government of the Church (...) bishops is
Antichristian because in their belief, Antichrist al^ady is, or, when he comes
into the world, shall be a Bishop.

For here, if I should press them in a rational, logical way, (un^sie they
will call Argument, and Logic, and Syllogism, Supersti^ ^oo, and banish
Reason as well as Liturgy out of the Church) ^o think (as they do) that
Churches are unhallowed by reason of their ornaments, or to persuade people to
refrain them, because some out of a blind zeal have paid worship to the
Windows, is to me a fear ^s on reasonable, as theirs was, who refused to go
to Sea, because ^ere was a Painter in the City, who limned Shipwracks. For
certainly, if that be all the reason they have to banish Images out of the
Church, because some (if yet there have been any so stupid) have made them
Idols; by the same reason, we should not now have a Sun, or Moon, or Stars in
the Firmament, but they should long sin^ have dropped from Heaven, because some
of the deluded Heathen, worshipped them. And if that be all the reason they have
to prove Surplices, or white vestments superstitious, because Papists wear
them, (pardon the meannesse of the subject, I beseech you, which is score^
worthy of a confutation) why do not they also conclude Linnes to be
superstitious, because Papists shift, and so make cleanliness to be as
unlawful as Surplices or Copes? Thirdly, to say our Co^ prayer-booke is
Popish, because it is so good, that some in the Church of Rome have praised it,
is to me an accusation as senseless, as theirs, who accused the General of
their Army of treason against the State, because his enemies out of the
admiration of his virtues, erected a Statue to him. Lastly, to call the
government of our Church by Bishops, Antichristian, because that Church which
they make to be the seat of Antichrist is so governed, is to me such a weak
Imputation, as by the same reason makes all the Christian Governments of the
world pagan. And therefore to be utterly extirpated, and banished out of the
world, because in some points of Government they resemble the Commonwealths of
Infidels. To all which vain, unlearned, impotent, shallow objections raised
against the Church, when I have added their vain, improbable conjectures, and
objections raised against the State too; Where things possible, nay in a
civil, politic way, almost impossible, have been urged, and cited as things
present, and done; Where, because some Princes have been Tyrants, and grievous
to their Subjects, people in serene, easy, halcyon times, have bin made
believe that an Egyptian bondage, and Thraldom was ready to fall upon them;
And where, because there was a time when a bunch of Grapes or two extraordinary
was gathered for the public, people, after so many reparations, so many acts
of recompense, have been entertained, that those few, irregular Grapes were but
the prologues, and forerunners to the intended rape which should in time have
been committed upon the whole future, following vine; I cannot look upon the
Prophets who have thus preached vanity to them, thus amuzed them with false,
imaginary dangers, but under that description which the Prophet Jeremy has
made of them, in his 23. chap. at the 26. verse; where he calls them Prophets
of the deceit of their own hearts, Seers who coin their own visions. Men who
relying wholly upon the uncertain illumination of their own fancies, which
they call the Spirit, and having never acquainted themselves with the true
ways, and principles either of reason, or Religion, which should clear their
minds, and take off the gross filme which beclouds their understandings, make
it their business and profession to deceive themselves, and others. Building
false conclusions upon weak, irrational premises; and supporting improbable
conjectures, by fictions, and untruths, Which suggests to me the second abuse
of the Ministry, and function of these Prophets here in the Text. Which was,
that they not only saw vanity, but divined lies too.

The thing in nature which makes the expression hold true, that man is (...), a
sociable creature, is that we are able to repay 4. ^he second a^e of their
^nction.
conversation with conversation; and have a privilege bestowed upon us, beyond
that of beasts, that we can unite, and join our selves to one another by
speech. Without which, we, who now make rational assemblies, and
Commonwealths, had been only a rude, discomposed multitude, and Herd of men.
Nay, without Language to express our selves, and to associate our selves to
one another in Discourse, every man had been thus like the first, that he had
been alone, and solitary in the world. For where commerce and intercourse, and
exchange of minds is denied, and where all that passes between us of men is
that we are Alter alteri spectaculum, only a dumb, speechless show, and
spectacle to one another; meetings, and numerous Assemblies are but so many
unpeopled Wildernesses and deserts. And where all that we enjoy of one another
company is only the dull sight, and presence, every one of us may reckon
himself single in a full theater and crowd.

As speech, then, was at first bestowed upon us that we might hold
conversation, and discourse with one another, so there was a Law imposed upon
us too, that we should not deceive one another by our sppeech. * (...), It Is
Aristotl^s definition of speech, which has a piece of commutative (...)
Justice in it. Words, says he, are the images of thoughts. That is, says the
Divine, they always ought, or should be so. The mind is thereby enabled to
walk forth of the Body, and to make visits to another separated, divided mind.
Our Souls, also, assisted by Speech, are able to meet, and converse, and hold
intercourse with other Souls. Nay, you must not wonder at the expression, if I
say, that as God at first conveyed our minds, and Souls into us by breathing
into us the breath of Life, so by Speech he has enabled us, as often as we
discourse, to breath them reciprocally back again into each other. For never
man yet spoke Truth to another, and heard that other speak Truth back again
to him, but for that time the saying of Minutius Felix was fulfilled, Crederes
duas esse animas in eodem corpore, there were enterchangeably two minds in one
Body.

But this (as I said before) is only when Truth is spoken. Otherwise, as the
Question was asked of fire, Igne quid utilius? What more useful gift did God
ever bestow upon us then Fire? And yet the same Poet tells us, that some have
employed it to burn Houses. So we may say of Words, Sermon quid utilius? What
more beneficial gift of nature did God ever bestow upon us then Speech? It Is
the thing which does outwardly distinguish us from Beasts, and which renders
us, like the Angels, (who discourse by the mere Acts and Revelation of their
wills) transparent and Crystal to one another. But then Speech mis-imployed,
and put to a deceitful use, may turn Crystal into Iet. And put into a Lie,
may raise a shade, and cloud of Discourse, and Obscurity there, where there
should be only a Translucency and clearenesse. In short, some men, like the
Fish which blacks the stream in which it swims, and casts an Ink from its
bowels to hide it self from being seen, make Words, which were ordained to
reveal their Thoughts, disguise them: And so like the Father of lies, deal
with their hearers, as he dealt with our first Parents, appear to them, not in
their own, but in a false, and borrowed Shape; And thereby make them embrace
an Imposture and Falsehood, in the figure, and Appearance of a Reality and Truth.

An offense so fit to be banished out of the World, that after I have said, that
two thus talking, and deceitfully mingling Speech, are some thing more then
Absent to one another; After I have said, that the liar is injurious to things,
as well as persons; Which carry the same proportion to our minds, as Colors
do to our eyes; And have a natural aptness in them to be understood as they
are, but are for that time not understood, because not rightly represented: I
must say too that there is injustice done to humane society. Since in every
untruth that is told, and believed, one man's Lie, becomes another man's Error,
whereby a piece of his natural Right is taken from him; which Right is by the
Casuists called Iudicandi libertas. He is disabled to make a Right judgment
of what he hears. His belief betraies him: And the Speaker thus fallaciously
conversing with him, is not for that time, his companion, but his deceiver.

But when Religion shall be joined ^o a lie, and when a Palsehood shall be
attit'd, and clothed with Holiness; When they, whose profession it is to
convey Embassies, and Messages, and voices from Heaven, shall convey only
cheats, and delusions, and impostures from thence; though I cannot much blame
the credulity of the Simple, who suffer themselves to be thus religiously
abused, and like men who see Iuglers, think their money best spent, where they
are best cosened; yet, certainly, the deceivers themselves do add this over
and above to the sin of Lying, that whereas others hold only the Truth of
things, these men hold the Truth of God in unrighteousness.

And such it seems, were these Prophets here in the Text. Who the better to
comply with the Public sins of their times, did put untruths, and falsehoods
to the same holy use, that others did sacred Inspirations, and Dreams.
Fictions, the bastard creatures of their own corrupt fancies, were delivered
as Prophecies infused into them from Heaven, and he who fained most, and could
lie with the most religious Art, was thought to have the greatest measure of
the Spirit. Prosperous successes were foretold to wicked undertakings, and the
Prophets dealt with the people, as some bold Almanack-makers deal with us;
coined soul, or fair weather as they pleased to set the times, and then
referred it to casualty, and chance to come to pass.

And can I pass over this part of the Text, and not say that there have been
such Prophets among us in our times? Unless things should come about again,
that the devil should the second time get a Commission to become a lying
Spirit in the mouth of the Prophets, with a promise from the Almighty, that he
should prevail too, were it possible that so much cosenage should so long
pass, for so much Truth? Have we not seen the Prophet Micah's prophetical
curse fulfilled upon this Kingdom? It Is in ^his 2. Chap. at the 11. ver. where
he says, that if a man walking in the Spirit, and falsehood, do lie, he shall
be the Prophet of this people. Certainly, my Brethren, when I consider how much
Romance, how much Gazette, how much Legend has for some years past for
Sermon; When I consider (even with tears in my eyes) the many false aspersions
stuck upon our defamed, wronged University, by some, who (even against the
light of their eyes as well as Consciences) have charged the Breasts that gave
them suck with infected poisoned milk; And have belyed their spotless Mother,
as if she were turned Strumpet; or as if it were grown a place from whence
piety, and gifts and true Religion, have long since taken slight; a place
which needs Conversion, and which affords nothing but dangerous education; of
which crime, I confess, I know not whether ^he be guilty, unless it be for
bringing forth such abortive lying Sons, who thus make it part of their
Religion to revile Her; when I farther consider, that they have not spared
Majesty it self, though clothed, and armed by God with all the sacred Guards
which should protect it from the venom of such disloyal, slanderous mouths;
when I yet farther consider the seeming sanctity of the persons that do this,
with what Holy passion, what inspired zeal, what composure of face, what
contention of voice, what earnest Rhetoric of hand, What Language of Saints,
they do this; Lastly, when I consider how many there are, who, driving a
gainful Trade in fictions, (fictions as strange as his, who wrote of Virgins
transformed to Bay-trees) use to lie as devoutly from such holy ground as this,
as others use to pray; And when withal I do observe that there is sprung up a
certain Sect of Hearers among us, who as zealously lend attention to lies, as
their Preachers utter them; I cannot but take the Philosophers liberty to my
self, and pronounce of such Congregations, as he did of Markets; that they are
places where people meet to deceive, and be deceived.

And as in Shops, and Markets, Religion is sometimes put to help out faulty
Ware, and the name of God is cited to make up measure and weight, and part of
the false light by which the Buyer is over-reacht, is the seeming sanctity of
the Seller: So it is here. A certain religious, holy, sacramental cozenage
passes between Preacher and People. And that they may the more solemnly be
cozened, these Prophets deal with their Fictions, as the Devil dealt with his
temptations, when he would have persuaded our Savior Christ to cast himself
down from a Pinnacle, cloth them with Scripture, saying, Thus it is written,
and, thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has not spoken; which brings me to
the third, and last abuse of their Profession, and Ministerial Function. Which
is to entitle God to their vanities, and lies. To which I shall only add
somebriefe Application of some things in this Sermon to our selves, and so
commend you to God.

Lucian, I remember in his (...), or false Prophet, tells us of a certain
Mountebanke Cheater, who the more artificially to deceive the People, did set
up an Oracle of his own Fancying, and (...) ^jury of^ to God.
contrivance; in which he was both the God, and Priest to the People who came
to enquire. And, like the Priests of those other true Oracles, which we read
of, where the Sybill never gave answers till she was first entranced, and felt
a kind of sacred fury, and possession within her self; so he, (as often as he
pleased to delude the People) had his sacred ragings, and trances too; and
appeared to those who came to consult with him, filled with a kind of holy
fury, and possessed with the God that spoke through him.

Me thinks, these Prophets here in this Text, were just such Iuglers, who, in
preaching their own Fancies for Gods dictates, did not only set up a false
Oracle, in which they were to the People, both the Deity, and the Priest; but
they divined untruths to them, in the same holy, solemn, Prophetical form
and way, as others did truths. Lies had a kind of holy trance, and ecstasy,
and rapture put to them; and Falsehoods came from them in a kind of sacred
madness, and possession As often as they had a mind to deceive the People,
they could presently raise to themselves their own inspirations, and a^ often
as a Plot, or Project was to be brought about, they could ^ently snatch
themselves up into the third Heaeven; and could (...) from thence as full of
holy fiction, and imposture, as S^. Paul did of astonishment, and wonder. In
the delivery of which Fictions to the People, ^here was thus much holy cozenage
more added, that the ^ips of the Reporters seemed for that time to be touched
with a Coal from the Altar; and God by the secret instuence and instinct of
his holy Spirit, was thought to be the kindler of that Coal.

An injury of that (hipocriticall, shall I say? or rather) bold, presumptuous,
impudent nature, that when I have spoken of it the most gently I can, I must
say it is something more then the breach of the third Commandment. For there we
are only bid not to take Gods name in vain; that is, not to mingle him with
our ordinary, rash, light, unpremeditated discourses, or not to forswear our
selves by him, or cite him to be a witness to our perjuries. But they who
speak falsely in his name, and vent their own sinister Plots for his
inspirations; they, who, when they should be the messengers of truth, and the
reprovers of sin, shall stand as the messengers of of falsehood, and
encouragers of public wrongs, between him, and the people; do not only take
his name in vain, and (as much as in them lies) draw a cheapnesse, and
contempt upon it; but do commit a sin worse then perjury, for that only calls
him to testify, and bear witness, but these men make him the Principal, and
first Author of a Lie: And so stick the reproach of a weak, impotent vice upon
him, common to none, but base, servile, perfideous natures, and slaves.

You may read in the old Testament, that the Priest of those times, among his
other Ornaments, wore two precious Stones in his Breast Plate, called the Urim
and Thummim. Through which, according as they did at times cast a bright, or
dimmer luster, God revealed his pleasure, or displeasure to the People; and
spoke to them by the sparkle of a Jewel, as he did at other times by the mouth
of a Prophet. You may read too, that after the Tabernacle was set up. God had a
Throne, or Mercy-seat placed for him, between the Wings of two Cherubims, which
veiled it; from whence at certain times he sent forth Oracles. Here then, let
me put this case to you.

Suppose the Priest, who wore the Breast Plate, should have belyed his Jewels,
and when the people came to enquire of him, should have interpreted a pale, for
a bright Ray to the people; or suppose he should have taken out the true, and
have placed two false counterfeit Jewels in his Breast Plate; and should have
taught them, by a kind of secret conspiracy, not to sparkle by the certainty,
and holiness of their own impartial Fires, but according to the desires, and
Plot, and Stratagem of the Consulters; had not this been plainly to set up an
illegitimate Anti-urim, and Thummim, which should have cast a false, as the
other did a true luster? Nay, had not this been to make God, who used to
appear, and reveal himself in these Jewels, as he did to Moses in the Bush,
in a flame of Fire, to become like one of those erraticall, uncertain, wandering
night-fires, of which Aristotle speaks in his Meteors; Fires, which shine only
to lead Travelers out of the way?

Once more put the case, that the Priest should have usurped the Throne, and
Mercy-seat of God, and when the people came to enquire, should have placed
himself between the Cherubins, and should from thence have uttered such false,
pleasing Oracles, as he knew would most suite, and comply with the humor, and
Interest of the Inquirers; Had not this been most insolently, to thrust
himself into the place of God, and for that time to depose him from his
Sanctuary or holy Place, and to assume his business and peculiar Office to
himself? Nay, had not this been the way in time, to draw the same bad report
upon him, which once passed upon the Oracle at Delphos, Apud Apollinem ut mihi
videtur, mendacia emuntur, men paid for lies at Delphos, and sacrificed to
Apollo to be cozoned and deceived?

That this was the sin of these Prophets here in the Text is evident from the
words of it, and from their coherence with the rest of the Chapter. Who, (as if
they had entered into the same secret compact with God, as they had with their
other Complotters of those times) made no other use of their profession, but
only to humor great men, and to make Sale and Gain of their Prophecies.
Enthusiasmes, and Visions, and Dreams, and Revelations, were uttered, as some
Mechanic men utter their Commodities, to him that would give most. The
Sanctuary, in plain terms, was made a place of Merchandise; only the VVare
was Spiritual. And the difference between Simon Magus's bargain with the
Apostles, and the Bargain here in the Text, was only this, that here both
parties consented; The one sinisterly bought, the other sinisterly sold the
holy Ghost.

An offense, my Brethren, so directly against the Truth, and Veracity, and
Majesty of God, so near, (^it not outright) that never to be pardoned sin
against the holy Ghost, that I am sorry I must say, that all the defense that
can be made for it, is, that our times have brought forth prophets who have
taken the same course.

For now, as if the Scripture were in a perverse, (...)* sense the second time
to be fulfilled, that the (...) things of the world shall confourd the wise,
and that (...), and (...), and things that are not, shall bring to naught
Realities, and (...), and things that are, he is not only thought to be the
holiest man, who can lie most in a holy Cause, but he thrives best, and makes
the best spiritual M^kets, who most belyes God to his Glory. To what
unweighed, aerie scruples, and vanities, is he entitled? How is his Scripture,
for want of learning to understand it aright, abused, and made the bellows to
blow a fire, fit rather to be quenched by the repentance, and tears of the
Incendiaries, and feeders of it? How many are there who daily urge text for
Bloodshed, and undertake to prove the slaughter of their Brethren, (I had
almost said of their lawful Prince and Sovereign too) warrantable by the
Word of God? What bold Libell, or Pamphlet has not for some years railed in
a holy style? And what Sermons have not been spiced with a a holy sedition?
Has it not (even to the ruin of one of the most flourishing Kingdoms of the
world) been made a piece of Religion to divide it against it self, and to
divorce a King from his People, and his people from their peace? Have not men
been taught that they cannot give God his due, if they give Caesar his? And
that the only way left to preserve in themselves, the grace and favor of the
one, is quite to deface and blot out the image and superscription of the other?
And have not the Teachers of these strange, unchristian Doctrines, delivered
them to the people in the holy stole of Prophets? Have they not called a most
unnatural, civil War, the burden of the Lord? Have they not quite inverted
the injunction of the Apostle, and turning his affirmative into their negative,
have they not (directly contrary to his word) said, Thus says the Lord, honor
not the King?

My brethren, let me speak freely to you, as in the presence of God, who
knows that I hate the sin of these Prophets here in the Text, too much to
flatter. Or if I would be so irreligiously servile, you your selves know that
the present condition of things is at too low an ^bbe, for me or any man else
to hope to thrive by such a false Engine. If there be such a thing as a Waking
providence over the actions of men, (which, I confess, an unresolved man in
such irregular times as these might be tempted to question) or if there be
such a thing in nature as Truth, with a promise annexed to it by the God of
Truth, that first or last it shall prevail, unless by a timely, and
seasonable repentance of their abuse of the Name of God, and of their many bold
reproaches thrown upon his Anointed, they divert their punishment: Something,
me thinks, whispers to me, (I dare not be so confident of my own infallible
sanctity, as to call it the Spirit of God) but something whispers to me, and
bids me in the Prophet Ezechiels words in another place, Prophecy against
these Prophets; and say, * VVoe to the foolish Prophets who have followed their
own spirit, and have seen nothing. Because with lies ^ek. 13. 3.
they have made the heart of the Righteous sad, whom the Lord has not made
sad; and have strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return
from his evil way.

Or if this will not awake them, but that they will still be guilty of the
sin of these Prophets here in the Text, they must not take it ill, if, not I,
but the holy Ghost (which they so much boast of, and by whom they so
confidently pretend to speak) pass this sad sentence on them and their
complyers, by the mouth of two other Prophets. 1. As for their complyers (if
any such there have been) who have said to the* Seers, See not, and to the
Prophets, Prophecy not unto ^ay 30. 10.
us right things, but speak to us smooth things, Prophecy deceit; let them
hear with trembling what the Prophet Esaias says in his 30. Chapter at the 12.
and 13. Verses. Because (says he) ye despise my word, and trust in oppression,
and perverseness, and stay thereon; Therefore, thus says the holy one of
Israel, This iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling ^ut
in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, at an instant. The meaning of
which prophetical judgment will be easily understood of any, who shall
consideringly mark the beginning and progress of the Chapter to the context
where it is uttered and denounced.

Next, as for the Prophets themselves, who for poor, low, earthly interests,
and respects, have suffered themselves to be misled, let them with confusion
of face, hear what the Prophet Jeremy says in the 23 Chapter, at the 32.
verse. A place no less remarkable then the former. As for those, says he, who
do prophecy false d^eames, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by
their lies, and by their lightness yet I sent them not, nor commanded them;
behold, I am against them, says the Lord, and they shall not profit this
people at all, says the Lord God.

The conclusion then of this Sermon, shall be this. Fathers, and The conc sion.
brethren of this University: I presume it could not but seem strange to you,
to hear your Manners, and Religion, as well as Studies, and Learning not long
since publicly reproved, and preached against out of this Pulpit, by men, who
profess themselves, indeed, to be Prophets, but discovering to you so little,
as they did of the abilities of Prophets sons, could not but seem to you very
unfit Reformers, or instructers of this place. I presume also, that with a
serious grief of heart, you cannot but resent, that there should be thought
to be such a dearth, and scarcity of able, virtuous men among us, that the
Great Council of this Kingdom, in pity to our wants, should think it
needful to send us men better gifted, to teach us how to preach. What the
negligence, or s^oth, or want of industry, in this place has been, which
should deserve this great exprobration of our Studies from them; or how one of
the most famous Springs of Learning, which of late Europe knew, should by the
mis-representation of any false reporting men among us, fall so low in the
esteem of that great Assembly, as to be thought to need a Tutor, I know not:
Nor will I here over-curiously enquire into the ungiftednesse of the persons,
who have drawn this reproof upon us, or say that some of us, perhaps might
have made better use of our time, and of the bounty of our Founders, then by
wrapping up our Talent in a Napkin, to draw the same reproach upon our
Colleges, which once passed upon Monasteries, which grew at length to be a
Proverb of Idleness. But that which I would say to you, is this: Solomon, in
one of his Proverbs, sends the sluggish man to the Spider, to learn diligence.
Take it not ill, I beseech you, if I send some of you (for this is a piece of
exhortation which does concern very few) who have been less industrious to
these vain, but active Prophets, which I have all this while preached against.
Mistake me not, I do not send you to them, to learn knowledge of them. For
you know it is a received axiom among most of them, that any unlearned,
unstudied man, assisted with the Spirit, and his English Bible, is sufficiently
gifted for a Preacher. Nor do I send you to them to be taught their bad Arts,
or that you should learn of them to dawbe the public sins of your times; or
comply with the insatiable, itching Ears of those whom St. Paul describes in
the fourth Chapter of his second Epistle to Timothy, at the third verse, where
he says, that the time should come, when men should not endure sound Doctrine,
but after their own lusts, should heap to themselves teachers. A prophecy,
which I wish were not too truly come to pass among us; where Studies and
learning, and all those other excellent helps, which tend to the right
understanding of the Scripture, and thereby to the preaching of sound Doctrine,
are thought so unnecessary by some Mechanicke, vulgar men, that no Teachers
suit with their sick, queasie Palats, who preach not that stuff, for which
all good Sch^llers deservedly count them mad: I do not, I say, send you to them
for any of these reasons. But certainly, something there is which you may
learn of them; which St. Paul himself commends to you, in the second verse of
the forementioned Chapter. If you desire to know what it is, it is an
unwearied, frequent, sedulous diligence of Preaching the Word of God, if need
be, as they do: In season, out of season, with reproof of sin, where ever you
find it, and with exhortation to goodness where ever you find it too; and
this to be done at all times, though not in all places. For certainly, as long
as there are Churches to be had, I cannot think the next heap of Turfes, or
the next pile of Stones, to be a very decent Pulpit; or the next Rabble of
People, who will find ears to such a Pulpit, to be a very seemly
Congregation. For let me tell you my brethren, that the power of these men's
industries, never defatigated, has been so great, that I cannot think the
mild Conqueror (whose Captives we now are, and to whose praise, for his
civil usage of this afflicted University, I as the unworthiest member of it,
cannot but apply that Epithet) owes more to the Sword, and courage of all his
other Soldiers, for the obtaining of this, or any other Garrison, then to the
Sweats, and active Tongues of these doubly armed Prophets; who have never
failed to hold a Sword in one hand, and a Bible in the other. There remain
then, but one way for us to take off the present reproach, and imputation
thrown upon us, Which is to confute all fly, sinister, clancular reports, and
to out-doe these active men hereafter in their own industrious way. To preach
Truth and Peace, and sound Doctrine to the People, with the same sedulity, and
care, as they preach Discord, Variance and Strife. If this course be taken, and
be with fidelity pursued, it will not only be in our power to dis-inchant the
People, (who of late (by what Spell, or Charm I know not) have unawares begun
to entertain a piece of Popery amongst them, and to think, ignorance the only
Mother of Devotion) But it will be no hard matter for us, (toward the
effecting of so charitable a work, as the undeceiving of so many well-minded,
but mis-guided Souls) to make our true Arts deal with their false, as the Rod
of Moses dealt with the Magicians Serpents, first, show them to be only so
much fantastical Form, and Air, then consume and eat them up, in the
presence of their Believers. To which (for a conclusion of all) I shall only
add this, That if this course be taken, and be reduced to practice, assisted
with those great advantages (which are to most of them unknown) of Study,
Learning, Tongues, the use of Libraries, and Books, besides those other helps
of opportunity, time, and leisure, to render our selves able, (which they too
immaturely engaged to a Family, or Fortune, cannot have) we shall not only
comply with the ends and intentions of those Founders, who built us Colleges:
(which they, certainly, intended should be Schools of virtue, not Nurseries of
sl^th) but our despised Mother, the University, shall reap more honor by us,
our Country more service, and God more glory. To whom with his Son, and the
Holy Spirit of truth, be ascribed all honor and praise.

Amen.
FINIS.
A late Printed SERMON AGAINST False Prophets, Vindicated by LETTER, From the
causeless Aspersions of Mr. FRANCIS CHEYNELL.

By Jasper Main, D. D. the mis-understood Author of it.

LUKE 21. 19. (...).

Printed in the Year, M DC XLVII.

A late printed SERMON against FALSE PROPHETS, Vindicated by Letter, from the
causeless Aspersions of Mr. FRANCIS CHEYNELL.
AS often as I have, for some years, considered the sad Distractions of this
Kingdom, methinkes, thus divided against it self, it has verified upon it
self the Fable of the People sown of Serpents T^eth; where, without any
known Cause of a Quarrel, Brother started up suddenly armed against Brother,
and making the place of their Nativity the Field, and Scene of their Conflicts,
every one fell by the Spear of the next, upon the turfe, and furrow which
hatched and brought him forth. It Is true, indeed, some have preached, and others
have printed, that the Superstitions of our Church were grown so high, that
they could not possibly be purged but by a Civil War. But finding, upon my
most sober and impartial Inquiries, that these Superstitions were only the
misconceipts of some men's sick Fancies, who called certain slight harmless
pieces of Church Ceremony Superstition, I thought it a piece of Charity to them
and the deluded people, to let them no longer remain in the Case of the
distracted Midianites in the Book of c. 7. v. (...)
Judges; where, upon a Dream told by a man to his Neighbor, and upon the
sight of such inconsiderable things as lamps, and broken pitchers, every man's
sword was against his fellow; and a well-ordered Host of friends, struck with
an imaginary fear, became a confused and disordered heap, and rout of
enemies. This desire to rectify mistakes, and withal to show upon what
slender threads of vanity their Sermons hang, whose accidental, misguided
Arguments, under certain false colors, have strived to prove things
indifferent to be unlawful; and then, that thus by them pronounced unlawful,
they are to be extirpated by the Sword, caused me at first to preach a Sermon
against False Prophets, which has since past the Travel of a more public
Birth: wherein, what a cold Advocate I am in my pleadings for Superstition,
will appear to any, who with an unclouded understanding shall read it: yet M.
Cheynell, (one of the Preachers sent down by the Parliament to Oxford) in a
morning Sermon of his preached at S. Mary's Jan. 17. upon Esaias. 40. 27. Having
directed the Doctrinall part of it against one M. Yerbury, an Independent, (who
publicly in a Dispute with him held, that the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in
the Saints bodily, in the same measure that it did in Christ) not without much
violence offered to his Text, He directed the use and Application of it to me;
whom (after some characteristicall reproaches of my person, and defamations of
my Sermon) He challenged to a public Disputation with him. This (after two
days) coming to my knowledge, I disputed with my self what I was to do in
such a case: To return reproaches for reproaches, or to vindicate my self in
the place where I was thus publicly reviled, had bin to make my self Second
in a fault, which the whole Congregation condemned in him as the First. Besides
if I could have dispensed with my self for being so unchristianly revengefull,
as to remove part of the Civil War, which has too long imbrued our Fields,
into the Temple, and there to answer Challenges, and fight Duells from the
pulpit, this license was denied me; who have for diverse months been compelled
to be a speechless member of this silenced University. Again, To sleep over
my infamy, and to dissemble my disgrace, had been to beget an opinion in the
minds of those that heard him, that either I wanted a good cause, or else my
good cause wants a Defender. At length (something contrary I confess, to the
peaceableness of my studies, which never delighted much in those quarrelsome
parts of Learning, which raise tempests between men) following the Scripture
counsel, which is, to take my offending Brother aside in private, and to tell
him of his fault, I resolved by the secrecy of writing to wipe off those
Calumnies for the future, and to answer the bold Challenge for the present,
which he hurled at me in the Pulpit; and having first banished all gall, and
Bitterness from my pen, sent him this following Letter.

SIR,
THat a Text of Scripture in your handling should wear two faces, and the
Doctrine of it should be made to look one way, and the use of it another, is
at all no wonder to me. But that pretending so much to Holiness, and
Christianity as you do, you should think the Pulpit a fit place to revile me
in, would hardly enter into my belief, were not the Congregation that heard you
on Sunday morning last at S. Maryes, my cloud of Witnesses. From some of which
I am informed, that you solemnly charged me with imprudence and impudence, for
publishing a late Sermon against false Prophets. SIR, Though report, and my
name perfixt in the Title Page might probably persuade you, that I am the
Author of it; yet to assure you, that I caused it to be published, or consented
to the printing of it, will certainly require a more infallible illumination,
then, I presume, you have. Besides, if I should grant you that 'twas printed
with my consent, (which yet I shall not) yet certainly the seasonableness of
it in a time where godliness is made the engine to arrive to so much unlawful
gain, will excuse me from imprudence, though perhaps not from an unthriving,
in your sense, want of policy. And as for the impudence you charged me withal,
I am confident that all they who heard you with impartial Ears, and have read
that Sermon with impartial Eyes, have, by this time, assigned that want of
modesty a place in a more capable forehead. I hear farther that having in a
kind of pleasant disdain shuffled pipes, Surplices, pictures in
Church-windowes, Liturgy, and Prelacy together in one period, and styled them
the musty Relickes of an at-length-banisht Superstition, you were pleased out
of that heap to select Images, and to call them Idols, and then to charge me
as a defender of them.

SIR, Had you done me but the ordinary Justice to pluck my Sermon out of your
pocket, as you did the Practical Catechism, and had faithfully read to your
Auditory what I have there said of Images, I make no question, but they would
all have presently discerned that I defend not Pictures in Church windows as
they are Idols, or have at any time been made so, but that it is unreasonable
to banish them out of the Church as long as they stand there merely as
Ornaments of the place. From which innocent use having not hitherto digrest,
for you to call them Idols, and then to charge me as if I had made them equal
with God, by my defense of them so formallized, will I fear, endanger you in
the minds of your Hearers, and beget an Opinion in them, that you are one of
the Prophets who use to see Vanity. I hear farther, that when you had traduced
me as a Defender of the forementioned musty Relicts of Superstition, you said,
that this was the Religion to which I professed my self ready to fall a
sacrifice. Certainly, Sir, This is not fair dealing. For if, once more, you
had plucked my Sermon out of your pocket, and had read to the Congregation that
passage of it which endeavors to prove that it is not lawful to propagate
Religion, (how pure soever it be) by the sword, they would have heard from your
mouth, as they once did from mine, that the Religion to which I there profess
my self ready to fall a Sacrifice, is that defamed, true, Protestant Religion,
for which the holy Fathers of our Reformation died before me. In saying,
therefore, that I profess my self ready to fall a sacrifice in the defense of
Surplices, the Common Prayer Book, or Church Ornaments, (things which I have
always held not necessary, unless made so, by right Authority) you have
incurred one danger more, which is, not only to be thought to see Vanity, but
to be guilty of the next part of the Text. I am farther told, that to deliver
your self from the number of the false Prophets there preached against, you
prophesied in the Pulpit; and chose for the subject of your prediction, a thing
which is possible enough for you to bring to pass; which was, that you will
have my Sermon burnt.

Sir I have, for your sake, once more severely considered it. And can neither
find Socinianisme, or any other Poland Doctrine there which should deserve
that doom. But if it must die like Bishop Ridley or Hooper, for its adhaesion
to the best Religion that this Kingdom ever enjoyed, I must repeat the words
of my Sermon, and tell you, that (without the fear of being thought by you a
Pseudo-Martyr) I shall account it one of the happiest passages to Heaven, to be
dissolved to ashes with it in the same funeral pile.

Lastly, Sir, having, with all the sober detraction, which might probably beget
a dislike in the minds of your Hearers, of me and my Sermon, sufficiently
defamed both, I hear you did beat up a Drum against me in the Pulpit, and
ehallenged me to a public dispute with you. If by a dispute you meant a
pen-combate, I shall be as ready to enter the lists with you, as you have been
to summon me to it, if you will grant me two things. The one is, that, if we
engage our selves in a Conference of that nature, you will confine your self
to the particulars in my Sermon which you quarreled at; and not use your
strange, wild Art of multiplying Questions upon Questions; or like another
Hydra, what ever the Hercules be, make three heads spring up in the place where
you find one convincingly lopt of. The other is, that, when you have made your
Charge, and I my Resistance, you will consent that the debate of every
question, thus disputed, may be made public and printed. But if by a Dispute,
you meant that I should fight a Duel with you upon the same stage, and in the
same Theater of men and women, before whom you, and Mr. Yerbury played your
prize, I doubt very much, if I should accept of your Callenge in that sense;
whether all discreet men would not count this a spice of the phrenzy in me,
which you complained of in the Pulpit, for being imputed to you by Him that
wrote the Conference at your late Scruple-House; and say I deserved to be cured
by the Discipline, and Physic of a dark room. To deal freely with you,
Sir, I by no means can approve of an English Disputation in a University. But
because you shall not loose your challenge, nor I be thought to desert the
cause, which I profess to defend, so you will choose the Divinity School, and
Latin weapons, I shall not refuse (as well as God shall enable me) to give you
a meeting there, and to sustain the Answerers part in the defense of the
lawfulness of white Surplices, Church Ornaments; the Common Prayer Book, and
Prelacy; which are the particulars in my Sermon, which you called Relicts of
Superstition. To one of these two offers I shall patiently expect your answer;
unless without troubling me any further, you will let me quietly retire back
again into the shade, from whence you have too importunately called me: Who,
never the less, have learnt so much Charity, as to pray God to forgive you the
wrong which you intended toward

From my chamber this evening. Ian. 19. 1646. The Author of the Sermon against
False Prophets. J. MAIN.


To this letter (in which (as briefly as the laws of a Letter would permit) I
endeavored to wash out the spots, with which M. Cheynell in his Sermon strived
to defile and sully mine, and withal to comply with him in any sober way of
Dispute, which might befit two University-men) after two days was returned an
Answer: First, strange for the messenger's sake that brought it, which was One
Iellyman (some say) a preaching Cobbler; who from repairing the decays of
University-mens shoes was now thought fit to have a part in the conveyance of
their disputes. Next, for the double Superscription of it, which without, on
the side of the first paper that enclosed it, was as fair and full of Candor
as the whited sepulcher in the Gospel, and was directed, To D. MAIN AT
CHRIST-CHURCH. But this outward stone was no sooner rolled away, but another
Inscription, very unlike the first appeared, which ran thus. FOR M. JASPER
MAIN (ONE OF THE NEW DOCTORS) STUDENT AT CHRIST-CHURCH. By which parenthesis,
it seems M. Cheynell, thought it an error in the University, to make me a
Doctor. And truly (if I may be believed upon my own report) as often as I
compare my unworthiness with my degree, I am of his opinion; and think I am a
Doctor, fit only to stand in a parenthesis; and, without any injustice done me,
to be left out of the sentence. This second Superscription was underwritten
with a kind of a preamble Letter to the more inward Letter; with the lock and
guard of a scale upon it; and ran thus.

SIR, I have sent several times to your lodging this day to answer your
challenge yesterday; if you cannot meet to morrow, let me understand your mind
to night. For I have a great deal of business, since the University was
silenced for your sake.

What kind of meeting was here meant, or whether I (having I thank God, the
use of my understanding) could consent to it, will appear by the Letter it
self; which (being an Answer to mine) was verbatim this.

SIR, I use to spend my morning thoughts upon a better subject then a pot of
dead drink, that has a little froth at top, and dreggs at bottom;

SIR, It appears by your Letter, that you do not understand my Text, and the
learned Scribe, or Intelligencer, did not understand my plain, very plain
English Sermon. I am not at leisure to repeat every Sermon that I preach,
(preaching so often as I do sometimes twice, and upon just occasion thrice a
day) to every one that is at leisure to cavil at that which they heard but at
second hand; yet to show how much you are mistaken, I will give you a breife,
but satisfactorie account.

My Text stands upon record, Isa. 40. 25. the Doctrine I raised from the words,
was as follows.

Doct. There is no creature in heaven, or earth, like God in all things, or
equal to God in any thing.

The first Corollarie I deduced from thence, when I came to make application,
was briefly this.

That no picture can be made of God, because there was nothing like him in
heaven or earth. All nations are less then vanity in comparison of God; to whom
then will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Isay. 40.
17. 18. The Prophet urges this Argument, against all manner of images which
are made to represent God, who sits upon the circle of the earth, and
stretches out the heavens from the 19. v. of the same chap. to the 23. ver.
and he enforces this Argument verse. 21. have ye not known -- have ye not
understood? etc. as if he had said, ye are ignorant sotts, irrational, and
inconsiderate men, if ye apprehend not the strength of this Argument. Now,
SIR, be pleased to produce your strong reasons, and overthrow, if you can, the
Doctrine or the Corollary. Your, Intelligencer was (if not a false Prophet yet)
a false Historian, when he told you that I accused you of making images equal
with God. SIR, I said, that images were not like unto God; and thereupon
wondered that you took upon you to plead for the retaining of those images
which have been too often turned into idols, not by the piety; but
superstition of former times. You say, that by the same reason there should be
no Sun in the firmament. Whence I collect, that you will be forced to
maintain, that images are as necessary in the Church, as the Sun in heaven; be
pleased to read the 22. page of the false Prophet.

Moreover, you plead for Copes, and for those parts of the Common Prayer Book
which were borrowed from Rome, page 21, 22. The Uisitors will ere long enquire,
whether there has not been a Superstitious use of Copes at Christ-Church? and
therefore I did not make any such inquiry in my Sermon, but as a Friend I give
you and your adherents timely notice of it, because I believe you had need
study for an Answer.

You maintain, that some things in the excellencies and height of the
Doctrines of Christian Religion depend for their credit and evidence of their
truth upon the authority of Christ's miracles conveyed along in tradition and
story, page 16. and therefore I say your Religion leanes too hard and too heavy
upon Tradition.

You are offended that I spoke not distinctly concerning Prelacy, you may (if
you please) try your strength, and endeavor to prove that Christ has put the
sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction in the hand of a Prelate. 2. You may
(if you can) justify, that no Church that ever the Sun looked upon has been
more blessed with purity of Religion for the Doctrine of it, or better
established for the Government and Discipline of it, then the Church of
England, page 7. if you believe this confident assertion, you may proceed and
justify all the Doctrines, which were publicly countenanced, or approved; all
the superstitious practices, and prelaticall usurpations, nay, the delegation
of the Prelates, usurped power to Chancellors and all the Tyranny of the high
Commission, together with all the corruptions and innovations introduced into
the State, Church, University from the year 1630. till 1640. by a prevailing
faction, who were not the Church or University, but the disease, indeed the
plague of both. If you dare not undertake so sad a task, you cannot justify
the 17. 18. 22, 23. 27. 35. pages of the False Pr^het; you must prove that the
proceedings of the Parliament are Turkish, page 15. 17. that none of the
Members of either House of Parliament (who complain of the blemishes of the
Church) are to be esteemed good Protestants, page ^8. that the Reformation
which they have made is vanity of vanities, page 20. that they are guided by no
other principles but such as are contrary to all rules of right judgment,
either common to men or Christians, page 21. that the Ministers who have
appeared for the Parliament, are all of them False Prophets, who have
encouraged the Parliament to oppression, sacrilege, murder, and to make all
names that are great and sacred, cheap and odious in the ears of the people.
That the Ministers are the liars, and the Parliament Men the compliers, as
appears by all your unworthy insinuations, hints, intimations, quite throughout
your Scurrillous Libell, falsely called a Sermon: let any prudent man judge
whether this be not your maine drift and scope, a carceribus usque ad metam.

You talk of a Religion, in which you were borne, were you borne in a Surplice
or a Cope? Christiani non nascuntur sed fiunt. Sir, the Parliament does not
defame nor will they suppress the true Protestant Religion, and therefore if
you fall in this quarrel, I said, that you must be sacrificed in the defense
of Tyranny, Prelacy, Popery: if you put not Religion in Copes, Images,
Prelates, or Service-Booke, quorsum haec perditio? why do you talk of being
Martyred? say, that (if the King will give you leave) you will burn your Copes
and Surplices, throw off the Bishops and Common Prayer Book, you will break your
windows, and take the Covenant, and make it evident that you are and ever will
be of the Kings Religion; for you hold none of these things necessary now,
(whatever you have said heretofore) unless they be made necessary by right
Authority.

Sir, if I made any prediction, it was that your Sermon would be confuted,
before it was burnt; you know Paraeus was burnt before he was confuted; and if
you be not guilty of any doctrine received in Poland, I wonder, First, why you
did endeavor to incense an Officer of this Garrison against me, because I had
refuted M. Yerburies blasphemous errors. 2. Why you did maintain those
damnable Doctrines on the last Sabbath: forgive me this injury, for I hear
you did but vent them, and were no way able to maintain them.

Sir, I acknowledge that I do contend for the restitution of the true
Protestant Religion, and contend for the civil right which we have to exercise
the true Protestant Religion: we were in manifest danger to lose our right, by
the force and violence of potent Enemies, whereupon the high Court of
Parliament judged it fit to repel force by forces: be pleased to show how the
Parliament does hereby canonize the Alchoran, or declare themselves to be of
the Mahumetan persuasion; the Parliament will not compel you to be happy,
only take heed that you do not compel them to make you miserable. Though you
renounce all Doctrines that M. Yerberie maintains, yet I think you are too
great a friend to the Rebels in Ireland; you contend for a Vorstian liberty,
not for a liberty of conscience, for you desire a liberty for men that have no
conscience, such as turn from being Protestants to be Infidels. There is one
of M. Yerburies opinion, who says, that the righteous are at liberty, [he that
is righteous let him be righteous still] and the wicked are at liberty, [he
that is wicked let him be wicked still,] but you are of a more dangerous
opinion, the wicked as (as you think) are at liberty to kill and slay, but the
godly are not at liberty to defend themselves by the power of the highest Court
of Justice in the Kingdom from illegal and unjust oppression, violence. I am
convinced by many passages in your Sermon, especially the 15, 16, 17. pages,
that you think we ought not to fight against the Rebels in Ireland, because it
is part of their Religion (as it was of your brethren the Cavaliers) to put all
Roundheads (as you term them) to the sword; missajam mordet, the Mass may be
armed, but the Gospel must not: What think you of the War foretold in the
book of the Revelation? Sir, you abuse your betters when you talk of the
Scruple-house. You are not worthy to carry the books of those Reverend
Ministers after them, nor could your Carfax-Sermon have ever silenced the
ungifted Preachers; you would have found them gifted Disputants: if you think
otherwise try one or two of them in some of their beaten points; Sir, I speak
thus freely, because I was not present at the famous meeting, November. 12. but I
see you can cite one of your own Prophets, Poets I should say, but he is no
truer a Prophet then you are like to prove a Martyr, a Cretian Prophet. Sir,
the knowledge of my Brethrens worth, and your famous pride and
self-conceitedness has provoked me to let my pen loose, that I might disabuse
and humble you.

It seems you are unwilling to come upon the stage (though that be a fitter
place for you then the pulpit) to appear before a Theater of men and women:
Sir, you love the stage too well, take heed you do not love women too ill,
there is a friend of yours that does entreat you to beware of dark rooms and
sight women; for though a great Physician does advise you to the use of such
pleasing physic, yet the Frenchmen will assure you, that it is not wholesome
for the body, and the English can assure you, that it is not good for the soul;
your kind of phrenfie must be cured by more severe remedies, your devil will
be better cast out with prayer and fasting. You are misinformed when you say,
that I did beat up my drum. No Sir, you did sound a charge and made a
challenge, my acceptance of it was but the echo which answered the 17. and 21.
pages of the False Prophet. In the 17. you seem prepared to enter into dispute
presently with the greatest Champion that appears for the Parliament, Sir, one
of the meanest that appears for them, takes up that Gantlet which you threw
forth with so much scorn and confidence.

In your 21. page you threaten to press us in a rational logical way; Sir,
do your best, you shall find that we have neither lost our reason nor our
logic. We can distinguish between demonstration and superstition; and truly
Sir, if you had not put more Poetry then Logic into your Sermon, though your
Sermon might have been longer, yet your Libell would have been shorter; if you
please to blot out those few places of Scripture which you have abused by
misapplication and imprudent insertion of them into so profane and wild a
stamp, you may do well to turn your Libell into Verse, and then it may pass
current amongst the Balladmongers for a triobolar Ballad, and you will be
ranked in the number of those who are reputed the most excellent Authors, next
to them that write in Prose. If you are offended that I did not show you so
much respect, as I have showed toward the learned Author of the Practical
Catechism, consider the difference, nay, distance between his person,
education, learning, civility, writings and yours, and you will see a very
sufficient and satisfactory reason. Sir, if that Author did overlook your
Letter, I believe he did advise you to contend only for the lawfulness of
Prelacy, because I see that is interlined, and he was present at the sad debate
at Uxbridge; if that learned Doctor has any thing to object against me, he
knows my mind, habet aetatem, he is able to speak for himself, the Orator
needs not borrow eloquence of so profane a Poet.

You are unwilling to dispute in English, to which I answer:

First, your Sermon is English. Secondly, many of the persons whom you have
abused and deceived by your printed Sermon, understand not Latin. Thirdly, you
have been too much addicted to English Plays, and English Verses, and you have
with a pleasant kind of ignorance shuffled them (with other Verses published in
more learned languages) in the same book printed by the University-Printer, and
therefore I believe you are most able, and most engaged to dispute in English,
for the disabusing and undeceiving of those whom you have seduced by a Sermon
preached and printed in English. Be pleased to perform that task to morrow at
two of the clock at S. Mary's Church, where your Sermon was preached, and I will
meet you; and if you dare examine your Sermon by the Word of God, I shall be
the Opponent, because you have chosen to be the Respondent.

If when the Doctor of the Chair comes home, you please to dispute in the
Divinity Schools, let us agree upon the state of the questions in controversy,
and I will accept your challenge at your own weapon, which will I fear have
more false Latin, then true steel.

SIR,
You make a dishonorable retreat, when you say that Prelacy is lawful; you
have cried it up jure divino, and assured the King, that he cannot in
conscience pass the Bill against Prelacy, because it is a Government
instituted by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. Now stand your ground,
o^ confess your error, acknowledge that you and your adherents have persuaded
the King to destroy so many thousand of his loving and gallant subjects, that
Prelacy might be established in its tyrannical height and rigor; and now the
God of heaven and Lord of hosts has broken all your forces, you tell us that
the Parliament must not pursue their victory; but we must in charity bear with
those malignant, Prelaticall, and Antichristian errors, which will not consist
with faith; be pleased to return such an answer as will endure the public test
and touchstone, and you shall be rationally, nay spiritually dealt with by

The Prior opponent of the false Prophet, Francis Cheynell.


To this letter (which (as all the world may judge) declines that part of
intercourse, which obliges one man's letter to carry some correspondence to
another, and instead of a confutation, only multiplies questions, and urges
me to prove diverse passages of my Sermon, which M. Cheynell's part was to
convince) because the superscription of it darkly, and the close of it more
clearly required me to meet him at an English disputation the next day at S.
Mary's before the Townsmen and their wives, (very unfit moderators, certainly,
in the points there to be discus'd) I for the present (to divert that meeting)
returned him this short Answer.

SIR,
THough in the Letter you sent me yesterday by (I think) Iellyman the Cobbler,
you have given me such a taste of your Logic as well as civility, that I have
small encouragement to med^* any farther with you, (unless you will promise
hereafter to write with better consequence, and less distemper) yet, Sir, least
you should triumph over me, as one beaten by your Arguments, not by your
rudeness, I have thought fit for once to return you this answer. First, that
without the danger of a dark room (as I told you before) I cannot consent to
meet you at S. Mary's at two a clock. Next, that I do embrace your offer to
meet me at Latin weapons in the Divinity School, when the Doctor of the
Chair comes to town. Thirdly, that if your Syllogismes be no better then your
wit, (which I perceive strived to be facete, when it adventured to say, that
you fear my weapon will have more false Latin then true steel) I doubt the
Poet you contemn so much, will go equal with you in the conquest. Lastly, not
being engaged (I confess) to preach thrice a day) I will with as much dispatch
as I can, put order to your chaos, and return a fuller answer to your strange
letter; wherein I know not whether you have less satisfied, or more reviled

From my Chamber this morning Jan. 22. 1646. The Author of the Sermon against
false Prophets, I. Main.


This Letter might have been lengthened with many other reasons (besides those
already set down) to show how unfit 'twas for me to meet M. Cheynell at an
English disputation at S. Mary's, as M. Yerbury did. As first, because the
frame and carriage of the whole dispute between us, in all probability would
have been as irregular and tumultuous as the other was; where, because neither
of them kept themselves to the laws of disputation, which enjoyne the
Disputants to confine themselves to Syllogism, raised from the strict rules of
Mood and Figure, which admit not of extravagancy: In the judgment of all
Scholars who were present, it was not a Dispute, but a wild conflict, where
neither answered one another, but with some mixture of ill language, were both
Opponents by turns. Next, because the greatest part of the Auditory would have
consisted of such a confluence of Townsmen and women, as understood good
Arguments and Replies as little as they do Latin; and so the issue of this
Disputation would probably have been the same with the former: where M.
Cheynell was thought to have the better by one Sex, and M. Yerbury by the
other. Loath, therefore to forfeit my discretion before such an Incompetent
Assembly of witnesses, with as much dispatch as one engaged by promise could
make, I returned to his Letter this fuller Answer.

SIR,
Among the other praises, which greater friends to the Muses then I perceive
you are, have bestowed upon Virgil, he has been called the Virgin Poet. Yet
Ausonius ordering his Verses another way, has raised one of the most loose
lascivious Poems from him that I think ever wore the name of a Marriage-song.
Me thinks Sir (and I doubt not but all they who shall compare them together will
be of my opinion) you in your Letter have just dealt so with my Sermon; it went
from my hands forth a sober Virgin, but falling into yours, it returns to me so
strumpeted, so distorted in the sense, and misapplied in the expressions, that
what I preached a Sermon, you by translating whatever I have said of false
Prophets to the Parliament, have with the dexterity of a falsification,
transformed and ^anged (...) a Libell. This I do not wonder at, when I remember
what the Physician was, who said, that where the Recipient is distempered, the
most wholesome ^od turns into his disease; just as we see in those harmfull
creatures, whose whole essence and composition is made up of sting (...)
poison, the juice which they suck from flowers and roses, conc^s into venom
and becomes poison too. Having said this by way of Preface to my following
Reply, first, Sir, (confining my self to your method) how you spend your
morning thoughts, being impossible for me outright to know, unless your
thoughts were either visible or you transparent; desire you will not think me
overcurious, if I open a door upon you, (...) proceed by conjecture. You say,
you use to spend them upon a better subject then a pot of dead drink that has
a little froth at top, and dregs at bottom. To what passage of my Letter this
refers, or why a language which I do not understand, should possess the porch
and entrance to yours, I am not Oedipus enough to unriddle. But if I may guess
what your morning thoughts were, when (as you confess) you did let them loose
by your pen to discharge themselves upon me in a shower of rude,
untheologicall, flat, downright detraction, though they were not employed upon
a frothy subject, yet they show that you were at that time in his distemper in
the Gospel, a piece of whose raging and distraction 'twas to foam at mouth.

Next Sir, had I been present at your Sermon, (as I am glad I was not, for I
desire not to be an Auditor where I must hear my self libelled from the pulpit)
I shall casily grant, by the taste which you have given me in this short
Conference with you of the perspicuity of your style, and the clearness of your
matter, that 't was possible enough for me not to understand it. I do,
therefore, acknowledge it as a favor from you, that you will let me no longer
wander in uncertainties, or write to you upon the mis-report of a fallible
Intelligencer; but will your self be my Clue to guide me to what you said.
Which favor, you have much heightened, by robbing your weightier employments of
so much time to convey it in, as might have been spent in providing your self
to preach thrice a day, and yet not do it so hastily, or with such a running
negligence, as to be thought to preach but once a week.

As for your Text, and the Doctrine built upon it, at whom soever it was shot,
I shall not quarrel with it. But how your Corollary should concern any thing
that I have said in my Sermon contrary to your Doctrine, I cannot possibly
imagine; who do there only speak of the vanity of some of our Modern Prophets,
who can see Idolatry in a Church-window: And do only strive to prove that for
people to refrain the Church (as you know who did) because some (though perhaps
not of our age) paid worship to the windows, was a fear as unreasonable as
theirs was, who refused to go to Sea, because there was a Painter in the City
who limn'd shipwracks.

Sir, had you a mind to deal pertinently or ingenuously with me, you would
witness for me, that though I speak in defense of the Ornamentall use of
Images, yet I in no passage of my Sermon do defend any Image or pourtraicture
made of the Deity. Sir, it is not your saying, That no picture can be made of
God, because there is nothing like him in Heaven or Earth, or the following
proofs of your letter (which I conceive to be a piece of your Sermon at St.
Mary's, which because I came not to it, you in charity have sent home to me)
that persuades me that any such picture is unlawful: Nature, as well as the
numerous places of Scripture, which you have quoted to prove that which I never
yet denied, have long since taught me, that to make, or draw any picture, or
Image of God is not only a breach of the second Commandment, which is built
upon the invisibility of his Essence, and Nature, but that the Attempt would be
much more vain, then if a Painter should endeavor to limn a soul or mind,
which not affording any Idea, or resemblance to his fancy to be taken by,
cannot possibly by him be expressed in Colors. The Task, therefore, to make any
Draught or Figure of God (pray Sir, being misled by your example, do not think
me superfluous in my pursuit of an Argument, to which I was not bound to reply)
is (besides the sinfulness of it) much more impossible. For, First, Sir, if the
Schoolmen (which I hear you once said you had long studied to little purpose)
may be Judges, He cannot be limn'd or drawn, because he is a Spirit: Therefore
not capable to be represented by any gross, material Thing. Next, because He
is Infinite; and therefore not capable to fall under Symmetry, or be
circumscribed within the finite lines which stream from a Painters pencill.
Thirdly, because He is Simple, that is, (as your Schoolmen say, for you know
Sir, I am but an English poet) All in All, and All in every part: Or, in other
Terms, a Thing entirely uniform, and indivisible within it self, which admits
not of any false representation of it self by limbs or parts. Lastly, Sir,
(because I will not be tedious, and go over all his other Attributes) who shall
paint his Omniscience, who his Omnipotence, who his Eternity, who his Ubiquity?
Knowing this Sir, and much more of him (not by the Help of a borrowed
Illumination) I could not trespass so much against my own studies, and
Conscience as to allow of any picture of God. And therefore, in this
particular, challenging me, (as you impertinently do) to produce my strong
reasons, and overthrow, if I can, your Doctrine, or Corollary, deduced from
E^ay 40. 25. where God by his Prophet says, To whom will ye liken me, or shall
I be equal says the Holy One? You would fain have me be your Adversary in an
undefensible Cause, that your conquest of me might be the easier. In short, you
would have me profess my self to be an Anthropomorphite, that you might have
the advantage to confute me for an Heretic.

Sir, since you deny that you said in your Sermon, that I made Images equal
with God (which if you had said, my Sermon without any new confutation, would
have disproved you) I am in that particular satisfied, and shall think it was,
though not a wilful one, yet a mistake in the reporter. But, then, Sir, I must
tell you, that I am not at all satisfied with that which follows. Where you
say, that Images are not like unto God, and Thereupon wonder that I took upon
me to plead for the retaining of those Images which have been too often turned
into Idols, not by the piety, but superstition of former times: For here, Sir,
if I would take the advantage of expression not well considered, upon you, in
saying that Images are not like unto God, and thereupon that I did ill to plead
for the retaining of other Images not of God, a Sophister would make the world
believe, that you think all Images superstitious, and therefore fit to be
banished out of the Church, but only such Images as are made of God; which
would expose you to the opinion of being thought very subject to speak
contradictions. But being a mere poet, Sir, whose ability, you know, lies not
in making use of Aristotle's Eleuchs, but in the soft, harmless composure of an
Elegy or Ode, I shall deal more gently with you; That is, take you in the most
advantageous sense which you possibly, upon your better morning thoughts can
put to your words; and believe, that the fault you find with me for the
retainment of Images, is, because by the superstition of former times they have
been turned into Idols. Sir, if I be not deceived, my Sermon, in this
particular, is able to save me the labor of a reply. Where I have once for all
said that which you will never be able to control (how poetically (that is not
dully) soever you may think it expressed) that by the same reason that Ornaments
are to be turned out of the Church, because some out of a mis-guided devotion
have adored them, we should not have a Sun, or Moon, or Stars in the
firmament, but they should long since have been banished the skies, because some
of the deluded Heathen worshipped them. The little fallacy with which you think
to entrap me, when you say, that hence you collect that I will be forced to
maintain that Images are as necessary in the Church, as the Sun in the
Firmament, will expire, like all other thin Sophis^es, in vanity and smoke,
when I have shown the weakness and infirmity of it, which will be briefly done
by repeating only the sense of my Sermon in other words, and saying, that if
Images do agree with the S^nne, in that they have both been made Idols, though
one be no necessary part of the Church, and the other be a necessary part of
the building of the world, yet if for that reason wherein they agree, one must
be banished any man that has Logic (though he be a Poet) may infer, that
'twill be as reasonable that the other should be banished too.

In your next Paragraph, or fardell of I know not what, you say that I plead
for Copes, and for those parts of the Common-Prayer-booke which were borrowed
from Rome: And then confute me with the threats of an ere-long Visitation. Sir,
there is neither Logic, nor School Divinity in this. As for Copes, you know I
join them with Surplices in my Sermon; and say that by the same reason that
the false Prophets of our times would persuade the people that Surplices are
unlawful because Papists wear them, they may endeavor to persuade them, that
Linen is also unlawful, because Papists shift; and so conclude Cleanliness to
be as superstitious as Surplices or Copes. Sir, you may call this Poetry, but
there is a Logic in it, which I hope does not ceafe to be Logic, which you
cannot resist, because it is not watrishly or slegmatickly expressed. As for those
parts of the Common-Prayer-booke, which I do not say were borrowed from Rome,
(as you impose upon me) but are to be found in the Rubric of the Church: if I
had said they had been borrowed from that Church, yet you have said nothing to
prove, that upon this supposition it is Popery to use those Prayers in Ours.
Foreseeing, I believe, that if you had offered to maintain that what ever is
in the Popish Lyturgie is Popery, that is, superstitious, and fit to be
proscribed out of the Church, you would (meeting with a good Disputant, and one
not addicted to Poetry) have been compelled to confess, that the Lords Prayer,
and David's Psalms are Popery too, (though the one were delivered by Christ,
the other by one who lived long before Antichrist) because they are bound up in
the same volumne with the Mass. Sir, if this be your Logic, it is Socrate
ambulante coruscavit, and will be a false fire to lead you for ever out of the
way. But here, Sir, though I need not take the pains to confute the Nothings
you have said against me, in this particular, yet whenever you shall call upon
me to make good my undertaking, I do promise to make it evident to you, that
all the ancient parts of the Common-Prayer-booke, which I plead for, I do not
plead for because they are used by the Church of Rome, but because they were
part of the Lyturgie of those Churches which were thought primitively pure, and
not superstitious, and were in the world long before Popery, or Antichrist was
borne. I must, therefore, for ought you have yet said to alter my opinion,
still stand to my former conclusion; which is, that by the same reason that
either the whole, or any part of our Comon-Prayer-Book is to be turned out of
the Church, because in some things it agrees with the Lyturgie of the Church of
Rome, Italy, and Rome it self is to be turned out of the world, (and so a new
Map to be made of it where these places are not) because they are the Popes
Territories, and lie under his Jurisdiction. Lastly, Sir, as for the Visitors
you threaten both me and Christ-Church withal, (of whom some report that you
are one) when you come to execute your Commission, so you will not urge it as a
Topicke to convince my understanding, but as a Delegary of power to examine my
studies, life, and manners, I shall bring all the submission with mewhich can
be expected from one subject to the trial and examination of such a power.
Being withal very confident, that when that time comes, however you may
perhaps find an old Cope or two in our College, yet you will never bring
Logic enough with you to prove, that they are either Idolatrous, or have been
put to a superstitious use. And therefore, Sir, in this particular you have
lost your friendly counsel, there being no need at all that we should against
that time study for an Answer.

In your next Fascicle, you say, that I maintain that some things in the
Excellency, and Height of the Doctrines of Christian Religion depend for their
credit, and the Evidence of their Truth, upon the Authority of Christ's Miracles
conveyed along in Tradition, and Story; And, therefore, conclude that my
Religion leaves too hard, and too heavy upon Tradition. Sir, though I have
always looked upon the Scriptures of the Old Testament and the New, as two
glorious lamps, which to all eyes (that have not lost the use of seeing, by
being kept sequestered from the sun too long in the dark) mutually give light
to one another, so that a vigilant Reader, by comparing Prophecies with their
Accomplishments, will have very great reason to believe that both are true, yet
because this amounts but to the discourses and persuasions of a single man's
reason, if I prefer Tradition, which is the constant, universal consent of all
Ages, as a fuller medium to prove doctrines by which are hardly otherwise
demonstrable, do I any more, I pray, then prefer the universal Testimony, and
Report of the Church of all Times, before the more fallible suggestions of a
private spirit?

Your next Paragraph, is perfectly the Hydra with repullulating Heads which I
warned you of in my first Letter; And multiplies so many causeless questions as
make it nothing but a heap, partly of such doubts, partly of untruths, as
would make it one of Hercules labors to examine them. First, you bid me prove
that Christ has put the sole power of Ordination in the hand of a Prelate.
Sir, if the practice of the Apostles in the Scripture in this point were not
clear, yet the practice and opinion of the Church for 1500 years ought to be
of too great Authority with you to make this a scruple. Knowing that no Church
in the world thought otherwise, till the Presbyterian Model crept forth of
Calvin's fancy; nor any good Protestant in the Church of England, till such as
you recalled Aerius from his grave, and Dust to oppose Bishops. Next, you bid
me justify, that no Church that ever the sun looked upon has been more
blessed with purity of Religion for the Doctrines of it, or better established for
the Government, and Discipline of it, then the Church of England has. Sir, you
repeat not the words of my Sermon so faithfully as you should. I am not so
extravagant as to say, that no Church that ever the Sun looked upon, but that
the Sun in all his heavenly course for so many, many years, that is, (in my
sense) for many Ages, saw not a purer Church then ours was, both for the
Doctrines, and Discipline of it. Against this you wildly object, I know not
what Doctrines publicly countenanced, but tell me not what these Doctrines
were, speak of certain superstitious practices, and Prelaticall usurpations,
but do not prove them to be either superstitious, or usurpt; quarrel with the
Delegation of Bishops power to Chancellors, then proceed to the tyranny of the
High-Commission-Court, and at last conclude with I know not what Imaginary
corruptions and Innovations introduced into the State, Church, and University.
Sir, if I should grant this longwinded Charge of yours to be true, (as truly I
think it is only a seeing of vanity) yet my confident Assertion is not hereby
enfeebled. I hope, when I spoke of the purity of our Church* you did not think
I freed it from all blemishes or spots. The Primitive Church it self had some
in it who broacht strange doctrines; Saint John had not else written his
Gospel against the Gnostics, nor Saint Paul his Epistle to the Galatians
against those that held the necessity of Circumcision. The next Ages of the
Church have not been more distinguished by their Martyrs, then Heretics; yet
the Primitive Church ceased not to be Apostolically pure, because it had a
Cerinthus, or Nicolaitans in it; nor the succeeding Churches to be the Spouse
of Christ, because one brought forth an Apelles, another a Marcion, a third a
Nestorius, a fourth an Eutiches, a fifth an Arius. Sir, as long as the best
Church in the world consists of men not infallible there will be errors. But
then you must not charge the Heterodox opinions or Doctrines of particular men,
though, perhaps, countenanced by some in public authority upon the Church.
Besides, Sir, every Innovation is not necessarily a Corruption, unless it
displace, or lay an Ostracisme upon some other thing more worthy and better
then it self. You your self say, that the corruptions introduced were brought
in by a prevailing faction, who were not the Church. If they were not, my
Assertion holds good, that notwithstanding such corruptions, yet our Church in
its time was the purest Church in the world. This, then, being so, me thinks,
Sir, you in your pursuit of Reformation, by making Root and Branch your Rule of
proceeding, have been more severe then the laws of right Reason will allow
you. If there were such a tyranny as you speak of streaming it self from the
High Commission Court, why could not the tyranny be suppressed, without the
abolishment of the Court? Or if there were such a thing as Prelaticall
usurpation, why could not the usurpations be taken away, and Episcopacie left
to stand? Sir, if you be Logician enough to be able to distinguish between the
faults of persons and the sacredness of functions, you cannot but pronounce
with me, that to extirpate an order of the Church, ancient as the Christian
Church it self, and made venerable by the never-interrupted Reception of it in
all the Ages of the Church but ours, for the irregular carriage of a Prelate or
two, (if any such have been among us) is a course like theirs, who thought
there was no way left to reform drunkenness in their State, but utterly to
root up, and extirpate, and banish Vines.

The remainder of your Paragraph is very politically orderd; which is, that
because you find it hard for you to confute my Sermon by your Arguments, you
will endeavor to make the Parliament my Adversary, who, you think, are able
to confute it by their power: And bid me prove that the proceedings of the
Parliament are Turkish.

Here, Sir, methinks, being a Poet, I see a piece of Ben Iohnson's best Comedy,
the Fox, presented to me; that is, you, a Politic Would-be the second,
sheltring your self under a capacious Tortoiseshell. Why, Sir, can you persuade
your self that the great Council of the Kingdom, by whom you are employed,
if they will vouchsafe to read my Sermon, will not presently discern your
Art? And withal perceive, that though the Text, upon which I, out of the
Integrity of my soul, preached that Sermon, stick as close to False Prophets,
as the Cen^aures shirt did to Hercules, and set them a raging, yet that they
having never Parliamentarily professed to propagate Religion by their spear, can
no way be concerned, when I say that such a persuasion in us Christians would
be Mahumetan; and we thereby should translate a piece of the Alchoran into a
piece of the Gospel. Sir, I am so confident of the wisdom of that Honorable
Assembly, of my own innocent meaning, and of your guilt, (who have been one
of those Turkish Prophets, (and in your Letter to me still are) who have
preached that piece of the Alchoran for good doctrine) that for answer to all
your slye, impotently-malicious mis-applications and shiftings off that which I
have said only of such as your self to the Parliament, I shall only appeal
to my Sermon. And by that, if you please to undertake the Devils part, and be
my Accuser, shall be content to stand or fall. In the mean time, Sir, I must
repeat what I said before, that if it be read, or looked on through those
refractions, with which you have mis-shap'd, and crookt it, I shall consent to
what you say in the end of your filthy Paragraph; That 'twas once a Sermon, but
you almost a Carceribus usque ad metam have made it a Libell.

In your next (what shall I call it?) you are very Critically pleasant; And
because I talk of a Religion wherein I was borne, ask me, whether I were
borne in a Surplice, or Cope; and then very distinguishingly proceed, and say,
Christiani non nascuntur, sed fiunt.

To the first, I reply, that it had been as unnatural for me to be borne in a
Surplice, or Cope, as for you to come into the world, with a little Geneva
set-ruffe about your neck.

Next, Sir, for your sharp distinction, I hope, though the Muses be your
Step-dames, yet you think not the figures of Rhetoric to be so superstitious,
that it shall be Popery in me, to make use of a Metonymy, and to express my
self by the Adjunct, when I mean the place, and Country. I grant, Sir, that
men are not borne, but re-born Christians; yet 'twill be no great Error in
speech for a man to say he is born in Christianity, if he be a Christian, and
were born in the place where Christianity is established. Sir, I doubt you
begin to think secular learning to be a profane thing; And that you are bound
to persecute Tropes out of Expression, as you have Liturgy out of the Church.
If you do, Sir, we shall in time, (if we proceed in this conflict) fulfill a
piece of one of Saint Paul's Epistles between us; I become a Barbarian to you,
and you to me.

I am glad to hear you say, That the Parliament will not suppress the true
Protestant Religion; Sir, I never thought they would. But, then 'twill be no
harm to you, if I pray, That whilst you pursue such a through Reformation of
it, as of late years has left it doubtful in the minds of the people what the
true Protestant Religion is, you let not in Popery at that Gate, by which they
strive to shut it out. If Queen Mary's days do once more break in upon us
through the ^luce which we open to them by our unsetledness, and Distractions,
and if I then fall a sacrifice in defense of the same Religion for which I now
contend, I hope you then will think your self confuted; And no longer believe
that I am such an ill Judge of Religions, or so profusely prodigal of my life,
that I would make it a Holocaust, or Oblation, either to Tyranny, or Popery.

In short, Sir, let the King and Parliament agree to burn Copes, and Surplices,
to throw away the Common Prayer Book, or to break our Windows, I shall not
place so much Religion in them, as not to think them alterable, and this done
by Right Authority. But as for the Covenant, it is a pill, Sir, which no secular
interest can so sweeten to me, that I should think my self obliged to be so far
of any man's Religion, as to swallow both parts of a contradiction in an Oath,
if it appear to me to be such.

Your promise that my Sermon should be first confuted before it be burnt, gives
me hope it will be longer lived, then upon the first report I thought it would.
But then I wonder you should pass that sentence on it, and choose Paraeus for
your precedent. I must confess to you Sir, had I written so destructively of
Parliaments as He did of Kings, I should think it no injustice from that High
Court, if they should doom me the Author to be sacrificed on the same Altar
with my Book. But having (upon the highest warrant that can possibly lend
courage to a good action) directed it wholly against False Prophets, and no
where reflected upon the Members of either House, but where I maintain it to be
unlawful to speak evil of dignities, to condemn it to the flame for speaking
such Truths, as I could not leave unspoken, unless I had prevaricated with the
Scripture, will be so far from the reproach of a punishment, that 'twill
increase the esteem and value of it from its sufferings; and make it ascend to
heaven as the Angel in the Book of Judges did, in the breath, and ayrc, and
perfume of an acceptable sacrifice to God.

Sir, As your she-D^ciple did very much mis-inform you, if she told you that I
endeavored to incense an Officer of this Garrison against you, so 'twas one
Error more in her (as upon just occasion I shall demonstrate to you) to tell
you that I vented damnable Doctrines in her Company, which I was not able to
maintain. She is my Gentle Adversary, and I desire she should know, that as I
desire not to fight serious duells with that unequal Sex, so when ever she
will again provoke me to a Dispute (so it be not at Saint Mary's, for S. Paul
forbids women to argue in the Church) she shall return with prizes, and I will
confess my self conquered. In the mean time, Sir, whither she came to you, or
you went to her, Her Sex puts me in mind of some false Teachers, not mentioned
in my Sermon, but branded by Saint Paul, * for creeping into houses, and
leading captive silly Women. 2 Timothy 3. 6
If your Intelligencer be one of these (as I shrewdly suspect she is) I should
be sorry for those Friends sake in whose Acquaintance we both meet, that she
should be liable to the Character of such silly women in the next verse; where
it is said, That they were ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge
of the Truth.

You proceed, and say, That you were in manifest Danger to loose your Right to
the Exercise of the Protestant Religion, whereupon the High Court of Parliament
thought it fit to repel force by force. Sir, do not entertain me with your own
false fears, and ^ealousies; but demonstrate to me that the King (for Him I
presume you mean) meant to extirpate the true Protestant Religion by the sword,
and to plant Popery in its stead; And you shall not more (...) charge me that I
make the Parliament by such a Resistance to Denizon the Alchoran, then I shall
truly pronounce the Kings party, in fighting for him to that end, guilty of a
Mahumetan persuasion. In saying this, you exceedingly mistake me if you think I
contend for a Vorstian Liberty, or am hereby a Friend to the Rebels in Ireland.
Sir, I hope you can distinguish between men's Disloyalty and Religion. As Rebels
I hold it fit, if they will not otherway return to their Alleagance; that they
be reduced by force. There is a right to their subjection pursued by such a
War, which makes all Arms warrantable which are employed for the recovery of
such a loss. But to think, that as they are Papists, nay, (Sir, I shall not
shrink from my word) if they were outright Infidels, that the Protestant
Religion is to be imposed upon them by force, is to make our selves guilty of
all the hard Censures which have past upon the Spaniards Conquest of the
Indians, where their Silver Mines were the true cause, and Religion the
pretense. Notwithstanding your Holy War, therefore, mentioned in the Revelation
(which place I have considered, and find it as mysterious as the pale or black
Horse) for ought you have said in disproof of it, I find not my self tempted to
desert my Opinion: which is, That to come into the field with an Armed Gospel,
is not the way chosen by Christ to make Proselytes. And, therefore Sir, I will
not so much distrust the Wisdom, or Justice of the Parliament, that upon your
bare Assertion, they will make me miserable, because I maintain that they
cannot wa^rantably compel any man to be happy.

Why the bare mention of your Scruple-house should put you into such a fit of
ill language, as to pronounce me unworthy to carry the Books of the Reverend
Divines after them, who met there to heal Doubts, or why my Carfax-Sermon
should contribute to the raging of that fit, I cannot reasonably imagine. Sir,
I have no mind to fight many Duells at Once; nor, (having received a challenge
from no other but your self) to engage my self with them by whom I have not
been provok'^.

Whither they be ungifted preachers, or Gifted Disputants, is best known to
themselves. But, certainly, Sir, if the Report which was made to me (by some
who brought both their understandings as well as Ears with t^em to the famous
meeting November 12.) be true, there was nothing so demonstratively by them
either objected, or replied, as might encourage them, or their Hearers, to
believe this piece of Popery, that they are unerring, and infallible in the
chair: pray, Sir, do not think my Famous pride, or self-conceitedness (which
you say has provoked you to break your chains, and to let loose your pen,
that you might whip me into Humility) has prompted me to say this. Had you
named the Reverend persons whose Books I am not worthy to carry after them, so
they be Greek or Latin Books, and those well understood by them, perhaps I
should have expressed a greater Act of Humility then you are aware of, and have
been content (though one of the new Doctors yet by the second Subscription of
your Letter but a Master of Art) to sit a while at the feet of such learned
Gamaliel's. But speaking indefinitely as you do, I hope Sir, for twenty years
study sake in this University, (where I have learnt to distinguish the letters
of the Greek Alphabet, and at first sight do know that it would beget a (...),
or quarrel among the Vowells, if (...) in a word should usurp the place of
(...)) you will find me a nobler employment then to carry Books after Them who
count Liberaries Superfluous, humane, Secular Things; And think a Minister, not
Minister of Gospel, (as your Scribe has twice erred in the transcription of
your letter, in a vowell very fatal to you) needs no other furniture but the
Spirit, Cottons Concordance, and the English Bible without the Apocrypha.

Sir, I am sorry the Fit which the mention of the Scruple-house did put you
into, should be increased by the mention of a Dark Room. There goes a Story of
one who had tasted a while of Bedlam, and was at length, by the help of
Discipline, diet, and Physic, cured of his Distraction; yet not so perfectly,
but that still when he came within the sight of the place, his fancy remembered
him of his old Distemper, and tempted him to do something which required a
second cure. I speak not this parable to upbraid any with an infirmity which is
unavoydably natural to them, and no way contracted from the pride, or
irregularity of their own Wills; But if you have read Tully's Paradoxes, you
may remember, Sir, that he there maintains the Opinion of the Stoics, that not
only they whose chains and fetters, proclaim them distempered, but that all
foolish, over passionate men are to be reckoned into the number of those who
are to be cured by manacles, and chains: pray Sir, do not take it ill, if
(being as you say a Poet) I cite a Poet who was of this Opinion; but maintains
it like a Philosopher, (I will not say a School Divine.) And having insisted in
verse upon Covetousness as one, Ambition as another, The love of beauty either
in real or painted faces, as another Species of Madness, He concludes in
Anger, and says, Ira furor brevis est; that is, That the Choleric man, during
the fit of his oholer, is in a short phrenzy. That which Seneca, Tully, and
Horace, called madness, (though not the other more natural, (which I should be
uncharitable to object to you) you by this letter (especially the angry part of
it) have given me very justifiable cause to apply to you, who (as all
dispassionated men may judge) have fulfilled the Poets definition of Madness
upon your self in all the parts of it but one, which is, that your Anger
against me is not furor Brevis, a short distraction, but extends from the word
Scruple-house to the End of your Letter. For first, Sir, in Language almost as
unclean, as the sin of uncleanness it self, you endeavor to raise a Suspicion
upon me in the world as if I had been more familiar then I should with light
Women in dark Rooms: Sir, besides the poverty of your wit, and quibling
Antitheses of Expression, (to which I find you in other places of your letter
very subject) I am not afraid (with all the confidence of an Innocent man) to
tell you, That as I never was an Enemy to that Sex, so I never converst with
any of them single, or in a dark Congregation, so loosely, to deserve to have
the slander fastened upon me, which Tertullian, and Minutius Faelix from him,
say was labored to be stuck upon the Christians of those Times, which was,
That they used to meet in Conventicles, where their custom was, after the end
of the Sermon, to put out the Candles, and then to commit Folly, the holy with
the holy. Sir, in plain Terms, (How blameable soever other Errors, or
vanities of my life may make me stand in the presence of God, who upon a true
Repentance, Sir, is not so Fatally tied to the Spindle of absolute Reprobation,
as not to keep his promise, and to seal merciful pardons, yet) in this
particular, my known Conversation in this University, and all other places,
bids me defy you; And challeng not only your self, but the precisest of your
Informers, either here, or any where else, (who use not to suffer the looks,
Gestures, or thoughts of any who are not of their Tribe, much less notorious
matter of Fact, to escape unquestioned) to appear in an accusation against me;
where it shall be probably, not conjecturally proved, that I have been frail
with the frail Sex either holy or profane.

Sir, all they of that soft Sex, with whom I have converst, have accused me of
too great severity, and ruggedness, toward them, but you are the first, who
ever endeavored to make me guilty of being too amorously affected.

Next, sir, However you may tell me that you have not so lost your Reason, or
Logic, but that you, (the meanest who appears for the Parliament) are ready to
take up the Gauntlet which I threw down, and to answer the challenge which I
first sounded in the Pulpit; yet, certainly, They who shall read that passage
of my Sermon, where I say, That if I were presently to enter into a dispute
with the greatest Patriarch among these Prophets, who (notwithstanding that
which I said before) will still perversely strive to prove that our Church stood
in such need of Reformation, that the growing superstitions of it could not
possibly be expiated, but by so much Civil War, I should not doubt with
modesty enough to prove to him back again, that all such irrational Arguments,
as have only his zeal for their Logic are composed of untemper'd Mortar: And
shall compare the wild Torrent of ill language, with which the furious
remainder of your paragraph over-flows, with the Sober Web, and Composition of
my Sermon, which you there think no worthier of, then of a Triobolar Ballad,
They will find that you have said nothing in the progress of at least forty
Folio-lines together, which shows not that your Reason assisted not your pen.
One passage I confess (like a lucide Intervall) has some taste of sobriety,
and not short fury in it; which is, that how meanly so ever you think you may
speak of me, yet you think you are to make a more honorable mention of the
Author of the Practical Catechism. That learned Doctor, Sir, I am acquainted
with, but not so inwardly as that he should contribute to the interlining any
letter I write to you; or should suggest to me what he, not I, think fit to be
maintained. I wish your lucid intervall had been as long as your fit; For, then
I persuade my self you would never have suspected that he did overlook my
letter, or advised me to contend for the lawfulness of Prelacy, because he was
present at the sad debate at Vxbridge.

What you mean when you say, That if the learned Doctor has any thing to
object against you, He knows your mind, and (being none of the new Doctors, who
you presume are Infants) is able to speak for Himself, I cannot possibly
divine: unless by this Oraculous Expression, you would have him understand you
ready to enter into a second conflict with him, and would put me to the mean
employment to convey your challenge. Sir, if I know that Doctor well, you had
best content your self with me, who am a more poetical adversary; and whose
weapons, you know, when they strike most, being sheathed in Roses, ought to be
terrible to none but such, whose buying and selling Consciences (like the
money changers in the Gospel) will drive them out of the Temple at the sight of
a whip made of straws and rushes. Nevertheless, Sir, if you be so fruitfully
quarrelsome, that you think your leisure will serve you to hold combat with us
both, let me desire you to hold this Opinion of us, that as I shall at no time
recruit my self fro him as an Orator, so he is too good a scholar to need my
assistance as a Poet. This word Poet, I do observe, through the whole phrenzy
of your letter, you strive to make use of in ad^graceful sense; And object it
to me as a Reproach that the Muses are my Friends. In one place you call me a
Cretian Prophet, That is, (according to your Comment) a Poet; In another place
you tell me, that only the few places of scripture which I have misapplied in
my Sermon, can preserve it from passing among the penny-merchandizes of those
that s^l Ballads. In your next paragraph (where you challenge me to dispute
with you in English at St. Mary's, as Mr ^rbury did) one of your Arguments to
move me to that frantic enterprise is, because I am an English Poet, and have
been not only addicted to Plays, but have shussied my Mother Tongue Verses,
with other Verses published in more learned languages, in the same Book Printed
by the University-Printer. First, sir, though the ungentleness of your style,
and Expressions, do sufficiently testify that neither the Muses, nor Graces
assisted at your Birth, yet I hope you are not such an enemy to numbers, to
think poetry Superstitious, and therefore to be turned with Imagery out of the
Church. If you do, you will compel me to call Nazianzen in to my Aid; who,
besides his writing of a Play (if Erasmus have not misnumbred them) has
written thirty thousand Heroic, (...), Hend^casyllable, Elegiack, and other
verses. Tertullian, Si^, you know has confuted Marcion in Verse; and Synesius
thought it as great a glory to be called a good Poet, as some who wrote in
prose did to be called fathers of the Church. I will not repeat a piece of
Prosper to you nor tell you what S. Austin has said in the prais of Virgil. To
be a Cretian Prophet, that is in your sense, a lying (...), but in all theirs
who understand the first C. of Titus, an Evil Beast, and a false Prophet) Is I
confess a crime. But then, sir, as one excellently says in his Defense of
Poesy, This is a kind of Poetry which belongs (...) those who lie in prose as
well as those who fain in Verse. For Plin^ when he speaks of men with one foot,
whose breadth interposed between them and the sun, shades their whole body, to
be as great a poet as Ovid, when he speaks of a Virgin transformed into a
Laurel, so, Sir, when you, (contrary to the direct mind, and Expressions of
my Sermon) fain that to be spoken of the Parliament, which is only spoken
against False Prophets, you are a far greater Poet then I have yet shown my
self either upon the Stage at Blackfriars, or in any University Book here in
Oxford. Next, sir, I was never so addicted to English Poetry, but that in the
same University Book I had Latin Verses too; And the Reason why I wrote in
both Languages was, because I was prompted to it by my Obedience to their
Commands, who had Authority over me, and thought English the fitter Language
for that part of the Court, whose Sex does make it a Solecism to be written to
in Latin.

Lastly, Sir, As for your Arguments to give you one of Mr Yerbury's Meetings,
at Saint Mary's; 1. Because my Sermon Preached there is English, next, because
you conceive that to be the readiest course to undeceive the people who
understand not Latin; thirdly, because I am an English Poet; if you think I
have not sufficiently answered them in my two former letters to you, I desire
you once more to consider, if I should have consented to that course, whither
you, as well as I, in the opinion of discreet men, might not have endangered
our selves to have that half verse in Horace applied to us, Aut insanit Homo,
aut versus facit, That either we are both mad, or both Poets.

The way to avoid such an Imputation, in a Time of liberty, where every body
may say what they list, is for us to stand constantly to the more Academicall
Proposition I made you; which was, to meet at Latin Weapons in the Divinity
School. Where, sir, not agreeing upon the true state of the Questions before
hand, (For if we agree before hand, nothing will be left us to dispute) if you
please, the Question shall be that which concludes your Letter; That is,
Prelacy, which, how far it is, or it is not to be defended to be Iure divino
shall then appear. In the mean time, sir, as I can by no means allow that
victory, and Success, are always the true signs of a Right cause, (Because,
The Lord of Hosts, who, you say, has broken all our forces, is sometimes
falsely thought to assist, when in truth he does only permit) so, Sir when you
write next to me, let me request you to keep your promise; which is, to deal
with me rationally for the Matter, and Spiritually, that is, like a Divine for
the language and form. Otherwise, sir, though I have long since learnt from
the best Master, that when I am reviled, I am not to revile again, yet,
instead of a Conference, meeting with nothing but Invectives, it is possible you
may so far provoke me from my mild temper, that the Philosophers expression
in Lucians Nigrinus may be verified upon me; (...). The English of it will
endure the public test; to which if you will be pleased to submit your Letters
with the same readiness that I am content to submit mine, I doubt not but the
world will judge, that as you have not yet confuted, so you have very
unchristianly injured

The Author of the Sermon against False Prophets, J. MAIN.
From my Chamber, Jan. 23. 1646.

To this Answer (in which the Reader may see, I have not much digrest from the
copy which was before me, but have proportioned my Defense to every
considerable particular of M. Cheynels Charge) at the end of six days was
returned this Reply.

SIR,
If I had not answered you according to your folly, you would have been wise in
your own conceit; but if I should again answer you according to your folly, I
fear I should become too like unto you, Prove. 26. 4, 5. I told you that I did
let loose my pen, that you might see how easy it is to answer you with a
running pen, nay a running negligence in the less serious part of the day; I
did let fly so many quibbles that you might smell the stench of your own
elaborate folly; glad I am that you have censured me for imitating of you, I
hope you will now be at leisure to censure your self, for setting me so foul
a copy; do but read over your own Sermons and Letters, and suppose they were
mine, and then seriously and impartially pass your sentence on them, and I dare
say you will be a gainer by this conflict.

I am very much pleased with your fair condescension to have all things in
controversy rationally and spiritually examined.

1. Sir, you did as I conceive preach in defense of all images set up in any
Chapel in the University; you know there are diverse Images of some persons in
the glorious Trinity set up in some Chapels within this University: You must
then acknowledge all Images of that sort ought to be taken down.

You are not persuaded by any Scriptures which I have cited, Imago nos tantum
ut memoriale excitat uti Iesuitae passim. Dico non esse ^am certum in Ecclesia
an sint faciendae imagines Dei, sive Trinitatis, qua^ Christi and sanctoru^,
hoc enim ad fidem ^ertinet, illud est in opinione. Bella. de imag. l. 2. c. 8
Inanimata spiritualem quandam virtutem exconsecratione adipiscuntur, etc. Tho.
p. 3. q. 83. art 3. Deum imaginibus inhabitante^ colunt, Deum ^utem virtute^
stam spirituale^ ^etrahere al^quando sive (...) fatentur. Cajetanus hac ^n re
ne Genti^ibus quidem ^apientior ha^tur.
but nature has taught you (so pure is your nature) that it is a breach of the
second Commandment to draw a picture of God: (revise that fancy) the Schoolmen
whom you prefer before the testimonies cited out of the Word, have taught you
that it is not only sinful, but impossible to draw any picture of God. But,
be pleased to consider that the Scriptures are a perfect (nay indeed the only
All-sufficient perfect) Rule, and therefore you need not go about to patch up
the rule with the low general dictates of nature and Schoolmen, you may study
the Lullian Art, and fill your brain with Sebund's fancyes, but my Schoolmen
(as you call them) are the bestTutors, and the best Scholars. If you prove
that is is impossible to picture God, you do not touch the point in
Controversy, for vain men will fancy and endeavor to do, that which is
impossible for to be done. Believe it Sir, they who had consulted as many
Muses, and courted as many Graces as you have done, and were able to
demonstrate out of their Poets that we are Gods offspring, yet were not able
without the help of divine Revelation to infer, from thence, that the Godhead
is not like to Gold, as you may see it convincingly proved; Act 17. 29. For as
much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like to Gold or Silver, or stone graven by Art or man's device, I
dare not therefore make the Schoolmen my Judges in this weighty point, and I
believe you cannot prove them to be Judges in any point which concerns the
Mystery of faith or the power of godliness, but enough of that.

3. The word (thereupon) is sometimes Illative, sometimes Ordinative, you are
sufficiently answered; but let me add, that if no Image is like God, then sure
those Images, which are not made to represent God, and yet are by Idolatours
turned into Idols, and worshipped as if they were divine, cannot reasonably be
defended. Sir, I must guess at your meaning, because I believe you have omitted
two or three words (such is your running negligence) which should help to make
your sophistical criticisme perfect sense.

Truly Sir, if it be so high a fault to picture God: I may justly wonder that
any picture of a Saint turned into an Idol should be retained and pleaded for
by any man that pretends to be a Protestant, and if it be impossible to picture
God, it is also impossible to picture God-man. And I believe that you will
acknowledge our Mediator to be (...).

4. That the Sun and Images cannot be put in the scales of a comparison in
point of fitness to be preserved, is a truth written with a Sun-beame; Sir, I
never durst argue from the abuse of a thing against the use of it, if the thing
be necessary; But the Sun is necessary, and Images are not necessary, ergo,
there is no parity of reason between the terms of your comparison.

5. It appears to me by your shifting fallacy, that you make Copes as
necessary as clean Linen.

6. You will never be able to prove, that all, that the prelates and their
Faction have borrowed out of the Missall, Ritualls, Breviary Pontifical of
Rome are to be found in any Lyturgie received by the Primitive Church; And I
would entreat you to consider, whether they, who do profess a separation from
the Church of Rome, can in reason receive and embrace such trash and trumpery.
And yet though you would willingly be esteemed a Protestant, I find you very
unwilling to part with any thing which the Prelates have borrowed from the
Court (rather then Church) of Rome.

7. Your next Paragraph does concern Tradition; I shall give you leave to
prefer the constant and universal consent of the Church of Christ in all
ages, before the reason of any single man; but Sir, you do very ill to call
the testimony of the spirit speaking in the word to the Conscience of private
men, a private spirit; I think you are more profane in the stating of this
point then Bellarmine himself.

8. You have not yet proved that any Prelate can challenge the Sole power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction Iure divino.

9. I should be glad to know for how many years you will justify the purity
of the Doctrine, Discipline and Government in England. I believe the Doctrine,
Discipline and Government of the Prelaticall faction whom you call the Church,
was not excellent, if you reckon from 1630. to 1640. and that is time enough
for men of our time for to examine. I believe that you will acknowledge, that
the Prelates did lay an Ostracisme upon those who did oppose them; who were in
the right both in the point of Doctrine and Discipl^ne, we shall in due time
dispute. Though Prelacy it self be an usurpation, yet there were many other
encroachments which may justly be called Prelaticall usurpations, and the
Parliament has sufficiently declared its judgment in this point, they have
clearly proved that Prelacy had taken such a deep root in England, and had
such a destructive influence, not only into the pernicious evils of the
Church, but Civil State, that the Law of right reason (even Salus populi quae
suprema lex est) did command and compel them to take away both root and
branch; you may dispute that point with them; Sir, you cannot prove that
Prelacy is an Order of the Church, as ancient as the Christian Church it self,
and made venerable by the never interrupted reception of it in all Ages of the
Church but ours.

10. I am no Turkish Prophet, I never preached any piece of the Alchoran for
good Doctrine, much less did I ever make it a piece of the Gospel; all that I
say is this, that Christians incorporated in a Civil State may make use of
Civil and natural means for their outward safety. And that the Parliament
has a Legal power more then sufficient to prevent and restrain Tyranny.
Finally, the Parliament has power to defend that Civil right which we have to
exercise the true Protestant Religion, this last point is sure of highest
consequence because it concerns Gods immediate honor, and the Peoples
temporal and eternal good. Pray Sir, show me if you can, why, he who says
the Protestants in Ireland may defend their Civil right for the free exercise
of their Religion, against the furious assaults of the bloody Rebels, does by
that assertion proclaim himself a Turk, and Denison the Alchoran; you talk
of the Papists Religion, Sir, their faith is faction, their Religion is
Rebellion, they think they are obliged in conscience, to put Heretics to the
sword, this Religion is destructive to every Civil State into which true
Protestants are incorporated, and therefore I cannot but wonder at your
extravagancy in this point. Sir, Who was it that would have imposed a Popish
Service Book upon Scotland by force of Arms? You presume that I conceive the
King had an intent to extirpate the Protestant Religion; Sir, I am sure that
they who did seduce or overawe the King, had such a design. I do not believe
that the Queen and her Agents (the Papists in England who were certainly
confederate with the Irish Rebels) had any intent to settle the true
Protestant Religion; and you cannot but believe that their intent was, to
extirpate the Protestant Religion by the sword, and to plant Popery in its
stead; I know Christ does make (...), and break the spiritual power of
Antichrist, by his word and spirit, for Antichrist is cast out of the hearts
and consciences of men by the spirit of the Lord Jesus; but Christ is King of
Nations as well as King of Saints, and will break the temporal power of
Antichrist by Civil and natural means. If Papists and Delinquents are in
readiness to resist or assault the Parliament by Arms, how can the Parliament
be defended or Delinquents punished but by force of Arms? I know men must be
converted by a spiritual persuasion, but they may be terrified by force of
Arms from persecution. All that I say, is, the Parliament may repel force
with force, and if men were afraid to profess the truth because of the Queens
Army* and are now as fearful to maintain errors for fear of the Parliament,
the scales are even, and we may (by study, conference, disputation, and prayer
for a blessing upon all) be convinced, and converted by the undeniable
demonstrations of the Spirit; Sir, this is my persuasion, and therefore I am
sure far from that Mahumetan persuasion of which I am unjustly accused.

11. I am glad that you speak out, and give light to your dark room; I did
not accuse you of Conventi^les. I believe you hate those Christian meetings
which Tertullian and Minutius, Pliny and others speak of; we had lights and
witnesses good store at our meetings. And as for your conceit, that I deserve
to be in Bedlam, because of the predominancy of my pride and passion, and the
irregularity of my will; Sir, I confess that I deserve to be in Hell, a worse
place then Bedlam; and if you scoff at me for this acknowledgement, I shall
say as Augustine did, Irrideant me arrogantes, and nondum salubriter prostrati,
and elisi a te Deus meus, ego tamen confiteor dedecora mea in laud tua. Sir,
be not too confident of the strength of your wit, make a good use of it, or
else you may quickly come to have as little wit as you conceive, God has
bestowed on me. 1. Do you believe that your nature is corrupt? 2. And does not
a wanton wit make the heart effeminate? 3. Did you never converse with any
woman of light behavior? rub up your memory. 4. Superstitious persons are
usually lascivious, I could tell you more, but I spare you. 5. Are you more
temperate then the Disciples to whom Christ gave that caveat, Luke 21. 34? you
may then apply your self to Prayer and Fasting; do not say that this is a
filthy Caveat, but beware of that filthy sin, and acknowledge that the Caveat
is given you, upon sad considerations.

12. You tell me that God is not so fatally tied to the Spindle of an absolute
Reprobation, but that upon your Repentance he will seal your Pardon. Sir,
Reprobatio est tremendum Mysterium; how dare you jest upon such a Subject, at
the thought of which each Christian trembles? Can any man repent, that is given
up to a reprobate mind, and an impenitent heart? And is not every man finally
impenitent, save those few to whom God gives repentance, freely, powerfully,
effectually? See what it is for a man to come from Ben. Johnson, or Lucian, to
treat immediately of the high and stupendidious mysteries of Religion; the Lord
God pardon this wicked thought of your heart, that you may not perish in the
bond of iniquity and gall of bitterness; be pleased to study the 9. Chapter to
the Romans.

You say if we agree upon the true state of the Questions before hand, nothing
will be left us to dispute. Sir, it is 1. one thing to state a question for
debate, so that you may undertake the affirmative, I the Negative, or e contra:
2. another thing to state a question in a supposition as the Respondent usually
does, and a third business to state a question after the debate in a prudent
and convincing determination, as the Moderatour should do; I speak of
agreeing upon the state of the question in the first sense, that the Question
may be propounded in such terms as do so far state the point in
Controversy, that you and I may know which part to take, the Affirmative or
Negative.

The questions as I conceive are these that follow.

1. Whether all that our Prelates have borrowed of the Church of Rome, and
imposed upon the people, ought to be still retained in the Church of England?
2. Whether the Images of our Mediator, and the Saints are useful Ornaments in
Protestant Churches? 3. Whether any Prelate be endued with the power of sole
Ordination and Jurisdiction Iure divino? 4. Whether they who defend the
Protestants of Ireland against the Rebels by force of Arms, are therefore to
be esteemed Mahumetans? 5. Whether that faith which is grounded only upon
Tradition, ought to be esteemed a Divine faith? 6. Whether the spirit speaking
in the word to the conscience of private men ought to be esteemed a private
Spirit? 7. Whether any Reprobate can ever be converted or saved? 8. Whether the
Papists of England, and Rebels of Ireland with their Confederates did
endeavor to extirpate the Protestant Religion and plant Popery in its stead?
9. Whether they who endeavored to impose a Popish Service-Booke upon Scotland
by force of Arms, were of the Mahumetan persuasion? 10. Whether the Schoolmen
are Competent judges in any point which concerns the Mystery of Faith or
Power of Godliness? 11. Whether the National Covenant contradict it self?
Sir, if you please to answer upon the three first questions in the Schools,
and hold them as you seem to hold them all Affirmatively, I shall endeavor to
prove the Negative.

To all your scoffs and abuses I have nothing to reply; if God bids you revile
or curse me, I shall submit to God; you call me Fool, Bedlam, Turk, Dog,
Devil, because I give you seasonable advice: Sure Sir, Nazianzen, Prosper,
etc. were not guilty of such Poetry, nor did Prudentius teach you any such
streines.

I did very honestly forewarn you of a visitation; it is I think proper enough
to enquire into matters of fact at a visitation. Now whether Copes have been
put to a superstitious use is not a question to be determined by any but
In-Artificiall Arguments, I mean by sufficient witnesses. To that which you
Prophecy of, that I am like to be a Visitor; I answer 1. I think you have
little ground for such a Prophecy: I call it a Prophecy, for I am sure the
Houses of Parliament have not yet named any Visitor. 2. You talk much of the
wisdom of the High Court of Parliament; and can you imagine that so wise a
Court or (as you term it) Council will make choice of a Bedlam, a Turk, Dog,
etc. to visit so many prudent and learned Doctors?

Sir, you say you are not satisfied with my Arguments, you might have
considered that I do reserve my arguments till we meet at Schools, our work
for the present is to draw up the Points in Controversy into formal
questions; I have you see formed some questions, if you please to add more,
you may, I shall be ready to give you the best satisfaction I can, after these
are discussed, if I be not called away to some better employment by those who
have power to dispose of

Your humble Monitor, FRAN: CHEYNELL.
An Omnia e Missali Breviario necnon Pontificali Romano a Prelatis nostris
decerpta, populoque obstrusa in Ecclesiam recipienda sint? Christi Sanctorumque
imagines Reformatorum Templis utili sint ornatui? Soli Praelato potestas
Ordinationis nec non Iurisdictionis Iure divino competat?
In hisce quaestionibus animi tui sententiam expectat

FRANCISCUS CHEYNELL.




Having read over this Letter, I felt two contrary Affections move within my
self. First, I was sorry, that it began in that kind of bitterness, which
uses to have the same mischievous effect upon minds not addicted to quarrel,
as blear eyes have upon other eyes more sound. Which find themselves
insensibly infected by beholding; And in the presence of those that are bleared
unawares learn their imperfections, and become bleared too. Next, I was glad,
that the Controversies between us, (which like the original of mankind,
began in two, and in a short time had multiplied themselves past number) were
at length reduced to three latin questions, and those to be disputed in the
Divinity School; where that part of Oxford, which understands no other Tongue,
but that in which they daily utter their commodities, if they had been present
toward the making of a throng, had yet been absent to the dispute. Thus
divided, therefore, between my provocations to Answer the reproachful Preface,
and my Alacrity to comply with the Conclusion of the precedent Letter, I
returned this following Answer.

Sir, When I had opened the Letter you sent me on Saturday night last, Ian. 30.
and found by the first period of it, that as your first Letter showed you a
great Master in Detraction, so in this you had learnt the Art to make the
Scripture revile me too, and taught two of Solomon's Pro. 26. 4, 5.
Proverbs to call me Fool; Finding also in the next period how naturally and
uncompelled ill language flows from you; who do here confess that you did let
loose your pen that I might see, how easily, and with what an unforced
Dexterity, in the less serious part of the Day, without premeditation, or the
expense of Study, you could revile me; And withal, that you did let fly so
many quibbles (as the exercise of your Recreation, I presume) to mind me of my
more industrious Trifles, I must confess I not only looked upon you as a
Person fit to sit in the Psa. (...). 1.
Seat of the Scornful, but as one very capable to be requited with a Proverb;
which the same Pro. 26. 18. 19.
Chapter which you quoted, presented to me at the 18. and 19. Verses; where
it is said, That as a madman who casts firebrands, Arrows, and death, so is
the man that deceives his neighbor and says he is in sport.

Sir, I should not have applied this piece of Scripture to you by way of
Retaliation, (which may seem to have some bitterness in it) had you not at the
very threshold and first unlocking of your Letter, verified this Proverb upon
your self, by casting firebrands and Arrows first, and thereby deceiving me,
who (upon your promise that I should be spiritually dealt with, that is, as a
Divine engaged in a needless Controversy with a Divine ought to be)
unsuccesfully flattered my self, that for the future, though I could not expect
much Reason or proof or Argument from you, yet you would certainly bind your
self to the Laws of Sobriety, and good Language. How you have made good your
promise, will appear to any, who (besides the reproachful proverb with which
you begin your Letter, and for which, a greater then Solomon has said, you
shall be in Mat. 5. 22
Danger of Hellfire) shall read the puddle of your letter which streams from
the first foul Spring, and Head of it; where, having first charged me in my
writing to you with Elaborate Folly, you make it an Excuse to the Dirt and mire
of your pen, that I set you the Copy, and was foul in my Expressions first.

Sir, Though the saying of Tacitus be one of the best confutations of
Detraction, Convitia spreta exolescunt, and though I have always thought that
to enter combat with a Dunghill is the way to come off more defiled, yet
finding my self engaged (like one of the poetical Knights errant) with an
Adversary that will not only provoke me to fight, but, whose best weapon is to
defile me out of the field, I shall for once apply as good perfume to the stench
you speak of, as can possibly in such times make me walk the streets in my own
Oxford, uncondens'd not by you made foggy, Air; And shall make it evident,
first to your self, next to the world, (if you will consent that what thus
secretly passes between us shall be made public, and Printed) that you are
not only fallible in your most sad, and melancholy considerations, but in
those more pleasant, mirthful chymes of quibbling, for which I before placed
you in the Chair.

First, sir, you bid me read over my two Sermons and the two letters which I
have sent you, as if they were yours, and then impartially tell you, whether I
am not to pass sentence upon them as you do; That they are Difficiles Nugae,
Elaborate Follies.

To which my Reply is; First, that there is so much loyalty, and so little
self-interest in them, that my imagination can never be strong enough to
Suppose them to be yours, Next, That what Folly soever betrays it self in your
expressions, yet the matter is built upon such sure rocks of the Scripture,
that it is not all the waves or Tempest which you can raise against them, will be
able to reduce them to the fate of a House built upon the Sand. Thirdly, (since
all Disputes, as well as wit, are like a Rest Kept up at Tennis, where good
players do the best with the best Gamsters) I do sadly promise you, that when
ever you shall either write or urge to me such Arguments of serious
Consideration, that I shall not have reason to think St. Paul's saying verified
in my Expressions, that my Foolish things are sufficient to confound, and bring
to naught your wise; I will lay aside the Folly you tax me withal. In the mean
time, if you think my Letters to you (By what Glass soever my Sermons were
made) are elaborate, pray compare the Dates, and Receipts of them, with the
No-dates, and uncertain Receipts of yours; And you will find that the longest
letter, I have yet written to you, was but the creature of two days, when your
unelaborate answer to it back again was the Birth, and Travel of a whole week.

Having said this, Sir, by way of Answer to your ungospel-like preface, I shall
next, (confining my self once more to your own method) address my self to the
examination of the rest of your letter. A hard task, I confess; It being so
much a Twinn-brother to your former where your evasions, and little escapes are
so many, and your true substantial, solid disproofes of any one thing which I
have said either in my Sermons or Letters, so few, that, to deal freely with
you, my Conflict with you hitherto has been (and for ought I yet foresee is
like to prove) like the Fight between Hercules, and the River Achelous; which
when 'twas foiled in one shape, could tire the Conqueror, and presently
provoke him to a fresh encounter in another. Sir, I could wish (without your
strange endless multiplycation of Questions) you would assume to your self some
constant figure, wherein I might say, I grappled with a bodyed Adversary. But
changing Form, as you do, and putting me still to prove that which you have not
yet so much as seemingly confuted, pardon me (I beseech you) if I say, that my
combat with you is not only like the combat of Hercules with that River, but
like his, who thought he had entered Duel with a Giant, and after much toil
found himself encountered by a cloud.

First, you conceive, that I preached in defense of all Images set up in any
Chapel within this University. Sir, This is but your conceit, of which you,
not I am guilty. My sermon, if you mark it, is not so confined either to
Vanlings Draughts, or any other man's pencil, as to defend what ever their
Irregular Fancies shall draw, or not to defend what ever, either here, or any
where else, they shall regularly limb. But if your conceit were true, what does
your Logic infer, That because some Chapels are adorned with the Images of
some of the persons in the Glorious Trinity, therefore I must acknowledge all
Images of that sort ought to be taken down? Pray, Sir, how long has the
single- Topic of your mere Assertion been of such forcible Authority, that
without any other proof, you should think me obliged to hold such Images
worthy of expulsion, because you say they are? Had you either from Scripture
(the most perfect Rule for the Decision of Controversies) or from Reason,
(Though in your esteem but a piece of nature corrupted) urged any one necessary
Argument to prove them unlawful, or things which deserve to be called the
Idolatry or Superstition of the place, perhaps being a servant to
Demonstration, (though a favorite of the muses) I should have been one of the
first that should have cried out for Reformation. But this not being done by
you, nor indeed, possible to be done by any other, though my sermon speak not
of any Image of any person in the Trinity, yet I conceive all Arguments, which
shall strive to prove, that no picture of any person in the Trinity ought to be
the Ornaments of a Church, or Chapel Window, will be as frail and brittle as
the Glass in which they stand. Sir, I have said in my last Letter, and shall
repeat it in this, that it is not you, but nature and the numerous places of
Scripture, which forbid to make any picture of God, (either taken for the
Divine essence common to all the three persons, or for the person of God the
Father distinct from the other two) which persuade me that any such picture
(besides the impossibility) is unlawful. And therefore you need not have put
your self to the unnecessary trouble to hang your Margin with quotations taken
out of Bellarmine, or Aquinas; since all such quotations applied to that which
I have said and you have cited, which is, That all pictures of God are a breach
of the second Commandment, do strike me no more, then if I should enter
conflict with those dead Arras-Captains, which in hangings threaten to assault
the spectatour with imaginary, woven Lances. Much less need you so
superfluously have called S. Paul from the third heaven to prove, that (because
he once quoted this Greek Hemistick out of Aratus (...), that we are the
Offspring of God) God is not like to gold, silver, or stone, graven by the art
of man's device. Since by that which I have said of him in my former Letter, you
are obliged to testify for me, that I have urged convincing reasons to prove
he cannot be: which Reasons, as borrowed from nature and the schoolmen (with
whom, sir, I hope you are not implacably fallen out) I do not urge as the
supreme Judges of what I there prove, but as subservient mediums, which carry a
music and consent to that which God has said of himself in the more perfect
Rule of his Word. So that, for doing this, to charge me (as you do) with the
Study of the Lullian Art, is either nonsense in your Letter, or an Illation
which resolvs it self into a contemptible mistake; which is, That because
Lullius, who wrote of Chemistry, was called Raymundus, I, who have read another
Raymundus who wrote of Natural Theology, am to be called a Lullianist, which
is a Logic as wretched, as if I should say, Mr Cheynell has read Cajetane,
and has made him a marginal note, Therefore he is a seeker of the Philosophers
Stone, and study's to convert the Ore and Tin of the kingdom into Gold. Sir,
Your Logic is not much mended when you say, That the Word (thereupon) is
sometimes Illative, sometimes Ordinative. For take it which way you will, As it
stands in your last letter, you are bound to give me thanks as a Poet, that I
dealt not with you as a Sophister, and proclaimed your infirmity for having
uttered a contradiction. Which contradiction, I confess, might have been
avoided by the insertion of the omitted word or two, for want of which, you say
my sophistical Criticism is abortive, and came but with one leg into the
World.

In answer to your next Paragraph, I shall most readily grant, That it is a high
fault to picture God. Because, any such Draught not being possible to be made
of him, but by resembling of him to something w^n is able to afford a Species
or Idea to the sense, would, (besides the Falseness of it, where a gross
material figure should represent a pure invisible Essence) degrade him from the
honor which he ought to hold in our Minds which are his Temple; in which
Temple if he should hang up in a frame or table, which should contract and
shrink him to the finite Model of a man or any other creature, 'twere the way
to convert him into an Idol; and so (as I have often said) to sin against the
second Commandment, which as it may be broken by spending our Worship upon
false Gods; so it may also be broken by our false portraitures, and
apprehensions, and venerations of the True.

The case of the Saints is far otherwise. For whose pictures turned into Idols,
as I have no where pleaded, (For as Idols I acknowledge they are the crime of
those who worship them) so, as Ornaments, you will never be able convincingly
to prove but that they may be innocently retained, and be looked on by those who
do only count them speechless Colors. The like may be said of al Pictures made
of Christ, which pretend to express no more of him then is capable of
Representation, and exceed not the lines and symetry of his Body and flesh. For
I shall grant you that to Limb his Divinity, or to draw him in both his Natures,
as he is (...) God as well as man, is altogether impossible, and not in the
power of any Painter, though we should recall Apelles, or Parrhasius from their
Graves, and once more put Pencils into their Hand. You know, sir, if a man
should have his picture drawn, 'twould be an impossible task, if he should
enjoin the Painter to limb his soul, as well as the proportion and feature of
his Body, since the Soul is a thing so unexpressible to the sense, that it
scarce affords any Idea to be understood by the mind. Sir, if you have read
Aristotle's Books (...), you will there find, that the proper Objects of all the
senses besides those of the Eye (though much grosser then Spirits or Souls)
cannot be brought into picture. A Painter may draw a flower but he cannot limb
a scent. He may paint fire, but he cannot draw heat. He may furnish a table
with an imaginary banquet, but he that should offer to taste of this banquet
would find himself cozened. The Reason is, because Nature it self makes it
impossible for the proper Object of one sense to be the Object of another; And
finds not art or colors for any thing invisible; But only for those
Superficie's, Symetry's, and sensible parts of Things, which are first capable
to be seen, and then to be transcribed into a picture. But why that part of
Christ, which after his Resurrection, (when it began to cease to be any longer
a part of this visible World) was seen of above five hundred brethren at once,
may not be painted; Nay, why the figure of a Dove, or of cloven Tongues of fire
(wherein the third person in the glorious Trinity appeared, when he descended
upon our Mediator Christ, and sat upon the heads of the Apostles) may not be
brought into imagery, I must confess to you, I am not sharp-witted enough to
perceive. Though this I shall freely say to you, (and pray do not call it
Poetry) That to maintain that Christ thus in picture may be worshipped, is such a
piece of Supe^stition, as not only teaches the simple to commit Idolatry, but
endeavors to verify upon him in colors the reproach which the calumniating
Jews stuck upon his person and to make him thus painted, a Seducer of people.

As for your fourth paragraph, (which assaults me the second time with an
Argument without an Edge, which is, that the Sun and Images cannot be put in
the scales of comparison in point of fitness to be preserved) having in my
former Letter already answered you, I shall not put my self to the needless
trouble, the second time to confute it.

For answer to your Fifth, pray, Sir, read that part of my Sermon which you
have corrupted into a quibble; And there you shall find, that what I say of
clean linen is not, as you say, a shifting Fallacy. But I there say that which
you will never be able to control; which is, That by the same reason that you
make Surplices to be superstitious because papists wear them, you may make
Linen also to be superstitious because papists shift; And so conclude
cleanliness to be as unlawful as Surplices or Copes. Sir, this is (...); I
confess, the same Answer twice served in to you, not out of scarcity or
barrenness, or for want of another Reply, but because much of your Letter is
but crambe repetita, a carret twice boiled.

Your sixth paragraph is a faggot bound up with more sticks in it, then you,
without poetical License, can possibly gather from my Letter; where, Sir, I
only promise you, (when ever you shall call upon me) to derive to you all the
ancient parts of our English Liturgy from Liturgy's which were in the Church
before popery was born. Of which if any part be to be found in the Rubricks of
the Church of Rome your logic will never be able to prove, that therefore it is
to be rejected as trash and trumpery in ours. Good things, Sir, lose not their
goodness, because they are in some places mingled with superstitious. Nor, as I
told you before, do David's Psalms cease to be a piece of Canonical Scripture,
because they are to be found bound up in the volumn with the Mass. Sir, if what
ever is made use of by the Pope, or touches upon Rome, should be superstitious,
the River Tiber would be the most blameable river in the World. What you mean
by a prelatical Faction here in England, or what they borrowed from the Rituals
or pontifical of Rome, is expressed to me in such a mist of words (which sound
big to the common people, and signify nothing to the wise) that I must confess
my dullness, I do not understand you. If you mean, that they inserted any new
pieces into the old garment of our Co^mon-prayer-book; and those borrowed from
the Missal, or Breviary of Rome, I believe, Sir, (abstracting from those
alterations made in the prayers for the King, Queen, and Royal issue, which the
Death of Princes exacted, (unless, for constancy sake, you would have them
allow of prayers for the dead; and in King Charles and Queen Mary's days, to
pray still for King James and Queen Anne, which would be a piece of popery
equal to the invocations of saints) you will find nothing modern or of such new
contrivance, as past not Bucers Examen in the reign of Edward the sixth; And
was confirmed by Act of Parliament in the reign of Queen El^zabeth. In saying
this in their defense, who had the ordering of such changes, I hope Sir, you
will not so uncharitably think me imbark't in their Faction (which truly to me
still presented it self like the concealed Horses under ground, a fiction made
to walk the streets, to terrify the people) as to persuade your self, after my
so many professions to fall a sacrifice to the Protestant Religion, that it can
be either in the power of the Church or court of Rome, to tempt me from my
Resolution: Which is, to go out of the world, in the same Religion I came in.

Sir, I gave warning in my last letter not to venture your writings upon the
Argument, which deceives none but very vulgar understandings, and which I in my
Sermon call the Mother of mistakes; which is, from an accidental concurrence in
some things to infer an outright similitude and agreement in all. Because
Bellarmine says tradition is a better medium to prove somethings by, then a
private spirit, and because I in this particular have said so too, you tacitly
infer that I and Bellarmine are of the same Religion; which is the same, as if
a Turk and a Christian saying that the Sun shines, you should infer, that the
Christian is a Mahumetan, and for saying so, a Turk. I confess, you do not say
we are both of the same Religion: but that I, in preferring Tradition, which
you your self, in your seventh paragraph, tllow to be the Constant and
universal Report of the Church) before he Testimony of the Spirit, speaking in
the Word to the Consciences of private men, am more profane than he. Here, sir,
you must not take it ill, if I expose you to the censure of being deservedly
thought guilty of a double mistake. The one is, that if Bellarmine in this
particular were in an Error, and if I had out-spoken him in his Error, yet
the Laws of speech will not allow you to say, That in an unprofane subject,
either of us is profane; more heretical, or mistaken you might perhaps have
said: and this, though a false Assertion, might yet have past for right
Expression. But to call him positively, and me comparatively more profane,
because we both hold, That a Drop is more liable to corruption then the Ocean,
or the testimony of al ages of the Church is a fuller proof of the meaning of a
text in Scripture, then the solitary Exposition of a man who can persuade none
but himself, is as incongruous, as if you should say, that because Bellarmine
wrote but three Volumns, and Abulensis twelve, therefore Abulensis was a
greater Adulterer then He. Your other mistake is, That you confound the Spirit
of God speaking in the Scripture with the private Spirit (that is) Reason,
Humor, or Fancy of the person spoken to. Sir, let that blessed Spirit decide
this controversy between us. He says 2 Pet. 1. 20
that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation. That is, so
calculated, or Meridianized to some select minds and understandings, that it
shall hold the candle to them only, and leave All others in the Dark. But, if
you will consent to the Comment of the most primitive Fathers on that Text, The
meaning of it is; That as God by his Spirit did at first dictate the scripture,
so he dictated it in those thingswhich are necessary to Salvation, intelligible
to all the world of Men, who will addict their minds to read it. It being
therefore a Rule held out to all mankind, for them to order their lives and
actions by, and therefore universally intelligible to them, (it should else
cease to be either Revelation or a Rule) for you to hold that it cannot be
understood without a second Revelation, made by the same Spirit that wrote it,
to the private spirit of you the more-Cabinet Reader, is as if you should
enclose and impale to your self the Air, or Sunbeams; And should maintain
that God has placed the Sun in the firmament, and given you only eyes to see
him. In short, sir, it is to make his word, which was ordained to give light to
all the World, a Dark Lanthorn, In which a candle shines to the use of none but
him that bears it.

Your Eighth Paragraph being the third of your eleven Questions as also the
close of your ninth, shall receive a latin Answer from me in the Divinity
School.

Your next Paragraph is again the Hydra with repullulating Heads: Where,
first, you put me to prove the purity of the Doctrine, Discipline, and
Government in England. Which, being managed by a Prelaticall faction, whom, you
say, I call the Church, was not excellent, if I reckon from the year 1630. to
1640. As for the Doctrine, Sir, I told you before, that the Primitive Church it
self was not free from Heresies. If therefore I should grant you (which I
never shall, till you particularly tell me what those erroneous doctrines were)
that some men in our Church were heterodox, nay heretical in their opinions,
yet I conceive it to be a very near neighbor to heresy in you to charge the
doctrines of persons upon the Kingdom or Church. Such Doctrines might be in
England, (as you whether out of Choice or Luck have said) yet not by the Tenets
or Doctrines of the Land: No more, then if you should say, that because M.
Yerbury and some few others hold the Equ^lity of the Saints with Christ, the
whole Kingdom is a blasphemer, and was by you confuted at S. Mary's. The
public doctrine of the Church of England I call none but that which was
allowed to be so by an Act of Pa^liament of England; and that, Sir, was
contained in the 39. Articles. If any Prelate or inferior Priest, for the
Cicle of years you speak of, either held or taught any thing contrary to
th^se, (as it will be hard I believe for you to instance in any of that side
who did) you shall have my consent, in that particular, to count them no part
of our Church. In the mean time, Sir, I beseech you be favorable to this
Island; and think not that for ten years space 'twas heretical in all the
parts of it on this side Berwick. Withal, Sir, I desire (since you have
assigned me an Epoch to reckon from) that you will compare the worst doctrines
which wore the date of the Trojan War among us, with those which have since
broke loose in the space of a War not half so long, and you will find, that
our Church for those ten years you speak of wore a garment, I will not say, as
seamless and undivided as Christ's coat: But since the Soldiers did cast lots
upon it, so much heresy, as well as schism, has torn it asunder, that it is
now become like Joseph's coat imbrued in blood, where no one piece carries
color or resemblance to another. As for the Discipline and Government of our
Church, (if you would speak your conscience, and not your gall) you would
confess, that the frame and structure of it was raised from the most Primitive
Model that any Modern Church under the Sun was governed by. A Government so
well sized and fitted to the Civil Government of the Kingdom, that till the
insurrection of some false Prophets, who presumed to offer strange fire before
the Lord, and reduced a Land which flowed with milk and honey, into a
wilderness; they agreed together like the two Scripture-brothers, Moses and
Aaron; and were the two banks which shut up schism within its channel, and
suffered not heresy or sedition to overflow their bounds. In short, Sir, I
know not into what new form this Kingdom may be molded, or what new creation
may creep forth from the strife-full heap of things, into which, as into a
second Chaos, we are fallen; But if the Civil State do ever return to its
former self again, your Presbyterian Government, which was brought forth at
Geneva, and was since nursed up in Scotland, mingled with it, (if I be not
deceived in the principles of that Government) will be but a wild Vine
ingrafted into a true. Upon which unequal, disproportioned Incorporation, we
may as well expect to gather Figs of Thistles, or grapes of thorns, as that
the one should grow so Southern, the other so Northern; that one harmonious,
musical Body should arise from them thus joined. What Errors in Government or
Discipline were committed by the Prelates, I know not; neither have you proved
them hitherto chargeable with any; unless this were an error, that they laid an
Ostracisme (as you say) upon those that opposed your Government. I believe,
Sir, when Presbytery is set up, and you placed in your Consistory with your
Spiritual and Lay-Brethren, you will not be so negligent, or so much asleep in
your place, as not to find an Ostracisme for those, who shall oppose you in
your office. In the mean time, Sir, to call them, or those, who submitted to
their Government, A Prelaticall faction, because the then wheels of their
Government moved with an unanimous undisturbance, is, I believe, a calumny,
which you would feign fasten upon them, provoked (I suppose) by the description
which I have made of the conspiracy of the False Prophets of Jerusalem in my
Sermon. I must deal freely with you, Sir, do but probably make it appear to me,
that this Faction in your letter was like the Conspiracy in my Sermon; Do but
prove to me, that the Prelates devoured souls; That they took to themselves
the Treasure, and precious things of the Land; That to effect this, they
kindled the first spark toward a CivilWar; and then blew it into such a flame,
as could not be quenched but with the blood of Husbands ravished from their
Wives, and the slaughter of parents pressed and ravished from their children: Do
but prove to me that they made one widow, or built their Honors upon the
ruin or calamity of one Orphane; Lastly, do but prove to me that the Priests
(whom you make to be the lower orb of their Faction) did so mingle, and
confound the services of the Church, as to put no difference between the holy,
and profane, or that in compliance with them, they saw vanity, and divined lies
to the people, and I shall think them capable of all the hard language, which
you or others have for some years heapt upon them. Till then, Sir, pray
mistake not Concrets for their Abstracts; nor charge the faults of persons,
upon the innocence of their functions. Prelacy is an Order so well rooted in
the Scripture, though now deprived of all its Branches in this Kingdom, that I
verily persuade my self, that as Caiaphas in the Gospel when he spoke
Prophecy, perceived not himself at that time to be a Prophet; so you
(overruled by the guidance of a higher power) have in this Paragraph
exceedingly praised Prelacy, whilst you labored to revile it. For either it
must be Nonsense, or a very great Encomium of it, when you say, that as long
as it enjoyed a root here in this Kingdom, it had not only a destructive
influence into the evils of the Church, but of the Civil State too. If the
Influence of it were so destructive of evils, (as indeed it was) pray with what
Logic can you say, that Salus populi quae suprema lex est, did compel the
Parliament to extirpate a thing so preservative and full of Antidote both to
Church and State?

Sir, if men's styles and denominations be to be given to them by the place and
clymate where they are borne and bred, I shall grant you are an English, nay an
Oxford Christian. But if you preach, and maintain, that Religion is to be
propagated by the Swor^, I must tell you, that an English Presbyter may in this
case be a Turkish Prophet, and that though his Text be chosen from the Gospel,
yet the Doctrine raised from it, may be a piece of the Alchoran. I shall allow
you to say that the Protestants in Ireland had a Right to the defense of the
free exercise of their Religion against the furious assaults of the bloody
Rebels. But when you tell me that Christ is King of Nations as well as King of
Saints, (which I shall grant you) and say, that as one of his ways to make
Proselytes is by the persuasion of his Word and Spirit; so, if that will not
do, his other way to break the power of Antichrist, that is, (as I conceive you
mean) to convert men from Popery, is by civil and natural means, that is,
(if you mean any thing) to compel them to be Protestants by the Sword;
Methinks I am at Mech^, and hear a piece of Turcisme preached to me by one of
Mahomets Priests. In short, Sir, whether the Papists in England were
confederate with the Irish Rebels I know not: But do you prove
demonstratively, not jealously, to me, that the Queen and her Agents had an
intent to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and to plant Popery by the Sword;
and the Army that should bring that design to pass, shall, in my opinion, be
styled an Army, not of Papists, but of baptized Ianizaries. As for your bidding
me dispute the right of taking up Arms in such a case, with the Parliament;
First, I must desire you to accept the Answer which Favroinus the Philosopher
gave to a friend of his, who asked him, why he would let Adrian the Emperor
have the better of him in a Dispute; I am loath to enter into an Argumentation
with those who command Thirty Legions. Next, Sir, if I were of consideration
enough to be heard to speak publicly to that Great Assembly, having first kissed
my weapon, I should not doubt, with all the respective liberty, which might
witness to them that I strive not to diminish the rights of their power, but to
defend the truth of my cause, to tell them, that to come into the field with an
armed Gospel, is not the way chosen by Christ to make Proselites. If this be an
error or mis-perswasion in me, show me but one undeniable demonstration of the
Spirit to disprove it, besides your untopicall persuasion of your self to the
contrary, and, without any farther conference, or dispute in this point, I
shall acknowledge my self your convert, and be most glad to be convinced. In
the mean time, Sir, you are obliged, (though I be in your opinion in an error)
to think more nobly of me, then of those Cowards of your side, who durst not
speak Truth in a time of danger, when you see me, in the like time, such a
resolute Champion (as you conceive) for the wrong.

Sir, it is one of the praises of a good picture to be drawn so livingly, that
every one in the room that beholds it, shall think it looks only on him; It Is
just so with some Texts in Scripture, and some parts of moral Philosophy;
which when they speak very Characterizingly of an irregular passion, or vice,
if they meet with a man Conscious, and one subject to such passions, remember
him of his guilt, and prick his mind as if he only were signified by that
which was writ to all the World. By your charging me that I dealt more sharply
with you then I should, you give me cause to suspect, that my Letter proved
such a picture to you; and you to your guilty self seemed a person so
concerned. The words of bitterness which you have laid together in one heap,
are composed of such Language, as upon your twentieth perusal you will never
be able to find in my Letter. Sir, Christianity; and my profession* (however
you in your letter forgot both) have taught me not to return Vomit for Vomit.
And the love which I bear to to the Civility of expression, would never suffer
me to be so revilingly broad. If I made use of one of Senoca's Epistles, or of
Tully's Paradoxes, or Horace's poetical Controversies, and if you would apply
what they said of Ambition, Pride, or Choler to your self, certainly, Sir, you
have no reason to call this the Luxuriancy of my wit. And thereupon to infer
these provocative conclusions; that my wit is wanton, therefore I am
effeminate. That I am superstitious, therefore lascivious too. Sir, as my wit
is so poor that I shall observe your Council, that is, never wax proud upon
the strength of it, or despise those that are more weak, so (without sparing
me at all) I do once more challenge you to prove, that the wantonness of it
has betrayed me to the loose Conversation of any that are light. Lastly, Sir,
I hope you do not think I have so much of the vain glory, or
selfe-conceitedness of those Reverend Hypocrites in the Gospel in me, who were
able to boast of their long Prayers, and broad phylactaries, and of their
fasting twice a week, that I will offer to think my self more temperate then
the Apostles. Yet, Sir, I dare once more challenge you, and the precisest of
your inspired informers, to prove me at any time guilty of the breach of the
Text you quote against Surfeiting, and Drunkenness. Luke 21. 34. That part of
your Paragraph, therefore, which ends in exhortation, is a piece of Homily,
which returns to you, to be made use of toward some other on the next last
Wednesday of the month, where Fasting, and Sobriety will be seasonable Theams.

I grant, Sir, that Reprobation is a Mystery to be trembled at. Yet Sir, all
they who (maintaining it to be absolute) do revive the fiction of the three
destinies, where one holds the Distaffe on which the Thread of every man's Fate
is spun, and do preach a piece of Zeno's Philosophy for a piece of Saint
Paul's Epistles, can have no reason to accuse me of a jest, because I applied a
spindle to the Distaffe, on which men's fates are rolled. Sir, in plainer
terms, as absolute Reprobation, is a piece of Stoicisme, which was never held
to be Christian, till it crept forth into the Church from the same fancy, which
was the womb in which the Presbyterian Government was formed, so me thinks,
Lucian, Sir, (how cheaply soever you think of him, or me, for having closed my
last letter to you with a piece of his Nigrinus) in his confutation of this
Heathenish Error (which has made so many hang themselves) urges Arguments
which would become one of the Fathers of the Church. I know not whether you
have read his (...). But if you have, he there tells you, that if there be such
a thing as the fatal Decree, you speak of; 1. That all they who lie under the
Inflexibility of it, being tied by an unalterable necessity to do what they do,
can in no reason be rewarded if they do well, nor with any Justice be punished
if they do ill. Next, that the Sins which they commit, (if they cannot but
commit them) are not to be called their Sins, but the Sins of that Decree
which laid this necessity upon them. And, therefore, Thirdly that a murderer
(thus predestined) if he should be arraigned, may say to any Judge thus
stoically persuaded, Why do you accuse me? Pray call my Destiny to the Bar;
and do not sentence me, but my fate to the Rack and Wheel. I was but an
oversway'd Instrument in this Murder; and was but such an Engine to my
Destiny, as my Sword was to me. Though this were spoken by a Heathen, only in
disproof of Fate, yet since Saint Chrysostom in more then three Sermons had
said the same things in disproofe of absolute Reprobation, I hope, Sir, neither
Calvin, nor Piscator, have so mistaught you to understand Saint Paul, as from
any Epistler of his to conclude peremptorily, that anywithout their desert, are
given up to a Reprobate mind, and finally struck, and necessitated to a
remediless impenitence. The 9. Chap. of the Romans, I have long since
considered, and studied it by the most ser^, impartial lights which might
uncloud the great Mystery to me which lies so obscurely there wrapped up. And
to deal freely with you, the best Commentator I ever yet met with to lead me
through the darkness of it, was another place of Scripture or two set in
presence, and scale with this, both which joined, me thought, made perfectly
the Cloud which guided the Jews through the Wilderness, which was a Cloud to
the Egyptians, but a pillar of fire to the Israelites. Sir, I know that
neither Saint Paul has written Contradictions, nor any other of the Apostles
written that which is Contradictory to Saint Paul. Sir, I presume, also, that
Aristotle's Book (...) has not so forsaken your memory, but you know that an
Universal Affirmative, and a particular Negative are a perfect Contradiction,
and cannot both be true. Here, then, stands the case. You, building your
Opinion upon the (...) or great depth of the ninth Chapter to the Romans,
infer from thence that God gives Repentance only to some few, whose
peremptory will it is that they only shall be saved. Saint Paul in his first
Epistle to Timothy, Chapter 2. verse. 4. gives us a line and plummet to sound
this Depth; and says expressly, That it is the will of God that all men should
be saved. Between these propositions, it is his will that all shall, and it is
his will that only a few shall be saved, there is no Medium, in which they may
be reconciled; but one of them must necessarily be true, the other false. This,
then, being so, I have always held it safer to build my Faith upon those
clear places of the Scripture, which have no veil before their face, then
those which are mysterious, and lead me to a (...) over which I stand amazed,
but cannot from thence infer. I do farther profess to you, that I am not so
wedded to this or any other Speculative Opinion, but that, if you will show
more convincing Scripture for the contrary, I shall most readily renounce my
own thoughts, and espouse my self to yours.

Your premonition or forewarning of me that we at Christ-church would e're long
taste of a visitation, has since come to pass, and in part approved it self to
be true Prophecy. Whether inspired by you or no, I know not, but there have
been two with us, who have taken away as many Copes and guilt candlesticks, as
if they had been superstitious. Sir, it is no wonder to me that in our times
silver should be Popery; Or that Church utensills if they be Gold should be
called superstition. But certainly, Sir, 'twas a great misinformation to send
them to search for Copes or things of value to my poor Protestant Chamber;
where there never was a Cope, though, perhaps, they might have found a
long-disused Surplice, there. And as for Idols of price, if they had searched
my purse, I believe that all the popery, which, in these impoverishing Times,
they could have found in it, cast into the fire, like the Jewish Earerings,
would neither have come forth a Silver Crucifix; much less so wealthy an Idol
as a Golden Calse.

Sir,
since at length I understand you, that by agreeing upon the true state of the
questions before we dispute them, you mean that we should agree upon the terms
in which they are to be held, I am very ready to comply with you in that
reasonable particular. But to accept of any, either of your eleven English, or
your three Latin questions, in the terms in which you have formed them, I can
by no means consent. First, Sir, Because I find a piece of Artifice in the
Web, and contrivance of them, which has something of a Trap, and Snare, and
Engine in it. Which is, that by making them as Popish questions as you can,
(especially one of them) where you insert the words Missall, Breviary, and
Pontifical) words odious to the people, and part of the dismal spell which
for six years has raised the spirit of discord to walk among us; if I should
hold it affirmatively under these terms of hatred, it is possible it may beget
an opinion in the minds of those that know me not, that, though I have more
then once professed my self ready to fall a sacrifice in the defense of the
Protestant Religion, yet that this was but a disguise which concealed my
hypocrisy, 'till provoked I were put to defend the superstitions of the Church
of Rome. Sir, I know upon what lesser grounds then this, some in our credulous
times have been unjustly called Papists. Next, Sir, if I should hold them
affirmatively, with their faces thus looking toward Popery, and should bring
them thus clothed in your terms of superstition into the Divinity School, I
doubt very much whethet the publickness of the Defense may not draw an
aspersion not only upon me, and the Moderator, (if he will vouchsafe to sit in
the Chair whilst we quarrel) but upon the whole already too much defamed
University, which such as you have from numerous Pulpits called long since
Popishly affected; But if it should allow of such a Dispute, 'twould lend fuel
to your calumnies, and be endangered to be no longer thought Popish, but
outright a Papist. Thirdly, Sir, your first and last Question (if they were
purged of their odious terms) cannot publicly be maintained without some
affront to the Parliament, who by one Ordinance have put down the
Common Prayer Book, by another Episcopacy. If, therefore, under your terms, I
should publicly stand up in defense of them, you had need procure a third
Ordinance, which when I have done may keep me safe. Yet, Sir, to assure you
that this is no evasion in me to decline a dispute, because my Sermon was the
occasion of your challenge of me in the Pulpit, and of this private conference
between us since; Since also you allow me the liberty of alteration, and to
add my stroke to the Anvill on which the questions to be disputed on between
us are to receive the last form, and shape, in which, with least offense, and
scandal, they may walk into the public. Lastly, since the three Latin
Questions you sent me are three passages of my Sermon, but so corrupted from
themselves, as show them to have been once purely Protestant, but passing
through your hands have degenerated, and clothed themselves with a
to-be-suspected robe of Popery, the nearest way I know for us to agree upon
their true state is to deal with them as the Bishops at the Reformation dealt
with the Religion of the Church of Rome; that is, purge them from their
corruptions, and restore them to the Primitive rule from whence they have
digrest. Which Rule, being my Sermon, (if you read it with open eyes) presents
you with your three questions, in this more genuine form.

An Liturgia Anglicana ideo ^liminanda sit, quia nonnullas parts ab Ecclesia
Romana mutuata est, Neg. Christi, Sanctorumque imagines in Reformator.
Ecclesiis l^ite retineri possint, Aff. Regimen Ecclesiae Anglicanae per
Episcepos sit Antichristianum, ex eo quod Ecclesia Romana (qua^ nonnulli sedem
Antichristi statuunt) sic gubernatur, Neg.


Upon these three Questions (which are but three periods of my Sermon cast into
a problematicall for^e) if you approve of them, and, like a generous Adversary,
will promise me, that neither for sending of them to you now, nor for defending
them hereafter, I shall be questioned, (for this I require no other security
but your word) I will not fail (God assisting me) to meet you in the Divinity
School at University weapons, when ever you shall think fit to call upon me;
and to bring with you those Arguments, which, you say, you reserve for that
place, and in your two letters have not vouchsafed to afford me, who do daily
pray (for I begin to be weary of fighting with shades) that this unnecessary
conflict may at length end in a Christian peace between you the opponent, and
me the defender of

The Sermon against False Prophets, J. MAIN.
From my Chamber this Afternoon, Feb. 4. 1646.

In the evening to the afternoon, in which this Letter was sent, M. Cheynell
returned an Answer, not so large, I confess, as I expected; but composed of
Language, so complying with my desires, that I unfainedly felt a new strife
within my self, how, having hitherto tolerably borne his rougher assaults, I
should preserve my self from being conquered by his civilities. Which I
confess, have such a forcible charm upon my nature, softend, and tutor'^ to it
by Religion, that the World cannot afford an Enemy, who shall raise such a
tempest of persecution against me, but that I shall be ready to afford him my
Embraces, and Arms, if he will be content to be received there in a calm. I
do farther confess, that M. Cheynell, by undertaking to secure me against the
danger which might have followed a public dispute, has not only verified my
expression, and shown himself a generous adversary; but by that engagement of
himself, has made me see, what reason I have to complain of my hard fortune,
which has left me only the will, and not the power, to be in the like kind,
as generous to Him back again. His Letter was to a syllable this.

SIR,
You may be confident that the Messenger was not sent by me, because he
returned without you and without his fees. I never writ up one Letter to London
that did in the least measure reflect upon you; if your Sermon had not been
printed, I had not spoke one word against it. I desire to deal with you in a
rational way, and therefore I do accept of your Academicall proposition or
challenge so often sent me; and because I find my prayers in some measure
answered, and you more civil then heretofore, I shall deal freely with you. I
do here under my own hand assure you, that if you be questioned for defending
these Propositions in a Scholasticall way, (you know reproaches are not
Scholasticke) in the public Schools, I will answer for you; the Parliament
will not question you for any learned rational debate about Prelates or the
Common-Prayer-Booke, for the satisfaction of your self and others.

I will meet you if you please, at the Doctor of the Chair his lodgings to
morrow about two of the clock in the afternoon; I doubt not but by his advice
we shall agree upon terms fit to express the points in Controversy; if you
like the proposal be pleased to send your approbation of it in two lines by
this bearer to

Your friend to serve you, FRAN: CHEYNELL.
Mert. Coll. Feb. 4. 1646.

To this Letter (which was the last I received from him) by the same Messenger
that brought it, I returned this Answer, which was the last he received from me.

SIR,
I shall (God willing) meet you to morrow at your hour, at the Doctor of the
Chaire's Lodging. Where if you be as willing to submit to the terms which he
shall think fit to put the Questions in, which we are to dispute upon as I
shall be, there will be no variance between us there, nor shall we I hope,
bring any with us from the Divinity School. Where Sir, you shall meet one who
is so great a lover of truth, that if you can convince me for being all this
while in an Error, I shall think my self indeed, a gainer by this conflict.
And no longer style my self the defender of the Sermon against False Prophets,
but one, who for being confuted by you ought to remain

From my Chamber, (...). 4. 1646. Your Affectionate friend and Servant, JASPER
MAIN.


Here, if any be curious to know how this last act of our conference ended, or
what Catastrophe did shut up the conflict between us, which had so much busy
Epitasis and expectation in it, I could wish Master Cheynell himself were the
Historian. Nevertheless, none will have reason to think me partial or
unfaithful in my Report, having not only Master Wilkinson, if I deliver false
story, but the Doctor of the Chair to dispro^, and contradict me. At whose
lodging in Christ-church when we (...), First, with a prudence becoming the
granity of his person, and the Dignity of his place, he told us, that he could
not think it sit to sit moderatour to any disputation which was ^ot either pro
form, and conduced to the taking of a degree, or pro Termino, which is a
Divinity exercise, at which the University Statutes require his presence in the
chair. Next, if we resolved to meet in the Schools without a moderatour, his
advice was, that Master Cheynell should have his scribe and I mine, to write
down faithfully his Arguments and my Replies: which thus taken and compared,
would not be so liable to the variations of report, as when the ears and
memories of the hearers are their only Register.

There remained but one difficulty, which was, how to make us agree upon
questions fit to be disputed in such a public way. M. Cheynell utterly refused
Mine, and the Doctor of the Chair thought it no way reasonable, that in the
dangerous attire they wore, I should accept of his; especially the first. Which
upon M. Cheynells unlocking of the full extent and meaning of the terms,
revealed it self to be a kind of Trojan horse; consecrated indeed to Pallas
without, but lined with an Ambush of Armed enemies within. For, besides the
Words Missall, Breviary, and Pontifical (against which I before gave in my
exceptions) by A praelatis decerpta, populoque obtrusa, Master Cheynell said,
he not only meant those parts of our English Lyturgie which have been borrowed
from the Church of Rome, but the Scotch Lyturgie too, as it was imposed upon
that Nation by the Sword. Which, though it were a mistake in him to say it was
imposed by the sword, (since the date of the reception of it in that Church was
the year 1637. At which time the Sword of both Nations lodged peaceably in the
Scabberd) and though upon the perusal of it since, I find it the same in all
points with ours, but only in the contraction of the form of the
Administration of the Lords Supper, and so for the matter of it as defensible
as ours, yet having been turned out of that Kingdom, and Church as solemnly as
it was at first introduced, that is, by an Act of Parliament; To whose birth
the King and Houses concurred,, for me to have disputed publicly for the
second reception of it, had been the way not only to raise a Northern Army of
men against my self, (who would, doubtless, have thought it a very bold piece
of insolence in me to disallow in a public dispute, the proceedings of a
whole State) but of such Northern Women too, whose zeal upon the first
reading of that innocent Lyturgie, mistook it for the Mass book, and thereupon
converted their Ioynt-stools, upon which they sat, into Weapons, with which
they invaded the Reader, and chaced him, with his Newborn Popery in his hand,
out of the Church. These Reasons being laid to those other, which in my last
letter but one, produced to show how scandalous, as well as unsafe, it would in
all likelihood, prove both to the University and my self, if I should
publicly maintain a question which carried so much danger with it, I pressed
M. Cheynell with the intimation which he gave me in his last letter, which was,
to stand to that frame of Questions which the Doctor of the Chair should
contrive for us. To whose Ordering of the terms of his first Question if he
would submit, I promised him to accept of his other two; (though in the Doctor
of the Chaires opinion, the terms of his third Question were something hard)
in that unaltered form into which he had cast them. To this his reply was,
that after the Words populo obtrusa, in his first Question, he would allow me
to insert these two words of Mitigation, ut fertur. Whereto my answer was, that
this addition would so little deserve the name of a Mitigation, that it very
much increast my burther, and hung more weights upon me. Since hereby I obliged
my self, not only to stand up for the Readmission of the Scotch Lyturgie;
which could not be done without an affront offered to the Act of State that
banished it, but for the Justification of all the unknown practices of the
Prelates, who had the contrivance of that Lyturgie, against the Sinister
reports, and Calumnies of the incensed people. Who, as for some years, they
have been falsely taught to think the Order of Bishops Antichristian, so
looking upon their persons through the mist cast by some False Prophets before
their eyes, it ought to be no wonder if their best Actions have seemed Popery.
The Conclusion of all was this. M. Cheynell at length, without any farther
Clouds of discourse, told me plainly, that to any other alterations then this
he could not consent; being bound up by his instructions to hold this Question
only in the latitude and sense, which was signified by the terms in which he
had Arrayed it. Whereupon, the long expected scene between us closed, and the
Curtain to this Controversy was let fall. And we, after some mutual
exchanges of Civility, parted, I hope like two Divines, in perfect Charity with
one another.

THE END.
OXLO-AXIA. OR THE PEOPLES WAR, EXAMINED According to the Principles of
SCRIPTURE and REASON, IN Two of the most Plausible Pretenses of it. IN ANSWER
To a LETTER sent by a Person of Quality, who desired satisfaction.

By JASPER MAIN D. D. one of the Students of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

Romans 13. 2. (...).

Printed in the Year, 1647.

Honored Sir,
I Have in my time seen certain Pictures with two faces. Beheld one way, they
have presented the shape and figure of a Man. Beheld another, they have
presented the shape and figure of a Serpent. Me thinks, Sir, for some years,
whatever Letters the King wrote either to the Queen, or his friends, or what
ever Declarations he publish^ in the defense of his Rights and Cause, had the
ill fortune to undergo the fate of such a Picture. To us who read them
impartially, by their own true, genuine light, they appeared so many clear,
transparent Copies of a sincere and Gallant Mind. Looked upon by the People,
(of whom you know who said, populus iste vult decipi, decipiatur) through the
Answers and Observations, and venomous Comments, which some men made upon them,
a fallacy in judgment followed very like the fallacy of the sight; where an
Object beheld through a false deceitful medium, partakes of the cosenage of
the conveyance, and way, and puts on a false Resemblance. As square, bright,
angular things through a mist show dark and round; and straight things seen
through water show broken and distorted.

It seems, Sir, by your Letter to me, that your Friend, with whom you say, you
have lately had a dispute about the Kings Supremacy, and the Subjects Rights,
is one of those who has had the ill luck to be thus deceived. Which I do not
wonder at, when I consider how much he is concerned in his fortunes that the
Parliament should all this while be in the right. Besides, Sir, Having looked
upon the Cause of that Side merely in that plausible dress with which some
pens have attired it, And having entertained a str^ng prejudice against
whatever shall be said to prove that a Parliament may err, it ought to be no
marvel to you if he be rather of M. ^rinnes then Judge Ienkins's. Opinion;
And persuade himself, that the Parliament having, if not a superior, yet a
coordinate power with the King, in which the People is interested, where ever
their Religion or Liberty is invaded, may take up Arms against Him, for the
defense of either. But then. Sir, finding by my reading of the public writings
of both sides, that both sides challenged to themselves the Defense of one and
the same Cause, I must confess to you, That (...) a while the many Battles,
which so often colored our fields with Blood, appeared to me like Battails
^ught in Dreams. Where the person combating in his sl^epe, imagines he has an
Adversary, but a wake perceives his error that he hel^ conflict with himself.
To speak a little more freely to (...), Sir, the Kings Declarations, and the
Parliaments Remonstrances equally pretending to the maintenance of the same
Protestant Religion, and the same Liberty of the Subject, I wondered a while
how they could make two opposite sides, or could so frequently come into the
field without a Quarrel.

But since your Friend is pleased to let me no longer remain a Sceptick, but
clearly to state the Quarrel; by suffering the two great words of Charm,
Liberty, and Religion. (from whence both sides have so often made their
Recruits) to stand no longer as a Salamis, or controverted Island between two
equal Challengers; And since he is pleased to espouse the defense of them so
wholly to the Parliament, as to call the War made by the King the Invasion of
them; Both for his and your satisfaction, who have laid this task upon me,
give me leave to propose this reasonable Dilemma to you. Either it is true what
your Friend says, that the Parliament has all this while sought for the
defense of their Liberty, and Religion, or it is only a pretense, and has hid
some darker secret under it. If it have been only a pretense, there being not a
third word in all the World which can afford so good Color to make an unjust
War pass for a just, the first discovery of it, will be the fall, and ruin
of it; And the People who have been misled with so much holy Imposture, will
not only hate it for the Hypocrisy, but the Injustice too. If it be true, yet
I cannot see how they are hereby advantaged, or how, either or both these
joined can legitimate their Arms.

For first, Sir, I would fain know of your friend, what he means by the Liberty
of the Subject. I presume he does not mean a Releasement from servitude. Since
amongst all their other complaints, delivered in Petitions to the Parliament,
they never yet adventured to say that they were governed as Servants by a hard
Master, not as Subjects by a Prince. Nor do I find that the King was such a
Pharaoh to them, that they were able to say, that he changed a Kingdom of
Freemen into a House of Bondage. Some Acts of his Government, I confess, some
have called Illegal; namely the exaction of Ship-mony. But this certainly, was
a grievance which if it had not been redrest, deserved not to be reckoned among
the Brick kills of Egypt, or to denominate his Government despoticall too.

Next then, does your friend, by Liberty, mean a Releasement from Tyranny, as
Tyranny allows men to be Subjects, but not much removed from slaves? Had the
King indeed, made his Will the Rule of his Government, and had his Will
revealed it self in nineteen years of Injustice, had he like Caligula, worn a
Table Book in his pocket, with the names of the Nobility in it designed and
Marked for slaughter; Had he without any Trialls of Law made his pleasure pass
for sentence, and lopt off Senators heads as Tarquin did Poppeys; Had he in his
oppressions of the People made them feel Times like those which Tacitus
describes; where no man durst be virtuous, least he should be thought to
upbrayd his Prince; where to complain of hard usage was capital; and where
men had not only their words, but their very looks and sighs proscribed; his
Reign would bear that Name. But alas, Sir, you your self know, that these
are Acts of Tyranny, which were so far from being practiced, that they have
not yet been feigned among us. It Is true, indeed, certain dark Iealousies were
cast among the people, as if some Evil Counselors about the King had had it
in their design to introduce an Arbitrary Government. But these were but
Iealousies, blown by those, whose plot 'twas to make the popular hatred their
engine to remove those Counselors, that by their ruin they might raise a
Ladder to their own Ambitions. For if the Calamity of these times have not
quite blotted out the memory of former, people cannot but remember, that no
Nation under Heaven, more freely enjoyed the Blessing of the Scripture then we;
every one secure under the shade of his own Uine. perhaps a grape or two
extraordinary was gathered for the public. But if any did refuse to
contribute, I do not find that like Naboth, they were stoned for their
Uineyard. If therefore, the Gentleman your friend understand Liberty in this
sense, the most he can say for the Parliament, is, that they have taken up
Arms against their King, not because he was, but because he possibly might be
a Tyrant. Which fear of theirs being in it self altogether unreasonable, and
therefore not to be satisfied, could not but naturally endeavor (as we find by
sad experience it has done) ^o secure it self by removing out right the
formidable ob^ect which caused it* which being not to be done but by the
Removal of Monarchical Government it self, could not but cast them at length
upon a new form of State, or such a confusion or no Form of state, as, we
see, has almost drawn ruin upon themselves and their Country.

Once more therefore* I must ask your Friend what he means by Liberty. I hope
he does not mean an Exemption from all Government; Nor is fallen upon their
wild Opinion, who held that there ought to be no Magistrate, or superior among
Christians. But that in a freedom of condition we are to live together like men
standing in a Ring, or Circle, where Roundnesse takes away Distinction, and
Order; And where every one beginning and ending the Circle, as none is before,
so none is after another. This Opinion, as 'twould quickly reduce the House of
Lords to the House of Commons; so 'twould in time reduce the House of Commons
to the same level with the Common people. who being once taught that
Inequality is unlawful, would quickly be made Docile in the entertainment of
the other Arguments, upon which the Anabaptists did here to fore set all
Germany in a flame. Namely, that Christ has not only bequeathed to Men, the
liberty of his Gospel, but that this liberty consists in ones not being
greater then another. It being an Oracle in Nature, that we are all borne
Equal; That these words of Higher, and Lower, superior, and Inferior, are
fitter for Hills, and Vales, then for men of a Kind; That the names also of
Prince and Subject, Magistrate and People, Governors and Governed, are but so
many styles Usurped. Since in Nature for one Man to be borne Subject to another,
is as much against Kind, as if men should come into the World with chains
about them; or as if Women should bring forth Children with Gyves, and shakles
on. Which Doctrine as 'twould naturally tend to a Parity, so that Parity would
as naturally end in a Confusion.

Lastly, therefore, I will understand your Friend in the most favorable sense
I can. That by the Parliaments defense of the Peoples Liberty, he means the
maintenance of some Eminent Rights belonging to the Subject, which being in
manifest danger to be invaded, and taken from them, could not possibly be
preserved but by Arms taken up against the invader. But then, granting this to
be true, (as I shall in fit place show it to be false) yet the King being this
invader (unless by such an Invasion He could cease to be their King, or they
to be his subjects*) I cannot see how such Rights could make their Defense
lawful.

For the clearer Demonstration of this, I shall desire you; Sir, not to think
it a digression in me, if I deduce things somewhat higher then I at first
intended, or then your Letter requires me; Or, if to cure the stream, I take
the Prophets course, and cast salt into the spring; And examine first, How
far the Power of a King, (who is truly a King, and not one only in Name)
extends it self over Subjects. Next, whether any such Power do belong to our
King; Thirdly if there do, How far it is to be obeyed, and not resisted.

As for the first, you shall in the Scripture, Sir, find two Originalls of
Kings, One immediately springing from the Election and choice of God himself.
The other from the choice and election of the People; But so, as that it
resolves it self into a Divine Institution. The History of Regal power, as it
took Original from God himself, is set down at large in the eight Chapter of
the first Book of Samuel. where, when the Israelites, weary of the Government
by Judges (who had the same power that the Dictators had at Rome, and differed
nothing from the most absolute Monarchs but only in their Name, and the
temporary use of their power) required of Samuel to set a King over them, God
bid him hearken to their voice. But withal v. 9.
Solemnly to protest and show them the manner (or as one translat ^s it more to
the mind of the Original, Ius Regis, the Right, or power) of the King that
should reign over them. That he would take their sons, and appoint them for
his Charets; And their Daughters, to be Confectionaries, and Cooks f^r his
Kitchen. That he would also take their fields their Uineyards, and their
Olive-yards, even the best of them and give them to his Officers; Lastly, That
he would take the Tenth of their seed, and sh^epe, And ye, says the Prophet
(which is a very characteristicall mark of subjection) v. 17.
shall be his servants.

All which particulars, with many others there specified, (which I forbear to
repeat to you, because they rise but ^o the same height) may in oth^ terms be
briefly summed up into these two Generals. That the Jews by requiring a King
to be set over them, (such a King as was to Reign over them, like the Kings of
other V. 5.
Nations) divested themselves of two of the grea^est Immunities which can
belong to Freemen, Liberty of person, and propriety of Estates. And both these
in such an unlimited measure, as left them not power, if their Prince pleased,
to call either themselves, or Children, or any thing else their own.

To this if either you, or your friend shall reply, that this was but a
Prophetical Character of Saul, and a mere prediction to ^he people wha^ He,
made King would do, noe true Draught of his Commission, what He in Justice
might, (since a Prince who shall assume to Himself the exercise of such a
boundless power, does but verify the Fab^, a S^ork set over a Common wealth of
Froggs, They to be his prey, not He to be their King) To the first I answer
negatively. That what is said in the forementioned Chapter by Samuel, cannot
be meant only of Saul, since nothing is there said to confine the description
to this Reign. Nor does any part of his History charge him with such a
Government. Next, I shall g^ant you, that no Prince ruling by the strict Laws
of naturall-equity, or Justice, can exercise all the Acts of power there
mentioned. Nor can his being a King so legitimate all his Actions, or so
outright exempt him from the common condition of men, that what ever he shall
do shall be right. Most of the Acts there recorded are not only repugnant to
the Laws of sociable Nature, or just Rule, (which forbids One to have All; and
binds Princes themselves in chains of Reason) but to the Deuter. 17. v. 16, 17,
18, 19.
Law of God in another place; which allows not the King of his own choice, to
Reign as he list, but assigns him the Law of Moses for his Rule. From which
as often as he broke loose, he sinned like one of the People. yet so, as that
upon any such breach of the Law 'twas not left in the power of the People to
correct him, or to force him by a War, lik^ ours, to return back again to
hi^ duty. His commission toward them (if you mark it well) ^an in such an
uncontroleable style, that his best Actions and his worst, toward them, wore
the same warrant of Authority. However therefore, Regal power, in the
forementioned place of Samuel, be called the manner of what a King would do,
yet that Manner, (as I told you before) carried a Ius or power with it
unquestionable by the Subject, to do if he pleased things unlawful. And hence
it is that the Prophet tells the Jews at the 18. verse of that Chapter, That in
the Day they found themselves oppressed by their King, they should cry out for
redress to the Lord; As the only Arb^ter, and Judge, of the Deeds, and Actions
of Princes.

The Original of Regal power as it took beginning from the People, you have
most lively expressed to you by S. Peter in the 13. v. of the 2. Chapter of his
1. Epist. Where exhorting those to whom he wrote to order their Obedience
according to the several Orbs, and Regions of power of the States wherein
they lived, he bids them submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man; whether
it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by
him etc.

In which words I shall desire you to observe. First, that Monarchy as well as
other Forms of Government, is there called (...), a Human Creature, or thing
of Humane Creation. From whence some, such as your Friend, (who, I perceive by
his Arguments against Monarchy in your Letter has read Iunius Brutus, and
Buchanan) have inferred, That as to avoid Disorder and Confusion, people did at
first pass over the R^le and Government of themselves to a Prince, so the
Prince being but an (...), or Derivative from them, does still retain a
Dependence on his first Creators. And as in Nature it is observed that waters
naturally cannot rise higher then their Springhead; so Princes, they say, have
their Springhead too. Above which as often as they exalt themselves, it is in
the power of the Fountain to recall it is stream, and to bring it to a plain,
and level with it self. For though, say they, it be to be granted, that a King
thus chosen is Major singulis, superior to any One, yet he is Minor vniversis,
Inferior to the whole. Since all the Dignity and power which makes him shine
before the People, being but their Rays contracted into his Body, they cannot
reasonably be presumed so to give them away from themselves, as that in no case
it shall be lawful to call for them back again.

For answer to which Opinion (taken in by your Friend from his misunderstanding
of that Text) I will go no farther then the place of Scripture on which it is
built, where (without any critical strife about the signification of the
Words) I will grant that not only Monarchy, (which is the Government of a
People by a Prince) But Aristocracy, (which is the Government of a People by
States) and Democracy (which is the Government of the people by the people)
has next, and immediately in all States but the Jewish been (...), of Humane
Creation. But then that it is not so purely humane, as not to be of Gods
Creation, and Institution too, is evident by the words next in Contexture,
where the Apostle bids them, to whom he wrote, to submit themselves to every
such Ordinance of man, (...), For the Lords sake. who by putting his Seal of
Approbation to men's Elections and choice, has not only authorized a Humane
Institution to pass into a Divine Ordinance; But toward it has imprinted
even in Nature it self such a Necessity of Government, and of Superiority of
one man over another, that men without any other Teacher, but their own
inbredde Instinct, (which has always whispered to them that Anarchy is the
Mother of Confusion) have naturally fallen into Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.
And however such a state, or condition of life under a Prince or Magistrate be
something less free then not to be subject at all, (since men's Actions have
hereby been confined to the Wills of Superiors, whose Laws have been certain
chains and shackles clapped upon them,) yet a subjection with security has
always, by wise men, been preferred before Liberty with danger, and men have
bin compelled to enter into those Bonds, as the only way, and means to avoid a
greater Thraldom. Since without such a subordination of one man to another, to
hold them together in just society, the Times of the Nomades would return
where, (...), the weaker served only to be made a prey to the stronger.

The next thing which I shall desire you to observe from that Text, is, that
the King, though chosen, and created by the People, is there styled (...)
Supreme. Now Sir, you know that (...) Supreme, is so to be over others, as to
have no Superior above him. That is, to be so Independently the L^ of his own
Actions, of what sort soever, whether unjust or just, as not to beaccountable
to any but God. If he were, that other, to whom he is accountable, would be
Supreme not He. Since in all things wherein he is Questionable, He is no longer
the King, or (...) there describ^d, but a more specious Subject. Whereupon will
either follow this contradiction in Power, That the same Person at the same
Time may be a King, and no King; or we must admit of an Absurdity as great;
which is, That a Supreme may have a Supreme; which to grant were to cast our
selves upon an Infinite progress.

For that there must be a Non-ultra, or Resolution of power either into one,
(as in a perfect Monarchy) or into some Few, (as in the Government by a Senate)
or into the Mayor part of the People joining suffrages, (as in a pure
Democracy; All three Forms agreeing in this, That some body must be Supreme
and unquestionable in their Actions,) the nature of Rule, and Business, and
Government it self demonstrates to us. Which would not else be able to
obtain it is ends, or decide controversies otherwise undeterminable. And
however this power may sometimes be abused, and strained beyond it is Just
limits, yet this not being the fault of the power, but of the Persons whose
power it is, it makes much more for the Peace of the public, that one, or Few
should in some things be allowed to be unjust then that they should be liable
to be Questioned by an Ill* Iudgeing. Multitude in All.

The third thing which you may please to observe from that piece of Scripture,
is, The Creation of Magistrates, or Governors, who are there said to be sent
(...) By Him. Where a Modern Writer applies the (...) or By Him, to God. As it
all other Governors were sent by Him, not by the King. Which Interpretation of
the place I would admit for current, if by the (...) or Governors, so sent, he
did understand the Rulers in an Aristocracie, or Free State. which being a
Species of Government, Contradistinct to Monarchy cannot be denied to have
God, as well as the other for it is Founder. But then the word (...) the
peculiar Epithet of Monarchy, will bear another sense then I have hitherto
given it; And will not only signify the King to be Supreme, (for so the Rulers
of a Free State are within their own Territories) but compared with other
Forms of Supremacy to be the most excellent. Monarchy being in it self least
subject to Disunion, or civil Disturbance. And for that Reason pronounced by
the wisest Stateists to be that Form of Government, into which all other
incline naturally to resolve themselves for their perfection. But by
Governors, in that place, understanding as he does, not the Senate in a
Free State, but the Subordinate Magistrates under a Prince, the (...) most
certainly belongs to the King. To whom the Apostle there assigns the Mission
of Governors as one of the Essential Marks, and Notes, that He is, in His
own Realm Supreme.

And thus Sir, having drawn the portraiture of Regal Power to you, by the
best Light in the world, but with the meanest Pencill; I know you expect that
in the next place I should show you what Rays, or Beams, of this power are
Inherent in our King. Which being a task fitter for one of our greatest Sages
of the Law, then for me, (who, being One who do not pretend to any exact
knowledge in the Fundamental Laws, or Customs, of this Kingdom,) which are
to stand the Landmarks and marks of partition between the Kings Prerogative,
and the Liberty of the Subject, may perhaps be thought by drawing a line or
circle about either, to limne Figures in the Dust, whose ^ate bangs on the
Mercy of the next Wind that blows) the steps by which I will proceed,
(leaving you to the late writings of that most learned and honest Judge Ienkins
for your fuller satisfaction in this point) shall be briefly these two. First I
will show you what are the Genuine marks, and properties of Supreme power;
Next, how many of them have been challenged by the King, and have not hitherto
been denied Him by any Public Declaration of the Parliament.

Sir if you have read Aristotle's Politics (as I presume you have) you may
please to remember that he * there divides the Supreme Powere of a State, into
three general Lib. 4. c. 4.
parts. The Ordering of Things for the public, the Creation of Magistrates,
and the Final resolution of Judgment upon Appeals; To which he afterward
adds the power of Levying War, or concluding of Peace, of making or breaking
Leagues with foreign Nations, of enacting or abrogating Laws, of Pardoning,
or Punishing Offenders, with Banishment, Confiscation, Imprisonment or Death.
To which Dyonisius Halicarnassensis adds, the power to call or dissolve
Comitia, or public Assemblies; As well Synods and Counsels in Deliberations
concerning Religion; as Parliaments, or Senates, in Deliberations secular
concerning the State. To all which marks of Supreme power, a * Modern Lawyer
(who only wants their Age to be of as great Authority as either) adds the
power to exact Tribute, and to press Soldiers. In the exercise of which two
Grot. lib. 1. c. 3. de Iure Belli and pacis.
Acts consists that Dominium Eminens, or Dominion Para*mount, which the state,
(when ever it stands in need, And that too, to be the Judge of its own
Necessity) has not only over the Fortunes, but the Persons of the Subject; In
a measure so much greater then they have over themselves, as the public poole
is to be preferred before the private Cisterne.

Now Sir, if you please to apply this to the King, though good Lawyers will
tell you that the power of making or repealing Laws be not solely in Him, but
that the two Houses have a concurrent right in their production, and
Abolishment; yet they will tell you too, that His power extends thus far,
that no Law can be made or repealed without Him. Since for either, or both
Houses to produce a Statute Law by themselves, has always, in this State,
been thought a Birth as Monstrous as if a Child should be begotten by a Mother
upon her self. They usually are the Matrice and Womb, where Laws receive
their first Impregnation, and are shaped and formed for the public; But
(besides the opinion of all present Lawyers of this Kingdom, who, like that
great Judge Ienkins.
example of Loyalty, dare speak their knowledge) it has always been
acknowledged by the Law made 2. H. 5. By the sentence of Refusal, Le Roy S'
Avisera, and indeed by all Parliaments of former Ages, That the King is thus
far Pater Patriae: that these Laws are but abortive unless his Consent
pass upon them. A Negative power He has then, though not an outright
Legislative. And if it be here objected, by your Friend, that the two Houses
severally have so too, I shall perhaps grant it, if in this particular, they
will be modest, and content to go sharers in this Power; And no longer
challenge to their Ordinances the legality and force of Acts of Parliament.

As for the other parts of Royalty, which I reckoned up to you; As the Creation
of Officers, and Counselors of State, of Judges for Law, and Commanders for
War, the Ordering of the Militia by Sea and Land, The Benefit of
Confiscations, and Escheats where Families want an Heir; The power to absolve
and pardon, where the Law has Condemned; The power to call and disolve
Parliaments, As also the Receipt of Custom and Tribute, with many other
particulars, which you are able to suggest to your self. They have always
been held to be such undoubted Flowers of this Crown, that every one of them
like his Coin (which you know Sir, is by the Law of this Land Treason to
counterfeit, which is an other mark of Royalty) has in all Ages but Ours,
worn the Kings Image, and superscription upon it. Not to be invaded by any,
without the crime of Rebellion.

And though (as your Friend says,) this be but a regulated power, and rise no
higher in the just exercise of these Acts, then a Trust committed by the Laws
of this Kingdom, for the Government of it* to the King, (for I never yet
perceived by any of His Declarations, That His Majes^y c^aimed these as due to
Him by Right of Conquest, or any ^er of those Absolute, and Unlimited ways,
which might render His Crown Patrimoniall to Him, or such an outright A^odium
that He might Alienate it, or choose His Successor, or Rule as He pleased
Himself) yet as in the making of these Laws He holds the first place, so none
of these Rights which he derives from them, can without His own Consent, be
taken from Him.

For proof hereof, I will only instance in three particulars to you, (for I
must remember, that I am now writing a Letter to you, not penning a Treatise,)
which will carry the greater force of persuasion, because conf^st by this
Parliament. The first was an Act presented to the King for the settling of the
Militia, for a limited time in such Hands as they might confide in. A clear
Argument, that without such an Act past by the King, the two Houses had nothing
to do with the Ordering of it. Another was one of the Nineteen Propositions,
where it was desired that the Nomination of all Officers, and Counselors of
State, might, for the future go by the Mayor part of Voices of both Houses.
Another Argument, That the King has hitherto in all such Nominations, been the
only Fountain of Honor. The third was, the passing of the Act for the
Continuation of this Parliament; Another Argument, that nothing but the Kings
consent could ever have made it thus Perpetual as it is. Many other Instances
might be given, but so undoubtedly acknowledged by Bracton, By Him that wrote
the Book called The Prerogative of Parliaments, (who is thought to be Sir
Walter Raleigh) By Sir Edward Cook, by the styles and Forms of all the Acts
of Parliament, which have been made in this Kingdom, and by that learned Sir
John Banks.
Judge who wrote the Examination of such particulars in the Solemn League and
Covenant as concern the Law; And who in a continued Line of Quotation, and
Proof, derives along these and the other parts of Supreme power in the King,
from Edward the Confessor, to our present Sovereign King Charles, that to
prove them to you, were to add beams to the Sun.

Here then, For the better stating of the Third thing I proposed to you, (which
was, That granting the King to be Supreme in this Kingdom, (at least so far
as I have described him) how far He is to be Obeyed, and not Resisted) Two
things will fall under Inquiry. First, supposing the King not to have kept
Himself to that Circle of power which the Laws have drawn about Him, but
desirous to walk in a more Absolute compass, That He has in somethings
invaded the Liberty of his People, whither such an Incroachment can justify
their Arms. Next, If it be proved that He has kept within his Line, and only
made the Law the Rule of His Government, whether a bare Fear or Jealousy,
That when ever he should be able, He would change this Rule, (which is the most
that can be pretended) could be a Just cause for an Anticipating War.

The Decision of the first of these Inquiries, will depend wholly upon the
Tenure by which he holds His Crown. If it were puerly Elective, or were at
first set upon His Head by the Suffrages of the people; And if in that
Election, His power had been limited; Or if by way of paction, it had been
said, Thus far the King shall be Supreme, thus far the people shall be
Free; If there had been certain Express conditions assigned Him, with his
Scepter, that if he transgrest not his limits He should be Obeyed, if He did,
it should be lawful for the people to resist Him; Lastly, if to hinder such
Exorbitances, there had been certain Epho^i, or Inspectours, or a Coordinate
Senate, placed, as Mounds, and Cliffes about Him, with warrant from the
Electours, that when ever he should attempt to overflow his Banks, it should
be their part to reinforce Him back into his Channel; I must confess to you
being no better then a Duke of Uenice, or a King of Sparta; In truth no King,
but a more splendid Subject, I think such a Resistance might be Lawful. Since,
such a Conveyance of Empire being but a conditional contract, as in all other
Elections, the chusers may reserve to themselves, or give away so much of their
Liberty as they please. And where the part reserved is invaded, It Is no
Rebellion to defend. But where the Crown is not Elective, but has so
Hereditarily descended in an ancient line of succession from King ^o King, that
to find out the Original of it, would be a task as difficult, as to find out
the Head of Nilus; where the Tenure is not conditional, nor hangs upon any
contract made at first with the people, nor is such a reciprocal Creature of
their Breath, as to be blown from them, and recalled, like the fleeting Air
they draw, as often as they shall say it returns to them, worse then at first
they sent it forth; In short, Sir, Where the only Obligation, or Tie upon the
Prince is the Oath which He takes at his Coronation, to rule according to the
known Laws of the place; Though every Breach of such an Oath be an Offense
against God, (to whom alone a Prince thus independent is accountable for his
Actions) yet 'twill never pass for more then perjury in the Prince; No Warrant
for Subjects to take up Arms against Him.

Here then, Sir, should I suppose the worst that can be supposed, that there
was a time when the King, misled (as your Friend says) by Evil Counselors,
did actually trample upon the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of his
Subjects, derived to them by those Laws; yet unless some Original compact
can be produced where it is agreed, That upon every such Incroachment it shall
be lawful for them to stand upon their Defense; unless some Fundamental
Contract can be shown where it is clearly said, that where the King cease to
govern according to Law, He shall for such misgovernment cease to be King; To
urge (as your Friend does) such unfortunate precedents as a Deposed Richard, or
a Dethroned Edward, (Two disproportioned examples of popular Fury; The one
forced to part with his Crown by Resignation, the other as never having had
legal Title to it,) may show the Injustice of former Parliaments grown
strong, never justify the Pitcht-feilds which have been fought by this. Since,
(If this supposition were true) the King being bound to make the Law Hi^ Rule
by no other Obligation but His Oath at His Coronation (Then which there cannot
be a greater, I confess, and where it is violated never, without Repentance
scapes vnpunish't) yet it is a trespass of which Subjects can only complain,
but as long as they are Subjects can never innocently revenge.

But this, all this while, Sir, is but only supposition; And you know, Sir,
what the Logician says, suppositio nihil ponit in esse, what ever may be
supposed is not presently true. I^ Calumny her self would turn Informer, let
her leave out Ship Money (a greivance which being fairly laid a fleepe by an
Act of Parliament, deserved not to be awakened to bear a part in the present
Tragedy of this almost ruined Kingdom) she must confess that the King through
the whole course of His Reign was so far from the Invasion of His Subjects
Rights, that no King of England before Him, (unless it were Henry the first,
and King John, whom, being Usurpers it concerned to comply with the People, the
one having supplanted his Eldest Brother Robert Duke of Normandy, the other his
Nephew, Arthur Prince of Britain) ever imparted to them so many Rights of his
own. To that Degree of Infranchisement that I may almost say He exchanged
Liberties with them. Witness the Petition of Right. An Act of such Royal
Grace, that when He past that Bill, He almost dealt with His people, as Tra^an
did with the Pratorian prefect, ^ut his sword into their Hands, and bid them
use it for Him if he ruled well if not, against Him. In short, Sir, Magna
Charta was a Uine, I confess, cast over the People, but this Act enabled them
to call the shade of it their own. An Act which (if your friend will please to
forget Ship money) being in no one particular violated, so far as to be
instanc^d in by those, whose present Engagements would never suffer such
Breaches of Privilege to pass unclam^ur'd, will ob^ge posterity to be
grateful, as often as they remember themselves to be Freemen.

Thi^ then being so, the next inquiry will be, whether a bare Iealousy that the
King would in time have recalled this Grace, and would have invaded the Liberty
of his Subjects, by the change of the Fundamental Laws, could be a ^ust cause
for such a praeventive War as this. To which I answ^re, that such a Fear,
(...) built upon strong presumptions cannot possibly be a just cause for one
Nation to make War upon another; much less for Subjects to make War
against their Prince. The Reason is, because nothing can legitimate such a
War, but either an Injury already offered, or so visibly imminent, that it
may pass for the first Dart or Spear hurled. Where the Injury or Invasion, is
only contin^ent and conjecturall, and wrapped up in the womb of dark Counsels,
no way discoverable but by their own revelation of themselves in some outward
Acts of Hostility, or usurpation, to anticipate is to be first injurious; and
every Act of prevention, which has only Jealousy for its foundation, will
add new justice to the enemies Cause, who, as He cannot in reason be
pronounced guilty of another Fears so he will come into the Field with this
great advantage on his side, That his real wrong will join Battle with the
others weak suspicion.

But alas, Sir, Time, (the best interpreter of Men's Intentions, has at length
unsee'^d our eyes, and taught us that this has been a War of a quite
opposite Nature. The Gentleman who wrote the Defense of M. Chaloners Speech,
and M. Chaloner himself, if you mark his Speech well, will tell you, that the
quarrel has not been whether the subject of England shall be Free, but
whether this Freedom shall not consist in being no longer Subject to the King.
If you ma^ke, Sir, How the face of things has altered with success, How the
scene o^ things is shifted; And in what a N^w style they, who called themselves
the Invaded, have spoken, ever since their Victories have secured them against
the power of any hat shall invade; If you consider what a politic use has
been made o^ those words of Enchantment, Law, Liberty, and Propriety of the
Subject, by which the People have been musically en^ced into their Thraldom;
If you yet farther consi^er the more then Decemvirall power which this
Parliament has assumed to it self, by repealing old Laws, and making
Ordinances pass for new; If you yet farther will please to consider How much
Heavyer that which some call Privilege of Parliament, has been to the
Subject, then that which they so much complained of, The Kings Prerogative; so
much heavyer, that if one deserved to be called a Little finger, the other has
swollen it self into a Loyne; Lastly, if you compare Ship-mony with the Excise,
and the many other Taxes laid upon the Kingdom, you will not only find that a
whippe then, has been heightened into a Scorpion now; but you will perceive,
that as these are not the first Subjects who, under pretense of Liberty, have
invaded their Princes Crown, (so far as the Cleaving of Him asunder by a
State Distinction, which separates the Power of the King from his Person) so
ours, as long as he was able to lead an Army into the Field, has been the
first King that ever took up Arms for the Liberty of his Subjects. Upon all
which premises, Sir, I hope you will not think it fa^e Logic if I build this
Conclusion so agreeable to the Laws of the Kingdom, as well as the Laws of
God: Tha^ supposing the Parliament all this while to have fought, (as was at
first pretended) for the Defense of their assailed Liberty; yet fighting
against the King whose Subjects they are, it can never before a Christian Judge
make their Armies pass for just. But being no way necessitated to make such a
Defense (their Liberty having in no one particular been assaulted, which has
not been redrest) if S. Paul were now on earth again, and were the Judge of
this Controversy between them and their Lawful Sovereign, I fear he would
call their Defense by a Name, which we in our Modern Cases of Conscience do
call Rebellion.

And thus, Sir, having as compendiously as the Laws of a Letter will permit,
given you, I hope, some satisfaction concerning the first part of your zealous
Friends dispute with you; which was, whether the Two Houses (which he calls the
Parliament) have not a Legal power, in Defense of their Liberty, to take up
Arms against the King, I will with the like br^vity, proceed as well as I can,
to give you satisfaction in the second part of his Dispute also; which was,
whether Religion may not be a just Cause for a War. The Terms of which
Question being very general, and not restrained to any kind of Religion, or
any kind of War, whether offensive or defensive, or whether of one Nation
against another, or of a Prince against his Subjects, or of the Subjects back
again against their Prince, allow me a very large space to walk in. In which,
least I be thought to wander, and not to prove, It will first be necessary,
that I define to you what Religion in general is; And next, that I examine,
whether every Religion which falls within the Truth of that Definition may for
the propagation of it self be a just cause of a War; and so whether all they
who either are of no Religion, or a false, may not be forced to be of the true.
Lastly, what the Duty of Subjects is toward their Prince, incase he should
endeavor by force to impose a Religion upon them which they think to be false,
and can probably make it appear to be so by proofe^ taken from the Scripture;

Religion then, (to define it in the dearest Terms) is says (...). Sae. q.
^0. c. 3.
Aquinas, Uirtus reddens debitum Honorem Deo, A virtue which renders to God his
just Honor. This payment of Honor to God as it is built and founded upon his
Creation of us, by which he has a Right to our S^vice and Worship of him, so
in the contemplative part of it, it consists in these four Notions or
Apprehensions of him. First, that there is a God, and that there is but One.
Next, that he is not any part of this Visible World, but something Higher and
more excellent, then any Thing we see. Thirdly, that he has a providence going
in the World, and takes care of Humane affairs. Lastly, that he made and
created the World. To every one of which four, answers a Commandment in the
First-Table of the Decalogue. Where the first describes His Unity, by
forbidding the Worship of other Gods. The next his Invisibility, by forbidding
any Image, or Resemblance to be made of Him. The third his providence,
described there by two eminent parts of it. His Omniscience, by which he knows
the Thoughts of men's Hearts: and his Justice, by which he inflicts punishments
on those whose Thoughts are disporportion'd to their Oaths and Words. The
Fourth declares his Omnipotence, by which he created the World, and appointed
the Sabbath to be the Feast and Memorial of that great Work. From which
speculative apprehensions of him do spring these practical, That being such a
God thus known, He is to be Honored, Loved, Feared, Worshipped, and Obeyed.

Now since men's Religion, or Worship of God, cannot in reason be required to
reach higher then their Knowledge of Him, (for Manifestation is so necessary to
Obligation and Duty, that if'twere impossible to know that there is a God,
'twould be no sin to be an Atheist) so if God had never made any second
Revelation of Himself by the Scripture, but had left Mankind to their own
Natural search of Him, and to those Discourses of their Minds, by which they
inferred that such an orderly frame and Systeme of things, where every one
works to the good and End of another, is too rationally contrived to arise from
a concourse of Atoms, or to be the Creature of Chance, and therefore must have
some Efficient Cause higher, and nobler then it self, (since it implies a
Contradiction, that any thing should be it is own producer) yet his bare
Creation of the World represents so much of him, that without any other Book
or Teacher, all Ages have believed that there is a God who made the World; and
that He has a Rule, and providence going in it.

This then being so, It Is the Opinion of a very Grot. l. 2. de Iure Bel^i ac
pacis c. 20.
Learned Modern Writer, That if there should be found a Country of Atheists,
or a People of Diagoras Melius's Opinion, or of the opinion of Theodorus the
Cyrenian, whose Doctrine 'twas, Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum, That there is
no God nor a habitable Heaven, But that such Names of Emptiness have been the
Creatures of superstitious fancies, whose fears first prompted them to make
Gods, and then to worship them; or if there should be a People found of
Epicurus his opinion, who held that there were Gods, but that they were Idle,
careless, vacant Gods, who troubled not themselves with the Government of the
World, but past their time away in an undisturbed Tranquillity, and exemption
from such inferior businesses as the Actions of Men such opinions (supposing
them to be National) as they are contradictory not only to the Dictares of
Natural Reason,) upon which God has built the forementioned precepts of the
Decalogue) but to that universally received Tradition, That there is a Divine
power; whose providence holds the scales to men's actions, and first or last
sides with afflicted Innocence against succesfull Oppression, so they would be
just Causes for a reforming War. Not only because they are contumelious and
reproachful to God himself, but because being directly destructive to all
Religion, They are by necessary consequence destructive to Humane society too.
For let it once be granted that there is no God, or (which, with reference to
States, and Commonwealths, will produce the same irregular effects) that he
regards not men's Actions, nor troubles himself with the Dispensation of
Rewards and Punishments, and the Doctrine of Carneades will presently p^sse for
reasonable; That Utility is the measure of Right; And that he is most in the
wrong who is least able to defend himself. That Justice is the virtue of
Fools; and serves only to betray the simple and phlegmatic, to the more
active and daring. In short, Take away providence, especially the two great
parts of it, which reign in the Hearts of men, hope of Reward, and fear of
Punishment, and men's worst Actions, and their best will presently be thought
equal. Whereupon Laws, the Bonds of Humane ^ociety, wanting their just
Principle, which upholds them in their Reverence, will inevitab^y loose their
force, and fall asunder; and Men will be Men to each other in nothing but their
(...) injustice and Oppressions of one another. 'Twas therefore the politic
observation of an Atheist in Adv. Mathemat. p. 3^8.
Sextus Empiricus, That, to keep men orderly, and regular in a Commonwealth,
wise men at first invented Laws, But perceiving that these, reaching only to
their outward Actions, would never be well kept, unless they could find a way
to awe their Minds within too, as a means conducing to that end, (...), one
more wise, and subtle then the rest, invented Gods too. Well knowing that
Religion, though but fained, is a conservative of States. upon consideration of
which harmefull consequences, which naturally follow Atheism, and the denial
of Gods providence, it is the opinion of that Author, that as 'twas no Injustice
in those Grecian Cities, which banished Philosophers, who were of this Opinion,
out of their Commonwealth, so if there should be found a Nation of such impious
persuasions, 'twould be no Injustice in any other People, who are not Atheists,
by way of punishment, to banish them out of he World.

Though this, Sir, were the opinion of one, whose works have deservedly made
him so Famous to the whole Christian World (besides the peaceablenesse of his
Writings which decline all the ways of quarrel) that to err with him would
be no disreputation to me, yet I must confess to you, that I am so fa^re from
thinking (...) War made for the propagation of Religion, how true soever it
be, is warrantable, that in this particular. I pers^ade my self I have some
reason to dissent from, Hi^ and to think it a Problem very disputable, if his
supposition were tru^, that there were such a Country of Atheists, or
Epicureans, who should (...) there is a God, or that he (...) providence going
in (...) World; whether for that reason only another Nation (...) justifi^bly
make War upon them. For first, what should give them Authority to do so?
Is It because men of this (...) persuasion do sin very grievously against
(...)? (...) (...) to be true, to the utmost (...) of (...) that this
speculative error in ^h^ir Minds, d^ was a practical error (...) it in their
lives, which i, not to p^y Worship to a God, which either they think not to be,
or not at all to regard them, yet this being but a crime against God, the same
Author has answered himself in another Paragraph, where he says, Deorum
in^ae Diis cura, That God is able to revenge the injuries committed against
Himself. Next then, is it because such an Opinion is destructive of Humane
Society? Truly, Sir, though I shall grant that saying of Plutarch to be true,
that Religion (which Atheism, and the denial of providence do destroy) is,
(...)* one, (nay one of the firmest) Bonds of Society, and supporters o^ Laws,
yet I have not met with any demonstrative Argument, which has proved to me,
that there is such a necessary dependence of Humane society upon Religion. that
the Absence of the One must inevitably be the Destruction of the other. If it
be, this is most likely to come to pass in the State, or Commonwealth, which
is of this opinion among themselves, Not in a foreign State, or Commonwealth
which is not. But since it is possible that a Country of Atheists may yet have
so much Morality among them, seconded by Laws made by common agreement among
themselves, as to be a People, and to hold the society of Citizens among
themselves. And as it is possible for them, without Religion, so far, for
mere utility and safeties sake, to observe the ^aw of Nations, as not to wrong
or injure a People different from themselves, so where no civil wrong, or
injury is offered by them to another People, but where the moral Bonds of
Society, and commerce, though not the Religious, of Opinion, and Worship, are
unbroken by them, for the People not injured to make War upon them, for a
feared, imaginary consequence, or because, being Atheists, it is possi^l* that
their example may spread, is an Act of Hostility which I confess I am not able
to defend.

For thirdly, Sir, such a War must either have for it is end, their
punishment, or their Correction. Their punishment can be no true warrantable
end, because toward those who shall thus make War upon them, they have not
offended. Nor can their Correction Legitimate such a War. Because all
Correction as well as Punishment, requires Jurisdiction in the Correctors, and
Inflictors of the punishment. Which one People cannot reasonably be presumed to
have over another People independent, and no way subject to them* unless we
will allow, with that Lib. 2. de jure bell* and pacis c. 20.
Author, that because Natural reason does dictate that Atheism is punishable,
therefore they, who are not Atheists have a right to punish those that are;
which Covarruvtas (...) Spaniard, who has learnedly disputed this point, and
others, as learned as he, have not thought fit to grant.

It has been a Question ^k't* whether Idolatry be not a Crime of this
punishable nature in one People by another, who are not guilty of that Crime.
To which the best Divines, which (...) h^ yet read upon that Subject do answer
negatively, that it is not. For though it be to be granted that an^ (...) (...)
and kinds of Idolatry, One is more Ignoble and irrational then Another; A
(...) so t^ e^nce toward God is greater or less as the Objects, to which men
terminate their Idolatry, are more vile, or honorable; As in those old
Heathens, 'twas a more faulty Idolatry to worship a Dog or Crocodile, or
Serpent, then to worship things of a Sublimer kind, namely the Sun, or
heavenly bodies, or Souls of famous men departed; And though all such
Idolatries have deservedly been thought to be so many Affronts, and Robberies
of the true God, whose worship is thereby misplaced, and spent upon false, yet
having left behind him in his whole Globe of Creation no exact figure or
Character of Himself, to be known or distinguished by, nor any plain Teacher
but his Scripture to inform men of vulgar understandings, that there is but
one God, and that that one God is only an Intelligible spirit, and no part of
this gross material World which we see, wherever the Scripture has not been
heard of, if men (unable by the sight of a Natural discourse to apprehend him
as He is) have fancied to themselves a plurality of False Gods, or made to
themselves false representations of the true, S. Paul tells us that Act. 17. 30.
God connived at it, as a piece of unaffected ignorance. which can never be a
cause meritorious of a War to correct it. First, because being only an
Offense against God, and the Offenders being (as I said before) free, and no
wa^ subject to any People but themselves, Any foreign Nation (unless they
can show the like Commission from God to punish them, as the Jews had to
punish and root out the Canaanites) will want Jurisdiction, and Authority to
their Arms. Next, because Idolatry though it be a false Religion, is yet as
conservant of Society (which distinguishes it very much from Atheism, and the
denial of Providence) as if'twere true. Nor can I see why He who worships many
Gods, if he believe them to be Gods, should less fear punishment for his
perjuries, or other Crimes, then He who only worships, and believes there is
but one. Lastly, because though Idolatry be an Error in men, yet being an
Error, without the light of Scripture to rectify it, hardly vincible in
themselves, and no way criminal toward others of a more rectified Reason,
It Is to be reformed by Argument, and persuasion, not violence, or force. Since
a War made upon the Errors or men's minds, is as unreasonable, as a War
made upon the Freedom or their Wills.

And for this ^ast reason, I conceive that the propagation of Christian
Religion, cannot be a just cause for a War upon those who will refuse to
embrace it. First, because such a Refusal may possibly spring from an Error
in the understanding, which even in a Preaching, and persuasive way would
scarce be in the power of S. Paul himself, if he were on earth again (unless
he would join Miracles to his Sermons) to dislodge. For though some parts of
the New Law do carry such a Music and consent to the Law of Nature, that they
answer one another like two strings wound up to the same tune; yet there be
other parts, which though they do not contradict it, are yet so unillustrable
from the principles of Reason, that they cannot in a natural way of
Argumentation force assent. And you know, Sir, 'twould be unreasonable to make
War upon men's persons for the reception of a Doctrine, which cannot convince
their Minds. I must needs confess to you, should Christ now live in our days,
and Preach much harder Doctrines then those in the Gospel, and should confirm
every Doctrine with a Miracle, as he did then, 'twould be an inexcusable piece
of Infidelity in all those who should see his Miracles not presently to
consent, and yield belief to his Sermons. But somethings in his Doctrine
appearing new and strange to the World, and depending for the probability of
their Truth upon the Authority of his Miracles, And those Miracles being
Matters of Fact, wrought so many Ages since, and therefore not possibly able to
represent themselves to our times upon g^eater Authority an^ proof, then the
Faith and general Report of Tradition and story; If any shall think they have
reason not to believe such a report, they may also think they have no reason
to believe such Miracles, and by consequence the Doctrine (...) be confirmed by
them. In short. Sir, the Gospel, at that very time when the (...) of it was
accompanied with Miracles, obtained not always that success which the saving
Doctrine of it deserved. The Jews says S. Paul 1. Cor. 1. 22. Require a
sign; that is, they would believe it no farther then they saw Miracle for it;
And the Greeks (That is, the learned Gentiles) seek after wisdom; that is,
They would believe no more of it then could be proved to them by Demonstration.
Nay, notwithstanding all those great Miracles which were wrought by Christ, and
his Apostles after him, S. Paul tells us at the 23. verse of that Chapter, that
the vileness of Christ's death did so diminish the Authority of his Doctrine,
though confirmed by Miracles, that the Preaching of Him crucified, was a
stumbling block to the Jews, and Foolishness to the Greeks. Next, Sir, As
Christ has no where commanded that men should be compelled to receive the
Gospel by any Terrors or Infl^ctions of Temporal punishments, so I find that
all such endeavors are very unsuitable to his practice. You know what his
answer was to his two zealous Disciples who would have called for Luke 9. 54.
fire from heaven, to consume those Samaritans who would not receive him. v.
55. 56.
ye know not, says he, of what spirit ye are of. The son of man is not come
to destroy men's lives but to save them. Which Answer of hi^ was like the
Commission which he gave to his Apostles, when he sent them forth to Preach the
Gospel of verall Cities, which extended no farther then th^s. Luke 9. 5.
If they will not receive you, shake off the dust of your feet against them,
for a Testimony that you have been there. Ag^eable to this p^actise of Christ
is that Canon which p^st in the Council of C. de Iudiciis did. 45.
Toledo, which s^ies praecipit san^ta Synodus Nemin^ deinceps ad credendum vim
infer, It Is ordered by this holy Synod, that no man be henceforth comp^lled
to believe the Gospel. A Canon, which I wish the m^ of the Country where
'twas made had worn in their Ensigns when they made W^e upon the Indians. And
agreeable to this Canon, is the saying of Tertullian. Lex nova non se vindicat
ultore gladio; The new Law allows not it is Apostles to revenge the contempt of
it by the Sword. And agreeable to this saying of Tertullian is the (...) in Iu
Arcana Historia.
Procopius; where one tell^ Justinian the Emper^or that in striving to force
the Samaritans to be (...) by the Sword, he made himself successor to the two
over zealous Apostles, who, because they would not (...) (...) Master, would
have destroyed them by fire. The (...) ^ing ^o, to deal freely, Sir, both with
you and (...) (...), (...) as I read the writings of some of our (...) (...),
w^o think all others Infidells who are not of the (...). And whose usual
language it is toward all (...) (...) (...) from them in Points, though in
them ind^fferent, and no way necessary to Salvation, Luke 14. 28.
(...), make Covenants, raise Armies, st^p them (...) ^ir Estates, and compel
them to come in, (...) thinks a (...) of (...) Alcoran is before me^; an^ the
Preachers (...) (...) ^christian Doctrines, (...) they walk our English
streets in the shape of Assembly Protestant Divines, seem to me to be a
Constantinople College of Mahomets Priests. To speak yet m^re pl^ly t^ y^u,
Sir, I am so far^e from thinking it a piece of Christian Doctrine, to Preach
that 'ti^ lawful (if it may not be done by persuasion) to take from men the
Liberty even of their erring Conscience, that the new Army which shall be
raised (which I hope never to see) for the prosecution and advancement of such
an End, however they may be Scots or Englishmen by their Birth, will seem to
me an Army of (...): and to come into the field with Scymitars by their sides,
and Tulipants, and Turbants on their Heads.

How far Defensive Arms may be taken up for Religion, cannot well be
resolved without a Distinction. I conceive Sir, that if such a war fall out
between Two Independent Nations, That which makes the Ass^ylants to be in the
wrong will necessarily make the Defendants to be in the Right, which is (as I
have proved to you) a want of rightful power to plant Religion by the Sword.
For in all such Resistances, not only They who fight to preserve a true, but
They who fight because they would not be compelled to part with a false
Religion, which they believe to be a true, are innocent ^like. The Reason is,
(which I have intimated to you before) because All Religion, being built up, on
Faith, and Faith being only Opinion built upon Authority, and Opinion built upon
Authority, having so much of the Liberty (...) men's wills in it, that they may
choose how far they will, or will not believe that Authority, No man has Right
^o take the Liberty of another man's will from him, or to prescribe to him what
he shall, or shall no believe, though in all outward things hit other have sold
his Liberty to him, and made his Will his Subject, where both parties,
therefore, are Independent, and One no way Subject to the Other, Religion it
self, though for the propagation of it self, cannot warrant the One to invade
the Others Freedom. But it is permi^ted to the Invaded, by both the Laws of
God, that of Nature, and Scripture too, (unless they be guilty of some
preceedent Injury, which is to be repaired by Satisfaction, not seconded by
Resistance) to repel Force with Force. And (...) the Army now in Conduct under
Sir Thomas Fairefax be of this persuasion thus stated, I shall not think it any
slander from the Mouth of a Presbiterian, who thinks otherwise, to be called an
Independent.

If a Prince who is confessedly a Prince, and has Supreme power, make War
upon his Subjects for the propagation of Religion, the Nature of the Defense is
much altered. For though such a War (whether made for the Imposition of a
false Religion or a true) be as unjust as if 'twere made upon a foreign
Nation, yet this injustice in the Prince cannot warrant the taking up of Arms
against Him, in the Subject. Because b^ng the Apostles (...) or Supreme within
his ow^ Kingdom, As (...) power concerning the public, secular Government ^f
(...) it self i^to Him, so does the ordering of the Outward exercise of
Religion too. In both Cases he is the Judge of Controversies. Not so unerring
or Infallible, as that all his Determinations must be received for Oracles, or
that his Subjects are so obliged to be of his Religion, that if the Prince be
an Idolater, a Mahumetan, or Papist, 'twould be disobedience in them not to be
so too. But let his Religion be what it will; let him be a Jeroboam, or one of
such an unreasonable Idolatry, as to command his people to worship Calves, and
Burn Incense to Gods scarce fit to be made the Sacrifice, Though he be not to
be obeyed, yet he is not to be resisted. Since such a Resistance, would not
only change the Relation of inequality, and Distance between the Prince, and
People, and so destroy the Supremacy here given him by S. Peter, but 'twould
actually enter duel with the Ordinance of God; which cease not to be sacred
as often as it is wickedly employed. Irresistibility being a Ray and Beam of
the Divine Image, which resides in the Function, not in the Religion of the
Prince. Who may for his Person, perhaps, be a Caligula, or Nero, yet in his
Office still remain Gods Deputy and Vicegerent. And therefore to be obeyed,
even in his unjust commands, though not actively by our compliance, yet
passively by our sufferings. This Doctrine as it is agreeable to the Scripture,
and the practice of the purest, and most primitive times of the Church, so I
find it illustrated by the famous example of a Christian Soldier, and the
censure of a Father upon the passage. This Soldier being bid to burn Incense
to an Idol, refused; But yielded himself to be cast into the fire. Had he,
when his Emperor bid him worship an Idol, mutinied, or turned his spear upon
him (says that Father) he had broken the fifth Commandment in defense of the
second. But submitting his Body to be burnt, (the only thing in him, which
could be compelled) instead of committing Idolatry he became himself a
Sacrifice. I could, Sir, second this with many other Examples, but they would
all tend to this one pious, Christian Result, that Martyrdom is to be
preferred before Rebellion.

Here then, if I (...) suppose your Presbyterian Friends charge to be true, (a
very heavy one (...) (...)) that the King miscounselled by a Pre^ticall Court
Faction when he first Marched in^o the field against the Armies raised by the
two H^uses of (...) (...) (...) a^ intent to subvert the Protestant Religion*
and to plant the Religion of the Church (...) Rome in it is stead, yet (...)
(...) (...) (...) to me, that (...) (...) (...) (...) he (...) (...) (...)
King* or the two H^uses to be his (...) or ((...) their two Oath^ ^f (...) and
Alleage^) that in so ^ing ^e for (...) his Crowns, and w^ (...) (...) over all
persons, and in all ^auses as well ^vill as ^cclesiasticall within the (...) of
his three Kingdoms supreme Head and Governor, I know no Arms which co^
^wfully be used against Him; b^ these which S. (...) used against an Arian
Emperor, Lach^as and Suspi^ia, Sighs and Tears, and Prayers ^o God ^o turn
hi^ heart. And therefore, Sir, when your Friend does next ask you* Flow it
could stand with the safe ^onscience of any English Protestant, to stand an
idle spectator, whilst Queen Mary's days were so ready to break in upon him,
that He was almost reduced to this h^rd choice, either to follow the Times in
the new erected fashion of Religion, or live in danger of the stake, and
Faggot, if he persisted in the old, y^u may p^ease to let him know from me,
That as I have no unruly Thirst, or irregular Ambition in me to d^e a Martyr,
Not am so much a Circumc^lee, as to court, or woo^, or (in case i^ fled from
me) enthusiastically to call upon me my own Death and Execution; So, if it had
been my Lot to live in the fiery times He speaks of, when a Protestant was put
to death for an Heretic, as I should not have quarreld with the Power that
condemned me, so I should have kissed my funeral pile; And should have though^
it a high piece of Gods favor to me, to call me to Heaven by a way so like
that of his Angel in the Book of c. 13. 20.
Judges, who ascended thither in the Flame, and air, and persume of a
Sacrifi^e.

But what if this be only a Jealousy and suspicion in your Friend? ^ay (...)
if it (...) (...) (...) (...) Disguise, and part to some Ambitious m^s (...),
who, to walk the more (...) (...) the dark and politic ends, ^ave styled
th^mselves the D^fendours when they have all this while been the Invadors; And
have calle^ the King the subverter, who has all this while (to his power) been
the Defendor of this Religion? This certain^y if it be proved, will very much
(...) and aggrav^e their sin, and dye it in a deep s^let, through all the
progress of it. But because I rather desire to east a m^tle over their strange
proceedings, then to ad^e to their Nakedness, which has at length discovered
it self to all the World, all that I shall say, to deliver so much Goodness
from so much misrepresentation it this. That the report, (which at first
poisoned the minds of so many Thousand well minded people) That the King had
an intent, by this ^re, in destroy the Protestant Religion, could at (...) have
no other parent but some men's either crasty Malice, or needless Fear, appears
clearly in this, that after all their great Discoveries, they have not yet
instanced in one considerable Ground fit to build more then a vulgar Iealousy
upon. The Kings affection to the Queen, His Alliance and confederacy with
Popish Princ^es abroad and the Gentleness of his Reign toward his Popish
Subjects at home, being premises (...) unfit to build this inference and
conclusion upon, that, Therefore He took up Arms that he might introduce their
Religion, as his in Aristotle were; who because it lightened when Socrates to^k
the Air, thought that his walking ^use that commotion in the skies. For that
the Root and Spring of such a report* could be nothing but their own deluded
fancy, they must at length (...) esse, unless with their Faith they have ^ast
off their Charity too. Let (...) Friend, Sir* read ^ve any one of His Majesty's
Declarations, and wh^ sacred Thing* (...) there by which he has not freely and
uncompelled, obliged, and bound Himself to live, and dre^ a Protestant? By
what one Act have these many Vows been broken? Who made that Court Faction,
which would have miscounselled him to bring in Popery? Or let your Friend if he
can, name, who those Miterd Prelates were, who lodged a Papist under their
Rotchet. If he cannot, let him for bear to hold an Opinion of his Prince and
Clergy, which Time (the mother of Truth) has so demonstratively confuted; And
let him no longer suffer himself to be seduced by the malicious writings of
those, who, for so many years, and from so many Pulpits have breathed
Rebellion, and Slander with such an uncontrouled Boldness and Sting, that I
cannot compare them to anything so fitly as to the Locusts in the Revel. 9.
Revelation, which crept forth of the B^ttomlesse pit; every one of which
worethe Crown of a King, and had the Tail of a Scorpion. In short, Sir, If he
have not so deeply drunk of the Inchanted^uppe, as to forget himself to be a
Subject, let him no longer endanger himself to east of their Ruin too, who,
for so many years, have dealt with the best King that this Nation ever had, as
Witches are said to deal with those whom they would by piece meal destroy,
first shaped to themselves his Image in wax, then pricked, and stabbed it with
needles. striving by their many Reproaches of his Government, and Defamations
of the Bishops, to reduce his Honor by degrees to a consumption, and to make
it Languish, and pine, and wither away in the Hatred, and Disaffection of his
People.

But, perhaps Sir, your Friend, and I, are not well agreed upon our Terms: If
therefore he do once more strive to persuade you, that (notwithstanding all
this which I have said to the contrary) the King would, if he had not been
hindered, have destroyed the Protestant Religion, pray desire him to let me
know what he means by the Religion which he calls Protestant. Does he mean that
Religion which succeeded Popery at the Reformation, and has ever since
distinguished us from the Church of Rome? Does he mean that Religion which so
many Holy Martyrs sealed with their Blood, that for which Queen Mary is so
odious, and Queen Elizabeth so precious to our memories? Lastly, Does he mean
that Religion which is comprised in the 39. Articles, and confessed to be
Protestant by an Act of Parliament? If these be the Marks, these the
Characters of it, let him tell me whether this be not the Religion which the
King in one of his Cabinet Opened.
Letters to the Queen calls the only Thing of difference between Him and Her,
that is dearest to Him, whether this also, be not the Religion, in which, if
there be yet any of the old Ore, and Dross, from whence 'twas extracted, Any
thing either essentially, or accidentally evil, which requires yet more
sifting, or a more through Reformation, Any thing of Doctrine to offend the
strong, or of Discipline, or Ceremony, to offend the weak, His Majesty have
not long since offered to have it pass the fiery Trial and Disputes of a
Synod legally called. To all which questions, 'till He and his Com presbyters,
give a satisfying Answer, however they may think to hide themselves under their
old Tortoise-shall, and cry out, Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, They
must not take it ill if I ask them one question more, and desire them to tell
me, whether this be not the Religion which they long since compelled to take
flight with the King, and which has scarce been to be found in this Kingdom,
ever since the time it was deprived of the Sanctuary it had taken under the
Kings Standard

This then, being so, has your Friend, or his fellow Assemblers, yet a purer,
or more primitive Notion of the Protestant Religion, which compared with the
Religion which we and our Fathers have been of, will prove it to be Idolatrous,
and no better then a hundred years superstition? Let them in Charity (as they
are bound not to let us perish in our Ignorance! show ut their Model. If it be
more agreeable to the Scripture then Ours, have more of the white Robe, and not
of the new invention; we may, perhaps, be their converse* And their
Righteousness meeting with our Pea^e ^ay (...) (...) ea^h (...)* (...) (...)
tim^* Sir, (...) (...) (...) wi^ not define ^e Prot^stant Religion so b^
Neg^tives, (...) to (...) (...) (...) (...)* No Bishops, No Li^, or No Comm^*
^er Bo^ke These we, ((...) y^ co^vinced to the (...)) (...) (...) (...) go^d
(...), but not Ess^ntialls, (...) (...) which we c^l the Pro^t Religion (...)
Si^e; Their Negation then, can b^ (...) true Essential Constituent of the same
Religion on theirs.

There is but On^ positive Notion more in all he world, (...) which* c^n p^ly
^nderstand Them, when They say, They have all this while Fought for the Defense
of the Protestant Religion: That i^, that by the Defense of the Protestant
Religion, (if they mean any Thing, or if this ^ave not (...) (...) (...) t^
(...) more dangerous secret) They mean the (...) (...) (...) New Directory,
and their a^ length conc^ Go^rnment of the Church by Presbyters. If this be
their (...), (And (...), (...) (...) should rock my Invention, I c^not make
(...) find ^other) The Second part of that most Holy, and Glorious Cause, which
has drawn the eve^ of Europe upon it, and renderd the Name of a Protestant, a
^roverbe to express Disloyalty by, That Pure, Chaste, Uirgin, without sp^t or
wrinkle-Cause, which like the Scythian Diana has been fe^ with ^o many Humane
Sacrifices, And to which, as ^o another Moloch, so many Men as well as
Children, have been compelled* (...) through the Fire, resolves it self into
this Vnchristiaen Bloody conclusion. That an Assembly of professed Protestant
Divines, h^ve advised (...) Two Parliaments of England and Scotland, confe^
Subjects, to take ^p Ar^ (...) (...) King, their Lawful Severaigne* H^e (...)
(...) Three Kingdoms in a ^lame* been the A^rs o^ more Prot^stants (...) (...)
(...) Civi^, th^n (...) ^ave served to ^ver the Pala^ate by a (...) (...),
(...) (...) bu^ thi^ vnn^cessary ^vell, accidental Consider^on, T^t the King
((...) compelled by Force) would never cons^nt, (not indeed without Perjury
could) to the Change (...) (...) Ancient, Primitive, Apostolic, Vn^versally
received Government of this Church by Bishop (...) (...) new, vpstart^*
Mushrome* Calvinisticall Government, (...) (...) Pre^bytery, of Spiritual and
Lay Elders. (...) (...) ((...) (...) (...) (...) by ^rinciples* ^en both (...)
(...), (...) ^ture proved ^o y^u) i^ the m^st (...) (...) (...) R^sistance,
(...) no* a^ Invasion of the Higher (...) and (...) Higher (...) being Romans 13.
2.
(...), Gods O^dinance (...) (...) (...) (...) a War made against God
^imselfe. And ^he Authors (...) (...) (unless they repent, and (...)
themselves t^ timely r^turne to their Obed^ence) in ^anger to draw upon
themselves this other, s^d, tragical* irresistible Conclusion, which St V. 2.
Paul tells us is the inevitable Catastrophe (...) Disobedience, which (...),
(...), you may English i^, swift Destruction.

And thu^, Sir (Though ^ll weak^ Defenses have something of the Nature of
prevarication (...) (...), and he may in part be thought to betray a Cause,
(...) feebly arg^ for (...)) I have returned you a large Answer (...) the two
Quere's (...) your short Letter; which i^ ^ou shall vouchsafe (...)
Satisfaction, you will very much assi^t my Modesty, which will not suffer me to
think that I, in this Argument, have said more then Others. Only being so
fairly invited by you to say something, to have remained silent, had been to
have cons^st any (...) convinced; And my Negligence, in a T^me so seasonable ^o
speak Truth in, might perhaps, in the Opinion of the Gentleman, your Friend,
have seemed to take part with those o^ his side, against whose Cause though not
^ir Persons* have thu^ freely armed my Pen, Sir I should think my self
fortunate, if Any Thing which I ^ave (...) in this Letter might make him a
Proselyte. But this being rather my wish then my Hope, all the Success which
this Paper aspires to is this, that you will accept it as a Creature borne at
your Command; An^ that you will place it among your other Records, as a
Testimony how much greater my Desires, then my Abilities are to deserve the
style of being thought worthy to be

From my Chamber June 7. 1647. Your affectionate servant JASPER MAIN.


