The Life and Death OF EDMUND STAVNTON D. D.

To which is added,

I. His TREATISE of Christian Conference. II. His DIALOGUE BETWIXT A Minister
and a Stranger.
Published by Richard Mayo of Kingston, Minister of the Gospel.

(...)

Clem. Alexand Longum ita est per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla.

Senec. Be followers of them who by faith and patience inherit the promises,

Hebr. vi. 12. LONDON, Printed for Th: Parkhurst, and are to be Sold at the
Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel: And at the Gilded
Bible on London Bridge, under the Gate. 1673.

To the Inhabitants of the Town of Kingston upon Thames, and to such of them
especially as love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
Dearly Beloved,
TO you of Right belongs the Dedication of the ensuing Narrative, partly by
reason of your quondam interest in him who is the subject of it, and partly by
reason of your present interest in him who is the Compiler and Publisher of it.
The Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.22.
That Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, were theirs; and they that labor, or have
labored amongst you in the Word and Doctrine may be said as truly to be yours.
When you read what is here written of the memorable, and praiseworthy actions
of your Reverend Pastor now deceased, you will be ready to say, as she did of
Solomon, That the one half is not told you, for you have fully known (as he
tells Timothy) his doctrine, manner of life, purpose, 2 Timothy 3.10.
faith, long-suffering, charity, patience. However, enough is here said to set
the world, and you, a Copy to write after. And oh! that you may not only know,
(...), etc. Tu vero ha^es exemplar ad quod te forms, actiones omnes, meus
quibus, praesens fuisu. Grot. in l^cum.
but diligently follow (as the Apostles words may be construed) his doctrine
and manner of living. Be ye followers of him as he was of Christ. Brethren, my
hearts desire, and earnest prayer to God for you all, is, that you may be
saved; that he, 2 Cor 11.2, 3.
and I, who have endeavored to espouse you to Christ, may present you as a
chaste virgin unto him; but I fear least by any means as the Serpent beguiled
Eve through his subtilty* so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ. I have somewhat against some of you, but I wont reveal that
upon the housetop. This worthy servant of God, to his dying day, would make
honorable mention of the people of Kingston; and as he reported, so I have for
many years experienced, that they are very courteous and kind to their
Minister. He said it, and I subscribe it, That a Minister (if it be not his own
fault) may live as comfortably in Kingston, as in most Parishes of England. And
I do here make an open, and grateful acknowledgment of your accumulated
kindnesses to me, and mine; and do wish that I were in a capacity to serve you,
as I have served you, in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Yet still I shall not be
wanting, as my present circumstances will allow it, to farther your Souls
health and welfare; and in this short Epistle, give me leave to stir up (may I
say) your pure minds by way of remembrance, 2 Pet. 3.1.
and to recommend to you some Rules of the new Creature, and Covenant, in the
practice whereof you will find peace.

I. Make Christ the main end of your life, let all your actions as the lines of
a circumference meet in him as their center. Live to him that dyed for you, and
with whom you hope to live for ever. Read 2 Cor. 5.15. Phil. 1.20, 21. You meet
in Scripture with several abstracts and abridgements of man's duty; sometimes
it is said to consist in his fearing God, and keeping his Commandments;
sometimes in his loving God with all his heart, etc. and his loving his
neighbor as himself: and may it not be sum'd up once again, and affirmed, That
it mainly consists in a man's believing in, and living to the Lord Jesus Christ?

II. Live as those that must shortly dye. Let your opinion of sin, and of the
world, be the same now, as it will be then; and remember who says, That if a
man dye, he shall not live again, Job 14.14.
and make the use of it that he does. Some have said, That if the damned in
Hell were suffered to come again upon the Stage of this world, they would Act
over the same Part they have formerly Acted; but I am not bound to be of their
belief: but this I believe, That it shall never be put to the trial, and that
no man will be allowed a second edition of his life, to amend the errors of the
first.

III. Keep your selves clean and unspotted from the evils of the times in which
you live, as fishes in salt water retain their freshness, so do you in evil
days hold fast your uprightness. Be not corrupted by the ungodly practices of
some, nor leavened by the unsound opinions of others. Beloved, believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits, whither they be of God, because many false
Prophets are gone abroad into the world. You are in daily danger of being
misled, watch and pray, least you fall into tentation, and the snares of the
Devil. I am jealous of you with a godly jealousy. The God of all grace who
has called you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen and settle you.

IV. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Let this be
past controversy whither you are converted and born again. Don't satisfy your
selves with a mere peradventure in this matter; it is not wisdom to put it to
the hazard whither you shall be saved, or damned to all eternity. You may run a
venture in other things, but not in this. Seeing assurance is attainable, as
undoubtedly it is, never be at rest till you have obtained it. You would be
sure in other cases, why not in this case? the comforts and advantages of
having it, will pay you for all your pains in getting it.

V. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Growth in grace, is
one of the best evidences of the truth of grace; the true Christian is a
thriving Christian. If there be no growth, there is no life. Pictures and
Images are always the same. You desire other things should thrive and prosper,
why not your Souls also? You would not come behind others in Temporals, why do
you let others go so far before you in Spiritual things? How many of later
standing, and lesser means, have made great progress in the ways of God? it is
not enough for you to grow, but you must grow apace. The Vine in the Vineyard,
the Cedar in Lebanon, the Calf in the Stall, are all of them Scripture-emblems
of a Believers growth and increase.

VI. Let brotherly love in particular continue and abound. This is the old and
the new Commandment. There is no duty more pressed in the Word of God, and no
duty less practiced by the people of God. Surely the end is at hand, because of
the flaming out of sin, and of the freezing of love. These last days have
introduc't a great many love-killing principles, that former Ages were ignorant
of: we want the Apostle John amongst us, or some of his spirit, to stir up
Christians to love one another. Remember wherein the duties of brotherly love
consist, in relieving, instructing, admonishing, exhorting, comforting, and
bearing with one another. He that says he loves his brother, and lives in the
neglect of these, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

VII. Let your Conversation in the world be with simplicity and godly
sincerity; this is the way to have favor with God, he has pleasure herein; 2 Chronicles. 29.17.
he desires truth in the inward parts, and reckons sincerity for perfection;
yea, this is the way to have rejoicing in your selves. Sincerity affords
comfort in every condition of life, and in the hour of death. A sincere person,
if he lives in trouble, he ordinarily dies in peace. He Is sure to find
acceptance for all his services, and indulgence for all his offenses. Oh that
it may be said of you, as of another in Scripture-story, that you are men and
women without guile.

VIII. Set the Lord always before you. Remember he sees you when you are most
out of sight; his eyes are never off from you, let your eyes be ever toward
him. One thought it would awe the Romans, and make them serious, if they did
always apprehend that Cato was in company with them. It would certainly have a
good influence upon our hearts and lives, if we did apprehend that God was
always at our elbows, and that his eyes are upon all our ways and doings. It
is an excellent preservative against sin, and provocation to duty, to carry a
remembrance of God about with us into all places and companies.

IX. Fill up all your particular relations with duties. Relative duties are
better known, than practiced; nature it self teaches them, the very Heathen
have excelled herein; surely if our righteousness must exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, it must not fall short of that of Heathens and
Infidels: it sounds like a contradiction, for one to be a good Christian, and a
bad husband or wife, father or child, master or servant, etc.

X. Promote the power and practice of Religion in your several Families.
Remember who said he would walk in his house; not only in Gods, but in his own
house, with a perfect heart; Psalm. 121.1.
resolve with Joshua, not only to engage your persons, but your houses and
families in the service of God. Of old, the Families of Christians were called
Churches, but now many of them are rather Synagogues of Satan, than Churches of
Christ: not Bethel's, but Bethaven's houses of vanity and sin. It is commonly
said, That Governors of Families, as well as Pastors of Churches, have curam
animarum, the charge and care of Souls; and if any perish through your neglect,
their blood will be required at your hands. How many of your Children and
Servants may say to you another day, bloody Parents, and bloody Masters you
have been to us; and may they not now say, Fathers, Masters, care you not that
we perish? Oh let your Families be instructed; do I require this, or does God
require it? Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, etc. Ephesians. 6.4.
who will one day require an account of your doing of it. Let there be morning
and evening sacrifices of praise and prayer offered up to God in your
dwellings. God forbid there should be one prayerless habitation in Kingston.

XI. Walk humbly with God. Micah 6.8.
This is the main thing that he requires of you; without this, let your other
excellencies be never so many, they are of no account with him. A proud persons
graces and good works do him hurt; whilst an humble man is made better by his
evil deeds, a proud man is made worse by his good deeds, Oh pray God, that
says he will give grace to the humble, to give you that excellent grace of
humility. You may be brought low, and yet not be lowly; many are humbled, that
are not humble. Plectuntur sed non flectuntur. Salvian.

XII. Follow the good examples of others. There are many patterns for imitation
in Scripture, there is the example of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, be as he
was in the world. The Word of God abounds also with many other excellent
instances and presidents; it shows you many evil examples, which are as
Sea-marks to forewarn you; and many good examples, which are as Landmarks to
direct you: you have other excellent patterns too besides those upon record in
Scripture. Take, my Brethren, your old Pastor, whose Life I have here
delineated, and who has spoken to you in the Name of the Lord, for an example
of patience, and all other branches of piety. Therefore is the story of his
Life and Death dedicated to you, that it may be imitated by you: But of this I
spoke somewhat before.

Let us remember here, That I am writing an Epistle, and not a Treatise; ergo
manum de tabula. Though it were easy to give you many dozens more of such
directions as these, I have been longer, because, though I have often Preached
to you, yet I never wrote to you before. As I have often suggested the counsels
of God to yous ears, so I would set some few of them before your eyes. I have
an ardent affection for you; you have had Ministers that have Preached, and
lived better than I have done, but never any that loved you better than I do. I
love your Souls, and their eternal welfare, and would be loath to meet any of
you at Christ's Tribunal in an unregenerate and Christless condition; I would
not the many Sermons I have Preached to you, should be at that day, as so many
Bills of Indictment against you.

Finally, Brethren, farewell, be of one mind, live in peace, and let me close
this Epistle, as Jude does his, build up your selves in your most holy faith,
pray in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life: Unto his grace and favor I
commend you all, and subscribe my self

Your unworthy Minister And Well-wisher, Richard Mayo.
Nov. 29. 1672.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF Edmund Staunton, S. T. D.
IT is usual (even in the Holy Scripture) when mention is made of any persons
of Note, to record their Genealogy. Parents do sometimes bring luster unto
their Children, and Children do sometimes bring renown unto their Parents.
This excellent person (who is the subject of the ensuing narrative) was borne
Anno 1600 of the Ancient and worshipful Family of the Stauntons in
Bedfordshire, his Father Sr Francis Staunton had several sons, of whose
Education he was more then ordinarily careful: though he left them good
estates, yet he did not think it enough that they should barely live upon the
estates he left them. He was of Solomon's mind, Eccl. 7.11. Otium fortunae
grandioris vitium. Symach. l. 10. Ep. 2.
that wisdom was good with an inheritance, Eccl. 7.11. And yet, He was of
opinion too that an inheritance was little worth without wisdom: he abhorred
the two Epidemical vices of our English Gallants, which in time are procreative
of many more; the one is ignorance, and the other Idleness. He resolved
therefore to train up his children in learning, not only that it might be an
ornament to them, Nihil sordidius imo crudelius quam si rempublicam is
arroderet, qui nihil in eam suo labor conferret. Jul. Capit. in vit. Anton.
Pii.
but that they might be serviceable by it to the Church or Commonwealth. Our
Edmund (one of the younger brothers) after he was furnished with a competency of
Grammar learning, was sent to Oxford, and admitted into C. C. C. where he so
plied his study, and got such applause, that whilst he was yet an
undergraduate, he was chosen a Probationer fellow in that College before 18 of
his Seniors (a Bedfordshire place falling void by the death of Mr Andrews, a
fellow of the house.)

When he was about eighteen years of Age, he fell dangerously sick in the
College, and was very far spent, and near unto death before those about him
understood his distemper; 'till anon a skilful Physician coming in, and finding
it to be a Pleurisy, gave order that a vein should be forthwith opened;
whereupon a Surgeon was immediately sent for, but it was long ere he could
be found; at length the messenger brought him from a Tavern, and though he saw
the way thither, yet he did not know how to do his work when he came there; he
struck the Patients arm twice, but no more blood came then if he had pricked
him in the palm of his hand; In this posture the sottish Surgeon leaves him
(it being late) all night; but when he had slept himself sober, he came the
next morning very early, and knocked at the College Gate, which being opened,
he hastily ran to his Chamber, and asked if he were yet alive? and coming in
presently opened a vein in his Arm which bled freely, and the Patient (half
dead) soon after recovered and grew well again.

Another strange deliverance he met with a little after; when he was newly
Batchelour of Arts, going into the water alone to wash himself, and not being
able to swim, he fell into a deep hole where his feet could feel no bottom,
but (as the Providence of God ordered it) he caught hold of a little turfe of
Grass by the bankside, by means whereof he climbed up the bank: if that little
hold had failed him, he had in all probability miscarried.

These merciful deliverances and preservations were preparatory to that good
work, which about this time God began in his heart: for about the year 1620.
(to use his own words which I have by me in a manuscript under his own hand) I
had many sad and serious thoughts concerning my spiritual and eternal estate.
Then upon the advice of Dr Barcroft I bought Brinsley's watch (the second part)
where the sins against the commandments are set down in order, and I fell upon
the work of examination; wherein this seems remarkable, that reading over the
several sins there mentioned, my heart (such was the blindness and
deceitfulness of it) cried, not guilty of any one of them; whereupon I began to
suspect my heart, and calling upon God to enlighten mine eyes, and discover my
sins to me, and then reading them over again, I judged my self guilty, very
guilty even of most of the sins there set down and enumerated. After this I lay
about two months under a spirit of bondage, being full of fears and inward
trouble, so that many times I durst not close mine eyes in the night least I
should awake in Hell; I thought every night the Devil would come for me, and
fetch me away: but anon the Lord was graciously pleased to shine upon me, and
this remarkable passage I shall never forget, That being one evening at prayer
all alone in the Dark, ( I remember the Chamber in C. C. C. and the corner of
the Chamber well) I was very earnest with God for the manifestation of his love
to my soul, and the assurance of pardon for my sins, and at length I brake out
into these words (or words to this purpose) Lord I will not cut off thy
presence, Non ab te absquete discedam.
I will not go off from my knees till thou speak comfort to me, whereupon I was
immediately filled with a strong persuasion of the love of God to my soul, and
with joys unspeakable and full of Glory.

From this time he applied himself to the diligent reading of the Scripture,
and to the study of Divinity; and when he was Master of Arts, his Father willed
him to choose his profession, whether that of a Lawyer, a Physician, or a
Preacher; he readily pitched upon the latter, telling his Father that he had for
some time past inclined his studies that way, and that he esteemed the turning
of souls to righteousness to be the most desirable work in all the world, and
that it would have the greater reward hereafter, Vide Mr. Chr. Loves speech
upon Tower Hill.
though the other callings were like to bring in more wealth and honor here.

His tender Father would not thwart, but rather encourage him in this his pious
resolution, and to that end he laid out to procure a good living (or place of
settlement) for him: in mean time, our Edmund was not idle; but having an
invitation to preach a lecture on the Lords day in the afternoon at Witny about
ten miles from Oxford, he accepted of of it; Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.15.
there he continued preaching well nigh half a year, and had comfortable seals
of his Ministry; as Epenetus and Stephanas were Paul's first fruits in Achaia,
so there are some yet living (or were lately alive) in that place who were his
first fruits unto Christ. So acceptable were his labors during his abode
there, that hearers from all parts round about flockt to him, as the Doves to
their Windows. This was not very pleasing to him who was incumbent there; he
therefore spent the more time in reading Prayers, that this novel lecturer
might have the less for Preaching his Sermons: and when he had protracted the
Common Prayers all he could, he himself would go out of the Church, being
followed by no one but his Clark, whom he would not suffer to call a Psalm,
but the Lecturer himself, or one Mr. Martin (an inhabitant of the Town, one
that feared God above many) was feign to supply his room. The text of
Scripture which he a long time insisted on was that excellent saying of
Solomon's, Prove. 23.23. Buy the truth and sell it not: whereupon the incumbent,
when he met any going to the Church, as he was going from it, would ask them
in a jeering manner; What! you are now going to buy the Truth.

His Father and friends had now provided a place for him, viz. Bushy in
Harfordshire; he the more inclined to accept it, because his continuance at
Witny was precarious, and the envy and opposisition of the Minister of the
place not to be removed: To Bushy therefore he goes, where he has a welcome
reception from all the Inhabitants, but especially from those that had any
savor of Religion. There he Preached and Catechized on the Lords Days, and
other days, to the great benefit of his hearers who attended his Ministry, not
only those that dwelt in Bushy, but those that lived at Watford, and other
adjacent places. Hear the testimony of a Godly ancient Minister (yet living)
under his own hand. That little time (says he) which E. S. spent in Bushy was
not without good success, many persons in my own hearing having acknowledged
his Ministry to be the means of their conversion. During his abode in Bushy,
which was about two years, he repaired, or rather rebuilt at his own charge the
dwelling house belonging to the Minister: at this time also he married a Wife
(the daughter of one Mr. Scudamore of Watford, a man of good account in those
parts both for Estate and Godliness) by her he had one daughter.

Being called upon to Preach a Visitation Sermon, he performed it with great
approbation, only because he inveighed against non-residency and pluralities,
some that were concerned were greatly offended, one of them saying, he might
the better speak against many livings, having got so good a one himself.

And indeed it was so good, that one Dr Seaton (who was seated at Kingston upon
Thames in Surry) had a longing mind after it, and either making or finding a
flaw in his Title, soon dispossessed him of it. But first there was a Trial at
Law about it, the Attorney general Noy (who was of Council for Seaton) likeing
the ingenuity of Staunton, moved for an Exchange, and so brought it to pass,
that Seaton should have Bushy, and Staunton should have Kingston: both parties
were agreed, Staunton preferred work before wages, and liked Kingston the
better, because his opportunities of service would be there the greater: Dr.
Winter in vita ejus.
he was of his mind, who was wont to say, his opportunities were his greatest
riches. But whilst he thought of settling there, he met with a disappointment,
Seaton having gotten Bushy would not part with Kingston, but either Staunton
must be his Curate there, or he must be gone from thence: hereupon Mr. Staunton
repairs to Noy, relates to him the disingenuous carriage of his Client. Noy was
of too generous a spirit to approve this baseness; sending therefore for
Seaton, he tells him plainly, unless he would resign Kingstone, he would soon
pick a hole in his Title to Bushy. Several also of the Inhabitants of Kingston
(who prized Mr. Staunton's Ministry, and were willing to purchase it at any
rate) did so work with Dr. Seaton, that in a short time he resigned, upon which
Mr. Staunton had the presentation, and soon after institution and induction.

In this Town he continued about twenty years, endeavoring to fulfill the
ministry he had received of the Lord; there he Preached twice on the Lords day,
Col. 4.17
and Catechized the younger and ignorant sort of people; and he did not
satisfy himself in teaching them publicly, but (though the place was large
and populous) he taught them also from house to house. Act. 20.20.
There also he set up a weekly Lecture, which was supplied in their turns, by
as eminent Preachers as that part of England did afford; and within a little
time, partly by his powerful Preaching, partly by his holy and exemplary life
(for, as John the Baptist, in the one he was a burning, One says of Mr.
Perkins that as his preaching was a Comment on his text, so his practice was a
comment on his preaching
in the other a shining light) he wrought a general reformation throughout the
Town both amongst Magistrates and people; he was loved by all those that were
Godly, and feared by those that were wicked. The good seed that he there sowed
does spring up to this very day, and many now living can hardly mention him
with their mouths, without tears in their Eyes. Nor was there any love lost
betwixt them; he would to the last call the People of Kingston (as Paul did the
Philippians) His joy and his crown; Phil. 4.1.
and would often say, That were it not for some wrangling persons, a Minister
might live as comfortable a life amongst them, as amongst any people in England.

And as by his Ministry, a work of reformation was wrought upon the Town in
general, so also a work of saving conversion was wrought upon many souls in
particular; he relates (in some memoires, that he has left behind him under
his own hand) that in 1648. when he left the place, there were thirty persons
which gave him a Paper subscribed by themselves, wherein they owned him for
their spiritual Father; and doubtless there were many thirties in and about the
Town, who could have made the like acknowledgment.

He married a second wife yet living
Whilst he lived here begetting many Sons and Daughters unto God, he had also
many Sons and Daughters begotten of his own body, Ten of which lie buried in
one Grave in the Parish Church of Kingston, on which he has laid a fair Stone
with this Epitaph fairly Engraven on it:

Here lie the Bodies Of Francis. Richard. Mary. Matthew. Mary. Richard. Edmund.
Edmund. Sarah. Richard.


Children which the Lord graciously gave to Edmund Staunton D. D. late Minister
of Kingston upon Thames, now President of C. C. C. in Oxford, by Mary his Wife,
Daughter of Richard Balthrope Esquire Servant to the late Queen Elizabeth.

Ten Children in one Grave! a dreadful sight,
Seven Sons, and Daughters three, Jobs number right.
Childhood and youth are vain, death reigns over all,
Even those that never sinned like Adams fall.
But why over all? in the first man every one
Sinned and fell, not he himself alone.
Our hope's in Christ the second Adam; He
Who saves the Elect from sin and misery.
What Is that to us poor children? it is our Creed,
God is a God to the faithful and their seed.
Sleep on dear Children, never more to wake,
'Till Christ does raise you, and to glory take.
He left only one Son living at his death; and may he long live to inherit his
Fathers Graces, as he does his Estate.

For three years and a half.
In the year 1635 it pleased the Authority of the Nation to permit sports and
pastimes unto the people on the Lords Day, and a Warrant was ordered to be read
in all Churches to that purpose: those Ministers who refused to read it were
for some time suspended; in which number was Mr Staunton; he was of his mind
that said, Praestatar are quam saltare die sabbathi. Aug.
It was better to work them sport, to plow then Dance on the Sabbath Day; he
would rather loose his place, then countenance such a practice amongst his
people.

During his suspension he took his degree of Doctor in Divinity in Oxford;
which he did, to use his own words, that he might put the greater honor upon
his sufferings; when he answered in Comitiis, and opposed in Vesperiis, he was
wonderfully applauded by all that were present. There were several Doctors in
the University whose fingers did itch to be dealing with him, because he was a
Country Minister and a Puritan, amongst which was a Doctor, whose name I shall
conceal (though a man of great note amongst them) who was so miserably
nonplust by Staunton, that the Auditors hissed at him, and one called out for a
Candle that the Doctor might see his Arguments; of this good Providence
Staunton himself takes thankful notice, giving all the glory to God, making use
of that Scripture, him that honors me I will honor. At that time also he
Preached in the University upon those words of Christ in Mar. 8.36. What will it
profit a man to gain the whole world, and loose his own soul, etc. of which
Sermon he says, He was called on to preach several times before the
Parliament, and his sermons ordered to be Printed.
That God did both graciously assist him in the Preaching of it, and
wonderfully prosper it when Preached.

When the Assembly of Divines was called at Westminster, Dr. Staunton was
chosen one of that Reverend Assembly, and was in good esteem amongst them,
insomuch that he was nominated for one of the six the P^^^cht that useful
Lecture, morning by ^ng, in Westminster Abbey.

In the year 1648 there were Visitors appointed for the University of Oxford,
who discharged Dr Newlin from his headship in C. C. C. and no man was thought
so fit to succeed in that place as Dr. Staunton. That College had been happy
in an eminently Learned and Godly President before, the famous Doctor John
Reynolds, and now it was blessed again with the residence and regency of this
excellent person; what College in either of the Universities can show such
another pair of Governors?

Here he continued above twelve years; in all which time his behavior was very
exemplary, not only to those that were of his own College, but to the heads
of other Colleges in that University: Be pleased to take a short account of
his Conversation, from the Pen of one that was Scholar and Fellow of the House,
the greatest part of the time that he was President: Thus he Writes. At his
first coming to the College he put in execution, and that vigorously, all such
Statutes as tended most to the advancement of Learning and Religion, and was
frequently himself present at all Lectures and other Exercises, to encourage
the Studious, and reprehend the negligent. He set up a Divinity Lecture every
Lords Day early in the Morning in the College Chapel, for the initiating and
exercising the Elder Students in order to the work of the Ministry. He
constantly Catechis'd the younger sort publicly in the Chapel every
Saturday. He preached once or twice every Lords Day, to the edification and
comfort of many; besides his constant course in the University Church and
College Chapel, and several lectures in the Country, whereunto he was always
most ready, rather seeking opportunities then declining them. He had every week
a meeting at his own lodgings for prayer and spiritual Conference, as well of
the members of the College as others, wherein himself always bore the
principal part, bringing forth out of his store of experimental knowledge things
new and old. He was constantly present in public duties of worship in the
Chapel morning and evening, observing all, and reproving any that were
negligent and remiss. He took great care to introduce and elect into the
College such as he either saw or heard to have some appearances of grace, at
least such as were docible and inclineable toward that which is good.
Spiritual discourse was his meat and drink; and when he sat at meals in the
College Hall, his constant course was either from the Chapter then Read, or
from some occasion or other, to speak that which might tend to the instruction
of those who were present, and to call up their minds to some heavenly
contemplation. In the year 1660. Being discharged from the College, where he
had been so eminent a blessing by his prudent government and Pious example; and
none know this so well as such whose lot was cast to live there under his
constant instruction and discipline; 2 Timothy 3.10, 11.
both which were so far effectual, that Religion and Learning scarce flourished
more in any one Society in the whole University then in that little Nursery, he
reckoned it advisable to withdraw also from the City, in which he had sown
many handfuls of precious seed, and he always well watered it with his tears;
few that I ever heard of Preached with greater Affection and less Affectation.
But when the time of his departure came, there are living that still know and
remember with what sad hearts his dear Friends, Scholars and Citizens, parted
with him. Some have assured me, it was much-what like Paul's departure from
Ephesus, taking his last leave of the Elders, Acts 20. latter end. Where they
all wept fore and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for
the words which he spoke. that they should see his face no more: and they
accompanied him out of the City; From the Famous University and City.

Recommending of himself unto the Divine Providence, to fix the Bounds of his
habitation for him; his first flight was to Rickmersworth, a small Market Town
in Hertfordshire, where he had not been long, but he had a very kind welcome,
both from the Gentry, as a Gentleman, and other good Christians of inferior
rank, as a Minister of Jesus Christ.

His first and chief design, when a little acquainted in the place, was to make
way for the settlement of an able Minister of the New Testament there;
reckoning that one of the best accommodations of a house was wanting when such
a Minister was wanting; and he used to say, That Rickmersworth were a good
place if there were better water, meaning a better Minister there: and that the
design took no effect, was not through any default of his, all means being used
on his part for the bringing that purpose to pass; but however he quickly found
the way to that Pulpit himself: and because the entrance being narrower there
then in some places, he sought out a wider door, and more effectual, and I
believe it may be affirmed he found above twenty more, scarce one Sabbath
passing wherein he Preached not the Gospel of the kingdom in a new Pulpit; and
his pains, though an old man, and somewhat infirm in Person, were rarely once
only, but twice in one day. Thus this good man in labors more abundant, in the
morning sowes his seed, and in the evening withholds not his hand, so liberal
he was of his spiritual Alms, not knowing whether should prosper this or that,
or whether they both might not be alike good, Eccl. 11.6. so that in imitation
of the great Apostle, by the power of the Spirit of God, he even from
Jerusalem, round about to Illyricum fully Preached the Gospel of Christ.

So this excellent Minister of our Lord Jesus, from Rickmersworth even round
about unto the utmost borders of the County, and into the neighboring Counties
also, he was spending, and being spent in the service of his great Lord and
Master.

By all this the Reader may gather that our Doctor had not layne idle in the
University, 'till he was rusted and cankered away and fit for no further use in
the house of God; but as it was said of Joseph, that his bow still abode in
strength; so it was with his parts, memory and with his affections also; and he
was constant until the act of uniformity imposed that general silence upon all
nonconformist, August. 24. 1662. But yet neither after this time was he willing
to be idle, every week almost keeping one day as a private fast in his own, or
else in some other godly Ministers or Christian Family, as to humble himself
for his own sins, so for the abominations that were in the midst of the land;
and it cannot be easily forgotten, with what brokenness of spirit, and with
what a dissolved soul, he would still take up some hours himself on those
extraordinary occasions, either in the word, or prayer, or both: for indeed, he
was mighty in prayer, as well as in the Scriptures, as it is said of Apollo.

Having passed, I think, some two years; his wife now laboring under some
weaknesses, and being weary with the burden of household affairs, he retired to
a Chamber or two in a private Family some miles distant, where he was very
useful; he much enlightened, and quickly leavened the habitation: his
Ministerial Gifts and graces were such, as that indeed he perfumed the whole
house. As long as he lived there, there was a Church always in that house; and
I presume the govenour, and children, and servants, do bless God for his
presence, and conference, and exemplary conversation, to this day, and may they
never loose the savor of the knowledge of Christ, and the sense of the power of
the world to come, that he manifested, and they were under, during his abode
with them. From thence he removed to another private family (and I believe his
frequent removes were, that he might have renewed opportunity of doing more
good, and God more service) where he was entertained as an Angel of God. This
Family was near S. Albans, in which Town, from that time he was a great
instrument in the hand of God for good, to correct some extravagancies amongst
some people there, by his sober principles, and great moderation of spirit, and
the noble exercises of selfdenial and charity, being no burden unto any, but
being crafty, catching them with guile, 2 Cor. 12.16.

His last remove was to a place called Bovingden, a little village; and I
question whether ever it had been mentioned in any story, if this good man had
not lived and ended his days there; he was led thither by the invitation of a
religious and very kind Gentleman, freely accommodating him, with all the
conveniences of an habitation of his in that place. But he once told me, that
whatsoever was saved that way, he still expended proportionably in charitable
uses, making conscience to give it either in money or books to the poor, to this
and the neighboring places; and I believe he has distributed several hundreds
of short Catechisms, besides some dozens of little books (of that great light
of our age) Entitled The call to the Unconverted. During his abode here, he
continued daily to attend the duty of the Family, wherein he was instructing
the souls belonging thereunto. And if one or more of the poor of that place
chanced to come in, he would say, they were welcome, and that God came along
with them, and the poor have the Gospel preached unto them. In this place he
enjoyed great privacy, which he greatly prized; and had be been born for
himself alone, he could always have chosen to have lived thus alone. How many
worthy's in the world have preferred retirement to the greatest preferments in
Church or State, and have thought Scepters and Myters not worthy to be compared
with it. But he could not thus satifie himself: that of Paul was often in his
mouth, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel; he was of Calvin's mind, who
would not his Lord should come and find him idle. Wherefore he rode often to
St. Albans or some other adjacent place, and once or twice a year to London and
Kingston; and seeing he could not preach in a Church to many, he would preach
in a Chamber to a few. It Is not the place or company that commends our preaching
to God. What excellent Sermons have been preached to despicable auditories, and
in very ordinary and contemptible places. Paul's meeting place in Macedonia was
the River side, Acts 16.13.
and his hearers a few of the weaker Sex: Our Lord himself preached a long
Sermon once to one timorous man; John c. 3. c. 4.
and at another time in the open air he preached at large to one silly woman.

Thus this eminent servant of God, like a torch or candle with lighting others,
consumed and wasted himself. On the eighth of July Anno Dom. 1671. and aetatis
suae 71. he was seized all on one side with the dead palsy, by reason of which
his speech much faild him, so that he spoke little and seldom. A friend coming
to visit him, and asking him how he did, he answered in the words of the
Prophet, In measure God debateth with me, and in the day of the East Wind he
stays his rough wind. A while after he said to a friend that stood by him; I
neither fear death, nor defire life, but am willing to be at Gods disposal: At
another time he uttered these words very audibly, I know that my redeemer
lives; and by and by he repeated the fifth verse of the one and thirtieth
Psalm in Meter:

Into thy hand Lord I commit
My spirit, which is thy due;
For why, thou have redeemed it,
Oh Lord my God most true.
He pressed the bystanders so long as he was able to many wholesome duties; As to
make sure of Heaven in the time of health, to keep their evidences fair and
unblotted, To remember and keep holy the Sabbath day, (of which he himself, as
you will find hereafter, was a most careful observer.) When he could not speak
himself, he would desire others to read the Scriptures to him, directing to
the places which he most desired, which were for the most part the Psalms of
David. Quid sentit crus in nervo quum animus in coelo? Tertull.
He either was without pain, or without any great feeling of it.

On the tenth of July his speech was quite taken from him, but yet his
understanding and memory continued with him; and for the space of four days he
lay (as all about him might perceive) in a very comfortable condition, lifting
up his eyes and hands toward Heaven with a smiling and cheerful countenance.
Qualis vita finis ita.
An upright life does usually end in a peaceable death. When a Minister (a
little before his departure) prayed with him, he showed great affection all the
while; and when prayer was ended he took him by the hand, and held it fast,
expressing by outward signs his inward joy in God, and thanks to him.

The 14 of July this shining light went out. Oh for young Timothys to stand up
in the room of such aged Paul's. He was buried the seventeenth day of the same
month at Bovingden aforesaid.

And is this all? may some say; Is this such a rare and exemplary life? read
on, and you will find the best wine is kept till last, to do right to the memory
of this blessed man; as also to help the memory of the reader, I have chosen a
new way (and though it be unusual, yet I judge it very useful) that is,
methodically and orderly in the close of all, to set down the imitable graces
and practices of this worthy person; it may be the reader will better heed and
remember them, then if they had been confusedly scattered up and down the
preceding Narrative. I shall begin with

1. His care and diligence in self examination. This duty of self-examination
is much out of date with many, yea I fear most Ministers and Christians; and
yet how frequently is it urged, both in the old and New Testament: Psalm.
4.4.13.5. 1 Cor.
This holy man would often press it upon others, and did much practice it
himself. I judged it would tend greatly to edification, if I did transcribe
some passages out of his forementioned Manuscript to this purpose. Pardon me if
I am somewhat large upon this head, it is intended Reader for thy good. Thus
then he Writes.

Evidences for heaven, which (if my heart deceive me not) are in me, through
the gracious workings of Gods spirit upon are, me.

1. Effectual calling. That this is a good evidence appears from Romans 8.30. 2
Pet. 1.10. The Calling I had was about the year 1620. and so he relates as in
page of this Narrative.

2. Change of Company, choosing the society of the Godly, shuning the society
of the wicked, Psalm. 1.1. Psalm. 26.4, 5. Ps. 119.115. Acts 9.26.

To this my heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. And does so still, Apr.
3. 1663. still so May 2. 1666. and again April 2. 1668, etc.

3. Vniversalty of obedience, Ps. 119.6. and Psalm. 139. the two last verses. To
this my heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. does so still, April 3.
1663. as before.

4. Love to the Godly as such, 1 John 3.14. To this my heart answers
affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629, etc.

5. Sincerity, desiring more to approve my heart to God, then my ways to men,
aiming more at Gods glory then my own profit, applause, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12.

My heart answers affirmatively, ut supra.

6. Kindly meltings and mournings for sin upon the sense of Gods free-love in
Christ, Zach. 12.10. 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.

My heart answers affirmatively, etc. Goeing to Hempsteed to preach as I was
meditating on the rode near Langley on the love of God in calling such a one as
I am, when thousands more noble, more mighty, more wise and learned etc. lie in
ignorance and profaneness, I burst out into a fit of weeping, and my heart was
by and by filled with abundance of joy and rejoicing.

7. Zeal for God, and against sin, John. 2.17. 2 Cor. 7.11. My heart answers
affirmatively, etc.

8. A love and a longing for Christ's appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 9.6. Rev.
22.17, 20. I cant say there has been such a longing in me after Christ's
coming, at least not so full and frequent, as in many others; yet in prayer and
meditation the thoughts of a future estate wherein I should never sin more, but
be satisfied with Gods likeness, have been very sweet and comfortable to me.

Once on the rode (in a day of my greatest rejoicing as to outward comforts and
mercies) it lightened, thundered and rained much: my thoughts were, what if this
should be the day of judgment? What if I should see Christ coming presently in
the Clouds? the answer of my soul was welcome, welcome, welcome; this filled me
with much peace and comfort.

9. Speech gracious, or with grace, Prove. 10.21. Ephesians. 4.29.

My heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. when I have met with any
ignorant persons willing to be instructed, it has been my manner (to God be
the glory and praise of it) ta put good discourse on foot, and to foward it
when others have begun it.

10. Blessing God for, and rejoicing in the gifts and graces of others. Joh.
29.30.

My heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. etc. Though my heart is apt
enough (the Lord humble and help me) to envy and detract from others, yet
through mercy I find,

1. A heart blessing God for others gifts and graces out shining mine. 2.
Rejoicing that others do God greater and better service, and bringing more
glory to him then I do or can.
11. The spirit of prayer, Acts 9.11. Romans 8.15. my heart answers
affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. etc.

Cum sublatum e conspectu lumen est, and. conticuit uxor (moris jam mei
conscia) totum diem mecum scrutor, facta ac dicta mea remetior, nihil mihi
abscondo, nihil transeo. Quare enim quid quam inerroribus meis timerem cum
possum dicere, vide ne istud amplius facias, nunc tibi ignosco. Sen. lib. 3. de
Ira.
12. A careful sanctificatiof the Sabbath, Comman. 4. Isa. 56.4, 5. and 58.13,
14. My heart answers affirmat. Feb. 4. 1629. etc. But here I will take up,
although he adds fourteen evidences more, with other considerable enlargements,
and descants upon these already mentioned. This is enough (yet I hope the
Reader will not think it too much) to show what was his constant practice in
this particular. Only let this be added, that according to the Psalmists
Council, and other good men's custom, he was wont to commune with his heart in
the night season, then there is the greatest silence, and the least
interruption. May the Relater and Reader write after this Copy.

2. His keeping a Journal or Diary of Gods mercies.

A second imitable practice in this man of God was his keeping a Journal or
Catalogue of the mercies of God. Genesis 32.10, 11. 1 Sa. 17, 36. Ps. 103.2. 2 Ti.
4.17.18. Three things we are apt to forget, the word we hear, the sins we
commit, the mercies we receive; all these do (...)slip out of our minds, as
water out of a Colander or sive.
What a furtherance this is to faith and love and thankfulness, they best know
who accustom themselves to it. This was the ancient practice of Gods people,
and it was his wont and manner. Of the many collections of this kind in his
manuscript, take these few instances.

When I was about ten years of Age, being sick of a feavour, and given up for
dead, of mine own accord (I think my good God suggesting it) I asked for
butter-milk, which taking by little and little my feavour abated, and I
recovered.

When about 14 years old swinging in a rope in my Fathers Kitchen at Birchmore,
which was paved with freestone, and of an high roof, which I endeavoring to
touch with back and belly; when I was very high, and my face downward, the rope
broke, I fell down flat, and there lay as dead and speechless; but anon (the
Lord appearing for my help) I brake out into a violent bleeding at mouth or
nose, or both, and so by degrees (through the blessing of the Lord) revived and
recovered. Going to bed in my Tutors Chamber at Oxford, and having a Wax Candle
in a Roll burning by me, I fell a sleep, and left it burning on a deal box full
of Linen: the box and Linen was burned, but the bed not touched, though close
to it, etc.

When I was Minister of Kingston, I drank Ink one morning instead of Muscadine,
yet had no hurt.

April. 8. 59. at Oxford my Wife being in her closet very late, which was hung
with much Linen round about, and I in bed and a sleep in the chamber
adjoining, the Candle taking hold of the Linen set it on fire, which flamed
round about her; she, the Lord assisting of her, bestir'd her self, pulled down
the linen, trod it underfoot, masterd the fire: I was not waked, nor she much
dammaged.

Feb. 1. 1666. At the Bell Inn in Aldersgate Street London, between eight and
nine of the Clock at night, missing the way to my Chamber, I went upon the
Leads unrailed, pitching my staff before me, I went so nigh the precipice or
downfall into the yard, that I found no room for my staff: but a step between
me and death! Oh what shall Irender! etc. There are many more of this sort, but
this may serve for a taste. Whilst thou read, resolve to imitate and write
after this Copy.

3. His laboriousness in the Ministry of the word.

The next commendable excellency of this holy man which I shall mention, was
his diligence and laboriousness in preaching the Gospel. Some hints of this you
had before: Minister verbi es! hoc age. Perk.
his great care was to fulfill the Ministry he had received of the Lord; his
heart was in this work, he did hoc agere, this was his (...), it was his meat
and drink. He would often say, he feared to hear that rebuke from Christ another
day, thou wicked and slothful servant, Mat. 25.26. There is no difference
betwixt nequam and nequaquam, an evil, and an idle servant.
wicked because slothful. When he came to visit his friends, if they did not
ask, to be sure he would offer his pains amongst them: What, he would say, is
there no work here for a Preacher? and though his Sermons were sometimes
offered, they were never ordinary ware. He never offered that to God in that
way which cost him nothing; It Is said of Mr. Perkins, that his Sermons were not
so plain, but the piously learned did admire them; nor so learned, but the
plain and simple did understand them.
he always disliked immethodical and indigested Preaching; indeed he was a
workman that needed not to be ashamed of his work: and yet he was as great an
enemy to quaint, as he was to crude Preaching; next to painfulness he liked
plainness in a Preacher: these two are not inconsistent. Ministers are termed
Gods Interpreters, yet many times their Sermons are such, that they need others
to be their interpreters. Many when they Preach shoot over the heads (as one
says) of most of their hearers: Aug. de doct. Ghr. l. 4. c. 17.
that is no intelligent Preacher that the hearers cannot understand: they are
not always low in learning, that stoop to the capacity of their Auditors. Some
say, that the life of Preaching lies in the application; and here indeed he was
ever most lively, in admonitions and exhortations; he was so affectionate as he
would not impart the Gospel only, 1 These. 2.8.
but his very soul also to his Auditory. He was called the searching Preacher.
This I have observed, that in every Sermon he would speak something still by
way of Trial and Examination, ever and anon he would have his marks of
distinction betwixt the precious and the vile, the sincere person and the
Hypocrite. This story he tells himself, That having a suspicion of one man in
his parish, who made a great profession of Religion, and often thinking of him
in his distinctions; that very person afterward came to him, and said, You
will never leave distinguishing, till you distinguish me into Hell. I have
related already how successful and acceptable his Ministry was where ever he
came, only here give me leave to insert one passage.

The Doctor Preaching once at Warborough not far from Oxford, one in the
Congregation was so affected with his first Prayer, that he ran to his house
(which was near) and told his wife, that she should make her ready and come to
Church, for there was one in the Pulpit that prayed like an Angel, so as he
never heard the like. The woman hastened away with her husband; and God so
ordered it, that that Sermon proved a means of her Conversion, and she proved
afterward a serious and eminent Christian.

4. His familiarity with the Holy Scripture.

He was familiarly acquainted with the Scriptures of the old and new Testament,
as Apollo he was mighty therein. This is praise worthy in all Christians,
especially Ministers: Bonus Textuarius est bonus Theologus.
his head was instead of a Concordance; I have wondered to see how readily he
could turn to any Text. He greatly loved the word, and therefore could not
easily forget it; he loved it more then maids do their ornaments, Omnia quae
curant senes meminerunt, Ter-Josephus says, that the devout Jews, if they
were asked concerning any point in the law, they could answer it as readily as
their own name. Ps. 119.24. Aug. Ad Volusian: Ep. 1. and Ep. 3. Juro tibi
Petrache multo mihi chariores esse scripturas quam regnum; and si alterutro
mihi carendum sit aequanimius me Diademate quam scripturis carendum. Rob. R.
Sicil.


which continually run in their minds. The Testimonies of God they were his
delight, and the men of his council; he read and meditated therein night and
day. Wherever he went he carried the New Testament, or David's Psalms, along
with him: the first thing he did in a morning was to read a portion of
Scripture, which was matter of meditation and communication also all the day
after. When he was to seek for matter of good discourse (which was not often)
or when no apt occasion was offered otherwise, then you should hear him speak
of some Scripture that he had read that morning, from which he would raise some
useful observations, or propose some practical questions to the instruction of
the Company. And at night when he went to bed, he would search out some
Scripture or other which suited his present thoughts, and that was the subject
or matter of his meditation in his waking hours. He seldom wrote any letter
but he added three or four or more Scriptures for a Postscript, and those very
pertinent either to the occasion of his writing, or the condition of the person
to whom he wrote; or it may be they should respect the times, and the
providence of God therein. How many letters have I received from him
subscribed in that manner. He selsome visited or met any friend, but he would
at parting leave some Scripture or other with him: Pray he would say, let me
leave one Text of Scripture with you, and think of it when I am gone.

5. His giving himself to Prayer. He was the most praying Christian that ever I
was acquainted with. Ps. 109.4. Ego oration ve. Tig. vir orationis eram. Pagn.
Vitus Theodor. Once it fell out, says he, I overheard him, but good God, with
what a spirit? what a confidence was in his expressions: with such a reverence
he sued as one begging of God, and yet with such hope and assurance, as if he
spoke to a loving father or friend.


What David said of himself, may be affirmed of him, that he gave himself to
prayer. One says of Luther, that no day past wherein he did not spend three
hours at least in this duty. I cannot assert so much of this reverend person:
but this I dare averr, that no day past wherein he restrained it, or slightly
past it over. His manner was, when ever he came to lodge at any friends house,
after he had saluted those that were in his way, immediately to betake himself
to his Chamber, where he would spend an hour (more or less) by himself, before
any friend could speak with him. At night again he would be shut up in his
Chamber a considerable time before any servant could be admitted. He would
often say to his Godly friends that came to visit him, Joach. pa. Virg. Mar.
Mihi cibus et pitus est oration.
Come, must not we pray together before we part? indeed it may be said of him
what was said of another, that prayer was his repast. Nor did he slubber over
this duty as many do, but he did it with all his might, he prayed in prayer,
he wrestled with God as our Father Jacob did, and he wept for the most part
when he made his supplication to him. He was not only affectionate in prayer
with others, but when he was alone by himself, This passage I find under his
own hand, [The Glory be Gods] where I have shed one tear in prayer with others,
I have (I think I speak within compass) shed two in secret betwixt God and mine
own soul. One thing I had almost let slip, that in prayer alone or with others,
if he could have room he would perform the duty kneeling on the ground, yea
though sometimes he was almost lost in the crowd by so doing; he would say, the
humblest gesture, as well as spirit, became the duty of prayer, and that he
knew no way of wrestling with the Almighty, like that of lying at his feet, and
prostrating our selves before him. Of old, when the question was propounded,
Servasti Dominicum? the answer was, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum.


6. His Sanctification on the Lords Day, the Christian Sabbath.

He was a strict observer of the Lords day; and indeed he is no true Christian
that is careless therein. Some have observed, that the Sanctification of the
Sabbath is one of the first things a converted person makes conscience of; this
good man was every day watchful over his thoughts, words and actions, but on
this day more especially. It was rare to hear him speak one idle word, or see
him do one unnecessary action on the Sabbath day. The Jewish Talmud proposes
this question, why God made man on the Sabbath Eve? and gives this answer, that
he might presently enter upon the sanctification of the Sabbath, and begin his
life with that work which was the main end of it.
His strictness was such herein, that some have wondered at it; and some (too
hastily) have censured him for it. I can remember, I have kept some Sabbaths
with him, but alas I could by no means keep pace with him; he went from duty to
duty (as Bees do from Flower to Flower) from public duty to family duties,
from family duties to closet duties, finding sweetness in them all; he would
say, we must always be good husbands of time, especially of holy time; we must
not spend that time, which is not our own, about our own things.

7. His ke^g days of prayer and fasting alone and with his Family. Ne. 1.4.
Dan. 9.3.2 Sa. 12.16. Est. 4.16. Mat. 18.19.20. v. Clarks Marrow of Eccl.
History p. 932.


He accustomed himself to keep private fasts; a practice out of use amongst
Christians, though much commended in the Scriptures. This good man sometimes by
himself alone, and sometimes with his little family, kept many whole days of
prayer and humiliation. This he did ordinarily before the Lords Supper; and
often, as he found any corruption to grow or get head in his heart. There are
some devils and devilish lusts that will be cast out or kept under no other
way.

This particular experience he himself records, That when he was a young
Preacher, he found himself very prone to be puffed up and exalted (and indeed
it was a common saying with him, that Spiritual pride is the special sin of
young Ministers) whereupon he set apart a day to seek God for strength against
that sin, and from that day forward he felt ('it is his own expression) the neck
and heart of it was broken.

And to speak truth (which might have been another head) he was a most lowly
minded Christian^ He was clothed all over with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Fuit in
honor sine tumore, in elatione sine praelation^. Bernard. Clem. de correct.
Eccl. Stat. c. 22. Aug. de civit. Deil. 14. c. 13.
that Treasury of grace; that ornament of Religion; neither his Parentage, nor
his parts, nor his applause, nor any thing else did, to appearance, any way
elate or puff him up; though he was lifted up in the eyes and hearts of others,
yet he was lowly in his own: how often have I known him to esteem others, that
were abundantly worse, to be better then himself. His carriage was a Comment on
Romans 12.10.

8. His great Bounty and liberality.

He was very charitable to all men, especially to those of the household of
Faith. Ps. 112.5.9. Verbum profusionem importat. Muis.
It Is David's character of a good man, that he he gives to the poor and
disperseth liberally; and this was his practice: whilst others were for
gathering and heaping up, he was for dispersing and scattering abroad. As all
graces were conspicuous in him, so this of charity in particular, which is the
only grace (as one says) wherein God and man communicate. He devised liberal
things, and drew out his soul to the hungry; Synes. Ep. 57. Is. 58.1^.
he did not only draw out his purse to supply them, but his bowels and soul to
pity them.

His manner was, Dando pauperi das tibi, quia quod pauperi non dederis habebit
alter, tu solum quod pauperidederis. Chrysol: Sermon. 41. p. 108.
when he rode abroad, to put so much money in his pocket as he could well spare
for this purpose; and as he met with any indigent persons, he would fall into
discourse with them, It Is related of Mr. Fox, that he never refused to give to
any one that asked him an Alms for Christ's sake: and being asked if he knew such
a poor person as was naim'd to him; Yea, said he, I forget Lords and Ladies to
remember such. It Is said of Cyprian, that he never turned away a widow empty.
He was wont to say, Ne dormiat in thesauris tuis quod pauperi prodesse potest.
And again. Aliquando de necessitate amittendum est, quod sponte pro divina
remuneratione distribuendum est.


and if he found any knowledge of God or savor of Godliness in them; he would
the more plentifully relieve them; nor should the ignorant sif he judged them
necessitous, and not idle, part from him without some counsel and relief. For
purse alms, and spiritual alms together, I never knew his fellow. He would
often visit poor and needy families, or call in as he past by them, and ever
leave somewhat behind him for the good of soul and body both. God lent him a
competent estate, and (which is better) gave him a heart to lend it back again
unto him. God honored him, and he again honored God with his substance.

9. His great patience and cheerfulness under afflictions.

You have heard of the patience of Job: And I would acquaint you a little with
the patience of this eminent servant of God. Those that knew his circumstances
and his lamblike carriage under them, will readily grant that he was one of
the greatest patterns of patience that this age has produced. 1. Vxorem
delirantem. Levamentum aliquod miseriarum est non veniti. Lips. cent. 1. Ep.
61. Plut. consolat. ad Apollon. p. 116. Gaudet patientia duris, Luc. li. ^.
Amongst the various trials wherewith he was exercised, he had one which was
not ordinary, and which for some reasons I conceal (though all that were of
his intimate acquaintance do easily guess what I mean) yet whoever saw him out
of humor? or ever heard a muttering or repining word to come out of his mouth?
he made light of those burdens which would have sat or layn heavy on others
backs. Yea many have admired, not only at his patience, but at his cheerfulness
under his afflictions; he had learnt in every thing to give thanks: it may be
said of him as of that Apostle, that he was joyful, yea, exceeding joyful in
all his tribulations. His conversation was made up of seriousness tempered with
cheerfulness. How grave was he in all company, yet how pleasant also. He
deemed, that a morose sour carriage in Christians did much disparage the Gospel
of Christ. I used my self (says he, in his aforesaid memoires) to be somewhat
merry and cheerful in company, that standers by might for that reason be the
more in love with Religion to show that it was not inconsistent with harmless
merriment, and through mercy I have cause to think that I have sometimes
attained that end. Suidas speaking of Macarius relates, how by his pleasant
discourses on all occasions he drew many into the ways of God.
I have drawn others by this means to a likeing of the good ways of God.

10. His moderation and peaceableness.

He much dislikt and lamented the unnatural heats and divisions amongst
Christians. He was not skeptical and indifferent, not was he severe and rigid.
He seemed to me to tread in Paul's steps, 1 Cor. 9.10.
and did always endeavor to accommodate himself to those that differed from
him so far as lawfully he could, and as his love of Truth would permit. Many
men prefer a petty Notion to the Churches peace and communion, and are so
capricious and overconfident of their own determinations, That they will hold
no communion, nay, hardly have a pleasing conversation with those who are not
of their persuasion; he was of a more excellent temper, he would say, All men
must have their grains of allowance; the most knowing Christians know but in
part. He would familiarly converse, (ay, and if occasion were, in all
Ordinances communicate) with those that held the head, and were sound in the
vitals of Christian Religion, though in other things they* were erroneous. This
one thing he would greatly declaim against, That Christians upon every little
occasion, Vide Hier. Zanch. de Ecclesia. and de quinque causis quas Schismatici
obtendunt, cum ab Ecclesiae communione deficiunt.
made nothing of Separation; if they dislik't a people, the next word is, We'll
join with them no longer; if they dislik't a Preacher, this followed next,
We'll hear him no more. His opinion was (to which I subscribe) That it will
never be well with the Church of God in this Nation, so long as Christians are
so prone to division and separation. This, this is Englands incurable Wound.

11. His Zeal for God.

What was said of David, and our Lord Jesus Christ himself, the same may be
affirmed of him, The zeal of God did consume and eat him up. John 2.17. Psalm.
69.19. and 119.139. Me zelus meus. Cruciavit. egregie vim exprimit zeli perquem
cor vellicatur and lancinatur. Muis. What is said of another, may be also
affirmed of him, That he was kin to Angels, who are active spirits, and a
flaming fire.


Though he seldom sinned in being angry, yet he often, very often, was angry
with sin. He could bear to be reproach't, and evil-spoken of himself, but not
that God and his Name should be blasphemed and dishonored: of this, I could
give many instances, take one or two under his own hand. Being once, says he,
at a Wedding dinner, at the Marriage of one Mr. Valentine's Servant, I observed
a Fiddler to swear and sing very obscenely, at which I was troubled and filled
with indignation, till anon I called to him to forbear, and gave him money to
hold his peace, tendering therein the glory of God, and was much comforted
thereby.

Supping once at an Inn, betwixt Oxford and London, where many who Traveled
together, did also eat together, one amongst the rest was full of vain and
profane discourse. I applied my self to him, and labored to convince him of
the evil of sin, and of the curse and heavy wrath of God which hung over his
head: And then I told him also of the riches of Gods grace to repenting
sinners, of his readiness to receive them, and be reconciled to them. This made
him more mute, but what farther operation it had upon him, I know not; only
this was remarkable, that the opening of the grace of God in the Gospel, fell
upon a young Scholar that stood by, and (as he afterward confessed) it melted
his very heart, and helped him from under a spirit of bondage wherewith he had
been bowed down, and broken, for many Months past.

Another demonstration of his great zeal for God, was his frequent projecting
and contriving how he might promote his honor and service in the World. How
often has he been heard to say in a Morning to his Friend or Friends, Come,
What shall we do for God this day? How shall we Trade with our Talents for the
furtherance of his glory? Never did any ambitious man more study the advancing
of himself, It Is recorded of Mr. Joseph Alleine, That he never arose in the
morning without some heavenly design of promoting Gods glory, and the good of
Souls, accounting it a shame, that the Covetous should arise with such anxious
projects of compassing his desired wealth, the Ambitious his aicry honors and
grandeur, the Voluptuous his sickly pleasu es, and that the Religious man, who
has so glorious a Prize and Trophies before his eyes, should be a man of no
projects and designs. History of his Life. p. 119.
than he did the advancing the Name and Honor of his God.

12. His dexterity and delight in Christian conference.

In this he excelled, and for this excellency alone, he deserves to be
Chronicled and Recorded to all Posterity: if he came behind some in Learning,
Elocution, etc. yet he went before all men that ever I knew in this grace or
gift. We make often mention of a gift of Prayer, and of a gift of Preaching,
and I am satisfied that there is a gift of Conference, of godly and christian
Conference, and I believe that he was endued with it, above any in this Age. As
men have their particular sins, so they have their particular graces, and
excellencies; Abraham excelled in Faith, Moses in Meekness, Job in Patience,
and this good man in godly Conference. Who ever conversed with him, and did not
hear some profitable Discourse proceed from him? his speech was always with
grace, Ephesians. 4.29.
as it argued grace in the speaker, so it was apt to work grace in the hearer:
it was ever savoury, seasoned with salt, and good to the use of edifying. Psalm.
45.1, 2. Prove. 10.21. Cant. 4.11.
His heart was always enditing a good matter, and his tongue was as the pen of
a ready writer. His lips fed many, and did always drop as the honeycomb,
grace was poured into them, and it flowed very plentifully from them. He had a
good stock and treasure in his heart, and from thence upon every occasion he
brought forth things new and old. Many have admired his skill and readiness
this way, who will never be able to imitate it. One would wonder when he sat
at meat with his Friends, how dexterously he would turn Water into Wine. I
mean, their merry and idle, into serious and useful Discourse. When any were
talking of their worldly and secular Affairs, he had a faculty of fastening, or
hitching on some heavenly Argument, which he did so handsomely, that the most
ignorant and carnal amongst them could not be offended at it; those that would
nauseate such Discourse in others, would yet accept it from him, so cleanly and
artificially did he manage it. He had a very good hand at warning the unruly,
and at comforting the feeble-minded; but he was wondrously ready at instructing
the ignorant, such as others would slight, and not think worthy of their pains,
by reason of their meanness and ignorance; he would delight in conversing with
them, and instructing of them; their Souls, he would say, are as precious as
the Souls of Nobles.

Conversion work has been much promoted by occasional speeches. A Maid
dwelling in a religious Family, was told by a Minister, That if she went to
Hell out of that Family, she would have a deep place there. This startled her,
and she became afterward a Serious Christian.
When he accidentally met with any person, though a stranger, as he was sitting
in a house, or walking or riding by the way, he would instantly apply to him,
and fall into discourse with him: not long before his death, I went with him to
a Gentleman's house, where sitting down, he presently ask't the servant that
attended, What Countreyman he was? A Minister riding one morning to a Lecture,
met with some young men carrying their Cocks to a Cock fight, he spoke to one
of them, and said, Friend our Lord and Master Jesus Christ never came into the
world to set up-such Sports as these. This saying (though the young man went on
to his sport that day) stuck like an arrow in his liver, and he could not be at
quiet, till he had learned who this Minister was, and afterward gained
acquaintance with him, and thereupon laid these, and his other sins to heart,
and made a happy Change of his sinful courses. Machin. in vita ejus. p. 82.
and where he was born? to which the young man no sooner replied, but his next
question was, I prithee tell me, do thou think thou art born again? and by
that handle or introduction, he took occasion to open to him (as Christ did to
Nicodemus) the nature and necessity of the new birth. His success in this way,
was something answerable to his diligence, some having been converted, others,
(and those not a few) instructed, comforted, and quickened by his godly
discourse.

His modesty was such, that he never judged any thing he did worthy of the
Press, yet he consented that his Treatise of Christian Conference should be
Printed, and accordingly it is annexed to this Narrative. The Reader will find
it, though a plain, yet a profitable discourse. Having also by me a Manuscript
of his, of a Dialogue betwixt a Minister and a Stranger, I thought good to
Print it with the aforesaid Treatise, which may serve for a specimen of the
practice therein urged and commended.

Thus I have set before the World one of the fairest Copies that this Age has
produced: Omne tempus Clodios non omne Catones parit. Senec. Ep. Tit. 2.7.
(...). The word SINCERITY, which is read in our Translation, is not found in
the Greek Text. Qu. How, or why it was added?
A man that was (as the Apostle exhorts Titus to be) a pattern of good works;
one that in doctrine showed uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound speech,
that could not be condemned: One that in conversation showed integrity,
unblameableness, and good works, that ought to be imitated. A few more such
Ministers and Christians would convince, yea, condemn the ungodly generation
amongst whom we dwell, and make them of another mind, who say and think, That
all Professors are but Pretenders to Religion, and that there is no such thing
as grace or godliness, distinct from moral virtue and righteousness, there is
no more ready way to refel such Calumnies, than to refer them to the
conversation of such a person as I have here described, as Diogenes confuted
one that denied there was any motion, Diog. La. ert. l. 6. p. 212. ^^^.
by rising up, and walking before his eyes.

To conclude, Vivitur magis ad similitudinem quam ad rationem. Sen. de vit.
beat. c. 1. Vide etiam Sen. Ep. 123. Ad rationem vitae exemplis erudimur. Plin.
l. 8. Ep. 18.
my heart's desire and earnest prayer is this, That God would use this
Narrative for the doing some good in the World, that those who wont be guided
by Rules and Precepts, may be a little moved by this holy man's example and
practice: how many are infected by the vices of good men, and why may not
others be attracted by their graces? Reader, whoever thou art that perusest
these Lines, I shall only say to thee, as Christ to that Lawyer, Luke 10.37. Go
thou and do likewise.

He lies Interred in the Parish Church of Bovingdon aforesaid, under a fair
Stone, with this Epitaph engraven upon it, made by the Reverend Doctor Simon
Ford.
IN MEMORIAM Eruditi and Sanctissimi Viri EDMUNDI STAUNTON S. T. D.

Qui annum agens Septuagesimum primum Decimo quarto die Julii Anno Domini 1671.

Spiritum ejus in manus Domini Jesu Christi summa pace deposuit.

Scire cupis, Lector, cujus lapis iste sepulti est?
En lege, summissa, sed lege, voce precor.
Se solum* nota latuit pietate modestus,
Erubuitque suis conscius esse bonis.
Vnde haec, vera licet, si norit forte, verendum
Ne fugiat marmor, vel cinis ipse loquax.
In virum Reverendissimum Edmundum Staunton S. T. D. C. C. C. Oxoniens.
Praesidem (non ita pridem) Dignissimum ^ Acrosticum.
E ccc virum Coelo dignum, dignante Jehova!
D ux erat ille Gregis, Rector Pastorque probatus.
M ille Patrem hunc animae poterant dictare beatum:
V irtutum centrum dulci fulgore coruscans,
N on parcum Christo tot consignare labores
D octis atque piis quam suavi melle fluentes!
V ictor jam laetus cum Jesu mente triumphat,
S ursum cord sequi, nos parvos integer urgens
S in dicas, desum-vires quis suppetat unde
T alia coelicolae vestigia tangere possem?
A spice de coelo Christi manus Omnipotentis
V ictrix, qua fretus nil non te posse putandum.
N il ultra objicias, audi, vide, tangeto facta
T itanis clare, radios spargentis amicos
O rbi Christicolae hoc obstetricante libello.
N ec sit qui maculas ausit conspergere nigras.
J. B.

EDMVNDVS STAVNTON. ANA GRAMMA: Non adest ut mundus.
NOn ut mundus adest nobis; hac infima spernit
Non ut mundus abest, qui perit absque mora
Mundus abest praesens, absens at adest (...)
Staunton, quem nobis reddit amica fides.
Idem.

In obitum Reverendi admodum Edmundi Staunton S.T.D. Collegii Corporis Christi
apud Oxonienses quondam Praesidis.
HEroas nimium festina morte peremptos
Maestaque, tu Vatum funera, dulce caput,
Excipis (heu) dura fati constrictus eadem
Lege: illam Plutus quando refiget atrox?
In genus humanum quando feritate remota
Mitescet demum post spolia ampla satis?
Si quid apud parcas, valuisset candor honestus,
Insignis nec non intemerata fides;
Flectere si possent malesanas ulla sorores
Quae vel suspiciant, quaeve stupere solent
Mortales, hodie nos te poteremur, Amice;
Agmine cultorum cinctus and ipse fores.
Ast quicquid puichrum terrarum ubicunque revidet,
Quicquid magnificum personat, atque plebi
Exemptum, statim mala surripit Atropos. Orbem
Nempe premit virtus, obruit ipsa, suae
Dispergit radios dum majestatis onustos.
Ito, Phile, ac inter sydena quaere locum;
Machina terrestris te long indigna, reducat
Saturnus terris aurea secla licet.
Planxit Jonathan. Tuckney Cantabrigiensis A. M. Coll. S. Joann. Evangelistae
nuper Soc.

In Reverendissinum dignissimumque. Virum Edmundum Stantonem, S. T. D. and
Herculeum quodam doctissimi Calvini Propugnatorem.
TV been legisti Calvinum, vera docentem;
Tu been cepisti candida sensa viri:
Dum blaterent Hosts, Blasphemum and figere scriptis
Peccata Autori pessima quaeque Deo.
Hos debellasti, fastu quam fell tumentes,
Frendebant luctu; risit at Oxonium:
Oscula multa dedit plaudens Academia; Coelo
Calvinus Tibi nunc Oscula multa dedit.
Vivite Consortes, Paradiso vivite juncti;
Nam studiis, animis, and pietate pares.
Ben. Agas.

A brief Relation (chiefly) of his great care to promote Religion, and
Learning, in the College of which he was President. By Mr. J. M. Sometime
Fellow of the same.
IT was a great commendation which Poggius the Florentine, though a Papist,
gave the Renowned Hierome of Prague; when (observing the great Learning,
Eloquence, O virum dignum memoria hominum sempiterna! Aen. Silv. Hist. Bohem.
cap. 36.
and Christian fortitude which he manifested at the Council of Constance) he
proclaimed him to be a man worthy to be had in perpetual remembrance.

There are, no doubt, many thousands in this Nation, who having had personal
knowledge of the worthy man, Dr. Edmund Staunton, will remember him while they
live, and vocally transmit the memory of his name, as precious to Posterity.
And some of them, who have often smelt the odor of his ointment (for he was
anointed with some gifts and graces above many of his Brethren) have spread
abroad the savor of it, by declaring what an excellent spirit was found in
him; chiefly, that men might utter the memory of Gods great goodness to him,
and to his Church in him; as also, that such as never knew him, might, by
beholding his Portraicture drawn (though, it may be, not to the life) be
brought, by his example, to some conformity to that holiness which did shine
forth in him: and, lastly, that so worthy a person might have the honor which
is his due, Psalm. 112.6.
and which the Lord allows to be paid to his faithful servants.

I also, who had the happiness to be near him for many years, and observed the
excellent workings of the grace of God in him, cannot but speak of the things
which I have seen and heard.

He was, in his younger years, chosen Scholar of Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, and, not long after, Probationer Fellow of the same, viz. before he
came to be Bachelor of Arts, a thing seldom known in that house. There Men,
finding him to be not only Ingenious, Ingeniosus. Ingenuus.
but Ingenuous also, did show him great respect, bestowing one token thereof
after another: And there God, not for any desert in him, but out of his own
mercy, and grace, did set his eye upon him; there did the kindness, and love of
God (which a great while before had run, like water, under ground) break forth
and appear, Saving him by the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

In Corpus Christi College (as he told me) it ^^leased the Lord (first) to open
(...) eyes, causing him to see his wretched condition, which did greatly, and
deeply humble him, and made him put up strong cries, with tears, to him that
was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared: Hebr. 5.7.
for at length he had his Conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ, by
whom he received the atonement; and the law of the Spirit of life, in Christ
Jesus, Rom 8.2.
made him free from the law of sin, and death.

And now he became a Member of the most ancient, honorable, and durable
Society in the world; being first chosen, and then admitted Fellow of Sion
College, where an innumerable company of Saints, and Angels, were his
Colleagues. Herb. 12.22.
Having received this grace, he found himself strongly inclined to make others
partakers of the same.

Wherefore, having taken his degree of Master of Arts, after some few Years, he
left the College, and addicted himself to the work of the Ministry.

He spent most of his time and labors at Kingston upon Thames, where the
pleasure of the Lord did prosper in his hands: From thence he was called, in
the time of the late Troubles, to take upon him the government of the College,
of which he had been before a Member.

As soon as he came upon the place, he manifested an earnest desire after the
welfare of the Society, in every respect, exciting, and, by his example,
leading such as were to assist him to endeavor the same.

His Government savoured more of lenity and mildness, than of sharpness and
severity; yet he kept the College in very good Order and Discipline. Though the
House, before his time, had been much troubled with divisions, he, by his
moderation, and Christian prudence, kept them all of a piece, and in the
enjoyment of great peace and concord.

He was, indeed, naturally, of an exceeding good temper, and disposition;
gentle, affable, and courteous to all, which, being embellished with grace,
made him exceeding amiable, and very useful in all his conversation.

His great care was to promote Religion, and Learning in the College, which he
did with both his hands earnestly. Divine knowledge, and Humane Learning, are
the right, and left eye of the World; as the Sun and Moon are to the Universe,
the eclipsing of either of them, leaves the World in darkness. One thing there
was that made him, the more desire to see Religion and Learning meet together,
in conjunction, in all such as were to be chosen Scholars of the House; or, if
that could not be obtained, to have them joined together afterward. It was the
Founders Will, expressed in one of his Statutes, That all the Fellows, and
Scholars of the Foundation, should, about a year, or two, after they became
Masters of Arts, be ordained to the Holy Ministry; one only excepted, who, ad
arbitrium, might be deputed to the study, and practice of Physic. Parts, and
Learning, without grace, make a man capable of doing very good service in the
Commonwealth; but both in conjunction, are more requisite in one, who is to
make manifest the savor of the knowledge of Christ in every place, Alludit ad
Sacerdotum unctione^, and Sacrificiorum suffitus. Junius in locum.
2 Cor. 2.14. Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. A man of
Learning without grace, is like a ship without ballast, the least blast of
applause is ready to drive him upon the Quicksands of Pride, or carry him on
the Rocks of opposition to others, and sometimes to the truth it self, to his
own great danger, if not ruin; and the prejudice of others. If such a man see
another not to sail altogether by his Compass, but to be carried by a
side-wind, to some distance from his judgment, he finds it a hard matter to
forbear making up to him, and can scarce hold his hands from letting fly at
him.

Difficile est Satyras-non scribere. Hence have flown those great heats,
Animosities, and perverse Disputings, which have so much troubled the Church of
God. Unsanctified Parts and Learning have been the sharpest Tools, that the
great Adversary of Mankind, and of the Church especially, could ever lay hold
on to do mischief withal; as the Histories of all Ages do abundantly testify.

Upon such accounts as these, this godly wise man was careful to prevent (if it
might be) an error in the first concoction, knowing how hard it might prove to
amend it in the second.

Therefore, when any Scholars place became void, if there appeared many
Candidates for it, he appointed them some time before the Election, to attend
him at his Lodgings, where he examined them privately, and set down in a Paper
the age, standing, and proficiency in learning of every one of them: He noted
also, what Testimonials he had received from persons of Integrity, concerning
the good conversation of any of them, and their hopefulness as to Godliness;
with his own apprehensions about them, upon his examination, as to that matter
also.

And if such a number of the Electors as was requisite, could not, after
public examination, agree upon one of them; he, upon whom the election was, in
that case, devolved; if there appeared to him an equality, or near an equality
in other respects, would always let Piety have the honor to turn the scale.

His next care was to have these Twins parts, and Piety fostered, and
cherished, and by all ways and means improved, and heightened to the utmost of
his power. To this purpose, he came, ordinarily, to all College Exercises, held
every one to the duties of their several places; and observed every ones
growth, and progress in Learning; by which he was the better able to judge whom
to prefer, when any of them came to be Competitors for a Fellowship.

He was no less careful to see Religion thrive, and prosper among them: For
first, he made choice of the fittest persons he could find, to perform the duty
of Prayer Morning and Evening, such as might, with reverence, seriousness, and
warm affection, engage the hearts of others in the duty.

At this holy exercise he was present himself, as constantly, if not more
constantly than the younger Scholars, as to join in the duty, to bring down a
blessing from above upon them, and their studies; so, to see it reverently
performed, and that the whole Society came duly together.

Every Lords day in the Evening, when the whole House met to offer up their
Sacrifice of praise, and prayer, he examined the younger sort, calling them to
account about what they had heard that day; which was a likely means to engage
them to the greater attention in hearing, and to make the truths, by their
pondering them, sink the deeper into their hearts.

He took great pains to instruct them of the lower rank in the grounds of
Religion, calling them one day in the Week into the Chapel; where he opened,
and explained the great, and weighty Truths of Christianity to them;
endeavoring still, not only to inform their judgments, but to make the truths
reach their hearts.

Whereas, the Founder required, that the Fellows, and Scholars should, at such
a standing (as was said before) be ordained to the Ministry; he, with the
consent of such of the Fellows as were empowered by Statute to make orders for
the good of the Society, decreed, That all of such a standing, or above, should
preach every Lords day in the morning, by course, in the College Chapel,
before the public Sermon in the University.

By this means, they, who were designed for the Work of the Ministry, might,
first, prove, and improve their own abilities. And secondly, approve themselves
to others, to be men apt to teach, which is one of the qualifications required
in the Apostolical Canons in them that are to be called to the Pastoral office.

Fifthly and lastly, besides the Conference which he had often in his own
Lodgings about Soul-matters, and Communion in the Lords Supper, in the College
Chapel, where he himself did administer, and many of the House, with others
from abroad were partakers; he was often discoursing, with such of the Society
as came to him about any business, in such a manner as tended to the promoting
of Holiness; for he seldom let them depart without some instruction,
admonition, or hearty counsel.

They especially, who, by reason of their place and standing, were most about
him, received great benefit by conversing with him; For his heart taught his
mouth, and added learning to his lips. When a portion of the Scripture was
read, at Dinner (as is usual) he did not only cause altum silentium, and
reverent attention through the Hall, that all might feed their Souls, while
they were feeding their Bodies; but, the Chapter ended, if there were any
difficult places in it, he either propounded them to the Fellows that sat at
the Table with him, to be unfolded by them, or else opened, and unfolded them
himself; if it contained practical matter, it was a pleasant thing to see, and
hear, how he, who applied his heart to the knowledge of God, and kept his words
and Laws within him, had them withal fitted in his lips.

He lived to see some fruit of his Labors, to his great joy and contentment;
for a competent number of them, who were educated, ab origin, under his care,
became Learned, well-disposed, and pious men. I cannot refrain, but must
mention one of them, viz. Mr. Joseph Alleine, late Minister of the Gospel at
Taunton in Somersetshire; for as he was a great comfort to this holy man, while
he continued in the College; so it did revive him to hear (for he was often
enquiring after such as had been of his House, as a father after his children)
that he proved so eminently pious, and useful a man in the Church of God.

But, had he lived to see the Relation of his Life, now published since his
Death, he would have fallen into an ecstasy of joy: And I have so much charity
for some, that were instrumental about his great Sufferings, and often
Imprisonments, as to believe, that if they would please to read the Relation
aforesaid, wherein both Conformists and Nonconformists agree to give him an
high testimony for his great parts, Learning, peaceable spirit, quiet
deportment, zeal of the right kind, with ardent love to God, and man, extending
to the worst of his enemies, their hearts would smite them for giving so good a
man so much trouble: however, he is, now, where the weary are at rest, Job 3.17.

We have seen how vigilant, and industrious a Governor this worthy man was in
his College; he was also one, who, in compassion to men's souls, took every
opportunity, when at home, to Preach in, or near the City.

One of the Impropriations belonging to the College, about seven Miles distant,
having but a small stipend, before his time, not sufficient to afford a
subsistence to an able man to labor, and watch among the people for the good
of their souls; he first went himself, afterward he desired some of the Senior
Fellows to go over by course, and Preach unto the people; which desire of his
they readily complied with, for some time, till the Lease of the Impropriation
came to be renewed; when, upon the Presidents proposal, the Fellows consented
either much to abate, or wholly remit the Fine; requiring, in lieu thereof, a
competent Sum to be paid yearly, to encourage an able man to labor constantly
among them.

When the Affairs of the College called him forth into places remote from the
University, he was always ready to take any opportunity to do good to the
souls of men.

One who has rode many hundred Miles in company with him, has always
observed his deportment in all places, and toward all persons, to be such as
became an heavenly minded Christian, and a true Minister of Christ.

When he was riding on the way, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
he entertained his company with heavenly discourse; and as variety of Objects
did present themselves to him, he always drew excellent matter out of them;
glorifying God for the power, wisdom, and goodness which appeared in the Works
of Greation, and Providence. Psalm. 104.24.


As he passed by such as were about their occasions in the Fields, he would
many times make an halt, and enter into a short discourse with them: He would,
first, ask them some ordinary question, such as Travelers use to ask, and then
take an occasion, from their answer, to ask them other questions of more weight
and concernment to their Souls; leaving always some serious word with them, at
parting, for them to ruminate upon: And I am persuaded, that there are many,
who never saw his face, nor he theirs, but thus, in transitu, that have blessed
God for him.

When he came to his Lodging, either in a public or private house; as he had a
better advantage there, so he constantly made good use of it, for the glory of
God, and the edification of whatever company he was cast upon.

He had an excellent gift, and rare faculty, beyond what I did ever observe in
any man beside, to improve discourse so as to make it, not only pleasant to
those with whom he did converse, (...).
but very profitable to their souls, aiming still at the last, as the mark
which he had constantly in his eye.

When he came among persons of Quality (being himself well born, well educated,
of a generous spirit, and a cheerful temper) his company, and converse was,
usually, very acceptable to them, which gave him an advantage to tell them (as
he would plainly, though prudently) of what he saw amiss in them; to mind them
of the vanity of the World, of better things above, and to put them (as he
often would) upon good designs, to show their thankfulness to God for his mercy
to them.

Nor was there a person so mean, but he could, and would readily, and humbly
condescend to him, as knowing what precious souls dwell in the poorest houses
of clay.

He spoke to such always in their own dialect, and in a phrase they well
understood; trying their knowledge, and feeling the pulse of their souls: if he
found them ignorant, or unsensible, he would endeavor to awaken them, by
laying plain Texts of Scripture before them, for their conviction.

If he met with humbled and burdened souls, or such as were babes in Christ, he
would gather them as lambs in his arms, and gently lead them to the Wells of
Salvation.

If at any time there happened to be a mixed company at the Table with him, some
serious Christians, some Professors at large, his manner was to be very free
and pleasant in discourse with them, which caused them all to give great
attention to him: then might you have seen, how, ever and anon, the honey dropped
from his lips, while the company were hanging on them; how skilful he was in
dividing the Word aright, to every one his portion; and how wise in winning of
souls.

If he observed any to take the boldness, from his innocent mirth, and pleasant
humor, to incline to vain, and frothy discourse, he would very dexterously
turn to some more profitable matter, and, as occasion was given, afford a
serious reproof, tempered with much kindness and love to their souls, which
was, usually, well taken at his hand.

If his occasions required his stay, a day or two, at any place, he seldom
departed before he had Preached to the People.

He found, by much and long experience, that a plain way of Preaching was most
effectual to the ends for which that Ordinance was appointed; and therefore he
constantly used it, even in the College and University; though he could easily
have appeared in another strain, had he preferred an aerie Reputation with
some, before the Work of his Master, and the real advantage of others.

To conclude, I hope, that many, who some time were, and some, who yet are
members of that Society, having felt his fatherly care, heard his sound and
pious instructions, and seen his godly examples, do, and will endeavor to hold
a conformity thereunto: If any neglect, or despise them, let them know
assuredly, that God will require it at their hands.

A Dialogue: OR, A DISCOURSE BETWEEN A Minister and a Stranger, As they were On
the Highway together, ABOUT Soul Affairs.

By Edmund Staunton D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Tho: Parkhurst, and are to be Sold at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel: And at the Gilded Bible on
London Bridge, under the Gate. 1673.

A Dialogue, or Discourse between a Minister and a Stranger as they were on the
Highway together.
Minister. FRiend, Good morrow to you: How far Travel you this way?


Stranger. To such or such a place.


Min. I shall be glad of your company.


Str. And I Sir of yours.


Min. Little thought you in the Morning of meeting me, or I of meeting you.


Str. True Sir.


Min. Well Friend, since by the Providence of God we are brought together, and
must be accountable to God at death and judgment, how we spend our time whilst
we be together, shall we talk of what concerns the good of our Souls, and of
the Things of God?


Stranger. Yes Sir, with all my heart, if you please.


Minister. Friend, What think you then that your Soul is?


Str. I think that my Soul is my breath, because when a man's breath is gone,
then he dies, and his Soul is gone also.


Min. True, Friend, when the breath departs, the Soul departs also, yet the
Soul of a man is not his breath, because 1. Beasts, and the Fowls of the Air
breathe; also and yet you do not think they have reasonable, immortal Souls, as
we have: 2. Our breath is but the Air drawn in, and cast out again; and can you
reasonably imagine, first, that the Air thus sucked in, and blown out again,
should be the Soul or Souls of men? or, secondly, that the whole Region of the
Air, should be the rational and immortal Souls of men? or, thirdly, that our
Souls come in and go out of our bodies, as the Air we breathe in does?


Stranger. Truly Sir, you have convinced me, that the Soul is not breath,
whatever it be.


Minister. What else do you think it is?


Str. I think it is my blood, most likely.

Not so, because 1. Beasts and Birds have blood in them, as well as Men, and
yet you do not think they have reasonable immortal Souls, as we Men have. 2. If
our Souls were blood, then, when our Noses bleed (to speak familiarly with you)
our Souls would even out at our Noses; or when we cut our fingers, our Souls
would run out at our fingers ends.


Min. Friend, guess once more what your Soul is.


Str. Sir, Is it not my Conscience?


Min. No, Friend, the understanding, will, conscience, and affections, as love,
hatred, are the faculties and endowments of the Soul, but not the Soul it self.


Str. You say well Sir, I pray tell me then, what my Soul is.


Minister. Friend (not to trouble you with any curious definitions) the Soul of
man is a spiritual substance, endowed with reason, immortal, created, and
infused into man, informs, inliveneth the body, does and acts all in man;
the Soul sees in the eye, hears in the ear, speaks in the tongue, etc.
zach. 12.1. God forms the spirit of man within him.


Stranger. I thank you Sir, this is more than ever I heard of before.


Min. Well Friend, having spoken something concerning our Souls, shall we speak
a little concerning God?


Str. Yes Sir, I like your talk very well.


Min. What do you think God is? Is he an old man, or a young?


Str. An old man surely, he has been a long time.


Min. No, God is neither a young man, nor an old man.


Str. If God be not a man, why do the Scriptures speak of God, as having eyes,
ears, hands and feet, etc?


Min. This kind of speaking is not proper, but figurative, speaking of God
after the manner of men, stooping to our understandings and capacities: but the
Scripture speaking plainly and properly, says, God is a Spirit, John 4.24.


Stranger. You say right Sir, God is a Spirit.


Minister. Well Friend, Are not the Angels spirits too? They are called
ministering spirits, Hebr. 1.13. What then is the difference between God, and
the Angels?


Str. God is the greatest and highest of all the Angels:


Min. No Friend, God is not an Angel at all, God is a Spirit, uncreated, having
his being of himself, infinite, and eternal; the Angels are creatures, were
made by God, are finite, have a beginning, Col. 1.16. By him were all things
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones and dominions, principalities, or powers; all the
Angels were made by God.


Str. I believe Sir what you say, concerning God, and the Angels.


Min. Where is God, think you?


Str. Why God is in heaven.


Minister. What, is God no where else but in heaven?


Stranger. Yes, I hope he is in the hearts of all good people also.


Min. Is God in hell also?


Str. No, not in hell, unless by his power only.


Min. Yes, God is in hell also; and that not only by his power, but in his
essence, and being; or else, How is God infinite, if he be not every where?


Str. What you say is true, but I never heard so much before.


Min. Friend, How many Gods be there?


Str. There is but one God.


Min. Is there not God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost? And are
there not then three Gods?


Str. Yes, Sir, three Gods.


Min. No, Friend, three persons indeed, but only one God: Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.


Str. Yea, three persons, and one God, I remember it now.


Minister. Having said something concerning God, what think you, Friend,
concerning your self? Are you a sinner against this God, or no?


Stranger. Yes Sir, we are all sinners, God help us.


Min. Why Friend, which of the Commandments of God have you ever broken?


Str. Sir, I break them all every day, in thought, word, and deed.


Min. Say you so Friend, let us come to each particular Commandment: Did you
ever break the first Commandment, Thou shall have, etc?


Str. No Sir, I believe there is but one God.


Min. What say you to the second Commandment, Thou shall not make, etc?


Str. I am sure I have not broken this Commandment, I am no Papist, I abhor
Images, I am a Protestant, and so was my father before me.


Min. Did you ever break the third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of
the Lord thy God in vain, etc?


Stranger. No Sir, I am no common Swearer, it may be I let fall an Oath now and
then, as others do, but I am sorry for it when I have done.


Minister. What think you of the fourth Commandment, Do you keep holy the
Sabbath?


Str. Yes truly Sir, I keep the Church, all my Neighbors can bear me witness,
I hear our own Minister; sometimes I stay at home, but not very often.


Min. For the fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father, etc. Have you broken this
Commandment?


Str. I hope not much Sir; my father and mother, were they alive, would say, I
was as good a child as any they had, and we were so many of us.


Min. What think you of the sixth, seventh, and eighth Commandments, Thou shall
not kill, commit adultery, steal: Have you broken these Commandments?


Str. I hope not, for I am no murderer, no adulterer, no thief.


Min. For the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor, have you kept, or broken it?


Stranger. I hope I have not broken it, for I never took a false Oath against
any man in my life.


Minister. What think you of the tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet, etc?
Are you guilty, or not?


Str. Covet! would I were as free from other sins, as I am from Covetousness;
if you would have me tell you the truth, I am to blame rather on the other
hand, I spend my money too fast.


Min. Oh Friend, how do these things stand together? you said even now, that
you broke all the Commandments every day, in thought, word, and deed, and now I
have dealt with you upon each particular Commandment, you clear your self in
all, as if you had broken none of the Commandments in thought, word, or deed.


Str. I pray Sir tell me something, that I may understand my self better.


Min. Know Friend, that you are grievously ignorant, and that Satan, the god of
this World, has miserably blinded you, that your heart fearfully deceives
you; pray earnestly to God that he would inlighten you; hear, read the
Scriptures, Catechisms, and other good Books; remember Sermons, go to the
Minister, entreating him to instruct you in the principles of Religion; grow
acquainted with good people, talk and discourse much with them about heavenly
matters; and by the blessing of God, in a little time, you will come to know
God more, and your self better.


Stranger. I thank you heartily Sir, and when I come home, I purpose to think
of your counsel, and to follow it.


Minister. Say and hold, Friend, and remember, that a blind ignorant Soul is
worse than a dark and blind body: And that the soul be without knowledge, is
not good, Prove. 19.2.


Str. I hope I shall remember what you have said to me as long as I live and I
confess I am a sinner.


Min. Are you guilty of Adam's sin, in his eating the forbidden fruit?


Str. No Sir, that was long before my time, I know nothing of it.


Min. Yes Friend, I, and you, and all Mankind (except Christ) are guilty of
Adams first sin, Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death passed upon all, for that all have sinned.


Stranger. True Sir, now I remember my self, I have heard them say, that we are
all guilty of Adam 's sin, because we were all in his loins.


Minister. I have heard them say, you must not build your faith upon
hear-sayes, but upon the written Word of God; and for your reason why we are
guilty of Adam's sin, because we were all in his loins, that is not the main
reason; for then we should be as well guilty of the sins of our Fathers, and
Grandfathers, etc. for we were in their loins also.


Str. How then, I pray you, came we to be guilty of Adam 's first sin?


Min. Why thus, Adam was a public person, representing all Mankind; and the
Covenant of life made with him, was not for himself only, but for all his
posterity; so that when he sinned, we sinned; when he fell, we fell with him,
in that his first transgression.


Stranger. I must needs confess that I am guilty of Adam 's first sin.


Minister. Friend, You and I are not only guilty of Adam's first sin, but also
of many actual transgressions: You said even now, that sometimes you let fall
an Oath in your common discourse, which is swearing, and taking the Name of God
in vain; and you said truly also, that we break the Commandments of God in
thought, word and deed; and the Scripture says, Romans 3.23. All have sinned,
etc. So that you, and I, and all men, are sinners certainly.


Str. I acknowledge Sir, that I am a sinner.


Min. Yea Friend, but are you such a sinner as that you deserve to be damned,
and go to Hell for your sins?


Str. I hope, not so great a sinner, as to deserve Hell and damnation.


Min. Friend, I must tell you, that you, and I, and the best Men and Women that
are, deserve to go to Hell for their sins, the least sin deserves eternal
death, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death.


Stranger. What you say Sir, I perceive is true, for you bring Scripture to
prove what you say.


Minister. Why then, say these words after me; I am a sinner, and such a
sinner, as that I deserve to go to Hell, and be damned for my sins.


Str. I am a sinner, and such a sinner, as that I deserve to go to Hell, and be
damned for my sin.


Min. Did you ever in your lifetime say so much before?


Str. Truly Sir I never thought, or said so much before all the days of my
life.


Min. It Is as true a word as ever you spoke all your days.


Str. I believe it Sir.


Min. If you did indeed believe it, Friend, it would trouble you, and make your
heart ache within you.


Str. Sir, how may that appear?


Min. Thus Friend, if you did verily believe, that you deserved to forfeit all
your estate, to be imprisoned all the days of your life, to be hanged, or
burned to death, would it not trouble you?


Str. Yes doubtless, that it would.


Minister. Friend, You cannot but think that to go to Hell, and to be damned
for ever, is a thousand times worse than all this; and therefore if you did
indeed believe it, it would trouble you, and that to some purpose.


Stranger. I thank God Sir, I was never troubled in mind all my life.


Min. Friend, let me tell you, that you had more cause to thank God, if you
could say, that you have been troubled for your sins; this be sure of, that
they who are not troubled for sin in this World, mourning and repenting, shall
be troubled with a vengeance in the World to come, when they lie in Hell under
the wrath and curse of God, tormented with fire and brimstone for ever, because
of their sins against God.


Str. I hope Sir I shall never come there, I have always been of a strong
faith toward God.


Min. Friend, what if your strong faith (as you call it) prove no better than a
strong fancy, or a strong presumption at the last, and so deceive you.


Stranger. I hope better.


Minister. Friend, if your faith and hope were right, you would find 1. A
difficulty and hardship in believing; he that never doubted, or never believed;
he that never saw his want of faith, never lamented his unbelief, has cause to
fear he has no true saving faith at all. It Is an easy matter to presume, but
it is a hard thing to believe, and hope aright in God, Ephesians. 1.19. It Is the
exceeding greatness of the power of God toward us who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power: ver. 20. Which he wrought in Christ when he raised
him from the dead. 2. Your faith and hope were they true, would be grounded
upon the Word and Promises of God. 3. Faith and hope, if right, would purify
the heart and life, Acts 15.9. 1 John 3.3. Now whether you have this kind of
faith and hope or no, you had need look to it.


Str. I trust I shall Sir.


Min. Friend, to return to what we a little before discoursed of, it must be
granted, that you and I, and all of us, deserve the wrath and curse of God for
ever; how do you think to escape the damnation of Hell, and to get Heaven and
Salvation when you die?


Stranger. I hope to be saved by my serving of God, and good prayers, and by
leading an honest life; how else should I be saved?


Minister. Friend, What do you hope to be saved for your good Works? that is
Popery, and I presume you are no Papist.


Str. Sir, All my Neighbors know I am no Papist, I defy Popery from my heart.


Min. Friend, let me tell you, that to rely upon our own righteousness, and to
hope to be justified and saved for what we do, is one of the most desperate and
damnable points in all Popery; and therefore, whatever you may think of it, if
you trust unto your good prayers, and your honest life (as you call it) as if
that were enough to save you, you are in that point a Papist.


Str. Oh, Sir, the Papists trust to their good works and merits.


Minister. Friend, What is it not a good work to serve God, to say good
prayers, to lead an honest life, etc?


Stranger. Yes, surely.


Min. Why then surely, to trust and rely upon them, is to rely upon your good
works, which is plain downright Popery.


Str. I perceive Sir you are too hard for me; but what would you not have men
to serve God, use good prayers, and lead good lives?


Min. Yes, Friend, that I would, and wish from my heart, that you and I, and
all men, served God more, prayed and lived better; but here is the mischief, and
the Popery of it, when men rely upon those works for justification and
salvation.


Str. Why, may not I safely do it?


Min. No, the Word of God is expressly against it, Romans 3.20. By the deeds of
the law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Romans 10.3. They who
establish their own righteousness, submit not unto the righteousness of God.
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of our selves:
ver. 9. Not of works, lest any man should boast; and many such places I could
tell you of.


Stranger. Sir, you bring so much Scripture, that I cannot tell what to say to
you.


Min. Friend, it is the Word of God by which we must be tried and judged another
day, Romans 2.16. In the day (of Judgment) when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel (says the Apostle;) and therefore
we might do well to try and judge our selves by it now.


Str. You speak reason Sir.


Min. Friend, deal plainly with me, do not you think, that though you have
sometimes offended God, yet you hope that your good works will satisfy, and
make amends for the bad; and so all will be made even between God and you.


Str. Sir, you hit me right, I wonder how you come to know me so well; I do
indeed hope, that my good works will answer for my bad.


Min. Friend, I am a stranger to you, it is not I that hits you, and knows you,
it is the Word of God that hits you, and knows you: only I may somewhat guess
at your heart by my own (naturally such as yours is;) Prove. 27.19. As in water
face answers to face, so the heart of man to man.


Stranger. If my good works, my serving God, my good prayers, and my honest
life will not serve me, I pray tell me how then may I be saved?


Minister. Friend, did you never hear of Jesus Christ (you speak never a word
of Christ all this while) why he, and he alone is the Savior of all Gods elect
and chosen people, Matthew. 1.21. His Name is called Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins. Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other Name under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be
saved. And many such like places in the Scriptures plainly show, That whoever
be saved, are saved by Christ only.


Str. True Sir, now you remember me of it, I have heard our Minister speak
often concerning Jesus Christ.


Minister. Friend, what think you concerning Jesus Christ?


Stranger. Why, I think, he is an Angel, the biggest of them all.


Min. No, Friend, Christ is not an Angel, he made the Angels, Col. 1.16. as
before.


Str. Sir, if he be not an Angel, then he is God in heaven.


Min. Friend, Is Christ, think you, now he is in heaven, God, or man?


Str. Sir, I think he was a man when he was on earth, but now he is God in
heaven.


Min. Then Christ is not man now he is in heaven? is he?


Str. No surely, now he is in heaven he is not a man.


Min. Yes surely, Friend, he is very man now he is in heaven, yea, God and man
in two distinct natures, and one person, and so will he be for ever.


Str. Truly Sir, I never thought that Christ had been man now he is in heaven.


Min. Friend, if you never thought so, yet you have said so, many, and many a
time.


Stranger. What I Sir?


Minister. Yes, you Friend, you have said over the Creed an hundred and an
hundred times, have you not?


Str. Yes, that I have constantly when I go to bed; and when I rise in the
morning, I seldom miss it.


Min. And when you say, I believe in God, etc. You say, That you believe that
Jesus Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried [who? the man Christ
Jesus] that he rose again from the dead, ascended into heaven, and there
sits, etc. and that he shall come again to judge the quick and the dead;
[who? the man Christ Jesus] and yet now you say, you think he is not man in
heaven: see Friend, by the way, how well you mind what you say, when you run
over the Creed.


Str. Sir, now I believe that Christ in heaven is God and man.


Min. That Christ is not only God, but man also, Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Hebr. 7.24.
But this man (speaking of Christ) continues for ever.


Stranger. Sir, I confess you prove what you said, by plain Scriptures.


Minister. Friend, you say, you hope now to be saved by Jesus Christ, but how
so? what has Christ done for man's salvation?


Str. Why, he dyed.


Min. Friend, would not the death of another, of Abraham, Moses, of David,
Peter or Paul, saved us, as well as the death of Jesus Christ?


Str. No.


Min. Why not?


Str. Because God appointed him to be our Savior.


Min. Friend, you say well, and let me farther tell you, that no mere man could
save us, but Christ being God, as well as man, had an infinite worth and virtue
in his obedience, his doings and sufferings, and so was able to satisfy, and
did satisfy the infinite Justice of God, whom we had offended by our sins.


Str. Sir, how prove you this?


Minister. Why thus, Friend, the blood of Christ was not the blood of a mere
man, but the blood of God also, to wit, of the person, which was, and is, very
God, Acts 20.28. The Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood;
to wit, with the blood of Christ, who was, and is not only very man, but very
God.


Stranger. Sir, I thank you for telling me this, which I never thought of
before.


Min. Friend, since salvation is alone by Christ, how, and which way do you
think to have an interest in Christ, and salvation by Christ?


Str. Why, by believing, and faith in Christ; and I have always had a strong
faith Godward, as I said before.


Min. Did you then never doubt, or question your spiritual estate? was you
never afraid of going to Hell?


Str. No Sir, never in my life, I was never troubled in my mind, nor, I hope,
never shall be.


Min. Say you so, Friend, it is better to be troubled here awhile, than to be
troubled in Hell for ever; sin will bring trouble, sooner or later, here, or
hereafter, as I told you even now.


Stranger. Sir, this seems strange to me.


Minister. Friend, did you never hear how those who were converted, Acts 2.37.
Cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? And how Paul, at his
conversion, cried, Acts 9.6. Lord, What will thou have me to do?


Str. Yes, Sir: But must it be so with all that believe, and go to Christ?


Min. Friend, possibly some few who were born of godly Parents, and have had
religious education from their childhood, have not been so sensible of their
want of Christ, have not had those fears and troubles which others have had;
yet all who are savingly brought to Christ, are more or less sensible of their
want of Christ, of the worth of Christ, and therefore have Christ and his
righteousness in deared to them, Philip. 3.8. Counting all but dross and dung,
that they may be sound in Christ. Holiness is highly prized, and embraced by
them; sin imbittered, and made odious to them all their days.


Stranger. But what is Gods usual way of dealing with men in their conversion?


Minister. Gods usual way is to convince men of sin, righteousness, and
judgment, Joh. 16.8. Making men sensible of sin and misery, of their lost
estates in themselves, of their disability to help themselves, or of finding
help any where but in Jesus Christ, Mat. 9.12. The whole have no need of a
Physician, but they that are sick: when sick of sin, then, and not till then,
do the children of men make out after Jesus Christ.


Str. Sir, you have satisfied me in this, that there is no way to be saved, but
by faith in Jesus Christ; and that none go to Jesus Christ, but such as find an
absolute necessity of going to Christ for life.


Min. Friend, it is well you are come to this, do you then believe in Jesus
Christ?


Str. Yes, Sir, with all my heart, I steadfastly believe that Christ came into
the World to save sinners.


Minister. And do not you think that the Devils believe as much as all this?


Stranger. I cannot tell.


Min. Friend, there is no question of it, but that the Devils do believe that
Christ is the Son of God, Mat. 8.29. that he came into the world to save
sinners; they believe, that the threatenings true, which makes them tremble,
Jam. 2.19.


Str. Sir, what you say is true; but I believe that Christ dyed for me in
particular.


Min. Friend, how know you that? You do not think that all who hear of Christ,
shall be saved by Christ, Luke 2.34. He is set for the fall, and for the rising
again of many in Israel. Romans 9.2. Though the children of Israel be as the sand
of the Sea, yet a remnant only shall be saved.


Str. I shall never be beaten off from it, but that Christ dyed for me, as well
as others.


Min. Friend, but what if Christ did not dye for you? Your conceit that he did
dye for you, will not serve your turn; can you be saved by believing that which
is not true? that is but the presumption, and vain confidence, which you have no
ground for, for ought I can perceive by you.


Stranger. Sir, you are the strangest man that ever I met with in my life; you
tell me, that to believe that Christ dyed for sinners, will not save me; and
that to believe that Christ dyed for me in particular, will not save me; I pray
for God's sake tell me, what is that faith which will save me?


Minister. Friend, it is true, I am a stranger to you, but what I have spoken to
you, is nothing but the truth, and the way; the only way to be saved, is by
faith, true faith in Jesus Christ.


Str. Sir, what is that you call true faith, whereby we are joined to Christ,
justified, and saved?


Min. Friend, I Will tell you, it is not a believing that Christ dyed for sinners,
for that the Devils do; it is not a believing that Christ dyed for me in
particular, for that, 1. Multitudes of ungodly men, and reprobates, do, and may
do, in a way of presumption: and, 2. Many a doubting Believer wanting
assurance, dare not say, I believe that Christ dyed for me in particular; now
that conceit or presumption which an ungodly man may have, and a godly man may
want, cannot possibly be that faith which is justifying and saving.


Stranger. Pray what is it then?


Minister. Faith is, Friend, a receiving of Christ, as God the Father offers
him in the Gospel, as our King to rule us, our Prophet to teach us, as well as
our Priest, who made satisfaction, and now makes intercession for us; it is
also out of a sense of our lost estate in our selves, a resting on him alone
for salvation, John 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.


Str. Why Sir, do not I do all this?


Min. Friend, I fear not; for had you taken Christ as your King, you would not
dare to allow your self in sinful courses, as Swearing, and the like, which you
cannot deny but you are deeply guilty of; had you taken Christ as a Prophet,
you would have been taught by Him, by his Word and Spirit, and have gotten some
knowledge at least in these principles and fundamentals of Christianity: Had
you rested upon Christ alone for salvation, you would not have told me as you
did even now, that you hoped to be saved by your serving God, your good
prayers, and the like, not mentioning a word of Jesus Christ; which makes me
fear, that as yet you are a mere stranger to Christ, and faith in Christ.


Stranger. Sir, you say enough to make me despair, and drive me out of my wits.


Min. Friend, Despairing? Yea, that is it I would have, I Would have you to despair
in your self, that so you might come to believe and hope aright in Jesus
Christ: And whereas you speak of driving you out of your wits, no, Friend, I
would only drive you out of your sins, your vain presumptions, and carnal
confidences; a man is never indeed in his right wits, never comes to himself,
as the Prodigal did, Luke 15.7. till he repents, and believes aright in Jesus
Christ.


Stranger. Sir, what would you have me to do?


Minister. This is a good question indeed; were you pricked in the heart, as
those, Acts. 2.37. were you truly and thoroughly sensible of sin and misery,
were you troubled in mind; but then you must unsay what you said before, that
you never in your life questioned your spiritual estate, and that you have been
always of a strong faith toward God, etc.


Str. Sir, what if it should be so with me? what if I should be troubled?


Min. I Will tell you, Friend, what you should do, and what you will certainly
do, if through the rich grace of God to you, your troubles be in order to
conversion and salvation.


Str. What, I pray Sir?


Min. Friend, were you troubled indeed to some good purpose, you would put two
questions to your self, What have I done? And what shall I do to be saved? What
have I done? look backward upon the former part of your life, with shame and
sorrow for what you have done, with an unfeigned purpose of heart of turning
unto God, as David says, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies: And Jer. 8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, What have I done?


Stranger. Sir, for that other question, What shall I do? what will that put me
upon?


Minister. Friend, this question, What shall I do? looks forward; and if it be
in earnest, will put you upon sollicitous and careful thoughts how you may get
out of that state of sin and misery, which you find your self entangled and
involved in; will put you upon going to good Ministers, and experienced
Christians, inquiring of them the way to be saved; will put you upon searching
the Scriptures, and the reading good Books; upon casting off your old company,
and acquainting your self with the people of God (whom before you hated, and
cared not for) upon secret and earnest prayer to God, according to your
spiritual wants and necessities, will indeed make you to be a new creature.


Stranger. Well Sir, I see then when all is done, I must mend my life, and
become a new man.


Minister. Friend, you have said well, hold there; but do you think by your
mending your life, and becoming a new man, to satisfy God for what is past, and
that your good deeds shall make amends for your bad?


Str. I hope so Sir.


Min. See how you have forgot what even now I told you; no, Friend satisfaction
for what is past, or what is to come, is made to God the Father only by Jesus
Christ, by what he has done and suffered, not by any thing we can do or
suffer; When we have done all, we must say, we are unprofitable servants; we
have done that which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10.


Str. But Sir, how shall I come to have all this you speak of, any part and
share in the satisfaction made by Christ? and how shall I become a new
creature?


Minister. Friend, this is a good question, I like it very well, and will tell
you how, 1. You must know and acknowledge that you can do nothing of your self
by your own strength; neither believe, nor repent, or the like. 2. You must by
faith rely upon Christ, and Christ alone, who has fulfilled the Law,
satisfied his Fathers justice, and and paid the uttermost farthing, for all
poor lost Souls that come unto him. 3. You must pray hard, beg the Spirit of
God to help your infirmities, to work all your works in you, and for you; and
God has promised to give his holy Spirit to them which ask him, Luke 11.13.


Stranger. I believe in Jesus Christ, and repent with all my heart, what would
you have me do more?


Min. Friend, concerning faith in Jesus Christ, we have spoken somewhat before,
enough to startle you, and awake you out of your carnal security, if you did
indeed believe the Word of God. Now for your repentance, what do you do when
you repent?


Stranger. Why, I cry God mercy for all my faults, and desire him to Jorgive
me.


Minister. Friend, that is Prayer, it is not Repentance; to say Lord have mercy
on me, and so forth, is praying.


Str. Oh but Sir, I am sorry for my sins.


Min. Friend, You speak these words so smilingly and merrily, as if your heart
were not much orewhelmed with sorrow at the present for your sin.


Str. Yea, but Sir, I grieve for my sin, though now I am a little merry I
confess, I hope there is no harm in that.


Min. Tell me truly Friend, did you ever weep for sin in secret, between God
and your own soul?


Str. Sir, you put me hard to it, I do not remember that ever I shed any tears
for my sins: but some men are not apt to weep.


Min. What you say, Friend, is very true, some are naturally more apt to weep,
than others; but cannot you weep, and take on bitterly for other things, for
the death of a wife, father, child, or some special friend of yours?


Stranger. I confess then indeed, I have mourned greatly, and almost wept my
eyes out.


Minister. Friend, it seems somewhat strange, that you, who have tears in
abundance at command upon other sad occasions, should not have some tears also
for your sins against God.


Str. Well Sir, though I weep little, or not at all for my sins, yet I grieve
for my sins, and hate my sins, as much as another man.


Min. Friend, if your grief for sin were right, it would be 1. For sin as it is
sin, displeasing to God, a dishonor to God, and a defilement to your own soul.
2. Godly sorrow works repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. That is, amendment in heart and
life.


Str. I hope I grieve for sin, and hate it also, though you Sir object
something still against what I say.


Min. Friend, be not angry that I object so much, and so often; I do it only to
find and beat out the truth, and for your good.


Str. It may be so Sir.


Minister. Friend, You think and say you hate your sins, let me put a few
questions to you: 1. Do you hate all sins, one as well as another; he that
hates one Toad, hates all Toads. 2. Do you long to be the death of your sins?
is your hatred a mortal, a deadly hatred? do you mortify the deeds of the
flesh by the Spirit? Romans 8.13. 3. Deal plainly and truly, as you will answer
it at death and judgment, is there not some beloved sin that you are loath to
part with, loath to be told of by friends or Ministers, some sinful way of
profit or pleasure which you have no mind to leave, but allow your self in it?


Stranger. Sir, I have had a great deal of talk with our own Minister, who is a
very good Churchman, and he never said half so much to me.


Min. It may be so, but what say you to my last question, is there not some sin
that you allow your self in, which is as dear as your right eye and right hand
unto you?


Str. Sir, I am not bound to confess to you, you have no authority to examine
me.


Minister. No, Friend, I speak in love to you, desiring (if the Lord please) to
do some good to your soul; but let me tell you, I fear your conscience cries
guilty, you begin to be so touchy.


Stranger. Sir, it is my fault to be angry; but you do so pinch me: yet I am
persuaded you mean me no hurt; therefore if you will needs have my heart out of
me, it is even no better nor no worse; I confess I love the company of some that
are none of the best, and I cannot shake them off; the world is hard, and unless
a man have some tricks, there is no living in it; and I do walk in some ways
(not to mince the matter with you) which my conscience tells me I ought not to
walk in.


Min. Friend, You do well to be open with me, by the blessing of God it may be
for your good, therefore tell me a little farther, do you not sometimes take
the Name of God in vain?


Str. I hope not, or very little.


Min. What think you of such words as these, As I live, As I am an honest man,
As I am a Christian, Let me never stir, Let me never be believed more, if it be
not thus, and thus? What think you of, By my Faith, By my Troth, and, By our
Lady; and of saying, O Lord, O God, O Jesus, and the like, in common discourse?
which kind of words I heard fall from you, at least some of them, since you and
I met.


Stranger. Truly Sir, I think they were better forborne.


Minister. I think so too, for they look like Oaths and Curses, as a light and
irreverent using of the Name of God. Christ says, Matthew. 5.37. Let your
conversation be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these, comes
of evil.


Str. Sir, People will not believe what I say, unless I use such expressions as
these.


Min. It matters not much, so long as you speak the truth plainly; if men will
not believe you, the fault is theirs: and let me tell you, that those who are
wise men indeed, will believe you the less for the using such words as these,
and say, He that will swear, will lie; he that sticks not at dishonouring God,
by taking his Name in vain, will not stick at deceiving man by a lie, and
speaking an untruth.


Stranger. Sir, what you say, I confess is reason.


Minister. Friend, since I find you in so good a vein, and willing to discourse
it on (which I am glad of) tell me, do you not use to break the Sabbath?


Str. No Sir, I go to Church constantly when I am well, and nothing hinders me.


Min. But Friend, do not you accustom your self to lie long a Bed in the
morning, to sit idling at the doors that day; to talk of worldly business, to
make bargains, to hire or pay Laborers, to walk in the fields needlessly? do
you not use some Sports, Pastimes, and Recreations; do you not Travel that day
to, or prepare for Markets and Fairs, and the like?


Str. I confess I have done so, but I Will do so no more.


Min. Friend, you must desire God to humble you for these, as all other your
sins, to pardon you in the blood of Christ, and to strengthen you against them
for the time to come, by his grace, and holy Spirit working in you.


Stranger. Sir, I hope I am truly humbled for my sins, I grieve and am sorry
for them, I have had many afflictions, and smarted for my sins.


Minister. If your sorrow for sin be right, it is not so much because of
afflictions and judgments felt, or feared, as because you have offended God who
has been so good and merciful unto you: You will also loath and leave your
sins, as the abominable thing which God hates, Jerem. 44.4. Romans 7.15. The evil
which I hate.


Str. Sir, I hope also, that I hate my sins truly, and indeed.


Min. Friend, if the hatred of sin be right, then 1. You Will hate all sin, as I
told you before: Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate every false way:
2. And withal know this, that whoever hates sin, loves God, and his people.


Str. Why Sir, I make no question of it, but I do love God and his people.


Minister. Friend, if you do indeed love God, you do also keep his
Commandments, John 14.15. Not allowing your self in any known sin; and for the
godly, if you love them, you are then acquainted with them, delight in their
company, as David, Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee,
and of them that keep thy precepts. And Paul, when he was converted, joined
himself to the Disciples which were at Jerusalem, and at Damascus, Acts 9.19.
and 26. Now if we be unacquainted with such people, if shie of their society,
etc. it is in vain to think we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.4. if we do not love
the brotherhood, (1 Pet. 2.17.) the society of Saints, and that when they are
most strict and spiritual in their communication and conversation; if you be a
mere stranger to them, where is your love toward them? what say you to this,
Friend?


Stranger. Sir, you, in your talk with me, put me hard to it, Lord help me.


Min. Friend, your saying, Lord help me, puts me in mind to ask you what good
prayers do you use to say.


Stranger. Such as my friends taught me, the Ten Commandments, I believe in
God, etc. and the Lords prayer.


Minister. Friend, do you think the Ten Commandments, and I believe in God,
etc. be good Prayers?


Str. Yes Sir.


Min. No, Friend, the Ten Commandments are a rule of life, showing us what we
must do; and, I believe in God, etc. shows us what we ought to believe; but
they are not Prayers: and when we say them, we ask nothing at Gods hands.


Sir. They are good things, and it is good to learn them.


Min. Friend, that is true, it is good to learn them, and to understand the
meaning of them; to live according to the Commandments, and to believe
according to the Articles of our Christian Faith; but to think they are
Prayers, and to say them over instead of Prayers, that is your mistake.


Str. Sir, I confess my error therein.


Min. Friend, what think you of the Creed, I believe in God, etc? is that form
of words Scripture, the written Word of God, as well as the Ten Commandments,
and the Lords Prayer?


Stranger. Yes, surely Sir.


Minister. No, Friend, we find the Ten Commandments, in Exodus 20. and the Lords
Prayer, in Matthew. 6.9. but I believe in God, etc. in so many words together is
not in all the Bible; but that form of words was made up, and laid together by
men, yet it is agreeable to the Word of God, and so is of good use for all
Believers.


Str. Sir, I thank you; if you would explain and open something to me out of
the Ten Commandments, I believe in God, and the Lords Prayer, you would do me a
great courtesy.


Min. Friend, I am glad to find you willing to learn, but that is too long a
work for the little time we are like to be together; and therefore I would
advise you by all means when you come home, to learn good Catechisms, and to
talk with good Ministers, and good People, putting questions to them, and they
will help you.


Str. True Sir, but whilst we are together, it may be you may say something out
of them, which may do me good.


Minister. Why then, Friend, in the first Commandment, Thou shall have, etc.
what do you think God forbids in that Commandment?


Stranger. I think, the having more Gods than one.


Min. Friend, what you say, is a general truth; but what is it to have other
Gods?


Str. Sir, to have other Gods, is, I think, to worship the Sun, Moon, or Stars,
etc.


Min. Friend, let me tell you, the Commandment of God is spiritual, and
reaches the hearts of men; so that, to love, desire, joy, fear, trust in any
thing more than God, is to have other gods: thus we may make husbands, wives,
children, friends, trades, customers, etc. riches, honors, pleasures, etc. to
be our gods, when our hearts run out more after, are set more upon them, than
upon God.


Str. Sir, this is strange.


Min. Friend, as strange as it is, it is very true; for God says, Prove. 23.26.
Give me thine heart: and Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and it is certain,
to have our hearts upon any person or thing more than God, is to make that our
God, and our Idol.


Stranger. Sir then, by what you say, if any be more careful to please, or more
fearful to offend a husband, a wife, a master or mistress, a landlord, or
great man that rules over us, than we are careful to please, or fearful to
offend God, is to make them our gods.


Minister. Friend, it is certainly so, however it may seem to be new doctrine
to you. And for the second Commandment, Thou shall not make, etc. what think
you is forbidden in this Commandment?


Str. I think we are forbidden to worship Images, as the Papists do.


Min. Friend, that you say is true; but the Commandment of God has a farther
reach in it, and forbids not only the worshipping of Images, or God by Images,
but the worshipping of God any other way not appointed in his Word, Deuteronomy.
12.32. What thing soever I command you (he speaks of worship, ver. 31.) observe
to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.


Stranger. I confess Sir, this is plain Scripture, I cannot gainsay it.


Minister. Well Friend, for the third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name
of the Lord thy God in vain, etc. What think you is meant by the Name of God?


Str. To deal plainly with you Sir, I cannot well tell on a sudden, what is
meant by the Name of God, though I have said it over many and many a time.


Min. Friend, are not men known by their names, you, and I, and others? why
then the Name of God is that whereby God makes himself known, by his Titles,
Attributes, Ordinances, Word, and Works.


Str. Sir, I think what you say is right, but I do not well understand you. I
pray tell me, what you mean by Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word, and Works?


Min. Friend, I like this inquiring of yours well, and I will tell you, 1. By
the title of God, is meant Lord, Jehovah, Jah, etc. 2. An Attribute of God is
that which is spoken of God; as that he is a Spirit, infinite, eternal, and
unchangeable: that God is Almighty, most wise, most holy, most merciful, just,
faithful, etc. 3. By Ordinances, I understand every part of that worship which
God has appointed, as Prayer, Preaching, Reading, Hearing, Singing Psalms, the
Sacraments, etc. 4. By the Word, I mean the Scriptures, wherein God reveals
his Will, and makes himself known to the children of men. 5. By Works, I
understand the works of Creation and Providence, whereby God reveals much of
himself to men who eye God in them.


Stranger. What is it then to break this Commandment?


Minister. It is to profane, or abuse any thing whereby God makes himself
known.


Str. I hope Sir you will tell me something also out of the fourth Commandment.


Min. Friend, why is that day we keep holy, called the Lords day, and the
Sabbath? for these are names which the Scriptures give that day, Rev. 1.10.
Genesis 2.23.


Stranger. Sir, I never heard that question put before.


Minister. Friend, it is called the Lords day, because the Lord appointed it to
be kept holy, and that in remembrance of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the great
work of Redemption wrought by him. And it is called the Sabbath (which
signifies rest) because it is to be kept by us as an holy rest unto the Lord.


Str. What must we do on the Sabbath day?


Min. Friend, we must spend the whole day in worshipping God publicly and
privately.


Str. Sir, may not works of mercy and necessity be done that day?


Min. Yes, Friend, if they be indeed works of necessity and mercy, and not so
in pretense only.


Str. Sir, you said the whole day must be kept holy; what mean you by the whole
day?


Min. Friend, by the whole day, I mean full Four and twenty hours; for the
Sabbath must be as long as any other day of the week besides.


Stranger. I pray Sir, what must we not do on the Sabbath?


Minister. Friend, we must not make that day, 1. A day of idleness, barely
resting from labor, as our Beasts do. 2. Nor a day of worldly business, in
buying, selling, or the like. 3. Nor a day of sports and recreations much less.
4. Nor a day of sinning especially, as in drunkenness, stealing, and the like.
5. Nor a day only of outside devotions, but we must labor to worship God in
spirit also, and to enjoy some spiritual communion with God in his holy
Ordinances.


Str. Sir, but am I not at liberty as to my thoughts and words that day?


Min. No, Friend, for God is a Spirit, his day and worship spiritual, so that
we ought to lay aside all unnecessary thoughts and words that day, (as well as
works) about worldly employments and recreations, Isa. 58.13. Not speaking
thine own words on the Sabbath.


Str. Sir, I hope you will say something to me also concerning the other
Commandments.


Minister. Yes Friend; but more briefly, lest our time should fail us; what
think you is meant by Father and Mother in the fifth Commandment?


Stranger. Sir, I think, my Father that begot me, and my Mother that bore me.


Min. Friend, that is true you say, but there is more in it; by Father and
Mother, we must understand Magistrates and Ministers, and all our Superiors in
any kind whatsoever.


Str. Sir, and what is it to honor my Superiors?


Min. Friend, it is to give them that inward and outward respect which is due
to them, and to obey the lawful commands of those who are over us.


Str. Sir, does this command require only our duty to Superiors?


Min. Yes, it injoined also the duties of Superiors to Inferiors.


Str. Sir, I pray tell me what the sixth, seventh, eighth, and nine
Commandments require of us?


Min. Briefly thus, the sixth Commandment enjoineth all lawful endeavors for
good of the life; the seventh of the chastity; the eighth, of the wealth and
outward estate; the ninth, of the good name of our selves and others; each
Commandment forbidding whatsoever is contrary, or opposite thereunto.


Stranger. The tenth Commandment also, I pray Sir speak to.


Minister. The tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet, etc. requires not only
a full contentment with our own condition, but a right and charitable frame of
heart toward our Neighbor, and all that is his.


Str. Sir, I thank you for all this good discourse of yours, I have rid many a
mile with some Ministers, and never had half so much from them.


Min. Friend, it may be so; but was not you your self much in fault, did you
put questions to them, such as I have now put to you, and you to me?


Str. No, Sir, to speak the truth, and I am afraid I am much to blame for it.


Min. One word more before we part; I presume, Friend, you have been at the
Sacrament, and received the Communion.


Stranger. Yes, many a time, at Easter, methinks, I have a mind to it.


Minister. Friend, and why not at other times also: Is your foul an hungry, and
does the spiritual appetite come to you but once a year?


Str. Sir, that is the time we use to go, and then the rest of my Neighbors
receive.


Min. Friend, then it seems you go much for custom and company; but tell me,
did you ever get any good by the Sacraments?


Str. Sir, I hope no hurt.


Min. Friend, they who live ignorantly, or scandalously, eat and drink
unworthily, are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and so eat and drink
judgment, or damnation to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.


Str. I hope I go better prepared than so.


Min. How do you prepare your self?


Str. Sir, I give my name to the Minister aforehand, I put on my best apparel,
I fast that morning, lay the blessed bread and wine next my heart; yea, I am in
love and charity with all men, and forgive give those that have wronged me with
all my heart.


Minister. Friend, that which in your answer fell last from you, is quickly
said, not so soon done; how can you say, you are in love and charity with all
men, etc. when your own heart tells you, and all your Neighbors can testify,
that for such and such a man you cannot give him a good word, or a good look,
you express much joy when any evil befalls him or his, where is your love then?


Stranger. Sir, you cannot imagine what a deal of wrong he has done me for many
years together, my heart cannot but rise against him, whenever I see him; but I
hope to be eaven with him, and to pay him all I owe him before I dye.


Min. Look you now, Friend, what is become of your charity, and of forgiving
with all your heart, those words were but wind, your heart deceives you, you
have expressed a great deal of malice and hatred in what you said last.


Str. Sir, I am sorry if I have offended you.


Minister. Alas Friend, you do not offend me, it troubles me indeed to see how
you offend God, and delude your own soul; and how the Devil cheats you, makes
you to have better thoughts a great deal of your self, than there is any cause
for.


Stranger. Sir, I hope, for all this, that I live in charity, and do as I would
be done by.


Min. Friend, it is well if your hope do not make you ashamed; if any man had
wronged you, would you not have him to acknowledge his fault to you, and to
make restitution for all the wrong you sustained?


Str. Yes Sir, you may be sure, I think it all the reason in the world I
should.


Min. Now Friend, let Conscience speak out, did not you at such and such a time
defraud, and go beyond such and such a man, working upon his simplicity, or
necessity? have you not put off bad wares, and bad money many a time? have not
you spoken an untruth, told many a lie in bargaining? and did you ever yet go
to them whom you wronged, did you ever make them satisfaction? and where is now
your doing as you would be done by?


Stranger. I must confess my heart smites me, upon what you say.


Minister. Friend, if your heart condemns you, God is greater than your heart,
and knows all things by you, 1 John 3.20. And look to it, least the Devil and
your heart deceive you with shows and shadows of faith, repentance, love and
charity, instead of the graces themselves in truth and reality.


Str. I thank you Sir for the good counsel you give me, and I pray God I may
follow it.


Min. Friend, I remember in the beginning of our discourse, you told me of your
saying over the Ten Commandments, Lords Prayer, and I believe in God, etc.
every morning, and every night.


Str. Sir, I did so, and would you would say something to me concerning the
Lords Prayer, and I believe in God, etc. as you have concerning the Ten
Commandments.


Minister. Say you so Friend, I cannot withstand so good a motion, tell me
therefore, do you think that the bare saying over these words, Our Father, etc.
is acceptable service to God?


Stranger. Sir, I hope so, why else did our friends teach it us when we were
children?


Min. Friend, your Parents and friends did well to teach you to say the words
by heart; but it had been better if they had also taught you the meaning of
them, that so when you came to years of discretion, you might have been able to
go it over with understanding.


Str. That is true Sir, and I hope I understand it.


Min. Friend, what do you pray for, or ask at Gods hands, when you say,
Hallowed be thy Name?


Str. Why? [Thy Kingdom come.]


Min. Friend, [Thy Kingdom come.] is another part of the Prayer; but what is
the thing you beg for, and would have, when you say, Hallowed, etc.


Str. Truly Sir, I cannot tell you.


Minister. Friend, you have said over the words 100 and 100 times, but it seems
never said them with understanding, and surely that is not right, for Paul
says, 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also: That is, so that others who join with us may understand us,
much more we understand our selves, and our own meaning.


Stranger. Sir, what should I think of, and pray for, when I say those words,
Hallowed, etc?


Min. Friend, you should pray and desire of God, that he would order all things
in the world for his own honor and glory; and that he would enable you, and
others, to glorify and honor him in a due and right use of his Ordinances,
Word and Works, or whatever he makes himself known by.


Str. Truly Sir, to deal plainly with you, I never thought of, or desired any
such thing, as often as I have said those words.


Min. Friend, I cannot conveniently go over the other Petitions in the Lords
Prayer with you: What has been said already in discourse about the first
Petition, Hallowed, etc. may abundantly convince you of your saying you knew
not what, and in a very ignorant and formal way.


Stranger. Truly Sir I am, I confess, ignorant, yet I am willing to learn.


Minister. Friend, I believe you are, or else you would not have held on the
discourse so long, and so freely with me; for I fall in company with some upon
the Road, who will by no means speak one word with me concerning God, and the
things of God; and if I motion such talk a little, they are either altogether
dumb and silent, or shift out of my company, saying, They must ride faster,
that their business requires haste; or they will lagg behind, or go out of the
way to speak with a friend, and some fall a quarrelling, saying, What have you
to do to Catechize me? I will not learn of you, every Tub must stand upon its
own bottom, etc.


Str. Sir, If I had in my younger days been so willing to learn, as I should
have been, I had not been so far to seek in these things as now I am, nor so
ignorant as you find me to be.


Minister. Well said Friend, that was a savoury speech of yours, I like it very
well, and therefore am willing to have a word or two with you about the Creed,
I believe in God, etc. before we part, though much of our former discourse has
been about things to be believed.


Stranger. I thank you Sir, I pray speak on, I will hear you.


Min. Friend, I hope you remember what I told you even now, that this form of
words, I believe in God, etc. is not Scripture, though it be agreeable to the
Word of God; and that it is not a Prayer, not to be said for a Prayer. Let me
now hear you say your Belief.


Str. I believe in God, etc. and I believe the Holy Catholic Holy-Church, etc.


Min. Friend, What is that you say, Holy Catholic Holy-Church; you mistake the
words, I fear therefore you know not the meaning of them, it is not Holy
Catholic Holy-Church, but the word is Catholic, and what mean you by
Catholic?


Stranger. Sir, I cannot tell, it is a hard word methinks.


Minister. Friend, it is so, but you that say it over and over, day by day,
should have asked the meaning of it, that you might have known what you had
said.


Str. I pray Sir, what is meant by it?


Min. Friend, it is originally a Greek word, and signifies Universal, or
General; so that to believe the Catholic Church, is to believe that there is
an Universal Church, and that God has a people up and down scattered in
several places, and in all ages of the world.


Str. Sir, I never understood so much before.


Min. Friend, you perceive again by this, that you have lived very ignorantly,
mindless of knowledge, and of the things of God, and of the great concernments
of your Soul, and of Eternity. Let me give you some good counsel before we
part, it may be you and I shall never meet again; and as we never saw the faces
one of another (for ought we know) before this day, so possibly we never may
see each other again till the day of Judgments that great and terrible day of
the Lord. Let me advise you, and the Lord persuade your heart, 1. To make
Conscience of secret Prayer, begging of God for Christ his sake, that he would
make you sensible of the ignorance, of the blindness of the mind of the
hardness and impenitency of the heart; of the carelessness and mindlesness of
the spirit, in the great things of grace and salvation, be earnest with God to
give you knowledge, and consider that the soul be without knowledge is not
good, Prove. 19.2. As also, for repentance from dead Works, and a true saving
faith in Jesus Christ. Beg of God an heart, to seek first the Kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, and that you may be of those who strive to enter in at
the strait gate, and of those violent ones who take the Kingdom of Heaven by
force, etc. 2. Be careful to hear good Ministers preach, remembering what most
concerns you in what you hear. 3. Be much in searching the Scriptures, and
reading of good Books, Catechisms, and such like. 4. Make choice of good
Company, of such as fear God, and walk precisely, holily, righteously, and
soberly in this present evil world, and improve such acquaintance by good
conference with them, putting such questions to them as may make for your
edification, and they, let me tell you, will be as glad of your society, as you
of theirs. 5. Be sure if you have a Family, to set up the worship of God in
your Family, reading the Scriptures, and praying morning and evening with the
household, Catechizing, and instructing your Children and Servants, if you have
a^y. 6. And lastly, be strict in sanctifying the Sabbath, spend that day well,
though the rest of the Neighbors be loose and careless therein; and though
men, ungodly men, hate you, mock and persecute you, it matters not, so long as
God loves you. Remember, that 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And that of Christ, Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are
they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
God: And ver. 11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, etc.

And now Friend, fare you well and the Lord bless you.


Stranger. And you also, good Sir, I hope I shall remember you, and some of
your words to me as long as I live; only let me desire one favor of you, that
I may know your name, and where you live.


Minister. That you shall Friend, my name is so and so, and I live at such a
place, and if your occasions call you thither, I shall be glad to see you; and
let me know your name, and where you live, and possibly if I come that way, I
may see you. Once more Farewell.


FINIS.
TREATISE OF Christian Conference.
MY design being to bear up the honor, the necessity, and usefulness of
Christian Conference (too much neglected, even by the, best of men) it will not
be wholly impertinent to bear down some of that unruliness and irregularity,
The Tongues Vnruliness.
which the Tongues of too many are too much guitly of. The Apostle James, as it
were, bores the black tongues of men with a red hot Iron of sharp, but just
rebuke. verse. 6.
The Tongue is a Fire; a world of iniquity, sets on fire the course of
Nature, and it is set on fire of Hell. For every kind of beasts, and of birds,
and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of
mankind: But the Tongue can no man Tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison. Its untamedness and unruliness appears in its great miscarriage, and
that both in reference to God and man. In reference to God in speaking.
In reference to God: we are too tongue tied in speaking both to God in Prayer,
Praises, and Confessions, and of God with others. To God: He was a great man,
To God.
and you will say, as good as great, who being a man of few words, and of much
prayer, was thought to speak more to God than men: Possibly, that man after
Gods own heart, was such a one, who says very truly, though of himself, Ps.
119.164. and 109.4.
Seven times a day do I praise thee: and again, I give my self unto prayer.
Possibly some Popish Votaries, in a superstitious way, possibly also, a man may
be found in our days, who is very slow to speak, but of a musing,
medirabundous spirit, in holy ejaculations, Colloquies, and Soliloquies betwixt
God and himself, much also in prayer by himself, and with others; but such a
man, wherever he dwells, (I believe he dwells alone by himself) is a very
great rarity, one of many thousands, who speaks more to God, than to men.
Again, Of God and for God.
We are all born, and live too much tongue-tied, as to our Speech of God, to
and with others; Omission.
though we have a large and spacious field, very pleasant, Fragrant, flowery
and Odoriferous for our Discourse to walk up and down, and expatiate it self
in; to wit, God in his essence and subsistencies, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, God in his Decrees, in his works of Creation and Providence; God in
his Covenants made with man, that of Works, and that of Grace; God in his Word,
Law, and Gospel, in his commands, promises, and threatenings. Again touching
Christ, his person, natures, and offices, his humiliation and Exaltation; As
also touching the Holy Ghost, his beginning and carrying on the work of God, in
the Elect, from the first to the last: Add hereunto, the many and great
privileges and benefits, which the effectually called ones are and shall be
made partakers of by Christ in life, at death, at the Resurrection, and to
Eternity. I might enlarge, but one would think in what is said, there were room
enough and enough for all the nimble ^^ngued in the world, to busy, tire, and
weary themselves in. O how sad then is it to have so little of God in our
Mouths? to observe how people, who have their faces Zion-ward, can spend hour
after hour together, it may be day after day, and yet scarce have a word
concerning God, Christ, the Spirit, or the great affairs of their souls, and
of Eternity, from one end of the prattle to the other. This fruit indeed is
bad, and bitter, but yet the root is worse: The true and only reason, The
reason, God is little in our hearts Mat. 12.34, 35.
I know of, is this, God is not much in our hearts, and therefore but little in
our Mouths; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. A good
man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things, and an
evil man etc. The Psalmist gives the ungodly man a black brand, saying, God is
not in all his thoughts; Ps. 10.4.
and let it be for an humiliation, and lamentation, that God is no more in the
hearts and Months of the best amongst us.

Secondly, Having laid down a little, and but a little, of the Tongues
Unruliness in reference to God, it is sinful silence, neither speaking much to
Gods nor of God, which is its grievous miscarriage by way of omission: Let some
enquiry be made after the Tongues positive guilt by way of Commission, 2.
Commission.
it is speaking irreverently, lightly, or profanely, and that in reference to
God, and so speaking too much of God. For instance, First, 1 Titles abused.
There is a frequent abuse of the Titles and Attributes of God in our common
discourse, saying, O Lord, O God, O Christ, O Jesu, O dear God, O sweet
Savior, and the like, and this upon very trifling occasion; as when one meets
an acquaintance unexpectedly, out fly these words, or the like, and usher in
no more but an, how do thou? who thought to see thee here to day? or, a
whence come thou? or whither art thou going? Is not this to play with Sacred
things? and to take the name of the Lord our God in vain? A question also may
be, whether, when we hear onesneeze, to cry God bless you, or Christ help you,
be a bounden duty, which upon this occasion God requires at our hands. Its the
judgment of a worthy Writer of this Nation (who was no dishonor to the Nation)
that there is more cause with us to pray for a man Coughing, than Sneezing; for
Coughing argues the Cold taken to be too strong for Nature to eject it; but
sneezing shows Natures strength in mastering the Cold taken, and casting of
it out. When I was young, as I remember, I read it in the French Academy, that
Sneezing was a good sign of a bad cause, of natures strength, though cold were
taken. Add also this question, Whether to apply the incommunicable Attributes
of God, as Allmighty, Infinite, and the like, to persons or things here below,
as to say, I love or hate such a person or thing infinitely; might not such
language well be spared? Secondly, 2 Scriptures abused.
The Tongue trips, and falls foully, when it makes bold with Scriptures, using,
or abusing rather, the phrase and language of it, in jesting, to provoke mirth
in Company, In jesting.
or in wresting it to maintain erroneous opinions, as seducers do: I grant that
there is a facetiousness, a witty cheariness in discourse, which being well
ordered, may not only be lawful, but a duty: yet to jest it in the words of
Scripture; as when asked, why did not you come at such a time to such a place,
as you promised? To answer merrily, saying, I have a Farm, etc. I pray you,
have me excused; or I have a Wife, and could not come; and an hundred the like
expressions, which the Devil, and profane wits of men, can forge and fancy;
surely this way of tossing the word of God, to and fro, falls within the
Compass of that jesting, which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.4.
is not Convenient. The Original word used, which the Philosophers ranked among
one of their virtues, the Holy Apostle puts in the Catalogue of vices, as
fornication, covetousness, foolish talking, Verse. 3.
and jesting. Talking scurrilously and lasciviously, is always bad enough,
especially when clothed with Scripture Language; that is a breach of many
commands together. Jesting in Scripture phrases, is inbeseeming the gravity and
fanctity of Christianity. Remember, it is ill jesting with edged Tools; such
surely is the word of God, yea, Heb. 4.12.
it is sharper than any two edged sword. Again, the holy Word of God is
miserably abused, and profaned, In wresting the Scripture.
in the wresting and misapplying it, to the countenancing and patronizing of
errors and heresies, or of vicious words and practices. 2 Pet. 3.16.
This the Apostle Complains of, saying, That in Paul's Epistles, are some things
hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Unlearned, and
unstable: Ignorance is the Root of instability. Again ignorance, and
instability, are the Mother, and Nurse, of most, or all the corrupt opinions,
and ways, which are taken up and walked in by the mistaken children of men:
and one great Engine which Satan uses, in his seductions, is the wresting,
misconstruing, and the misapplying the Holy Scriptures; making men believe that
the Spirit of God speaks that in the word, which indeed never was at all the
meaning of the Holy Ghost. The word in the Original significantly points at
this, alluding to tormentors, who lay men on the Rack, and make them to speak
that which they never meant, or thought; so that this wresting, is to torment
and rack the Scriptures; and, which is dreadful to think, all this is to their
own destruction. As if a man sadly distempered, walking in a pleasant Spring or
Grove, should cut up a young Twig, and be twisting and twining of it, till he
had made a with of it, and then go and hang himself therein. Thus the Sabbath
break^ who profane the day by idleness, The Sabbath breaker.
(...) speaking their own words, by finding their own pleasure, upon Gods holy
day; if rebuked, will plead, saying, Mar. 2.27.
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Thus the greedy
worldlings, The worldling. Amos. 2 7. Hab. 2.6.
who pant after the dust of the Earth, and all the day long are lading
themselves with thick Clay, mind nothing but Earth, Earth, Earth; if
questioned, why do ye thus? why spend ye your strength for that which is not
Bread? and labor for that which will not satisfy? they have a ready answer, 1 Timothy 5.8.
If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he
has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. The Glutton. Phil. 3.19.
Luke 16.19.
Thus the gluttons and voluptuous Epicures of our Age, who make their bellies
their gods, faring deliciously every day, who care for nothing but to eat the
fat, and drink the sweet; if a reason of this their brutish sensuality be
demanded, They Will presently tell you, Eccl. 2.24.
There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that
he should make his soulenjoy go^ his labor. The worst of sinners.
Yea, the worst of sinners, (...) on swearers, drunkards, adulterers, liars,
cheaters, and such like, will wrest and pervert Scriptures to their own
delusion, obduration, and destruction.

By swearing.
3. The Tongues of men grow black and bloody with Oaths of several sorts and
sizes. 1. Blasphemous Oaths, by the parts and members of Christ, by his
wounds, blood. 2. Popish Oaths, by Saints, by our Lady Mary, by John, etc. Or
by Idols, See Learned Dr. Downam on the 3. Co.
by the Mass, by the Rood. 3. Pharisaical Oaths, by Creatures, as the light,
the fire, the bread, the drink, etc. Or 4. Ridiculous Oaths, by Lakin, by
Cock-by-Pye, by Jekins, Bodikins, etc. Add hereunto, those diminutive
disputable Oaths, (as some would have them) as by my Faith, by my Troth, by
Yea and by Nay, God's me (God is with me) God's so (by God it is so) as I live,
as I am an honest man, as I am a Gentleman, as I am a Christian, and such like.
Surely the forbearing of this kind of language would have more of wisdom,
peace, and safety in it.

4. By cursing.
Tongues of Sinners do bespot and bespatter themselves and others in Cursing
and Maledictions, as, a Pox, or, a Plague on you, the Devil take you; let me
never stir more, speak more, be believed more, if the thing spoken of be not
thus, or thus; Let me be hanged, whipped, let me be a Vagabond and beg my
bread, etc. I might add, Damn me, Ram me, etc. and such new-coin'd
execrations: But possibly it may be prudence to forbear the mentioning any more
in this kind. The Devil has witty inventions to destroy men, and men to
destroy themselves. This should be, O let it be for a lamentation among us, and
the rather because this cursed disease of cursing is grown Catholic, and
epidemical; superiors through the pride and haughtiness of their Spirits curse
inferiors; and inferiors through discontent and murmuring curse Superiors,
yea Curse their King, Isa. 8.21.
and their God, and look upwards. There are Parents and Masters who curse their
Children, and servants, and that before theirfaces; and withal, Children and
Servants Curse them as fast behind their backs. In brief, the Cursing Tongue
spares neither man nor beast; Have you not heard how Draymen, Carrmen,
Coachmen, Carryers, ourse their Horses, and that for not doing what the poor
creature is not able to do? how gamesters will Curse their Cards and Dice? how
some passionate ones in hunting or hawking, curse the Hawks and Hounds? all
which argues simpleness, as well as profaneness? And have you not read, Because
of Swearing (or Cursing) the Land mourns? Jer. 23.10.
And do you not believe (if you do not I do) that Atheism, Unbelief, and
Profaneness, are the cursed root of this accursed fruit? This transgression of
the wicked says in my heart, Ps. 36.1.
there is no fear of God before his eyes. You see I am hot and angry; I hope
you will Charitably judge me zealous rather for God, and against the Cursing
generation of this Age: and yet before I go off, let me make my marking Iron
red hot, as hot as fire can make it, lapping it upon the naked back,
stigmatizing and burning to the very bone, such who in their mad moods tremble
not to curse either Moses or Aaron, Magistrates or Ministers. Solomon (the
wisest of Kings) gives his Counsel, Eccl. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich in thy
Bedchamber; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter. And God by Moses of old, Exe. 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor Curse the ruler of thy people. And for
Ministers, no wonder if they be sorely lashed with the scourge of Tongues, when
Jeremiah himself escaped not, but complains, Woe is me, my Mother, that thou
have born me a man of strife, and a man of contention, to the whole Earth: I
have neither lent on Usury, nor men have lent to me on Usury, yet every one of
them does Curse me: A pox on these black-Coats, Priests (in contempt) Baals
Priests, and the like: the worst words in some mouths are thought too good for
them.

2. In reference to men.
Having spoken thus far something concerning the Tongues miscarriage, in
reference to God, speaking but little to God in Prayer, or of God in Company,
yet too much using, or abusing rather, his Names, and Titles in common talk,
in jesting with or wresting of the Holy Scriptures, as also in swearings and
cursings; I proceed to treat also concerning the Tongues Unruliness in
reference to men, which may be considered,

1. In general, Defamation. Tit. 3.1, 2.
In general, Defamation, or words injurious to the good Names of others. Paul
warnes Titus to put the people whom he taught, in mind, to speak evil of no
man, or to blaspheme no man, as the original word carries it, not to blot or
hurt the name or fame of others. Beza thinks that Paul in this expression is a
fair Expositor of David's words, He that backbiteth not with his Tongue; Psalm.
15.3.
One of the Psalmists negative Characters of the man, verse. 1.
Who shall abide in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell in his holy hill:
verse. 3.
adding this, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor. This sin of
defamation is much heightened, 1. By the reach and duration of it, which is far
and long, Ps. 120. verse. 3, 4. Ainsworth in Locum.
What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false
Tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with Coals of Juniper; which some say will
be burning a year together. 2. By the dignity of the persons defamed, speaking
evil of Dignities, despising dominion, a kind of old Levellers. Or Thirdly, 2
Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
from the relation they stand in to the persons defamed. Thus for servants to
defame their Masters, or Children their Parents, Scholars their Teachers, or
Subjects their Sovereign, or people the Ministers, carries a sharp accent of
aggravation with it. For Absalom to disparage his Father the King, and the
Jews to flander the Prophet, was very heinous; yet they were deeply guilty of
it, witness their own words, Jer. 18.18.
Come, said they, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah: what devices?
Come, and let us smite him with the Tongue, and let us not give heed to any of
his words. Witness also the Prophets complaint, Jer. 20.10.
I have heard (says he) the defaming of many; report, say they, and we will
report it. All my familiars watehed for my halting, saying, peradventure he
will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our
revenge on him. It Is methinks remarkable, to observe Satan's wily designs, in
provoking the Jews to slander and defame Jeremiah; one was, to hold them in
their infidelity and unbelief, let us smite him with the Tongue, and let us
not give heed to any of his words; another was, to give them a Color, and
Cloak, for their rage against him, and persecution of him, report, say they,
and we will report, and we shall take our revenge on him. Rivile, Mat. 5.11.
and persecute, go together. The Devil plays the same game still, stirs up
the profane generation of men, to bespatter the faithful Ministers of Christ,
to speak all manner of evil against them falsely, to brand them for Hypocrites,
traitors, 1 Ki. 18.17. Act. 24.5.
Rebels, troublers of Israel, as Eliah was; for pestilent fellows, as Paul was;
yea, our Blessed Savior himself, Jesus Christ, is stigmatized by the bloody
Jews, Jam. 8.48.
Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? And why all
this? As before, to nuzzle up the people in ignorance and unbelief, incense
their rage and fury, and to make an unjust persecution, to look like a just
execution. You know the Primitive Christians must first be put into Bears
Skins, and then baited with Dogs, and worried. Take away a man's good name, and
you take away his life; yea, pursue a dog in the Market, and cry, mad, mad, and
every man's hand is up against him, and glad is he that first knocks him down,
and kills him.

Thus in general, the Tongue is injurious to others in a way of defamation.
Take it more distinctly in these particulars. Particulars. I. Tale bearing.


1. In its Tale-bearing; wherever they come, talking of this body, or that,
what they said, or what they did, and all usually to the prejudice of the
parties spoken of. This Talebearer usually drives on his Trade, by undertaking
to be a great Intelligencer, knows what is done in every Corner, and much of
his work lies in revealing Secrets; so Solomon tells us, Prove. 11.13. A
talebearer reveals secrets, and the fruit thereof most an end, is but the
kindling of strife between neighbor and neighbor, friend and friend, Prove.
26.20. So Solomon again, Where no wood is, there the fire goes ont; so, where
there is no Talebearer, the strife cease. Verse. 21. As Coals are to burning
Coals, and wood to fire, so is a Contentious man to kindle strife. And the
fruit of both, to wit, Tale-bearing and strife, is most commonly the wounding
the good name, the blasting of the Credit and Reputation one of another; which
to preserve, and promote, is the scope of the ninth Commandment. For, The
words of a Talebearer, are as wounds; and they go down into the innermost
parts of the belly, Prove. 18.8. and 26.22. It Is often in the Proverbs. The
Talebearer is so bad a member in a Commonwealth, as that God himself has by
Moses particularly, and expressly enacted a Law against such persons, and
their practices, Thou shall not go up and down, as a Talebearer among thy
people. It Is observable, how the word rendered a Talebearer, may as well be
rendered a Peddler, and that very significantly: Ainsworth. on the place. Rakil.
for as the Peddler goes from Town to Town, from House to House with his pack
on his back, to vend his wares, and put off the petty things he Trades in; so
the Talebearer busieth himself, in hearing and speaking of the weaknesses, or
miscarriages of others, much to the prejudice and disparagement of those who
are spoken of, and little or nothing to the edification or benefit of those who
are spoken to; and all upon low, carnal, sinful grounds, and ends: so that the
Talebearer has but a bad, a miserable Trade of it. Yet farther, the Holy
Ghost in the New Testament, sets a black brand, as black as Hell, upon this
sort of Men and Women, and calls them Devils, false accusers, or make-bates, 2 Timothy 3.3. for as the Devil accuses God to man, as to Adam; and man to God, as
he did Job; and is by way of notorious eminency, styled, The accuser of the
brethren, Rev. 12.10. So the Tale-bearers work is to accuse men to men; and the
truth, is pride, malice, flattery, and self-seeking, are the weights and
wheels, which set this clock, the Tale-bearers Tongue, a going. I might add
here, that the credulous receiver of Tales, is as bad as the Talebearer; the
receiver, as the Thief; both robbing their neighbor of his good name: the one
having the Devil in his Tongue, the other in his ear, possibly both in their
hearts.

Rash censures.
2. The Tongue miscarries in reference to others, not a little, in rash
Censoriousness, as to their words and actions, yea, their persons, and estates,
as to grace, and glory; hearing the words of others (let me so express it) with
the left ear, observing their actions with the left eye, taking all with the
left hand, putting the worst interpretation upon words or actions, looks and
gestures, when all that is said, or done, is fairly capable of a good
construction, and a good meaning; which construction to give, and meaning to
take, is no violation of the royal law of Charity, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7.
thinks no evil, believes all things, hops all things, to wit, puts the
best sense upon words and actions, which they may rationally bear. For though
Charity is neither blind nor foolish, to believe all that is said, Verse. 4.
or hope all that is promised; yet Charity is kind, makes the best of all, that
may possibly or probably be made. God and Nature has given us right Ears,
Eyes, and Hands, and the grace of Charity does use them, does all things
dexterously. But the foulest and harshest censures, are those which are passed
upon the final state and eternal condition of others, as to say, such an one is
a reprobate, is damned, and with the Devil: If thou have no good grounds for
thy hopes, yet what have thou for thy despair? surely, in these secret things,
thou art not of Gods Counsel; Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's
servant? to his own Master he stands, or falls; is here applicable.

Scoffing.
3. The Tongue, which should be our glory, is certainly a shame and dishonor to
men, who mock at, or insult over others in their infirmities criminal, or
penal: To scoff at others for their gross and sottish ignorance, for their
swinish drunkenness, sodomitical uncleanness, or such like, I am sure is none
of the virtues or duties commanded in the Decalogue. Charity, (or love, which
is the sum of the Commandments) rejoices not in iniquity, 1 Cor. 13.6. To twit
and upbraid others with their natural infirmities, is an high provocation to
the most High; witness that dreadful story of the forty and two Children
mocking Elisha, saying, Go up thou bald-head; Kings 2.23, 24.
two she Bears coming out of the Wood, and tearing them. One would think their
Age, being Children, might have been some extenuation of their fact; and
probably ill bred Children, yea, set on by their Idolatrous Parents to deride
the Prophet, and that for his baldness; but all this would not excuse them; but
wrath is revealed from Heaven against them, in the loss of their lives; or
against their wretched Parents rather, in the loss of their Children. Thus to
flout at, and in scornful language to trample upon the meaner sort of the
people, who have scarce bread to put into their mouths, or rags to hide their
nakedness, is an heinous evil in the sight of God; Whosoever mocketh the poor,
reproacheth his maker; and he that is glad at Calamities, shall not be
unpunished, Prove. 17.5. Reprocheth his Maker, to wit, his own Maker, or the
poor man's Maker, not owning his sovereignty and wisdom in his various
allotments of some to wealth, of others to poverty; and in not answering God's
Holy and gracious ends in his different distributions of things below. Thou art
rich, thy neighbor's poor, why? not that he should be despised, but releaved
by thee; God made him not to be the object of thy scorn, but of thy love,
pity, and bounty. This sin of rejoicing in the hurt or harms of others, has
much of inhumanity in it, makes men like that sycophantizing Doeg, who betrayed
David (as he thought) into the hands of Saul, glorying in it, Psalm. 52.1. Why
boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? or like to the accursed
Children of Edom, who in the day of Jerusalem (to wit, Jerusalem's distress)
said, raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof, Psalm. 137.7. Obad.
10.9. Or like to the bloody Jews, who Crucifying the Lord of Glory, did it
with most horrid revilings, and barbarous insultations, Matthew. 27.40. Or last
of all, which is worst of all, this sin makes men as like the Devil, as ever
they can look; who if he could rejoice, would rejoice in nothing more, than in
making men like himself, sinful, and miserable.

Double Tongued.
4. And lastly, the double-Tongue, speaking one thing to this body, another to
that, must needs be a false and faultering tongue, on the one side, or on the
other. To be double tongued, is blameworthy in all, as well as Deacons; as
speaking hot and cold, 1 Timothy 3.8.
with the same breath. The reason why it is so bad, is, because it argues a
double heart in the breasts and bosoms of men. The heart doubles first, and
then the Tongue: A double minded man is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1.8.
and in his words also, and Cogitations. This double minded man, is either the
dissembler in discourse, who speaks one thing, but thinks another; or rather a
sceptick in judgment, as a learned Expositor carries it; Beza, in locum.
a man unsettled, of a doubtful mind, now inclining to this opinion or way, and
then to that, not being established in the true Religion: many such were in the
primitive times, and are in our days also. Yet dissembling in discourse and
talk is the evil, which I am here striking at; an evil so prevailing and
reigning in David's days, as it made him cry out, Help Lord: why? They speak
vanity every man with his neighbor; with flattering lips, and with a double
heart do they speak, or an heart and an heart. As of old to have an Ephah and
an Ephah, unjust weights and measures, was a great Crime, and is so still; so
to have a Tongue and a Tongue, an heart and an heart, is highly displeasing to
God and man, and to both very injurious. It was the commendation of the
Children of Zebulun, 1 Chr. 12.33. That they were not of a double heart, or, a
heart and a heart. Let it be our temper, and our commendation also. I might
add, that brawlers and liers are as bad as any. But no more of this.

In reference to ourselves.
3. Having spoken hitherto touching the Tongues unruliness in reference to God,
and to our neighbors, I shall say a little of its miscarriage in reference to
our selves, and that very briefly.

1. In self-praising, 1. Self-praising.
magnifying our selves, what we are, as to our birth, or breeding, our parts,
and abilities, what we have said, or done, or will do, Prove. 20.6. And all the
while the Tongue is wandering from that excellent way of Charity, which vaunteth
not it self, 1 Cor. 13.4.
is not puffed up, to wit, as a bladder with wind is blown up. So the proud
hearts of men swell with a windy conceit of their excellencies, bragging and
exalting themselves upon all occasions, and in all companies; whereas alas, if
they were weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, they would be found but
light and empty, yea, possibly wretched and miserable Creatures.

2. In self-Cursings, 1. Self-Cursings.
wishing this or that evil may befall them, yea, that all the Plagues of God
light upon them and theirs, if things be not so, and so. But having already
harped upon this string, when I spoke concerning the Tongues unruliness in
Cursing; I touch no more upon this, or any other of the Tongues Unruliness and
irregularities, but have forward, to what is most in my design, and wherein, I
must crave leave somewhat to enlarge; showing (the Lord assisting) the
necessity and usefulness of Christian Conference, with several directions for
the right management and improvement thereof, so as that God thereby may be
glorified, our selves and others edified, and all be upon account with Comfort
in that great day of the glorious appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The necessity and usefulness of Christian Conference is evincible and
demonstrable by arguments.

1. In reference to God.

1. There Is a necessity of precepts upon this commanded duty, command upon
command, from God himself enforcing it by Moses to Israel, in De^^^nomy, which
is a repetition of the L^^^, particularly and expressly of the Ten Commandments;
which being d^^^vered, he stirs up and excites attention, Hear O Israel; Deu.
6.3, 4, 5, 6.
and again, Hear O Israel: what must Israel hear? Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart: and what else? These words which I command thee this
day shall be in thine heart; and where else? why, in thy mouth; Deuteronomy. 4.10.
And thou shall teach, or whet them and sharpen them as Mowers and Barbers do
their Instruments, diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when
thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lieft down, and when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. Yea, there is the
inculcation of this duty again and again, intimating man's natural aversness
and backwardness thereunto; and withal, the infinite wisdom and goodness of
God to man in his thus reinforcing it, for their good here, and for ever. This
God commands by Solomon, the wisest of Kings or men, Train up, or Catechize, a
Child, in the way (...) should go, Pr. 22.6.
or, in his way. Now the ^raining up, or Catechizing work, is carried on
principally, if not only, by ^^^ferring with Children, and talking to them
about the things of God, and matters of Religion. Yet farther, the Lord our God
presses this duty of Christian Conference more then once in the New Testament
by the Apostle, as upon the Ephesians, and that both negatively, and
positively, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it minister grace to the
hearers. No Corrupt, or rotten putred communication; alluding to meats rotten
and putrified, stinking and unsavory to the Palate, loathsome to the stomach,
and hurtful to the body: so unsavory talk is loathsome to God, and good men,
and of it self hurtful to the souls of all the hearers; It corrupts the head
with errors, the heart with vile affections, and the life with sinful
practices, 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil communication corrupts good
manners. It seems we are apt to be deceived herein, therefore the Spirit
prefaceth thus, Be not deceived: Positively, but that which is good, etc. and
has a tendency for good to the heads, hearts, lives and Conversations of the
hearers, in it is own nature, and our design, for the advance of knowledge and
grace in heads and hearts, holiness and righteousness in the life and
conversation of others. To the same purpose, command is given to the
Colossians, Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, Learned Davenant on
the place.
seasoned with salt. As Salt is a preservative against putrefaction, so is
gracious speech against errors and sins, in the heads, hearts, and lives of the
hearers. Salt on meats draws out, dries up, some think, noxious humors, and
renders them more apt for digestion, and wholesome for nourishment. This grace
in speech, is that pious prudence flowing from the Spirit of God, which
sanctifies first the heart, and then guides and directs the Tongue and words,
and makes them sound and solid, suitable and seasonable, to the Cases and
Conditions of others with whom we converse. Remember, salt must be rubbed in,
thrust into holes and corners; so speech must be set on with life and warmth by
the speaker. But what, must our speech in reference to Children also be with
grace, and seasoned with salt? yea, why not to Children, so far as they are
subjects capable and recipient of what is spiritual and good? What though the
understandings and memories of Children be little narrow vessels, yet, they are
every day growing bigger and wider; and they are vessels of God's making, and
therefore good, and for good ends and purposes: and if parents and friends do
not labor to fill these small vessels, and to season them with the good liquor
of Divine and wholesome truths, the Devil and his Instruments, wicked ones will
bestir themselves to drop store, great (I cannot say good) store of venom and
poison into them, possibly for the tainting, sowring, and infecting them, as
long as they live. It Is God's command, that Parents do bring up their Children
in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. To bring up, that is
natural; even the beasts of the field, and fowls of the air, bring up, feed
their young, and cherish them. In the Nurture; that moral and rational men, as
men, if prudent, will do: they keep their Children in awe, and order;
therefore the Apostle adds, and admonition of the Lord, that is Christian and
spiritual. Christians indeed will instruct their Children in the Principles of
Religion, will put good things into their minds, (as the word imports) so far
and so fast as their capacities will take in, and their memories retain. If any
demand what Children? at what age must they be instructed?? All the answer that
I will give, is this; the Original word is large and Comprehensive, takes in
all that be born; and why should I straiten, or narrow it? Common reason will
suggest, that the Child's capacity must be the parents guide and rule therein;
nor is this the taking the Name of God in vain, as some ridiculously may fancy
it.

Arg. God takes delight therein.
2. Argument for the promoting of holy conference among Christians, is, that the
Lord our God takes much delight (to speak of him as he speaks of himself after
the manner of men, in a gracious condescension to our weakness) and pleasure in
the spiritual and heavenly communications of his people. And this argument
depends as a consequent upon the former, Gods command. Parents are never better
pleased with their Children, nor masters with servants, then when they are upon
the work enjoined them to do: Yea, each glorious person in the God head,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, seem to be much taken with the good language of
his people when met together.

The Father. Mal. 3.16.
1. The Father himself loves and likes it, and takes special notice of it; as in
the days of Malachi, Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and thought on his name, Mal.
3.16. Then in Malachi's days, which were none of the best, as his Prophecy
declares. In that it is said, The Lord hearkened and heared, is implied a kind
of delight and complacency, which he found therein: as men listen to Music,
vocal, or instrumental, which is melodious and harmonious. Again, in that A
book of remembrance is written it imports, Gods taking delight in the words of
his people, as men addicted to learning: what they read and hear, which they
take delight and pleasure in, they will book it down, for after use, as occasion
shall serve: And probably this place is an allusion to Kings and Princes, who
have their State-Scribes and Secretaries to make Records, as of bad services
done against them, so of good services done to them and for them, as Ahasuerus
did Mordecai's, Esth. 6.1. There Is not a word spoken for God, his truth,
ordinances, day, his ministers or people, that shall fall to the ground and be
lost; for God has an Ear to hear all, and an hand to register and record all;
so that all will be upon the account of believers with Comfort in life, and
death, at judgment, and to eternity.

The Son.
2. God the Son, our dear Lord Jesus Christ; holy conference to him is welcome,
and very acceptable. What Christ said to his Church concerning her voice in
prayer and praises, is true also concerning her voice in holy speech and
Conference, O my dove, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, Can.
2.14. and 4.3, 11. And if Christ had not found much content in conferring with
Company, why did he the very same day in which he rose again from the dead,
associate himself, and that by choice, with the two disciples going to Emmans?
he knew full well they were engaged in good discourse; and whiles they were
communing, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them, Luke 24.15. And to show
how he liked their company, and approved their discourse, he gave them signal
tokens of his love toward them, verse. 27. He beginning at Moses and all the
Prophets, expounded to them in all the Scripture the things concerning himself:
verse. 32.
the best Divinity Lecture, or exposition that ever was made or heard, unless
such another made by himself. Yea, he spoke to them with authority and power,
so that their hearts did burn within them. He condescended to their entreaties,
and made some considerable abode with them at Emmans, verse. 29, 30, 31. He went
in to tarry with them, sat at meat with them, took bread and blessed it, and
brake and gave to them: and their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he
vanished out of their sight. How they came to know him, and how he vanished,
I Will not curiously enquire; It is enough to my purpose, that Christ gave so
ample testimony of his approbation of the two disciples, engaged in their holy
talk and conference.

The Holy Ghost.
3. That the Holy Ghost also is well pleased with Christian Conference among
believers, as occasionally they meet together, there is no question. Are not
good thoughts the motions, good words the language of the Spirit in believers?
and can it be imagined that the blessed Spirit is not delighted in, and well
pleased with his own work? with the thoughts he himself puts into the hearts,
and words he puts into the mouths of his Saints and Servants? Again, the
Spirit of God all along in Scripture setting a Crown of honor and highest
commendations upon the head of Holy Conference, is sufficient demonstration of
that delight and contentment which he takes therein: take a few expressions
among many, Pro. 10.20, 21. The Tongue of the just is as choice Silver.
Gartwright. in locum.
The lips of the righteous feed many. These metaphorical expressions are
significant and emphatical: as Choice Silver, Silver refined again and again,
seven times refined: Silver in it self is precious, but the more purified, the
more precious. Feed many, alluding to famous housekeepers, men of renowned
hospitality, who keep open house, feed many; so the lips of the righteous, by
words of sound doctrine, of correction, of instruction, feed the souls of
others, which is the best hospitality. There is Gold (says Solomon Prove.
20.15.) and a multitude of rubies; but the lips of knowledge are a precious
jewel. And our dear Lord Jesus Christ, setting forth the graces of the Church,
says, Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely, Song of
Solomon 4.3, 11. Once more, in that glorious, eminent, and promised effusion of
the Spirit upon the Apostles, Act. 2.3. Why was the apparition in Cloven
Tongues, like as of fire, which sat upon each of them, so that they were filled
with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave
them utterance? The main and principal design, no doubt, was, the publication,
and propagation of the Gospel among the Nations; for every man heard the
Apostles speak in his own language, verse. 5.8, 9, 10, 11. Yet a subordinate
design might be to provoke all believers, who though they have not the
miraculous gift of Tongues, as the Apostles had, yet they all have their
measure of the Spirit, and should speak with other Tongues, new Tongues, be a
people of a pure language or lip, Zeph. 3.9. and their Tongues should be Cloven
Tongues, dividing in their talk, between truth and error, good and evil;
administering comfort to whom comfort, and terror to whom terror belongs;
Severing between the precious, and the vile, Jer. 15.19. Not sadding the hearts
of the Righteous, whom God would not have sadded; nor yet strengthening the
hands of the wicked, by promising them life, Ezekiel. 13.22. Yea, fiery Tongues
also, inflamed with love to God, zeal for his glory, indignation against sin,
in our selves or others, as that because unto God it is so highly displeasing.
Surely this heavenly fire of love and zeal in our communication and
conference, is kindled from above, by the Spirit, and therefore must of
nenessity be very grateful unto, and acceptable with that blessed Spirit. And
so much for the second argument enforcing Christian Conference, upon this
ground, because it is so delightful to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Argument, Remuner ation of it.
3. This duty of Christian Conference, finds great remuneration from God and
that both here and hereafter. First, in general, as it is the keeping of a
command of God, for in keeping them is great reward; not only upon, and after,
but in keeping them. 1: Inward peace.
Obedience to the commands is an evidence of grace, and for glory, carries with
it in the very act, oftentimes an holy and heavenly tranquillity, and serenity
of spirit, a cheariness of heart, as it were wages in the work. Hannah prays,
1 Samuel 1.15, 18.
that is her duty; and her countenance was no more sad, that is her reward in
hand presently. I knew a young Minister, who being at a wedding feast, Instance.
where was much mirth and Music, also the Fiddlers singing Songs, lascivious,
scurrilous, and profane enough; the young man being sensible that God was
thereby highly dishonored, had great trouble in his spirit, wondered that none
would stand up and appear to rebuke and give check to that disorder; still the
jolly Fiddler plays and sing on, and the young man's perploxity, and indignation
goes on still, and was as a fire in his bones, whereupon he whispered in the
care a Minister by him, of more gravity then himself, and one that had more
relation to, and authority with the company then he himself had, entreating him
to stop that profaneness; but in vain: the Aged, Minister held his peace, the
young man's troubles within increased, as fire kindling; and then he break out
to this purpose. You Musicians, I am not against your Music, by instruments;
or by voices, but the matter of your songs is such as dishonours God, may
probably corrupt and debauch some of the hearers, and does sad others: he said
moreover, still with some heat and fervor, probably zeal for God, I do not see
any body giving you any thing for your Music; but if you will be still and
gone, I Will give you something for your silence: whereupon the Musicians
withdrew, and the young man had tides and floods of peace and comfort flowing
in upon his spirit, the impressions whereof were (as I have heard him say more
then once) a refreshing to him many years after, and possibly are (if he be
yet alive) to this very day. Yea the same Minister often professed, (and is to be
believed, so far as humane Faith, and Charity, (which believes all things)
will carry us, 1 Cor. 13.7.
) that he found such delight and contentment in Christian Conference, that when
upon the Road, he fell into company, which was willing to discourse, and though
ignorant, yet were willing to learn; it was as pleasing to him, as theives, or
high-way-men please themselves, when they meet with a prey, or booty; and
seldom mentioned he this, but he gave God alone all the glory. This is a great
and a good reward which the Lord often gives into the breasts and bosoms of
such, as speak often one to another, concerning the things of God, even joy and
peace, That peace which the world cannot give nor take away, a kind of touch or
taste of that peace which passes all understanding, Phi. 4.7. And thus this
good man is satisfied from himself, Prove. 14.14.

Estimation with God.
2. There Is a greater and higher remuneration then this, even in the breast and
bosom of God himself, that good estimation they are of with him: they shall be
mine, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 3.17. All the world is his, made,
preserved, governed, commanded by him; but these are mine, to wit, in a way of
special propriety, my peculiar lot, my treasure, Exo. 19.5. Jer. 51.19. 1. Pet.
2.9.
my inheritance, my jewels, my children, my spouse, my beloved; such honor,
and titles of honor have the Saints, especially such as are active for God,
speaking often one to another.

Signal advancement.
3. God often rewards them even in this life, by setting some signal token upon
them of his love and favor, which the men of the world cannot but take notice
of. There was a day, when they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another.
What that day was, Mal. 3.16.
or what they said, is not clearly expressed, but may be probably gathered from
the Context, and from the History of the Kings Reign in which he prophesied,
which lay down plainly how the affairs of Church and State were managed under
their Reign, and his prophecy. But when does God own them in the open face of
the World? not presently; yet has he a set time when he will appear for them,
verse. 17. That day (says he) when I make up my jewels; which refers (as most
interpreters carry it) partly at least to this life, to wit, in the day of his
Churches Restoration and Reformation. This is one way, and one day, of Gods
making up his jewels, in Church reformation, when he turns again Zions
Captivity, when he makes, according to his promise, Kings to be nursing
Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to his Israel: When he gives Judges as at
the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, and to his people Pastors after
his own heart, when purity of Doctrine, Worship, and discipline, is set up and
maintained, the will and word of Jesus Christ; in such a fair day Jewels will
glister and sparkle, and the Saints and Servants of the living God, usually are
advanced, and become the heads, and not the tail: Though God seem to neglect
his people, yet he has a day, a set day, wherein he will thoroughly plead Zions
cause, which is indeed his own cause, Then shall the Lord of Hosts reign in
mount Zion, and in Jerusadem, and before his ancients gloriously, Isa. 24.23.

Sparing them.
4. Such as speak often one to another, God spares them in his Fatherly
indulgence toward them, as a man spares his own Son, that serves him. Spares,
son, and serves, go together; adoption and sanctification, and find indulgence;
sueh God spares pardons their sins, Ps. 103.13.
accepts their services, though tainted with many defects and imperfections,
pittieth them in all their afflictions and temptations, supports, and delivers
them, accepts of their good meaning and endeavors, the will for the deed; 2
Cor. 8.12.
and sometimes remarkably spares them in the black and cloudy days of public
Calamity, by the destroying sword in the hands of Angels, or men, in
pestilences, or war. And which notably sets off Gods love, the Saints
privilege, is, that God so eminently shows himself on the side and behalf of
his people, that the ungodly world cannot but take notice thereof, to their
great admiration, astonishment, and terror; Mal. 3.18, 13.14, 15. verse. 18.
Then shall ye (to wit, the blasphemers) return, and discern between the
righteous, and the wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not. The Prophets retorts their blasphemies upon themselves, making them
their own judges and condemners therein: Whose words were stout against the
Lord, who said, it is vain to serve God; and what profit is it, that we have
kept his ordinances? who call the prond happy, etc. And thus God convinces
obstinate and rebellious sinners of their stupidity and Frenzies, not to their
Conversions, but to their horror, and amazement: and extorts acknowledgments
from the worst of men, not alone of his Sovereignty, but of his wise
administrations, how that he is a gracious rewarder of the good, as also a just
and dreadful revenger of sin, and sinners. Psalm. 126.12. Thus when the Lord
turned again the Captivity of Zion, they said among the Heathen, The Lord has
done great things for them.

Owning them at death and judgment.
5. For the completing of this argument drawn from Gods gracious remuneration of
Christian Conference, he does it not only here, but will do it more amply and
abundantly hereafter, as may be cleared from the words of Christ, Beza at Pacet
in Loc.
Mat. 12.37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall
be condemned. Justification stands here in opposition to condemnation; and to
be justified, is to be absolved, or declared just, not to be made just. Our
words and speeches are the declarations and publications of what lies latent
in our hearts, and so are signs and Characters of what we are, good or bad, as
well as our deeds and actions: and God has a book of remembrance, as well for
what we speak, as for what we do. And when the book shall be opened, Rev. 20.12.
and the dead, small and great, shall stand before God, and be judged according
to what is written in these books, then it will be known to all the world what
good Commucations Gods people have had among themselves, and that for their
honor and renown, before God, the Angels, and their fellow Saints to all
eternity. God is, if I may so express it, all-eye to see all the actions of
men, all ear to hear all the words of men, and all hand to register and
record all; and not alone good works, but good words also, shall have a
gracious recompense, and reward of glory! Oh that, that is the day, Mal. 3.17.
when God will make up his jewels (those that spoke often one to another)
completely, fully; then indeed the tide shall turn, the Scene Change, the case
and face of things shall so be altered, as that the damned reprobates, whilst
howling and roaring among the Devils, shall discern (little to their comfort,
much to their horror) between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not. To these three arguments exciting to
Christian Conference, in reference to God, his injunction or commanding of it;
his remunerations and rewards for it, let me add another.

The fourth Argument which should provoke us to be much in the duty of
Christian Conference, Gods end in the variety of gifts bestowed.
is our answering therein Gods great end in his various distribution, of gifts
and graces to his Children; which is, that by gracious discourse and holy
communication, they might mutually impart each to other for their edification,
and spiritual advantage. For the amplification thereof, an apter similitude
cannot be used, then that of the Apostle, drawn from a body natural, in which
each member has its proper gift, not for it self only, but for the whole, and
every other member in particular; thus the Eye sees, the ear hears, the Tongue
speaks, the hands work, the feet walk, not each for it self only, but for each
other member, and the whole body: so in the Church of Christ, which is one body
mystical. Can. 6.9. My dove, my undefiled, is but one, one body, Can. 6.9. Ephesians.
4.4. Yet in that one body there are variety of members, and God by his Spirit
distributeth gifts and graces variously, dividing to every one severaily as he
will, 1 Cor. 12.11. But to what end? He answers it, verse. 7. The manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. So in a body politic,
Perkins Reformed Catholic. Of Tradit.
a Kingdom or Commonwealth, all are not Peers, but some Peasants, all are not
rich, but some poor; the Peer and the Rich have as much need of the poor
Peasant in some cases, as they of them in other cases. So in the world, several
Countries have their several commodities, and all to maintain mutual Trade,
Commerce, and converse among men, but all for the good of the whole. What
another Apostle speaks in another case, in regard of hospitality, is here by
way of illustration fairly applicable, 1 Pet. 4.9, 10. As every man has
received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. There Is much, very much of the wisdom and goodness of
God, in laying up rich treasures of knowledge, and gracious experiences in the
heads and hearts of some, not only for their own use, but for the guiding and
leading of others also. No member in the body natural, or mystical, but is
designed to be, and ought to be useful and serviceable to the whole. The way
to compass our end with God, which is to be everlastingly glorified by him,
and with him, in the full enjoyment of him, is to give him his ends here on us,
1 Cor. 10.31.
which is that we should glorify him, and that in laying out all our talents to
the best advantage of our Master, and the use of his family, which is his
Church and people here below; and this end is abundantly advanced, by the wise
and frequent exercise of Christian Conference.

The 5th Argument in reference to God, Argument, propagation of the Gospel.
which pleads hard for Christian Conference, is, that it is powerfully
efficacious (by the blessing of God) for the propagation of the Gospel, and for
the bearing up of the Name, Worship, and glory of God in the World from
generation to generation. How was the worship of God transmitted from Adam to
Moses, but by Oral Tradition, and that in Conference; Fathers declaring to
their Children, and so from Children to Children, age after age? God at first
revealed his will to Adam by word of mouth; and renewed the the same to the
Patriarks, not by writings, but by speech, by dreams, and other inspirations:
and thus the word of God went from man to man, for the space of two thousand
and four hundred years, unto the time of Moses, who was the first penman of the
Holy Scriptures; and all this while men worshipped God, and held the Articles
of their Faith by tradition, not from men, but immediately from God himself.
And the History of the new Testament probably for the space of twenty years at
least, went from hand to hand by tradition, 'till penned by the Apostles; or
being penned by others, it was approved by them. And now the Canon of
Scriptures being completed, and by the infinite wisdom, power and goodness of
God, kept pure and entire, we must to the law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20.
Ephesians. 2.20. 2 Timothy 3.16.
to the Scripture, the written word of God, for our guidance and direction in
matters of Faith and practice. But as for the way and manner of Conveyance and
propagation of the heavenly and blessed truths contained in the Scriptures,
that is authoratively by Ministers, and by Preaching, hearing, reading, and
holy Conference, which is common to all, who having Tongues to speak, should
delight to be speaking of God and for God, that so religion, the knowledge and
fear of God, might run down all along through the whole race of mankind, even
from Adam to the end of the world. The Psalmist is warm in this argument,
Psalm. 78.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
That (says he) which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us,
we will not hide it from their Children, showing to the generation to come, the
praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he has
done. For he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law* in Israel,
which he commanded our Fathers; that they should make them known to their
Children: That the generation to come might know them, even the Children which
should be born; who should arise and declare them to their Children: That they
might set their hope in God, and not forget the work of God, but keep his
Commandments. We pray Thy kingdom come, and that is our duty; but we must work
also, and labor to our uttermost, by good Conference, by doing, or suffering,
that the kingdom of grace may be advanced more and more in the world, that God
in Christ may be more known, believed in, and be loved, obeyed, owned and
honored, by our selves, and all others, from the rising of the Sun to the
setting of the same; and this in a perpetual succession from time to time,
'till time runs up into Eternity. Its reported to be one of the Olympic games,
that they have a set company of Racers, (if I mistake not the story) each
whereof had his stage, or Race-post, as it were; the first takes a great
burning torch, or blazing link in his hand, and away he runs with it with all
possible speed to the end of the race; then another takes it of him, and away
way he posts with it might and maine; and so a third, and a fourth, and so one
Racer after another, 'till the link or light went out. I allude only to it. So
one generation runs with the light of the Gospel, to another generation, and
so from generation to generation, I cannot say till the light goes out, (for
it is an everlasting Gospel, and never goes out) but 'till the light of grace
be heightened unto, or swallowed up in the light of glory. The necessity and
usefulness of Christian Conference, in order to the preservation of the Gospel
amongst us, and the propagation of it to posterity, may sufficiently be
evinced, if we go a little to School to Priests and Jesuits, to all Arch
heretics and seducers; do not they spread their opinions and practices, even
among ignorant ones and illiterate, merely, or mainly by discourse and
conference? do not common swearers, adulterers, scoffers, and the like rabble
of men, by their evil communications corrupt good manners; and so propagate
profaneness to Children, and Childrens Children? and what, shall Antichristian
and unchristian Conference build up the Devils kingdom in the World,
even-before our eyes, and under our noses; and shall not Christians indeed,
real Saints, bethink themselves, and bestir themselves, in promoting and
advancing the interest and Kingdom of Christ by conferring and discoursing
upon all occasions, and fair opportunities, and that with good and bad, for
the building up the one, and gathering in of the other, and edifying of both?
It Is pity, a thousand pitties, that England should run the hazard at least of
loosing the Gospel, for want of such Conference and Communication, as is by God
himself enjoined, and well becomes the Professors of the Gospel. Will not our
Forefathers rise up in judgment against this present generation, and condemn
it, saying, we primitive Christians, and we their successors, have by our Holy
Conference, as well as by our Prayers and practice, transmitted and handed down
the Gospel to you of this Age: Yea the Martyrs and Confessors may say, we have
sent the Gospel purified and refined by, and through our flames, and swimming
to you in our blood; and have you now fooled away the Gospel by sinful silence,
as to edifying discourse; and by sinful talkativeness, as to vain
disputations, tending to strife, to the multiplying of rents and divisions? How
shall we answer it to God, to conscience, or to the Children yet unborne, if
this should be their doleful discourse hereafter. Had not England once the
Gospel? O yes, in such a Kings, and such a Queens Reigns, etc. and what is now
become of the Gospel? how comes it to pass that we their sad posterity are thus
left in the dark? why, it was not the Lion and the Bear, the Turk, or the
Pope, that cut down, or destroyed the Gospel; but it was the little Foxes, the
subtle Jesuits, and their Agents and Factors, simple and silly ones by them
deluded, yet witty and active enough, to divide the Professors in England, and
break them in pieces. Now let each believer presently put on the whole armor
of God, praying always, Ephesians. 6.13, to 18. Prayers and Tears are good weapons;
and among the rest fall roundly upon, and buckle close to, this great duty of
Christian Conference; let every one of us say with that Holy man, Awake, up my
glory -- I my self will awake early, Psalm. 57.8. Let our sleepy Tongues, (that
instrument whereby God may so much be glorified) awake, arise, get up and be
doing, in this great work of Christian Conference, which if well ordered and
managed, might be a Compendious way (by the blessing of God) to win all the
World to Jesus Christ, which to design and attempt would be one of the best
projects imaginable: Let families begin, set up Religion in their Houses,
instruct their Children, and so their Childrens Children, that the knowledge,
faith, and fear of God may run in a blood, in a line or pedigree, as unfeigned
faith in young Timothy, but first in his Grandmother Lois, and then in his
Mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5. and from Families to Parishes, from Parishes to
Counties, and so to Kingdoms, and so throughout the World. And this Christian
Conference well managed and Conscienciously improved, would contribute
something to the impletion of that blessed prediction, Rev. 11.15.
When the seventh Angel sounded, saying, the kingdoms of this World are become
the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever.

The sum of what has been hitherto laid down to demonstrate the necessity of
Christian Conference in reference to God, comes to this; That which God
commands, delights in, rewards, and makes for the propagation of his Name
and Gospel in the World, is of great necessity and usefulness as to our
practice. But Christian Conference is all this, commanded, delighted in,
rewarded by God, and does advance and propagate the glory of God and the
Gospel: Therefore Christian Conference is much to be used and practiced.

The reasons and arguments in reference to men especially enforcing this great
duty of Christian Communication, Arg. in reference to men.
wherein I design more brevity.

1. It is profitable.
The first Argument I take ab utili, from the profit that has been, is, and may
be gained thereby: And this kind of Argument from profit, uses to be a very
taking prevailing Argument, There be many that say, who will show us any good?
Psalm. 4.6. And it is very taking in temporals and Carnals; and should be, I am
sure, much more in spirituals, which are an higher, a nobler good. To instance
in some particulars.

To the head.
1. It does the head good, by the augmentation of our parts, and heightning our
intellectuals, and that partly in a way of natural and moral causality; and
partly in a way of benediction, from the Father of lights; who willingly and
freely gives in light more abundantly to such, as give out of their light
received, to others for their good. Those of an higher form in the School of
Christ may get something from them of a lower form by Conference each with
other; those of the stronger sex may be beholden to them of weaker. Apollo was
an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures; yet Priscilla (the Woman) as
well as Aquila (the man) instructed him in the way of God more perfectly, Acts
18.24, 26. And it is one of the good properties of that virtuous Woman so
commended by Solomon, Gartwright and Dod in loc.
That she opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her Tongue is the law of
kindness, Pro. 31.26. It is the judgment of two men of God, now with God,
that her speech consisted not about the things of this life so much, (which may
be in Infidels) as about holy and heavenly matters; In her Tongue is the Law of
kindness. Which seems to declare both Covenants, of works, and of grace;
whereof in the one the bounty of God toward us does stand; and in the other,
our love both toward God, and toward our neighbor for Gods sake is required:
for she is not only a hearer, and reader of the word of God, but also she
conferreth thereof with her Children, with her maids, and with her Husband.
Yet farther, that the law of kindness, is said to be in her Tongue, plainly
declares, how that she often used such good speech, and that it dwelt richly
and plentfully in her house; ( There is that scatters, and yet increases
(says Solomon, Prove. 11.24.) The man that is liberal gets by giving. And the
faithful Servant, in the Parable, who made his five Talents ten, has the
eleventh Talent given him, Matthew. 25.28. Christ adds the reason, verse. 29. for
to every one that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundance. To
Trade with our parts, gifts, and graces for the spiritual good of others, will
be for our own gain and advantage also. By kindling and blowing up zeal in
others, we inflame it in our selves; by comforting others under their various
temptations, we gather experiences whereby we may comfort our selves in the
like trials. As the widows Cruse of Oil and barrel of meal wasted not by
emptying, but filled rather. And the milk in the Mothers breasts, which by
giving suck to the Child continually increases, and not drawn out, dries up
the sooner. Let Us lay out our parts and gifts, as opportunity is offered,
sincerely for God; and to be sure, we shall be furnished with gifts and parts
graciously from God. Parents do not use to let their Children want books whilst
they have a mind to learn; nor Masters their servants to want Tools, or lights,
whilst they are willing to work: nor does the husbandman tilling his ground,
let his seeds-men want Corn, when he sees they will well and wisely sow and
scatter it. Thus Christian Conference is not alone beneficial to others, but to
our selves, a great augmenter of parts and gifts: I Will give you for the
Confirmation hereof, an example of two Women, (to tell you their names, and the
places where they lived and died is needless) both well in years, I think forty
at least, before they began to mind to purpose the affairs of their souls, and
the concernments of Eternity; both were deeply sensible of their gross
ignorance, and highly desirous to get knowledge in the things of God: neither
of them could read at all, both were industrious: one her eyes being pretty
good, learned to read; the other being weak and dim sighted, could not, but she
also so bestir'd her self in hearing, Meditation, Prayer, and abundantly in
Christian Conference, putting questions to every one she met with, whom she
thought able and willing to instruct her, that she grew eminent (for such an
one she was, poor also) in the knowledge and practice of Christianity, and I
hope are both long since with God.

2. To the heart.
2. Christian Conference is not only profitable for the head (by augmentation
of parts) but for the heart also, by the communication of spiritual good
things; the best things to the best part, the heart of man: and it is usual with
God, to bless Christian Conference, especially where the hearts of speakers do
design his glory, the edification and salvation of the hearers, Paul's holy
temper, design and practice, 1 Cor. 10.33. I please (says he) all men in all
things; not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved: and his counsel, 1 Cor. 14.12. For as much as ye are zealous of
spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. If the
question be made, what spiritual gifts may be communicated by Conference? I Would
answer, what not? the ignorant may be enlightened, the erroneous reduced; weak
Christians may be strengthened, and the strong established; the worst of sinners
may be converted, and the best of Saints quickened, and all edifyed and saved.
Take each of these particulars distinctly.

1. Ignorant enlightened.
1. That the ignorant may be enlightened, is as clear as the Sunrising turns the
night into day. The word of God not alone preached by ministers in office,
ordained and commissionated by Christ to that end, but read and discoursed of
by private persons, may and does make wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7. The entrance
of thy words, to wit, when it first opens the door of the understanding, it
gives light, it gives understanding to the simple, Psalm. 119.130. Paul's
preaching to the Gentiles, was, to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, Act. 26.18. The daily experience that Godly Parents, and
governors of families, have as to their Children and Servants brought out of
darkness worse then that of Egypt, into a Goshen, where light abounds, and in
them abounds, and that conveyed by Catechizing and(...)

2. Erroneous reduced.
2. For the reduction of erroneous persons into ways of truth, scarce any means
more efficacious and successful then that of Christian Conference, for thereby
the grounds of mistakes in opinions are detected, and the scruples and doubts
lying in men's spirits are discovered, and so answers from Scripture and right
reason may be presently, pertinently, and warmly applied. That of the Apostle
speaks, methink; fully to the purpose. Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, if any of you
do err from the truth, and one Convert him: Let him know, that he which
converts a sinner from the error of his ways, shall save a soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins. Wherein we may observe, as to our point in
hand, whom he speaks to, Brethren, even all whom he wrote to: so that to reduce
the erroneous in away of fraternal correption, is a duty belonging to all, none
exempted; brotherly love constrains hereunto; for if I must bring back the
straying Ox or Ass of my enemy, Exo. 23.4.
much more the wandering soul of my brother. Again, what errors are here to be
understood: no doubt (says a learned Expositor) errors in Doctrine, Mars. in
Plo.
and matters of Faith, and those fundamental errors also, which are in a
special manner destructive, and bring death, eternal death unavoidably; and
therefore it is said, that he which converts him, shall save a soul from
death, that is, from Hell and damnation. Now every petty error about
Scholastic subtilties, is not so severely threatened, as fundamental errors
and heresies are, which take off from Christ, directly, or indirectly; such
unrepented of, bring inevitable ruin and destruction: Yet I must grant, though
errors in Doctrine be principally intended, yet errors in life and practice,
are not to be at all excused, no not the least sin, for the least sin deserves
death, eternal death, as wages due to it. To. 6.23.
But how does he that Converts a sinner save his soul from death? not by
meriting, or deserving life for him, or by giving life to him; but by being an
instrument or means under God to repentance, and so into the way of Salvation.
And lastly, how does he hide a multitude of sins? that he does by being a means
to bring him to Christ for Righteousness, whose Righteousness alone imputed to
us, and so made ours, does, or can hide our sins, so as they shall never be
imputed to us, or charged upon us, Jer. 23.6. 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 5.19. 1 Cor.
1.30. And surely this work of converting sinners from their errors, of saving
souls from death, and of hiding a multitude of sins, is a gallant work; this
piece of service is high and noble service; and this has been, is, and may be
done, (by the blessing of God) in a way of Christian converse and Conference. I
need not give any farther confirmation by Scripture: the constant experience,
not alone of Ministers, but or private Christians, who themselves have been
sound in the Faith, and whose hearts filled with a zeal for God, and with love
to, and compassion for their erring brethren, and who thereupon have laid out
themselves much in Christian Conference with them; I say their abundant
experience of good success may save me the labor of farther enlargements
herein. Yet let me drop my mites, and give an instance or two in the case.
Though I have been very, very remiss and negligent in taking and improving
opportunities in this kind (for which I desire to be humbled in the sight of
God and men) yet my being (through grace) sometimes a little active herein,
has not been altogether in vain. I have had occasionally discourse with
Papists about Justification by works; with more, touching Salvation by living
up to the light within them; with more yet, who hoped to be saved by their good
Prayers, serving of God, leading a good life, doing as they would be done by,
and the like; several of them in each sort well-meaning people I hope, yet all
split upon the same rock, works, works, whereas the Scriptures say expressly, By
the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, Romans
3.20. And again, By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God: not of works, least any man should boast, Ephesians.
2.8, 9. Not to multiply quotations, so well known to all who search the
Scriptures, take but one more, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness, which
we have done, but according to his mercy, he saved us by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. It is (by) as the way, not for as
the deserving and meritorious cause of salvation, that is Christ, and none but
Christ, Act. 4.12. But to instance a little for Papists; I know not any by me
reduced, I hope many are by others, and I rejoice therein, and bless the Lord
for it. For the second sort, who expect Salvation by living up to the light
within them (a generation of men as much to be pitied, prayed for, and
tenderly dealt with, as any, who by reason of some opinions and practices lie
under the wrath of men, and for others, without breach of Charity, we may say,
lie under the wrath of God) only one I can speak of, a fellow passenger with
my self and others in an hackny Coach from St Albans to London, who after long
and warm disputes, at length ingeniously confessed, that no righteousness but
the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, could avail for satisfaction to God
the Father, nor for our justification and salvation, or to this effect. For the
third sort, those who hope to be saved by their good prayers, their serving
God, and so forth, think, and profess they think, their repentance and good
deeds for time to come, will make amends for their bad deeds in time past, and
make satisfaction to God for all that formerly has been done amiss by them: I
hope by the good hand of God upon weak endeavors, (the whole of glory be the
Lords) many have been plucked out of this snare of the Devil. I perceive this
work grows upon my hands, take but one instance therefore. There was some few
years since, a young gentlewoman, who waited on a Lady in a Noble man's family,
who passing by Coach with others and my self from Barnet to London, upon
discourse I soon found that this young woman had a devotion, and a zeal for
God, cared not for vain frothy Company, gave her self to reading Scriptures,
and good Books, she was well read, talked willingly and understandingly; at
last discoursing with her, and putting questions to her touching Justification,
I perceived, she built much upon works, and a legal righteousness; whereupon
my bowels yerned toward her, and I told her in plain terms I feared she was
not yet in the way of life and Salvation, and I spoke as seriously and
pertinently as I could, showing the insufficiency of all our own
righteousnesses, and the impossibility of justification, life and salvation to
be had by the deeds of the Law; and withal opened the Covenant of grace to
her, how that it was Christ, and he alone, that was made under the Law to
redeem them who were under the Law; of the fullness and sufficiency, and also
willingness and readiness in him to save us: and to this effect I discoursed
about half an hour together; and perceiving that she had pulled her hood over
her face, and was weeping, I held my peace; dropping a few words sometimes; at
length, she breaks out in expressions to this purpose; Now Sir, I see the mind
of God toward me this day, which is to bring me off from that sandy foundation
of works which I have been building upon this many a day, and to bring me to
free grace in Jesus Christ, so setting me upon that rock which is higher then
I; and I bless the Lord that I saw your face this day, that I fell into your
company; the good I hope I have received from you will stick by me and comfort
me as long as I live. I hear and believe that her Conversation ever since has
not been a dishonor to her profession, and that she has not hindered the
advance of Religion at all in that noble family, but a means to promote it
rather.

Rebellious converted.
3. That Christian Conference may be useful, and availeable even for the
Conversion of obstinate and rebellious sinners, I make no question; the place
forecited abundantly proves it: for whereas the Apostle says, Jam. 15.19, 20.
He that converteth a sinner from the error of his way; by sinner we must needs
take in such as are vicious and flagitious in life and conversation, as well as
one erring from the truth, persons erroneous and Heretical. Again, Paul's
injuction Ephesians. 4.29. Let no rotten communication proceed out of your mouth, but
such as may Minister grace to the hearers: and why not Converting grace
ministered, and regeneration work wrought even by Christian Conference? This I
may safely say, that the Ministers of Christ, have been not only by the public
Preaching of the word, but by private Conference, very instrumental under God
in the converting many souls to righteousness; and the ground hereof to me is
plain and abvious, because Christ sets them apart on purpose for that work,
and gave gifts to men, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. He received gifts, even for the
rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among them, Ps. 68, 18. And though
private Christians and Ministers speak the same words, yet there is this
difference, that what private Christians say in Conference, comes from
fraternal Charity; what the messengers of Christ say, comes from special
ministerial authority; and their discoursing about matters of Religion is
properly enough preaching, and has been eminently instrumental for the
Conversion of many from darkness to light, and from the Kingdom of Satan unto
God. Experiments herein I believe are frequent and usual, through the blessing
of God, and his Christ; who by promise has freely and graciously engaged
himself to be with his Gospel-ministery to the worlds end, Mat. 28.19, 20. Let
me leave you but one instance, which may by the Lords blessing be an
encouragement to this too much neglected duty of Christian Conference. There is
an honest able Minister, who within these two years told me it for a piece of
News, (and indeed it was welcome news to me) and it was this, That in the
Knights Family with whom he lives (the Knight is of good quality and repute)
there was a maidservant, he verily believed fearing God in that family, which
(to use his own words) dated her Conversion from my discourse with her, walking
up Highgate Hill together, whereupon I remembered that about four years since I
came from London in an Hackny-Coach for St. Albans, and there was a Gentlewoman
(I Will spare her name) with this her maid, and others; the Gentlewoman was able,
and willingly maintained good discourse on the way; and it being a cold
morning, I at the bottom of the Hill went out of the Coach, to walk up the
Hill, and warm my self thereby; when I was out, the Maid asked leave of her
Mistress (who stayed in the Coach) that she being cold might go up the Hill
also, which she did; and we talked together as we went; and I think the sum
of my discourse was our misery by nature, our disability to help our selves by
any thing we could do or suffer, that there was an absolute indispensable
necessity of getting an interest in Christ, who was infinitely able and
willing to save every poor lost soul that came unto him by believing; and to
this purpose, both in Coach and in walking: which the only wise and infinitely
gracious Lord God it blessed for the Spiritual and Eternal good of this poor
handmaid; for which let his Holy Name be for ever glorified, and let all good
Christians take from hence encouragement to be yet more and more abounding in
holy talk and Conference, sowing this seed in the morning, and in the evening
not withholding their hands; who knows but the gracious Lord our God, may
bless and prosper, both the one, and the other.

The weak strengthened.
And fourthly, if the Holy Word of God rightly managed in Christian Conference
be efficacious for the inlightning of the ignorant, the reducing the erroneous,
and the converting of stout-hearted sinners, then by necessary and undeniable
consequence, it must be also soveraignly efficacious for the strengthening of
the feeble minded, and comforting of such as are cast down, 1 These. 5.14.
Brethren, comfort the feeble minded, concerns all; and how can this be better
done then in Christian Conference? and again in the same place, support the
weak, is the common duty of all believers: but how support? even as a Crutch
does a lame body, or as a beam does a ruinated and tottering house; the word
significantly imports, the holding up one that's ready to fall, by a hand
reached out to help him, or the assisting any who are lifting and heaving at
what is weighty, but have not sufficient strength to move or remove it, as they
desire. Thus by Christian Conference, many gracious souls full of doubts and
fears, ready to fall into dreadful despairs of mercy, have been held up, and
cheared, sometimes by laying before them the precious promises, or the great
ability and willingness of Christ to save, sometimes by imparting to them our
own experience, how we were cast down and raised up again, telling them what
God has done for our Souls, or for the souls of others in the like sad and
dejected condition as they are in. I Will leave one instance in this case also;
It Is near twenty years since, that several Travelers of us passing between
Oxford and London, supped together at an Inn in Great-Wickham, one of the
company carried himself so untowardly and offensively, that others at the Table
wondered at me for my not rebuking him; whether thinking it prudence to forbear
at supper time, or rather through my want of zeal for God, I know not, but
supper being fully ended, I addressed my self, as well as I could, to speak to
this vain person, which accordingly I did, laying first the Law before him,
and the sadness of his condition at present, and that, if he died impenitently,
he was like to perish eternally; after which I opened the Gospel to him, with
as much tenderness and compassion as I possibly was able, acquainted him with
the readiness that is in God and Jesus Christ to receive penitent sinners; and
how those that came to Christ, he would in no wise cast out; and many such
expressions to this purpose, that grace discovered might win and allure him to
Christ, and to repentance. Yet what impression all that was spoken had upon
that vain person, I know not. It seems that there was a Scholar in the
Company, whom I think then I was altogether unacquainted with, he is now an
honest able Minister, who lay under a spirit of bondage, had great fears and
troubles upon him, he hearkened attentively, and I have cause to be persuaded,
that by the wise and gracious providence of God, much of the Gospel
Consolations fell upon his spirit, to his great refreshing, not unlike that
spirit of Adoption which teaches believers to Cry Abba, Father: you shall have
his own words in a late letter to me: This I can unfeignedly say, that amongst
my spiritual benefactours, I do heartily bless God for you, and do look upon it
as a very good providence, I was cast into your Company at that time.

5. The strong quickend.
In the fifth and last place, That Christian Conference has been and still is
very beneficial, not only for strengthening those who are weak in the faith,
but for edifying and quickening, even the strongest, and most grown in
Christianity; the Holy Scriptures, right reason, and sweet experience, give in
abundant testimony thereunto. It Is a Sovereign antidote against Apostasy, and
defection in Religion, and that both as to understanding and affections: The
Apostle prescribes it Heb. 312.13. Take heed brethren, least there be in any of
you, an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God: But how
shall it be prevented? he answers, Exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day, least any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Exhort
one another. The duty is mutual, concerns Christians of all sexes and sizes:
daily, that is frequently, not by fits, and starts: while it is called to day,
to wit, presently, and speedily, delays in this case are dangerous, do not put
off for a month, a fortnight, a week, no not for a day, and the reason is
weighty, from the danger of the hearts obduration, by the deceitfulness of sin:
It deceives the understanding with error for truth, darkness for light, the
will with evil for good, the heart and affections, with what is loath some and to
be abhorred, instead of what is lovely and to be desired. And again the same
Apostle to the same purpose, Heb. 10.23, 25. Let us hold fast the profession of
our faith; Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is: how shall this be helped? he answers, but exhorting one another
etc. Christian Conference well ordered, is an excellent preservative of truth,
and peace, in the Church or Churches of Christ; and good talk, be it
Table-talke, or Highway talk, has been, is, and (by the blessing of a
gracious God) will be as a golden Pipe of Conveyance, of much spiritual good
from one to another, until time run up into Eternity, and grace into glory.

Having somewhat largly discovered the profitableness of Christian Conference,
in that thereby believers abundantly Communicate spiritual good things one to
another; let me add

Arg. It Is peaceableness.
3. It Is peaceableness. It Is a teeming Mother, bringing forth peace at home and
abroad, within doors and without.

Peace at home.
1. Peace at home. Christian Conference is attended usually with sweet inward
peace, and an heavenly tranquillity of spirit; I appeal to your Consciences
herein. When you lie down in an evening, and reflect upon your selves, look
inward, and make inquiry, what have the thoughts of my heart, the words of my
mouth, and the actions of my hands been this day? (as I presume they who keep
their watch do) and some Heathens by Natures light have done) when you find
your language and discourse has been to this person, or that, holy and
spiritual, and that upon this design, to edify and minister grace to the
hearers; surely the fruit thereof has been a Calm in thy soul, and serenity
in thy spirits. Peace also not alone at the end of each day, but at the end of
life. It was a chearing, a reviving Cordial to that good King Hezekiah, when he
lay (as he thought) a dying, to be able to say, Remember now O Lord, I beseech
thee, how I walked before thee in truth, Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. And so to be able to
say, and that from the heart sincerely, Remember O Lord, how I have talked
before thee, and for thee, in thy despised truths, ordinances, and Ministers,
how I have in discourse at least (and by example also) contended for thy holy
Sabboths, so profaned by a sinful generation; and in brief, I have, (as all
sanctified ones, and called of God are exhorted) earnestly contended for the
faith, (or doctrine of faith) once delivered to the saints, Jude v. 3. The word
is emphaticall, and imports such eagerness in contention, as is among wrestlers
and racers striving for victory. Remember O Lord how I have contended with thee
by Faith in Prayer, for that faith, the true Christian faith by thee delivered;
and how I have contended with erroneous persons and Heretics by arguments an
by practice, bearing up those truths and ordinances which they pull down:
surely the remembrance hereof when we go to bed, night after night, or when we
are going to make our beds in the durst to be no more seen, will speak much
peace and comfort to us. And the reason hereof is strong and weighty, because
good conference, if right in the spring, flowing from an heart fired with zeal
for God, and love to my neighbor; and right in the ends, it designs Gods
glory, and the good of the hearers; is a clear evidence of a good and gracious
heart; and grace makes way for peace, as the needle for the thread, so that
those who much lay out themselves in Christian Conference, have, or may expect
to have, yea be sure, first or last, shall have much inward peace and
tranquillity of spirit. Who would not sow good seed, when he knows it will grow?
who would not be scattering words of grace, when he knows, that every such
word has a seed of peace, yea of eternal peace in it?

2. Peace abroad.
Christian Conefrence not only brings forth inward peace and quiet in our
breasts and bosoms, but also outward peace with men, and safety in all places
and companies whatever. Set you on foot good discourse, or run it on, and
whoever is present, there is no great danger, unless it be of a taunt, or flout
from a profane Esau, or a scoffing Ishmael; and that a good honest soul may
wear as a Crown of honor, as Job speaks of himself, Job 31.35, 36. My desire
is, that my adversary had written a book: surely I would take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me. (Upon my shoulder,) not as a burden,
but as an honor; as standard-bearers carry their ensigns and colors, that
all may see them: Tongue-persecution (such as Ismael's was of Isaac) breaks no
bones, but brings under the blessing of God, and the promise of a great reward,
Gal. 4.29. Genesis 21.9. Mat. 5.11, 12. No, no, the danger in discourse, is not
whilst we are talking of God, or of Christ, or of the Spirit, or of
regeneration, and the like; but the danger comes when you begin to talk of
persons, this body or that; either highly and hyperbolically praising one, and
that smells of flattery, and is possibly, by some who are present, so
accounted; or dispraising another, and that is presently suspected of
uncharitableness, if not of malice. The danger is farther heightened, when in
your discourse, course, you will needs be meddling with Authority, and
State Affairs; how soon then may the Tongue be found tripping, and you thereby
but trip up your own heels, and catch a fall, possibly such a fall, as may
break your bones, if not your neck. So the wisest of Kings tells us, Pro. 13.3.
and 21, 23. He that keeps his mouth keeps his life: but he that opens
wide his lips, shall have destruction. Wherein he seems to compare man to a
City besieged with enemies round about, the safety whereof consists much in
the well ordering the gates, duly and wisely opening and shutting them. Man is
this City; his mouth the gate prudently opened by speech, or shut by silence,
is his protection and safety; negligence and imprudence therein, often proves his
ruin and destruction. That natural principle of self-love, should make this
argument from self-preservation and safety, to be of force and prevalency with
us. The better and more spiritual our discourses and conferences are, the
more's our safety: It concerns us at all times to weigh our words well, but
especially when the company we are in is bad, or somewhat dubious, and to be
suspected: Ps. 39.1.
Thus holy David, I said, I will take heed to my ways that I sin not with my
Tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, (or a Muzzle) while the wicked is
before me. To conclude this Argument, Ainsw.
I have heard of a Sect called Trapanners (unknown I presume to our honest
Forefathers, both name and thing) men skilful and active to entangle and
ensnare others in their talk; I would hope that they are now dead and gone:
but if hundreds of them should be yet alive and with you and me in a room, and
hear us discoursing of nothing but faith, repentance, love, and good works, and
the like, methinks we need not much to fear them; innocence would be our
protection, or rather God and his Christ our shield and buckler.

In the fourth and last place, 4. Arg. Honor and Credit.
Christian Conference is not only beneficial in point of peace and safety,
but in point of honor also: many a carnal man having heard or overheard
spiritual discourse among the Saints and Servants of God; though this language
of Canaan, he neither understands, nor relisheth much; yet it leaves an
honorable conviction upon his spirit, and he is half persuaded, that these men
have something of God in them, more then he has. But surely all who are really
good themselves, cannot but put an high value and estimation upon the persons
and practices of those, who are much in holy and heavenly Communication. Yet if
all men should disregard, to be sure the holy and gracious Lord our God will
have regard; and to have honor of him, and with him, is the highest honor
desirable, or imaginable. was of a communicative spirit, very ready, and
resolute, in the imparting good to others, in any way of counsel and
Conference; and makes this expressly the ground why he honors Abraham in the
revealing of Secrets unto him, Genesis 10.17, 19. And the Lord said, shall I hide
from Abraham that thing which I do? for I know him, that he will command his
Children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.
It is an high honor to be a Privy Councellor to Kings and Princes; O then,
what an honor is it to be admitted and advanced (as it were) to be of Council
to the King of Kings, whose Supremacy and Sovereignty is over Heaven and Earth?
Before I go off, let me hint this by way of Caution, that when we speak, or
rather Scripture it self speaks of Council in reference to God, or of Gods
acting upon Counsel, it is not to be understood properly: for to act upon
Counsel, that implies Consultation, and Consultation a defect in knowledge
(which to fancy concerning God would be high and horrid Blasphemy) but to be
understood of God after the manner of men; the wisest of men act upon Counsel:
now because all that God does, is infinitely well and wisely done, therefore he
is said to act by Counsel, as men do; But I have done with this great Argument,
to press Christian Conference, drawn from its profitableness and usefulness;
it is beneficial to the heads of our selves and others, in the augmentation of
gifts and parts; to the hearts of our selves and others, in the communication
of, and receiving of spiritual good several ways, beneficial in regard of
inward peace at home in our own Consciences, and outward peace abroad, with
men, amongst whom we live; and which crowns all, it has a mark of honor set
upon it by the hand of God himself: and he whom God honors, is honorable
indeed.

Hitherto the Arguments exciting to Christian Conference have been deduced from
the duty we owe to God, and man, our selves, and others, and so from the ten
Commandments; some other arguments may fairly be drawn from the Creed, or the
Articles of our Christian Faith.

As first, 1. Arg. The Communion of Saints.
We profess we believe the Communion of Saints; Now Christian Conference
rightly managed is a considerable part of that Communion; so that to deny or
neglect Holy Conference, is to deny, or neglect one of the Articles of our
Faith, and so far to Unchristian our selves. Christian Conference is a Gospel
duty, as it has been proved by express testimonies out of the word of God: and
it is a Gospel privilege: none indeed but such as receive the Gospel, are
savingly wrought upon by the Gospel, Mat. 11.6.
can carryon discourse, or Conference, which for matter and manner, is truly
Christian; and in truth, society is scarce desirable, without mutual Colloquy,
and speaking one to another; to have a company of people meet together, and be
as mutes and dumb, all in deep silence, methinks is a very uncomfortable
meeting, and irrational. Solitariness and being alone fits best for meditation
and musing. Society and being in Company calls for speech and language. What
humane Society can be among men, as men, without Conference? or what Christian
society among Saints, as Saints, without Christian Conference? to what end has
God and nature given us Tongues, speech and language, but to glorify him
therewith, and to edify one another? and that is mainly done in the way of
Christian Conference. Yet farther, it is one of the branches of the Communion of
Saints, to keep others in the right ways of truth, and holiness; and a likely
means conducing thereunto, is to be much in good discourse with others. It Is
hard to keep the way when one's alone, for man by nature is apt to wander. Many
Travelers together may help to guide one the other, to keep from falling, or
to raise up if fallen. Two are betten then one (says the Preacher, Eccl. 4.9,
10.) for if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is
alone when he falls; for he has not another to help him up. Great is the
benefit of Society, from that natural helpfulness, which thereby one man
affords to another. When the Lord employed his servants in high works, he
usually sent them Two by Two, Moses and Aaron, Joshua and Zerubbabel, in
reference to whom, we read of Two witnesses: and our Lord Jesus Christ when he
sent forth his Disciples, they went Two and Two; and why this? Not only that
they might be joint witnesses of the truth of the Doctrine, and messages
delivered, but withal, that they might with more ease and success carry on the
Ministry and work wherein they were employed, and help mutually to strengthen,
to encourage, and comfort one the other. The instance given, is pertinent to
our purpose, for if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow. What fall? why
society is helpful in all kinds of falls, as corporal, in a journey, on foot,
or horseback; or falls into diseases, dangers, temptations, sins, errors; the
society of friends is useful, to pity, to support, to restore, to convince, to
comfort, and every way to Minister subtable supplies and relief. To close up
and strengthen this argument, in that Christian Conference, as it is a part of
the Communion of Saints by special promise, Psalm. 133.1. Behold, how good, and
how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity. Cohabitation, or
dwelling together, is insignificant without Communication, and Conversation
becoming the Gospel; and why so good, so pleasant? verse. 3. For there the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. The illustration whereof the
Psalmists gives, in two lively and emphaticall similitudes: verse. 2. It is like
precious ointment upon the head of Aaron. It was not the ointment in the box or
vial stopped, but poured out, that gave the fragrant savor, and was so
odoriferous: it is not grace in the heart (though that is saving) but grace in
the lips and life, which makes a Christian indeed so sweet and savoury. Aaron
in his ointments going about, was as a Pillar or Cloud of perfumes walking,
leaving a sweet scent and smell behind him: such are Christians indeed in their
Communications and Conversations, in all places and companies, into which the
hand of Providence leads them. The other similitude is also very elegant and
expressive, As the dew of Hermon, etc. verse. 3. The dew on the earth is a
refreshing, makes it moist, soft, and fruitful: full: such in an higher,
nobler, and more spiritual way, is Christian Conference, well and wisely
managed, to hearers who are humble, conscientious, attentive, docil, and
tractable.

A second argument moving to Christian Conference, Arg. The day of Judgment.
in relation to the Creed, and things to be believed, is fairly and strongly
deducible, from that great and dreadful day of judgment wherein an account must
be given as well of words, as of actions, before that righteous Judge, the Lord
Jesus Christ; who has foretold us, Mat. 12.26, 27.
that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof
in the day of Judgment; for by thy words thou shall be condemned. An idle word
is that which in it self has no tendency to the edification of speaker or
hearer, to profit men, Par. in loc.
or honor God. Christ, our great Lord and Master, entrusteth men as stewards
with much treasure, to be laid out for their Masters use: part whereof is that
of the Tongue and language, which certainly he will call men to an account for;
and if for idle words, then surely for reviling bitter and slandering words
against the righteous ones, his servants and Children, Ministers, or people.
Now some ungodly men think, that the worst words of their mouths are too good
for them, calling them hypocrites, dissemblers, factious, seditious, traitors,
rebels, and what not? sepaking all manner of evil against them falsely, or
lying, and reproachfully, Mat. 5.11. But they will be of another mind another
day, when Christ comes, 1 Pet. 4.14. And behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodily committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, Jude 14.15. By the way observe, that what evil is done to,
or spoken against Christ's little ones, he looks upon as done to, or spoken
against himself; but that which is principally to our purpose, is that Christ
will then convince sinners, force them to know and acknowledge that their
speeches of and against the righteous, were hard speeches; and that conviction
will be a dreadful and terrible Conviction, he will convince them with a
witness, before all the world; convince them with a vengeance; convince them by
the flames of Hell, a dreadful dismal and everlasting conviction indeed, but
very just and righteous. They would not be convinced by the clear, sweet and
pleasant light of the word, Law or Gospel, to their humiliation; therefore they
shall be convinced by the fire of Hell, though to their terror, and confusion.
As some letters writ with joyce of Lemons or Onions are not legible by common
day light; but held to the fire, and a little scorched, are legible enough: so
sin and guilt in the Consciences of some wretched sinners, are never read by
the common-light of the word; but when their Consciences are held close to the
flames of Hell, and well scorched, then will they, nill they, their sins and
guilt are made clearly legible and visible unto them, filling them with
everlasting horror, with shame and confusion of face for ever: O the sad and
doleful reckoning that sinners will make before that dreadful Tribunal and
Judgment seat of Jesus Christ for words only (to pass by thoughts and actions)
then Conscience, thoroughly awakened, and terrified, will be forced to speak,
and speak out, accusing poor lost sinners; Imprimis, for idle words,
multitudes, multitudes, even innumerable; Item, for lying, scoffing,
slandering, defaming words against the Saints of the most high God; Item, for
Cursing, Swearing, yea blasphemous words against the most High God himself,
taking his Name in vain, all the day long; and each of these by hundreds,
thousands, yea possibly millions; O, What will the total sum amount unto!
tremble sinner, tremble to imagine. To Close up this, we read in the parable of
Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.24. That the rich man in Hell complains particularly
and especially of his Tongue, how that was tormented in the flame. An ancient
Writer gives this reason, his Tongue was that member which most sinned, and
therefore that had the sharpest torment. Thus we see how the bad words of
wicked men will be remenbred and repeated to their shame and anguish at the
last day; and no question the good words of the righteous shall not be
forgotten, They shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. and their
words also, as the Prophet testifies, Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord
spoke often one to another, and a book of remembrance was written with him: God
booked down every word they said; O what great encouragement should this give
to all that fear God, to be much in speaking of God, and for God, to and with
one another. What, shall the great and glorious, good and gracious Lord God
Almighty, vouchsafe to write down every good word which droppeth from us, and
shall not our lips drop apace, and that as the Honeycomb, the sweetest words
imaginable, tending to the glory of God, and good of men? did we indeed believe
this one truth, O how would it set all our Tongues a going? how would every one
strive, who should talk most, and speak fastest? vying as it were, and
contending which of us should have the most words in Christ's book at the day of
his appearance. Its unbelief friends, it is unbelief, which makes us so
Tongue-tied, tieth up the strings both of hearts and Tongues. Let Us get, yea
the Lord give us more faith, and then we shall be more talkative, in a good
sense, and to good purpose; and so God will be more honored, and our neighburs
edified; we and they shall have more heights of grace here, and weights of
glory hereafter. I will Close up this argument with John's Vision, Rev. 20.12. I
saw the dead, says he, small and great, stand before God: and the books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead
were judged out of those things, which were written in the books, according to
their works. Alluding, I suppose, to the manner of judiciarie proceedings by
Judges, who have depositions upon record. Judge according to the Laws of the
Land, and matters of fact, cleared to them by allegations and proofs: this
still remembering, God needs none of these records or books, but condescending
to our capacities, he is pleased to speak of himself after the manner of men.
What the books are that shall be opened, is not fully agreed upon; some think,
the Books of the Old and New Testament, wherein God has prescribed what was to
be done by men, and what not to be done; and that because the Apostle says,
Romans 2.16. In that day, when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel. Others, by the books, understand the
Consciences of men, which shall then be fully opened, and the secrets of all
hearts be revealed: so that none shall be able to complain of injury done him,
or injustice in God. Because every man's Conscience shall excuse or accuse,
absolve or condemn him, and give him clear and full information, whether he did
indeed, or did not believe in Jesus Christ, Faith in Jesus Christ being the
only condition of the New Covenant, Mar. 16.16. He that believes shall be
saved, he that believes not shall he damned. To preach this, is to preach the
Gospel. Which of these two Books shall be opened, I dare not determine; why not
both, Scriptures, and Consciences? but theres' mention of another book to be
opened, which is expressly called, The Book of Life: to wit, in which God from
Eternity has written the names of those who shall be saved by Jesus Christ,
which is frequently spoken of in the Revelations: Rev. 3.5.13.8. chap. 17.8.
Not that God needs or has a Book; it would be simplicity and blasphemy, to
fancy it; but it is so expressed after the manner of men, to show the certainty
of Predestination, immutability of Election, and the Infallibility of the
Salvation of Gods Elect. But I forget what I have in hand. Can we rationally
immagine, that when the book of Conscience is opened, words will not he as
legible as works? yea not only works, and words, but thoughts also, and every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil: wherein Scripture is
so express, Eccl. 12.14. 2 Cor. 5.10. O let us remember and lay to heart, that
at the last day, it will be known to all the world what good Communication the
Saints have had, and what bad the sinners; it is matter of Consolation to the
one, but of Terror to the others: Let us all fear and tremble before this great
and glorious Lord our God, who takes most exact notice of every word we speak,
and will, no question, call us to an account for what good or hurt we have done
by our words and communications, as well as by our works and actions; let this
be as a bitt orbridle in out mouths to curb and restrain us from vain and
sinful language, and yet be as a spur in our sides to put on, quicken, and mend
out pace in holy, heavenly, and Christian Conference.

I have been much larger than I intended, yet I would well hope not too large,
in arguing for the advance and increase of Christian Conference amongst such as
profess Christianity. Let my closing Argument be drawn from the vulgar
example, Lust Arg. vulgar practice.
and popular practice of the men of this World, in their several ways and
employments, how they manage and promote their affairs by discoursing and
conferring together. The Merchants on the Exchange, how do their Tongues run by
Sea and Land, to the Indies, East and West; to both the Poles, North and South;
yea, all the world over, where any thing is to be got by trade and merchandise:
and shall not Christians, who, if Christians indeed, are wise Merchants, speak
freely and rejoycingly of the goodly Pearls which they have bought; Mat. 13.45,
46.
and of that Pearl of great price (Jesus Christ) which they have have found
(through grace and mercy) and of their spiritual merchandise, better than that
of Gold and Silver? shall your Heirs to Nobles and Princes, talk, and love to
talk, of what is theirs in reversion, of Earledomes, Dukedomes, Crowns, and
Kingdoms? and shall not Christians discourse, and love to discourse, of what
is theirs in reversion, of Crowns of Glory, of that heavenly Kingdom? how they
bring Children, are heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, Romans 8.17.
and of their inheritance, incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.4. This is to have our Conversation
in heaven, Phil. 3.20. For heavenly Communication is usually a fruit of
heavenly Meditations and affections; and the language of Canaan (if not forced
and hypocritical) is a Comfortable evidence of our interest in that Celestial
Canaan, and heavenly Jerusalem, which is above. Again, shall Countrymen, in a
strange place, delight to be speaking of their native soil, their Fathers
house, the good Company and Society there? 1 Pet. 2.21. and shall not
believers, who are strangers and Pilgrims here, delight to be speaking of
Heaven, willingly and readily, with a kind of supernatural naturalness, as
being their native Country, because born from above, Joh. 3.3. Heaven born,
delight to be speaking of their Fathers house, where are many mansions, Joh.
14.2. and of that sweet, invaluable sweet society of Saints and Angels, yea of
Jesus Christ himself, which they shall then and there enjoy, and that for ever?
we know fellow-travellers love to be talking of their way, making that sure,
that they are right, Jer. 50.4, 5. and shall not Christians (who are journying
together with their faces Zion-ward, Joh. 14.6.
going, though possibly, weeping as they go) talk of Christ, the way, Heb.
12.14. and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, 2 Cor. 13.5. Make
Christ sure, that they are in Christ, and Christ in them; making their Callings
and Elections sure, giving all diligence thereunto? 2 Pet. 1.10. Surely it is
all the reason in the World, that they should be much in thinking, and much in
speaking of such high, such holy and happy things as these are: None is
ignorant, how good Yeomen, Farmers, and Husbandmen, when they meet at Markets,
or Faires, at home, or in the Fields, delight to discourse it about grounds
good or bad, the best seed, seedmen, and seedtime, about weeding their Corn in
due time, casting out the Cockel and darnel, burning the twich; and when
harvest comes, O how they work it with both hands, and their Tongues are going
as fast as their hands, in talking, laughing, whistling, and singing, and when
it is harvest home with them, O what shoutings and acclamations, what hooping
and hollowings, so loud and shrill, as that the Hills and Dales ring again, and
Echo it unto them! and to make up the Solemnities of their joy, the Horns are
winded, trumpets sounded, yea the fiddlers also are sometimes playing, with
boys and girls dancing: And when harvest is come home, the grain housed, then
the same husbandmen will be talking as fast as ever, touching their threshing,
fanning, sifting, and so forth: and their skill and wisdom in managing these
their affairs, is the gift of God: as the Prophet plainly and fully
acknowledges, speaking of the Plowmans plowing all day; Isa. 28.24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29.
his Casting abroad the fitches, and scattering the Cummin; his ordering the
wheat, the barley, and rye in their places, says, his God does instruct him to
discretion. Again, how the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin
with a rod. How bread Corn is bruised. He Concludes, This also comes forth
from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in
working. And to make way for this joyful harvest, husbandmen speak often of
plowing, and that soon enough, and deep enough, though in the cold winter
season: much, very much, if not too much of the Country man's discourse is
harping upon these strings: and shall not the generation of believers, who
themselves are Gods husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. Mat. 13.4, 5, 7, 8, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23.
be much in talking (they cannot be well too much) about those several grounds,
the highway, the stony and thorny ground, the good ground also, mentioned by
Christ in the parable, with the interpretation thereof.

And how the Word of God, in the plainness and power of it, is the good, the
best seed, faithful Ministers, such and such, are good seeds men, this life,
and therein youth especially when Consciences are stirred by the good motions
of the holy Spirit, is the time, the only seed time with us? and withal shall
not believers speak often one to another about cutting down, and plucking up by
the roots, the Cockel, and the darnel, the weeds, and the twich, errors in
judgment, unbelief, spiritual pride, earthly minededness, and all disorderly
passions and affections, consuming and destroying them by that spirit of
judgment and of burning? And though the Christians harvest, their full harvest,
come not till that last and great day, when all the elect, their souls and
bodies being reunited, (as shocks of Corn fully ripe) shall be gathered into
those everlasting barnes, and be housed in glory; yet shall the husbandman all
the year long rejoice and solace himself in the hopes of a rich Crop when the
harvest comes: and shall not believers all their life time, rejoice in the
hopes of the glory of God? Romans 5.2. Isa. 9.3.
and their joy be as the joy of harvest? yea, their joy be unspeakable, and
full of glory? and in order to all this, shall not believers in their Christian
Conference together, much and seriously mind each other to look to it, that the
plough of legal Convictions, Compunctions, and Humiliations, has gone deep
enough in their hearts, breaking up their fallow ground, that they sow not
among thorns? Jer. 4.3.
Certainly all the reason imaginable, excites the people of God to such kind of
discourses as these are. Again, we see how all men who are dealers in the
world, will be talking how the market goes, what good commodities in one kind,
or in another, they can buy, and upon what easy rates; and shall not believers
speak freely, and frequently, among themselves, (rejoicing therein, and giving
glory to God only) what good penny worths, they make, (if I may so express it)
how they have the choicest and the rarest commodities to be had, and that upon
the lowest terms? Isa. 55.12. Rev. 3.18. Waters, to cool and cleanse them;
Wine, to glad and cheer up their spirits; milk, to nourish them; bread, to
strengthen their hearts, yea and Eye Salve, that they may see; Gold, that they
may be rich; and white raiment, that they may be clothed, to wit, Christ and
his Spirit, grace and glory, and all this, (more than which is not to be had)
without price, and without moneys. It is but ask, and have; but take by
believing, and its all yours; surely such bargains as these, are worth the
having, the thinking of, and speaking of, with the highest exultations, and
with all possible triumphing of spirits whatsoever. Yet farther, shall
Scholars, when they meet, discourse it, concerning the famous Schools they were
bred in? shall their Tongues run nimbly whiles speaking of Arts and Sciences,
of Logic, or Philosophy, or of Divinity, dogmatical, or polemical, yea in all
manner of humane learning, whether Grammatical or Academical! And shall not
Christians, when they meet, tell one another how they were all trained up in
one School (it is the best, Ma. 4.38.
a nonesuch) the School of Christ, how they were, and still are his disciples,
his Scholars, how Christ is their Master, has taught them to fear God, Eccl.
12. To. 10.3. Ephesians. 1.2.
and keep his Commandments; to deny their own righteousness, and to establish
the righteousness of God in Christ, has taught them those hard lessons of
Faith, and repentance, of loving their enemies; so that they know how to want,
and how to abound; how to be empty, and how to be full, Mat. 5 44. Act. 5.31.
yea, how to live, and how to die: In a word, That they can do all things
through Christ strengthening the, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

Once more, shall Lawyers talk much of their Cases, and trials, and why not
Christians be putting of Cases of Consciences, and of the trials of their
faith, in times of temptations, persecutions, and defertions; when the very
trial of their faith is more precious than of Gold that perishes? 1 Pet. 1.
Shall Physicians and Chyrurgions with their Patients, be continually talking
of what wonderful Cures have been wrought by them, or upon them; I says one,
was even wasted and worn even to nothing but skin and bone, by pining
sickness, and a long lingering Consumption, but such a Doctor cured cured me,
and I am now full and fleshy, strong and hearty: And I, says another, was
troubled with sore Eyes, had almost quite lost my sight, but such an Oculist
healest me: and I, says a third, was grievously vexed and tormented with the
stone for so many years together, Oh the grinding pains of the stone, how have
they held me as upon the rack for weeks or months together; but such a
Surgeon cut me, fetched it away, so big, so ragged; and now I am at ease,
and as well as ever; and what? shall not the generation of believers speak much
and often of Christ their great Phesicion, what strange, yea, miraculous Cures
he has wrought in them, for and upon them, how they were in their
unregenerations pining away for and in their iniquities; Eze. 24.23.
a spiritual Consumption upon their souls, being hereditarie, from their
Forefathers even as far as Adam, yet Christ recovered them, Hos. 14.4.
healed their backslidings. How they were as to spiritual Eye-s^^ht, not only
dim-sighted, but quite blind, yea born blind, Ephesians. 1.1, 5.
but now they see; he anointed their Eyes, so that they see; yea are
quick-sighted through grace in the things of God; how they were born with a
stone in their hearts, Rev. 3.18. worse than those in the back or bladder; but
Christ has graciously taken away that stony heart, Ezekiel. 36.
and given a heart of flesh to them. Yea more than all this, Christians can and
do tell one another, how they were born Lepers, overrun with a noisome
leprosy of sin from head to foot; how that no sooner were they born, but
legions of Devils got possession of them (so many beloved lusts, as bad, or
worse than so many Devils) and how they were still born dead, quite dead in
Trespasses and Sins; but now through the riches of Grace in Christ, the Lepers
are cleansed, the Devils are cast out, and the dead are quickened and raised to
the life of grace and glory. Ephesians. 2.1.
To hasten, shall Soldiers, old Soldiers love to be talking of what battles
they have been in, what sharp Conflicts and hot disputes they have had with
such and such enemies, what victories obtained, what spoils they have divided,
what joyful triumphs they have solemnized? and shall not Old Disciples, yea,
all experienced believers, who are the good soldiers of Jesus Christ,
discourse, and love to discourse, what spiritual combats they have had, with
the Devil, the world, and the flesh, the corruption of their own hearts, their
unbelief, pride, passions, covetousness; how they have conflicted with ungodly
men, their Cruel mockings, and persecutions, yea how they have gotten the
victory, have overcome the world by their faith; ( Heb. 11.36. Gal. 4.29. Joh.
5.4.) what spoils they are enriched with, what answers to prayers, what
mortifying of such and such Corruptions, what eminent growth in grace, how
faith has been marvellously strengthened, love inflamed, zeal fired, longing
after communion with God heightened, and the like; and all this, because they
fought under such a Captain, who puts spirit and life into all marching under
his banners, even Jesus Christ the Captain of their Salvation, yea, the Lord of
Hosts himself, mighty in battle? Heb. 2.10. Jer. 50.34. Again, shall wrestlers
and racers speak much of their strength and swiftness? And why not believers of
their wrestling, not against flesh and blood, only, but against principalities,
and powers, Ephesians. (6.12.) and of their running with patience the race set before
them? He. 12.1. and how, they can do all things, through Christ which
strengthens them? shall wise men be speaking, Phil. 4.13. Je. 9.23, 24.
yea glorying in their wisdom, mighty men glorying in their might, and rich
men in their riches, which is their sin and their shame? and shall not the
Saints of the most high God, each glory in this, that he understands, and
knows me, says the Lord, which glorying is their duty, and honor also? yea,
Gal. 6.14.
glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom, or whereby, the world is
Crucified unto them, and they unto the world? shall men addicted to
recreations, who devote themselves to hunting and hawking, fishing and fowling,
speak much of what delight and contentment they find therein; one praising his
pack of Hounds, for being well mouthed, hunting close and round, as in a ring;
another commending his hawk for mounting high, as an Eagle, even to the Skies,
and when the foul arises, for falling and shooting down upon the prey, like a
thunder bolt out of the Clouds, and so forth? Then surely the generation of
believers have more cause to speak one to another, and that (not with a carnal
and sensual delight, as men in their sports and recreations but) with a
spiritual and heavenly cheariness, of what contentment and satisfaction they
have found in God, delighting themselves in the Lord their God? David speaks to
all his fellow Saints, Ps. 66.16.
Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my soul, to wit, how he has heard my prayers, quickened me when dull and dead,
raised me up when I was brought very low, delivered me from the hands of all
mine enemies, and from the Hands of Saul, Psalm. 18. the Title: He gives us his
judgment plainly, A day in thy Courts, O God, is better then a thousand: and
backs it with the choice he made; I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness, Ps. 84.10. Talk with men,
called of God according to his purpose, who in their youth poured out their
souls to vanities, to all manner of sports and pastimes, and they will
ingeniously confess, that they find more sweetness and hearts solace in one
hours communion with God in secret prayer, in one day of humiliation, or
thanksgiving, in hearing a good Sermon, or in being partakers of the Lords
Supper, and so sitting with the King at his Table, (Can. 1.12.) then they did
in all their youthful games and recreations all their days. To conclude,
shall the worst of men, the cheating gamester, the swinish drunkard, the
beastly adulterer, be so bold as to talk, and that in a jolly boasting way, of
their false Dice, and coggings, of their drinking down such and such, laying
them under the Table, of their defiling Women or Maidens, satisfying their lust
to the full with them, all glorying in their shame? Phil. 3.19. and shall not
Christians in their Conference speak freely with joy and thanksgivings
(ascribing all the glory to the Lord their God) of their diligence and
faithfulness in their lawful callings, of their Temperance and Chastity; yea
farther, how their hearts have bin raised up and ravished with holy
Meditations, and heavenly ejaculations; how their spirits are got above the
world, whilst in the world; how their fellowship is with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ, through the Spirit, 1 John 1.3. How the Father and the
Son love them, make their abode with them, and manifest themselves unto their
souls, Joh. 21.23. How Jesus Christ is pleased Can. 1.2. to kiss them with the
kisses of his mouth, day by day? O Friends, what I say, are not bare words, and
notions, but things and realities, and glorying herein is good, for it is
glorying in the Lord. But I fear my fancy and pen run too fast and too far in
this argument, possibly to the tiring of some faint and feeble readers:
Therefore in a word, know, the Devil drives a great and mighty, though an
ungodly and accursed. Trade in the Tongues of Sinners; they speak often one to
another, corrupting, poisoning, and debauching each other, and how unwearied
are they in this drudgery, advancing and promoting to their uttermost the
Kingdom of darkness, and of the Devil, as they are going toward Hell together:
and shall not our God, and Father, and our dear Redeemer Jesus Christ, carry on
an holy and blessed Trade, (if I may so phrase it) in the mouths and lips of
his Saints and Servants, his sons and daughters, to the convincing and
converting of sinners, if possible; or at the least, to the rendering them more
inexcusable in that great and terrible day of the Lord; and to the edifying,
strengthening, and comforting one another, speaking much of God, and for God,
even with all their might striving and laboring to enlarge the Kingdom of
Christ in grace here, and so in glory hereafter. Whilst we are Travelers here
below in our present pilgrimage, to be very busy, active, and toyling, as it
were, in the work of the Lord, will doubtless be upon our account to our
safety, comfort, and honor, in that happy day of our Lords appearance, Awake,
awake, O my glory, Psalm. 57.8. Let each real Saint say, Let us therefore arise
and be doing, and the Lord will be with us and prosper us, 1 Chr. 22.16.

Having proposed several arguments enforcing the necessity and usefulness of
Christian Conference, I proceed to lay down some directions, for the better
performance of that great and weighty duty; which may fall under two heads,
either habitual preparation for, or actual execution in the discharge of that
duty.

Habitual preparation.
Touching our habitual preparation for this spiritual service, let me commend to
all,

1. Heart purity.
Heart purity, full of God, and good, which will fill the mouth with discourse
of God and good, For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mat.
12.34, 35. As the fountain is to the stream, such is the heart to language;
both good, or both bad: And our present state being mixed and imperfect, the
purer the fountain is, the more Crystal are the streams flowing from it. But
for the making up this heart purity there is requisite.

1. By Blood.
Our being washed white in the blood of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.5. Nothing washes
white indeed, but blood; and no blood, but the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14.
not Tears, though penitential Tears, and rivers of these Tears; for all our
Tears, when all is done, even themselves need washing. The justification of our
persons by the gracious imputation of the righteousness of Christ, and by faith
received, is the prime and grand requisite; pride and vain glory may squeeze
good words out of the mouths of persons, unjustified, unsanctified, strangers,
mere strangers to regeneration, (they lisping and stammering, shuffling and
bungling at it), but holy language never flows freely and sweetly indeed,
till Christ dwells in the heart by faith. That Tree of life, whose fruit is
for meat, and leaves for the healing of the Nations, makes, and alone makes
fountains and streams, hearts and language, sweet and wholesome, which else
would be bitter and brackish, yea noisome and poisonous. Heb. 9.13, 14. The
Apostle argues from the less to the greater, from the Law to the Gospel; if the
blood of bulls etc. How much more etc.

2. By the Spirit.
Washed also in the waters of the Sanctuary, by the holy spirit of
Sanctification, infusing and implanting gracious qualities and habits into the
Soul, fitting it to utter speech gracious, and such as may minister grace to
the hearers; and that from such principles as these.

1. Faith.
An habit and principle of faith, eying God and eying duty; I believed (says
holy David, Psalm. 116.10.) therefore have I spoken. Prayer is faith speaking to
God; and holy Language, is says speaking to men; faith herein eyeing the
command of God, is obedient and does duty, and eyeing promises of blessings
thereunto annexed, is heartened and takes encouragement.

2. Love.
Love to God, to our neighbors, and to our selves, that Gods glory may be
advanced, our neighbors spiritual good promoted, and our own inward peace
preserved, by a Conscientious discharge of this duty. The truth is, (to speak
plain English) that even forward professors themselves being too miserably
Tongue-tied as to Christian Conference, argues, that there is but little true
love to God, to our neighbors, or our selves, to be found in us. Paul had
another frame of spirit, more lively, more communicative, Romans 1.11, 12. He
longs to see the Romans, that he might impart to them some spiritual gift, to
the end that they might be established, that he might be comforted together
with them, by a mutual faith. And this is certain, his way of imparting to
them, was not in preaching to them only, but in conferring and discoursing
with them also, for their establishment, his comfort and theirs, and the glory
of God in all. Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. Puffs
up, as a bladder with wind: Charity edifieth, or builds up others, as an
house or Temple for God.

3. Fear.
There is required an holy fear, and awe of God upon our spirits, They that
feared the Lord (says the Prophet Mal. 3.16.) spoke often one to another, etc.
and therefore they spoke often one to another, because they feared the Lord.
And the reason is clear, and plain: all who fear God, know that he is offended
by sinful silence, as well as by sinful language. Omissions are destructive as
well as Commissions, and negatives as positives. The servant that hid his
Talent, is punished with a vengeance, Mat. 25.30. Cast ye the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Not
only that evil servant which smote his fellow servants, did eat and drink with
the drunken; when the Lord came, was cut in sunder, and had his portion
appointed with hypocrites where is weeping and gnashof teeth? Mat. 24.48, 49,
50, 51. The same dreadful doom and dismal vengeance falls on both; the idle
servant, and the wicked. Silence or speech, if sinful, are both accursed.

4. Musing.
A musing, meditabundous spirit, much fits and disposes us for holy
Conference, They who are much in the thoughts of God are like to be much also
in speaking of God, and for God; Mal. 3.16. They that thought on his name spoke
often one to another. David tells us Psalm. 39.3. My heart was hot within me,
while I was musing the fire burned; then spoke I with my Tongue. Be it he spoke
in Prayer to God, as his next words import, verse 3. Lord make me to know my
end, etc. It holds also in holy Conference, words for God; though to men. A
full vessel must have vent: and an heart full of holy meditations, will vent it
self in holy communications with men, and in holy ejaculations, prayers, and
praises to God.

5. Delighting in God.
A delighting our selves in God, his word, works, and ways, would dispose us
to a more warm and frequent speaking of God, his word, works, and ways.
Naturally men love, and take occasion to be speaking of such things as they are
much delighted in. Holy David who said Ps. 119.24. Thy Testimonies are my
delight, said also, verse. 72. My Tongue shall speak of thy words. And again
when he had said, I will speak of thy Testimonies before Kings, and will not be
ashamed, ver. 46. he adds his incitement thereto, I will delight in thy
Commandments which I have loved.

6. Wisdom.
Wisdom is a great requisite, for the well ordering of the Tongue; to know the
time to speak, and the time to keep silence, Eccl. 3.71. The virtuous woman
opens her mouth with wisdom. And the man that refraineth his lips is wise
also, Prove. 31.26. Prove. 10.19. Wisdom keeps the door of the lips, opens
and shuts them in due season; It Is the Wisdom of the Magistrate which guides a
tumultuous people: the wisdom of the Pilot, which steers the ship tossed with
winds and billows; and it is wisdom in believers, which rules Tongues, as
tumultuous and turbulent as winds and waves, or as an heady multitude: It is an
unruly evil, says the Apostle, James 3.8.

7. Courage.
And lastly, he that will order his Tongue well, and his discourse aright, had
need be one of great courage and resolution; for many and great discouragements
will arise from within and from without, to stop the course of Christian
Conference: David is a resolved man, Psalm. 39.1. I will take heed to my ways
that I offend not with my tongue. I will keep my mouth with a bridle, (Orig. A
bridle or muzzel for my mouth.) And Job is so resolved a man, Job. 27.24.
as that he binds himself by an oath, as God lives, my lips shall not speak
wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. The Tongue is as the bow, words as the
arrows, (it is Scripture language) courage and resolution are as the arms which
bend and draw the bow; wisdom as the eye, which levels and lays the arrow
right: both together shoot near, or hit the mark and white, in Christian
Conference.

A second preparative direction for the well managing of Christian Conference,
Direct. A form of sound words.
is, to get and hold fast a form of sound words in faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.13. Faith and love, that is, what is to be believed, and
done, and so takes in the whole systeme and body of Divinity. If this would be,
and was a good help to Timothy, for the carrying on of the work of his
Ministry, then surely, it is greatly useful for private believers in the
maintaining of Christian Conference, in the places and companies into which
providence casts them. For knowledge guides the motions of our lips, as
eyesight does the motions of our feet. A blind man must be lying, sitting, or
standing still; if he will be going, he soon stumbles, and falls. An ignorant
person must keep silence: if he will be talking, he soon trips and falters, and
falls under disgrace and Contempt, in an understanding company. And these heads
of divinity in order to Christian Conference, may be either,

General matter.
1. General, which concerns all persons, in all places, and at all times. As,
1. Concerning God, his Titles, Names, Attributes, works of Creation and
Providence. Or 2. Concerning sin, its heinous nature, how it and nothing else
is abominable to God, and destructive to man. Or 3. touching death, how all
must die, none knows how soon. Or 4. concerning Christ, the great and
glorious work of redemption, wrought by him; his ability, and willingness to
save every poor lost sinner, who comes to him for life; how little we are
sensible of our want of Christ, or of the worth of Christ, how little Christ is
prized by us, or beloved of us, or believed in, or longed after by us, or of
that absolute indispensable necessity there is of our getting union with him,
or else of our unavoidable misery, and that for ever. 5. As also concerning
hell, the pains and torments of the damned, endless, easeless, and remedyless;
and touching also the joys of Heaven, and happiness there, such as eye has
not seen, ear has not heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive, 1 Cor. 14.9. and these too for ever and ever: And withal concerning
doomsday, that dreadful day, when that trumpet shall sound, that loud shrill
voice be heard all the world over, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment; when
the earth and the Seas shall give up their dead, and all shall stand naked
before that righteous Judge, the Lord Jesus Christ, out of whose mouth shall
proceed those two last words, Mat. 25.34, 41. Come ye blessed, and go ye
cursed, etc. and so Saints and sinners shall part for ever: The righteous, who
are the blessed of the Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for them and go
into life eternal: but sinners shall go into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his Angels. These particulars, an ancient Minister (now with God)
laid down thus:

Thy God, thy sin, thy death, thy Christ,
The eternal pains of Hell,
The Joys of Heaven, the day of doom,
These seven remember well.
Add hereunto the vanity of all Creature excellencies, riches, pleasures,
honors, beauties, wit, strength, nimbleness of body, etc. as also buildings,
feastings, wine, women, music, or what ever any mistaken soul calls
delectable. Solomon, the wisest of Kings, got up (if I may so express my self)
to the top of the mountain of all Created excellencies; and seeing multitudes
clambering and climbing up the hill after him, some for riches, some for
pleasures, some for honors, etc. he beckons to them all, and cries aloud, down
again, back again, back again, I have seen, and find all to be Vanity of
Vanities, Vanity of Vanities, Eccl. 1.3.

Especially let me commend to you two common Theams for the Subjects of your
discourse; the sinfulness and misery of man by nature; with the beauty and
loveliness of Jesus Christ: for the bringing others under the due and deep
convictions of sin in themselves, and of righteousness in Jesus Christ to be
found, and in him only; that so sin may be imbittered, self may be emptied of
all it is own conceited righteousness, and Christ may be indeared, as the only
rock to build upon; and holiness embraced, as the way to happiness, and glory,
Heb. 12.14. Deal with the sons and daughters of men, as the Spouse of Christ
dealt with the daughters of Jerusalem, My beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand: his head is the most fine Gold, Can. 5.10 to 16.
etc. and so goes on in a larg and lively description of Jesus Christ; and
concludes, yea he is altogether lovely: this is my beloved, and this is my
friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. Who knows but others thereby may be enamoured
with Christ, and stirred up to make enquiry after him, as the daughters of
Jerusalem did; whose question presently it was, Whither is thy beloved gone, O
thou fairest among women, whither is he turned aside, that we may seek him with
thee? Can. 6.1. An heart filled with sweet Meditations concerning Christ, and
warm affections to Christ, will be breaking out in high commendations, and
recommendations of Christ to others also; witness David, who says, Psalm. 45.1.
My heart is inditing of a good matter, and presently adds, I speak of the
things I have made touching the King; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
[Is inditing] in the Original, toileth, or bubleth up, fryeth, as in a frying
pan, to wit, my heart studieth and prepares, by warm and fervent meditation;
alluding to the Mincah, or meat offering under the Law, made of fine Flour, and
dressed in the Frying-pan^ boiled in Oil, and then presented to the Lord by the
Priest, ( Lev. 2.5, 8, 9.) So the matter of Divine Meditation, is as the
Mincah, the oblation boiled in the grace of the holy Spirit, as in Oil, so
prepared, and presented to the Lord by Christ our great High Priest. Such
should all our Holy Meditations and Communications be, the Spirit of God being
as firelight in our heads, and heat in our hearts, would make our Tongues run
as the Pens of ready writers, talking and discoursing of God, and of the great
concernments of our souls and of eternity. Heads filled with the knowledge of
God, his Christ, our Jesus, and hearts filled with Faith and affiance in
Christ, and so with warm affections to Christ, would provoke us to speak freely
and frequently to others, imparting our spiritual experiences to them, carrying
Christ to the Children of men, inviting and drawing others to Christ, exerting
and putting out to our uttermost that strength of grace which we have by grace
received, thus laying out our talents for our Masters use.

Special matter.
2. And particularly, it is a good preparative for Christian Conference, to be
well stockt and furnished with special matter of discourse, for special
occasions, as to times and persons, and the condition of those with whom we do
or may converse; If with young people, Young.
wishing them to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, 2 Timothy
2.22. If with aged persons, Old.
advising them to look to it, that their hoary heads be found in a way of
righteousness, (Prove. 16.31.) and telling them, that a sinner, though of an
hundred years is accursed, (Isa. 65.20.) asking them, whithey have found that
promise made good to them and in them, how that they shall bear fruit in their
old age, and shall be fat and flourishing, (Ps. 92.14, 15.) to wit, in
knowledge, grace and holiness: If with afflicted ones, in any kind, Afflicted.
minding them how the time of being afflicted, is a time to be much in prayer,
Jam. 5.13. Call upon me (says the Lord) in a day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
Though we must pray continually, (1 Th. 5.17.) yet then in an especial manner;
and repent also, as good King Hezekiah did, in his sickness he prayed and wept
sore, Isa. 38.2, 3. If with persons full of wisdom, and policy, Prosperous.
mighty men for strength and soldiery, wealthy thy men, full of Moneys and
Treasures, mind them of the Prophets advise and Counsel, Jer. 9.23, 24. Let not
the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither the mighty man glory in his might;
let not the rich man glory in his riches; but let him that gloryeth, glory in
this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which
exercises loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth: for in
these things I delight, says, the Lord. Tell the strongest, sturdiest, and
stoutest men you talk with, that as lusty as they are, a few fits of an ague
may soon weaken them and bring them low enough; or that a Consumption, or any
pining sickness, may bring them to be bare skin and bones, very Skeletons, or
Anatomies; and to be sure in old age (if they live to it) The keepers of the
house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves; and the hoary
head will hang down: the grave must be their house, and their long home, and
their faces bound in secret: wish them to remember the days of darkness, for
they shall be many, Ec. 12.3, 5. Job. 17.13. Job 40.13. Eccl. 11.8. If you meet
with rich men, Charge them to be rich in good works, Rich.
and to honor God with their substance, and to make them friends of the Mammon
of unrighteousness, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Pro. 3.9. Luke 16.9. If with poor people,
first relieve them, Poor.
and then charge them not to steal, not to take the name of God in vain; to get
poverty of spirit, and then they are blessed; to be rich in faith, and so heirs
of the Kingdom, Prove. 30.9. Mat. 5.31. Jam. 2.5.

Here Is a large field before me, but I Will run and hasten. If you discourse with
Magistrates, Magistrates.
be their humble remembrancer, that Gods great ends in his constitution of
civil powers, are, that they should be a terror, not to good works, but to the
evil, be able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, Romans
13.3. Exo. 18.21. If with Ministers, advise them, Ministers.
to take heed to themselves, and to their Doctrine; continue in them, etc. to
be examples to believers in word and conversation, 1 Timothy 4.12, 16. Tell them,
they are, in a special manner, the salt of the earth, (Mat. 5.13.) to season
the places wherein, and the persons among whom they live, with soundness of
Doctrine, and integrity of life and conversation; your Doctrine giving the
people the Rule, and your lives the example: but if the salt has lost it is
savor, it is good for nothing, no not for the dunghill, Luke 14.34, 35. It Is
true, not alone of Scandalous Ministers, but of Apostate Christians and
backsliding professors. If you discourse with married persons, husbands and
wives, Married. Luke 1.6.
advise them to be as Zachary and Elizabeth, both righteous before God,
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless: and in
particular, the husband to love his wife, even as himself, and the wife to see
that she reverence her husband, Ephesians. 5.33. Unmarried.
If with unmarried ones, counsel them, to care for the things of the Lord, how
they may please the Lord, 1 Co. 7.32. but if they think good to marry, let them
marry, only in the Lord, verse. 34, 39. If you meet with parents, Parents.
advise them, to bring up their Children in the nurture, and admonition of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. To bring them up, that is natural; birds and beasts bring up
their young: In the nurture, keeping them in awe and order, that is moral; men
as men, being rational and prudent do it: in the admonition of the Lord,
that is Christian and spiritual. If with Children, enjoin them, to obey their
Parents in the Lord, for this is right, Ephesians. 6.11. Children.
And to prevent their stubborness and disobedience, mind them of that terrible
commination, The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his
Mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall
eat it. And how that under the Law, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. The stubborn and
rebellious son which would not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of
his mother, was to be stoned to death. If you discourse with governors of
Families, Masters or Mistresses, mind them, Governors of Families.
how they must give unto their servants that which is just and equal, knowing
that they also have a Master in Heaven, Col. 4.1. And how they must look to it,
that their menservants and maidservants (as well as themselves and their
Children) sanctify the Sabbath, according to the Fourth Commandment, not
suffering them to idle it, or to wander abroad vainly upon the Lords day.
Servants.
If you have occasion to deal with servants, Charge them, to obey their Masters
in all things, not with eye-service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of
heart, fearing God. Not answering again, not purloining, showing all
fidelity, Col. 3.22. Tit. 2.9, 10. Yet again, 15. Ignorance.
if you meet with them that are ignorant, tell them, That the soul be without
knowledge is not good; and the high aggravation of the gross ignorance of many,
is, that they are willingly ignorant, neither know, nor desire, or care to know
the things of God, Prove. 19.2. 2 Pet. 3.5. If with men of knowledge, 16. Knowing.
caution them to beware least their knowledge puffs them up; but rather being
acted and managed by and with Charity, that it edify, being laid out for the
good of others; and their lips being the lips of the righteous, let them feed
many by Christian Conference and holy communication with others, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
Prove. 10.21.

I might be very large and voluminous herein; but to close up this direction;
be still furnished to speak to any persons whatsoever, of such points as are of
universal concernment, as touching regeneration; the absolute, indispensable
necessity of it to salvation: as also touching our having a saving interest in
Jesus Christ. Christ told Nicodemus in plain terms, ( Joh. 3.3, 5.) That except
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And expressly (as to the
necessity of union with Christ) He that has the Son, has everlasting life;
and he that has not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him, verse. 36.

A third preparative direction, Direction.
for the promoting of Christian Conference, in all places and companies where
we come, is to begin at home each Christian setting it up and keeping it up in
his own house and Family, that so wife, Children, and servants, may gain an
habit of good and savoury discourse, to be acted and exercised when you or they
go abroad; as children, mannerly, or rude and unmannerly at home, use so to
carry themselves abroad also: and such talk and discourse as is used at home by
husbands and wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, is like to be
their language abroad also. The Lord by Moses gives his peremptory command, as
to good discourse in families, These words which I command thee this day, shall
be in thy heart; and thou shall talk of them, when thou sit in thy house,
and in thy lying down, and rising up, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Such was wise King Solomon's
practice, which gave occasion to Sheba Queen of the South in her Princely visit
to him, to say unto him, Happy are these thy servants, which stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy wisdom, etc. Custom is another nature: use
legs, and have legs: use memory, and have memory: use good discourse, and you
will have good discourse. I have seen Children, boys and girls, had to
neighbor houses, upon occasion of feasting, visits, or the like; and when
their parents call upon them for manners, saying, sir, where is your hat, and
your leg, and girl; where is your Cursy? but no hat off, no leg or Cursy made,
why? not used to it at home. So when we come into Christian Company, and we
provoke our selves to carry on good discourse, and say, Awake my glory, Answer
is given, no, sleep at home, must sleep abroad also. Acts frequent beget habits
acquired, and strengthen infused. A dexterity in the managing of Christian
Confernece aright, as to matter, manner, principles, and ends, is I presume, an
infused habit, a special gift of God. Isa. 50.4.
The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how
to speak a word in season to him that is weary. [Given me,] that is, me the
Prophet in his measure; or rather, given me, is meant of Christ, on whom the
Spirit is poured without measure, yet so as that every believer has his
proportion of the Spirit, and so of this gift and habit of Christian Conference
to be used, and so improved and strengthen, by a frequent and vigorous acting
of it for the glory of God, and the good of our selves and others, with whom we
have occasion to converse. Let it be one of thy Christian exercises, to act and
strengthen this habit, day by day, in this language and communication.

A fourth preparative direction may be repentance and humiliation for our great
failing in our great neglect of so great a duty as Christian Conference is.
Humiliation.
We spend little of our time and strength in this duty, to wit, in such
discourse as has a proper and direct tendency, to the conversion or
edification of the hearers; we are much, if not too much upon this talk, what
news abroad? speaking of persons, this body, or that, magnifying some too
high, vilifying and depressing others too low; possibly erring in a way of
flattery on the one hand, or of envy and hatred on the other; blameworthy in
both.

A fifth Direction I would give, 5 Prayer.
is, the pouring out a prayer to God in faith and love every morning, that he
would guide thy discourse all the day long. It was David's prayer, Ps. 141.3.
Set a watch O Lord before my Mouth, keep the door of my lips: And again, Ps.
51.15. O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise; and
that thou may pray in faith, plead the promise, The Tongue of the dumb shall
sing, Isa. 35.6. fulfilled in the Gospel Corporally and Spiritually: Christ
made, and still makes the dumb to speak, and that to his, and his Father's
glory: when they brought a dumb man to Christ, possessed of a Devil, Christ
cast out the Devil, and the dumb spoke, etc. Mat. 9.32, 33. Then the promise
was made good in the very letter of it: and in the spirit of it also, when the
Children in the Temple cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, Mat. 21.15,
16. and so fulfilled that prediction in Psalm. 8.2. Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings thou have perfected praises. Go to God in Christ, and say, what
though a kind of dumb Devil possesses me; thou can, and do thou cast him
out. What though I be but a babe in Christ, and a suckling in grace, yet thou
can, and O do thou, out of the mouth of a babe and suckling, as I am, ordain
strength. Pray in faith, fervency and constancy, and who knows, but the
gracious Lord thy God may loose and unty thy Tongue, and create the fruits,
even of thy lips, peace, peace, for his own glory, the good of others, and thy
comfort here and for ever: And in thy discourse let holy secret ejaculations be
frequent and fervent also.

A sixth Direction, is to be much in praises, 6. In praises.
(which also will make prayer more successful) having found by sweet
experience, Optimum rogandi genus est gratia agere.
that God does enable thee sometimes to let fall some good words, in obedience
to his Commandment, eyeing his glory, and the good of the hearers, telling them
what God has done for thy soul, Ps. 66.16. Be sure to offer up to God the
Calves of thy lips, a sacrifice of praises on that behalf. In the evening look
back on the day past, and say, what have my words bin this day; if vain and
idle, be humbled, and lie low before the Lord; if at all gracious and savoury,
lift up thy heart to God in praises, giving him all the glory. Thus far
concerning our habitual preparations for Christian Conference. Now touching
actual execution, when we are in company, take these following directions,
which may fall under two heads; Negative directions, and positive.

1. Negatives to be cautioned against and carefully avoided.

1. As to the outward man, that the body be not distempered, and so indisposed
for so spiritual a piece of service as Christian Conference is, as by
intemperance, or excess in eating and drinking, which has a spice of gluttony
or drunkenness in it, when it unfits for duty, or this duty among the rest.
Meats and drinks immoderately taken in, fill the head with fumes and vapors,
and incline to sleep rather then discourse: if the mouth take in too much, the
tongue is likely to send out too little, as to Conference heavenly and
spiritual. The body is to soul as the instrument to the Musician: let the
Musician be never so skilful, yet if the instrument be out of tune, there is
like to be but little melody. Though the head be full of good notions, clear
and strong, the heart stored with grace and good affections, yet a disordered
body marrs the music of holy discourse and Conference.

2. Inward man 1. Passion.
As to the inward man.

1. Beware of irregular passions, disturbances in the affections, the lower
part of the soul of man. To instance only in anger, grief, and fear. Anger
disposes a man to speak too much, and grief too little; and fear, not to speak
at all, or else in an abrupt and broken manner. I remember, in university
disputations, if the opponent could put the respondent, or the respondent the
opponent into a flame of anger, or into a damp of pannick fear, he would soon
nonplus and gravel the Antagonist. It Is much so in Conference, though about
matters of Religion: violent passions obstruct and impede the understanding
faculty, in its clear and distinct actions and operations. Passions when boiled
up to an undue heat and height, do no more befriend the intellect in it is
reasonings and argumentations, then foggs, mists, and clouds, do the Sun in its
shinings; not at all, they obscure and much darken the Sun and so does passion
reason.

2. Pride.
Beware of Pride, high, overhigh thoughts and conceits of our selves, our
sufficiency and ability. 1. Pride usually is a great ingrosser, takes up all
the time and all the talk, as if he were the only Rabby, the Teacher, Master,
all the rest fit only to be hearers and his Disciples; inverting or perverting
the words of the Apostle, who bids us be swift to hear, slow to speak; Jam.
1.19. The proud man is slow to hear, swift to speak. 2. Pride is a deceiver,
speaking beside the condition, or above the Capacity of the Company; The reason
is, because the proud man is a self-seeker, carried and acted by a principle of
vainglory and ostentation; and therefore speaks what he apprehends himself
best able to speak, as what he has lately heard, or read, though impertinent
as to his present auditory, or so sublime as to matter and language in
School-distinctions and metaphysical notions and speculations, as that the
Company know not what he says, or whereof he affirms. An evil found among
some public Preachers sometimes, who though they speak English, preach (as it
were) in an unknown Tongue, much above the Capacities of the people, who go
away filled with admiration or the man's parts and gifts, though nothing at all
benefited, as to edification or salvation: yet wit and eloquence is good, even
in Conference, provided it be without vain affection, be clearly to be
understood, be disswasive from evil, and persuasive unto good.

3. In reference to the whole man.
In reference to the whole man. Beware of losing time, precious time; whilst
you be in company, not trifling or squandring it away in sinful silence, or in
vain and worldly talk, much less in sinful and corrupt Communication; the least
minute of time being too good to be spent in idle words, not tending at all to
the glory of God, or to the spiritual advantage of our selves or others. A
Heathen by the light of Nature could say, Solius temporis sacra avaritia.
that of time alone there is a sacred covetousness. And the Apostle, by the
light of the Spirit, says, that the redemption of time, is a considerable part
of our Christian wisdom: walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15, 18.
not as fools, but as wise, how so? he adds, redeeming the time etc. redemption
of time is laudable, yea necessary, for self-examination, soul humiliation,
secret prayer, reading and searching the Scriptures, meditation when alone, and
for good discourse when we are with others.

2. For positive directions, take them then, 1. Common discourse.


1. Common discourse may be introductory to special and spiritual; and
interjectory, cast in by the by, as sauce to meat. For instance, it is lawful,
and in some cases a duty to discourse of things natural, as of diet, physic,
medicines for the preserving or restoring of health and strength in our selves
or others, to discourse of things civil, and moral, buying, selling, manuring
of Land, plowing, sowing, family concernments, public affairs of Nations; and
even this discourse may be in a sense spiritual, in regard of principle and
ends, when it is done with an eye to Gods commands; receiving directions for the
ordering and guiding of affairs with discretion, one property of a man fearing
God, Ps. 112.1, 5. And to discourse touching the stateof Zion at home or
abroad, is not only lawful, but an high and holy duty, provided we do not
discourse it barely as News; for so it leaves us, as it found us; but to
provoke us to suitable affections of rejoicing with the sons and daughters of
Zion when they rejoice, and weeping with them when they weep, and to excite us
to such holy duties, as the present providence calls for at our hands; as good
Nehemiah asked Hanani, Neh. 1.2, 3.
and the men of Judah, concerning the Jews lost in the captivity, and
concerning Jerusalem; and hearing that they were in great affliction and
reproach, and how the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the gates thereof
burnt with fire, O how deeply was he affected therewith, how did he lay it to
heart: when I heard these words, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain
days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, verse. 4. His prayer is
upon record, verse. 5. to the end of the Chapter. And withal; when the Lord
turns again the Captivity of Zion, we are like unto them that dream, our
mouth is filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing, Psalm. 126.1, 2, 3,
4. Such Sympathizing frames are sweet and honorable.

Mirth and Cheerfulness.
2. Mirth and pleasantness of speech, by way of cheariness and recreation, is
not only lawful, but expedient by way of introduction, or of interjection, cast
in now and then, being as sauce to the meat that so more solid and serious
discourse may go down more easily, and it may be more profitable also. And now
I am accidently (as it were) fallen upon this Theme, give me leave to speak
something concerning this kind of talk; though it be a digression, and should
be somewhat a large digression; yet by the blessing of God, it may be for his
glory, and the spiritual good of readers, or hearers; which I desire may run in
three streams, 1. Showing the lawfulness of mirth and pleasantness of speech,
and in some cases a duty. 2. Touching the usefulness and expediency of it in
some cases. Thirdly Cautions to prevent miscarriages therein, which are soon
and easily run into; a merry heart being like a boiling pot, which if not well
eyed, and looked to, will quickly sieth over. 1. As concerning the lawfulness
of mirth and merry discourse, even to laughter, methinks its evincible upon
these accounts.

Natural Faculty.
1. God and Nature has given man a faculty of risibility, as a property
distinguishing him specifically from other Greatures, and surely not in vain,
but this Faculty may be acted and exercised; and Solomon tells us, that there
is a time to laugh, as well, as a time to weep, Eccl. 3.4. And if mirth and
laughter be lawful, then cheerful discourse is lawful also, as being a natural
means, exciting thereunto, or rather part thereof.

2. It Is highly commended at least, Commended.
if not commanded also by the wisest of Kings, acted and guided by the
inspiration of God, who tells us, that there is nothing better for a man, then
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in
his labor; This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God, Eccl. 2.24.
chap. 3.13, 22. chap. 5.18. chap. 8.15. He often strikes and harps upon this
meery string. When he says there is nothing better etc. he speaks not
absolutely and simply, for the love and favor of God in Christ, the fear of
God seasoning our hearts, is far better; yea, the assurance of the acceptance
of our persons and services is better also, as being the ground and occasion of
our mirth and merriment; as he expresses it, Go thy way, eat thy bread with
joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepts thy works,
Eccl. 9.7. The root is better in the fruit, the cause in the effect; To know
our acceptance with God in all our natural and civil mirth and merriment,
though it be also honest and lawful. So that when he says nothing is better,
he speaks comparatively, that riches, houses, lands are good, but the
comfortable enjoyment of them is better, using them to the glory of God, to the
chearing up and refreshing our selves and others, doing good with them, and
rejoicing in God in the liberal, yet sober use of them. And to be sure, the
Spirit of God in Solomon had no mind by these expressions to patronize
Epicurisme, sensuality, gluttony, drunkenness; though some wanton profane wits
may study to wrest such a carnal liberty from them; which to do has in it a
spice of blasphemy.

3. It Is commanded also; Commanded.
and it is not only lawful, but a duty: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye
righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32.11.
[Shouting] is laughing in in its elevation and triumph. But why? Because He
that trusts in the Lord; mercy shall compass him about, verse. 10. It Is
commanded by the Apostle, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice,
Phil. 4.4. Rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. You Will say, this joy is spiritual;
Yea, that is it I Would have, as best becoming the gravity and sanctity of
Christians. Joy in the heart, holy, and heavenly, venting it self by a
lightsome countenance, by cheerful discourse, and singing also a duty much
neglected, scarce any more enforced, four times in a verse, Sing praises to
God, sing praises: sing praises unto our king, sing praises, Psalm. 47.6. and
civil mirth, if regular, helps rather then hinders spiritual, of which by and
by.

4. It Is promised, Promised.
and duties are couched in promises: what God promises we shall be, or do, is
our duty to be and do, They shall praise the Lord that seek him: your heart
shall live for ever, Psalm. 22.26. [Shall live] or be lively, cheerful,
comfortable; as when Jacob heard that Joseph was alive, the spirit of Jacob
revived, Genesis 45.27. To the same purpose, The humble shall see this and be
glad, your heart shall live that seek God, Psalm. 69.32. As at the downfall of
Gods and his Churches enemies; so upon Doegs ruin, it is promised, That the
righteous shall see and fear, and laugh at him, Lo, this is the man; that made
not God his strength, Psalm. 52.6, 7.

5. Practiced by the best of Saints. Practiced.
The man after Gods own heart was the sweet singer of Israel. He Is upon a merry
pin, but an holy, a pin in the Sanctuary: He cries out, Awake my glory, awake
Psaltery and Harp; I my self will awake early, Ps. 57.8. or, I Will awake the
morn, be up before it, and fit it up, Ainsworth.
especially when it goes well with Zion; The Book of Esther is a book of
Providence, of amazing Providence: Esther is made Queen, is spirited for the
work with zeal and wisdom, Mordecai is advanced, Haman is hanged, the Jews
are delivered, and by them their enemies destroyed; and what joy and rejoicing
is thereupon? Their Purims instituted, days of feasting and joy, and of
sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor, Est. 9.20, 21, 23. Like
to them, this was the temper of the Churches of God, when the Jews returned
out of the Babilonish Captivity; Ps. 12.12.
When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion, we were like to them that
dream; then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing,
etc. I might tell you how that before all this, when Pharaoh and his host were
drowned in the Red sea, Exo. 19.1.
Moses and all Israel sung a sweet song unto the Lord, etc. and how after all
this when Antichrist, that great Pharisaical of Rome shall be destroyed, the
Saints will have a merry time of it; when the harps of them are in their hands,
and the Song of Moses* and of the Lamb in their mouths, Rev. 15.2, 3.

I confess the joy and rejoicing commanded, promised, and practiced, was, for
the main, spiritual, heavenly, and supernatural, yet not exclusive of mirth
natural and civil, for there was feasting: The Jews had joy, Est. 8.17. Neh.
8.10.
and gladness, a feast and a good day, and in their feasts, did eat the fat,
and drink the sweet. And let me add this, that even civil mirth, well ordered
and regulated, is a good natural preparative for rejoicing in a more sublime
and holy manner: And the reason is, because of the Spirits which are in men,
natural, animal, and vital spirits, engendered in the Livers, heads and hearts
of men, which being kept up lively and agil by civil mirth, are as wings to the
Souls even of Saints, in their sublimer, higher, and nobler operations; And
herein I may appeal to the experience of the choicest servants of God, who find
when their spirits are down and low, an indisposition in them thereby for holy
duties. The disciples themselves, when they should have been watching and
praying, Jesus Christ found them sleeping for sorrow. But when our Spirits are
up, lively, Luke 22.45.
and cheary, they dispose for duty, and our heads and hearts, as wheels oyled,
move more nimbly.

2. As for the usefulness and expediency of mirth and lightsomness (I say not
levity) of spirit, Useful. 1. Preservation of the bodies health.
It Is not only serviceable to the soul, in its gracious actings, and
operations, (as I said before) but to the body also, for the preservation of
health and strength, vigor and activity, by the multiplying and refining of
spirits in us: A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance. It does good indeed
to the whole body; Prove. 15.13.
but the good it does, appears and shows it self especially in the
Countenance, as being made thereby more amiable and lovely, the eye more lively
and sharp-slighted, the Cheeks more ruddy, the blood more pure, and sparkling.
Though the countenance only is mentioned, yet the whole body is to be
understood, as receiving good by the hearts cheeriness; for though the soul and
body differ in substance, as spirit and flesh, yet God having joined them
together in so close a union, (as to the making up of one person) they mutually
sympathize each with other, a sickly body makes a sad heart, and a wounded
spirit makes a crasie body; and I think the body is less able to bear the
souls burdens, then the soul is the bodies. To return to what is in hand, that
[a merry heart, countenance] appears by the example of Esau (none of the best)
whose heart being gladded by the present sent by Jacob, when they met, his
countenance was so cheerful that Jacob said, Genesis 33.10.
I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God. And by Daniel, and
his associates (none of the worst) who though they did eat pulse only, and had
nothing but water to drink, yet their countenances were fair and fat, ( Deuteronomy.
12.15.) Why, they had merry hearts, quiet consciences in their breasts and
bosoms, arising from their reconciliation and peace with God. It Is not choice
meats and drinks, much less painting or dawbing with vermilions, but a good
conscience that makes a merry heart, and so a cheerful countenance. To the same
purpose, verse. 15. He that is of a merry heart, has a continual feast. By [a
merry heart] he means not carnal mirth and jollity, in eating, drinking,
singing, music, dancing this he elsewhere calls madness; but the merry heart
he commends, is a good conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ; his
righteousness being imputed to us for our justification; and so having peace
with God, Ecc. 2.2.
and peace of Conscience: which the Apostle expresses by a pure heart, a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. Once ag^^^e the wise King tells us,
That a merry (...) does good like a medicine, Prove. 17.22. and that because
chea^ness of spirit helps Nature's operations with its food and Physic,
whereas sadness and heaviness of heart hinders both. I Will close up this with a
true story. I was once in company at dinner (where kindred and friends were
met; and among the rest, one (a learned and godly man) was very merry in
telling Tales, breaking jests, harmless and inoffensive; Yet I was somewhat
troubled to see and hear it, and in some heat break out, and asked him, saying,
Sir, I pray what is the meaning of those words of the Apostle, Let your
communication be that which is good to the use of edifying? Ephesians. 4.29.
to which he answered me to this purpose; we have bodies to edify as well as
souls, and harmless mirth does good to both; and so it does, if it be well and
wisely ordered.

Honor to Religion.
2. This cheariness of spirit in Company has its usefulness in reference to
others, even those without, who are strangers to the work of grace, and w^^es
of Christianity; and are apt to (...) up prejudices against the people of God,
as a morose and sour people; and that the life they lead is but an
uncomfortable life, full of melancholy; and they verily think, that when any
set their faces this way, Zion-ward, that they never have a merry day after,
but live mopishly and disconsolately all their days: Now the harmless mirth
and merriment in the communications and conversations of Christians, is a
practical and real confutation of this mistake, and so is a removing of that
stumbling block in their way, and withal a fair invitation, and allurement of
them to come in, and to engage in a stricter and higher profession of
Saintship, when they are eye and eare-witnesses of its consistency with all
possible civil mirth and merriment, which is lawful and commendable. Instance.
Let me back this from my own experience. I knew a Lawyer of good parts and
practice, who being naturally of a lepid and cheerful spirit, and possessed with
hard thoughts touching Religion in the strictness of it, and exactness therein,
as necessitating the professors thereof to lay quite aside that kind of mirth
which he was addicted to, was thereby kept off from engaging himself in any
forwardness in Christianity; but afterward observing the carriage of some
Ministers of note and eminency for piety and Ministerial abilities, how
pleasant they were, how facetious in their discourse (yet still keeping within
the bounds which God in his Word had set them) he changed his opinion, embraced
the Society of the Saints, walked with them in the ways of God, and died, I
believe, a true servant of God, and of his Christ our Jesus, and that he is now
in glory: To strengthen this argument, The mirth of a Christian life, by Zac.
Bogan printed at Oxford 1653.
I Will commend to the reading a little Treatise, made by a learned holy man,
whom I knew both in his life and death.

3. This cheariness of spirit, has this commendable virtue in it, that it puts
a shine and luster upon duties, and offered of love performed to men, Alustre
upon duties.
(and that in the eyes both of God and man) God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor.
9.7. and man also, and a cheerful lender to, cheerfulness in a child or
servants obedience, O how lovely is it! Its so also between husbands and wives,
those offices of love they discharge each to other, with readiness and
cheerfulness, what a beauty does it add thereunto? But on the contrary, when
these or the like services are performed, but unwillingly and by constraint,
with a sad look, and a lowering countenance, they are rendered ungrateful and
unacceptable. What Is a feast, if no mirth there? good looks and language are one
of the best dishes at the Table.

Having spoken concerning the lawfulness, and usefulness of civil mirth; I
proceed to lay down some cautions, Cautions.
to prevent disorders and irregularities therein.

Unseasonable.
1. As to the timing of mirth, it must be seasonable; when Zion weeps and
bleeds, for the sons and daughters of Zion to be upon a merry pin, (I speak of
common civil mirth) especially if with constancy, and some heights therein, is
^s unseasonable, as snow in harvest, an high and heinous provocation: When ^he
Lord calls to weeping and mourning, and if in that day, behold joy and
gladness, and eating flesh, and drinking wine; and surely, says the Lord of
hosts, this ini^uitie shall not be purged from you till ^ou dye, Is. 22.12.13,
14. True, When the lord turns again the Captivity of Zion, ^hen let our
mouths be filled with laugh^er, and our tongues with singing, Psalm. 26.1, 2.
But when the Jews are in Captivity, then by the rivers of Babylon we sat down
and wept, we hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof, Psalm. 137*
1, 2. And yet by the way, let me insert this, that spiritual mirth and
rejoicing in the Lord, is always a duty, and in the worst of times, to be
performed by the generation of believers, Phil. 4.4. Hab. 3.17, 18. Eccl.
10.19. A feast is made for laughter, says the Preacher; but at a funeral,
sighing and mourning is more seasonable; especially on a day set apart
professedly for solemn humiliation, even civil mirth seems abominably
unseasonable. Let me add also, on the Lords day, the Christian Sabbath, our
common civil mirth may well be spared, the doing our own ways the finding our
own pleasures, the speaking our own words, Isa. 58.13. Being under a special
inhibition; whereby the word [own] we understand not, ways pleasures, or words
in themselves sinful (for such are unlawful at all times but such as are lawful
on other days but on the Lords day unlawful, as concerning worldly
employments and recreations. Its true, it is a duty to call the Sabbath a
delight; but the more spiritu^^ and heavenly our joy and rejoy^ings are, the
more in the Lord, the ^ore agreeable with the day of the lord: to the advancing
of which holy ^irth, there is by divine appointment (...) Psalm for the
Sabbath day, Ps. 92.

Immeasurable. Voluptato commendat rarior usus.
2. Civil mirth must not be immeasurable, excessive, and without measure. The
commendation of all our Civil ^leasures, are the sparing use of them. To be
always in a merry vain, jesting and laughing, is a swerving from the gravity
and sanctity of Christianity: ^leasantness of speech should not be ^sed as meat
to feed the company with ^ests; (frollick frothy jokes are but windy, not
overwholsome,) they may be indeed, as sauce to meat, to quicken ^ppetites unto
more solid and wholesome discourse, or to fit our spirits for higher duties;
facetious speech is to a sober mind, as whetting a sith is to mowing; too much
whetting, turns the edg of the Sith, and unfits it for service; he who is
always whetting, is an idle mower, or rather mowes not at all; and he that is
always jesting, may go for a vain person, or a vile one rather.

Not with the sins of others.
1. Not sporting our selves, making our selves or others merry with our own
sins, or the sins of others; such a man is one of Solomon's fools, It is sport
to a fool to do mischief, Prove. 10.23 And again, Fools make a mock at si^ Prove.
14.9. That is, obdurate, and hardened sinners, having their Conscience seared,
and being past all sense of goodness, take a kind of complacency and delight,
as in the acts of sinning, so in their talking of it, and making themselves and
others merry with it afterward. Then to set men, or Children o^ fighting, and
to rejoice in seeing them beat and hurt each other; then wit^ many youngsters,
never so merry a feas^ as where there is stolen venison, rabbet hens, or other
provision, To whom stol^ waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is
pleasant, Prove. 9.17. as some quorish, and therein theevish servant^ though
they have good food allowe^ them, and enough of it; yet get some dainties in a
corner, how pleasantly (...) they go down! or as adulterers, an^ adulteresses,
their secret uncleanness are the stolen waters and bread in secret, which
the Spirit chiefly aims at, as the Context shows: Its sad to hear how some
men will in a jocular way, boast how many women and maidens they have defiled,
and how often. So that woeful generation of men, who are mighty to drink wine;
and men of strength to mingle strong drink, Isa. 5.27. How they will merrily among
their pot companions vaunt and brag it, that so many quarts they took off at a
sitting; laid such a man asleep, drunk another dead down, laid him under the
Table, and glory in their shame. So the Gamesters, the Jewel of their mirth is
many a time, their cheating such and such an one who played with them, how they
fetched him over for so many pounds, it may be hundreds; so the malicious
persons of a vindictive spirit; how is it mirth and music to them to boast how
they have made even with such or such an one, and hope they have given him his
own, and shall not die in his debt. I might enlarge in this too copious a
subject, but in brief, all this kind of mirth is madness, and indeed monstrous,
for men to rejoice in that for which they ought to mourn; to laugh at that till
their sides ache, and their eyes water, for which they should rather grieve till
their hearts ache, and rivers of Tears flow from their eyes, as did David's and
Jeremiahs, Those choice servants of the most high God, Psalm. 119.136. Jer. 9.1,
2, 3.

4. Not Scripture or matters of Religion.
Not the Scriptures, or matters of Religion. Jesting in Scripture phrases, and
the language of the Holy Ghost, as Politian the Heathen, and Julian the
Apostate, it is a Character of profaness in any, and in such as profess
Christianity, of profaneness with an accent of high aggravation, and carries
also much of danger with it; if it be ill jesting with edged tools, then surely
with the Word of God, which is the sword of the Spirit, and sharper than any
two edged sword, Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Kings and Princes do not take it well
from their subjects, that they should scoff at, or sport themselves with their
Laws, Acts, and Proclamations. The holy Scriptures they are Laws, Acts, and
Proclamations of the great God, the King of Kings, and our making our selves or
others merry, in a trifling, jesting, and sinful way with them, will kindle
and incense the wrath and fiery indignation of the highest Lord against us: and
if not repented of, and quenched with the blood of Jesus Christ, will end in
everlasting burnings in Hell, and misery for ever.

5. Not the Saints
Not at the Saints and Servants of the most high God, calling them by way of
scorn and derision, the holy Brethren and Sisters; and the Ministers of Christ,
calling them Priests, Baal's Priests, Parsons, Sir John's. Those ill bred
children who mocked Elisha, saying, Go up, etc. had the sore curse of God
befell them, 2 King. 2.23, 24. Job, a perfect and upright man, as the Lord
himself testifies of him, he is a byword among the children of fools, Job.
1.1. and Chapter 30.9. And holy David, that man after Gods own heart, he is the song
of the drunkard, Psalm. 69.12. And he complains, Psalm. 35.15, 16. The abjects
gathered themselves together against me, they did tear me, and ceased not, with
hypocritical mockers in feasts; they gnashed upon me with their teeth. It seems
there was in their days, as it has been in ours, some professed jesters, who
were a kind of smell-feasts, who made it their work at feasts, to jest and
scoff it, to make the company merry; and who is the man they sport with, upon
whom do they set their wits on work, but David, the choicest Saint in his age?
There has been an usage with some of our Nobles formerly to keep Jesters
(fools they called them, or made them rather) to make them merry at meals, and
in their mirth, the Jobs and David's of that age must be their laughing stocks:
and wise men abused, to make fools merry. Add to all this, your Stage Players,
who in their Comedies, Interludes, Balls, have personated in a way of taunt and
scorn, learned and godly Ministers in their habit, yea in prayer and preaching.
But no more of this, least the age stink we live in, in the nostrils of our
childrens children. If any such abomination be amongst us, Tell it not in Gath,
etc. 2 Samuel 1.20. Let us rather say with Jeremy, O that my head were turned to
waters, etc. And oh the patience and long-suffering of the Lord, the great
mighty God, who does not send some signal token of his wrath on such abominable
wretches as these are, sending them packing out of the world with a vengeance.

Natural Infirmity
6. Not the natural infirmities, or calamitous conditions of others, to break
jests upon, and insult over others, because crook-shouldred, wry-necked,
flat-nosed, wide-mouthed, dim-sighted, lame-legged, club-footed, or the like,
carries barbarism and inhumanity in it. No, though thy enemy, Rejoice not,
(says Solomon) when thy enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he
stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his
wrath from him, to wit, to be avenged on thee, Prove. 28.17, 18.

Not profane or injurious
7. Not profane as to God, or injurious to our neighbor; profane in reference
to God, when there is a light and jocular using of any of his titles, names, or
attributes, or of any part and portion of the Scriptures, which the proud and
profane wits of men are too apt to make too bold with: But I have touched upon
this already. Nor may our merry discourse be injurious to men, in their bodies,
souls, estates, names, or otherwise. If thy witty talk be obscene, wanton, or
lascivious, that tends to the wronging of thy neighbors chastity, and therein
both the soul and body of thy neighbor, and so is a breach of the sixth and
ninth commandments of the Lord our God. If it be derogating from the credit and
repute of thy neighbor, bitter and absurd, this is to wrong him in his good
name, a breach of the ninth commandment; yea, a provoking him to wrath and
anger; yea, a driving him into passions violent and unruly; yea, thy self also:
and all for want of true love to thy self or neighbor. It Is a common evil,
tossed to and fro of men, who love death, to be reproaching, taunting, and
girding at some in the company to please others; which usually carries with it
defamation, and flattery; defamation, to him they displease; flattery, to him
whom they strive to please; and humor, and great uncharitableness in thy self
to both.

Not self-ended.
8. Not self-ended, making mirth the end of mirth, as if happiness were placed
in it, or the chief delight and comfort of life were to have a merry life of
it: some such there are, who are never better in their own conceits then when
they are in a frolic humor, laughing till their sides ache again, thinking the
time is well passed away, when in such jollities: but Solomon, guided by the
Spirit, has past his censure long ago; I said of laughter it is mad, and of
mirth what does it, Eccl. 2.2.

2. Positive directions.
Positive directions for the ordering of our civil mirth in company, of which I
shall speak briefly, the rather because I have been large, if not too large in
the negatives; and partly also, because negatives include at least by
consequence positives, as positives negatives.

1. Well seasoned.
Our mirth in discourse must be well seasoned, not so much with wit, as with
wisdom; not with levity, but gravity; not with ill will to any, but love to
all; not rashly, and at random (as guided by the vaporing dictates of our wild
unruly fancies) but well weighing circumstances, of persons, of whom, and to
whom we speak; of time when, and places where we speak, for the consideration
of circumstances is some of the corns or grains of salt which must season
this recreational discourse also.

2. Wel-designed.
It must be well designed, to right ends, such as these.

1. Honor of Religion.
To render Christian profession most lovely, and desirable in the thoughts of
worldly men, when they see it is consistency with mirth and cheariness,
harmless, innocent, of which before.

2. Cheariness of spirit.
To exhilerate the spirits of our selves and others, when dull and heavy, that
being made more quick and nimble, we may be the fresher and fitter for the
duties we owe to God, or to men as men, or to Saints as Saints, as to our
selves, in our callings, general or particular, whether as Christians, or as we
stand in our several places and relations; Sampson who was one of the Lords
Champions to fight his battles, and one of the Lords Saints and Servants (his
name's enrolled in the Catalogue, Heb. 11.32. he has his merry riddle, at a
feast, to prevent and shut out possibly worse discourse, as also to minister
occasion of mirth to them by stirring up their wits, and busying their minds to
find out the meaning of his riddle: that mirth which carries this design, the
profit of our selves, or others, is lawful and laudable.

3. To make way for what is serious.
To facilitate the passage for rebukes, or advice, serious and weighty, which
with some go down smoother in a merry word, then in plain and downright
language; so that cheariness of speech helps to gild over, and sweeten the
bitter Pills of reproof and counsel, which are therein swallowed down, no stob
made, but taken better in a jest, than in earnest; This way of dealing with
others in ironical language, is frequent in the Scriptures of the old and new
Testament, Solomon, Rejoice O young man, etc. and since you are so wilful and
heady, heed no advice that is given to you, go on, take your course, see what
will come on it; But know, that for all these things, God will bring thee to
judgment, Eccl. 11.9. Take one of many in the new Testament, Paul saw the
Corinthians were a proud conceited people, though Christians, and good for the
main, see how he taunts them, 1 Cor. 4.8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye
have reigned as Kings without us: and all in an holy loving ironie.

3. Attended with affections.
Our civil mirth, as it must be well seasoned, well designed, so also must it
be well attended with suitable affections, and such Christian graces as the
present occasion calls for. To instance in a few particulars.

1. Fear.
There should be in our greatest and highest mirth an holy fear, and awful
dread of God upon our spirits; merriment is a kind of boiling liquor, will soon
run over, if not well watched, and looked unto; we should rejoice in the Lord,
yet, with fear and trembling, Psalm. 2.11. and when we express our inward joy by
outward mirth, be it in feasting, and days of thanksgiving, yet still with
fear and trembling. It is laid by the Apostle, and charged as a crime upon
those seducing teachers, that they did feed themselves without fear, Jude 12.
To feed without any fear of God, or reverence to the Church, the Saints, with
whom they did eat all their Love Feasts, is Bezas note upon the place.

2. Sympathy.
With Christian Sympathy, being duly sensible of, and deeply laying to heart
the miseries of others, especially the distresses of Zion at home or abroad,
Amos 6.5, 6, 7. To chant it to the sound of the viol, and drink wine in bowls,
but not to be grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, is a provocation,
threatened and plagued with desolation, Therefore shall they go captive with the
first that go Captive, etc.

3. Sorrow
With godly sorrow, mourning for the sin, whilst we rebuke the sinner. Love to
God, and our neighbors, and our selves will engage us in both mourning and
rebuking also; and without this, all our Civil mirth will end in heaviness,
Prove. 14.13.

Having laid down directions for the well managing of Christian Conference, in
the actual exercise of it, and that both negatively and positively, let me add

Direction in Transition.
A third Direction; which is, by witty, yet wise transitions, to pass and slip
off from common discourse, into discourses more serious and spiritual. As,

1. From the words of others. of others.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has pattern'd and fairly copied this out to us by his
own example, Joh. 4.6.15. He being weary sat down on Jacobs well; and presently
a woman of Samaria coming out to draw water, Christ glides into a gracious
discourse with her about living water, the water of life, which he himself was.
Again, having rebuked his Carnal hearers who followed him for the loaves sake,
he passes into a holy and large discourse touching the bread of life, which he
himself was: so preaching the Gospel from place to place. So when Simon Peter
was astonished at the draught of Fishes, Christ said to him, From henceforth
thou shall catch men, Luke 5.9, 10. I might be very large herein: But why all
this? surely for our imitation, that we might go and do likewise. When others
are speaking of buying and selling, what good pennyworths they had, mind them
of buying the truth, and not selling it; and of buying wine and milk, Christ
his Spirit, grace and glory, and that without price and without money, (Isa.
55.1.) the best bargain that can possibly be made, and the best penniworth that
Earth or Heaven it self affords. If the talk be what good news is stirring,
put in, saying, the Gospel, the glad-tidings of Salvation by Jesus Christ, is
the best news which ever was told to or heard by mankind since the world was.
If the stream of discourses run concerning great feasts that any have made, or
been at, what fat Venison they had, what plenty of the best wines they drank
of; turn the stream and speak of that royal Princely feast made by the King of
Kings* and that for all his subjects, by Christ for believers, A feast of fat
things, full (...) marrow, of wine upon the lees well refined; Isa. 25.6. Math.
22.2, 10. When we hear others talking of fair houses, and stately buildings,
let it draw out our discourse concerning that building of God, that house not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2. Cor. 5.1. If of the City
rebuilding, (which work the Lord prosper) then speak of Abraham, how he (and
all believers, the spiritual seed of Abraham) looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10. If the discourse be
touching the vast estate and revenues, that such or such an one is possessed
of, or heir apparent to, so many hundred or thousand pounds per annum; then
declare how the poorest Saint outvies and outweighs the greatest Prince, King
or Emperor, yea all of them laid together, for he is born to an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
tihm, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. All worldly inheritances are corruptible, as the world
it self is; but the inheritance of the Saints incorruptible, and abides for
ever: worldly ^^heritances are usually much defiled, both in the getting and
keeping of them in ways sinful, when restitution is not made of what was ill
gotten, when God is not honored with their substance, etc. either for the
maintenance of an able Ministry, or for the relief of the poor, but rather
spending their estate upon their lusts, pride, gluttony drunkenness, gaming,
whoring, etc. but still the inheritance of the Saints is undefiled, both in the
getting and keeping of it, by the purchase and mediation of Jesus Christ; and
the Saints using of it, which will be in the glorifying of God with it, and for
it for ever and ever: yet again, all worldly inheritances fade away, but the
inheritance of the Saints fades not away, as flowers do, or as the Laurels did
with which the Victors in the Olympic games were crowned, which though green
when put upon their heads, yet soon withered: but Heaven and glory will be
fresh and flourishing, as at the first, so to Eternity. But I forget my self,
am as in a wood or wilderness, wherein I may loose or tire my self and the
Reader; the hints and intimations given for transitions, and passings from
common discourse to spiritual and Christian conference, being well nigh in as
great variety, as the turns and occurrences of providence are; so that a
gracious heart, somewhat fitted by natural ingenuity, but especially
strengthened, edged and sharpened by the Holy Spirit abiding in it, makes well
nigh every story or tale told, every turn of Providence, or word spoken, to be
as a bridge or boat to carry, or waft over, from discourse natural or moral, to
what is supernatural, spiritual, and Heavenly: And why should we imagine that
the Devil, and carnal hearts, should be more dextrous and active in the
advancing of vain and sinful talk, then the Spirit of God, and believers
hearts, are in the promoting and advancing of holy and Christian Conference?
especially considering that greater and stronger is the spirit which is in us,
and so for us Saints, then the spirit which is in the world, and so against us
Saints, 1 John 4.4. God is stronger then the Devil.

2. From Providence.
Having touched upon Christian ingenuity, in turning common talk (though
lawful) into spiritual, which might be more for the use of edifying; let me
direct also to raise up good conference from the voice of God in providence,
smiling or frowning providence, be they personal, national; or oecomenical and
Universal, such as concern all mankind: as the ways of God working in a
tendency toward the fall of Babylon, or toward the rise of Zion, in the
conversion of the Jews, or the residue of the Gentiles yet in darkness worse
then that of Egypt. Take a few instances, which may serve for those many
hundreds which might be given.

1. Are great deliverances vouchsafed to, and bestowed upon us or others, from
sore fits of sickness, from the Plague of pestilence, from dangerous falls,
from perils by fire or water, from bonds of imprisonments, or from unreasonable
and absurd men, or from enemies in any kind, full of malice and cruelty; then
let us provoke our selves and others to gratitude, with that holy man, What
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116.12. who
made also a Psalm of praises, when he was delivered from the hand of all his
enemies, and from the hand of Saul, Ps. 18. and excite our selves to answer
those gracious ends which the Lord aimed at, in delivering of us; which was not
to do abominations (Jer. 7.10.) but, that we being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies, might serve him without fear, (to wit, a slavish fear) in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75.
This is the use God expects we should make, not alone of that grand deliverance
from the wrath to come, but of those lower and lesser deliverances we enjoy
here.

2. Death of others.
Again, when the news comes, such or such an one is dead, or dying, the bell
toles, or rings out for him, one it may be, young and strong, as likely to live
possibly as any one you know; does not now pale death, as it were take us by
the hand, and lead us into a deep and due consideration of our latterends,
which is our wisdom, (Deuteronomy. 32.29.) and withal, into a serious minding and
reminding of our selves and others, of our mortality, how it is appointed unto
men once to dye, and after that the Judgment, Heb. 9.27. as also of those two
Eternities, a black eternity of woe and misery, which is the portion of
sinners; and that white eternity of joy and glory, which is the gift of God
through Christ to all the righteous, who are by the blood of Christ justified,
and by the Spirit of Christ sanctified; and say each of us within our selves,
when I die, (as die I must and that I know not how soon) whither will my soul
go? to Heaven or Hell? and whereas I am now well, O where shall I be an hundred
years hence, or a thousand years hence? where for ever and ever? and when
Christ comes to judge the world in righteousness, shall I be found among the
goats on the left hand, or among the sheep on the right hand of Jesus Christ?
Shall I be under that sweet and joyful sentence, Come ye blessed, etc. or under
that doleful doom, Depart from me ye cursed, etc. Matthew. 25.34, 41. It must
be the one or the other, therefore let us all look to it.

3. Any smart afflictions
If Providence frown upon us, or others, in smart and sore afflictions, near
and dear relations, as husband, wife, father, mother, child, or friend, being
taken away by death; sore diseases, as the Stone, Gout, Dropsy, Consumptions,
or the like; or suppose molestations in estates by oppression; and injustice
from the men of the world; or defamations, by lies, slanders, and cruel
mockings, blotting and blasting our names and reputations; ^ea, what if it
comes to imprisonment, banishment, or any cutting evil whatsoever? such
Providence cry aloud to us, and bid us cry and call upon others. Let patience
have her perfect work, Jam. 1.4. Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord: let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the
Heavens, Lam. 3.40, 41. Let us get and keep that middle golden frame of spirit,
despise not, (or as the word imports, do not little) the chastening of the
Lord, neither faint, when thou art rebuked of him, Heb. 12.5. Let us not so
much desire the rod may be laid aside, as that it may bud and blossom, that so
God may have his ends, his gracious ends upon us, which are for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness, verse. 10. Better the rod should lie
on still in mercy, then be laid aside in wrath and displeasure; let not the
bitter cup go out of thy hand; 'till thou have found the Sugar in the bottom,
to be sure it lies there, because it is a Cup in a Fathers hand. 'Twas an holy
man's saying, Sanctified afflictions are spiritual promotions.

It were easy to be very large and copious upon this subject; not a woman
delivered of a Child, but it prompts to a discourse of regeneration, and being
born again, and of Christ, That Child which to us is born, that Son which to us
is given, Isa. 9.6. 1665 1666
whose name is called wonderful Counselor, etc. We cannot call to mind that
dreadful Plague of Pestilence one year, and the dismal burning of the City, the
next; our Childrens Children, and after Ages cannot rehearse those black and
horrid stories, but that they must needs suggest to us and to generations to
come, how heinous and how abominable a thing sin is, which incenseth the wrath
of God, (who is the God of patience. Romans 15.5. whose name is by himself
proclaimed to be, the Lord, the Lord God gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
Exodus 34.6. Neh. 1.6.) so highly, as to pour out his fury like fire, yea in
fire to the laying wast of Englands Metropolis in three or four days, and so to
putting God, yea forcing God, as it were, upon his strange work, which he so
unwillingly is engaged in. I would well hope, that whilst England, is England,
the Histories and Chronicles relating these signal tokens of Gods fierce
indignation, will have a benign influence (by the blessing of God) upon our
posterity to the worlds end; that they may hear and fear, and do no more such
wickedness, as we have done, Deuteronomy. 13.11.

Strangers meet.
. Again 4ly, Strangers meeting upon the highway or else where, might and
should discourse it; how all, even the best of men, Gods own Children, are and
have confessed themselves to be but strangers and pilgrims here; and therefore,
as strangers and pilgrims we ought to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war
against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. Or, when we ask others, or others ask us, the
way to such or such a place, why may not a question be put touching the way to
heaven and happiness, how Christ is the way purchased for believers; and how,
in thankfulness to God for Christ, and the benefits we have by Christ, we
should walk in; yea, run the way of his Commandments, as holy David resolved
to do, Ps. 119.32. Yet again.

5. When people marry, Marriages.
and matches are made, possibly with some of the relations, and you are guests
also at the wedding feast; surely it would not be unbecoming Christians to be
thinking and speaking of the happy condition of such as are betrothed to Jesus
Christ (as all believers are) and that for ever, in righteousness, in judgment,
in loving kindness and mercies, Hos. 2.19, 20. And as John was commanded to
write, Blessed are they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb,
Rev. 19.9. As also the sad and doleful estate of all who being invited to the
wedding feast, (as all are who live under the sound of the Gospel,) Come not,
but desire to be excused, make light of it, go their ways, one to his farm,
another to his merchandise, Matt. 22.5. or if they come, yet have not on the
wedding garment, (are not clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and graces
of the spirit) The Gentile hypocrite is that man, to whom the King, when he
came to see his guests, said, Friend, how earnest thou in hither, not having a
wedding garment, verse. 11, 12. Both these fall and lie under an heavy doom,
and dreadful vengeance. The slighters who came not to the feast, probably the
unbelieving Jews, with them the King was wroth, and he sent forth his armies
and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City. This execution was done
speedily by the Romans destroying Jerusalem, firing and demolishing the Temple
and the City, and there was a dismal slaughter of eleven millions of men, De
belle Judaico.
women, and Children, as Josephus reports. And for the man that came to the
feast, he made some Christian profession, but had not the wedding garment,
which is the false unsound Professor, the Gentile hypocrite, the King deals
or will deal severely with him also, the man was speechless, or muzzled, not
having a word to say for himself why he should not be condemned, verse. 12. but
the King has something to say to him, which might make his heart to ache and
tremble, verse. 13. Then said the King to the servants, to wit, the holy Angels,
ministering spirits, bind him hand and foot, that is, make him sure, as they use
to do condemned persons, he is disabled to sight for himself, or by flight to
make escape, being bound hand and foot, take him away: O that is a cutting word,
if when an angry Father says, concerning a froward child, take it away; away
with it, the Child screams and roars, it is worse to it then the rod or
whipping. If when the Judge upon the Bench, having passed his sentence of death
against a Malefactor, says, Take him Jailer, away with him to Prison, and from
thence to the place of execution; if these words be as swords and daggers
piercing the hearts of the condemned; O then how terrible and dreadful beyond
all expression or imagination, must it needs be, when Christ the righteous
Judge shall turn and cashire sinners for ever out of his gracious presence,
never to see the face of God, never to be with the Lord; this punishment of
loss, privative torment, is not the least piec^ of the misery of the damned;
and to complete their woe and horror, it follows, Cast him into utter, or outer
darkness, Joh. 3.19. They loved darkness rather then light, the darkness of
gross and wilful ignorance; know not, nor care to know the things of God, but
are willingly ignorant, saying unto God, Depart from us; we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, 2 Pet. 3.5. Job. 21.14. Ephesians. 5.11. And love the deeds
of darkness; therefore the Lord justly casts them into darkness, and they shall
be filled with darkness: as they who cutting the bloody Tyrants head, threw it
into a pail of blood, saying, satiate thy self with blood. Whereas The
inheritance of the Saints is in light, Satio te Sanguine
Col. 1.2. The portion of sinners shall be in blackness of darkness for ever,
Jude 13. And more, it is outer darkness, as dogs without, Rev. 22.15. When
believers, as the children of God, are within doors, housed in Heaven, a place
of light and glory, the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, verse. 23. And if here be not misery enough, for what follows, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22.13. Now the sinner has (as
he thinks) a merry time of it; but there is a woe coming, Woe unto you that laugh
now; for ye shall mourn and weep, Luke 6.25. Now the wicked plotteth against
the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth, Psalm. 37.12. But let them know
their black day is at hand, wherein they will have gnashing for gnashing; their
gnashing upon the righteous, in scorn and contempt, shall be turned into a
gnashing their teeth, through extremity of pain, anguish, and horror for
ever. Having been large in this instance, my words may seem to be words of
digression, or of diversion: might they (by the blessing of God) prove to any,
words of Conversion or of Edification, neither writer nor reader would have any
cause to repent them of their labor. Conversion. of a sinner.
If we hear of the conversion of a sinner, it puts us upon rejoicing and
praising God, and expressing our thankfulness in words and actions: It was meet
we should make merry, and be glad; for this thy brother was dead, and is alive
again, etc. says the Father of the returning. Prodigal to his elder Brother,
Luke 15.32.

Apurchase made.
7. The making a purchase of house or land, leads us into a discourse of
purchasing the field wherein lay hid the treasure; and of selling all, to buy
the pearl of great price, Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46. In brief, where I have given
one instance, I might with ease give an hundred, the voice of Providence
uttering fresh news every day. Providence is the best and truest interpreter
of the Decrees of God; and what lay in the womb of Decree before time, even
from eternity, that Providence brings forth day by day, and so administreth
fresh matter continually for Christian Conference, to all that delight and take
pleasure therein.

From the word of God.
3. If the voice and speech of men one to another, and the voice of God in
Providence, suggest occasion for holy discourse and conference, then surely the
voice of God in his word, read, preached, or heard, does it much more.
Christians do you not read, and search the Scriptures day by day? I take it for
granted, that you do, and take delight in so doing: and what, understandest
thou all thou hear or read? is there nothing too hard for thee? if so,
then put questions to persons of understanstanding, Ministers or people, among
whom thou come, saying, what is the meaning of this, or that portion of
Scripture? And they will be opening and expounding hard places to thee:
Ministers especially, their lips should keep knowledge, that is their duty; and
for the people to seek the law at their mouths, Mat. 27.
is their duty also. And study not out questions tending to strife and vain
jangling, or abstruse inquiries, to puzzle others, as some do, and go away
scoffing and boasting, saying, I think I have posed one parson to day, or
gravelled such or such an one, non-plust him, so that he had nothing to answer:
but let the questions be such as tend to the edification of your selves, and
others, by enlarging the understanding, in a way of knowledge, but principally
to the warming of your hearts and affections, to the purging of your
consciences, to the regulation and better ordering of your lives and
conversations. For when you have heard the word preached, know it is spiritual
seed, labor to harrow it into your hearts by holy meditation, Mat. 13.3, 4.
and 18, 19. 1 Pe. 2.2. Isa. 55.2.
and by Christian communication, that so it may spring up and grow in heart and
life, and thou may have a rich and goodly crop of it in grace and glory: It
is also our spiritual food, and in order to nourishment must have its due
digestion. Now they tell us of three concoctions as to natural food; the first
they call Chylification in the Stomach, the second Sanguification with the
Liver, and the last Assimilation in every part; the nutriment being conveyed to
every part, is made like to that part it is conveyed to: suitable hereunto, the
Word in order to our spiritual nourishment and growth in grace, must have
various digestions: First by Meditation, and Conference: A second, in our will
and affections, being subdued by it, to will what God wills, to love or hate
what God loves or hates: and lastly, in our lives and practice, when we
exercise our selves herein, to have consciences void of offense, toward God,
and toward men, as Paul did, Acts 24.16. Yet there is this vast difference in
the resemblance; for whereas our meats and drinks are assimilated and made like
to the parts of man, fed by them; the word, our spiritual food, changes the
man into its own likeness, makes the inward and outward man spiritual and holy,
like it self, so far as it turns to nourishment. And remember this, that an
error in the first concoction is seldom mended in the second or third, but
vitiates the whole; and the gross neglect of meditation and conference, is one
great cause why we are no better in our hearts, and in our lives: and many, too
many professors who hear much, but thrive little, they have, or seem to have
good appetites, but to be sure they have very bad digestions, by reason of
their failings in holy Meditation, and Christian Conference.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Tho: Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Commentary on the Hebrews. By John Owen, D. D. fol.

Sermons upon the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians. By Mr. John
Daille: Translated into English by F. S.

Tho: Taylor's Works, the first Volume fol.

2. An Exposition of Temptation, on Matthew. 4. verse 1. to the end of the 11th.

Divine Characters in two parts, distinguishing the Hypocrite in his best
dress. By Samuel Crook, B.D.

A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians. By Richard Sibbs, D.D. fol.

A Commentary on the whole Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians. By Mr. Paul
Bain, Fol.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to
the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. ver. 6, 7, 8. By
Anthony Burgess, fol.

The dead Saint, speaking to Saints and sinners living, in several Treatises.
The first on 2 Samuel 24.10. The second on Gant. 4.9. The third on John 1.50. The
fourth on Isa. 58.2. The fifth on Exodus 15.11. By Samuel Bolton, D.D. folio.

Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By Ephesians. Pagit, fol.

These seven Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones
business, in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his
Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first Part. 2. Likewise a second Part; wherein
Christians are directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants in the conditions of Prosperity and
Adversity. 3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, wherein
the Christian is directed how to make Religion his business in his dealings
with all Men, in the choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good Company,
in bad Company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a weekday from morning
to night, in visiting the sick on a Dying bed; as also the means how a
Christian may do this, and some motives to it. 4. The Door of Salvation opened,
by the Key of Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True
Christian characterized. 6. The fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of
Faith: Or One cast for Eternity, with the only way to throw it well. 7. The
Incomparableness of God in his Being, Attributes, Works and Word, opened and
applied. All these by Geo. Swinnock M.A.
An Antidote against Quakerism. By Steven Scanderet.

A learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians: to which is added, First, A conference between Christ and
Mary. Second, The Spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles.
By Richard Sibbs, D.D. 4to.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon. By Will. Greenhil, 4to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England.
By Peter Bulkeley, 4to.

God's Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer. By Edward Elton, B.D.
4to.

A plain and familiar Exposition of the Commandments. By John Dod, 4to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines,
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dyalling Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts by a new Method.
By Sylvanus Morgan, 4to.

Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward
diseases from the head to the foot. By Walter Bruel.

Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of Salerns Regiment of Health,
containing Directions and Instructions for the guide and government of Man's
Life, 8vo.

Ames on Peter and on the Psalms.

Christ and the Covenant, the work and way of Meditation; delivered in ten
Sermons. Large Octavo. By William Bridge late of great Yarmouth.

Heart-Treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and Heart
of every Christian, with soul-inriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences
and comforts, to help him in Meditation, Conference, Religious performances,
Spiritual Actions, Enduring Afflictions, and to fit him for all conditions,
that he may live Holily, die happily, and go to Heaven triumphantly. By O.H.
with an Epistle presixed by John Chester.

The sure Mercies of David, or a second part of the Hearts-Treasure.

Closet Prayer, a Christians Duty. All three by O. Heywood.

A Glimpse of Eternity. By A. Caley.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and duty of
Prayer. By Tho. Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered. By The^^hilus Polwheile.

Wells of Salvation ^^^ened; or Words whereby we may be saved: with advice to
Young Men. By Th. Vincent.

The Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations. By
Samuel Rolls.

The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union with
Christ; wherein that great Mystery and Privilege is opened in the nature,
properties, and the necessity of it. By R. Steedman, M.A.

Sober Singularity. By the same Author.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16.26. By James Livesey.

Moses unvailed. By William Guild.

The Protestants Triumph, being an exact answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists. By Chapter Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death. By Zach. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed. By Will. Geering.

A sober Discourse concerning the Interest of Words in Prayer.

The Godly man's Ark, or City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with (...). Moor's Evidences for Heaven. By Edw. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered: or the false Professor tried and cast. By

Spiritual Wisdom improved against temptation. Both by M. Mead.

The true bounds of Christian Freedom: or a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian Liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
confuted, out of John 8. ver. 36.

A Treatise of the Sacrament, showing a Christians Privilege in approaching to
God in Ordinances, duty in his Sacramental approaches, danger, if he do not
sanctify God in them; Both by Sam. Bolton, D. D.

The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath. By Philip Goodwin.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons. By W. Bridge.

The Treatises next following are Written by Mr. Thomas Watson.
The Doctrine of Repentance. Heaven taken by Storm. Mischief of Sin. A Divine
Cordial. A plea for the Godly. The Holy Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. The Life and Death of Mr. Tho. Wilson of Maidstone in Kent. The
Life and Death of Dr. Samuel Winter of Dublin.
The Conversion of a Sinner.

The day of Grace.

A Covert from the Storm.

Worthy walking pressed upon all that have heard the call of the Gospel. All
three by Nath. Vincent.

The Duty of Parents?

A little book for Little Children.

A Method and instruction for the Art of Divine Meditation. All three by Tho.
White.

The Child's delight, togather with an English Grammar.

A plain and Familiar Method of instructing the younger sort, according to the
lesser Catechism of the late Reverend Assembly of Divines. Both by Tho. Lie.

The inseparable Union between Christ and a Believer. By Tho. Peck.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and duty of
Prayer.

A Treatise of quenching the spirit, the evil of it, both in respect of its
causes and effects.

A Defense against the Fear of Death. By Zach. Crofton.

Esops Fables in English and Latin Verse.

Meditation upon Mr. Baxter's Review of his Treatise of the Duty of Heavenly
Meditation. By Giles Fermin.

A Discourse of Excuses, setting forth the variety and Vanity of them the Sin
and misery brought in by them. By John Sheffield.

Invisible Reality set forth in the Holy Life and triumphant Death of Mr. John
Janeway.

A Discourse concerning the Education of Children. By R. Kedder.

The Saints perseverance asserted in its positive ground against Jer. Ives. By
Thom: Danson.


