depiction of maze A MAZE OF STATE
A. Errando, disco. B. Numinis arbitrio res hominum anxio, motu, ancipite cursu
volvuntur, et revolvuntur. Cic. C. Mundus in ambiguo. D. Circus inest Mundo. E.
Emblema est vita Meandri. F. Effigies Mundi Sinuosa Figura Meandri vndae sunt
curae; ripa Memento, mori. G. Daedalus est Orbi velut Area flexilis Horti,
Stamen Ariadnis Daedale read mihi. H. Vnde Labyrinthus? labor est quia labilis
intus, Quo veniens redeo; quo rediturus eo.




THE MAZE: Contrived, Digested, and Couched in these distinct Subjects:
REPRESENTATIVES For these present times to admire: PRESIDENTS For future Ages
to decline. 1. THE TRAITORS TRIAL. 2. THE PLAINTIFFS APPEAL. 3. THE
STATE-MONKEY, OR, THE DISLOYAL FAVORITE. 4. PEMBROKES PLEA. 5. A CORDIAL for
BRITANNICUS, etc. 6. OLD FATHER LASHER to the MODERATE.
THE SENATES ANSWER TO THE SCOTCH CHANCELLOR. A FUNERAL ORATION DELIVERED AT
DARBY-HOUSE. ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE FOURTH SECTION.

Orderly Marshalled with these Poems: 1. CASTLES CATASTROPHE; OR, GARRISONS
JAIL-DELIVER. 2. THREE STATE-TARRIERS coupled up with THREE TART SATYRS.


Sperate miseri; Cavete faelices.
Printed in the year 1659.

TO His poor PATRONS.
TO all Delinquents that shall trace
The winding angles of this MAZE,
Send I this
With my wish, Alluding to the Act of Grace.

That this Act of saving Grace
May not prove like Chevy-chace,
That displays
Wandering ways,
So as He that reves along
Knows not if He be right or wrong;
For in the eyes
Of the wise
This gay-checker'd Act declares
In Soldiers favor more then theirs.
Worlds wonder!
Public plunder
Must be freed from restitution;
O rare chymicall Illusion!
This Act when it came first a landing
The peace it brought past understanding,
For though it promised Graces store
They showed no better then before:
At the Senat-door then let us knock
And get a clavis to unlock
The wards of this rewarding gin,
To rinse our State-Original sin.
"Wise Oedipus unloose this knot,
"Are we made Heirs of Grace or not?
PARTHESIUS REGIUS, His DEDICATORY To all People BOND or FREE, Round or Sound
wheres'ere they be.
CHop-fallen Plaintiffs or Defendents;
Sectists, Separists, Independents,
Presbyterians that are whiter
Then Lawne-Sleeves or any Miter.
Crop-ear'd Zimri's, Sequestrators,
Statists, Truckers, Timists, Traitors.
Haxsters, Huxsters, or Promotors,
Farriers, Furriers, or Free-booters,
Broakers, Breakers, Brewers, Bakers,
Braggadoches, High-way-takers.
Sergeants, Catch-pools, or Regraters;
Cheats, Comittee-dis-estators:
Or Assemblies cursed for ever
Make a Preacher of a Weaver.
All who headlong by their meddling
Make our whimzed State a Bedlam.
Counting it lighter then a fether
To ruin Church and State together.
Trepenners, Pimps, Prinadoe's, Nippers,
Tarpaulins, Currers, Quakers, Dippers,
Whifflers, Shufflers, Heavers, Hectors,
Sharks, Excisers, Ale-Collectors.
Spanger, Spooner, Spurrier, Spinster,
And our Saintlings at Westminster.
With that Royall-loyall true sort
That of late did treat at Newport.
Et complere vatis Somnium,
CAESARI, uni instar omnium.
THE TRAITORS TRIAL.
EUPHORMION and MENIPPUS. Euphormion. Good Morrow to the Loyal Genius of
pregnant Menippus; with my blessing to the weak remainder of his Sequestered
Fortunes. Let me encounter thee with the Dialect of these days: the Salute of
these times; What News abroad?


Menip. Hah, hah, hah. What News, my noble Euphormion? why? thou shall find
every corner full of them. New, new, new, every blind Alley eccho's withal.

New Fates, new Faiths, new Foes, new Faces, new Fashions, new Creeds, new
Crimes: all things new, saving that old relic of Honesty, which will never be
renewed.


Euphor. Go to Sirrah; such wormwood Lecturers as you, usually convert your
Pens into Needles, your Paper into Nettles. But in good sober earnest, tell me
what becomes of the Capitol?


Menip. The Senate of Saints, you mean. I will tell thee, Euphormion, there is
not in that Saintly Sanctuary, so much as a Goose left for Centinell to guard
that Antinomian Assembly. Their day-work is done, I can assure thee; for their
Shop's shut up. Nay, some roguish hand or other, has distinguished it with
rubric Letters, and a Pesthouse Posie, LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US.


Euphor. It was so long infected, I ever thought, it would break out into Spots
ere long.


Menip. Spots, Euphormion! Nay, Carbuncles on my conscience. The mad Parliament
was a Sage Synod to this. Such a Self-hanging frenzy was never heard of.

The Devil never played his part with more active Subtilty: nor presented
Pageant with more Artifice nor shrouded Policy since he was a Tempter.

For he has made fools of them, whose aim and art it was to befoole the State.


Euphor. But are They in such a desperate condition?


Menip. Yes, Sir, I can assure you; They are never likely hereafter to
transgress out of the Line of Communication. They who could not all their time
endure the Gregorian Letany, are very like, with a Gregorian line, to close
their Tragedy: WHARTON has rightly casten up their Nativity.


Euphor. Be they impeach't already?


Menip. They are; and this very day to receive their Judgment. The Crimes
objected against them, are notorious and heinous. Pillaging, and plundring the
State; obstructing Traffic; making Seats of Justice, Butchers Shambles.


Euphor. Excellent Reformers!


Menip. Long and heavy Quarters, grievous Taxes, numerous Excizes: All these
have drawn up a Bill of Arreares together; And the Bill is found: The whole
Jury return them guilty. Ha, ha, ha. Hemp, by all likelihood, was never in
more request, nor liker to be highlier honored. I must tell thee Euphormion,
low Necks and Collars, are not for these Nouzes.


Euphor. As I live, this will be rare sport for Bystanders. Me thinks I see
what wry mouths these sleek Orators will make at their Confession!


Menip. Nay, at their Suspension! Never found more Funerals dryer eyes.


Euphor. I am sure, they have made the State weep sufficiently; But such rogury
was ever likely to close with such a Catastrophe. But pray thee, Minippus, what
Judges may we have to sit upon them?


Menip. A question that deserves resolving, trust me. All the world knows,
Euphormion; we have but two judicial Consuls left us of all the old Covey; And
the One is a mere Trivial nifter; as barren of Sense, as he is cram-fed with
Substance. The Other, sometimes a Reverend Sage, had not this timing compliance
made him an Ass, and fooled his Judgment. His ominous Name boads, he must not
die a natural Death.

I must tell thee, my Euphormion, though Justice ride on her foot-cloath, yet
She goes on Stilts. There was never such an halting Age since Vulcans time.
She, who formerly stood like a Beacon to give others aim; is now become such a
Dark-lanthorne, it will scarcely afford it self light.


Euphor. All this while, Menippus, thou resolves me not who these Judges be.


Menip. But I shall in good time, Euphormion: And first, give me leave to tell
thee, that these, who are pricked out to sit upon these Corrupt Members; were no
Sergeants of the last Call, for those wear a Parliamentary Coife; and for all
their violet Livery on their shoulder, are very likely to be degraded of their
honor. No; these be old Benchers, who have stuck close to their restrained
Justinian all this while. That Levelling Democracy bandied them into a
desperate hazard: Being sent away in such Shoals, as the whole Isle of Antycera
could scarcely receive them. But by a writ of Revocation most of them were
called back from banishment; and begin already to outstrip those
Party-colored Turn-coats both for Practice and Reverence. Now out of all
those, be these three culled for this great Goal delivery; Argestes, Bonarges
and Calazius. The first, a pert pregnant fellow; One, who can take a Ball at
the first rebound: being of a quick apprehension, and present dispatch. The
Second, a rough, rigid, downright Justice: One, whose hands and ears hold
antipathy with price and prayer. The Third, of a more cool and remiss Spirit:
yet prompt enough to denounce judgment, where he meets with an incorrigible
Delinquent. These be they that must do the feat.

A shout within. Away with them, away with them, They deserve not to live: They
have been the ruin of us, and our Families.


Euphor. What means this shout within?


Menip. Hah, hah, hah. They come, they come, they come, we shall hear rare
sport presently. Enter Judges, Clark of the Assize, etc. at one door. Enter
Traitors, mannacled, by the Marshall, and other officers attended at the other
door.
See, see, see; those be the Judges of Oyer and Terminer: and these the
Traitors, who having been upon their Trialls, found the only Canker-wormes of
the Commonwealth; and such whose egregious abuses deserve exquisite
punishments; are this very day to receive their Doomes.


Euphor. Be there no more of this fry?


Menip. O yes, Euphormion! This very instant is Antipas impeacht of High
Treason by Venaticus: But he is to be tried by a Council of War. Both our
Higher and Lower Hives swarm with them: but these were the Principal
Instruments of creating and fomenting all our mischiefs.


Euphor. What may that Grand Senior be, who with his wall-eyes looks like one
of Machiavels familiars?


Menip. Who he, Euphormion! Why? That is Misarcus, a Protean Politician; One
who can present as many shapes to acquire his own ends, as any Cloud-walking
Tiberius in the whole world. He can play the Fox, and make use of the poor
Pusses foot to get himself the Chestnut. He has been in strong labor of
Anarchial Plots this twenty years at least: and having now at last brought
forth such useful Principles of un-kinging; as Brutus and Cassius could not be
of quicker dispatch, had his Agents been as secret as they were desperate.
He Is held the only Sinon in all Albania. In a word, he breathes not that
knows better how to mint, mince nor shroud Treason then he does. All the rest
are but Apprentices to him in that trade, the Velvet-Varlet can carry it so
nimbly and neatly.


Euphor. Who is he, that looks for all the world, like the Promethean Satire;
or some Antique piece of decayed Arras?


Menip. That is Montanus; a confident Agitator: but comes far short of the
former. For this Fellow Acts but what the other Plots. He has indeed, been
successful in some undertakings; which makes him infinitely arrogant: yet for
all his success, he has purchased himself no good Opinion; being in no less
capacity of Censure for cowardice or remissness by his own Party; then He is by
the other part of ingratitude and disloyalty, The man desired much to become
popular; which in the end undid him. Such Baits are dangerous for these
frisking Fishes to nible at. His Father, that Physiognomist of Queen Besse, was
another kind of Creature. He could have taught him the guize how to sculk in a
distempered State; and to fish without exception in troubled Waters. There is
small question, but that he had once some weakling unsettled* thoughts to become
Honest: But private interest begot such obstruction to his resolves; as those
fair purposes were stifled in their infancy. So as, he held it his only safe
course to keep in Consort with those who accounted no part of Music,
comparable to Division. No Allegiance to arbitrary Obedience.


Euphor. But what makes that Mellancholy Don so imbrim his face; and cast down
such a forlorn and dejected a look?


Menip. Not without cause, Euphormion. That is the white-liver'd Clinius, who
lately performed that fearlesse feverish Combat with Damaetas; and to divert
danger, (though they fought at sufficient distance) made their equal retreats;
the one to a Saw-pit, the other to a Marle-pit.


Euphor. Is this the Man?


Menip. Yes, if thou please to call him so; but there is as little Man in him,
as in any of all the Bunch.

Now to resolve thee, why his Look makes this settled contract with the Earth;
Thou must know, he has been so basely baffled, jeered, and buffound in every
quarter, as he consorts with no Society, where disgrace does not meet him;
telling Him, how his very Memory will be a lasting stain to his Fame: a
dishonor to his Family. Do not blame him then, for looking downward: Thou
know well what the Poet sometimes so divinely sung; God gave Men looks to
view the azure Skies,
While Beasts look down with earth-dejected Eyes.


Yet in some points, I must tell thee withal, that there is no Valiant loyal
Spirit within the whole Island that may compare with htm for some dangerous
attempts: For he has the boldness to pocket more Treason, then would hang a
Legion: yet with protests of Honor and Reputation, incredibly salves it: and
secures himself by it. But feeding on the better side oth' Bush, and
fortifying his weak Cause with strong complies (for he gloried in nothing more
then in the style of Machiavels son:) he never feared a change: nor to be
brought to such a fearful charge.


Euphor. Who is he, that stalks along with such a shaking pace?


Menip. That is Lentulus; one of the Lower Siedge; and could shake his tongue
in his time: and blast the temper of a wel-composed State with the distemper of
his breath. But I believe, his Rhetoric has left him, since this State-palsey
seized on his tongue. I partly understand what the sum of his Petition might
be; if his Godfathers would afford him an hearing: He has more then a months
mind to be out of the Palace yard: and to be no Inhabitant under the Line. For
he holds nothing more conducing to his safety then distance: which he might
have procured without flight, had he acquainted his Tongue with less speech,
and more silence. But the Inds must not save him: though he has mined
sufficiently for his time. The Moale is now to be unmolded. -- O how happy a
thing were it rather to be tongue-tide, then tide in a nooze; and for a little
loose lip-labor, sum up his Days work in a Halter!


Euphor. Who is he, who carries those Papers in his hand, as if he were
Sollicitour General for the whole Synodall?


Menip. And so he is, I must tell thee: and for himself too: for he is very
likely to lick oth' whip as any of them all. Shall I display him to thee? This
is Metaxus; a fellow of infinite confidence: and unto those that fall under his
Test, of a domineering insolence.

His first fame came to him by a Sea-case: since which time, he has
incomparably thriven by a Land-case: having by his means and other Officials,
brought the whole Land into that pitiful case, as none can live well, unless
they live ill like Land-sharks: who prey upon the Fry of the Gentry: and by
their irremissive cruelty so soake them; as places of Hospitality become Nests
for Owls: or Cages to Imprison Vindicators of their Countries Liberty and
their own Loyalty.

This same Advocate is a close youth, I must tell thee: One, who desires
nothing more then to imposture a State with colorable and plausive pretenses
of sanctity: as if his Nature held such correspondence or Analogy with his
Name; as the one could not hold up without the other. But watsoever he
pretends, he is more Core then Cordial, He might for a time gull private eyes
with peculiar interests: and by laying his oily hand on his hypocritical
heart, delude the easy Vulgar: But being now to act his part on the public
Stage; there were some (and those unconcerned spectators) who had not like
those Lamiae, left their eyes at home in a box: but had the art to discover
his posture: and how his Action suited with his Person.


Euphor. Who may that Malevole be; who walks like a debauched Prostitute; that
has stakt his honor for as much as it will give?


Menip. That, my brave Boy, is Hircanus; A Goatish Gamester, whose profuse lust
seared with an assiduate heat, has caused him to sue forth a divorce betwixt
him and his natural Perriwigge. The Mounted Scale-drake has dropped all his
feathers in his Cornelian Bath.

His mouth used formerly to be furred up with obsceane tales, and his passages
of Brothelry: and herein (which may seem a Paradox) he did the least hurt. For
since, he became a Member (and such a one as the Bordella's cannot show a
corrupter) he has acquainted his forlorn tongue with no other discourse but
Treason. Now some there be (and such who are not altogether unknown to his
crazy saplesse constitution) who stick not to avouch that he is infinitely weary
of his life: and cares not much for being dispatched out oth' way; for his
dainty Duggs and Doxes hold him so inconsiderable and contemptible a creature,
as they jeere him to his face: That he does well in hatching his eggs in the
House: for he can Sit better then he can Stand. Some there be that report, how
he very lately had a desire to travail as well as any of the Tribe: hoping by
that means (having sent before Gold his Harbinger to store him for provision
against Winter) to escape the lash. But this report admits no belief: for
should He travail by Land or Water, those that know him would witness with
him, that he stood in more need of a Bone-setter then an Harbinger. So as,
should he now chance to be hanged (as there is small question to be made on it)
he would quarter himself: and like an over-ripe Medler, drop peece-meale from
the Tree, long before the rest of his fellows.


Euphor. It seems, Menippus, these three you described last are in their
quality inferior to the former.


Menip. It Is true, Euphormion; but though their Siedge be lower; it is
generally held that their Sconces be no ways inferior: Nor the revenues of
their Places lesser; as their late Century lists fully discover. Those three
indeed whom we displayed before; were drawn forth from the Higher Hive; these
three last from the Lower. But this Lower has infinitely trenched upon the
Privileges of the Higher; and presumed to be as active too; for else had the
coast been clearer, and the Storm calmer then now it is.


Themophilus. Clear the Bar there; and give way to the Prisoners.


Euphor. Let us observe their process of Judgment. -- Justice never till now
(since the first foundation of this perennially-trienniated Synod) found any
eyes to see with.


Menip. Content, content; we shall hear shortly, how abused honor must be
adjudg'd to collar with an halter.


Themoph. Call Misarchus, Montanus, and Clinius to the Bar.


Argestes. You know Misarchus, what an honorable (and in your respect,
immerited Trial) you have had by your Peers: how you have been found guilty
of High Treason. How active for your part, you have approved your self, in the
speedy pursuance of your cruellest designs: which, as they were with much
disloyal subtilty hatched: so no less speedily to be acted, had they not been
by the power of an Higher hand divested. Mean time, how little sensible were
you of this shaken and shattred Kingdom? Your own interest took up all your
care: while our heart-sick State became desperate of cure.

Sir, The recollection of these must needs beget a remorce in you: with an
earnest desire of your reconciliation to Him, whom you have so highly, and
hainously offended. Which must be done seriously, and seasonably, lest the hand
of death arrest you, which is now approaching near you, before your peace be
made. Your abuse to Sovereignty; your violation of our Liberty; your
disturbance of Unity; your indangering of our public Safety: All which with
joint voice and vote have contested against you. These should retain in you
such a deep impression, that unless you be an enemy to your self, they must
needs beget in you, both living, and dying, a sensible compassion.


Misar. I must confess, my Lords, that humane policy had too strong a seizure
over my thoughts. I shall wish my fall may be a caveat to others, of falling
upon the like designs; lest they become liable to the like unfortunate ends.


Argest. Your resolves are fair, Sir; may these close with as fair an evening.


Bonar. For you Montanus; what could in reason move you to take up Arms
against your Sovereign? Was it desire of Change? What estate could you aspire
to higher, or for your condition better then what you enjoyed? Catiline had
some reason to plead for Treason; because his profuse course had brought him to
a shaken fortune. But you were no such man. Well; I shall not aggravate it. Let
Death be the Guerdon of your Crime: Only, let me tell you, your hours are
few; employ them then only for eternity.


Monta. My Lord, I thank you: my aims are fixed that way.


Calazius. You are only left me, to speak to Clinius. Nor shall I need to
present to you the horror of those actions for which you are to suffer, I am
persuaded, you are no less conscientious in repenting for them, then you were
conscious in committing of them. Only let me advise you not to be more
fearful of death, then you may be hopeful of a future life; So you neglect
not time, but make an useful benefit of your just doom.


Clinius. All my desires (my good Lord) shall be summed up in this; that by the
Princes clemency, my censure of death may be so much sweetened, as it may be
changed into banishment.


Calaz. Sure so I think it might, Sir; our State needs little fear you; you
were never yet held any dangerous Plotter: only a State-shadow, whose designs
had their period in desires: but you could pocket Treason, and conceal it;
nay, with protests of honor strive to salve it: being no less then if you had
contrived it. This renders you in that qualification, as your Crimes admit no
lower punishment.


Euphora. So! I see these younkers of the higher Siedge must be untruss'd.


Menip. No; Thou art deceived Euphormion; they must be trussed. -- Let us
observe the rest. These Grand Seniors press here in clusters.


Themoph. Clear the Bar there behind. -- Call Lentulus, Metaxus, and Hercanus
to the Bar.


Argestes. Now, Lentulus; you lately heard what heavy Charge was laid against
you: and how by the joint verdict of an uninteressed Jury you were returned
guilty. Now then it behooves you, in this little space, nay pace of time, which
must be afforded you, to take a serious Survey of all your actions and
speeches. You could no less immodestly then indiscreetly tax a Member of your
House, of an unmannerly posture, for laying his sinnew-shrunk leg before him
for his ease; saying, more reverence was due to that place. But what Answer
gave this Member? Mr. Speaker, I could wish that you would begin as soon to
sit upright in your Chair, as I should do in rectifying this uncivile posture,
as you call it. What I do, is for mine own ease: whereas you abuse your place
for sinister ends. How inconscienciously you have pursued the States ruin for
your own ends! What a timing Prolocutor you have been to foment Sedition: and
confine the Sovereignty of a just Prince, to the irregular sway and swinge of
Faction! It was your hint to Propose: Others to Say the Proposition's good: and
by strength of prepared Votes, or absence of opposing Voices, to seal
whatsoever was proposed or said. But see to what shame and dishonor, a tongue
tipped with the guilt of dishonest lucre may bring the Speaker! your fame and
fortune perish in one Bottom. That gain which you so much loved, must render
rewards to those whom you most hate. While a poor Shroud, after an ignominious
death, shall be only left you to shadow your shame.


Lent. Good my Lord, give me leave to speak.


Argestes. No Sir, you have spoke too much: your Lips are become your Snares.
No Poison of Aspes more full of Venom, then a Tongue infected with the
witchcraft of Sedition. -- Jailer look to your Prisoner.


Bonarges. How now Metaxus! what mean those Papers? your present condition
stands in more need of a Manual of Prayers. Your State admits no dispute.

Bestow now your Sollicitancy for heaven. So long as you studied your Case, and
pleaded the Commons Cause for removing public aggrievances from our Realm;
it got you repute: all which you have now lost by playing the foolish Faune,
and soothing Sycophant to a corrupt State. -- Withdraw the Prisoner.


Metax. I am taken in my own Gin: being therein lost, wherein I held my self
most secure.


Menip. So -- there will be work enough for a Solicitor in Limbo.


Themoph. Draw nearer there to the Bar with Hircanus.


Menip. Trust me, He Is near enough already. -- Pox on his Rogueship; this
Palliard smells ranker then any Welsh Goat. He that holds not this Tege for a
Mortified Member; He has small skill in Chyrurgery.


Euphor. I wonder much those Grave Judges use not their Pomander!


Menip. They are the honester men, Euphormion, to prefer Justice before Sense.


Calaz. For you, Hircanus; though last, not least, but worst of that
Anarchicall Crew; I must tell you, that of all others, your inbred and indurate
impudence had so glazed your forehead, and by the bladder of popular air blown
you up to that height of shameless boldness, as you durst affront Majesty,
cry down Monarchy, spurn at Authority, and lay a gappe open to that irregular
Track, wherein your self so long trod, of licentious liberty. Command was
with you a word of too strict acception: Loose lives desire ever to be
lawless. Riotous-awlesse minds give freest admittance to easy reins.


Hircanus. Yet do me right, my Lord, your Honor knows how I have ever
maintained, That if there were a necessity for us to have a King (with which
Title my desires could never cordially close) my voice should pass for Him
whom we already had, because we knew best how to trust Him.


Calaz. Go to, Sir; you meant by that particle Trust, to asperse distrust upon
your Sovereign. -- No more; we will not rub too much upon your perfidious
folly: Be it your care, if you intend your inward cure, to bestow your few
hours (for many you must not have) in bemoaning your numerous crimes;
Dangerous Sins exact Deep Sighs. By how much slower you were in paying Tribute
to your Earthly Caesar; be so much speedier in rendering your last dues in these
your last days to your Heavenly Maker.

Enough, enough; -- Two days only are afforded you for your Preparation. The
Third appointed for your Execution.


Themophilus. Room for the Judges. -- Make way there, for the Prisoners.


Exeunt. Menippus. Hah-hah-hah!
Room and make way sound equal to the ear,
Yet in construction several senses bear:
Giants and Pigmeys be of liker stature,
For th'first refers to Judge; the last to Traitor.
Though some there be, and who have Judges bin
Deserve a Slip for slipping from their King.
For Scarlet never loses more his die
Then when a Traitor wears that livery.
Thus, Those who poor petitioners suspended
Find quick dispatch: So our petition's ended.
May corrupt Members who return denial
To men's just Suits, receive like TRAITORS TRIAL.
-- Come lets away, let us away, Euphormion; when these come crowding to
Charon's Boat; He Will verily think, that Hell's broke loose: and that these were
some of those Pick-locks who broke the Jail: but being got again, are to be
wasted over to their old Lodging.


Haeccine perfidia comitantia praemia --?
THE PLAINTIFFE'S APPEAL. Argued Dialogue-wise Betwixt Master OSBORNE, and
Master HUNTINGTON.
Regium est bona facere, and mala pati.
Osborne. HOw goes the squares, Master Huntingdon?


Hunt. All out of square, M. Osborne. I hold nothing more dangerous then to
accuse a great man of Treason.


Osb. It Is no wonder; have thou no fear of an approaching fury; in levelling
thy shot at such a Conquering Leveller, as wins wheresoever he comes; and takes
in wheresoever he Summons?


Hunt. Who would ever have thought that he should come to such a formidable
Greatness?


Osb. Who ever knew him since these brackish times, and could think that this
cunning Porpuise could fish worse in such troubled waters? Trust me,
Huntington, howsoever you stood conceipted, that his brain symboliz'd with his
barmy profession; I observed him ever, to have Sage in his pate: And that his
Headpiece (as one observed) would make an excellent Pipkin to boil Monarchy:
and his Breast-piece a rare Drippin-pan to baste Presbytery. He knew well how
to walk in a shade to his Foes: and in the Sunshine to his Friends. This was
Jugurths policy; which highly improved his Commands. Salust. Ma^rob. Plutarch.
Montan.
Besides, did not observe how he advanced none to Commands, but such in whom
he had a commanding interest? nay, and to oblige them the more, were knit to
him by alliance or blood. And these no Shallops neither. For they knew well how
to build upon his materials; and to act the designs of absolute Instruments
by his influence.


Hunt. All this had redounded more to mine honor, if way, as Justice required
it, and due Allegiance enjoined it, might be given to my Charge: which was so
punctual in every particular, as it could admit no exception.


Osb. Pray thee, Huntington, did thou never read how the Capitol was ever
shut, when Janus Temple was open? Art thou become so hood-winkt to the
knowledge of these worst times, as not to observe, how Greatness is a
subterfuge to Guiltiness? How dangerous is it for Justice to plead her
privilege of Right, or enter into contest with a fleshed Soldier with his
Sword in his hand?


Hunt. Soldiers who have their lives in their hands, should have grace in
their hearts.


Osb. True, they should so; but these Martial times can show us no such
Presidents. Success makes a Soldier swell above the bounds of Justice.

After Pharsalia's Field, so fatal to Pompey, so successful to Caesar; it
was too hard a task for Cicero with all his Eloquence; or cunning Coelius with
his Compliance; or censorious Cato with all his gravity and composedness, to
work upon Caesar's thoughts any thing less then a Monarchical influence.
Either a Caesar or none; and that Caesar a King; and that King no King but
Caesar.

Thou art to know Huntington, for else thou know nothing, how these airy
Spirits, who hatch their high-flowne projects in the Eagles nest, never use to
observe friendship, or court any favor out what may suite with their Ambition.
He, who was but lately a Soldier of fortune, by his improvement from fat and
numerous plunders, is now conceipted that his condition holds in a Sphere above
the reach of fortune.


Hunt. But pray thee, Osborne, can these, who are for the present, thus
transported with this vading shadow of their pretended happiness, grounded on
pillage and rapine; and like a rotten Building supported only by the Bases of
others ruin; can these, I say, be so miserably besotted with the opinion of
their plundered greatness; as to imagine that this giddy-headed world will
never come to her wits again?


Osb. What else, Huntington? So long as these Pious Rookes, or Magisteriall
Mag-pies, deigne to bestow no better style on their Sovereign, then a chief
public Officer of this Kingdom: Do not think they are confident enough of
their Cause; and that their Party is grown too strong to entertain a change?


Hunt. We shall then, no doubt, have a dainty Waxen State on it, when every
blind Moale may cast himself in his own Mold; and kick Discipline with his
heels.


Osb. What may we expect less, when the Feet hold equipage with the Head! The
divine Story sufficiently informs us; that when there was no King in Israel,
Judge. 17.10.
every man did what he pleased.


Hunt. It will be a great pleasure for an honest minded man to live under such
a Government!


Osb. Honest men, Huntington! Those be rare Birds, and of a foreign Airy.
Were that wise Cynick now living, he would not bestow a farthing candle on his
Dark-lanthorne, to spend it in the fruitless pursuit of that Inquest. No, no,
Honesty now goes by Beards: He that can time it the best, deserves to enjoy his
own, and his neighbors to boot. A rough-rigid Committee-man, who will not
stick to impawne his Soul to improve the Public, deserves the Grecian Tripod.
This sage Decoy is superseded for all his transgressions from above: do not
mistake me, I mean from above Hell at Westminster.


Hunt. They have a brave joviall time on it.


Osb. And so might we too, Huntington, had we been timely wise. What Mad-caps
were we, to shoot our Shafts at the Moon? Could we in reason think, that our
Gracious Senate would swinge their own Champions, Patrons, Associates, or
Assassinates? Had we no Articles of Charge to prefer against
State-malignants, but their own Assistants? We had surely, left our eyes at
home with those Lamian witches, in running headlong into such a precipice; as
to make fetters for our own feet by our Loyal service.


Hunt. For all this, I fear not but a time will come.


Osb. Yes; To suspend us for endeavoring to impeach their Protectors of High
Treason.


Hunt. Suspend us! How do thou mean, Osborne, by our Estates?


Osb. No, Huntington, but by our Necks.


Hunt. Sure they will not be so cruel.


Osb. O, thou mistakes it! "Mercy to the Wicked, is cruelty to the Innocent. It
were tyranny to show indulgency, or least specificall impunity upon such as we
two are, who have trenched so highly on their propriety.

I shall acquaint thee with a late passage of a virtuous sweetly demeaned
Gentlewoman, daughter to Sir Peter Killigrave; who out of her pious zeal to His
Sacred Majesty, with a deep sense of His unprincely usage during this His
restraint; was pleased to write in Sea-coal, in a place not far distant from
Newport, only these words, Hammon was hanged, and the Kings wrath was
pacified. For which Sentence she stood in great danger to incur a censure;
had She not been saved by her Book, though by some held for Apocryphal
Scripture. And being further pressed; that the Name used in Esther was Ammon;
She wittily replied, that H was no Letter: So as by means of her wit so well
authorized by Scripture, She came off clear from further censure.


Hunt. I must confess, there be more Hammons then Mordecayes in that Island.
But it was well for the Gentlewoman she came off so fair: For it is no playing
with Lions at the mouth of the Cave.


Osb. Yet observe but those wanton Cubs of their own Litter; and thou shall see
them without control, sporting in others Enclosures far freer.

GRIFFITH, a Member of the House, ravished the Lady SHVDLEY; and this was but a
prank of youth; exempted from censure. MARTIN may play the frisking frolic
Goat; and in the disguise of an Independent, though his jeering Doxes swear by
all the indisposed hairs of their Boults periwigge; that He Is become an
emasculated Dependent. So as, with a kick oth' breech they discard him;
transmitting him to the Committee of Examinats for an useful Agent in a
troubled State; but none for them. This leprous Lecher, I say, may attempt any
Ladies honor: and return piping-hot from his Neapolitan Stove, and his Common
Whoores, to the House of Commons; with an obscene mouth, venting naught but
Treason: and this beastly Buffoun must be hugged for a Witty Traitor.


Hunt. And whence all this; But if it be in the Armies power (as it is conceived
to be) to purge the Houses, as Hercules did those Augean Stables: the
Parliament may thank themselves; Their power will be abridg'd, as well as the
Kings.
but because the KING's Power is weakened: which makes Him more slighted, less
feared?


Osb. It Is true; yet there was a Precept which admitted no such restraint of
Power: nor abate of fear. My Son, Prove. 24.21, 22.
fear thou God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly, etc.


Hunt. True; But These, who by their licentious living, rioting and surfeiting,
(and all for the good of the Public) put the Evil day far from them, never
dream of any such calamity to rise suddenly, and fall upon them. Alas, poor
Souls! (for I must pity them, though I perish by them) they laugh like the
Fool when He goes to the Stocks. Impiety cannot promise to it self long
impunity; Nulla Salus, iniquo bello. Their Principles are deep-ingrain'd in
blood: Their Laws in Draco' Lines; all Rubricks. That wise (but unfortunate)
STRAFFORD, showed himself an excellent Monitor, and probably, a true Diviner of
their future condition. He told them of his fears, when He took his leave of
earth: "Parliaments grounded in blood, could promise "no good Success. We have
found it; and They must find it. For when divine judgment is deferred, it
inferres more to come. The whole State is sick; and heart-sick: for, how can
the Body be at ease, when the Head fares so ill? Now, this Sick State being
sensible of her distemper, seeks about for a Physician: but unhappy is that
sick Patient that is endangered more by his Physician, then his Disease. The
Patient is the State: Infoeliciter aegrotat, cui plu^ est a Medico periculi
quam a Morb^.
and her Physician is the Senate. But small judgment (it seems) had this
Physician either of her water, or her pulse. For, her water is turned into
blood: and her pulse beats nothing but distemper. Members fight One with
Another: and threaten Dissolution to the Whole.


Osb. Their comfort is, their precipice cannot be steep: seeing the whole
Island must be laid Level.


Hunt. Too certain; These Civil Wars must leave such impressive Scars to
Posterity; that though this term of Levelling sound cheerfully in the Ear of
debauched Haxters, and profuse Rioters; who look for a day when Debts must pay
themselves: and Trades-mens Books make public Bonefires: yet be there many
plump fed Lobsters both in City and Country, will hold it a strange
Catastrophe; when the very Dregs of the Land must squeeze their Vessels: and
their hopeful Heirs, for whom they took such infatigable care; become
Sharers at best with these Levelling Sharks.


Osb. It will be, indeed, a strange World, my Masters! as that Corydon of
Croydon said, When the Winfleet Oistresse must ride cheek by you will with the
Lady Mayoresse in her Caroch: and with a gracious buxom bed, salute her
Subjects as She yoggs along, with, a God save you my good People.


Hunt. Thou do well, Osborne, in making a merriment of thy Misery.


Osb. Do well or ill, all is a matter. Wars grounded on Such Principles,
could never fare better. He that holds himself safe, should he Sit at the
Stearne, in a Disturbed State? Surely, He Is as dangerously Distracted as any
raving Soul that inhabits it. We were too well fed, to be no better taught. We
enjoyed plenty; and our Surfeiting begot in us a Loathing: and our next
descent, Scarcity. We desired infinitely to fight, though we knew not for what.
Pretenses and Shadows were fair inducements to ruin a Kingdom. "So sweet is
War to those that know it not.

Three grave requisites are to be assisting of necessity to legitimate a War:
viz. Supreme Authority. A Sound Cause. A just Intention: For Commanding it, for
Undertaking it, for Execution of it. But whether these just grounds were found
in our Palace yard at Westminster, or no? that is a material Quaere.

They may fob a deluded State, with telling. All is for the Public Good; mean
time, Private Coffers be those vast Exchequers of the State.

The Jewish Corbona may not be compared to their Storehouse. Mean time, our
Commonty is merely gulled; They wonder how so many Sequestered States,
insupportable Loanes and Levies in times of Free Quarter, should be employed:
and the Army remain unsatisfied.


Hunt. No man that has his brains about him will wonder at it: Those
State-Saints, in the times of their fears, Make inquiry at the Leopard, the
Unicorne, the Victory, the Marygold, the Ensurer, the Sovereign, (wherein they
desire no great share:) And some of these will acquaint you better, where these
Gebezzais have banked their treasure.
discovered sufficiently where both their Hearts and Treasures lay. The
Parliaments Golden Navy lanch'd forth in those days for Holland, with other
convenient Coasts; where their Wisdoms had set their Rest. Their Purveyors
were sent before them; but since their panick fears vanished, they never to
this hour overtooke them. Those, who were scarcely Savers at home, in the time
of Peace; are now become Usurers abroad, in this time of War. Thus the
English State becomes a Foreign Staple.


Osb. Mean time, what will become of us that can neither thrive at home, nor
abroad?


Hunt. We may thank our loyal Service for it.


Osb. It Is true; and thou art to be commended for it. I cannot compare thee more
fitly, Huntington, then to One of those brave courageous Dogs that the Prince
of Albany sent to Alexander the Great; who scorned to fasten on any Small or
inferior Beasts, as Fox, Badger, wild Goat, or Otter; but Lions, Elephants,
Panthers and Tygres. None but brave victorious OLIVER, that Universal
Leveller; who makes but an Harvest work of mowing down both Wales and
Scotland: where in his military Progress (for War is but His recreation) He
was entertained with more Debonaire Salutes, and Courtly Congies by that
Achitophel-ARGYLE, then ever He vouchsafed to bestow on his Sovereign all his
time; None, I say, but this Northern Terror, this Calidanian Conqueror,
Welsh Warrier could serve thy turn to tugge with: while it was my unhappiness
to be snapt by a This stigmatized Traitor was since made G^vern: of the Isle
of Wight, where He practices that blo^d: Design against his Sove^rigne Lord
and Master.
Wesel; a Soultry Souter; who always had his ends: and lived by them. A rotten
rebellious Runnegado, who left his Shop to salute the KING his Master with a
Pistol Shot. A pilfring Night ranger, that had more Diseases then an Horse: A
Fistula in his breech; an Imposthume in his breast; and an Apostasy in his
heart.


Hunt. Yea Osborne, but now Fistula dulce canit --. A Wild Barren brain for a
Lord Chief Baron.
Gaffar WILD, that Child-Chopper of the Chequer, has from certain parcels of
partiall-guilt Nonsense, cured Him of all Diseases, and made Him go straight.


Osb. But never of the Kings Evil.


Hunt. Thou meanst of the Evil he meant the King!


Osb. What else?


Hunt. Pish! Osborne, thou dashed the very heart of thy Cause out in the
beginning: for though thy Plea were justifiable, thy Foe despicable, nay in the
presence of Loyalty detestable: though (I say) thy Cause were as worthy, as his
Case nasty, yet thou darknedst it so at the very first, as it could never
promise better success at the last.


Osb. How! darkened it?


Hunt. Yes, I Will tell thee how: The first grounds of that Charge, thou laidst
against Him were so soiled, sullied, and purfled with Saw-pit Sand, as when it
came to be read, very few of either House could Discover the Character.


Osb. Thou art pleasant, Huntington; But had that Saw-pit Peer lived in
Severus's time, He would have choack'd him with his own Dust, for laboring to
gravel such an Act of High Treason.


Hunt. True; but what Act can make Him a Traitor, that acts nothing against
the KING but as a Public Officer? His Prerogative-Royall extinct, Treason
loses her name. -- But now Osborne, Since like two tame Fools, we are caught
both in one Net; let it be no Eyesore to thee, that my Foe should be a
Conqueror, Parum refert an compedibus aureis an ferreis perstringar, modo
detincar. Pausan. in Plut.
thine a Cobbler. It Skills not much whether my Fetters be of Gold or Iron, so
long as I remain in Prison. But I hear, Osborne, how thy private Interest
having failed in thy Design of freeing the KING, has lately forced thee (what
will not the activest and clearest Spirits do in cases of necessities) to make
thy Addresses to the House.


Osb. It were well argued by Those that Object these Addresses against me, if
they could find where that Interest lay. It is well known to the whole world,
I was free and at liberty to go whither I would, before I gave notice to the
Houses of this treacherous Design against His Majesty. Upon Discovery whereof
(after such time as that White-liver'd Leveller had disburdened his Pocket of
my Letter) most Men were of opinion that the Houses would hardly bestow any
reward upon me for my Intelligence, at least, it has not hitherto appeared. So
that no other Address but the Public Interest, wherein every loyal Subject
is concerned, The Preservation of His Sacred Majesty, had influence upon Me, to
draw me to This: and upon this ground, God (I hope) will still assist me
against Hammond, whom I count a silly weak Man in all actions, except Villainy
and Treason: and that branded Assacin Rolph: and all their Accomplices.


Hunt. Thou do well in that, Osborne; resolution must either make us
Parliament-proof, or I know not what will become of us. Should we hang down
head like Bull-rushes, we should be presently accounted False-Accusers: Such as
were ashamed of our Charge.


Osb. Which for my part, I shall never be: Truth is, that Reverend Senate which
pretends such Uprightness; may be ashamed to enjoyne us a peremptory Day to
pursue our Charge: and now being ready to justify our Plea; thus to trifle
time, and poast us off with fruitless Delays: Which presupposes Some (and
those no Rookes of a Low Perch neither) to be accessory to the Bill.


Hunt. Blame them not then if they make it their Labor, to flip their necks
out oth' Collar. -- Now I profess to thee, Osborne, (for I am so persuaded)
that those Senate Zimri's who have been hatching their Crocodile-eggs visibly
these eight years; but invisibly Some Decads of Time; mean by some nimble
tricks of Legerdemaine to have those hateful Traitors, whom we have justly
accused and impeached, clearly acquitted; and our selves who stand in Defense
of our Plea, personally indicted.


Osb. So, indeed, was that Wildmans Motion.


Hunt. And were not this extreme justice, for us to be thrown into Prison, for
our laboring by timely prevention, the preservation of the KING's Person?


Osb. Pish! What do thou speak of Justice? -- Terras Astraearel quit.
Westminster Hall has shut gates of her long ago. That Court of Wards Cushion,
whose imbrodery professed it self an Attorney for the Widow and Fatherless, is
worn to the botome. That Court cannot be more out of Request then the Cushion
out of Date. Besides, that Dieu and Mon Droit, which was sometimes held a
proper Posie for every Court of Justice, suffers with our Saints in all our
Cathedral and Parochial Church-windows: being a French Posie, and held
Superstitious, because it smells of the Country of Queen Mary.


Hunt. Whereto then shall we appeal! To the Court of Conscience?


Osb. In no case; That was put down with the High Commission. Though in truth,
it went out of the Court long before the Court went down. -- No; since we are
shut from all Courts, let us fly into our selves: The Sanctuary of a Sincere
Conscience; where we shall find a faithful Advocate to plead our Innocence.


Hunt. Agreed.

"Let Foes and Furies rage, a loyal breast
"May safely say, Come Soul, and take thy rest.

FINIS.
THE STATE-MONKY; OR, The DISLOYAL FAVORITE: From PARTHES De Gest: Arag:
Originally extracted, with all propriety rendered, and to an Eminent Subject of
these Times, personally applied.
SEN: In ipso Scelere, fructus Sceleris est.

NO Creature more odious then Man, when he begins to unman himself. No Member
more dangerous to his Country, then a Court-fawne, or State-sharke. Such an
One, has crept into the posture of Courting Sin: and idolatrizing Sense. All
his aim is to prepare a Curtain, to shroud his vice from Discovery. For in
his too much heightened prostitution, He becomes more jealous of the Grooms of
the Privy-Chamber; then the All-seeing eyes of the Almighty. We shall need no
other Pencil, then his own loose life to draw his feature. He has by this
time, set up his Court in another Orb. Lust is too hot to nestle long in One
Ciyme. And here suppose Him imbathing and Sating his Swelling desires in those
usurped embraces of his Dalilah. Mean time, that distressed and woefully
distracted State, from whence They came; and whereto They owe themselves,
suffers infinitely for their folly. Fields become Wastes; Cities, Wildernesses;
Forts, demolished; Towns, dis-peopled; Herds, estranged from their Downs;
Flocks, from their Folds; Fear at home, Fury abroad; Nuptials made Funerals;
Cheerful Brides, careful Widows; Old-men, Young-mens Executors; and those
who were nearest them in blood, their Executioners; Sons at enmity with their
Fathers; Fathers their Sons betrayers; the reeking Sword raging in every
corner; the thirsty ground opening her jaws to take in the forage of every
days Slaughter. All this while, this Man of Sense, this Zanie of Pleasure,
braves it in the prohibited Delights of a Divested Prince: reteining not so
much as the least Sentiment of his restrained CHIEF; who improved his liberty:
nor of that PERSONS honor: whose abused Greatness bestows now a Vermillion
blush on her too long eclipsed Majesty.

Reflect on thy condition, thou Sensual Libertine! Is it possible that any
Creature endued with reason, should labor His ruin, from whom He received his
extraction? Were not the Names of Artaces and Nabarzanes branded with lasting
dishonor, for practizing unworthily against their Founders?

Recall to mind those private Addressrs, betwixt thy Disloyal self, and that
Perfidious Senate House; and thou will confess thy mercenary baseness. A
Scandal to the Bed of Honor: A professed villain to a just Master. Eye thine
own actions, and see what thou findst in them! Was not Ingratitude scrued up
to a sufficient height, by being Sharer in that princely pleasure, wherein none
was to retain a property save the true Owner; and He thy Master: but thou must
mould new Designs, to obstruct all means of his Assistance: lest his liberty
might abridge this freedom of thy injurious Dalliance? O imparalel'd
impudence! An ambitious pursuit of Sovereignty (though Majesty seldom admit
Corrivals) is more Dispensable, then this continued Track of Sensuality, which
abridgeth life by corrupt love: and effeminates Man by exposing his Divinest
Faculties to the Service of Sense.

Nor shall that native ardour, nor sinnowy vigor, which for a Season sprinkles
in thy blood; and makes thee such a choice Object to so eminent a Mistress;
render the ever grateful to such embraces. There can be no Perpetuity in a
Subject of Frailty: There can be no perpetuity in a Subject of frailty: much
less in a Prospect of folly. Embleames may we see of this mutability,
wheresoever we suffer our eyes to be Spectators. Now should thy Person incur
dis-esteeme, or an easy neglect through dis-ability: or become wholly
slighted by a more active, and attractive favorite: what a strange
Catastrophe would this produce in thee? With what folded Arms, melancholy
Walks, pensive thoughts, and pitiful aie-mee's, would thou ravell out the
remainder of thy days: And so fool thee self in bethinking how miserably
happy thou were in the fruition of thy former fancy: and consequently, how
unhappy, by being insensible of those miseries which thy impoysoned affection
had brought on thee? What imperfection attends that Solace, which is ever
accompanied with repentance! And such are thine, unhappy man, whose insatiate
appetite admits no mean. What is a Moment to Eternity? Hear the advice of a
Sage Professant: If thou will needs open thy bosom to love; fix it on such an
Object of Fancy; as thou may have in it a just propriety. Stolen waters may
seem sweet to the Sense; but they taste bitter to the Soul. Thy own Cisterne
will afford the sweetest and purest.

To divert then from thee, this opinion of being a German wonder, nay, a
Monster in deluding thy Master; and in betraying thy Country, a Viper: arise
from those sheets of shame: Cure thy distemper by a timely absence from thy
Mistress. Sloth and delicacy is the only effeminator of Man: and fomenter of
Sin. The Poet confirms it: Want of employment makes the wisest err,
Sloth caused Aegistus play the Adulterer.


These present Civil Wars invite thee; Thy Princes safety injoynes thee; The
redemption of thine Honor calls upon thee. Though Reputation be not so easily
gained as lost: yet so graceful be those Returns which remorce of Conscience
makes: as they beget in us a pious pity, and religious joy, wheresoever we
find these evidences of an unexpected, but unfeigned Conversion.

PEMBROOKS PLEA: OR, A just Vindication of his HONOR, from all those injurious
Aspersions, AND Abusive INVECTIVES of these TIMES.
Non facilis est venia, prava dixisse de rectis.

IT cannot be without wonder, that this Age so much distempered with Civil
Factions; should be taken up with such prejudicacy, as to retain no candid,
nor clear thoughts for Personages of Honor. Such especially, whose actions,
were they summed up from their first infancy and initiation in the Court; or
Affairs of State: cannot merit any rigid or Critic Censure, as might justly
lay either upon themselves, or those Families from whence they were Anciently
derived, in reality the least dishonor.

This cannot in any one be more personally, nor presentially instanced then in
our Chancellor of Oxford, the Earl of Pembrook. Against whom, some
virulent-traducing Pens, to disgorge their exuberance of wit or Surquedry
rather, have used such abusive liberty; as their vindication of those expulsed
Members of Colleges within that University; cannot do less then bring along
with it an error of judgment in all those who made choice of Him, for their
Chancellor, whom his Speeches, Actions, or palpable Ignorance, as is
pretended; have rendered so odious, or incapable of such Academick Honor. Why
was not this foreseen, and timely prevented, before He came to be elected? Did
He walk more in the Clouds then now? or did He discover more hopes of
protecting, or improving the Privileges of that famous Seminary then now
appears? No; it was neither his neglect of These; nor his dis-regard of Those,
whom in point of Honor He was to protect: No; nor his pretended ignorance, but
ready compliance with those late-domineering Visitants, that begot Him
distaste. Admit all this; resolve me heartily what might probably be done in
this Case to salve his honor: and retain the affection of those Houses, who
by Ordinance of Parliament were to become subject to the Sentence and Censure
of those Visitants? Should He have opposed the proceedings of these Visitants?
No; for so should He have opposed the two Houses of Parliament: and for his
Opposition purchased to himself a Deposition.

But He should have allayed the fury and violence in their form of Proceeding!
No doubt he did; using by way of persuasion the best means He could to
attemper and sweeten the tartness of their Censure: that Stoicall roughness
of their behavior. For had He done otherwise; as by public reproof, or
authorized Severity, admonished them to look to their Principles: and not to
transgress those bounds which a Superior Command had prescribed them; His
honor had run himself upon the same Rock. For those University Visitants
were no such Moderate Men, nor Meek Spirits, as to admit of reproof. They knew
well their own strength: whom to appeal to; and from whom to receive speedy
redress; upon the very least complaint exhibited: or affront pretended.

Yet all this cannot clear Him (you will say;) It had been the Duty of an
honest and integrious Chancellor, in discharge of the trust conferred on Him,
and recommended to Him; to encounter all extremes rather then to suffer any
pretensive or Deputative Power to incroach upon the ancient Statutes, Laws and
Liberties of the University; whose Patriot, Patron and Protector He had professed
himself to be. But what would all this have advantaged the Cause! This might,
indeed, have prepared way for an Other to Succeed him: but not to redress
those wrongs done to the Place committed to him. Yet, will Some allege, his
Honor was highly conscious of one Erour; which, no doubt, He might seasonably
have diverted; by interposing himself by way of authoriy, for the indemnity
of such Scholars, whose known abilities, sweet and Docile natures merited not
only approvement, but advancement in the opinion of Honor: and whose rising
hopes might have presented them Singular Ornaments to so absolute a Mother. It
is answered; that his unquestioned desires applied them seriously though not so
effectually that way, as He did wish. For such Severe Censors were those
Visitours; as neither able parts nor affable natures could have any influence
upon them. If they appeared not pliable to their bent, suitable with their
strain; They might necessarily incur Censure. The walls of the University
were of too strait a Circumference to confine them.

Thus you see how groundless aspersions have been thrown upon his Honor
without Cause; being desirous with his most studious endeavors to pursue, what
His Countermanded Power could not effect.

Shall we now peruse Him as He was Courtier, or employed in affairs of State?
It was sometimes observed by a Wise and experienced Historian; that there were
three Objects, of all Others, most fatally dangerous to a qualified Courtier.
Ambition; Avarice; and Recede from employment. Let us examine these in Him.

Ambitious He was never; for his desires were ever impaled within the freedom
of their own just limits. His highest Ambition was how to prefer the just
Suite of an injuried Petitioner, and to expedite it without Charge to the
Preferrer. To be eminent in the eye of a Prince; and make use of his royal
favor in so pious an Office is a glorious Ambition. Besides, he was never
observed to carry a Supercilious Look: nor retain a Difficulty of access.
Bearing a cheerful pleasant aspect to all Comers and Suitors, without an
imperious Dis-relishing frown; which was such a Stranger to his Countenance;
as there was nothing He held at more distance.

For Avarice; there is none that truly knows Him, but will witness for Him,
that it was never in request with Him; nor admitted to take acquaintance of Him.

He was never mercenary in the amplest favors He showed to any. So as, though
there have been ever many both Justiciaries and Courtiers who might be aptly
resembled to the Celidonie Stone, that loses it is virtue and vigor, when it
cease to be touched with Gold; His Honor was not of that humor. Wealth was
one of his lowest and contemtiblest Objects. His Revenues, indeed, were great;
which might have stored his coffers with an affluence of treasure: but his
desires were never confined to those ends. His bounty every where returned Him
this testimony.

For Recede from employment; it was a thing, which of all other, He most hated.
He was, you will say, a Man of pleasure. He was, indeed, much addicted to
Exercise and Recreation; wherein He would usually be very Sociably merry. Some
slight perfunctory Passion might, perchance, sometimes overtake Him; but it was
quickly overcome by Him. In all these Recreations and Delights, a pleasing
familiarity accompanied Him; which in all Places procured him love: Being
nothing like Some of our Surly Lords; who hold familiarity in such contempt; as
they become contemptible to their familiars.

Some infirmities, I must confess, He has; as every One has Some: and He the
best who is Subject to the least. And of These He repents Him. Neither is He at
any time incensed at Such as friendly admonish Him of them: but with all
affability thank them. Habits, indeed, in Vice, are sooner got then forgone.
But his desire to be reclaimed from them, argues his hate to them: with his
resolution wholly to decline them.

His small acquaintance and familiarity with Books, should not muster Such
Invectives against his Person: though Learning be the exquisitest beauty, that
can imbellish Honor; yet it directs not always a line to that Center. There
be more Havens to arrive at then Corynth. To be a Protector of Learning, though
no Professor, is praiseworthy in Honor.

Now, to conclude this Apology; whereas, much might be here Objected against
Him touching his Compliance with these times; what that Great Favorite spoke
sometimes to ingenious Pibrack; may be returned in his behalf: Honors and
Revenues be strong pullies to frailty.

But I am confident, his Honor reteines in Him thoughts of Loyalty: and will
be ready to manifest them to the world with all reality.

You then, who usually walk in Shades of Wormwood, cease from dipping your
Pens in the least tincture of Gall, that may any way tend to the impeachment of
Honor. There be other Subjects fitter for Loyally-affected Subjects. Let your
Pens be so employed, that Goodness may be rather encouraged; then the least
hopes of proficiency in actions of Honor retarded.

For his Secretary Michael Olds worth, Esquire, (so nearly symbolizing both in
name and nature with that Eminent confined Divine) as His abilites are well
known: so is his integrity no less approved.

He shoots shafts at the Moon, (as one no less worthily then Morally
observes) who out of a Malignant humor, makes it his labor to darken the
splendor of Goodness and Honor.

FINIS.
A POTION FOR BRITANICVS: WITH A Cordial powder for the Stationary
Eve-dropper; that Sir Reverence Rabby LUKE HARRUNEY.
A tergo Nemesis.

HO! you sir Brutish Britannicus. -- You nitty-nasty Law-louse; the Anagram
of a good face --. Pray thee, Sir GREGORY NONSENSE, mark what a nooze thou
have woven for thy self! If thy traduced Mercurius play not Titaeus part, and
make thee hang thy self by his tart, but true discovery of thee, I shall
conclude thou have fools fortune: and that want of understanding kept thee
from hanging. For I shall no sooner have dissected thy Carrian quality, then
thou will wish with all thy heart ( la) that thou were transformed by Medusa's
black rod, into one of those Insecta that thou brainlesly talked of.

Now to thy Anatomy Lecture; which for mere pity sake, I I shall do with
favor; lest (thou Prodigy of Loyalty and Nature) thy display should make thee
a Spectacle of too much horror to any modest Reader. First then, (thou
cheeck-aside Groat) shall I touch thy face? O no! It looks like a Noli me
tangere. Thy party par pale will not endure the touch. Besides that, St.
Antonies Fire (my squeaking Ginny Pigge) which holds such affinity with thy
crazy physnomy, proclaims to the whole world, that some Incubus or other makes
thy mummitiz'd body their nightly Hackney. -- How bravely my Dydapper fluttered
in Cornelius Tub! from whence, after some small vent or respiration, thou
presented thy Adamite head like a Moulted Skale-drake, without so much as one
hair of a natural Perrywig. And well, thou escaped so; for the sacrifice of a
tuft of Goatish hair, or of a decayed Calfe, were unsatisfactory Gages for
discharge of the Mounte-bankes Bill. Thus, my Neapolitan Nit, having with much
bathing, cupping and chasing recovered thy desperately-infected Body from the
Claws of the Grinchams: and after all this, procured a speedy cure of the Snap
thou had got over shins with a French Faggot: thou seconded thy recovery with
an honest resolution, if thou had so much grace as to hold it; that thou
would never (for, burned Child fire dreads) from that time forward endanger
falling into any such Venetian Purgatories. -- But The Devil fell sick, the
Devil a Friar would be,
The Devil grew well, the Devil a Friar was he.


But now, my illiterate Criket, I will break off from any further discovery of
those broad-spreading Maladies of thy Malignant body (being the true Embleame
of a Raddish for its frailty:) and take a little pains in display of those
exuberant distempers of thy mind.

In the first place then, give me leave to become thy Remembrancer: for it is
much to be feared (if thou were a thing worthy either our fear, or our care)
that thou art fallen into Corvinus Messalahs disease; having either forgot, or
else wholly lost thy good name.

Tell me then, my surly grumbling Don, do not remember how thy Father,
though he had small hopes of thee, and as weak promises of proficiency from
that Pedant who taught thee; adventured to send thee to the University,
purposely to enable thee, if there were any virtue, or qualifide ability extant
in thee: but how quickly, and that deservingly fell thy Freshmanship under the
hand of a rigid Censure: being for thy boyish misdemeanures publicly whipped; in
the School for thy ridiculous Arguments shamefully hist; in thy own College
unsociably jeered: and by general vote and voice for thy looseness of living,
and incapacity to learning, excluded the University without mercy? But thy
Ignorance has clothed it self with such an incorrigible insolence; as thou
scorned to follow the example of the humble Prodigal. Ask forgiveness for thy
forepast follies! No; my ranting Ratoune; Thou had such bad success by Land,
as thou meant'st to make one Adventure by Sea; and to bring thy Merchandise
from a far.

A Wife is compared to a Ship; but in these Notions different: She is neither
to have many Owners; seeing only one is to have in her a propriety: neither to
ruffle it with her Top and Top-gallant; lest she should negotiate with folly,
by entertaining those dresses of vanity; nor lay her broadside open to all
encounters; neither admit Master-mates; nor partake with sharers. For this end,
my dear Don, thou adventurously lanched, and at last prosperously arrived, for
want of a better Harbor, at Cuckolds Haven; where ever since, like a sullen
Sourell, thou have been shaking thy Velvet Head; but hopest in time to put
forth: and brandish thy brow-antlers amongst the Elders.

But we will leave thee with thy Britannica; intended at first for the Meridian
of Duresme, but may serve indifferently, upon any intervening opportunity for
all Great Brittany.

But see and wonder! This peeking-Popingay-Puppy has by this time got an
infinite itch (to sympathize with his in-laid, and skin-laid Erysipelis) to be
seen in Print. He must fool it in folio; there is no remedy. In such miserable
follies do these madding times ensnare these Wittall Widgeons. But he must use
the weak wings of his Coy-ducke to mount with: otherwise, his short Icarian
flight must be soon at an end. And who may this be? A Cumrade, or
fellow-Journeyman of his; one for his wit of the same Last and Size. A base
Bell-buzard, who will seize on any prey for his advantage: and, indeed, a late
baffled bonby, who, take my word for it, for his practice will neither do Law
nor Learning hurt, unless it be to eat up their Commons. But this Ingle must
be his Instrument to put his best helping hand to this weekly Sheet work: or
Mounseur Clot-braine must suffer his web to fail in the Loomes. Suppose them
then jogging and justling their equally-poiz'd nodles together: and like two
adle Eggs thrown out of one nest, sent abroad to beget a noisome steame in the
nostrils of any sensible Reader; breathing out this, in their Peripatetick
Garden-walke, for a settled Conclusion: That Brittannicus, who either out of his
ambition, or his Cumra les discretion, to free his hide from a lash, was to
take upon him the Title of an Author, and should play the Mercurist: though
neither He, nor his Assistant knew the Gender of Mercurius. And this Puny-Puppy
must take upon him to oppose all those honest Mercurii, who wrote in their love
to loyalty, for the honor of their Country.

Mean time, this egregious Dottrell dips his Goose-quill in such poisonous
gall as might (for so his lean-lying Genius meant) turn the color of zeal: and
by his Paradoxes in defense of Rebellion, repair that maine breach of his
irreparably decayed Breaches. O Democritus, resolve thee self to laughter: for
thou had never a rarer Subject to tickle thy spleen: nor such a Braintrap in
all thine Isle of Guls to sport with!

It was not sufficient for this Rebellious Rascal, this sordid sultry Sutler
to soil pure paper with impertinences and Tap-house Stories purchased at the
Expense of a double Jugge at the utmost; but he must vilify their Persons,
whom he dare not look on; hoping to be so superceded by his Britannick
Anonymus, as his unknown Name may give him liberty (under Mabbots privilege)
to impeach any man's Name, and make it as infamous as his own.

Nor is it his only Profession to asperse dishonor on those, who in the
Opinion of best men, are held approved: but, by playing the base Sycophant, to
magnify those, whose Names are odious to the Ears of all good men: nay, whose
Memories shall rot, and to perpetuate their shame, leave stamps of ignominy to
their hopeless Families, for Cautions to Posterity.

Let but Britannicus purchase a pair of uninterested Spectacles, if he may
reserve so much from his Commons, and peruse his Catalogue of purple
Magisteriall Bench-whistlers; those reverend Scarlet Grand Guls: who never
remember to whom they are sworn: nor to whom they are by allegiance to adhere:
nor whose Persons they represent in their dispensation of judgment. O brave
Sages! Politic Sconces! Deserve not these to be recorded? yes, sure; but in
the Black Book, where all State-Zimry's must be canonized. Mean time, what
Hyperbolees must these soyles of honor and Stains to Justice have bestowed on
them; to make the face of TREASON look with the clearer Countenance?

For to descend to thy Critical Catalogue: (for I protest, thou deservest well
to be pillored by the Parliament Party, for abusing those State-shadowes: and
bestowing on their immeriting persons, such undeserving praises:) So as instead
of the Clawing Sycophant, thou actest the part of a Saucy Critic; in praising
those whom all the world condemns: and for those pretended virtues, which their
tainted breasts never harbored. For that praise falls into dispraise, where
either the Praiser wants judgment:
or the Party praised wants merit. Neither is it less Criticisme, to praise
where either the Object or Subject admits no praise.

Thus with a palpable cheating Ignorance, thou committest a double Offense:
First, in deluding these Authentical Transgressors: in making them believe (if
thy flattery could make them so credulous, or confidently opinionate, as to hug
their folly) that all this long track of disloyalty, wherein they have so
assiduately stalked and trampled on the face of honor, was a path of public
convenience; leading to the safety, security, and liberty of the Subject: and
no disturbance to a civil peace; their Principles tending to no other end, nor
their Designs aiming at any other Object, then Reformation of Church by
introducing a Presbyterian Government: and redress of abuses coincident to the
State, by coercion of Their power, who might otherwise extend Their power by a
Privilege of Sovereignty, and convert their Commands into a Tyranny.

This (my poor Rooke) were a plausive palliating way, if thy shallow brains
could either press it: or integrity of judgment prove it. But least one wedge
drive out another, I must have a touch (my paltry Parasite) at thy next error:
Wherein thou desire (but shallow-grounded desires ever produce groundless
effects) to delude the People: whose judgments, were they as purblind as thine
own, thou would make them believe, that whatsoever that Perenniall
Consistory of State has already ordered or shall hereafter order, conduces
principally to Their improvement; and the Kingdoms honor: That there is no
error, nor any Symptom of a corrupt Member, in that grave and gracious
Senat-house. No Ordure (He would say Order) in that High and magnificent
Praetorian of Honor.

What a Pithy-asse would this Orator prove, if the ground were sound, he walked
on! But such a Dampe steames from below, as it argues, some hollownesse within.
There will appear Knavery in this Saintly Consistory, or the World's cozened.
All is not gold that glisters, The metal of this Massy Capitol resembles the
Amalga; it has more Moon then Sun in it.

But now to those Reverend Patriots, which thy bleer'd eyes have summoned up,
and so highly mounted. "The ravenous Puttock pursues the Parliament Kite.
Pleasure more suitable for an Hagler then a generous Falconer.

Now for the first, He derives his title from Kent. "A man, whose faith and
uprightness is many degrees above all that reproach which the foulest of
mouths can lay upon him.

Show me, thou nasty excrementall Ibis, what Bird, or in what Ayry, that is
more likely to blast the fame of any good man, then thy foul Mouth; Wherein
impudence and ignorance hold such predominance; as no modest ear capable of
Sense, can choose to do less then glow to hear humanity so much abused, by
making it self a Zanie to every Society: an Object of contempt to all clear
judgments.

The Morallist can tell thee (thou Scarabee to honor) that virtues become
vices and change 'their nature, when from a vicious tongue they receive their
luster.

Trust me, Sneeking Rat, I should account it more praiseworthy, to be held thy
professed foe then thy friend: and glory more in thy dis-esteeme then thy praise:
for thy want of judgment would make me jealous of my self, for some maine
defect, if I should receive approvement from thy pen. So as, this Kentish Peer
were but little beholden to thee, if any virtue be extant in him: seeing thy
blanched praises rather impeach then improve him.

For thy Second Patriot or Conscript Statist; He is an Antiquary; One, who were
he as Loyal as Learned, might be more deservingly reputed. But I wish He heard
thee, how thy phrentick pen commends him. "A man not to be named without a
religious kind of horror, and secret veneration. What means this religious
horror, thou injurious Tetter? Sure, there is either an error in the propriety
of the Author, or escape from the Printer. For I appeal to the Person
concerned in thy frivolous discourse, if in all His Readings through the whole
Course of his Antiquities, He ever read such a pitiful phraze.

Thirdly, for thy English Brutus; thoustyles Him more properly then thou
thought of: For whosoever knows Colonel Henry Martin, will conclude, that
he would not stick to act Brutus part, if he had but opportunity to stab Caesar in
the Capitol.

As for Master Speaker, being (as he is rendered) A Gentleman of admired
constancy and faith to the State, and who to the infinite prejudice of his
health (but allegiance will prescribe him a cordial) has stood constantly to
his duty, and will leave a better memory behind him then any of his Accusers.

I must tell thee in the first place, that Comparisons are odious; there may
chance to be an Accuser, who upon equal terms may cope with your Speaker.
Mean time, many of those who know him are verily persuaded, that he would with
all his heart lose all those vast sums which he has purchased with his
Tongue, upon condition he might have no occasion to make Buttons with his T.

For Mr. Sollicitour, whose very name attests him a Saintly Professor; " He is
a person of too much worth and honor to be tainted by a slander. Yet I must
tell you, Sir Snap, for all his integrious candor, Sir John Stowell did not
stick to lay more to his charge, then his untainted fidelity could well answer.

For Mr. Justice Rolls, "A man of endowments, excellent, and not the least, for
his parentage, contemptible; (observe the contemptible propriety of this
phrase) One whom the violentest malice durst never yet attach, till the
madness of this pen (dipped in gall and poison) did first attempt it.

Would not this Tucca prove a daring Champion in defense of tainted honor!
Well, Sir; if thy practice fail, (as I am persuaded thou will never be
guilty of much) I Will tell thee how thou shall improve thy valor, and with
sordid vailes minister fresh fuel to thy braving humor; Turn Boult or
desperate Haxter; thou needst not want for Inmates; thy Coy duck will furnish
thy Covy. But tell me, my Gue, whence is it, that thou should have such
confidence, in a distempered brain, to maintain these attesting Assacinates,
these timing Assertors of disloyalty! Had thine empty Sconce been gifted like
that acute Erasmus, Gaudanus, Cornel. Agrippa, ingenious Rhesnerus, or spritely
Co^radus, or that no less present then pregnant Perottus, then thou might
with more assurance have writ as they did: Paradoxes of different Subjects: and
transcendents to inferior judgments. Tasks more witty then necessary;
addressed to the Praise of Folly; Vanity of Knowledge; Bravery of Beggary;
Beauty of Deformity: Or what might more properly and experimentally Suite with
thy fancy, BRITANNICUS; Pasquills in Praise of the French Pox; in Honor of a
Cuckold: and the commodious Society of a Louse.

Neither was this Subject which thy cloddy brain undertook, of less
difficulty, if thy Scribbling pen could have performed it as artfully.

Traiters are strange Subjects for Encomiasticks: Thou might have come off
far better, (though such a Task, I confess, could not have redounded much to
thine honor) in praising thee self, as Apuleius did his Ass. But I smell thy
meaning why thou reserved a Skirt of thy sheet to wrappe up the praises of
these Rabshakaths in. It is thy aim, if ever thou creep into practice (as
there is very small hope on it) by this poor sneeking insinuating way, to make
these Reverend Benchers so much thy friends, as thou may by their
countenance, procure audience and attention to thy Mariot-motion: and so by the
present help of a ten groats Fee Satis^e thy Ma^-worme: having told thy Tale,
got bread and cheese, and come thy way.

But I will spend no more time in probing these impostumous ulcers. Bray the
fool in a mortar, he will never be wiser. What a folly were it then to
contest, with such a madding Antagonist! Since he who has to deal with durty
foes,
He must be foiled, whether he win or lose.


Only, out of the pity I bear thee, let me advise thee, to divorce thee from
this foolish Title of BRITANNICUS; it befooles thee above measure, and makes
thee as ridiculous, as that Shrewsbury Weaver, who familiarly spoke Nonsense
to his Shutle.

Fawnes thy Stationer, holding such firm relation to Allegiance, has vowed,
never to bestow more charge on thy Scribbling, to the value of one reame of
paper: And for that ugly speckled Bird, Partridge, He has freely protested,
that he would not be at the charge of publishing it, but for the hate he bears
to some particular persons, who invey against it.

So as, these Pattent-Papers of thine (for we know well how thou holds in fee
of that Saintly Synod) may sleep peaceably with Mayes, and Spungy Sprigs moldy
Chronicles (such spurious sprigs varnish our bloomy May) to the General
Resurrection: whilst that welsh Stationer of the Rose and Crown finds just
cause to complain with that Pasquill in Castalion. Eheu! Multi dum libros
typis mandare volunt; Typographi liberos mendicare cogunt. But his Zeal
supercedes his want of Sale. Leave off then betime, lest one Royallist or other
to thine utter dishonor bastinado thee out of thine humor. Thus from
Minerva's Hall to Laverna's Kitching
I leave thee falling, where thou escaped a switching
For having after Print so mad an itching.


For I must tell thee, thy sinister mischievous pen oft-times begets a Foe
where it intends a Friend.

Thy ominous friendly figure-caster, languishing Lilly, whose approaching
ruin, (maugre all his Divination) makes him look like a Russeting, being now
out of all hope to be saved by his Book; holds himself much agriev'd to be
charged with a Wench, by his dear BRITANNICUS. This makes him bellow from his
Astronomicall Cave. -- Et tu Brute! -- Go to then; leave betime, lest thou lick
of the whip. Pin thy self up in thy Spiderwoven Study: and if thou find so much
capacity left thee, as to aspire to the Desk of a Puny Clark; apply thy weak
pericranium that way: for to use thy own phrase, thy radical humor for
Minerva is wholly exhausted in thee. Thou art as feere as a Skeleton. How durst
thou then so impudently tax our late MERCURIUS, whose known abilities are not
to be measured by thy Last, for inventing Theames; when they were real
Speeches: and transcribed by so sincere an Amanuensis, as his approved esteem
is spheared above all exception? But me thinks, in repeating this word Theme,
thou should remember how Master Birch served thee for playing the Truant, and
pilfring thy Theme out of Apthonius: an Author too precious to be abused by
such a brutish Britannicus.

Thou censurest him too, like a bold Bayard, For rambling in Poetry, and making
an huge-sort of Verses in the Baeotick dialect; which are in English to
persuade the swarms of Sir Blewbotle, Bully Blewcap will go near to turn
your Roundisme into true Blew.
Blue-caps to advance hither once more, to perfect those rudiments of civility
which they once got in England. But such squeaking oratory as his (says this
State-puppy) is not likely to persuade those ears, who are not guided with any
thing so much, as the real appearances of a groat a day and flesh. -- Fury and
folly mad thee! Has not thy mis-guided Genius deluded thee? Is not Referring to
the Scotch last incursion: a design pursued with more hope then success.
Calidony become a Cavalry; marching along bravely with their High General
Hamilton; Lieutenant General Calendar; Major General Lenrick for the Foot:
with sundry other brave Scotch Commanders, and numerous Forces furnished with
all Ammunition, and But you will say, those formidable Forces are dispersed!
its true; but their dillo all Dukes feigned restraint, has given fresh Summons
to the Scots for a fearful recruit: having already resolved (with the joint
vote and voice of their KIRK) either to redeem their endangered fame, and
revenge the Sale and Slavery used to their Subjects: or to sacrifie their
dearest lives in the Quarrel. LANCASHIRE, Return a just Account of those Blew
bonnet Slaves you have sold: with your several Rates, Prices and Receipts at
that Mart: for it will be expected at your hands. That Anarchiall Council of
War may Vote down Monarchy: and impose a period to a specificall Charles,
but never to a Successive King; A life cannot contract a line: Nor can a Prince
unjustly suffer without revenge from his lineall Successor.
Warlike Provision already joined with General Langdale? Be not our best
defensive Forts Northward, with men, money and munition sufficiently fortified?
Be not their Forces daily increased? Has not the Navy lately declared how
Allegiance must be the Card that steers their Course? Is not the City turned
Retrograde? Nay, what is more then a nine nights wonder; is not their Meaning
Mayor Warner, that magisteriall Monster.
Mayor become both Wise and Loyal against his will?

But thou say, Thou will deliver us up to the justice and fury of the Kites
(the Parliamenteeres thou meanst) if we continue thus to speak Truth! Base
bugbear, suggest these affrights to those that fear thee. Our undanted
Spirits, as they know how to trample on thy vilany: So they slight the braves
of an usurped power: the insults of a disloyal Enemy. He who reteins a Loyal
heart within him,
Threats cannot fright him, nor allurements win him.
For in that Orb where Wisdom keeps her Court,
Wise men holds Tyrants fools, their Censures sport.


THERE is another walking Familiar; a peeking cozening Gipsey, a John of all
Trades, having sojourned in as many Shops, as ever Proteus took upon him
Shapes, whom I am to have a bout with too. One who can spit poison in the face
of Sovereignty with more facility, than any Martin of them all; be he never so
sufficiently qualified in the Notions of Treason and Disloyalty.

This egregious plush-turn'd Rascal, whose back was not long since beholden to
an over-cast Hounds-ditch livery: and whose Stomach was usually gorged with the
fly-blowne reversions of a Pye-Corner Pantry; is now become one of the Grandees
of that King-impeaching Assembly. This Rogue passes under two Names: where his
Alias makes up the latter; by patching up a senseless Jew, Kenelraker: would be
an Anagram more fitly suiting this Heathen Interpreter.
Anagram for the firster. His Character shall render him a discovery. His
numerous professions the Badges of his knavery. Shall we then draw up his
yearly Compute? Yes; and in it find him thus distinguished; thus dignifide.

Know all men by these presents, that this Mangy Mungrell in the year 1641. was
a broken Iron-monger: from whence collect his Iron age. In the year 1642.
having found the commodity of Iron through want of credit to be out of request:
and of too hard and rusty a temper to digest; He became Petty Stationer, and
sold small books, and ballads, winter-tales, Carols, Hooks and Eyes, Clasps
and Bosses; And this was his Brazen age.

But desirous to partake knavery in the highest measure; In the year 1643.
intending to play the Evedropper, He sculked in the Lobby for News; to set his
pestilent Forge a work: and in short time grew such a notorious Stigmatist that
way, as by means of his broaking Agents employed in that current Mintage of
State-lies, He became the only Classick Author of the Age: witness those many
millions of treacherous fictions, and shameless untruths, broached and
frontlessely published under his own hand in print.

Neither was this Horse-leach thus satisfied; his palpable ignorance must scrue
it self to an higher degree of impudence: So as in the year 1647. this
Ratle-braine, who took more of Rogue than Rabby (this is one of the Devils
tricks, ever to shame his Servants before he leave them) took upon him to write
pitiful Funeral Anagrams in Hebrew: a Tongue that might be rendered in the
Vtopian language, for ought he knew. For this paltry parasiticall Rascal,
discovered in them as little sense, as he had before shown truth in his Pen, or
sage in his Sconce.

I shall little need to devine what will become of him. All those that know
him, are verily persuaded, how that threedplush which he now wears, for all
its bravery, must become the Livery of Tyburnes Gregory. And that He must at
the feet of his Horse lie by doom of mortality, as he was permitted to lie
here by Mabbots authority. TERENT. Dehinc ut quiescant porro moneo; and desinant
Maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua.


FINIS.
OLD FATHER LASHER; In Answer to that Scurrilous Libell, styled, but
mis-called, The MODERATE.
Scelera Sceleribus sunt tuenda.

WHat have we here? The Moderate! Surely Corvinus, thou have quite forgot thy
Name. Nomen in Antithetis posuit -- MODERATA durant.
For if an obsceane Statizing Pamphlet may bear the Style of Moderate: or a
sottish senseless Libell forced with Calumny, Treason and Blasphemy, hold in
that predicament of Quality, the whole world, Sure, is whimzed: and has sent
forth their wits a wool-gathering, without all hope of recovery.

But to follow thee hot-foot in thy own path; and trace thee in thine own
track; I mean to take a little pains with thee; not for that I hold thee
worthy my labor: but that others, upon thy discovery, may look on thee, and
bless them from thee, as an Abject from Grace, and an Object of Horror.

To unkennell then this Mangy Mongrell; and uncase Him too if his Sultry Hide
were worth it: you are to understand that this Campe-Cataline-Curat, or
Pedanticall Pedro, having traversed all Faiths, and served his Apostasy to all
fashions: this Protean Gypsey, I say, to foment these Schisms of the time: and
repair those Seame-rent Schisms of his Preeches: being in his Fig-leafe habit
more like an Adamite, then a Senate Proselite; chanced to fall into an
Anarchicall Society, wherein after a short time of Probation, He became the
Chayr-man, and in his Paraean and unkinging Arguments such a public Professor;
as this Isis Ass was held their only Idol in all the Synagogue. After a very
little instancy by this Holy Fraternity, he was persuaded to deliver his
Anarchicall Opinion publicly (as Jezabel did out of her window) in BELS-ALLY.
Where this Where he no less locally then doctrinally infused this false Belief
in those gadding Gadareus, his wandering Congregation; how that Bell-Alley was
the very place where Bell combated with the Dragon.
Satanicall Schismatic vented such impertinent childish Tautologies: with
other Atheistical stuff to his judaicall Assembly; As any Sober judgment
would verily have thought that he had been some Lunaticke, newly broke out of
Bedlam: such apparent Symptoms of a phrensy did this Bremo discover both in
Language and action. Now the principal points (and all not worth a point)
whereon this bawling Curre insisted; were in such a levelling way digested: as
in process of time, after sundry long gravellings, He labored to present
these his Familiars with a monstrous misshapen Body without an Head. Telling
them plainly (for his Education from a pad-staffe, could not promise much
Oratory) that as there was no Smith in Israel, so it stood with the convenience
of a State to have no King in Israel. And that He would prove by good
authority, that in their first Institution, they were accounted as Ordinary
men, both in respect of their Antiquity, Dignity, and Quality. For said He,
what great Antiquity can they prescribe from Adam? Do we read that either Adam
was a King: or his Consort Eve a Queen? Digging and Delving was no proper
office for a King: neither Spinning nor Weaving for a Queen. Yet was this
Manufactory and Manual Labor the only employment of that absolute Emperor
and his Emperesse. But admit (what is not to be admitted) that this Only Man
on Earth enjoyed the Style of King; yet all the World will confess, that He
had no great assurance of his Kingdom, when the taste of an Aple drove him out
of his Dominion. Besides, was She worthy to retain the Style of a Princess,
who was deceived so easily by a Serpent? Or He worthy to exercise his Commands
over men, who was so quickly seduced by a Woman?

To the Second point; if you account him so eminent in respect of his Dignity;
you are wholly mistaken (quoth He) there is no such mattter. For look upon the
manner of their Election; and you will find in it no such inducement of
titular honor. For was not Darius that great Persian King; One who would have
valued Great Britanny but as a Molehill; chosen King from Neighing of his
Horse: and I pray you, did not the Groom of his Stable deserve that Title as
well, if not better then He; when his device was the only Means for his
Master to win the prize? Was not Gordian likewise chosen Prince from the
Plowshare? And Probus taken from Setting of a Turnop in his Garden to be made
Guardian over a flourishing State? Would not these prove brave complete
Courtiers, when the One was bred a Gardner; the Other a Curter? O dainty
perfumed Emperors! With what beseeming State could Hobnaile put on a Royal
Roabe? Or a Turnop-setter, whose only triumphant Cry was to improve the Sale
of his Carrets, mount to a Chair of State?

Thus you see, said He, Majesty clouted up in a Plow share: and disht up in a
Sallet.

Now for the last, which is his Quality. Have not the Greatest Kings been the
worst men? Look upon that brutish Nebuchadonozer; and you shall find him
grazing amongst beasts of the field: and he the very worst Beast of all the
Herd. Look upon Pharaoh; and you shall find Him acting bloody Nimrods part,
hunting cruelly and craftily after the Children of God. Go to Herod, and you
shall hear Him exalting himself above God. Rich Ahab must have poor Naboths
Vinyeard, though he have many of his Own. Naboth must be stoned, to enlarge
his State. Thus many Kings have wholly unking'd themselves, by striving to make
themselves too absolute Kings. By incroaching upon their Subjects, they have
become lower then their Subjects. Base Monopolies, High Impositions, heavy
Imposts, burdensome Taxes, have made Peers, Commons, Merchants, Persons of
all conditions to become weary of their Yoke: and cast off Loyalty, to redeem
their Liberty.

Those Syracusan Tyrants made fetters for themselves. Their own actions begot
them factions. They needed no greater Enemies then them selves to depose them.
Phalaris that cruel Tyrant caused his cunning Enginiere Perillus to make him a
Bull (nearly resembling our late Colchester Bull) purposely to torment Those,
whom He hated: but Perillus was the very first Patient that was tormented in
it. -- Nec est lex justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
No juster Law on Earth was ever known
Then when Deaths-Artists perish by their own.


AFTER this manner, would this wandering Gospeller vapor. But this Conventicle
Alley grew soon weary of their Lecturer. So as, this Kentish Kite must be
enforced to take upon him some Other vocation: being out of all hope to receive
from Bells Alley or any other zealous Corner in all Colemans Street, any more
pension. To repair then his starved fortunes, He betakes himself to that
over-jaded Trade of a Scurrilous Statizing Pamphletter. A Diurnall dunce;
Styling himself THE MODERATE: Impartially communicating (if you may believe
him) Martial Affairs to the KINGDOM of ENGLAND.

Principem Criminari! Quid gravius? Parthes. and Viget. lib. 1. cap. 24. --
latet Aspis in ore Maligni. Auson.
But harken old FATHER LASHER, thou Moderate Goos-cap. Have thou crept out of
thy Schismatic Tubbe, to play the treacherous Bouby in Print? Can thou
find no face to cast thy dirt (base Kennel-raker) but on the Prince? Must He
be thy Subject? Yes; for thou justifies thy Plea: and avowchest Him worthy of
it. -- Charging him with all the blood that has been shed by this War in the
three Kingdoms: Nay, with a fact of that notorious quality, as the very
ancient Ethnicks would not suffer it to be mentioned in their Edicts: nor any
punishment to be devised for it; because they held none so unnaturally
barbarous as to commit it. Villainous Rabshakeh, do thou charge Him with the
Death of his Father? Was it not sufficient misery for Him to be deposed of His
Sovereignty; deprived of his Liberty; but to have his precious fame stained
with this egregious brand of infamy? Impious Impe! How dare thou accuse thy
Prince? One, to whom Thou owe even thy self, of so heinous a Crime as
Patricide? By whom did thou ever hear Him Taxed, but by Those whose only
aim was to innovate and change our form of Government; nay, utterly to
supplant it? These indeed, were those Engineers of the Independent Faction,
whose Labor it was, (as now it is, by their obstructing our late Treaty; in
laying to His charge (grounded upon his own pretended Confession) all the Blood
that has been shed since these Wars begun, through this purple Island. But
reflect, (thou Monarchical Moth) who bestowest thy licentious Lamp in
blanching the fame of Princes, and aspersing dishonor upon their actions,
whose purity may justly vindicate them from the least tincture of infamy! May
the sovereignty of an absolute Prince, who pursues nothing with more
justifiable fervor, then preserving his Prerogative Royal; (without which,
Majesty, be it never so gloriously personated, nor personally accomplished, is
but a naked style, or imaginary State) deservingly receive any such brand? That
wise Politician could have better informed thy rash judgment: and declined thy
loose pen from pursuit of so odious an argument; who delivered this
State-position as a Maxim for Princes to observe, and Subjects to obey: The
Spirit of a Prince, who can dispense with his Prerogative: or studies to
ingratiate his Subject; below himself, merits not the style he bears; nor the
Throne whereto he mounts: Justin. in regim. Princ. Lamprid. de stat. reg.
Plutarch. in Moral. Cic. de Repub. Paul. Jovius de antiq. ordine. Princep.
C^ssian. de administ. Gent.
nor that regal state which he presents. Whatsoever lies before him, is not
worthy to be admitted by him, unless his low desires be to lose himself. Yet
for all this, must the privilege of thy licentious pen, made mercenary to
relieve thy starved guts with the scattered revenues of a threepenny Ordinary,
break forth into this virulent detraction of laying this boundless deluge of
Civil blood (uncivilly effused) upon the just and legal defense of an
authentic Prerogative.

What a brainsick madness has surprised thee (Thou senseless stupid
stygmatist) that without ground of reason, or least relish of discretion, Thou
should run upon so fatal a Rock, so irreparable Precipice, as to become a
Satanicall Satyr; Nugantia sunt Opera, vulgi ludibria, v^nti vehicula, vespis
velamina, pulicibus pabula, Tineis tegmina, Authoris discrimina, Temporis
disp^ndia. Lamprid.
and in that rough and rigid feature, present thee a Prodigy of Nature; nay, to
every loyal eye, that holds Sovereignty a state of conscientious policy, a
Monarchical Meteor or prodigious object of humane horror? O quam multa opera
dum prodeunt, deplorati Authoris famam produnt! This may be justly verified in
thee (Thou ulcerous Censor of Princes actions;) thy Book cannot possibly save
thee, were the Ordinary, on whose indulgence thy illiterate sconce so much
depends, never so partially cemented, nor by reward personally affianced to
thee. For could either common sense or competent reason speak for thee, or
authority were it never such a King-killer, as were nursed in Paraeus bosom,
plead thy Cause, thou might breath some small hope of comfort, and though
not of release, yet some small reprieve from present suspension: But where none
of these will adventure to become Advocates for thee, look for no mercy; only
expect a Newgate Jury to return their pitiless verdict upon thee; a
Rhadamanth within thee to condemn thee: and Furies in all seasons, and upon all
occasions to torment thee. What will become then of this Barbarous Bard, when
he shall be taught to sing his incaged note like a Newgate Bird, and in
resemblance to the Ostridge, feed on his Grate, with an eager digestion, for
want of better provision?

If thou had ever read so far (my muddy and moldy-witted Moderate) but I fear
me thy Reading never traveled further then Riding, and consequently never
arrived at Corinth; as to have read those heavy and tragic censures of Eupolis
and Aristobolus; the gravel of their Criticisme would have so grinded thy
teeth, as it would have broken thy fangs: and returned thee in no capacity of
biting: though by a natural instinct, in a quality of snarling. But what
discreet brain will set any value of thy envenomed pen! Though I must
ingenuously confess, it is not only mine, but the fortune of many others
encounter with thine exuberant surquedries; for they frequently meet me in my
dish; but in what posture? In the public service of ushering in of
March-paines, Custard-plates, Tart-papers, with other kick-shawes: being proper
employments for such spurious excrements.

But whence comes this frontlesse impudence (my Moderate Brain-strap?) From no
other source then a confident ignorance. Thou conceitest that the obscurity of
thy person, and impertinency of thy pen, will exempt thy buffoun wit from an
apparent baffle: and by a continuation of thine useless Diurnall, procure thee
by means of thy State-patron some obscure corner in an Hospital. And this
thou hopest to obtain, when thy aged joints become seered, thy native
faculties enfeebled: and thy lame body, like thy lean fancy, render themselves
contemptuously slighted. But let old Father LASHER undeceive thee (my Moderate
Mamothrept;) Thou art lost if thou ground on these deluding ends. Let thy
weaksteered resolution thaw it self into a serious retractation. It is no error
to alter thy course for a better. Since thy obscene pen has shamed thee; sheath
it, and let silence salve thee. None, unless he be his own enemy, would
publish his own folly. Let no despicable price proclaim thee a fool in print.
And though thy weak-winged Genius cannot soar so high, as to right so
Majestic an object as thou have traduced; yet of a mis-named Moderate become
an immoderate Penitentiary; A recluse thy mansion; Tears thy Consort;
passionate sighs thy sole-breathing-accents. And if thy weak estate endanger
thee to starve; Return to thy late manual vocation (putting off thy former
fraud and collusion) and in thy progress serve him, on whose providence so
long as thou relieft, Thou can not starve. Recover thy wits, so far estranged
from thee: and dis-own that improper Title of MODERATE, which has so grossly
abused thee.

THE SENATS ANSWER TO THE EARL of LOWDON: THE SCOTCH CHANCELLOR Anno. Dom.
1648.
Sir,
YOur polished lines enamelled with much art, and pretending (if we may be
confident of Scotch dialect) to some truth; we have here received, wherein your
labor is in the person of your whole Council of State, to assure us of that
unity and affectionate harmony, as in one incorporate State, so lately and
lovingly established betwixt our neighboring Nations; and how the influence
and continuance of it appears in your Representative, of so pure and refined a
quality, as it were piacular to hold it capable of any jealousy. But wash off
this Cerusse, Mr. Chancellor, that we may discover your Complexion the better.
Can your plausible Apology, though never so subtly nor curiously woven, make
us believe that you love us, or in our extremes immutably cleave to us; when
apparent arguments of hostility display your levitie, and proclaim to the wide
world, that the Wolf will sooner lose his hair then his conditions: and that
the ancient British Proverb will be ever verified by you; Constant foes, but
inconstant friends: So constant in inconstancy, as your advantage has ever
won ground upon your Allies extremity?

But let us draw the Curtain, that we may have a perfecter veiw of the Picture.
You take your level from that pretentended union so happily established betwixt
the two Nations. But how have you for your parts tempered or preserved that
Cement, which should have strengthened this Juncture? Did your late Invasion by
that ever practicing but never successive Hamilton, manifest your affection to
peace, or any symptom of intended Union? Can you under color of plunder and
hostility; pretend a continuance of our dissolved unity?

Yes; you can close the wound smoothly; and palliate your pernicious projects
with numerous protests; that his preci^itious attempts were both molded and
acted without your privity. Take off your vizard; and let us see if your
impudence can discover it self without a blush. It is true, what we read of
Tiberius; that he could s^rowd his intentions from the clearest judgments
without suspicion, and walk in the Clouds without discovery. But this had been
a strange imposture for a strong and potent Army, levied from all the quarters
of your Kingdom, unless they had been inveloped in Cimmerian shades, to have
marched so invisibly; nay, and unanimously too, without your joint assent,
admittance and authority. Yet we must not believe this, your hearts were ever
harmoniously united to us. Both in judgment and affection you were wholly
Aliens to any such Invasion. And if we may have so much faith as to believe
you; there is nothing that may hold consistence with our safety, which you do
not equally balance as your own security. What amicable brothers you be! who
could think how any Snake could lie shrouded under such green grass? And yet
there lies hid a Pad in the straw. Tell us, grave Chancellor, did there ever
break forth any such sparks of your ferverous zeal to us: or any such flaming
desire of being individually united to us, till your forraging Army, either
through want of spirit, or discipline, or both, were by us wholly discomfited?
During your march, all were hushed: much expected from the success of your
invasion: no acknowledgement then intended: nor tender of submission. Did you
then think (unbosome your selves freely, and for once cashere hypocrisy) to
call for mercy; but rather to expose our States for fuel to your fury? Did not
the confidence of an approaching conquest transport you; nay, wholly estrange
your affection: and make you forgetful of our transacted union? Had your
large-spreading Army marched on with success, and proved as victorious as it
was numerous; should we have received from your imperious Commands this
peaceful message? would your white banner have been then displaied? No, Sir;
such fair dealing could not be expected from your hands. It is not to be
doubted, but your Nation knows better to make use of a victory, then how to get
it. You who profess your selves now (if we were so foolishly credulous as to
believe you) our indeared friends; would have appeared then our implacable
foes. A pusillanimous Enemy admits no quarter. You and the inhumane Irish hold
concurrency in this: you cannot be secure from fear, till you can play at
football with the Head of your foe. But Devine providence timely deluded your
expected success. For what gained you by your confused march, but reproach and
hate? Those Northern Parts, through which you ranged and ravaged, had good
cause to conjecture, that you came rather to plunder then conquer. Mun-Ro (a
man as ignorant in the discipline of Arms as civil carriage, being in the one
artlesse, the other savage) became a true stake to our new-established State;
when his brutish and intolerable usage made those who should have been his
Assistants, his Assassins: our pretented foes, our converted friends. This
courtesy did that uncivil Bore do us, though against his will. Such infinite
disadvantage befalls an undisciplined Commander by ruining his own: and
inhancing his rifling fortunes with injurious booties. But we must be friends,
(so you say;) These invasions must not dissolve nor dis-joynt our affections. A
National union has joined us together: which no fomenters of division should
dissever. Hate is not to be engendered upon every light heat.

Fall from that account, good Chancellor; hostile invasions are not so to be
minsed. Though remissness of Spirit in the pursuit of your design, caused you
to faint in your fight; the impoverished North groaned under the insupportable
burden of your insolence: finding no Salve to cure their Sore but a coactive
patience. Now, your Casuists will tell you, that the offense cannot be
remitted, till Satisfaction be rendered. Open your Exchequer; that must prepare
the Plaster. They who invade another interest, harping after nothing more
eagerly, then how to prey upon others, deservedly become a prey unto others.

Though you hold your Stool of Repentance for some transgressions a sufficient
Penance; yet where actual or personal injuries are so licentiously acted,
Offenses so highly qualified, are to be more strictly weighed; and sharply
schooled. All your extorted store will scarcely recompense our injured State.

But you will object,
and cloth your countenance in a Cloud, as if the days of your plunder (your
only year of Jubilee were expired) that you are for the present become our
Tributaries, nay constant Almoners to our Soldiery: in your quartering and
high Assesses to our Garrisons now residing with you. It Is true; but whence
arises this hospitable intertaine? Is it not an Assesse, rather then a
Benevolence? Our moral Philosophers, who knew best how to define true
Liberality; will inform your knowledge sufficiently in this point. These will
tell you, that a coacted Bounty is a palliated Parcimony. What a stronger hand
then your own will not suffer you to enjoy, that you seem willing to forgo; but
our Nation, to whose favor you thus insinuate, expects a more satisfactory
Oblation. In your late assistance, which merits not the style but shadow of an
Association, your valor was often engaged and brought to stake, but never came
off with honor. Some indeed of your Country-carcases lay scattered under the
walls at Hereford. Whose Deaths gave greater testimonies of their valor then
their Lives: being only used as dead Marks to shoot at, without resistance.
You were still rather upon the taking then fighting hand. The estates and
livelyhoods of our distressed Country exhausted by the fury of civil wars and
domestic hostility, became your injurious merchandise and extorted booty.
Which you on your foundred Sumpters daily exported to your sordid and
disfurnished Lithstows, without ever doing any action of importance in our
service. Though we have heard one of your Country Commanders, after your native
facetious way, answer a qualified Soldier of ours, twitting him in saying: All
their valor consisted in number. O, replied he, if we be so terrible in the
appearance of our number, what shall we be, when we discover our valor? But the
Cure had been worse then the Disease, if our late and long dispute had
continued, till your personal prowess had determined it. Your old General,
now a Blind Guide, and deserted of his own; after his Sweden fame, amply
gratified by his pension in Pomerania, eclipsed much of his glory, in his too
much speed at Haysham Moor; where he was better known to his fear then
unexpected fortune: making his issue with such winged speed through his Army,
as it would not suffer him to stay the time of being a witness to the issue
or close of the victory. Yet in this Conquest achieved by our hands, it was
wonderful to observe, how your frontlesse pusillanimity could put upon it the
countenance of Sovereignty! For how often have we been advertised of your
unsufferable boldness in dating your usurping Letters, from our Towns of
Northallerton, Thirske, and Darlington in Scotland, with other places of
confluence in our Northern parts: as if you had wholly subdued these to enlarge
the boundiers and revenues of your penurious State, without relation to our
benefit, but highly to the derogation of our honor.

And in these your braving and insupportable insolences, we for bear to
recount those inhumane cruelties perpetrated by you; in the view whereof even
the blood of Savages would curdle: and resolve hearts wholly composed of marble
into tears; being writ in characters, of so deep a die, as no revolution of
time can raze them. Sad spectacles! To see aged persons, who had one foot in
the Grave, and whose mellow and mature years might have begot in your inhumane
assasinats a venerable awe and reverence, imbathed and imbrued in their own
blood; for laboring with their decayed and decrep it strength to preserve the
conjugall honor of their enforced Daughters. Rapes, rapine and murder
frequently committed, and with impunity transmitted!

But our Brotherhood, pretended alliance and association might seem to apply
Salves to these Sores; we never called you to account for them: the more is our
account.

But to omit these; for long since were they cancelled out of your memory; like
a Stage-tragedy, no sooner presented, and the Curtain drawn, then with an act
of Oblivion closed; your desire holds still to be at one with us; though there
be no union among your selves. Which makes us partly believe that you are
lineally descended from some of those ancient Britains, (as your Nation
pretends) who whenever they were engaged or endangered by their invasive
Enemy, fled for refuge to the Romans; not so much for any express of loyalty,
as for their own security. In a word, if you mean to shake hands with us; you
must first shake off your old hair. Whitened walls and painted Sepulchers are
more suitable Emblems for your Presbyterian. Principles, then for the late
Instauration of our Democraticall Government. Your inconsistency to Tenets of
peace; and inconcurrency to truth, have made us your Aliens: though we dare
trust you, so long as you be Visible Objects; in our sight, but no further.

We shall be content to account you Subjects: but by a disproportionate union,
to draw in one yoke with you, were to advance you to an immerited liberty: and
by that means bring us to incur an imperious slavery: Nay, by our weakness
to enable an Enemy; who now wants sinews to act his fury. This might detract
more from our discretion, then the fame which the continued success of our
actions has won us, would in an Iliad of ages repair.

SIR, you may spare your pen, where there is no probability to prevail. Only
let us tell you: That your conquered Nation may hold it for a Trophie of
Honor; when an English Victor injoyns you to suffer.

A FUNERAL ORATION; as it was delivered at DARBY-HOUSE: The 6. of Feb. 1648.
BEhold my Beloved! We are come hither to an House of Mourning! And we are to
rejoice in it; for it is better to come to the House of Mourning then
Rejoicing. Surely the mournful condition of this late-Metamorphosed House must
needs confirm it. O vanity of vanities! DARBY-HOUSE dissolved! That Corbona!
that Tagus! that Pactolus! nay, that Indian Inn of Albion blown up in a
moment! Woe is me for thee, thou headless Capitol!

But in the recollection of our sorrows, it will become me, whom Authority
has enjoined to this sad Task, to reduce these Iliads of griefs into Order,
which mount to that height, as they will neither admit of measure nor number:
unless with those, who have suffered so much by them, as they can forbear to
suffer with them: or sacrifice one poor tear of pious compassion for them.

Give me leave then to present this late Grand Model or Masterpiece of State
in the form of a Naked Body, but no Breathing Feature: Only a vapor; an
indigested Bulk without Symmetriall Contexture, or Organicall Proportion: a
vessel of dust; a Pile of dissolution. Draw near then, ye amazed Spectators,
and in this grave, but now Grave-approching Patriot, whom we here personally
present: Behold a Spectacle of Mortality; a President of Mutability! See how
the Gold has lost his Color; how this deceased Party, that lies here before
you, has lost both fame and honor! How clear a yesterday looked upon it: and
with what a lowering brow does this day welcome it? It cannot be less then well
known to you, Judicious Auditors; how singularly this Mournful Memorial was
endowed: with what abilities completed; being the only select one culled from
Apollo's Senate, to beget a feverish and awful reverence in his retainers.

Shall we dissect him, and eye his Materials? Wipe your eyes first, that such
a sense-seazing Sceleton turn you not all to Niobees.

Philosophy tells you, that Man consists of three parts: and bestows his
faculties wholly upon them. The Irascible, Concupiscible and Intelligible. Now
survey the late abilities of this Breathlesle Object in every of these: and the
apprehension of them will leave you in astonishment.

For the Irascible; he scorned to recall to mind that lesson which that
absolute Philosopher left with his Emperor: To repeat the four and twenty
Greek Letters in his anger, before he proceeded to any censure. Or to follow
the example of Archytas; Who would not correct his hind, because he was angry
with him. No; this brave Spirit was more sensible of a wrong: and more speedy
in his revenge. He would strike while the Iron was hot: He was but a word and a
blow.

He held it a dishonor to him, to expostulate the cause with a supposed
Malignant: Report was sufficient to make him one, without further evidence to
evince him.

Believe it, my Beloved, so strong was this grave Segniour in passion; so free
in his exhibition: as he with the rest of his worthy Rhadamanths, have sent
more Presents from hence to Peter house, in one day: then they did in Alms or
Peter Pence all their time. It has been observed, that the only Air which
this reverend Censor used to breath, was -- Secure him, Secure him. Which was
ever done to purpose: for those that went in, found the Lions Cave to be there:
-- vestigia nulla retrorsum.

I have many times heard Him maintain it (to the gall^ntry of his Spirit be it
spoken) that it was one of his Ambitions to learn perfectly the Art of Memory;
to the end he might receive a sense of his Injuries the better. The sole ends
of a politic Statist.
And that it was never his desire to be employed in behalf of the Public, but
for private ends and secret revenge. Which could never be more nimbly effected,
nor colourably pursued, then while our Waters were troubled: and our State
distracted. He always held it convenient in his object of revenge, to begin
with the Cedar first. Eagles catch no Flies. This he confessed a few days
before he departed this life, to be be his Masterpiece in the dispatch of
STRAFFORD: Timely prevention is the life of policy: and in this President the
ruin of a Monarchy.
whom, if by the singular industry and dexterity of his Nimble Didappers, whom
he employed as Active Instruments for that design; he had not timely lopped;
the aims of his Senate had not been only prevented; and their main project
diverted: But he with all such as adheared to him, had been caught in
STRAFFORDS Gyn: and foold themselves, before ever they had brought him to the
Bay.

One Eucopius drawing near his Bedside a very small time before his death;
seriously demanded of him, what his reason might be, under such fair plausive
pretenses so to imbroile a peaceful State: and instead of plenty, peace and
prosperity, by his seditious accomplices, to bring in scarcity, ruin and misery
into this Kingdom? His answer was; As all Creatures feed not on clean meats:
Nor all Fishes delight in Clear waters: So neither did it agree with all
humors to hold peaceable times their only Jubilees. Peace, I confess (said
he) may be highly conducing to the benefit of such Merchants; whose improvement
draws its life and spirit from Traffic: As all other Artists by Manufactory or
other Mysteries: but Some we have who Margites -- like can neither dig,
delve, nor raise them a subsistence by any legal or peaceful endeavor: and
must these Lobsters perish? No; Some are naturally bred for Arts; Some for
Arms. Arts had their proper vocations before; Let Arms supply their place now.
Those that know neither how to beg nor work; by an especial Committee of
Examinats, we have given them free scope to take that course as may enforce
such as cannot work, to beg relief from their hands, who make it their
vocation to practice plunder: and in the pursuit of it, An excellent provision
for lame Soldiers: and sturdy Beggars.
account it their absolute honor.

During the time of his visitation; which was not very long: for he was taken
with such a violent pestilentiall Fever, as through want of sleep with other
occasional distempers arising from the intemperate heat of his brain, He
became diverse times wonderfully distracted, and in the end mortally surprised;
yet in his Intervalls, he was one evening by a serious and grave Royallist, who
in regard of his near relation to him, oftentimes visited him, asked these
three questions.

The first, how he with the rest of his prudent and reverend principal Members
to be so injuriously rent and pulled from them; as if the whole Power or
Prerogative of their House were to render up their ancient pretended
Privileges to the power of the Sword?

O, said he; heave but my head a little higher upon my Pillow, and I shall
answer you. These whom you call principal Members; were permitted to be
removed from us, not to prejudice us, but improve us. They were known to be
strong presbyteriall Opinionists; such, as held an Article of Faith to stand to
their first Principles: which, as we rightly apprehended, would prove
inconsistent to our Privileges. We might discover a stronger Party
interposing. Though we had many votes in the House: yet the Army had ever the
casting Voice.

For my part, my Conscience was not so straightly laced, nor most of my zealous
Brethren neither (though the Army diffide us, nay defide us, and in our
Connivence slight us) but we could give way to Power: and dispense with our own
Tenets to procure our selves peace: so cautious were we of preserving the
propriety of our estate, and priority of our place.

But whence was it, replied this Visitant; that after you had given them this
repulse, you should vote them so graceful a return?

O, said this deceased Senator; A rare Emperical Receipt; whose ingrediences
consist more of policy then piety.
this was not intended to cherish but to chastise them. In our receiving them,
we reserved them for Sacrifices to the Army; to practice on them what pleased
them best, whether it were cruelty or mercy.

Our only policy was to approve acts of Hostility: being done by the stronger
Party.

Wisdoms will be able to answer those main and many Objections pressed against
you, by that great discomfited and now captivated Duke, touching your late
invitation of him and his numerous fugitive forces in this Kingdom!

That Tiberian Duke, invelop't his Counsels in a cloud, till his cloudy
designs clothed with Ambition, haled him to the Block.
Nothing more easily, replied this our departed Brother; may not we with as much
confidence avouch that some of our grave well-monied Citizens were their only
inviters; and that for our selves, we were never so much as made acquainted
with their designs till the Duke with his Army was defeated; may not we, I
say, with as much boldness and as little truth, maintain this; as Monsieur
Loudon their reverend Chancelour, in the representative Body of his credible
Nation, protested, purposely to ingratiate them with our awefull Senate: and by
this pretensive defense of their suspected innocence, to reunite them to their
amity and correspondence?

City; whose frequent considerable recruits ever redounded highly to the
advantage of the Public: by your joint votes and voices to have opposed the
Armies quartering with them: at least from suffering them to be their own
Paymasters with the Cities treasury: or dishonouring D. Humphrey so much,
Chaste Diana's ancient Temple, Augea's Stable, Lavernas Staple.
as to make him now in his old days the Keeper of an Ordinary: or Commissary
to a three penny Hostry; a Turn-spit to the Souldry: or to reduce Paul's
Sanctuary to a pilfring Scullery.

So might we, replied this bemoaned Party, have brought an old house over our
ears. The tongue is but a weak Engine against force. Whom had we to side with
us for our security, if our indiscreet votes should have opposed the Army? you
must know, Sir, it fares with us as with a splitted Ship, or a ruinous Pile:
when the House falls to decay, the Rats run away.

Besides, our just revenge upon those white-liver'd Citizens, (who, so they may
sit quietly to hatch their own eggs, care not much though other nests be
rifled) Or as in a thunder; where every one prays the thunderbolt may not fall
upon his own house, and very little regards the danger of his neighbor. So a
sprig of Laurel may secure him; he rests secure of others ruin.

For their daring Petitions so often presented to us; but with such easy
thanks slighted by us: that, albeit we commended their care and zeal for the
public peace, yet we carried still a Stone in our Bosom, which we intended to
throw whenever opportunity should give way. That Spirit suits not well with
the constitution of this time; that entertains remorse, where he may encounter
his foe with a suitable revenge.

Thus far have we presented to you in this Spectacle of Mortality, how this
breathless relic of State, stood affected touching the Irascible Part: will
you hear his own confession for the Concupiscible?

He acknowledged freely in the presence of sundry eminent persons; but never
till our Physicians had given him over: that since the very first time that he
was made a M. of the House; he found his mind much distempered with an
Hydroptick humor. The more he got; the more he sought. His thirst was never to
be quenched, no, though his steeming Lungs were the Spunges of the State; and
shared sufficiently with the Committee of every County: yet were all these
In-comes but empty Purveiers to my hungry desires. For though my Nest were
freely feathered at home: my Hutch richly stored abroad: I was ever angling
after the fat fortunes of some pretended Malignant: hugging that prudentiall
Ordinance, by virtue whereof a crammed Estate empowered a Committee to make a
Delinquent. Hence it was, that being fortified by Council at home, and Forces
abroad: we found it an easy matter to make Loyalty a Crime: and vote all such
as adhered to their P. by a Legislative Power, Egregious Traitors.

Now to the third; if you who be here present, and see me drawing near the
shore, desire to know how I since my first calling up to be a Senator,
employed my Intelligible Part: WALSINGAM in his time was never more sollicitous
after Intelligence. I understood well how France begun to follow our
foot-stepps: Sovereignty became unto them an insupportable yoke of slavery. The
Turkish Commonty: Especially with the mutinous Janizary, with whom ever since
these State-distractions, we have kept a firm and constant correspondency.
(for we had the knack of fingering the strings of Infidels for the better
tuning of our own Instruments) approved and applauded our super-regulating and
regulizing Authority.

This infinitely joyed me: not doubting, but within short time (at least in
their next Turkish Jubilee) to be enrowled Saintly Musilmen, in their Alcoran.

More Mourners over him, then for him.
Thus have you heard, my dear Auditors, the life and death of this grand
Areopagite. The grounds of his rising; the occasion of his falling. Yet though
this funeral Room be sabled: never was Hearse accompanied with more State, nor
attended with fewer tears.

Dry eyes every where usher in the Obsequies of this Senate. Such is the fate
of those who violate their faith.

The Senate-doors are shut: those Doers in the Senate utterly shamed: here a
Duke degraded: a Pretorian Train disgraced: a faithless Synod dissolved: an
endless Trienniall adjourned: and a distracted State recovered; if a New State
by a late-introduced Anarchy do not dis-compose it.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE FOVRTH SECTION.
SInce the penning and publishing of that fourth Section, entitled PEMBROOKS
PLEA; the Person, to whom it had its address and relation, changed his life:
and for a worse, say some uncharitable Censors; who in the draught of his Will,
like Commentors full fraughted with Lucians invention, stick not to present him
acting the part of a Mad Lord at his death; as he had formerly done of a Weak
one, all his life.

Truth is, to defend the weakness of most of our Lords as well as his; were a
work of such difficulty: Tale opus si quis ederet, sine nausea Lector non
digereret. Laert.
and to most of our loyal palats so dis-relishing; as it would appear a
Paradox rather then an Apology.

But if this Lords capacity were in the lowest Siege, (as is already granted;)
how deservingly are those Grandees to be condemned, who being held deep
Machiavels, have fooled themselves out of their wits: and recorded their
unthriving Projects in living Annals of Idiotisme to all generations?

Much could I say, and more then some would have me say: but I will be spare,
for I know our Consul-kites have Eves-droppers in every corner: So jealous be
these Actaeons of their own interests: Only, let me say, what the whole world
will make good: That never such a Trienniall of State-gullery has been
presented, since those Gooslings kept Centinall in the Capitol. -- O what
hacking and hewing has our Whimzed State made for Senators; when they must be
teezed out of Sawpits? -- O Trephonius Cave, what a fit recluse had thou
been; for these Spirits in the Vault, to act their Pagan Pageants in! yet who
sees not, but any one might draw as much proving policy out of Anacharses
Mortar, as SAYS Synodicall Arbor: though in the Infantry of our State-Lunacy,
That was held the only Jewish Sanhedrim for debate: or rather that Chymicall
Crucible; which out of its Callow Principles could resolve an Episcopal Mitre
into a Presbyteriall Cipher: A Monarchical Scepter into a Democraticall
Center. But these, like the Amalga, had more Moon then Sun in them. For what
have our Bedlamites got by their same plots?

Have they not (with their breach of faith to boot) disseised themselves and
their Heirs for ever: and like desperate Adventurers, imbarqued the remainder
of their forlorn fortunes, in the Ship of fools, with their Tolosan Treasure
sent over before them; which in all men's judgments, shall never meet them? And
were not these Wise Shallops, to strip themselves both of wit and wealth at an
instant? -- well, I shall ever commend that true Neapolitan, HARRY MARTIN: who,
though he sometimes played the frontlesse noddy; yet he loved to have some
sport for his money.

Condemn him not for degenerating from that feathred Martin, from whom he took
his name. That Bird ever took content in a cleannest: whereas pragmaticall
Harry never stood much either upon neat lodging, or clean linen: so his dainty
mercenary Dabrides were free in her quartring.

Admit his late Suburban practice has made him as brittle as a Raddish; he
stood as long, and spoke as much in defense of the Cause; as his decayed Calves
would give him leave: or the imposthumed palate of his mouth, permit him to
prate.

Thus you hear how this Spritely Member was paid home for his labor. A knot
of State-Mawworms sprung from the corruption of a distempered Body.
But for an Herd of seditious Stoicall Asses to ruin themselves; by suffering
their foes to jade them: and undermine their States by their own Stratagems:
Heraclitus would scarce find lungs enough to laugh at such dottrells. For can
we find any man so wise through our whole Island, that may unwarpe their
designs: or in the discovery of them (if they be so quick-sighted or
ripe-sented as to retreve the game) shall not observe their mis-guided flight
dis-advantageous to themselves: and like ill ground-givers, in directing their
Gamesters for setting their Byasses ever the wrong way?

Now, these Sage-Soakers, who were ever accounted notable State-pyoners, have
generally escaped the lash; while those of the younger fry, and weaker wing,
being scarcely pen-feathred in actions of treason; must be stripped, whipped,
disgraced and exposed for Buffouns to the eye of the world.

It has been the unhappiness of many eminent persons,
(neither has it balked this traduced Lord) to have suffered in their fames,
by the unthankful censures of such, who had received their subsistence and
supportance from them; even their own Domestics: as might be instanced in his
Countesses Coachman. Who carrying his Lady in her Coach to Church upon a
tempestuous day, during her reside at Apleby in the North: her groom, more
tender, it seems, of his Horses harm then his Lords honor; caused a sheet to
be thrown over them, to keep them from cold: but the tempest increasing, grew
so fierce and furious, as it took the Cloth quite from the Horses: and hoising
it up into the air, suddenly vanished so strangely, as it could not be found.
This jeering Coachman, having diligently inquired after it, but could not find
it; made himself merry in his pots, in this manner: I know not, to dye for it,
how the devil has plundered it: nor what way it is gone: unless my Lord (
being then lately dead) wanted a winding sheet at his death: and it is flown
Southward, to present his Hon. with an office of charity. Was not this
egregious and unsufferable impudence from a mercenary Horse-fly?

Alas, poor Pembrook! Thou could not crop one May-bud, but thou must be taxed
for freedom of sense: and yet they tax thee for want of sense. Thou had not
the art to disguise treason: nor to pretend welfare to the State: nor liberty
of Subject: nor palliate thy dis-allegiance with plausible pretenses of a new
face and form of government. No; if thy zeal to thy Prince (to whom I must
confess thou oughtst thy self) were foreslowed; thy revenues were the
remora's, and no other treacherous aims, as thou many times freely
acknowledged. O then, let me conclude for thee: O quam multi faeliciores
fuissent, si minus possedissent!

The world has deluded many: which imposture in most men's judgments, held no
Analogy with thy bounty. But to press this argument a little further, thy
Favorites say; Thou could not maintain the One without the Other.

Admit him a person of Pleasure, a Court-Sycamour; more for shade then use;
Take your Survey further, and you may find some of our Rabshakah Rabbis good
for neither: Assasins more ready to destroy, then to build: to pull up, then to
plant.

As treason ever had Incendiaries to foment it: So assisting sinues to support
it.
It were to be wished, (if so much charity might be hoped for) that his failings
in allegiance might be imputed to his weakness. No Trees can be without their
Shadows: and that our State-projectors made use of his umbrage; there is none,
being acquainted with their proceedings and pursuit of assistance, but will
admit it. This is the only Plea that can be made for him: if the world have so
much charity in store to afford him.

CASTLES CATASTROPHE: OR GARRISONS GAOLE-DELIVERY. Down with BABEL.
Relliquiis belli civilis fungimur. --
Pennigeris facimur Nidi* --

Down with those aged Piles; whose ashes may
Repair our ruins by their just decay:
And in their faithless breasts retain those Scars
Inflicted on them by our civil wars.
Down with those mounting Spires of Babylon;
" England has lost the Style of Albion.
Down with those Forts, those Garrisons of State,
That to our civil Furies gave receipt;
Silenus arched Grates, Triphonius Caves,
Procrustes Cittadells, where forlorn Slaves
Hatched their seditious brood. -- Let not a Stone
Witness to aftertimes what has been done.
Here Is work for Levellers! Diggers retire,
Your delving earns you nothing; here is hire,
With ruin to those Denns that lodged your foes:
You see, my boys, what way the world goes.
And I could wish, my Lads, with all my heart,
Cinque Ports were shut up too, that none migth start
From our Antycira, this hateful Isle
Deep-dy'd in blood, and varnished with guile;
Till some for the service they have done our King,
Be sent to Heaven for Presents in a string.
-- Thus Children jeere their Parents, and contemn
Those sumptuous Works which were contrived by them.
A gracious prudent Age, when Sons appear
More politic then their Forefathers were.
They rear, we raze; They build, and we pull down;
They crown a King, and we unking a Crown.
-- But to those ruined Castles let us return,
And close their Ashes in Oblivions urne.
When I by fatal Pomfract came, and found
Those stately Structures levelled with the ground,
Richard 2. cruelly murdered by Sir Piers of Exton and his Accomplices.
With that ensabled Room, (where RICHARD's s'ed
By thirsty Bloodhounds to be massacred,)
Resolved to mouldred ashes, I drew near,
Sending a Sigh forerunner to a tear;
And I applied it thus: If furies wing
Fledged such revenge for murder of a King,
What heavy vengeance may we think will fall
Upon those Consuls of the Capitol;
Whose only Council has for eight years been
Their Princes and his Offsprings ruining;
Both Root and Branch: and with a long debate
To strippe a King, and starve a phrentick State:
Expunge the name of STUART and his race,
To do their Office in a meaner place!
Rufus affirmed, Westminster was so small,
It seemed a Parlour rather then an Hall
To entertain a Prince: -- Sure, lived he now
He Would hold his Hall too short and narrow too
For such a Shambles as Rebellions hand
Has acted on the Sub^ects of our Land.
So as should we fresh Martyrologies write,
And make our Scene Westminster, 'twould affright
Uninteressed hearts, and with a tear
Inscribe this Mort -- Aceldama stands here.
-- And yet these Rooks some protects have intended,
Which at first sight deserve to be commended.
What gorgeous Stables have they reared of late
To beautify the ruins of a State!
Great Moguls Stables came far short of these
For Ordure and Equestrian rarities.
The Church (Camp-like) for disci line may vaunt
Never any one more truly militant.
Duke Humphrey too with his late-hunger'd Guests,
May now invite whole Legions to their feasts:
So as those starved Greeks that used to stand
For a receipt of Alms at our hand,
Want now a Marble Pillar for a stay:
Bob-tail and Crop-eare have more room then they.
"No Annalls nor Records since Jessees time
"Can show Cribbs, Racks nor Mangers more divine.
So as, though Forts and Garrisons appears
Impaled with ashes, and imbath'd in tears,
Our Stables are so stable, as no Nation
Assumed such strength on such a strange foundation.
I would advise you then to be content,
Ye braving Towers late from your Groundwork rent;
Since sacred Phanes and Temples in your view
Are razed, defaced and split as well as you.
This may be here presented as we pass
Ith'fractures of our Statues and our glass.
No; ancient Houses of their Arms are rest,
An Omen that our Gentry should be left
To a Plebeian Power: which were unmeet
That Bodies should be guided by the Feet:
Which closes with our Capitols consent;
But just is Heaven such Furies to prevent:
And to convert our purple Tragedy
To Comic Scenes. -- Thrice blessed Catastrophe!
-- But lets look back, and take a serious view
Of hazards past and those that may ensue.
-- Is not this strange, such action should be done
By any Kilderkin of Huntington?
Is Barme so full of Spirit? Yes, I Have heard
That Here long would pull Great Turk by the Beard;
Recover Palestina with his men,
Translate the Metropolis to Jerusalem;
Possess him of his Throne: and with his sight
Put all his Janissaries to that affright,
As they should have more reason to complain
Of General Cromwell then of Tamberlain.
Has vowed besides, his Officers shall be
Such sharers in a Turkish Emperie,
As like brave Epicurians they shall feast
And be invested petty Kings at least.
Their Sanhedrin and Council of Estate
Should guided be as Englands was of late;
And by same Principles which they held here,
If our grand Sophies knew but what they were.
Admire this, State-Usurpers! Do but eye
This Corkie Bottle how it mounts on high
And foams with fury! -- Eye this English Jew
What Plots he brews with his rebellious crew!
How Molehills or'epeer Mountains! Envious Brakes
Incroach on Cedars, and their Stations takes!
To see a Ship steered by a prosperous gale
And sudddenly retarded by a Whale
Or fish of some vast bulk, were such a thing
As this repulse deserved no marvelling:
But for a Remora to stay her course,
Her gallant Port can brook no Pirate worse.
Reflect on this: -- Where is he would have thought
That to a State such ruin should be brought.
By a mere barmy Beetle! Or that he
Should raze the title of a Monarchy,
Supplant Religion, pull our Temples down,
And make a Subject, Rebel to a Crown!
Prodigious valor! Brutus falls asleep
When he should play the Guardian and keep
His Country from such Tyrants. -- So sleep still
Till these Horse-leaches sat their boundless fill
With civil gore: and like Cyrcaean Elves
Close up their Chaps with feeding on themselves.
England is full of blood, though much be spilt,
And by Phlebotomy must purge her guilt.
The way for to secure a State from stain
Is by an artfull hand to breath a vein:
Not that Basilica vena lately touched,
Strained from a Stem perfidiously boucht:
Peruse our ancient Stories ore and ore
"The like State-cure was never known before.
States are like Trees; the Bole must needs decay
When the Top-branch's lopt too near, or cut away.
Three STATE-TARRIERS Coopled up with three TART-SATYRS.
Vix Oriens tales produxit in orb triones.
Novimus hisce pares? --
A PRESBYTERIAN
IS a pretender to a madding zeal
That makes a Bedlam of our Commonweal.
A Plague to Pictures, Ceremonies, rites,
Fonts, Organs, Surplice, consecrated Lights.
State-Symonist, who reckons it no sin
Through the breaches of a Window to get in
As well as by the Door: -- one, who can gather
No fruit nor profit from an ancient father:
Holding 't a special Act of Reformation
In The Church, to preach without due preparation.
Collects, Hymns, Anthems must be laid aside,
No wedding Ring admitted to a Bride.
No Christian Burial, nor no Funeral Rite,
But throw him in a hole, and so good night.
A grand Assembly-man, to root out Schism,
And in eight years squeaze out a catechism
Not worth perusal: though some Donns there be
Who hold it orthodox Divinity;
The form of pure-elixir'd discipline,
Such as our Isle never purchased fore this time.
A precious Purchase! when our hapless Nation
Must be informed by blind illumination.
When Enemies to the Cross command us stay,
"Take up no cross, but turn an other way.
When Temples must be Denns to harbor Thieves,
And rapine takes what moral Justice leaves.
When Houses dedicate to God, are made
Fo. Grooms of the Stable, or a worser trade.
When Pastors hold't sufficient to keep
The Fold for pro^t, and devour their sheep.
When that blessed seamelesse Coat the badge of peace
Must be cut out in shread of heresies;
So as if He who owed that Coat should come
He would disclaim it wholly for his own.
What has this Reformation, pray thee say,
Improved our Church or Nation any way?
How has it made our channells flow with blood?
How has it with our trade or traffic stood?
In the Lords Field what darnell has it sown?
What spawne of Sects and Schisms in every Town?
What acts of horrid treason has it wrought?
To what a Sea of blood is Albion brought?
What bonds of peace remain inviolate?
What stain untoucht that might impeach a State?
Are we not made a Spectacle to those,
Who were so mean, we scorned to call them foes?
-- Deluded State, what caused thee to bring in
This Presbyterian, this man of Sin
Bred to our ruin! to division sold!
And unresolved what Principles to hold!
O rich religious Mintage! could no Sun
Clear our dark Phanes but that of Calidon?
Had our two Nursing Mothers lost their eyes,
And to be cured by such Cantarides?
Should these who were scarce Academian,
Inspired (ragg'd colts) by Knox or Buchanan
Oretop our Predeaux, one profounder far
Then a whole College of Scotch Doctors are?
Shall these incivile Formalists propose
Canons or Constitutions unto those,
Who both for life and learning far exceed
The greatest Rabbis ever crossed Tweed?
I muse their Preachers, being hither sent
Bad them not keep the Commandment:
But such a Law their flock would never live under
That took them from their trade, the use of plunder.
Poor stupid Sots! where lie our English brains,
Must we exchange our liberty for chains?
Must we needs fly from fire into the flame,
And close our Action with a Scene of shame?
That lawless time of rude Domitian
Had suited with our Presbyterian:
When a Proscription was to learning given,
And from the boundiers of his Empire driven;
No man advanced to offices of state
But only such as were illiterate.
The parallel is yours: who with a style
Of gulided zeal have made a Stale o'th I Will
Cimerian Revellers; whose only dance
Meets in a Maze, or Net of ignorance;
So you may take your tith of mint and Cummin,
You little care for Vrim or for Thummim;
Mere antiquated words: Pulpits are made
For a Mechanic and a Manual trade:
When if mad zeal his Cushion roundly beat,
He Is one, no doubt, sat at Gamaliels feet:
When he no Education had at all
But from the Topics of a Cobblers stall.
Bring me three Presbyterians to this place,
Where we may state the Question face to face
(Without exchange of Tongues) for it is well known
They Are constant Linguists only to their own;
And if these three in Principles agree,
Or hold that ancient mark of unity;
Or if their Tenets prove not out of joint
In some Essential faith -- concerning point;
I Will say, disloyal Argyle was as just
As any Subject that his Prince could trust;
His ways smooth and sincere; his wandering eye
Clear without squinting at an Anarchie:
And that no wool was ever yet more true
Then what was woven to make a Cap of Blue.
Now, who should read these Paradoxes over
Would hold them rar'st He ever heard before.
For Argyle to be loyal, who from's youth
Shook hands with faith's adulterated truth:
Nay, to act horri'd treason makes no doubt,
So He may bring his close designs about.
And for the plundering Scot, to hold him just
Who falsifi'd his oath, made sale of trust;
Exposed his Prince sprung from their native stock
To base restraint, contempt, and fatal block:
If these deserve approvement, there is no reason
For Loyalty to mount, but veil to Treason.
Now as we have our Presbyter pursued,
Here with his admonition we will conclude:
That if there be least grain of Grace remaining*
His sense of sin may bring him to reclaiming.
Since a pretense to banish Superstition,
Has made our Church a Seed-plot of Division:
Since ancient rites, Shrines, relics of the Saints,
Robes, Ceremonies, Tapers, Ornaments;
Since Imagery and Pictures to his eye
Appear occasions of Idolatry;
Since he no decency can well approve,
So as Christ scarcely may discern his Love,
Nor take delight in his abused Spouse
Stripped of her clothes, and spoiled in her house;
Since Order is an Enemy to him
As it is in the mansion of that Prince of sin;
Since breach of moral and diviner Laws
Accuse him jointly for the moving Cause;
Since wasting famine and the raging sword
And with that dearth of bread, the want oth' word
(Pure Manna I do mean) sprung from this shelf,
This Shark who knows not what he holds himself.
If these with such impieties as these
Took breath from him and his base accomplices,
Who like Egyptian flies since they came hither
Have plagued our Church and Commonweal together;
Let him with tears ingenuously confess
Himself the cause of Englands heaviness,
Pollution of Religion, and the advance
Of groundless Academick ignorance;
Subjects untimely ruin, with the fall
Of Prince and all, all save that Capital;
That blessed to make us cursed: -- That Seat of Pim,
Shambles of Saints, Monopoly of sin:
Till its swollen grandeur to that height did grow
As it s^u'd out the Presbyterian too,
To mount the Independent; who, he fears,
Will slight State-foes to fall about his ears.
Let him then leave his Dreams; since there is no man,
Admit he be indu'd with senses common,
But he shall find, if he his Tenets scan,
Less truth in him then in the Alcoran.
AN INDEPENDENT
IS one, of whom in Mandevile we read,
Who acts all offices without a Head.
He knows no King; no Caesar; nor a Law
That should Allegiance from a subject draw.
His gallant Independence cannot stand
Where Sovereignty holds a commanding hand.
At first (says he) no King was known to us;
Which to confirm, He states the Question thus.
When Adam was on earth the only man,
Admit him King, who were his Subjects than?
Beasts, Birds and Plants the only Creatures were,
Over which he was assigned to dominere:
Nor can you find, turn Annals over and over,
That ever He a Crown Imperial wore.
No Princely habit beautified his state,
No surly Guard sat waiting at his Gate;
No grooms of the Chamber; nor smooth Parasites
To lure Him to prohibited delights:
Unless it were, (from whom we are taught to err,)
That Serpent Parasite, damned Lucifer.
Courts were not then exposed to merchandise,
His Garden bounded in his Liberties;
Which in their choice fruition were so many,
They pleased himself without offense to any.
His solitary Empire was so good,
Oppression was a word not understood:
An Eden given him for his Continent,
Where each flower cheered his sense with various sent.
A native freedom made him only great,
And though no Monarch in a Monarchs seat.
Nor King, nor Subject He; but such an one,
"None did depend of Him, and He of none.
Kings are usurpers, take them at the best,
Who with stolen feathers build their airy Nest.
For if their aims comply with liqu'rish sense,
Angling at more then humane competence,
They play the ravenous state-incroching Beasts
To sat their quests with others interests.
And must our flesh feed their insatiate jaws,
Or slave our freedom to tyrannick Laws,
Which much like subtle Spider-webs betray
Small Flies, while Great ones escape and break away?
He then who would his Liberty resign,
And make himself a bondslave unto time,
May he wind up his days in discontent,
By changing of his freedoom with restraint.
A brave exchange! when the Master of a Trade,
Is through his weakness an Apprentice made;
As if he should less dignity receive
From style of Freeman, then the stamp of Slave.
Give me leave then to be my own Physician,
And build my faith upon this firm Position:
"He who depends upon another power,
"Forfeits his state to his Superior.
What a disloyal Libertine is this,
Huggs Independence, Knows not what it is:
And for his life cannot assoyle this doubt,
Which member has most worth the Head or Foot?
It Is his opinion too, no vital part
Holds any such dependence on the heart,
As to take strength or livelihood from it,
Or that one joint should to another knit,
But keep a distance: as if nature meant
An independent equal Government
Through all this little humane Commonweal;
No Court must to another make appeal.
So as, methinks, His statue is become
Like Mahomets rare -- independent Tomb
In Mecha reared; which twix't two Adamants
To the admiration of those Miscreants,
Hangs in an equal distance without stay,
From roof to pavement in a middle way.
Should we survey Him further, we might find
This Prodigy to nature most unkind
To his own Members being much ashamed
To call them his, because thei'r Organs named:
Tunelesse they must be, if such Pipes they be,
Swollen with Apocryphal disharmonie.
But what are State-distractions unto Him;
In troubled waters He desires to swim?
For even as Beetles are by ordure bred,
So is his humor by distempers fed:
When flourishing Empires surfeiting of peace
Break forth into rebellious Accomplices;
When Civil wars imbroile a fruitful Land,
And gage our fortunes to a Soldiers hand;
When Princes are cut off, and Traitors live
By their own Laws without Prerogative
Or check of Caesar; than, and nere till than
Does the Independent show himself a man;
Or savage fury; then is his harvest-day,
Which must by others ruin make a way
To his exhausted fortunes; and redeem
His blanched fame by good men's disesteeme.
Fame strangly purchased; when a knave in grain
Aims at esteem by an injurious gain!
But to reclaim thee, and expunge that wrong
Absurd opinion thou have nursed so long,
Tell me, licentious rioter, whose state
Has its subsistence from our Civil hate
Fed by perfidious Council; what can see
Should plant these grounds of Independencie
In thy distempered bosom? -- Take a view
Of all such Creatures as on Earth renew,
What Analogicall dependence these
Acknowledge in their natural increase.
Plants cheered by silver dewes and glorious rays
Bud, bloome and blossom forth delicious sprayes;
Which without native heat and moisture too
Would neither fruit not livery bestow:
The faithful Elm supports the fruitful Vine,
The Honey-suckle clinges the Eglantine;
An Emblem of the State and Church our Mother,
Holding such near dependence one on the other.
Rills from their Fountains like relation take,
Sprigs from their Stems, and Consorts from their Make,
Servants to Masters, Children to the Law
Of Parents, whence they their extraction draw;
Soldiers to their Commanders; in a word
Inferior States to their superior Lord
Hold true Analogy: No Music sweet
Unless the strings harmoniously meet:
And breath such Diapason in the ear
As no disunion in their notes appear.
Had Orpheus harp been harsh, we may presume
Pluto had never been ravished with his Tune,
Nor so surpised with his attractive hand
As to bestow whats'ere He would demand.
O had he been from jealousy as clear,
As in his Musical pure Lyrick sphere,
He might with safety have enjoined his Bride,
Who now lies wantoning by Pluto's side!
Observe but these; and see if any shelfe
Encounter with dependence but thy self.
Stones by a native cement are so knit,
No art nor violence may sever it
Without a dissolution of the maine,
In these reflect upon thy Sovereign,
That polished stone, if it should be defaced,
The structur's blemished where it was placed.
For it fares with the body Politic
As with the Natural; if the Head be sick,
Or indisposed, the Members needs must show
An Indisposure in their temper too.
He sits at stern, and like a Pilot guides
The ship that on the Ocean bravely rides.
Impetuous winds He patiently indures,
Imperious fears He with his courage cures;
He holds the Card by which they steare their course,
He of his fellows sufferings takes remorse.
He shares in all extremes: and entertaines
His Mariners for sharers in his gains.
Now, who is He if humane, could afford
An hand to throw this Pilot over board?
Yet thou art He have done it: -- yea that Gate
Where thou performed that tragic Act of late,
Act of all Acts a President, and tell
If any age can show it is parallel.
Now if a Tree be best known by the fruit,
How may it with an Independent suit.
To kill his Sovereign? -- Abjure it then
And be no more a Prodigy to men:
And to assoyle the crime that thou haste done
Unto his Sire, redeem it in his Son.
Recant, relent, return, repair thy time,
And turn true Convert to the Royal line.
A LEVELLER
IS a Platonic Pioner, whose care
Is in another fortunes so to share,
As He his full proportion may get
In their Receipts for which He never swet.
This man amongst fools was held in great esteem,
Deluding them with this fantastic dream,
That none in proper should possessed be
What others might not have as well as He.
This was cried up at first with great applause,
Because it was confined to no Laws:
The Prentice now might be a Freeman made
First day he came, and never learn his Trade.
A puny Clarke might for a Justice sit
And vie with his Master both for worth and wit.
The foreman too, for so his fate allows,
Might freely share in's Masters Counting House.
He who Margites-like had spent his prime,
And never did any good thing all his time,
Might safely style himself some great man's Heir,
And share more in his treasure then his care.
The Prodigal fed with delicious sloth,
And knew no posture but from hand to mouth,
When he with riot had consumed his store,
Might leap into a Mine of Golden oar
To second his late surfeits, and repent
Of nothing more, save that no more was spent.
No difference 'twixt mistress and her maid,
Both in their order equally obeyed.
For Academies, though no precious gem
Should be compared to Learning amongst men,
Proficients in Arts so slighted were,
A Groom might be made Doctor of the Chair.
Scholastic Tippets, orders and degrees
Might be conferred without accustomed fees.
Fat Prebends, who might by their Patrons rise,
With those who never rose to a Benefice
Might share alike, and jointly be possessed
As if they had a mutual interest.
No Farmer needed to observe his day,
Because no Law in joined Him to pay.
All stood Copartners, and might partake
By Competition in an equal Stake.
O dainty mold of formelesse Government,
When fools are only holden provident!
When Princes, Peers, and Persons of renown
Must rank in state and breeding with the Clown!
When swads who never knew gentility,
Extraction, posture, graceful quality,
Nor civil garbes, must strut it cheek by joule
With Purple Senators, without control!
Brave a la mode! if this phanatick level
Suit not with that Dominion of the Devil,
Where horror and confusion only dwell,
I Will say there is an harmony in Hell.
Now in this Levelling order you shall find
Two distinct sorts branched in a several kind.
The first true Adamites, with strength of hand
Dig Commons up, let no enclosure stand.
And these are they endure the heat of the day,
Doing their work in hope of future pay:
Our Commons Rural Patriots: who indeed,
Account themselves Heirs of the promised seed:
But peaceful portions please not factious men;
They may inherit, true; but God knows when.
The other shows himself more Martiall-like,
One less inured to Mattock then to Pike.
This swears by his Buff-jerkin, He would see
That man who dares stand for a Monarchy.
The Kingdom's ours, late purchased by our sword,
And we will dispose on it at our Councell-Boord,
Thus swells this Ranter: -- He who would command
Or share in fortunes, must receive our hand
To make his Title good: -- what do ye talk
O'th Old Exchange or of the Merchants walk;
Their Trafficks and Accounts for many years
Serve but to answer us for our areares?
The City thinks we their Protectors are,
And for their safety keep our quarters there:
But simple Cockneys, they shall shortly find
By our designs, we are of another mind.
Our aime's Community; and we must have
A part in that which they take care to save.
Their sleeps were calm and sweet: none to molest
Their conjugall Embrace; no barred Chest;
While we to all extremes engaged were,
And had no Twilt to shroud us but the air.
None with rich fraught did e're the haven enter,
Who on the Sea would not his person venture.
And must these Lobsters flow with store of wealth,
Enjoy their liberty, preserve their health
Witn Physical Receipts, while we confine
Our famished hopes to the humors of the time?
No, No; these Bilbows that impale our side
Bid us march bravely and observe the tide.
We Are Caesar's all; and those who will not give
Way to our Law, He never deserves to live.
We promise parity, and that is Law
Which like the attractive Adamant will draw
Plebean factions, who desire to be
Owners of theirs, and in their persons free.
But little know these fondlings what we mean,
For we in truth are not the same we seem.
It Is least of our intent that these should stand
Equal to us in fortunes and command.
These must be Petti-sharers at the best,
And reap their Vintage where our grapes are pressed.
Soldiers of fortunes once, indeed, we were,
But now that needy style we scorn to beat.
Success has made us great: nor do we know
That Sect or Faction that can make us low.
We frame no Calidonian pretense
As if we went to fight for Conscience
As Presbyterians do; whose pilfring zeal
Can make a Shirt of the Syrpecloath that they steal.
Religion is no Action we maintain,
Platonic parity is all our aim;
Which having got, Those that depend upon us
Shall see how State and Majesty become us.
Who by success is Sovereign made of power,
Cannot endure a rude Competitour:
So who by Conquest has advantage got
And never improves it, He deserves it not.
Hear you this ranting Rebel make his boast,
As if he could by his victorious Host
Subdue the spacious world, and retain
The style of universal Sovereign?
But hear this Admonition, Sir, of ours
Before that Conquest make the world yours.
You tell us, Sir, you never meant to fight
For your Religion nor the Churches right.
The aim you had in your commencing war
Was to make States Monarchiall, Popular:
Though I must tell you, some have lost their blood,
Of your own faction, for the Churches good;
And late at Tyburne left a precious pledge
For Clements and S. Gyles joint Sacrilege:
So as for sacred stealth, though nor for murder,
You past, S. Gyles to mount a little further.
It was no Clergies cause nor care of King
But Churches stuff that raised them to this string.
But pray thee Leveller, what have thou done
To make thee such a fearful Myrmidon?
Did not thy Forces lately, Horse and Foot
Receive from General a fatal rout?
Were not some of your Chief Commanders shot,
While the rest by their submission quarter got?
Must these run over the world, and display
Their plumed helms, who lately run away?
Ye who resolved to lay your Level round,
Are you not now laid Level with the ground;
Rest of repose; of fortunes dis-possest,
Unless ye build upon the Martins nest?
Come Leveller, let us have no more to do,
See what condition thou art brought into.
Hang up thy Musket, Fauchion, Fife and Drum,
Until the Prince unto our Borders come:
Whom to restore should be thine only Level,
All else act Mathematics for the Devi^l.
The only way to regulate the time
Is by a loyal Level, royal Line.
This will conduct your aims to glorious ends,
And of State-traytors, style you Caesar's friends.
Upon the ERRATAE'S.
DUring the late fatal continuance or epidemicall dispersion of that
unexemplary Kings evil; a contagion of such malignant influence, as it forced a
Princely Father to the Block; his Son to Exile; inacting Loyalty High
Treason: and a Competent Estate a Sufficient Plea to impeach the Innocent of
D^linquency. During (I say) this Careere in our distracted State; Sundry Parts
of these Sections, through the Stationers fear of the strict and severe search
of irregular Censors, or mercenary visitants, (who pretended a power to seize
on the Press, to cram their own Purse) were scattered, in hope to be secured:
so as the Original Copy, after a long quest could not be retrived: nor these
Sections completed; till now by the Authors industry, recollection and Helps
of memory recovered, revived and methodically digested.

Though His necessitated attendance on Committees injoyning his absence from
the Press, might occasion the Committing of many Errors, which by his presence
might have been prevented. Let Goldsmiths Hall then undergo the Censure: A
self-interessed Committee, the cunningst inameller of Vice: and inchaser of
State-Error.
seeing it knows so well how to guild Error: and imbellish it too with a
Curious State-Cov^r.

Now to remove all grounds of prejudicacy (for it fares with Books ofttimes, as
it does with Great-mens Children, to be wrong fathered) the Author of these
Sections, is supposed to be the same, who writ that Excellent Tragi-Comedy,
entitled- MERCURIUS BASILICUS; presented with no less State then general
applause before the Queen of Swede and other Princes at her Palace of
Stockholme.

(...)

