MORBVS POLYRHIZOS ET POLYMORPHAEVS. A TREATISE OF THE SCURVY.

Examining Opinions and Errors, concerning the nature and Cure of this Disease.

ESTABLISHING A Method for prevention and cure, founded upon other principles;
concordant with Reason, verified by Practice.

By Everard Maynwaringe Doctor in Physic.

Vnum hoc Medicus recte agit, quod recte cognoscit.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. for T. Basset under S. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1665.

IMPRIMATUR.

Ex aedibus Lamb. Sept. 9. 1664. Tho. Cook Reverendissimo Patri ac Domino D.
Gilb. Arch. Cant. a Sacris.

To The Right Honorable MOVNTAGVE BERTIE Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Knight
of the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
HEalth being of so valuable a consideration that without it, the best temporal
enjoyments are insipid; and rather may be termed representations and shadows
then really fruitions, and therefore the Phiolosopher said truly, (...).

The business of this little Manual, is for preservation and restoration of
that invaluable requisite, which seasons, and gives a pleasant relish to
mundane happiness and felicity.

My Lord, I have not used your name in a small concernment and inconsiderable
matter; it is a public affair wherein all are highly interessed.

This scene represents the Protean shapes and delusive actings or motions of a
subtle Impostor; or rather, discovers a combination of Diseases, listed in
hostility to break the Peace and disorder the regular government of the
Microcosm, and consequently to ruin it; and having undertaken to discover,
oppose and extirpate these Confederates, and break their association; I have
assumed this boldness to invite your Honor to the Prize: and seeing so great a
Champion stand by to view the contest, puts me in mind of what is truly noble,
exemplary and renowned: for looking toward you, I see a pattern of prudence,
of fortitude and skill at arms, which you inherit from your Ancestors of most
worthy memory, who have defied the fiery breath and thundering voice of Canon;
From whose sides the Loyal Sword of Honor has often appeared naked, to
vindicate the Truth of Royal interest, and a Kingdoms safety: and what not,
worthy to be recorded?

To you therefore, My Lord, a favourer of Arts and Learning, are these
endeavors peculiarly offered; waiting this opportunity to make my
acknowledgments for Your Honors favor and kindness received, and to let the
World know the respects I bear to this Renowned Family, and that I am

Your Honors Most devoted Servant. Everard Maynwaringe.

Viro Doctissimo, Amico suo singulari D. Dri. Everardo Maynwaringe Medico
Peritissimo.
S. Pergratae mihi fuerunt literae tuae, amice plurimum colende benevolentiae
and candoris in communicando plenissimae: verae and constantis amicitiae
(abhinc diu in America contractae, postea hic feliciter continuatae) symbolum
and munus gratissimum. Gratias habeo maximas pro communicatis; habebunt and
omnes pro tuis accurate in scorbuto tractando laboribus (cum publici juris
fuerint) magni sane aestimandis, serioque ab omnibus notandis.

Quamobrem multum desidero, moram omnem abjicias, atque thesaurum illum miseris
ubicunque scorbuticis feliciter a perias; ut medicamenta tua eximia
antiscorbutica (secundum leges spagyricae artis quam peritissime concinnata.)
Communi bono nulli etiam lateant; ut and languentibus, varieque hoc morbo
cruciatis eorum auxilio quam primum succurras.

Plura notatu digna (vere and fine blanditiis dico) tuis scriptis reperio:
grata manu ea quidem me accepisse fateor. Perge itaque tu, quod facis: faxitque
Deus, omnia tua studia, in aegrotantium exoptatam valetudinem and nominis tui
famam, feliciter cedant; de quibus nihil dubito.

Hisce vale, and memoriam mei quod hactenus benign fecisti, retine: meque
promptum and observantem in omnibus promitto. dab. Dublinii. Calend. September.
1664.

Christophorus Laurentius. Med. Doctor.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst the complaints of the diseased none more frequently mentioned than the
Scurvy, and none less known, except by its title: most of them showing a
several character of the disease, and in several parts; some spots in this
place, others in another, and different colors: some looseness of teeth, putrid
gums, ill savoured breath; pains in several parts, weakness of the legs and
thighs, lassitude and indisposition to motion or action, and other symptoms
accompanying this Protean disease.

And although the signs be many which discover the Disease, yet to the most
they are rather a disguise (save only the name Scurvy) to cheat their Judgment,
than a guide to lead them into the knowledge and discovery of it, from what
causes, its chief seat of residence, and manner of generation.

The variety of spotted faces and dresses that this Disease puts on, and
presents it self in; the variety of places and parts of the body, differing in
constitution, fabrication, and office, that this takes up for its quarters and
abode; displaying it self in colors above board, and yet a jugler, deceiving
and deluding, that comparing one sign with another, they disown their alliance
as Heterogene, and seem to clash one with another as if they were not the
offspring of the same Parents, the fruit and productions from the same radix.

Hence variety of opinions and errors concerning the nature of this disease;
and from false principles, erroneous practices in the cure have ensued, and is
prosecuted by many ineffectually and frustraneously; which causes many
Scorbutic Persons to think and say their disease is incurable: for having
undergone so many courses in Physic spring and fall, and tried variety of
Medicines; yet they are the same, or benefited but a little, or for a short
time, the symptoms only abated, and nature alleviated for a while; but soon
after they return to their former condition, or worse.

These considerations moved me to ventilate this subject, as well for my own
satisfaction and more certainty in the cure thereof; as also to inform others;
and by a strict disquisition and serious examination, tracing step by step;
made discoveries of errors which passed for warrantable and unquestionable
truths, being supported by the authorities of Learned and approved Authors: and
being sufficiently satisfied Theoretically and practically, I cannot but recede
from some opinions, which before tenaciously I maintained, being nourished and
bred up in those doctrines.

I have not therefore bestowed these pains for an affected singularity, to gain
popular applause, or be accounted a novelist and innovator; but that the
dictates of reason, confirmed by observation and practice, have caused me to
dissent from the common opinions; for being frustrate of my intentions in
effecting cures by the usual method, established upon unsound principles; was
urged to make inquiries into the causes from whence such frustration and
failings did arise, and being sufficiently persuaded and satisfied herein; have
therefore deserted the usual method and Medicines, for that which is more
certain and effectual; as the Medicines subjoyned will testify these truths to
those that shall prove them: and although hete^^dox in the prosecution of this
work, I have inserted nothing for ostentation, or aemulation toward others, or
biassed with affectation of subtilities; but contending for the truth and
benefit of the diseased, is the scope and aim of these endeavors.

If any disgusted at what is delivered, thinking their own opinions hereby
injured; I shall stand by these assertions, and reply to the opponent.

E. M.
London, Next the Blew Boar on Ludgate Hill.
ADVERTISEMENT, Tutela Sanitatis SIVE VITA PROTRACTA.

The Protection of long life and detection of its brevity, from diaetetick
causes and customs.

Wholesome Precautions, Theorems and daily Practical Rules for the Preservation
of Health and Prolongation of life.

WITH A TREATISE of Fontinels or Issues.

By Everard Maynwaringe Doctor in Physic.

Sold by S. Thompson at the Bishops head in St. Paul's Churchyard. T. Basset
under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, Booksellers.

ERRATA.
Page 13. l. 26. read separated, p. 22. l. 19. barely, p. 38. l. 25. air, p.
34. l. 12. parts, l. 15. read stomach and spleen, p. 75. l. 25. obedience.

NAMES Given to the SCURVEY.
DIseases, for the most part, have significant Names, whose Etymology discovers
either the Nature of the Disease: as, Hydrops the Dropsy, from (...), aqua,
water; or points at the part principally, or primarily affected: as Pluritis
the Plurifie, from that Membrane compassing the breast, called Pleura.

Or intimates the manner of invasion; as Epilepsia the Epilepsie, from (...),
apprehendo, to seiz, or take suddenly.

Or denotes the procuring cause; as Lues Venerea, the Venerial Pox.

Or declares the manner of afflicting, as Convulsion, from Convello to pluck.

With many other, whose Names do import and carry various significations
pertinent and declarative, which for brevity sake I omit. That which I have
particularly designed to handle, is the Scorbute, or Scurvy in the English
tongue; but in other languages, denoting some part symptomatically affected: In
the Danish it is called Schorbect, signifying a vicious depravedness in the
mouth, because in many it was discovered by looseness of Teeth, and putrefaction
of Gums, to which the Greek name agrees, (...).

In the Low Countries it is called Schorbunct, signifying torsions or gripings
in the belly, which attend this disease in some persons.

It is also called Scelotyrbe, from the spots and pains in the thighs: It has
been called by some Gingipedium, from the Gums and feet, that frequently are
affected in this disease.

The Latin word Scorbutus, now most frequently used among Physicians, being a
name not of long standing, unknown to the Ancients, and therefore called by
some a new disease, but falsely; and it is not against Reason to think this
disease to be of as great antiquity, as most infirmities incident to the body,
(as may appear hereafter) though known by diverse appellations, suting with some
of the symptoms, or products that follow this Disease, yet insufficiently and
erroneously discovered in their Causes.

Concerning the several Names, whether proper or improper, I shall not insist,
the nature of the Disease being the thing aimed at to be detected and
prosecuted, and not to spend time upon words.

How to discern the Scurvey in its various signs, symptoms or products, and
complications with other infirmities.
IN the disquisition and search to know and find out the nature of this
Disease, I must survey the concomitant effects and products of it, which
discover its being, gradual maturity, fortitude or progress, and parts affected
or infected, though not the Fountain Spring and Rise thereof.

Many and various are the Symptoms which accompany this Disease, though all do
not appear in every Person, but some more, some fewer, according to the
greatness, duration and progress of it.

The Morbific disposition and debility of parts to consent, degenerate, and be
depraved. Propter inaequale robur partium, by reason of the Natural integrity,
and deficiencies, Fortitude and imbecility of Parts in diverse Persons; some
have one Part strong, and vigorous in its Office, not easily depraved and
vitiated: another has the same Part weak, soon consenting with any Distemper,
easily perverted from the integrity of its Office, and contributing its vice:
And since the parts be diverse, their Use and Offices various; their enormities,
vitiosities and defections also must be various, and their effects dissimilar,
heterogene and unlike, according to the consent and dissent of Parts, in their
integrities and defections.

Which being rightly understood, it is no wonder that the Scurvy appears in
diverse colors and shapes, acting a part here and there in the body, in various
difformities; We shall not need then to fly to the admixture of Humors, and
diversity of Temperaments, to derive the variety of Symptoms charging the
innocent, and freeing the nocent Parts.

Now as the several Parts in the Body have their several Offices distinct from
each other, yet all harmoniously (in the rectitude of Nature) cooperating
subserviently and subordinately for the preservation and welfare of the
whole; so is there distinct Characters for their duties and deficiencies,
discovering which part acts in integrity, and which is irregular, degenerates
and falls off.

From hence the Scorbute, as it is variegated and discordant in the Symptoms
and Products, which cheats the judgment of many, and puzles them to appropriate
a fit Medicine; yet may the able Physician hereby collect and find out the
conspiring and contributing Parts to the difformity of this Disease, which
rightly known, the difficulty of the Cure is much abated.

Some complain of laxity, and breaking out often into fluxes; others complain
of costiveness, but a stool in 2, 3 or 4 days; some complain of burning and
flushing heats; others their limbs are rigid and stiff with cold, the blood
settled, black and livid.

Some are heavy, drowsy and sleepy; others tired and worn out with watching,
and indisposed to the Nights refreshment; some have a slow, weak, languid
pulse; others a quick, fierce, leaping Pulse.

Some have thin, pale, watery Urine; others thick, muddy, and high colored
Urine.

Some have black, loose Teeth, and putrid Gums; the thighs and legs free from
pains or spots; others the contrary, have spots and pains, but the Teeth and
Gums sound.

Some are molested with erratick wandering pains from part to part; others more
fixed and constant in particular Parts.

Some their Bodies pine away, wast and are consumptive; others grow corpulent,
swelled and puffed up.

Some complain of shortness of Breath, straitness and compression of the
Breast, difficult or hard breathing, and palpitation of the heart; others their
vital parts are more free, but complain of the Head, Hypochonders, and loins,
loss of appetite, etc.

Some are molested with thirst, heat of the Stomach, and dryness of Mouth;
others are troubled with salivation, superfluous moisture and spitting.

The variety of opposite and different Symptoms, which accompany the Scorbute,
do startle many in their judgment, to determine certainly when they meet with
the Scurvy, when not; and because the Symptoms are not peculiar but common, and
the effects of other Diseases as well as the Scurvy, it is no wonder if their
Cure be so uncertain, difficult and seldom performed, since they are equivocal
effects, obscured in their causes by a dubious complication, and alternative
causation.

To resolve the ambiguous, and such as stagger in their judgments; Take these
following Corollaries.

1. Many are the Symptoms which accompany and follow this Disease, which appear
and vanish, are greater and lesser, as the Disease increases or diminishes in
its essential primitive Causes.

2. Many are the Products and offspring of this Disease, which exist
afterward of their own ability and enormity, having perverted the parts
wherein they reside, and drawn them to consent with their vitiosity.

3. Many Diseases are complicated with the Scurvy, which had not their
production and generation from it, nor is their dependence of it, though
probably made worse and exasperated by it.

4. That none of the Smpytoms or Signs before mentioned, singly do declare the
Scurvy to be present in the Body, but may challenge other causes for their
Parents; and therefore to judge and determine that Person Scorbutic, barely
from the appearance of any Sign or Symptom that frequently accompanies the
Scorbute, his judgment is fallible and uncertain and erroneous in the
dependence: for, any Symptom or Sign arising in any part of the Body, usually
atributed to the Scurvy, may be the peculiar defect of that part, or effect of
some occasional cause, without a praevious Scorbutic disposition.

5. That the subsequent digestions have their proper errors and degenerations,
from a spontaneous defection and lassitude in their vital principles, without
disturbance from an injurious object, transmitted by erroneous preceding
digestions, or improper aliment in sua natura; whose effects are consimilar and
equivalent to some Products and Symptoms of the Scurvy; therefore to
distinguish and know aright to whom they belong, and whence they had their
rise, is by examining each faculty in their proper Characters of rectitude and
declensions.

6. That the Diagnostic Signs of the Disease usually so accounted and most
frequent, as defects in the mouth, pains, spots, weakness, lassitude, etc. some
or more; antecedent causes concurring, some or more; as a close Chamber air,
and confinement within doors; or a Region where the Scurvy is Endemical, gross
food, sedentary, inactive, retired Life, studious, melancholy disposition, or
splenetic, indulging sleep and ease: In the concurrence of these causes
collated with the Signs mentioned, a certain determination and judgment of the
Disease will result; and from thence a certain process in the Cure may ensue:

Examination of opinions concerning the nature of the Scurvy.
BEfore I explicate the nature, quiddity, or essence of this Prothean Disease,
I shall first recite the judgments and determinations of the most learned and
eminent Physicians that have writ upon this Subject, to whom the most of our
age do adhere, and imitate their practice in the Cure. Sennertus gives this
definition or description of it.

Scorbutus est prava and occulta qualitas, seu dispositio, toti corpori,
praecipue vero visceribus nutritioni dicatis impressa, ab humore melancholico
crasso, seroso seu ichoroso, peculiari modo corrupto orta; cum spontaneae
lassitudinis and gravitatis, in cruribus praecipue, sensu; pectoris angustia
and respirationis difficultate, gingivarum corruptione, and oris graveolentia
ac maculis purpureis in cruribus inprimi^, aliisque morbis, ac symptomatibus
plurimis ab eadem causa pendentibus, conjuncta.

He says, It is an evil occult quality, or disposition, impressed upon the
whole body, chiefly the Parts destinated for nutrition, arising from a gross
melancholy or serous ichorous humor after a peculiar manner corrupted with
lassitude and heaviness.

This Definition looks imperfect and unsatisfactory.

An evil occult Quality.]

Here Is a ne plus ultra to our enquiry, if we would sit down here, and be
contented only to know, that we know not what it is; an occult quality.

A Quality.]

Here he makes the Disease to be accidens, when as it is ens substantiale
habens propriam radicem in vitali principio.

Arising from a gross melancholy, or serous ichorous humor after a peculiar
manner corrupted.]

To find out this gross melancholy, or serous ichorous humor peculiarly so
corrupted, is the same task as to find out the occult quality; this is ignotum
per ignotum, to describe one unknown thing by another. The Scurvy does not
arise from a gross melancholy; that is a gross error, or a serous ichorous
humor: but if the Scorbutic depraved humor may go under those denominations,
they are the effects of the Scurvy and not the cause; you must dig deeper to
find the radix of the Disease.

Chiefly the parts destinated for Nutrition.]

Here he says the Scurvey is an evil disposition impressed upon the Parts for
Nutrition; but I must say it is chiefly arising from the Parts destinated and
appointed for Nutrition: which difference is as great, as between the terminus
a quo, and the terminus ad quem.

Impressed upon the wholo body.]

Here is the Disease in facto esse, and its progress, but from whence it
sprung as yet is not discovered, you must return back and trace it farther, if
you will see it in fieri, in its generation; in radice, and the womb from
whence it springs; and that not from a melancholy or serous humor; the
Disease is not seated in excrementis, but in vitalibus principiis: for, as
sanity or health consists in vita integra; so the Disease, in ipsamet vita
oblaesa, and therefore health and sickness in eodem hospitio vitali degunt,
successively dwell in the same Mansion.

Ecthius in his Epitome of the Scorbute, describes it thus.

Scorbutus est morbus Splenis aliquando obstructi, aliquando intemperati,
aliquando cum incipiente Scirro, qui praepedit ejus attractionem, ac consuetant
atribilariae redundantiae sequestrationem, ex hepate venisque, eoque humore
universum corpus vitiat, sed peculiariter crassiore feculentia crura
contaminat, atque evaporandae acredine gingivas inficit.

He says, the Scurvy is a Disease of the Spleen, obstructed, distempered, or
hardened, which hinders the attraction and separation of abounding Melancholy
from the Liver and veins; by which humor the whole body is vitiated, the
grosser part affecting the thighs, the thinner acrid part the gums.

A Disease of the Spleen obstructed, distempered or hardened.]

Here the essence of the Disease is set forth and defined, per effectus
separabiles a morbo; by effects which may, or may not be, and the Scorbute in
being: and it is absurd to define a thing essentially, by effects which are but
results a posteriori and separable; and that which is an effect cannot be
constitutive, the ratio formalis of the thing from which it does proceed.

Which hinders the attraction and separation of abounding Melancholy.

Here the Spleen is made a place of reception and sink, to drain away
excrementitious Melancholy from the Liver and Veins: an inferior Office for so
noble a part; nor is it fabricated or situate conveniently for such a use;
having no ample cavity for reception, nor a fit passage for emission of such an
excrement, being intertexed variously with small vessels, having insertions
into each other, and doors of communication, argues a place of elaboration, and
grand affair, not a draught or sink for venting an excrementitious humor: if
it had been destinated for so mean service, why was it contrived with so many
arteries, that no other Part is furnished like it, but that it was appointed
for higher purposes and design, and therefore is plentifully stocked and
enriched with vital spirits. More might be said to take off this aspertion from
the Spleen, but let this suffice at present.

Brunerus in his Tract of the Scurvy describes it thus.

Proprie hic morbus est affectio lienis, in quo acervato and leviter putrefacto
humore melancholico, qui a sanguine separatus ad lienem transmittitur, pars
tenuior seu effervescens, effertur sursum and obsidet gingivas, tanquam
tenerrimas oris parts, and putredini maxim obnoxias, easque inficit and
erodit, imo etiam emollit: crassior decumbit ad crura --

He says, this Disease properly is an effect of the Spleen; in which a putrid
melancholy humor is accumulated, suparated from the blood and transmitted
thither.]

He makes the Spleen to be seeds morbi, the part primarily affected, and yet
the peccant humor is only transmitted thither; and so it is but a part
recipient, as other parts of the body are; pars infesta, not primario affecta
from whence it does arise.

The thinner part is carried upwards and infects the Gums, the grosser settles
downwards and affects the Thighs.]

This Distinction of thicker and thinner parts is frivolous: for, that
degenerate scorbutic Disposition of the Stomach, whether the depraved matter
lodged there be thick or thin, it will affect the mouth and gums, because the
stomach and mouth have one membrane lining both the parts; and therefore when
the stomach is foul, the mouth has a bad relish, and an unsavory taste (which
is most perceived in a morning after digestion is past;) and let any disgustful
thing come into the mouth, the stomach nauseates presently, and is ready to
vomit, although it be not swallowed down; and this is by reason that the mouth
and stomach have one membrane investing both the parts, that the one cannot be
affected but the other immediately consents and participates, by reason of the
continuity of the membrane; which is more or less manifest according to the
greatness of the cause: So that thickness or thinness of the matter is not to
be taken notice of, but the effect's the same be it thick or thin.

And for that he says, the grosser part affects the thighs, the reason is as
light as the former, though not to be refelled by the same Argument: I shall
not anticipate my intentions in another place, but refer you to a future
opportunity in the discourse following, where this point is cleared.

Eugalenus in his book of the Scurvy treats largely of this disease, in whose
footsteps most Writers since have trod, or digressing but a little from his
opinions, have relied on him as the best guide in tracing this Disease.

His observations are many in his own practice, upon several persons variously
afflicted with this disease; and brings in several infirmities complicated with
it, worth your reading.

Notwithstanding the basis and foundation that he lays, whereon he makes this
disease to be founded, is not firm; and that is Humoris Melancholici
exuberantia, abounding Melancholy: to which something has been said already
that I shall not repeat, and more to be said in another place, in satisfaction
to this error.

And in his determination of the internal cause and generation of the Scurvy,
he delivers his judgment in ambiguous wavering terms, not positively and
resolvedly; but with some kind of dissatisfaction and uncertainty: his words
are these, that you may not think I traduce him.

Interna hujus morbi causa, melancholici humoris exuberantia censetur, ex jam
dicta vitae victusque (scilicet inordinati) ratione acquisita: qui circa lienem
and hepar, vel in intermediis inter haec and ventriculum spatiis, vel in ipsis
etiam venis, quod puto, coacervatus; propriam and huic morbo familiarem
corruptionis formam subit, qua adjacentia, vicinaque viscera, sua vel
substantia, and contactu, vel qualitate and fumis depravat, naturalem eorum
temperiem corrumpendo, donec in contagii communionem consentiant: Where you may
observe by censetur, vel, puto, his determination with haesitation and
uncertainty.

In finding out the Scurvy; for his Diagnostick signs, the Pulse and Urine are
his two great discoverers; that in most of his Observations the one or both
confirms his opinion, and relies upon their signification: both which are very
uncertain; for, there is no particular Pulse or Urine peculiar to this Disease,
but almost all Pulses and Urins may be in Scorbutic persons, as most Diseases
may be complicated with it: and therefore their judgment is very fallible and
uncertain that depend on these signs.

Others there are who have written Tracts of this disease, as Ronsseus, Wierus,
Sal. Albertus, Martinus, whose judgments and opinions are involved and agree in
the main, with those already recited; that what has been said in castigation
of their errors suffices for these, that I need not spend time ine xamining
them apart: nor have I recounted their failings intending their dishonor
(whose names I think worthy of memory, for their learning and labors in the
medicinal faculty) humanum est errare: but that it is the duty of every one, to
examine the principles and tenants of our Predecessors, and not subscribe to
the authority of any, when a clearer light of Reason, confirmed by experiments
and due observation, commands a recession from their opinions and practice.

Amicus Eugalenus, amicus Sennertus, Sed magis amica veritas. Prolegomena.
Induction to the knowledge of the SCURVY.
BEfore I come to define the nature of the Scurvy, its matter and manner of
generation and germination, I must premise something concerning the Office of
digestions, for the clearer apprehension of what shall be thence deductively
asserted; lest I taking that for granted, which others in that action or office
deny, it will be objected I state my positions upon false suppositions, and so
denying the basis of my Reasons, will think they have satisfied the Argument
and evinced.

I shall therefore survey the digestive offices in the regularity and
irregularity of their actions, defections, and errors, assign their causes, and
draw my conclusions ad punctum, to concenter with my intentions and scope aimed
at.

Meat being received into the stomach, must suffer a transmutation there in the
first laboratory and preparatory Office, for nutrition of the body: The
principal agent in this work, is the stomachical ferment; this ferment by its
incisive acidity penetrates, rarefies and volatiseth the food, and transmutes
it into Chyle, or white juce: That which before was fixed, gross, hard or
tough, is made Volatile, rare and fluid, which having obtained that praevious
digestion and perfection proper for that place, the lower orifice of the
stomach opens and gives it emission, sending it to the next Office of digestion
for a new impression.

Contrary to this doctrine have the ancient Physicians asserted, and built
upon, as a sure foundation, that heat is the principal efficient cause of
digestion; being induced to this opinion, from the similitude of artificial
concoctions and digestions: And finding humane bodies to be actually hot,
supposed by increasing of natural heat, to fortify the digestions; and that
the difference of digestions in several persons, or the same person at several
times, did depend and vary, from the degrees of heat, its debility and
fortitude, but upon a due examination you will find it otherwise, and from the
strength of reason be forced to conclude with me thus.

1. That heat is a chief agent in the artificial preparation and praevious
digestion of meat, before it be received into the stomach, whether in rosting,
boiling, baking, etc. but not in the natural digestions of the body: For,
nature in its principal operations works not primarily by the signatures and
concomitant effects of life (as heat;) but by vital principles as efficient
primitive causes.

2. That the changing of food into Chyle is a fermental transmutation from a
vital principle, not an impression of a subordinate instrument.

3. That digestion in humane bodies, is accompanied with heat, though not the
proper effect of heat.

4. That internal natural heat by its own power and peculiar efficiency, makes
not a digestive transmutation, but is a concomitant of vital operations,
contributing instrumentaliter and equivoce to various effects; and is
subservient in the several digestions distinct from each other.

5. That extraneous and additional heat does excite the vital principles to
operation, and is asistant instrumentaliter and excitative, in performance,
propter symbolum qualitatis.

6. That heat quatenus heat, acts univoce, always producing the same effects;
but as it is the instrument of various efficient causes, concurs in the
production of various heterogene effects; as also in respect of diverse objects
upon which it acts.

7. That the variety of heat in several bodies are but gradual differences; but
diversity of digestions are from formal distinct proprieties.

8. That the gradual difference of heat in diverse persons; or in the same
person at several times, do signally testify the ability of the vital
principles in their vigor a priori, in their essential causes; or a posteriori
in their manifested operations Claudicari, to be impedited or depraved
accidentally.

9. That heat acts not as principle instrumentally in the stomachical
digestion, but subordinately inferior to a superior manifest quality, more
immediately the organ of the vital principle or primitive cause of digestion:
For, heat may be sufficient, yea, abound, and digestion weak or depraved (as in
Fevers;) but the other cannot be in its rectitude and vigorous, but the
digestive faculty must be strong and unblamable.

10. That veriety of appetites, suting with and desiring some kind of meats,
but refusing and rejecting other as dissentaneous and disgustful, arises from
the peculiarity and singular propriety of stomachical ferments, and not the
gradual diversity of heat: For, that which is principal in operation is also
principal in election of the proper object of that faculty, embracing and
coveting what is most suitable and agreeing, but repugning and showing
aversion, from what is discordant and disagreeing, by an innate power and
prerogative, as supreme moderator of that faculty.

11. That the digestive faculty in fishes, being of another region, is not
accompanied with heat; because their vital principles do differ toto genere
from land creatures: And therefore heat is not necessarily required as a
principal agent, or instrument, in digestion; but shows it self as a
distinguishing character of vitality; yet not vainly or bare so, but usefully
where it is.

Hence it appears from these theses, with their connexd reasons, that heat is
not the primary efficient cause of digestion, but an emanative accident, or
characteristical concomitant of vital principles, instrumentally subservient in
the digestive faculties; and therefore I must rest upon another basis, more
firm in reason, and assign a vital principle the parent of digestive
transmutation specifically distinct in every digestion: which that you may the
better understand what they are, I shall divide and distinguish them into these
following propositions.

1. That the primary efficient cause of digestion, is the ferment of that
digestive Office; which is a vital principle endowed with a transmutative power
(by way of similitude astral or influential) discharging its virtue upon the
object matter to be wrought upon or digested.

2. That the several digestions have peculiar distinct ferments, acting
subordinately in their own stations, until aliment be brought to its height of
perfection, for nutrition of the body.

3. That these ferments are primitive essential causes, and therefore a priori
indemonstrable; but discover themselves a posteriori in their distinct
operations and effects.

4. That the impressions of the several ferments upon their alimentary objects,
are so distinct that their productive alterations are alien, dissimilar and
opposite, yet conducing to one ultimate intention, the nutrition and
conservation of the body.

5. That the producted alteration of the precedent digestion, if not subdued
and changed by the subsequent in its passage, is hostile, injurious and a
morbifick cause; if it submit not to the power and government of that Office,
through which it has transmission, by receiving the transmutation and
character of the place: So the acide cremor of the first digestion, is changed
into a saline nature in the second; else gripes in the bowels and fluxes do
ensue.

6. That the emanative influential power of the ferments is absconded in their
causes (because vital principles) but detected by assuming similar homogeneous
manifest qualities, subservient to their intentions and instrumental in their
operations, do show the diversity of their natures, and what they are.

7. That the instrumental qualities of digestion are indisposed, and unfit, by
their intention or remission, being vitiated and depraved from their own
natures and proprieties, by improper discordant food, carrying in their natures
alienating and hostile qualities; or similar qualities in excess, advancing the
fermental qualities to a luxuriant injurious exaltation: As pricking and gripes
in the stomach from acide juices, as of lemmons, etc.

8. That errors in digestion may arise from the depravation, enervation and
decay of the ferments: or the indisposition of their instrumental qualities and
organs by which they act; or the intractability, discordancy and unfitness of
the object matter to be wrought upon.

9. That the vital Principles, by provocation from unnatural bad Customs, are
thrust and enforced from the constancy and regularity of their operations;
thence grow disordered, debauched and habituated in disobedience to the
institutions of Nature; do hardly and with difficulty return and be reduced,
unless coacted by prevalent good means, and regular care for their reduction
and restoration.

10. That the vital principles, without violence offered or disturbance, ab
extra, from injurious bad Customs and irregular living, do deficere in radice,
spontaneously fall off and desist, sooner or later according to their strength
and radication ab ortu; in their first plantation and initiation: and therefore
it is that some in the ordinary course of Nature (though irregular in living)
do outlive, and have their faculties perform vigorously of longer duration,
than some others more regular and conformable to the Laws of Nature; because
the difference is great in the Principles of their Nature, and foundation of
their beings.

11. That Diaetetick errors, as in meat and drink, sleeping and watching,
motion and rest, passions of mind, etc. do so discompose and disorder the vital
Principles in the government of their Offices, that their strength and vigor
is thereby impoverished and abated, their duration shortened, and hastens them
to a period of extinction: for, as vital Principles are radicated and
established by Nature, so are they best kept and longest preserved, by that
course and method which Nature has enjoined for their tuition and
conservation; but being transplanted out of their genuine and native
regularity, by incongruous and unnatural Customs, they degenerate, decay, and
are of shorter duration, much sooner declining and terminating their beings; as
more fully is set forth in Tutela Sanitatis, therefore I forbear here.

What the Scurvy is, its essential constitutive Causes and manner of Generation.
HAving determined the use and Office of the digestive ferments, their manner
of operation, and specific distinction from each other, their diverse
subordinate effects conducing to one ultimate intention, their declensions and
durations: which being premised and rightly understood, the Nature of the
Scurvy in its Essential causes and manner of Generation will more clearly be
detected, and made obvious to reasonable capacities: and to facilitate your
apprehension and retention, to prevent mistakes or cloudiness by a long
dependant concatenated discourse, I shall aphoristically deliver my opinions,
and divide them into morsels, fit for your reception and more easy digestion,
which you may take thus.

First Ngatively.

1. It is not one univocal homogeneous preternatural Humor, the materia ex
quae that generates the Scurvy; for as the Symptoms and concomitant Effects are
various, so is their material cause different and various.

2. It is not melancholy degenerate and depraved, acquiring a specific
malignity (as most Physicians I meet with in Print do affirm) that is the
material cause of the Scurvy: for (a signis diagnosticis) admit there were such
a melancholy humor depraved and specifickly malign, this specification would
determine it to some certainty, and confirm it to some distinct diagnostick
signs, indubitably declaring its peculiarity and separation from others; for
there must be some specific distinguishing character which necessarily must
accompany such a specific malignity; but there is none such, for a man is
adjudged to be Scorbutic, with looseness of Teeth and without, with spots or
without spots; and so likewise of the other signs, in their absence and
presence: and the Symptoms are so various that they contradict and oppugn one
another in their declarative signs, that they own distinct causes not one
peculiar malignity.

Secondly, The diversity or difference of the scorbutic spots do argue
variation of the material cause, and not one Specific malign humor: for, if
you judge of temperaments by colors, making them one sort of distinguishing
Characters, (as you do) saying this person is Phlegmatic, because pale; and
that sanguine, because rosy; and this choleric, of palish yellow: as also of
preternatural tumors, saying, this is a Phlegmone, that Erysipilas, or oedema,
etc. from the variation of their colors and external appearance, assigning
several humors and complication of humors for causes; then why not various
commaculations and discolourations in parts, as well as various extuberations,
should challenge diverse material causes, since they differ but ratione
quantitatis, in the quantity of peccant matter, the one has more, the other
less; and sometimes these spots do germinate and swell into Scorbutic tumors
ex abundanti materia, from increase of the same depraved matter, and have their
variations and denominations as other preternatural tumors have.

A juvantibus and contra.

If melancholy humor be the foundation of this Disease, then Purgatives that
attract melancholy (as you suppose) would prevent this Disease, or eradicate
it; but you may purge and purge Spring and Fall, and yet the Scurvy shall come
on and prevail: but if it be melancholy degenerate and malign, as you say,
then sudorificks would be the grand opposers of this Disease; but neither
Purgatives or Sudorificks, nor both, are the adequate medicines of this
Disease, yet both useful a posteriori, applied to the Effects and Products of
it: but that which unhingeth this Disease, stops the spring, prevents or
eradicates it, roborates the faculties intentionally and primarily, restores
them to integrity and pristine vigor in the performance of their Functions and
duties.

A Causis antecedentibus externis:

Certain Climates, Regions and bad Airs are procuring and promoting Causes of
this Disease; not that we can imagine they engender melancholy more than other
places, but because they are infested with noxious fumes and vapors, which
surrounding and being drawn into the body, commix with the Spirits, and do
labefactare vitae principia, debilitate and deprave the faculties in their
operations, from whence Scorbutic effects do ensue.

But you may say, a sedentary, studious and melancholy Life does often breed
the Scurvy, and therefore it must needs be a melancholy humor, the material
Cause and foundation of this Disease: To which I answer; that a melancholy
inactive Life does breed the Scurvy, but how? not to conclude from thence that
it is a melancholy humor degenerate and malign; but because by such a
condition of Life the vital Principles do receive much prejudice, decay and
fall off from their Functions; for mirth and an active Life do roborate all the
faculties, keeps them vigorous, the Spirits being cheerful and lively in the
performance of their duties, but by the contrary are languid, debile and
insufficient, from whence many inconveniences and prejudices to the body do
ensue, as you may see enumerated in that Book called Tutela Sanitatis.

But you may farther say, the Spleen being the seat of that passion, is chiefly
affected and injured thereby, and therefore it must needs be a Splenetick
luxuriant humor.

That a melancholy Life does debilitate and frustrate the Spleen in the
rectitude of its Office, I agree, and not the Spleen only, but other principal
parts and Offices of digestion also; for if melancholy seiz and fix the
Spirits, makes them torpid (as it is the property of it so to do) and the
Spirits are principal agents in all the faculties, then not the Spleen only is
prejudiced, and a splenetick humor only that abounds, but all parts do
participate of the injury idiopathically; and all the digestions are vitiated,
and their ill effects do appear Scorbutical, and variously complicated as their
several Actions and Offices are various.

Having showed you Negatively, and determined that the Scurvy is not what some
have supposed it to be; I shall now positively set down what it is, in these
following Theorems.

1. That the Scurvy is generated by the conjunction or conspiration of diverse
Causes; yet disjunct in their causation, subordinately and distinctly
contributing to a Scorbutic difformity; for, although the deficiency of the
first digestion lay the foundation, yet it is not completed so as to challenge
the denomination of the Scurvy, until by addition from the irregularity and
depravedness of other parts.

2. That the Scurvy is a complication or concatenation of Diseases, conspiring
to the making up of its difformity and Prothean shapes; not arising from a
single Disease, or any solitary cause: for, as the variety of symptoms and
products do appear in several parts, dissimilar and unlike, being the effects
of several inordinate faculties; must of necessity Challenge and own distinct
immediate causes, as the parts wherein those faculties do reside, are distinct
and separate in place and Office.

3. That the difformity of the Scurvy, in the diversity and dissimilarity of
symptoms, arises from the complication of errors in the digestions, and
variety of parts thereby affected and drawn into consent.

4. That the individual variegation of the Scurvy arises from the peculiar
association of causes, and idiosyncratical propriety of particular persons,
producing such and such symptoms, which in no other person you will exactly
find the like: For, as sound bodies in respect of sanity having a parallel
equality and proportion in the whole; yet particularly and disjunctively
collated there is great variety and difference; in stature organization,
complexion, inclinations, appetitions, performance of functions, etc. If there
be such variety of parts, proprieties, and operations in humane bodies in a
state of sanity and integrity which is uniform: then much more variety and
disproportion in a state of declension and irregularity, which is deform and
multiform.

5. That the Scurvy is generated formaliter and essentialiter, in the vital
principles ut ens invisibile, not discerned by sense: But the effects and
products are distributed, have their residence in all the parts, and are
sensitive objects; as spots, pains, looseness of Teeth, putrid Gums, Tumors,
ulcers, etc.

6. That the Scurvy is planted Seminaliter and radicaliter in the digestions or
digestive Offices, whose ramifications, spread throughout the body, and are
increased extensive, more or less, according to the fortitude and debility of
parts, to resist or consent and be depraved.

7. That the Scurvy increases, or is worse intensive, from the greater
frustration of digestions and degeneration of the digestive matter, ex causis
antecedentibus quibuscunque.

8. That the Scurvy is procured occasionaliter, by numerous and various
diaetetick accidental causes, seducing the vital principles to declension and
deviation from their rectitude and integrity.

9. That the ratio formalis, quiddity and essence of the Scurvey is defection
and enormity of the vital principles; occasionally procured ab extra and moved
to such a deviation: Or spontaneously inclining through an innate deficiency
and hereditary propension; or natural inability, longer to persevere, from the
fragility of constitutive principles in nature.

10. That the Scurvy is not restrained to any certain symptoms either in
quantity or quality; or univocal material cause: But is various and equivocal
as to the material products, by degeneration and complication; as also
unlimited in the symptoms.

11. That the part affected principaliter, chiefly and contributing prae aliis,
to the pravity and deformity of this disease, is the Spleen. For that the
Spleen is a principal member, in chylification, and sanguification as to
perfection and conservation; and by a deficiency in the Spleen, both are
vitiated, there wanting due fermentation: and therefore the Spleen is
fabricated and contrived with so many arteries, having plenty of spirits for
this office.

12. That Scorbute spots arise from impediment, vitiation, or extinction of the
last digestion, or assimilation; and that ratione objecti deturpati: vel
facultatis transmutativae deficientis: Either the alimentary object is depraved
and unfit; or the assimilating faculty is languid, deficient or extinct.

13. That spots appear chiefly upon the Thighs, and Legs, not from the gravity
of their material cause and ponderous propension of grosser matter downwards,
as is commonly alleged for the reason; but because ignoble parts are more weak
and debile in their assimilation, being more remote from assistance and supply
of vital spirits, have first the tokens of defection: And farther, not the
lower parts only are so affected, but the superior parts frequently, as Arms
and Shoulders, from the same cause, do bear the same characters, not
distinguishable by tenuity and grossness of humor.

14. That Scorbutic pains are caused from alien qualities arising out of the
degenerate matter in the parts so molested; or from stomachical acidity
transmitted unsubdued; from defect or debility of the second digestion, or its
own luxuriant exorbitancy resisting transmutation and obedience in its passage.

15. That pro ratione corporis perspirabilitatis, plus minusve, scorbutus
variatur: As the body is perspirable or impervious more or less, is the Scurvy
varied, intended and remitted in the symptoms: And therefore the Crassities,
impenitration of the skin, and constipation of the pores, prohibiting
tranpiration, is a partial organical cause of preternatural spots, and makes
for their continuance and duration: For, as the body in its natural good state
is transpirable, giving emission to what is superfluous remaining after the
last digestion; on the contrary, the restraint thereof by congestion, begets
commaculations and defaedations of the skin, tumors and apostumations, one or
other, pro magnitudine causarum.

16. That although the Scurvy, eo nomine, is not of long standing, and unknown
to the ancient Physicians under that title, and the distinguishing characters
that we denote it by; yet the disease in specie is antique, though in
individuis not so frequently then, nor perhaps characterized altogether alike,
as we now distinguish it: For, as humane bodies do decline in these latter
days, and degenerate from the pristine vigor of the ancients in all the
faculties and abilities of body, by reason of intemperance, and various manners
of abusive living, transmitted in semine from generation to generation; so
likewise, and for these causes, diseases do not continue alike and certain, but
have their variations, and complications different; which occasions new names,
though the disease be the same in its essential constitutive causes and manner
of generation.

Preservation from the Scurvy, and to be observed in the Scurvy.
IN the due Regiment of Health, and protection from Diseases; you must consider
and know that all things which belong, and are necessary for the preservation
of the body and support of Nature; that they also may be the antecedent
procuring causes of sickness; as also the fomenting and aggravating causes of
diseases already generated: as when contrary to the law or disposition of our
peculiar Natures, they are applied or used unseasonably, immoderately,
incongruously, or any ways unsutably to our Nature and Condition of Body: And
therefore both in the time of preservation and curation they are to be regarded.

And since there is not a moment of time in which we do not stand in need of
air; and that being constantly drawn into the body, must needs make for, or
against the continuance of health, according to the conditions and properties
it is pregnant with.

Wherefore in preservation from the Scurvy, it is of no small concernment the
air and climate that you live in, to dispose or defend you from it: the nature
of the air is such in some places, that few there are not tainted with it, and
this as a principal cause. And therefore in Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and such
places this disease is most common; and chiefly in the Fenny and Marrish parts:
for that a moist foggy cold air is apt to engender this disease or increase it:
because the spirits thereby are clogged and fixed, dull and inactive; from
whence defects in fermentation, humors incrassated and obstructions, the pores
occluded, and transpiration prohibited.

But a warm, dry, serene air makes much in the preservation from the Scurvy:
the spirits thereby are kept more vigorous, lively and brisk; humors
attenuated, volatile, and freely circulating; the pores more open and
perspirable, giving emission to excrementitious vapors unprofitable and
hurtful to be restrained; and all the parts more free in their communications
and subserviency one to the other.

Those that retire themselves voluntarily to a studious sedentary life, or are
confined to a close chamber airy, are thereby disposed to this disease; or much
aggravated and increased, if already they are scorbutic, more specially if
melancholy be their companion: and where the air is impure, not to be avoided,
as in great Cities, correct it something by Art in your houses, with wholesome
fumes, especially in moist cold weather: They that live in Cities, especially
some parts thereof, more close and noisome than others; as in narrow streets,
lanes and Allies, are much prejudiced in their health. There is great
difference in the place and parts of a City to live in; the broader streets and
places more open and airy, the wholsomer: and the outside (caeteris paribus)
near the fresh fields is better than to be crowded in the middle, provided no
stinking ditches or dunghils be adjacent.

And here I cannot but take notice of Bloomsbury (the Right Honorable Earl of
Southampton's propriety and Seat) for the best part about London, both for
health and pleasure exceeding other places: It is the best air and finest
prospect, being the highest ground, and overlooking other parts of the City.
The fields bordering upon this place are very pleasant, and dry grounds, for
walking and improving of health; a fit place for Nobility and Gentry to reside
in, that make their abode about London; there being the Country air, pleasure,
and City conveniences joined together: Now lately improved and built upon, and
still increasing with fair and well contrived Buildings, a good addition, and
Ornament to this place.

The next considerable in a regular preservation from the Scurvy, is Diet;
which ought to be duly observed: for, as by convenient food, suitable and
agreeable in all the requisite circumstances, quantity, quality, time, and
order: so on the contrary, by a disproportionate and unsuitable diet, the
faculties are disordered and debilitated in their several functions, inclining
to this or that disease, according to the nature and quality of the food, and
other circumstances that attend it.

And therefore some kind of meats and drinks do dispose, and are the antecedent
causes of this disease; as also do cherish and help to maintain it where it is
already generated, although procured first by other causes.

The grosser meats, and such as do not easily digest are to be avoided; but
light meats, and such as the stomach does well agree with, covet, and digest
best, keep to such.

Milk and Milk-meats in a foul body do soon alter and degenerate, and therefore
injurious to Scorbutic Persons; but in clean bodies it is good food.

Broom buds, Capers and Sampire are good sauce to your meat, helps the Stomach
in digestion, and is profitable for the Spleen; a part chiefly affected in the
Scurvy.

Also Oranges and Lemmons, Berberries and Sorrel helps fermentation, and are
good.

But old flesh, dry and hard meats long kept, Rie-bread, and brown, especially
Crusts, fried, or broyled meats, are to be avoided: for these are more
stubborn, do not soon yield to fermentation, nor beget good nutriment: as also
salt fish, and meats smoak-dried, as hanged Bief, Bacon, dried Tongues, and
such like, are injurious, and promote this disease: But for variety of meats
and their qualities you may see a Catalogue in my Tutela Sanitatis, therefore I
shall not repeat them here.

For Drinks take these observations:

Drink not your Beer new, because not yet fully purified by fermentation, but
rather stale, well hoped, clear, and reasonable strong, if your stomach be weak
and declining.

And it is very considerable, of what water your drink is made; for that there
is great variety and difference in the goodness of waters, being impregnated
with several qualities from the nature of earth through which it passes; and
several accidents that happen to change water from its genuine properties, and
make it impure and unwholsom, by carrion, filth, and such like admixtures that
may corrupt it.

And from these causes many places are more disposed to breed the Scurvy than
others, from bad water with which their Beer or Ale is made, and meats dressed.
And Plyny relates, that Caesar's Army by drinking of bad water but a few days,
had the symptoms of the Scurvy.

Ale I do not approve of; but white Wine and Rhenish is good for you to drink a
glass or two sometimes, to open obstructions, cleanse and whet the appetite, and
promote fermentation.

Sider also is good drink, if it be made of the best Apples; as Pippins,
Pearmains, and such like; and that it be clear, having had good time to
ferment, separate, and purify: but withal have respect to your stomach, that
it be agreeable, and desired by it: but if you have a cold, raw stomach, a
warmer liquor will be more acceptable; as a glass of Canary sometimes, to
fortify the stomach and help digestion, is agreeable to the most.

The next considerable for praecaution of the Scurvy, is exercise and motion:
which duly and moderately used, is a good preservative from this disease: a
sedentary sloathful life makes the body to degenerate from its purity and
vigor. Corrumpunt otia corpus.

From hence Defects in fermentation, humors incrassate and obstruct; the
Spirits being torpid, dull and inactive, do not rarify and circulate the blood,
as when by motion they are excited and stirred up to their duties and
performances: by seasonable exercise the digestions are strengthened,
obstructions opened, and evacuations more duly performed: and since an idle
Life does procure and promote this Disease, you must account it as your enemy
to avoid it.

And like to this is the indulging of sleep unseasonably, beyond its limits and
due times; from whence necessary evacuations are restrained and put by their
due accustomed times; and superfluous humors accumulated and lodged, that
otherwise Nature would have sent forth profitably in good time; the spirits are
made sluggish, dull and inactive, and all the faculties injured.

But on the contrary, let not watching exceed its just times appointed by
Nature; for from hence the inconveniences are as great; especially to such
bodies as are lean and spare, or inclining to be Consumptive and hectical; by
over-watching the spirits are heated and tired, the blood degenerates and turns
acrid or sharp, leaving its balsamic nature, and is disposed to a colliquation
or separation of parts; the vigor of nature is hereby abated, and the
functions depraved.

Passions of mind, though in the last place accounted, are not the least, but
principally to be regarded, and due order to be kept there for preservation
from infirmities: for the Soul being the better and more noble part, from whose
command and power bodily actions do proceed; of necessity if that be
discomposed and disordered, the instrumental part must act irregularly and
depravedly; and of all the Passions, melancholy and sadness do most dispose to
this Disease, and aggravate it; the reasons are these.

The Soul in that Passion suspends and withdraws her influence and emanative
virtue, which was wont to be enlarged and let forth into all the faculties,
mediately by the spirits, her chief and appropriate Agents; and the Soul in
this state and condition of sadness, being as it were locked up and straightened
within her self, darkened and overspread with a cloud of melancholy, does not
emittere and emanare, send forth her wonted quickening power; by which
suspension the Spirits are disposed to cessation from their duties, whereby the
faculties are enervated and deficient in their functions.

The Spleen which is accounted the seat of this Passion, is chiefly debilitated
and impedited in its office; the spirits hereby are fixed and deaded,
fermentation cohibited and restrained, from whence scorbutic effects do ensue;
for that by the benefit of fermentation, our food is decocted, deserts its
crudity and fixity; is raised and promoted to a state of volatility, that it
may be fit for nutrition, and assimilation into the substance of the body: but
if fermentation be deficient and wanting, neither chylification nor
sanguification can be good, but altogether depraved and vitiated.

But concerning the several Passions of mind, and their various effects wrought
in the body, is set forth in that book called Tutela Sanitatis, to which I
refer the Reader for satisfaction.

Determinations of the Scurvy concerning the difficulty and facility of the
Cure.
BEfore I enter upon discourse of the Cure, to lay down fundamental precepts,
and rules upon which it does depend; I shall say something as to the
possibility of the Cure in particular persons, in whom there is a great
difference; that by examination every one may give a rational conjecture of
their own condition and state in this Disease; and be something satisfied of
the difficulty or facility of their Cure before they undertake the Course, and
method to effect it.

Many there are more curious and inquisitive to know what their Disease is, how
dangerous and whether curable, than they will be industrious afterward for a
Cure: If it be the beginning of a Disease, and not very troublesome, they
contemn and slight it: if it be of long standing and difficult to deal with,
they despond and have no hopes to part, being so long associated together; and
then give themselves the liberty of their phancies in the discipline and order
of themselves, whether it be good or bad, for or against their Disease.

Others more rational in their actions, desire a satisfaction concerning the
nature and radication of their Diseases, and state of their bodies, that they
may order themselves to the best advantage, and to oppose their Disease with
that strictness and diligence, in the use of good means, as is thought
requisite for such a cure.

In satisfaction to such which are scorbutical, that you may know in what
condition you are, and the strength of your Disease, and what possibility of
Cure, whether difficult or more easy: Examine your self by these questions.

1. What Functions in the body are decayed and irregular, more or fewer; and
whether such faculties so injured be principal or of a lower degree: for,
according to the number of Functions disordered and debilitated, is your
Disease better or worse: and if they be from principal faculties the worse
also: therefore look to the distinguishing Characters that belong to each
faculty, which will declare whether they perform regularly, or disorderly and
dificiently: the Characters of rectitude are the common signs, when every part
performs its Office according to the custom of Nature: the characters of
declension and a depraved condition, are all such as declare the contrary.

2. The duration and time, how long such symptoms and signs has appeared and
been manifest; for by how much the longer this Disease has been rooted in the
body, by so much the more difficult it is to be eradicated; for that the vital
principles have so long deviated from their rectitude and integrity, and is
more difficult to return, by the length of time habituated to the contrary. The
Scurvy in the beginning is of easy cure, and soon yields to gentle medicines,
properly appointed, with due orderly Customs; but after it is fixed and
radicated firmly by time, stamping impressions of its depraved Nature upon all
the Parts, is then more stubborn and difficult to be removed, and will require
more time in the prosecution against, although with effectual medicines.

3. Whether the Scurvy be haereditary; that is, descended of scorbutic
Parents, or their Ancestors: and here you must know, that the Scurvy
haereditarily derived, is worse than that which is acquired by ill diet, bad
air, melancholy and unwholsom customs: for, if the Scurvy be worse and more
difficult to be removed in those habituated to it, by length of time, acquired
only by a declension and degeneration; then much more when it is radicated in
the principles of Nature from the birth, and derived from their Parents or
Ancestors, it being then connatural to them a principio.

4. What Sex, Male or Female: the Sex makes some difference in the facility or
difficulty of a Cure; it being worse in Women, who are more obnoxious to the
prejudice of this disease than men.

First, because they are of a weaker nature, more apt to degenerate and
accumulate ill humors; whose constitutions are sooner changed, being more
exposed by such a feminine debility; not so able to resist the procuring and
occasional causes of this Disease, as masculine vigor, and fortitude of their
vital principles.

Secondly, by reason of their accustomed courses in Nature which are apt to be
suppressed, decreased, qualitatively altered, or be disordered in time, that
Nature has appointed for that purgation, which brings much detriment; and this
happens to Women from small occasions sometimes; especially infirm and diseased
bodies, which aggravates and promotes their other infirmities, or inclinations
to such.

Thirdly, in respect of Childbearing and the weaknesses that attend such a
condition, which decay and abate their vigor and strength; and in the time of
their going with Child the Scurvy does prevail very much; partly for some of
the preceding reasons; as also that in such a condition they cannot so well
oppose the Disease by that Discipline and order as is required: and several I
have observed to die in Childbed by scorbutic Fevers, and some suffocated
soon after a probable good delivery, by a sudden and great fermentation,
occasioned from the preceding Labor, and extraordinary internal motions.

4ly. In giving judgment of this Disease, the age of the person is to be
considered, whether it be in young or old: in old age the cure is more
difficult by how much the older, because the vital principles are declined in
their vigor, and fall off from the integrity and rectitude of their Natures
spontaneously, from their proneness to desist, and natural inability to a
longer duration; and therefore are not to be restored, but may be retarded in
their speed of declension; their ill affects corrected and abated, not wholly
prevented, being the inevitable consequents of lapsed Nature.

The Scurvy in Children argues an haereditary infirmity derived from their
Parents, or the vital principles debile and weak in their initiation and
plantation: or that their Nurses were scorbutical, and tainted with this
infirmity, from whom the child has imbibed and drawn in impure nutriment, to
corrupt the principles of its Nature in the in fancy and tender days, being
then more apt to receive, and longer to retain any impression quo semel est
imbuta. --

In all these Causes the difficulty of the Cure is advanced; and since so great
a prejudice may arise to Infants from their Nurses, therefore there ought to be
a strict and diligent care in the choice of them, and that by the approbation
of an able Physician before the Infant is committed to them.

5ly. The color of scorbutic spots declaring this Disease, is to be regarded;
for that such spots by how much they incline to blackness, so much the worse:
denoting a greater degeneration of the material product, or extinction of the
assimulating faculty.

Quicquid est in effectu, praeexistit in causa; arguing the vital principles to
be very enormous and deficient; or the materia ex qua and nutrimental object to
be of a very depraved Nature, not to be reduced.

6ly. That the Cure is more difficult and will be longer in effecting to those
that are irregular, live high, loose and careless; not observing laudable
Customs, and such a Discipline as is required to oppose the Disease: as also to
such, whose low condition and inability, constrains them to a bad diet,
inconveniences and ill customs which promote and aggravate this Disease also.

The Therapeutick or Curative part examined.
THe common method in curing this Disease, is carried on by these intentions:
preparation of the scorbutic matter; opening of obstructions; evacuation of
the morbifick cause; and roboration of parts.

For the first intention namely Preparation it is performed (as they suppose)
by medicaments that are attenuating and incisive, and by a more peculiar
property do respect the malignant Cause: and such medicines are compounded of
these ingredients, Fumiterry, Spleenwort, Germander, Cichory, Borrage, Bugloss,
Hart's-tongue, Enulacampane, Squils, Bark of Tamarisk, Cappar roots, Polipody,
etc. Of which decoctions are made, and drank some days before purging, to
prepare the morbifick humor, and make it more fit for evacuation.

That some of these rightly used are good against the Scurvy, I do not deny,
but under the notion of preparation is a delusion of judgment: First, because
there is no possibility of reducing this degenerate scorbutic matter into a
good state and condition, a privatione ad habitum non datur regressus. Ax.

Secondly, for that the humor which you intend so to prepare, is occult and
unknown in its proprieties (by your own determination;) the preparation then is
but a blind business, and a shooting at random.

Thirdly, for that there is no purgative which attracts elective this humor
you intend thus to prepare: wherefore no preparation is available or
beneficial, distinct from that which is antiscorbutical and curative.

The second intention is opening of obstructions, and that is necessarily
included in antiscorbutical medicines, which are a peritive, rarifying,
volatising and of a fermenting Nature: but if it be meant only as a praevious
disposition to the Cure, I think it more nicely distinguished, than necessary
to be observed.

The third intention is evacuation of the morbifick cause; and that is supposed
to be performed by phlebotomy and purgation.

Phlebotomy I cannot approve of (except there be a plethora urging) for that
this Disease is generated and depends upon the defect of fermentation; which
rather requires addition of spirits to help the lassated vires, exciting and
assisting their wonted operations; not detraction and diminution: but hirudines
venis haemorrhoidalibus appositae for some persons may be profitable.

It fares with the Blood, as in other Liquors; when their spirits are gone,
flat and dead, they change their former nature and degenerate; and all things
that exhaust, depress or fix the Spirits, are promoters of this Disease: and I
much wonder Phlebotomy so frequently used upon slight occasions, perniciously
sometimes and mortally; as in the eruption of the small Pox, more apparently,
at such time when the blood is fermenting for a purification; detraction of
blood then abates the strength of Nature, by emission of spirits; which cease
the ebullition, and checks Nature in the very height of contest, for expulsion
of the malignity and virulency of the Disease, but this obiter.

Purgation is appointed to be performed by such medicines as evacuate
melancholy, supposing that predominant humor to be the cause of this Disease;
but if I should grant melancholy to be the morbifick cause, and that
purgatives do attract elective; yet the process of the cure is not rationally
grounded; for that this melancholy (as you say) is degenerate and changed from
its specific known nature, into that which is secret and unknown;
metamorphosed and disguised by occult proprieties, arising from its secret and
new Nature: so that it is not the same, but another humor distinct from what
it was before: and now you must seek for another Purger, peculiar and different
from the common Purgers of melancholy.

And farther, here is a great mistake in taking that to be the morbifick cause,
which is the morbifick effect: that excrementitious matter which is purged out,
is but the product or effect of the Disease, not the cause; except it be
occasional; not essential and constitutive.

You must distinguish between the Disease and the product thereof: depraved
matter and excrements are the products of a Disease, and may be the internal
occasional causes of another Disease: but in respect of the Disease of which
they are so a cause, they are external; that is, they are not the constitutive
essential causes: for Causae constitntivae and constitutum sunt simul in esse:
but occasional causes are antecedent and have priority of exstience; so
likewise the product matter or effect is distinct and separate from the
Disease; for that the Disease has a real existence before such a production;
and also after this degenerate matter is removed, unless otherwise obliterated;
or that Nature sua sponte returns to her integrity and rectitude.

The last intention is Roboration, which is the perfection of the Cure, and
praecaution for the future; and this is so necessary, that although the Disease
make a cessation for a time, yet there will be a recidivation and recurrence:
the parts being debilitated by the pravity of this Disease, will show their
propension to it; until those impressions be totally obliterated, and the parts
restored to their pristine vigor.

And this is not performed by dyet-drinks, Apozems, Syrups, and such like
heterogene languid medicines; but with such as are purely defaecated from
terenity, volatized, spiritallized, and graduated to a pitch of energy,
symphoniacal with vital principles.

Having briefly discoursed the scope and intentions of the common method in the
Cure of this Disease; I shall now give you some Theses curative, deducted from
the Theorical part of this work, founded upon the Doctrine delivered.

1. That the difficulty in curing the Scurvy does depend upon the principal
causes in the digestive and distributive faculties, being more or less
enervated, deficient or irregular; not from the contumacy of a melancholy
humor (as is alleged;) for, as the vitiosity and difformity of the Scurvy does
arise from the complicated defection of the digestive and distributive
faculties; so the difficulty also, or facility of the Cure does depend upon the
possibility of restoration to their integrity and rectitude: and if the
internal constitutive causes of the Scurvy be cut off and subdued, the symptoms
and effects that from thence do depend, will soon die and vanish, not being
supplied by their causes of generation and conservation: therefore it is not
the contumacy of a producted degenerate matter that protracts, or makes the
Disease incurable, but the difficulty of reducing the vital principles to their
integrity and rectitude, being weakly or depravedly radicated, or habituated to
enormity and irregularity, enforced by diaetetick bad Customs; or promoted and
continued by some unavoidable occasional cause.

2ly. That an haereditary scorbutic disposition is not to be changed and
altered in the radication; but will show a propension and inclination suiting
with the peculiarity of its Nature and principles: for, Nature depraved a
principio in principiis, is not to be reduced, but will retain her vitiosity
being indivisible and inseparable from her self; nor is capable of reduction,
having not had the principles of rectitude to return to.

3ly. That an haereditary Scorbutic dispofition as to fructification and
symptomatical production, may be prevented, retarded, or lessened; for that the
symptoms and products which usually attend this disease, are under the command,
and must give obedience to a diaetetick and pharmaceutick power and authority.

4ly. That the various symptomatical appearance of the Scurvy, and difference
of scorbutic matter by degeneration in diverse persons, does not always
necessarily require variety of Medecines, but will admit the same cure; for,
although in the production and progression of the disease, there is great
variety; yet there is more certainty and unity in the essential constitutive
causes, the spring or fountain from whence those issue; to which rightly
applied the cure will succeed, reliquum supplente natura juvata.

5ly. That the occasional, or antecedent internal causes of this disease, by
way of praecaution; or the product matter and effects of this disease, in
primis viis seated, may conveniently be removed by manifest evacuation: that is
degenerate Chyle, which will not be reduced, but deprave and infest where it
resides, passes, and is transmitted; yet the spirits and ferments are chiefly
to be regarded, that they be kept in their purity and vigor, being the
principles in each faculty; and this is performed privative, by subducting what
is offensive and injurious; and also positive, by contributing an additional
strength, having some equality or proportion suting with their natures.

6ly. That purgation cannot eradicate, or take away the constitutive causes of
this disease; but only carry off some of the producted scorbutic matter, which
is not reducible, and is remedium a posteriori: for, the essential constitutive
causes of the Scurvy are enormity and deficiency of the vital principles in
their duties; which are to be reduced to their regularity and fortitude: but
evacuation per se respects the producted matter and effects, not the essential
causes, but per accidens: and therefore that which does apply radically to the
internal causes of this disease is symbolical and consimilar with the vital
principles, uniting with them, roborating and confirming them in their
functions; and therefore they that lay all the stress of the cure upon
evacuation, whether purging, vomiting, bleeding, or sweating, as if that alone
must do it, are much deceived and frustrated in their expectations.

7ly. That strong purgations, offering violence to the vital principles,
exasperates and makes them more irregular and defective, and thereby promotes
rather than abates the strength of this disease: But purgation or abstersion
rightly instituted (not every purge that makes you go to stool) is convenient
and helpful in the Cure.

8ly. That Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, Brooklime, most frequently used for the
Scurvy, in Diet-drinks, Syrup, and juice, is not the specific remedy against
the Scurvy; that is, challenging a peculiar propriety and singular virtue
against this disease before other Medicines; but comes far short of other
Medicines (though good, and may be more advantagiously used) in their activity
and restoration of the digestions to their primitive vigor and rectitude of
their office and duties.

9ly. That Cochlearia etc. does not resist this disease by a specific,
peculiar antipathy against the occult malignity and products thereof; but by
restoring and roborating the digestive faculties, by their saline volatising
virtues, natura reliquum perficiente; which endowments are not specific, but
common.

10ly. That the diseases complicated with the Scurvy are not cured by their own
peculiar Medicines, usually effectual; unless they have respect to this
disease, and that which is antiscorbutical added to their specific virtues; or
alternatively used: and therefore scorbutic Consumptions, Fevers, Dropsies,
Gouts, Astmaes, etc. will not be subdued and yield obedience to the common way
of Cure.

I have now prosecuted this disease, and made disquisition into the nature of
it, so far as time will give me leave at present: something more I have to say
upon this subject, but want due leisure to deliver it to you, and therefore
must defer, and wait for an opportunity to revise and augment this Treatise.
What follows are the Medicines I use in the cure of this disease.

Arcana Artis

Spagyrice fideliter and Cura singulari, propria inspectione praeparata.

Potestatum vitalium deficientium Virtute resuscitativa and instaurante dotata.

In levamen aegrorum ad praxim accommodata; and ad morbos contumaces domandum
valentissima.

Usu and experientia quam sae pissime probata.

Modo exhibendi, dosi, vehiculo, tempore, cum discrimine sexuum aetatum,
virium, pro re nata and eorum natura, legibus apposite restricta.

Quicquid aliud de his curiosus, vel difficili morborum complexu coreptus caute
dubitabit; me consulat, supplebo.

Everardus Maynwaringe, M. D.

Antiscorbutick MEDECINES, Exactly prepared and fitted for the principal cases
that occur in Practice.

Largely endowed in universality, opposing many and grand DISEASES, Limited
and distinguished in their Appropriation and Virtues.

Regulated praecisely in their Use, by fit Doses, proper Vehicles, due times,
with respect to strength, Sex and Age.

London, Printed for T. Basset under S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1664.

PREFACE.
IN the former discourse having traced the Scurvy, from its infancy and
generation to its full strength and growth, its chief places of residence,
variety of appearance and monstrous deformity: it remains now to propose some
effectual means to check and subdue the prevailing power of this spreading
disease, that daily grows and increaserh to the ruin and decay of Nature; being
possessed and seated in the vital principles, seducing and constraining them to
enormity and defection from the regularity in which they were planted by Nature.

And having strictly surveyed the condition and nature of this disease, with
its variety of attendance and additional strength, being ready to join with any
morbifick cause, and be transformed: I was unwilling to sit down here and rest
with a contemplative knowledge of the disease,, and leave the greatest part of
the work undone; the subduing and vanquishing of it by powerful Medicines: nor
being willing to commit the remaining grand part to the industry and care of
others (for good Reasons;) I have therefore labored to form medicinal
Instruments and prevalent means to oppose this Gigantick Monster; being always
ready prepared for my own Patients, and those that desire the benefit of them:
Namely, the Scorbute Pills and Catholic Elixir, efficatious Medicines for the
purposes appointed; with sufficient Instructions here annexed, for their proper
and most advantageous use.

I shall not recount the benefits and advantage that many have received by
them, nor publish the Persons, (a way practiced by some Quacks to induce credit
to their Medicines, though the stories be oftentimes feigned, or effects
fallaciously and unduly imputed) but leave every one to believe of them what
they please, if my word be not sufficient to pass for their reputation.

LONDON, Next the blew Boar on Ludgate Hill. E. M.

Scorbute Pills.
THe Scorbute Pills are efficacious against the defects and errors of digestion
in the first, second, and third Office: In the first Office, namely, in all
diseases of the stomach, requiring purgation, and cleansing downwards, this
Medicine is very proper; it evacuates and unloads a heavy oppressed stomach,
clogged with indigested or depraved matter, that corrupts good food retained,
or duls the Appetite, and hinders digestion; prevents Fluxes, Gripings and
pains in the stomach and bowels, Cholick and Iliack passions, by taking away
their causes, and leaving a grateful astriction and roboration upon the parts.

By their abstersive quality, they remove crude viscous phlegm impacted in the
corrugated Tunicles of the stomach and guts, being a receptacle for inflation
and wind. They destroy Worms, and prevent their breeding, by carrying away the
putrid matter whereof they are generated; they correct a nauseating and
belching stomach; make the stomach clean and fit for the reception of wholesome
food, and not till then can you expect good nutriment.

In the subsequent digestions, and splenetick diseases, they are powerfully
abstersive and a peritive, opening obstructions of the Spleen, Gall, Mesentery,
Liver and Reins, removing their morbifick causes, which produce a Cachectick,
or ill habit of body, the Scurvy, Dropsies, hypocondriack Melancholy, Jaundice,
etc.

These Pills cleanse and evacuate gently, whereby the forenamed parts are
exonerated and discharged of crude, coagulated, depraved fermenting matter,
which remaining there congested, or transmitted, various symptoms do arise in
several parts of the body, appearing in a scorbutic difformity: as lassitude,
debility, and decay of several functions in the body, from frustrated and
corrupt digestions: Fluxes from Crudities, or stimulation of acrimonious
qualities, with erosions and torsions of the guts: febrifick aestuations,
turgid ebullitions, and unnatural fermentation, producing various disquietudes
and erratick pains; flatulent distentions, painful compressions, angust and
difficult breathing; obstructions of the vessels, and ductures, from slimy and
viscous coagulations; causing unnatural retention of excrements which ought
duly to be voided; impeding and retarding the expedite and free conveyance of
nutriment, made degenerate and depraved by a sluggish passage and impure
commixture in the way; from whence Atrophies and scorbutic Consumptions,
spots, and defaedations of the skin; the spirits also obtunded in motion,
inactive and torpid, dark and impure, being but the rarefactions and
subtiliated extractions from depraved matter, alien and counterfeit; from
whence dullness, heaviness, and unwonted sadness.

These symptoms, and many more in several persons, are variously complicated,
more or fewer, this with that, according to the plurality and complication of
causes, which makes scorbutic persons to be differently and variously affected.

For the Scurvy, these Pills are the best abstersive and purgative Medecin I
ever made use of, in any the forenamed cases, leaving no bad impression
behind, or debility upon the parts, as most purgatives do, and are offensive to
Nature and disgustful, though per accidens auxiliary and helpful, by removing
some material morbifick cause, yet require correction and roboration of parts
afterward.

For Hydropick Infirmities and watery tumors of the body, whether universal,
puffing up the whole body, as the Anasarca: or in particular parts, as the
Hydrocephalus, being a collection of water in the head: or the Hydrops
pectoris, in the cavity of the breast: or Ascites in the belly: or Hydrocele,
when the Cod is filled with water like a bladder: and sometines in the legs
only.

In any of these cases, these Pills are very profitable, and do evacuate
serous, or watery humors, accumulated and preternaturally retained in the body.

They are Aperitive, resolutive, and diuretical, dissolving coagulated matter
that obstruct the urinary ductures, provokes the Reins to discharge their
office, in freeing the body from superfluous watery humors, attracting and
transmitting them by urine, which is the due regiment and imperial power of the
kidneys.

They open obstructions in Women whose Courses are stopped contrary to the custom
of Nature, and brings them into their right order; they cleanse the matrix, and
evacuate noxious humors collected there, dissipate vapors, and is profitably
used by those who are subject to fits of the Mother.

For diseases of the head they are not improper, but fit and efficacious
against infirmities, afflicting the Brain and Nerves; by eradicating their
occasional causes that require abstersion and evacuation in the lower regions
of the body.

Diseases attributed to the head, for the most part do arise from inferior
parts, occasioned by their impurities, obstructions and distempers; for one
that is idiopathically afflicted, ten is Sympathically affected, by consent of
parts, and transmission of some morbifick matter thither; but the foundation of
the disease is elsewhere, and to that part must the Cure be directed.

And therefore if well observed, we frequently meet with, scorbutic palsies,
scorbutic convulsions, apoplexies, soporiferous, or sleepy diseases, falling
sickness, pains of the head, giddiness, tremblings, deafness, dull fight and
blindness: And all these arifing from the Scurvy or Scorbutic impurity of the
body oftentimes: And these are not cured but by antiscorbutical medicines; and
those that endeavor otherwise with their specific and appropriate medicines
to the parts where such symptoms and diseases do appear, labor in vain and are
frustrate in their intended cures.

For those that are troubled with Rheums arising from indigestion and
crudities, these Pills are profitable; not so much that they attract rheum, but
because they cleanse and strengthen the digestions, and so the antecedent cause
is cut off.

And for the same reason they are good in pectoral infirmities, diseases of the
breast, arising from phlegm and crude indigested humors, sometimes sharp or
falt, causing pertinacious coughing, and disturbing the Lungs in the
performance of their office, by an unquiet irritation: sometimes viscous, tough
and thick, stopping the pipes of the Lungs and vessels for respiration;
obstructing and occluding the pores of the Lungs, which ought to be pervious
into the Cavity of the breast, whereby the air is drawn in with difficulty,
although so thin a body and penetrating: from hence Asthmaes, wheezings, short
and painful breathing; and in these cases of obstructions, the Lungs (or rather
the intercostal muscles) to supply this defect is forced to a double or swifter
motion, that the heart should not want air, necessarily required in the
performance of its noble office.

And that these infirmities are caused oftentimes from the Scurvy, none that
understand will deny; and so great have these Scorbutic Asthmaes been, that
many have been suffocated in the extremity of a sudden paroxism, or fit of this
disease.

And not only difficulty of breathing, but angustness, compression,
palpitations of the heart, or heart-beating, and swoonings sometimes are caused
by this disease: in such cases these Pills are proper and beneficial; they open
obstructions, dissipate putrid malign vapors that afflict the heart, and
disturb the regularity of its motion.

There is also Scorbutic Consumpsions, accompanied for the most part with a
Hectic fever, whereby the body wastes and pines away, being defrauded of good
nutriment, that should support and maintain the faculties; but is converted
into impure depraved matter and excrementitious; hereby the body is enfeebled
and weak, the spirits heavy, dull and sad, the skin lax or loose, the flesh
soft and wasting, and all the faculties languishing and declining.

In this case these Pills are a fit medecin to begin the Cure; then use the
Elixir following: but cooling drinks and restaurative Broths hurtful: Corpora
impura quo plus nutriveris eo magis laeseris: foul bodies the more you feed and
endeavor to nourish them the worse you make them.

Finally, for all occasions where purgation and clensing is necessary these
Pills are fitly used, and is a universal medicine in purgation. Nor do they
only cleanse and carry away excrementitious degenerate matter which occasions
many diseases, (according to the diversity of parts to which it is transmitted,
and from consent of parts though not transmitted) but also do roborate and
strengthen the parts in their passage, being amicable and friendly to Nature.

The Dose for man or woman is 3 or 4 Pills; perhaps 5 Pills may be required;
according to the strength and condition of the body to operate.

So great a difference there is in bodies for purging, that two or three of
these Pills are sufficient for some, when as others will require 4, or perhaps
5, if a robustick body: therefore try your body first with a lesser Dose; then
if it require more, you may add to the next, and be not too Bold at first.

The times for taking them generally is thus, except good reason to the
contrary: Take one Pill over night going to bed, having eaten but a light
supper at 6 of the clock before; the next morning early in bed take the
remaining part of the Dose, and you may sleep an hour after if you will; but
lie not long in the morning: when you are up drink a little warm posset drink,
and forbear eating until dinner time; but drink you may.

These Pills take thus every fourth or fifth day; and you will find it best to
give such intermission: Chronick or old diseases must have time to be
eradicated, and you must reduce Nature from an ill habit by degrees, better
than hastily; as diseases come on, gradually prevailing upon Nature; so Nature
by degrees must be restored again to its power and regularity: Cum natura male
sustinet repentinas mutationes.

But on the intermittng days you are not forbidden every thing medicinal, but
may take the following Elixir conveniently.

Concerning Doses I must say something more, that none may mistake, but know
what is meant by a Dose.

A Dose is the true quantity of a Medecin to be taken at once, or for one
operation: A Dose is not a set quantity (as some may suppose) to be given
equally alike to all; but such a proportion as is convenient for the condition
of every body, to some more, to others less, according to strength and
concondition of the body in operation.

For the Doses or quantities of Physic suitable to every body (chiefly in
purging) there is as much variety, as in the proportion of meat for every man's
stomach: so much as will fully satisfy and be convenient for one man, may be
too little for another, and too much perhaps for a third. Therefore in a
regular diet, to the weaker sort of persons we allow a spare and slender diet;
but to the strong and lusty, firm and solid bodies, we allow a larger
proportion, and that necessarily.

The same Rule in Physic is to be observed, to fit every one with a due
quantity and Dose, to strong bodies more, to weaker less.

The Dose of these Pills is not praecisely appointed to a Pill, neither more
nor less to all; but with some latitude, 3, 4, or 5 (being gentle in
operation:) for the difference of bodies is such in operation, (especially
purging) that they require a different quantity oftentimes for their
proportion, which cannot so exactly be determined and appointed by the
praescience of the most skilful Physician, but by rational conjecture, until
the first experiment and trial of their bodies; and after the first Dose, your
own Reason and ability of body will prompt you in the next, whether to keep to
the same, to augment or abate; Taking this caution, that 4 or 5 stools in a day
is enough; and that number I intend you to aim at, and no more.

For example; if you have a stubborn body, difficult and hard to purge, and
your Physic works very little, the next Dose you may take one Pill more: but
if you have a lax gentle body and easy to purge, then take a lesser Dose, and
abate a Pill, if the former work too nimbly with you: and remember this as a
necessary Caution, That you covet not strong purges, to have many stools in a
day (a common error) which offers violence to Nature, and forcibly sweeping
down both good and bad together; but rather choose to draw away the offending
cause gently by degrees, giving Nature time for separation, the pure from the
impure and noxious: 4 or 5 stools in a day is sufficient, and you will find it
much more beneficial, Nature more kindly assisting, and less weakened.

Some there are (brainsick fools) who unless their Physic work a douzen
times, think they have kept house for nothing, and their money cast away,
accounting the goodness of their Physic by the number of stools; but they
deceive themselves very much in desiring strong purgations, which weaken and
impare Nature, leaving such impressions behind, sometimes worse than the
disease they took them for.

These Pills, although purgative, yet their chief virtue is not contained in
the purgative faculty, but in other appropriate qualities, opposing the several
diseases, to which the laxative adjunct property is but a Handmaid and
subsidiary: nor must you expect always the disease to be brought into the
Close-stool, there are other Conveyances and ways of emission of Natures
providing besides the common back door.

Concerning preparation before purging, muck talked of, take this advice: That
soluble bodies easily yielding obedince to gentle purging Medecines, need no
other preparation than what Nature has provided in the disposition of their
own bodies: for those bodies that are hot and costive, it will be advantageous
and facilitate their purgation, to eat stewed Prunes, or drink Whey two or
three days before, which will prepare and open your body, make it more soluble
and easy in purging.

For the manner of taking; whereas these Pills are appointed to be taken, one
Pill over night, the other part in the morning; yet if you find any
inconvenience thereby, you may take the whole Dose in the morning very early;
but if you have not a just cause of alteration, observe the former prescription.

For going abroad after your Pills, if you desire it, or your occasions
require, take this advice: if your body be indifferent strong, not apt upon
small occasions to take cold, the weather temperate, having ordered the Dose of
your Pills to work but three or four times; you may then go abroad without
prejudice; but if otherwise, it is better to forbear.

The Catholic Elixir.
BEfore I proceed to tell you the virtues and profitable use of this Medecin,
I must first give you the reason of the Title, that none may stumble at it.

Catholic is universal; and this Medicine may be styled so: not that it cures
every disease', but that it is effectual against some disease or infirmity in
every faculty, as they are thus divided and distinguished into the natural,
vital, animal, and genital faculties: and being thus endowed with a competent
measure of universality, it may not improperly be called a Catholic or
universal Medicine, since its virtue is extended to all the grand faculties.

But you may ask, why an universal Medicine should be composed and appointed
for a particular disease, it being intended chiefly for the Scurvy? In answer
to this; if you look into the preceding Tract, you will find the Scurvy not to
be a single disease, but a complication of diseases, whose root, or branches,
if arrived at some height, extend to all the faculties, bringing detriment and
decay throughout the body.

For the word Elixir, concerning its Etymology and derivation, there are
several opinions; some will have it from the Arabic, others from the Greek;
but I shall not trouble you with that: it is sufficient that you understand it
is a Medicine of noble descent, and may have the use of it: If you expect I
should tell you of what it is made, and the process how? you must pardon me
there, it does not belong to you.

If an Artist should view the ingredients of this Medicine, before operation
upon them, would determine them only for the deficiency of the natural
faculties, and their parts; as the Stomach, Spleen; Gall, Mesentery, Liver,
Reins, etc. but being spiritalized, graduated and advanced; they do extend
further: as also, for that the other faculties do depend very much upon the
integrity of these, as well as the compleatness of their own peculiar organs,
by and in which they execute their several functions: for, either by
transmission or consent the rest suffer if these be injured.

I shall not demonstrate this truth, and explain it further; being a Doctrine
not so necessary for you to know: but proceed to give you an account of the
virtues this Medicine is pregnant with, and manner of use.

And first of their essicacy in the natural functions.

This Elixir is used with good success against most infirmities seated in the
Stomach, Spleen, Guts, Pancreas, Mesentery, Liver, and Reins, especially if
they be languid and weak; degenerating and falling off from their duties; being
obstructed, loaded, or clogged with crude, depraved and indigested matter;
wanting spirit and vigor, and accuteness of ferment fit for their proper works:
This Medicine does acuate and vigorate, giving spirit and activity in the
performance of their duties.

For surfeits, oppression, and overcharging the Stomach, it is a sure Remedy;
working off the offending matter, cherishing and refreshing the stomach. It
excites and quickens a dull or weak appetite, and procures a good digestion,
(which is the main pillar of health) being very auxiliary and assistant to the
stomachs digestive ferment deficient and decayed, or obtunded and overlaid with
crudities or depraved matter from intemperance, incongruous diet, and bad
customs.

By its Balsamic Amaritude, is healing and grateful to a waterish, crude, raw
stomach: corrects nauseousness and vomiting (safely in breeding women)
suppressing and subduing the offensive causes, leaving a good astriction upon
the stomach, and roborating the retentive faculty.

Is helpful to those molested with belching, and gripped with wind in the
stomach, or guts, by correcting and digesting crudities, and preventing a
discordant fermentation the causes thereof.

Amends a strong offensive breath, and checks unsavory risings in the stomach
from frustrated and corrupt digestions: prevents and destroys worms bred from
such putrid indigested matter.

This Elixir has an aperitive and opening power, and is profitably used by
those molested with hypocondriack Melancholy; that have obstructed Livers or
Spleens; distended and full in the sides under the short ribs; or pained there,
by reason of wind and humors obstructed in motion.

It Is a good Medicine in the cure of Dropsies, and beneficial for Hydropick
persons, or inclining thereto and troubled with a watery humor in any part: it
digests superfluous humidity, opens obstructions of the vessels leading to the
reins; excites the attractive faculty of the Kidneys which before were
sluggish, imbecile, or impedited in the attraction and transmission of urine;
roborates the parts and confirms them in their duties.

For intermitting Fevers, called Agues, quotidian, tertian, or quartan, it is
very good; they being seated in the forenamed parts, to which this Medicine is
properly assistant and auxiliary; discharges its virtue upon the parts so
affected, alters and subdues their morbifick causes, and hastens their diseases
to a period, by removing their fuel of conservation and continuance; and
afterward does strengthen those parts, debilitated and weakened by such
diseases harboring there; and raseth out the bad impressions left behind them,
which breed future inconveniences, and are foundations laid for other
diseases; which will succeed, if not prevented after this manner by good
Medecin, to cleanse and restore the parts; as frequently we do observe in
practice.

In the vital faculties this Elixir is of good use, and beneficial for those
that are troubled with palpitations of the heart, angustness and compression
there; arising most frequently from vitiated digestions and scorbutic
feculency, an ill affected spleen, or matrix; from whence noxious vapors
arise, and are communicated to the vital Spirits, which afflict and irritate
the heart to this distempered motion: and if the cause be very great and
sudden, sometimes swooning is caused thereby, as in Fits of the Mother, and
passions of the spleen: this medicine dissipates the vapors, and prevents
their causes of generation, by rectifying and roborating the parts from whence
they proceed.

It is good in asthmaes and stoppings of the breast from crude Phlegm; opens
the pipes of the Lungs and helps difficulty of breathing; strengthens the Lungs
and is very advantageous for Consumptive Persons, and that have a faint short
breath, or that are molested with a troublesome and dangerous Cough, inclining
and disposing them to a Consumption.

It Is Cordial and restaurative, cherishes and refreshes the Spirits, by the
aromatic virtue and pleasant transpiration of its odor, raising the Spirits
and affecting them with delight.

In the animal faculties, and for infirmities of the head; as Convulsion,
falling Sickness, Vertigo or giddiness, sleepiness lassitude and dullness, pains
of the head, rheumes and superfluous moisture, this medicine is very good, and
beneficial to strengthen the brain and nerves; to enervate, lessen and abate
the antecedent causes of these infirmities, generated in other parts, although
they appear and show themselves most here.

And although this medicine is more peculiarly appropriate to supply the
natural faculties than the other, primo intentionaliter; yet consequenter and
in effect, the vital, the animal and generative faculties is improved and made
more vigorous in their performance and functions; and also freed from many
diseases by the rectitude and integrity of the natural faculties, both in
respect of prevention and cure: for that the natural faculties are the basis
and foundation of the rest in conservation; and are supported from thence as
the Tree from radix, the Branches from the root: and defects, impediments and
decay of the natural faculties, causes debility, disorder and infirmities in
the rest, by transmission or consent.

And though the Symptoms appear in one part, and disorder one faculty more
apparently; the cause often lies obscure and is the proper defect of another;
between which you would think there were no relation, nor commerce or
incommodation one from the other.

If the natural faculties be vitiated in their functions; all the rest decline
from rectitude, and abate in their vigor: as in the Scurvy, first the natural
faculties are debilitated and disordered; then from hence the vital, the animal
and genital do degenerate, and are discomposed; and there is sufficient reason,
for that these are supplied from thence: and when the natural faculties are
restored to their vigor and rectitude; the other also participate of this
change and are restored in a great measure; except the particular Organs of
those faculties be made incapable.

Wherefore and for these Causes, if I extend the virtues of this Medicine yet
farther, and show its power and prevalency against more infirmities, I do not
ascribe above what it does justly challenge.

In the genital parts: if I should tell you it were good against deficiency in
generation, and defects of the seed: as crudeness, thinness degenerate pravity,
and infaecundity, the causes of barrenness, perhaps you would think I go beyond
my bounds; but I could easily prove, and make it a rational assertion,
deductive from the principles of Physic, besides what is said before; but my
intention here is not so much to improve your knowledge as your health; the
preservation of the bodily functions in their integrity; and restoration of
them declining, languishing and deviating from their primitive rectitude; if
your faith will not put you upon the trial, I shall not raise arguments to
convince your reason and persuade, believe what you please.

It is very good for Women that have lost their Complexion, looking pale,
yellow and ill colored; by reason of that weakness called the Whites, or
wanting the due course of nature, by reason of obstructions from cold, bad
diet, ill customs and vitiated digestions; or a distempered melancholy mind;
which disturbs nature in her constant order, and due regiment of preservation:
it is very profitably used during the time of their monthly purgations; it
procures them effectually.

For those that have sores, or abound with corrupt humors which enforces them
to keep issues open, to prevent greater inconvenience and danger; this Medicine
applies to the springs from whence they issue, and where they are bred;
prevents them in their causes, in some persons; in all it abates and lessens in
the quantity; corrects and alters the stinking corrupt quality, and makes your
body more sweet and wholesome.

This Elixir as it is properly used in the particular cases mentioned singly,
so likewise in the same conjunct and variously complicated and graduated,
amounting to, or challenging the denomination and title of the Scurvy; against
which this medicine is very effectual, and necessarily follows the use of the
preceding pills, to strengthen the faculties after abstertion and cleansing;
whereby the like Scorbutic impurity and ill symptoms arising from thence, for
the future is prevented, and a return of the disease prohibited (in a regular
due course of living) for, as the disease did grow by errors and defects in the
digestions, producing such various symptoms; so are they prevented by
assisting the digestions, and preserving them in their integrity and due course
of nature from declension.

For which purpose and intention this medicine is prevalent, to roborate the
faculties and principal parts ordained for those offices: resolves and
volatiseth coagulate and fixed matter; attenuates and rarefies gross subsiding
humors which cause obstructions, tumors and pains: resists putrefaction,
depurates and renovates the blood from a degenerate condition, stained with
Scorbutic feculency and impurity, restoring its balsamic nature and genuine
proprieties.

Of necessary use for aged and weak persons whose faculties fall off from their
integrity, and abated in their vigor, do perform but weakly and deficiently;
as also for such who are recovering or lately recovered from some great
disease, which has enervated and debilitated all the functions, leaving the
character and impressions of an evil cause behind upon the parts, chiefly where
they were seated; which renders them indisposed and unfit in their duties, and
lays the foundation of new diseases to ensue from hence.

In such cases this medicine is a good assistant and requisite auxiliary help
to performance, and restoration of vigor in a competent measure, if there be a
capacity of restoration in the parts remaining, where such faculties do reside
and are exercised.

And that you may use this medicine to the best advantage, take this advice;
that if your body be foul, first cleanse with a dose or two of the Scorbute
pills; then begin with this Elixir to strengthen the faculties, and you will
daily perceive a growing benefit encouraging you to continue the use thereof;
which is done with the least of trouble not incommodating your occasions; that
amidst affairs, in journeys, it prevents you not in your lawful customs, or
ties you to inconvenient observance, nor of the season, but is profitably used
at any time of the year.

Take this caution: be not too hasty in your expectations, and leave not the
use of it too soon; your disease came on gradually, and was longer in breeding
than you imagine, though the symptoms or signs of it appear to you suddenly
and lately; perhaps some years, or many years have laid the foundation, and but
now makes a discovery, being arrived at some height: you must then in reason
allow some time for eradication and removal; since nature will not admit of
violence and sudden changes, but is disturbed and injured at such rude
dealing: therefore take time as nature, and the medicine does require; nor will
you want encouragement to persevere, but have daily advantage against your
infirmity.

The full dose for Man or Woman of strength, is thirty drops: for twelve years
old, twenty drops: for five years old, ten drops.

And observe this rule; that at the first taking, you begin but with half the
dose that is appointed for your age: as thus; thirty drops is appointed for a
Man; let him begin with fifteen drops, and then augment two or three drops
every day after, until he ascend to thirty, and there continue.

Take it (in bed if you be very weak) in a spoonful of good Canary; and one
spoonful after to wash your mouth; every morning, fasting an hour and a half
after: and likewise at five of the clock in the afternoon: (those days only
excepted that you take pills) but you are not so strictly to observe the
afternoon; that if your occasions do not well permit; as when you must be
abroad, or the like; you may omit.

Note that this Elixir is never to be taken or tasted alone, but mixed in some
liquor.

Of Diseases and Medicines.
IN the preceding tract of the Scurvy, you may remember that in the body there
are several digestions and digestive offices for the preparation of food,
subordinate one to the other, whereby aliment is prepared gradually until it
receive the complement and perfection of assimilation for nutrition, and
conservation of the body.

These digestive offices as they are the grand laboratories of the body
necessary for preservation, so occasionally by their errors and defections from
their integrity of operation, most diseases in the body do arise, and are
planted radically in some principal member the mansion assigned where these
faculties do reside and exercise their power and jurisdiction.

And although Diseases are very numerous and various in their denominations,
sometimes from the diversity of symptoms that accompany them, as if they were
the offspring of diverse Parents, by their several faces and appearance: yet
trace them up to their original descent, you may find many to spring from one
radix, and own the same occasional causes, notwithstanding their dissimilarity,
in their growth and progress; yet their affinity is such by birth, that with a
single medicine, or perhaps two may be required, rightly prepared and fitted
for the work, you shall eradicate or destroy the root; and the branches that
grow from thence though spread in diverse parts of the body, shall whither and
fall away.

It is not necessary therefore to multiply medicines for every particular
spmptom that springs from a disease, but to level and aim at the root or
fountain from whence they spring.

The discourse is metaphorical, and carries illustration with it; but to make
it more plain and facile to your apprehension, and to show you the verity of
it, take this example for a Confirmation.

A Physician coming to his Patient finds him thus affected; feavourish, head
ach, pained at the Stomach, gripped in the belly, a looseness: all which may
proceed from one cause, and will be cured with one good medicine.

The cause producing all these symptoms, may be acor indebitus; a domestic
luxuriant, or peregrine acidity in the first digestion: hence a febrile temper
arises, from the Spirits tumultuating, agitated and troubled at this
exorbitant hostile quality; the stomach pained by the lancing of its sharpness;
the head ach by consent from thence; the belly gripped and colic pains by
transmission of this peccant acidity with the chyle; a flux or looseness
procured by the same purging quality, stimulating and provoking the expulsive
faculty, which endeavors to eject and expel it,

You see that one morbifick cause may produce various symptoms and effects: and
it is unnecessary, yea improper and without success to apply particular
medicines to each, not respecting the cause; and herein a wise Physician is
known from him that is otherwise.

In the case recited, some there are, and those thinking they do secundum
artem, will prescribe a Julip to abate or prevent the fever increasing: apply
a frontale to the head, or give a specific medicine for the head ach: an
emulsion for pain of the stomach and griping of the guts, which allayes for the
present, but soon after it is received into the body, turns sour and joins
with the morbifick cause.

For the looseness, perhaps you will give an astringent medicine and lock the
Thief up: but I will imagine you to be wiser, and consult about a Clyster, to
draw away the cause, the peccant humor that stimulates, and when that is come
away, nature being no longer provoked with an intestine enemy, will return in
peace to her former sedate temper.

This is something you say, and plausible; but what Clyster will you give (in
this case) to attract the peccant humor, which is the Chyle in the stomach,
alienated with a luxuriant acidity? your Phlegmagoga and Cholagoga, etc. I
know, but Chylogoga, I know none, nor you: but you will say, the guts being
emptied by any Clyster, the stomach also will be exhausted and drained, by the
attraction below: if I should grant your reason to be good, the practice
notwithstanding is not good: for, if this exorbitant quality in the Chyle
mentioned, be the only disturbance, as it is in the case, then the
transmutation subjection and subduing of the same, is sufficient, and an exact
Cure without evacuation and subducting the Chyle: but this, a single Alkalizate
medicine will perform, cito, tuto, jucunde, without any other help and means,
and all symptoms arising from the said cause shall cease.

In jurious it is to make exhaustion of the body, when the blotting out of an
aliene impression, or the taming of a luxuriant quality is the scope of the
Cure; which may be done, salvo succo nutritio: and like to this is the
multiplying of medicines impertinently, when a single medicine will effect the
intention, according to the axiom; frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora.

An able practiced Physician, rightly principled in the nature of Diseases, and
expert in pharmacy, may well contract his practice within the compass of a few
medicines; such I mean as are graduated to a high pitch of energy, having
acquired a latitude of universality, quadrate with the grand faculties,
opposing all their deficiencies and depraved operations.

Indigestion and depraved digestion are the foundations of many diseases and
bad symptoms: as vomiting, nauseousness, wind, oppression, pains, loss of
appetite, fullness, heat and thirst, in the stomach primarily affected; by
consent, and transmission of the same morbifick cause, diverse parts are
variously affected, producing fluxes, feavors, distention of the Hypochonders,
Cholick, head-achs, obstructions and pains in several parts: the radix and
fountain from whence these spring is the stomach or first digestion; the
symptoms and products are branched and spread into several parts of the body:
now for the cure, not many medicines are required, but one or two efficacious
and proper, aiming at the cause, directed by the hand of art; a good abstersive
and roborating medicine after to confirm the faculty, is both prevention and
cure.

I might farther exemplify and make it plain, by the parallel cases in the
other faculties, but verbum sat sapienti, and others it concerns not, therefore
I pass on.

But I would not be mistaken herein, that any should think I countenance the
Panpharmacums of Quacks, by them decanted and cried up for their excelling
virtues, and universal property to oppose aerie disease: I know it is a grand
delusion and cheat that is upon those who believe such aerie empty boasters; but
that an elaborate perite Artist, solidly grounded in the true principles of
Physic, may prepare medicines endowed with a large portion of universality,
bringing within the lattiude and circle of their energy, very many diseases,
restoring the faculties decayed, the great engines of our bodies; roborating the
primum mobile instrumentaliter, and of this, reason and experiment can
demonstrate the truth, and convince the unbeliever.

The greatest deficiency I have observed, in some, though otherwise
sufficiently stockt with Learning and accomplished, is in Medicines; I mean the
Pharmacopoietical part; but if more time were improved in that practice, it
would much compensate their labor, and redound to their success, honor and
advantage: they were then Masters of their secrets which now are exposed, the
consequents whereof sero nimis sentiunt; and I must say that Doctor Medicinae
ought to be peritum in medicinis, and that practically: medicines then would be
more nicely and exactly scruted into, their defects supplied and amended, their
superfluous accumulation of ingredients in many compositions abated; many
errors in preparation and composition corrected, not to be known, because not
experimented by their own inspection, thinking a fiat seeundum artem sufficient.

Hence it is some diseases pass for incurable, through the penury and
deficiency of medicines, not for the quantity, but quality, being meanly
graduated, not extracted from their feculency and terenity, but remain
complexed in their heterogene parts, with a super addition of sugar, honey,
etc. to drown the energy and power of the medicine.

For variety of medicines, there were never more impertinent, frivolous, and I
may say dangerous, from the multitude of spurious pretended Chemists,
illigitimate, and not the Sons of Art; being ignorant of Phylosophical
principles, and the abstruse natures of what they deal with, blindly run upon
many errors, obtruding their casual experiments upon the People, under the
titles of laudable approved Medicines: others are guilty of great abuses,
wilfully for advantage, to spare cost and labor, thus, most places abound with
base Medicines which brings defamation to Physicians lingering sicknesses and
death to their Patients.

The charge incumbent upon Physicians in these cases, for prevention, is not
small; and it much concerns them to be very circumspect what Medicines they
make use of; and the quality of the Artist they trust: and I must assirm that
an expert knowledge in the Pharmacopoietical part of Physic, do as much belong
to a Physician and is so necessary, that without it he cannot be said to be
complete; for, he that is not an Artist herein cannot direct and correct as he
ought, by the promptings of a bare contemplative knowledge: and although he
excludes himself from inspection into the practick part, as an unnecessary
trouble and below the dignity of his title, yet he is not excused thereby, but
his reputation pays for the miscarriages and abuses therein.

But this is an excursion beyond the limits of my intention, at the entrance of
the discourse, and therefore I wave the prosecution.

FINIS.

