EN OLIGO PISTIANOS

THE Almost Christian DISCOVERED, OR The False-Professor Tried and Cast.

Being the substance of Seven SERMONS, first preached at Sepulchers, London,
1661. and now at the inportunity of friends made public.

By MATTHEW MEADE.

Luk: 16.14. And the Pharisees who were covetous' heard all these things, and
they derided him.

Verse. 15. And Jesus said unto them, ye are they which justify your selves
before men, but God knows your hearts: For that which is highly esteemed
amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God.

London Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the three Crowns in the lower end of
Cheapside, over against the great Conduit. 1662.

To the Congregation at Sepulchers that were the Auditors of these Sermons.
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Beloved,
WHat the meaning of that providence was that called me to the occupation of my
Talent amongst you this Summer, will be best read and understood by the effects
of it upon your own souls: The kindly increase of grace and holiness in heart
and life, can only prove it to have been in mercy: where this is not the fruit
of the word, there it becomes a judgment. The word travels with life or death,
salvation or damnation, and brings forth one or other in every soul that
hears it; I would not for a world (were it in my power to nake the choice) that
my labors, which were meant and designed for the promotion of your immortal
souls, to the glory of the other World, in a present persuance of the things of
your peace, should be found to have been a Ministration of Death and
Condemnation, in the great day of Jesus Christ. Yet this (the Lord knows) is
the too common effect of the most plain and powerful Ezekiel. 47.11.
Preaching of the Gospel, The waters of the Sanctuary, do not always heal where
they come, for there are mirie and marish places that shall be given to salt.
(...) The same word ((...)) is elsewhere in Scripture rendered barrenness, Ps
107.34,
he turns a faithful land ((...)) into barrenness so that the judgment
denounced upon these miry and marish places, is that the curse of barrenness
shall rest upon them, notwithstanding the waters of the Sanctuary overflow
them.

Jude. 12.
It is sad but certain, that the Gospel inflicteth a death of its own as well as
the Law; or else how are those trees in Jude, said to be (...) twice dead,
plucked up by the roots. Yea that which in it self is the greatest mercy,
through the interposition Romans 5.8
of men's lusts, and the efficacy of this cursed sin of unbelief, turns to the
greatest judgment, as the richest and most generous Wine makes the sharpest
Vinegar. Our Lord Christ himself, the choicest mercy that the bowels of a God
could bless a perishing World withal, Ioh. 3.16.
whose coming (himself bearing Witness) was on no less errand then that of
eternal life and blessedness to the lost and cursed sons of Adam; Ioh. 10.10
Yet to how many was he (...) a stone of stumbling, Isa. 8 14.
and a rock of offense; Yea, a gin and a snare, and that to both the houses of
Israel, the only professing people of God at that day, in the World. And is he
not a stone of stumbling in the Ministry of the Gospel to many professors to
this very day, upon which they fall and are broken? When he says, Mat. 11.6
blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me, he does therein plainly
suppose that both in his person and Doctrine the generality of men would be
offended in him.

Not that this is the design of Christ and the Gospel, but it comes so to pass
through the corruptions of the hearts of men whereby they make light of Christ,
and stand out against that life and grace which the Lord Jesus by his blood so
dearly purchased, and is by the Preaching of the Gospel so freely tendered; the
wilful refusal whereof, will as surely double our damnation, as the acceptance
thereof will secure our eternal Salvation.

Mat. 11.23.
Oh consider it is a thing of the most serious concernment in the World, how we
carry our selves under the Gospel, and with what dispositions and affections of
heart and soul, seasons of grace are entertained; this being taken into the
consideration to make it weight, that we are the nearer to heaven or to hell,
to salvation or damnation, by every ordinance we sit under: boast not therefore
of Privileges enjoyed with neglect of the important duties thereby required.
Remember Capernaums case and tremble; as many go to Heaven by the very gates of
Hell, so more go to Hell by the gates of Heaven, in that the number of them
that profess Christ, is greater then the number of them that truly close with
Christ.

Beloved, I know the Preaching of the Gospel has proselyted many of you into a
profession; but I fear that but few of you are brought by it to a true close
with the Lord Christ for Salvation, (I beseech you bear with my jealousy, for
it is the fruit of a tender love to your precious souls) most men are good
Christians in the verdict of their own opinion, but you know the Law allows
no man to be a witness in his own case, because their affection usualally
out-acteth conscience, and self-love baulketh truth for its own interest.

The heart of man is the greatest impostor and cheat in the World, God himself
adjusts it, (...) Supplante tivum cor prae omui
Jeremy 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things. Some of the deceits
whereof you will find discovered in this treatise, which shows you that every
grace has its counterfeit, and that the highest profession may be where true
conversion is not.

Ezekiel. 13.22.
Mat. 12.20.
The design hereof is not to break the bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking
flax, not to discourage the weakest beleiver, but to awaken formal professors.
I would not sad the heart of any, whom God would not have made sad, though I
know it is hard to rip up the dangerous estate and condition of a professing
Hypocrite, but that the weak Christian will think himself concerned in the
discovery. And therefore as I Preached a Sermon on sincerity, among you, for
the support and encouragement of such, at the end of this: so I did purpose to
have Printed it with this, but who can be Master of his own purposes, that is
(as I am) under such daily variety of providence; your kindly acceptance of
this, will make me a debtor for that.

The dedication hereof belongs to you on a double account, for as it had not
been Preached, but that love to your souls caused it, so it had much less been
Printed but that your importunate desire procured it: and therefore what
entertainment soever it finds in the World, yet I hope I may expect you will
welcome it, especially considering it was born under your roof, and therefore
hopes to find favor in your eyes, and room in your hearts.

Accept it I beseech you, as a public acknowledgement of the engagements
which your great and (I think I may say) unparalleled respects have laid me
under, which I can no way compensate, but by my prayers, and if you will take
them for satisfaction I do promise to be your remembrancer at the throne of
grace, whilst I am

Matthew Meade.

TO THE READER.
Reader.
I Know how customary it is for men to ascend the public stage, with premised
Apologies for the weakness and unworthiness of their labors, which is an
argument that their desires (either for the sake of others profit, or their own
credit, or both,) are stretched beyond the tedder of their abilities; and that
they covet to commend themselves to the Worlds censure, in a better dress then
common infirmity will allow; for my own part I may truly say with Gideon,
Behold my thousand is the meanest (my Talent is the smallest) and I am the
least in my Fathers House, (...) Iud. 6.15.
and therefore this appearance in public is not the fruit of my own choice,
which would rather have been in some other subject, wherein I stand in some
sense indebted to the World, or else in somewhat more digested, and possibly
better fitted for common acceptance; but this is but to consult the interest
of a man's own name, which in matters of this concern, is no better then a
sowing to the flesh, and the harvest of such a seeds time will be in
corruption. Gal. 6.8.


Luke 13.24.
1 Cor. 9.24.
Thou have here one of the saddest considerations imaginable presented to thee,
and that is, how far it is possible a man may go in a profession of Religion,
and yet after all fall short of salvation; haw far he may run, and yet not so
run as to obtain, this I say is sad, but not so sad as true, for our Lord
Christ does plainly attest it, strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many
I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

My design herein is that the formal sleepy professor may be awakened, and the
close Hypocrite discovered; but my fear is, that weak beleivers may be hereby
discouraged: for as it is hard to show how low a Child of God may fall in sin,
and yet have true grace, but that the sinner will be apt thereupon to presume;
so it is as hard to show how high a Hypocrite may rise in a profession, and yet
have no grace, but that the beleiver will be apt thereupon to despond. The
prevention whereof I have carefully endeavored, by showing, that though a man
may go thus far, and yet be but almost a Christian, yet a man may fall short of
this, and be a true Christian notwithstanding; judge not therefore thy state by
any one character thou find laid down of a false professor, but read the
whole and then make a judgment, for I have cared, Mat. 15.26.
as not to give childrens bread to Dogs, so not to use the Dog-Whip to scare
the children: yet I could wish that this book might fall into the hands of such
only whom it chiefly concerns, who have a name to live, Rev. 3.1.
and yet are dead, being busy with the form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but strangers to the power of it. These are the proper subject of this
Treatise. And the Lord follow it with his blessing wherever it comes, that it
may be an awakening word to all such, and especially to that generation of
profligate professors (with which this age abounds) who, if they keep to their
Church, bow the knee, tale out a few prayers, and at a good time receive the
Sacrament; think they do enough for Heaven, and hereupon judge their condition
safe, and their Salvation sure, though their be a hell of sin in their hearts,
To. 3.13.
and the Poison of Asps under their lips, their minds being as yet carnal and
unconverted, and their conversations filthy and unsanctified: if eternal life
be of so easy attainment, and to be had at so cheap a rate of devotion, it is
to me a wonder what our Lord Christ meant to tell us, Mat. 7.14.
straight is the gate and narrow is the way, which leads into life, and few
there be that find it. And why the Apostle should perplex us with such a
needless injunction, To give diligence to make their callling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10
certainly therefore it is no such easy thing to be saved, as many make it,
and that thou will see plainly in the following discourse: I have been somewhat
short in the application of it, and therefore let me here be thy remembrancer
in five important duties.

Mat. 7.16 verse. 27.
2 King. 6.25.
First, Take heed of resting in a form of godliness, as if duties ex opere
operato could confer grace; a lifeless formality is advanced to a very high
esteem in the World, as a Kab of Doves Dung, was sold in the Famine of Samaria,
at a very dear rate. Alas the profession of godliness is but a sandy
foundation, to build the hope of an immortal soul upon for eternity, remember
the Lord Jesus Christ called him a foolish builder, that founded his house upon
the sand, and the sad event proved him so, for it fell, and great was the fall
of it. Oh therefore lay thy foundations by faith upon the Rock Christ Jesus, 1
Cor. 3.11.
look to Christ through all, and rest upon Christ in all.

Secondly, Labor to see an excellency in the power of godliness, a beauty in
the life of grace; if the means of grace have a loveliness in them, surely
grace it self has much more, for finis dat amabilitatem mediis the goodness of
the means lies in its sutableness and serviceableness to the end, the form of
godliness has no goodness in it, any farther then it steads and becomes useful
to the soul in the power and practice of godliness. The life of holiness is the
only excellent life, it is the life of Saints and Angels in Heaven, yea it is
the life of God himself. As it is a great proof of the baseness and filthiness
of sin, that sinners seek to cover it, so it is a great proof of the excellency
of godliness, that so many pretend to it; The very Hypocrites fair profession
pleads the cause of Religion, although the Hypocrite is then really worst, when
he is seemingly best. Malus ubi bonum se si^ulat tunc est passimus.


Thirdly, Look upon things to come as the greatest realities, for non entis and
non apparentis idem est effectus, things that are not believed, work no more
upon the affections then if they had no being; and this is the grand reason why
the generality of men suffer their affections to lacquey after the World,
setting the creature in the place of God in their hearts.

Col. 3.5.
Most men judge of the reality of things by their visibility and proximity to
sense, and therefore the choice, of that wretched Cardinal becomes their
option, who would not leave his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise: sure
whatever his interest might be in the former, he had little enough in the
latter: well may covetousness be called Idolatry, when it thus chooses the World
for its God.

Mar. 9 44
O consider eternity is no Dream, Hell and the Worm that never dies is no
melancholy conceit, heaven is no feigned Elysium: there is the greatest reality
imaginable in these things, though they are spiritual and out of the ken of
sense, yet they are real and within the view of faith: look not therefore at
the things which are seen, but look at the things which are not seen; for the
things that are seen are temporal, 2 Cor. 4.18.
but the things which are not seen are eternal.

Isa. 55.2.
Heb. 12 16.
Fourthly, Set a high rate upon thy soul, what we lightly prize we easily part
with, many men sell their souls (at the rate of profane Esau's birth right)
for a morsel of meat, nay for that which (in the sense of the Holy Ghost is not
bread; O consider thy soul is the most precious and invaluable jewel in the
World, it is (...) the most beautiful piece of Gods workmanship, in the whole
creation, it is that which bears the Image of God, and which was bought with
the blood of the Son of God, 1. Pet. 1.18, 19.
and shall we not set a value upon it, and count it precious?

The Apostle Peter speaks of three very precious things.

A precious Christ, 1 Pet. 2 7 2 Pet. 1.4 and 1.1.
Precious promises, And precious Faith.
1 Cor. 6.13.
Now the preciousnes of all these lies in their usefulness to the soul. Christ
is precious, as being the Redeemer of precious souls; the promises are
precious, as making over this precious Christ, to precious souls. Faith is
precious, as bringing a precious soul to close with a precious Christ, as he is
held forth in the precious promises. Oh take heed that thou art not found
overvaluing other things and undervaluing thy soul. Shall thy flesh, nay thy
beast be loved, and shall thy soul be slighted? will thou cloth and pamper thy
body, and yet take no care of thy soul? this is as if a man should feed his Dog
and starve his Child; Meats for the belly, and the belly for Meats, but God
shall destroy both it and them. Oh let not a tottering perishing carcass have
all our time and care, as if the life and Salvation of thy Soul were not worth
the while.

Gal. 6.7.
Lastly, Meditate much of the strictness and suddainness of that judgment day,
which thou and I must pass through into an everlasting state, wherein God the
impartial judge will require an account at our hands, of all our talents and
betrustments, we must then account for time, how we have spent that, for
estate, how we have employed that, for strength how we have laid laid out that,
for affections and mercies how they have been improved, for the relations we
stood in here, how they have been discharged, and for seasons and means of
grace how they have been husbanded, and look how we have sowed here, so shall
we reap hereafter.

Mat. 7.10, 20.
Reader, these are things that of all other deserve most of, and call loudest
for, our utmost care and endeavor; though by the most least minded; To
consider what a spirit of Atheism (if we may judge the tree by the fruits, and
the principle by the practice) the hearts of most men are filled with, who live
as if God were not to be served, nor Christ to be sought, nor lust to be
mortified, nor self to be denied, nor the Soripture to be believed, nor the
judgment day to be minded, nor hell to be feared, nor heaven to be desired,
nor the soul to be valued, but give up themselves to a worse then brutish
sensuality, Ephesians. 4.19 and 2 12.
to work all uncleanness with greediness, living without God in the World, this
is a meditation fit enough to break our hearts, if at least we are of holy
David's temper, Psalm 119.158.
who beheld the transgressors and was grieved, and had rivers of waters
running down his eyes, verse. 136.
because men kept not Gods Laws. The prevention and correction of this soul
destroying distemper, is not the least design of this Treatise now put into thy
hand; though the chief virtue of this receipt lies in its sover aign use to
assuage and cure the swelling tympany of Hypocrisy, yet it may serve also
(with Gods blessing) as a plaster for the plague sore of prophanness, if
timely applied by serious meditation, and carefully kept on by constant prayer.

Horat.
Reader, Expect nothing of curiosity or quaintness, for then I shall deceive
thee; but if thou would have a touchstone for the trial of thy state,
possibly this may stead thee: if thou art either a stranger to a profession, or
a Hypocrite under a profession, then read and tremble, for thou art the man
here pointed at.

-- Mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur --
Mark 9.1 Luke 17.21.
But if the Kingdom of God be come with power into thy soul, if Christ be formed
in thee, if thy heart be upright and sincere with God, then read and rejoice.

Isa. 48.17
I fear I have transgressed the bounds of an Epistle; The mighty God whose
prerogative it is to teach, to profit, whether by the Tongue or the Pen, by
speaking or writing, bless this tract, that it may be to thee, as a cloud of
rain to the dry ground, dropping fatness to thy soul; that so thy fleece being
watered with the dew of Heaven, 2 Pet. 3.18.
thou may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, In whom I am Thy friend and Servant.

London, October. 29. 1661. Mat. Meade.

The Contents.
THe scope of the Chapter, page 1 The coherence of the Text, page 3, 4 The
sense and meaning of the words page 4, 5, 6, 7 The Doctrine propounded, viz.
That there are very many in the world that are almost and yet but almost
Christians. page 9 Two things arise from hence of serious meditation. page 10
Three things are premised before the Doctrine is handled. First, There is
nothing in this Doctrine should be matter of stumbling or discouragement to
weak Christians, page 11 There is great use of such Doctrine as this is, 1. To
make them look to their standing, page 12 2. It helps to raise their admiration
of distinguishing love, ibid. 3. It incites to that excellent duty of
heart-searching. 4. It ingages the soul to double diligence. ib.
Secondly, It is premised, though many go far in the way to heaven and yet fall
short, yet that soul that has the least true grace shall never fall short page
13 Thirdly, They that can hear such Truths as this without serious reflection,
and self-examination, may suspect the goodness of their condition page 14
The Doctrine reassumed and demonstrated by Scripture evidence, 1. By the
example of the young man in the Gospel, page 14, 15, 16 2. Proof from the
parable of the Virgins page 17, 18, 19, 20 3. The Demonstration from Isa. 58.2.
The Text opened, page 21, 22, 23, 25
For the more distinct prosecution of the point, is showed, First, How far a
man may go, what at tainments he may reach unto, what progress he may make in
Religion and yet be but almost a Christian Secondly, Whence it is that many go
so far as that they are almost Christians. Thirdly, Why they are but almost
Christians. Fourthly, What the reason is, why men that go so far to be almost
(hristians, go no farther then to be almost Christians. Quest. 1. How far a man
may go in the way to heaven, and yet be but almost a Christian; This shown in
Twenty several steps. 1. A man may have much knowledge and yet be but almost a
Christian, page 27 Object But is it not said, This is life eternal to know the
only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent? answered, page 28, 29, 30
2. A man may have great and eminent gifts, yea spiritual, and yet be but almost
a Christian, page 31 1. Gifts from the common work of the Spirit page 32 2.
Gifts from the use and good of others, ibid. 3. It is beyond the power of the
greatest gifts to change the heart, page 35 4. Many have gone laden with gifts
to hell, ib. Three things must be done for us, if ever we avoid perishing, page
36 5. Gifts may decay and perish, page 37 Object. But does not the Apostle bid
us covet after the best gifts, why covet them earnestly if they avail not to
salvation? answered page 37, 38
3. A man may have a high profession of Religion, be much in external duties of
godliness, and yet be but almost a Christian, page 38 1. A man may profess
Religion, and yet never have his heart changed, page 40 2. A man may profess
Religion, and live in a form of godliness, page 41, 42 3. Custom and fashion
may create a man a professor, page 43, 44, 45 4. Many may perish under a
profession of Godliness, page 46 Object. But is it not said, He that confesses
me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in heaven? page 47
Answered, page 48
4. A man may go far in opposing his sin, and yet be but almost a Christian,
page 49 1. A man may be convinced of sin, and yet be but almost a Christian,
ibid. 2. A man may mourn for sin, page 50 Object. But Does not Christ pronounce
them blessed that mourn page 51 Answered, Those that mourn for sin truly, it
must flow from spiritual conviction, ib. 2. It must be more for the evil that
is in sin, then the evil that comes by sin, ib. 3. A man may make confession of
his sin to God and to others, and yet be but almost a Christian, page 52
Object. Does not the Apostle say, if we confess our sins, he is merciful and
just to forgive us our sin? answered, page 53 1. Many confess sin out of
custom, ibid. 2. Many confess lesser sins, page 54 3. Many confess sin in
general, ibid. 4. Many confess sin only under extremity, page 55. 5. Many
confess sin but with no intent to forsake it, ibid.
4. A man may forsake sin, and yet be but almost a Christian, page 56 Object.
But is it not said, He that confesses and forsakes shall have mercy,
Answered, page 57 1. A man may forsake his sin not as sin, ib. 2. Open sins may
be forsaken when secret sins are retained, page 57 2. A man may let one sin go
to hold another the faster. page 58 4. A man may let all sin go, and yet a
sinner still, ibid. 5. Sin may be left and yet loved, page 51 6. Sin may be
chained, and yet the heart not changed, page 59, 60
5. A man may hate sin and yet be but almost a Christian, page 60, 61 Objection
arising from Romans 7.15. answered. A man may hate sin 1. For the shame that
attends it, page 62 2. A man may hate sin more in another then in himself, page
63 3. A man may hate one sin as being contrary to another, ib. 4. Not hate sin
as sin, but as contrary to his beloved sin, page 64
6. A man may make great vows and promises, strong purposes and resolutions
against sin, and yet be but an almost Christian, page 65 1. Purposes never hurt
sin, ib. 2. Troubles and Afflictions may provoke us to large purposes, page 66
3. Purposes may be only a temptation to put off Repentance, page 67 4. Nature
unsanctified may make great purposes, page 68 It may be from conviction of sin
approving of the Law, and defire to be saved, ibid.
7. A man may maintain a strife and combat against sin in himself, and yet be
but almost a Christian, page 70, 71, 72 V. A man may desire Grace and yet be
but almost a Christian, page 73 What desires of grace are grace, page 74 What
desires of grace are not true, page 75
VI. A man may tremble at the word of God, and yet be but an almost Christian,
page 77 T wofold trembling, page 78
VII. A man may delight in the word and Ordinances, and yet be but an almost
Christian, page 79 Delights that flow from grace, ib. Delights, when no grace,
page 80
VIII. A man may be a Member of the Church of Christ, and yet be but almost a
Christian, IX. A man may have great hopes of Heaven, and yet be but almost a
Christian, page 83 Properties of a true hope, ib. Groundless hopes, page 84, 85
X. A man may be under visible changes, and yet be but almost a Christian
Threefold change may be, when as yet the soul is not renewed, page 90, 91, 92,
93 XI. A men may be very zealous in matters of Religion, and yet be but almost
a Christian, page 94 Several kinds of zeal, none of them true and sound, page
96, to 104
XII. A man may be much in prayer, and yet be but almost a Christian, page 105
What prayers speak a man an altogether Christian, ibid. What prayers speak a
man an almost Christian, 106, to 109. Whether answer of prayer evidence the
truth of prayer, answered, 110. Whether the stirring of the affections in
prayer argue the truth of prayer, page 111
XIII. A man may suffer for Christ, and yet be but almost a Christian, ibid.
What suffering for Christ is a note of sincerity, 113. What suffering for
Christ, is the suffering as a Christian, page 113, 114
XIV. A man may be called of God, and embrace his call, and yet be but an
almost Christian; page 114 T wofold call of God, page 15, 16
XV. A man may have the Spirit of God and yet be but almost a Christian, 117.
There is a having the spirit which is a sure mark of Saintship, 118. Every man
that has the Spirit, has it not in this manner, page 119 XVI. A man may have
faith, and yet be but almost a Christian, 121. Saving Faith what called, 123.
Common Faith what, page 124, to 128 XVII. A man may have a love to the people
of God, and yet be but almost a Christian, 128. What love to the children of
God is a true love, 130. For what an almost Christian loves a Saint, 132. His
love carnal, page 133 XVIII. A man may obey the commands of God, and yet be but
almost a Christian, page 135 True obedience has a three fold property, It is
Evangelical page 136 It is Universal, page 137 It is Continual, ibid
XIX. A man may be sanctified and yet be but almost a Christian, page 141
Sanctification, inward page 142 outward page 144
XX. A man may do all (as to external duties and worship) that a true Christian
can, and yet be but almost a Christian, page 146 Wherein the difference between
them does lie, page 147, to 180
Quest. Whence it is that many go far, and yet no farther? page 153, to 160
Quest. What difference between a natural conscience and a renewed conscience,
answered in seven particulars? from page 160 to 175 Quest. Whence it is that
many are but almost Christians when they have gone thus far? page 180 For want
of right conviction, ib. How to know whether our conviction is only from a
natural conscience or from the Spirit? page 182 to 187 Spiritual conviction an
essential part of sound conversion, page 187 Slight and common convictions are
the cause of great hypocrisy, page 188
Quest, What is the reason that many go no further in the profession of
Religion then to be almost Christians, page 194 1. It is because a man mistakes
his own state and condition, ibid. Five rises of this mistake, page 195 4
Reasons more why it is many go no farther then to be almost Christians page 132
to 205
Application First Inference, Salvation is not so easy a thing as it is
imagined to be, page 206 Second Inference, What shall be the end of them who
fall short of these, page 210 Use of Examination. Two Questions we should often
put to our selves, What am I? where am I? page 212 Cogent argments for
self-examination, page 214, to 118 Quest. How shall I come to know whether I am
an almost or an altogether Christian, answered in 8 particulars, page 218 to
226 2 Use of Caution, To take heed of being almost, and yet but an almost
Christian, page 227 This condition of all others Greatly unprofitable page 228
Exceedingly uncomfortable, page 229 Desperately dangerous, page 232
3 Use of Exhortation, To be not only almost but altogether Christians, under
which are five motives, page 246 to 270 Directions for obtaining a through work
in the heart, the being not only almost, but altogether Christians, page 272,
to the end.

ERRATA.
Page 2. Line 26. was r. were, p. 42. l. 18. (...) r. (...), l. 19. (...), p.
54. l. 18. r. distinct, p. 68. l. 26. r. promise, p. 104. l. 11. r.
Antichristian. p. 108. in the margin, r. (...), p. 112. l. 24. r. from that
profession, p. 149. l. 15, r. arises, in the margin, r. propria, p. 207. l.
26. r. untwisted. p. 209. in the margin, r. pauci, p. 218. l. 11. r. whether,
p. 229. l. 16. r. seventy, p. 243. l. 26. r. judgments, p. 264. l 12. for and,
r. to, p. 269. l. 12. r. nor to stand in the judgment.

The Printer to the Reader,
READER,
THou art desired heartily to pass by any inadvertency thou meetest withal in
the Contents or Table of this Book, they being not gathered by the Author, but
by another hand.

J. B.

ACTS 26.28. -- (...)
-- Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

IN this Chapter you have the Apostle Paul's Apology and defensative plea which
he makes for himself against those blind Jews which did so maliously prosecute
him before Agrippa, Festus, Bernice and the Council.

In which plea he does chiefly insist upon three things.

The manner of his life before conversion.

The manner of his conversion.

The manner of his life after conversion.

How he lived before conversion he tells you from v. 4. to 13.

How God wrought on him to conversion, he tells you from verse. 13. to 18.

How he lived after conversion, he tells you from v. 19. to 23.

Before conversion he was very pharisaical.

The manner of his conversion was very wonderful.

The fruit of his conversion was very remarkable

Before conversion he persecuted the Gospel which others preached; after
conversion he preached the Gospel which himself had persecuted.

Verse. 21.
While he was a persecutor of the Gospel the Jews loved him, but now that (by
the grace of God) he was become a preacher of the Gospel, now the Jews hate him
and sought to kill him.

Verse. 9.
He was once against Christ, and then many were for him, but now that he was for
Christ, all was against him; his being an enemy to Jesus, made others his
friends, but when he came to own Jesus, then they became his enemies.

And this was the great charge they had against him, that of a great opposer he
was become a great professor.

Hic vir invidet mihi granam Christi.
Because God had changed him, therefore this enraged them. As if they would be
the worse, because God had made him better. God had wrought on him by grace,
and they seem to envy him the grace of God.

He preached no treason nor sowed no sedition, only he preached repentance and
faith in Christ, and the Resurrection, and for this he was called in question.

This is the breviat and sum of Paul's defense and plea for himself; which you
find in the sequel of the Chapter, had a different effect upon his Judges.

Festus seems to censure him, verse. 24.

Agrippa seems to be convinced by him, verse. 28.

The whole Bench seems to acquit him, verse. 30, 31.

Festus he thinks Paul was beside himself.

Agrippa he is almost persuaded to be such an one as himself.

Dei sapieutia, mun de est insanta M^lc. (...) Putat hominem esse fa^ati um Mr
lor. in loc.
Festus thinks him and because he did not understand the doctrine of Christ and
the Resurrection; Much learning has made thee mad.

Agrippa he is so affected with his plea, that he is almost wrought into his
principle: Paul pleads so effectually for his Religion, that Agrippa seems to
be upon the turning point to his profession.

Then Agrippa said to Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

Almost] (...), so the Greek, the words make some debate among the learned. I
shall not trouble you with the various hints upon them by Valla, Simplicius,
Beza, Erasmus and others.

I take the words as we read them, and they show what an efficacy Paul's
Doctrine had upon Agrippa's conscience. Though he would not be converted, yet
he could not but be convinced. His conscience was touched, though his heart was
not renewed.

Observe.
There is that in Religion, which carries its own evidence along with it, even
to the Consciences of ungodly men.
Suadere^st ecorantes, persuade reest escien it is. Beza Suad^t qui consusit
persuadet. qui que vult, induc^t hominem. Eras.
Thou perswadest me] (...), the word is from the Hebrew (...) and it signifies
both suadere and persuadere, either to use arguments to prevail, or to prevail
by the Arguments used.

Now it is to be taken in the latter sense here, to show the influence of Paul's
Arguments upon Agrippa, which had almost proselyted him to the profession of
Christianity.

Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian

A Christian] (...).
I hope I need not tell you what a Christian is, though I am persuaded many
that are called Christians do not know what a Christian is, or if they do, yet
they don't know what it is to be a Christian.

A Christian, is a Disciple of Jesus Christ; one that believes in, and follows
Christ. As he that embraces the Doctrine of Arminius is called an Arminian, and
as he tha^ owns the Doctrine and way of Luther, is called a Lutheran, so he
that embraces and owns and follows the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, he is called a
Christian

The word is taken more largely, and more strictly: more largely, and so all
that profess Christ come in the flesh, are called Christians, in opposition to
Heathens that do not know Christ; and to the poor blind Jews, that will not own
Christ; and to the Mahomeian, that prefers Mahomet above Christ.

But now in Scripture, the word is of a more strict and narrow acceptance; it
is used only to denominate the true Disciples and followers of Christ, Acts
11.26. The Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch, 1 Pet. 4.16. If
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, that is as a member, and
Disciple of Christ, and so in the Text, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian.

The Word is used but in these three places (as I find) in all the New
Testament, and in each of them it signifies in the sense forementioned.

Fulk, not. on Rhem. Test.
The Italians make the name to be a name of reproach among them, and do usually
abuse the word Christian to signify a fool.

1 Cor. 1.18
But if as the Apostle says, the Preaching of Christ, is to the World
foolishness, then it is no wonder that the Disciples of Christ, are to the
World, fools.

1 Timothy 3 16.
Yet it is true (in a sound sense) that so they are. For the whole of godliness
is a Mystery.

1 Cor. 4.11.
A man must die, that would live; he must be empty, that would be full; he must
be lost, that would be found; he must have nothing, that would have all things;
he must be blind that would have illumination; he must be condemned that would
have redemption: so he must be a fool, that would be a Christian. If any man
among you seems to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

He is the true Christian, that is the worlds fool, but wise to Salvation.

Thus you have the sense and meaning of the words briefly explained.

The Text needs no division, and yet it is pity, the almost should not be
divided from the Christian.

Though it is of little avail to divide them as they are linked in the Text,
unless I could divide them, as they are united in your hearts, this would be a
blessed division, if the almosi might be taken from the Christian. That so you
may be not only (...) but (...) not only propemodum, but admodum, not only
almost, but altogether Christians.

This is Gods work to effect it, but it is our duty to persuade to it, and O
that God would help me to manage the Subject so, that you may say in the
conclusion, thou perswadest me (not almost, but) altogether to be a Christian.

The observation that I shall propound to handle is this.

Doct.
There are very many in the Would, that are almost, and yet but almost
Christians, many that are near Heaven, and yet are never the near, many that are
within a little of Salvation, and yet shall never enjoy the least Salvation,
they are within sight of Heaven, and yet shall never have a sight of God.
There are too sad expressions in Scripture which I cannot but take notice of
in this place.

The one is concerning the truly righteous.

The other is concerning the seemingly righteous.

It is said of the truly righteous, be shall sarcely be saved; and it is said
of the seemingly righteous, (...) 1 Pet. 4.18.
he shall be almost saved. Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, Mark 12.24.

The righteous shall be saved with a scarcely; that is, through much
difficulty: he shall go to Heaven through many sad fears of Hell.

Quod vix fit fit; quod fere fit non fit.
The Hypocrite shall be saved with an almost; that is, he shall go to Hell
through many fair hopes of Heaven.

There are two things arise from hence, of very serious Meditation.

The one is, how often a beleiver may miscarry, how low he may fall, and yet have
true grace.

The other is, how far a Hypocrite may go in the way to Heaven, how high he may
attain, and yet have no grace.

The Saint may be cast down very near to Hell, and yet shall never come there;
and the Hypocrite may be lifted up very near to Heaven, and yet never come
there.

The Saint may almost perish, and yet be saved Eternally; The Hypocrite may
almost be saved, and yet perish finally.

For the Saint at worst is really a beleiver, and the Hypocrite at best is
really a sinner.

Before I handle the Doctrine I must premise three things which are of great
use for the establishing of weak believers, that they may not be shaken and
discouraged by this Doctrine.

First, There is nothing in the Doctrine that should be matter of stumbling or
discouragement to weak Christians.

The Gospel does not speak these things to wound beleivers, but to awaken
sinners and formal professors.

As there are none more averse then weak beleivers to apply the promises, and
comforts of the Gospel to themselves, for whom they are properly designed;

So there are none more ready then they to apply the threats and severest
things of the Word to themselves, for whom they were never intended.

Mat. 16, 15
As the Disciples, when Christ told them, one of you shall betray me, they that
were innocent, suspected themselves most, and therefore cry out Master is it I?

So weak Christians, when they hear sinners reproved, or the Hypocrite laid
open, in the Ministry of the word, they presently cry out, it is I.

It is the Hypocrites fault to sit under the trials and discoveries of the
Word, and yet not to mind them.

And it is the weak Christians fault to draw sad conclusions of their own state
from premises which nothing concern them.

There is indeed great use of such Doctrine as this is, to all beleivers.

1. To make them look to their standing, Mat. 7.24 26.
upon what bottom they are, and to see that the foundation of their hope be
well laid, that they build not upon the Sand, but upon a Rock.

2. It helps to raise our admiration of the distinguishing love of God in
bringing us into the way everlasting, P^a 139.24.
when so many perish from the way; and in overpowering our souls into a true
conversion, when so many take up with a graceless profession.

3. It incites to that excellent duty of heart searching, 1 Cor. 13.5
that so we may approve our selves to God in sincerity.

4. It ingages the soul in doubled diligence, that it may be found not only
beleiving, but persevering in faith to the end.

These duties (and such as these are) make this Doctrine of use to all
beleivers, but they ought not to make use of it as a stumbling block in the way
of their peace and comfort.

Isa. 50.1.
Mat. 12.20
My design in preaching on this subject, is not to make sad the souls of those
whom Christ will not have made sad, I would bring water, not to quench the flax
that is smoking, but to put out that false fire that is of the sinners own
kindling, least walking all his days by the light thereof, he should at last
lie down in sorrow.

My aim is to level the mountain of the sinners confidence, not to weaken the
hand of the beleivers faith and dependence, to awaken and bring in secure
formal sinners, not to discourage weak beleivers.

Job. 17.9
Secondly, I would premise this, though many may go far (very far) in the way
to Heaven, and yet fall short, yet that soul that has the least true grace
shall never fall short. The righteous shall hold on his way.

Psalm. 7.10
Though some may dovery much in a way of duty (as I shall show hereafter) and
yet miscarry, yet that soul that does duty with the least sincerity shall never
miscarry. For he saves the upright in heart.

The least measure of true grace is as saving as the greatest, it saves as
surely, though not so comfortably.

The least grace gives a full interest in the blood of Christ, whereby we are
thoroughly purged; and it gives a full interest in the strength and power of
Christ, whereby we shall be certainly preserved.

1 Pet. 1.5.
Christ keeps faith in the soul, and faith keeps the soul in Christ, and so we
are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation.

Thirdly, I would premise this, they that can hear such truths as this, without
serious reflection and self examination, I much suspect the goodness of their
condition.

You Will suspect that man to be next door to a bankerupt, that never casts up his
shop, nor looks over his books; and I as verily think that man a hypocrite,
that never searches nor deals with his own heart.

He that goes on in a road of duty's without any rub or doubting of his state,
I doubt no man's state more then his.

When we see a man sick, and yet not sensible, we conclude the tokens of death
are upon him.

So when sinners have no sense of their spiritual condition, it is plain that
they are dead in sin, the tokens of eternal death are upon them.

These things being premised (which I desire you would carry along in your mind
while we travel through this subject) I come to speak to the proposition more
distinctly and closely.

Doct.
That there are very many in the world, that are almost, and yet but almost
Christians.
I shall demonstrate the truth of the proposition, and then proceed to a more
distinct prosecution.

1. I shall demonstrate the truth of the proposition, and I shall do it by
Scripture evidence, which speaks plain and fully to the case.

1. The young man in the Gospel is an eminent proof of this truth, in Mat. 19.
from the 16, to the 23. verse. There you read of one that came to Christ to
learn of him the way to Heaven. v. 16.
Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life?

Our Lord Christ tells him, v. 17.
if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments; and when Christ tells him
which; he Answers, v. 20.
Lord, all these have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?

Now do but see how far this man went.

Luke 11.8
1. He obeyed] he did not only hear the Commands of God, but he kept them, now
the Scripture says blessed is he that hears the Word of God, and keeps it.

2. He obeyed universally] not this or that command, but both this and that, he
did not halve it with God, or pick and choose which were easiest to be done, and
leave the rest, no, but he obeys all, all these things have I kept.

^os. 6.4.
3. He obeyed constantly] not in a fit of zeal only, but in a continued series
of duty, his goodness was not (as Ephraims) like the morning dew, that passes
away, no, all these things have I kept from my youth up.

4 He professes his desire to know and do more] to perfect that which was
lacking of his obedience, and therefore he goes to Christ, to instruct him in
his duty; Master, what lack I yet? Now would you not think this a good man?
alas how few go thus far!

And yet as far as he went, he went not far enough; he was almost, and yet but
almost a Christian, for he was an unsound Hypocrite, he forsakes Christ at last
and cleaves to his lust. v. 21.


This then is a full proof of the truth of the Doctrine.

A second proof of it is that of the Parable of the Virgins, Mat. 25.1. and so
on.

See what a Progress they make, how far they go, in a profession of Christ.

1. They are called Virgins] now this is a name given in the Scripture, Psalm.
45 14
both in the Old Testament, and New, to the Saints of Christ, Cant. 1.3. 2 Cor.
1, 2, 3.
The Virgins love thee, so Revel. 14.4. the One hundred forty and four thousand
that stood with the Lamb on Mount Sion, are called Virgins. They are called
Virgins because they are not defiled with the corruptions that are in the World
through lust. 2 P^ta. 4.


Mat. 25.1.
Now these here seem to be of that sort, for they are called Virgins.

Hisu at non quaiescunque animae sed 1. les quae habent cathalicam fidem, and
habere vid ntur bona opera in ecclesia dei. Aug De ver Dom. Ser. 1^.
2. They take their Lamps] that is, they made a profession of Christ.

3. They had some kind of Oil in their Lamps] as appears v. 8. they had some
convictions, and some faith (though not the faith of Gods elect) to keep their
profession alive, to keep the Lamp burning.

4. They went] their profession was not an idle profession, they did perform
duties, frequent ordinances, and do many things commanded, they made a
progress, they went. v. 1.


5. They went forth] they went, and out went, they left many behind them, this
speaks out their separation from the World.

6. They went with the wise Virgins] they joined themselves to those who had
joined themselves to the Lord, and were the Companions of them that were the
Companions of Christ. Cant. 1.7


7. They go forth to meet the Bridegroom] this speaks out their owning and
seeking after Christ.

8. When they heard the cry of the bridegroom coming, they arose, v. 7.
and trimmed their Lamps, they profess Christ more highly, hoping now to go in
with the Bridegroom.

9. They sought for true grace] now, don't we say the desires of grace, are
grace? and so they are, if true and timely, if sound and seasonable.

Why lo here a desire of grace in these Virgins, give us of your Oil.

It was a desire of true grace, but it was not a true desire of grace, it was
not true because not timely, v. 8.
unsound as being unseasonable; it was too late.

Their folly was in not taking Oil when they took their lamps, their time of
seeking grace was when they came to Christ, it was too late to seek it when
Christ came to them. They should have sought for that, when they took up their
profession; it was too late to seek it at the coming of the Bridegroom.

And therefore they were shut out, v. 10.
and though they cry for entrance, Lord, v. 11.
Lord, open to us, yet the Lord Christ tells them, v. 12.
I know you not.

You see how far these Virgins go in a profession of Jesus Christ, and how long
they continue in it, even till the Bridegroom came; they go to the very doors
of Heaven, and there (like the Sodomites) perish with their hands upon the very
thresholds of glory.

They were almost Christians, and yet but almost: Almost saved and yet perish.

You that are professors of the Gospel of Christ, stand and tremble, if they
that have gone beyond us fall short of Heaven, what shall become of us that
fall short of them?

If they that are Virgins, that profess Christ, that have some faith in their
profession (such as it is) that have some fruit in their faith, that outstrip
others, that seek Christ, that improve their profession, and suit themselves to
their profession, nay, that seek grace; if such as these be but almost
Christians, Lord, what then are we?

If these two witnesses be not sufficient to prove the truth, and confirm the
credit of the proposition;

Take a third, and that shall be from the Old Testament. Isa. 58.2. see what
God says of that people; he gives them a very high Character for a choice
people one would think.

They seek me daily, they delight to know my way, as a Nation that did
Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God, they ask of me the
Ordinances of Justice; they take delight in approaching to God.

See how far these went; if God had not said they were rotten and unsound, we
should have took them for the He Goats before the Flock, Ier. 50.8.
and ranked them among the worthies; pray observe.

1. They seek God] Now this is the proper Character of a true Saint, to seek
God. True Saints are called seekers of God. Psalm. 24.6.
This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face O Jacob, or O
God of Jacob.

Lo here a generation of them that seek God, and are not these the Saints of
God? Nay farther,

2. They seek him dayly] here is diligence backed with continuance (...) day, by
day, that is every day from day to day. They did not seek him by fits and
girds, nor in a time of trouble and affliction only as many do.

Jonah 7.5.
Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them, Isa. 26.16. Many when God visits them, then they
visit him, but not till then; when God pours out his afflictions, then they
pour out their supplications. This is Seamens devotion, when the storms have
brought them to their wits end, then they cry to the Lord in their trouble,
Psalm. 107.27, 28. many never cry to God till they are at their wits end, they
never come to God for help, so long as they can help themselves.

But now these here, whom God speaks of are more zealous in their devotion, the
others make a virtue of necessity, but these seem to make conscience of duty,
for says God, they seek me daily.

Sure this is (one would think) a note of sincerity.

Job. 27.10
Job says of the Hypocrite, will he always call upon God? surely no, but now
this people call upon God always, they seek him daily, certainly these are no
Hypocrites.

3. Says God, They delight to know my ways] sure this frees them from the
suspicion of Hypocrisy, for Job 21.14. they say unto God depart from us, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

4. They are as a Nation that did Righteousness] not only as a Nation that
spoke Righteousness, or knew Righteousness, or professed Righteousness, but as
a Nation that did Righteousness, that practiced nothing but what was just and
right. They appeared to the judgment of the World as good as the best.

5. They forsook not the Ordinances of their God] they seem true to their
Principles, constant to their profession, better then many among us, that cast
off duties, and forsake the Ordinances of God; but these hold out in their
profession, they forsook not the Ordinances of God.

6. They ask of me (says God) the Ordinances of Justice] they will not make
their own wills the rule of right and wrong, but the Law and will of God, and
therefore in all their dealings with men, they desire to be guided and
counseled by God. They ask of me the Ordinances of justice.

Job. 27.0
7. They take delight in approaching to God] sure this cannot be the guise of a
Hypocrite, will he delight himself in the Almighty? says Job: no, he will not.

Deliciae l^umanigeneris.
Though God is the chief delight of man, (having everything in him to render him
lovely, as was said of Titus Vespasian) yet the Hypocrite will not delight in
God.

Hypocrita neque drum neque divina habet in del ciii.
Till the affections are made spiritual, there is no affection to things that
are spiritual, God is a spiritual good, and therefore Hypocrites cannot delight
in God. But these are a people that delight in approaching to God.

8. They were a people that were much in fasting, as you may see verse. 3.
wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou see not? Now this is a duty that
does not suppose and require truth of grace only in the heart, but strength of
grace.

Mat. 9.17
No man (says our Lord Christ) puts new Wine into Old bottles, least the
bottles break, and the Wine runs out.

New wine is strong, and Old bottles weak, and the strong Wine breaks the weak
vessel, this is a reason Christ gives, why his Disciples who were newly
converted (and but weak as yet) were not exercised with this Austere Discipline.

Assemblys annot. upon the place.
But this people here mentioned were a people that fasted often, afflicted their
souls much, wore themselves out by frequent practices of humiliation.

Sure therefore this was new Wine, in new bottles, this must needs be a people
strong in grace; here seems to be grace not only in truth, but also in growth.

And yet for all this, they were no better then a Generation of Hypocrites,
they made a goodly progress, and went far, but yet they went not far enough,
they were cast off by God after all. I hope by this time the truth of the point
is sufficiently avouched, and confirmed, that a man may be (yea very many are)
almost, and yet (no more then) but almost Christians.

Now for the more distinct prosecution of the point.

1. I shall show you step by step, how far a man may go, what seize he
may reach unto, how specious and singular a progress he may make in Religion,
and yet be but almost a Christian, when all is done. 2. I will show you, whence
it is, that many men go so far as that they are almost Christians. 3. Why they
are but almost Christians, when they have gone thus far. 4. What the reason is,
why men that go thus far as to be almost Christians, yet go no farther then to
be almost Christians.
How far may a man go in the way to Heaven, and yet be but almost a Christian?



1. A man may have much knowledge, much light, he may know much of God, and his
Will, much of Christ, and his ways, and yet be but almost a Christian.

For though there can be no grace without knowledge, yet there may be much
knowledge where there is no grace; illumination often goes before, when
conversion never follows after. The Subject of knowledge is the
understanding, the subject of holiness is the Will.

Now a man may have his understanding enlightened, and yet his will not at
all sanctified.

Romans 1.21.
He may have an understanding to know God, and yet want a will to obey God.
The Apostle tells us of some that when they knew God, yet they glorified him
not as God.

To make a man altogether a Christian, there must be light in the head, and
heat in the heart, knowledge in the understanding, and zeal in the affections.

Some have zeal and no knowledge, that is blind devotion, some have knowledge
and no zeal, that is fruitless speculation. But where knowledge is joined with
zeal, that makes a true Christian.

this is life eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent? John 17.3.

Sol.
It is not every knowledge of God and Christ that interests the soul in life
eternal. For why then do the Devils perish? they have more knowledge of God
then all the men in the World; for though by their fall they lost their
Holiness, yet they lost not their knowledge.

They are called (...) from their knowledge, and yet they are (...) for their
malice, Devils still.

Knowledge may fill the head, but it will never better the heart, if there be
not somewhat else. The Pharisees had much knowledge. Behold thou art called a
Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, Romans 2.17 18.
and know his will, etc. and yet they were a Generation of Hypocrites.

Sinite Sapientes hujus mundi sapienter descendere adinfernum
Alas, how many have gone loaded with knowledge to hell?

Though it is true, that it is life eternal to know God and Jesus Christ, yet
it is as true that many do know God and Jesus Christ, that shall never see life
eternal.

There is, you must know, a two fold knowledge, one is common but not saving,
the other is not common but saving; common knowledge is that which floats in
the head, but does not influence nor affect the heart.

This knowledge reprobates may have, Number. 23.10
Balaam saw Christ from the top of the Rocks, and from the Hills.

Naturalists say, that there is a pearl in the Toads head, and yet her belly is
full of Poison. The French have a Berry which they call uve de spine, the grape
of a Thorn.

The common knowledge of Christ is the pearl in the Toads head, the grape that
grows upon Thorns, it may be found in men unsanctified.

Isa. 53 11.
And then there is a saving knowledge of God and Christ, which does include the
assent of the mind, and the consent of the will, this is a knowledge that
implies faith, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many.

And this is that knowledge, which leads to life eternal: now whatever that
measure of knowledge is, which a man may have of God, and of Jesus Christ, yet
if it be not this saving knowledge, knowledge joined with affection and
application, he is but almost a Christian.

(...) 1.10
He only knows God aright, who knows how to obey him, and obeys according to
his knowledge of him, a good understanding have all they that do his
commandments.

All knowledge without this, makes a man but like Nebuchadnezzers Image, with a
Head of Gold, and Feet of Clay.

Some know, but to know, Some know, to be known, Some know, to practice what
they know. Now to know, but to know, that is curiosity. To know, to be known,
that is vain glory. But to know, to practice what we know, that is Gospel duty.
This makes a man a complete Christian, the other without this makes a man
almost, and yet but almost a Christian.

2. A man may have great and eminent gifts, yea spiritual gifts, and yet be but
almost a Christian. The gift of prayer is a spiritual gift, now this a man may
have, and yet be but almost a Christian, for the gift of prayer is one thing,
the grace of prayer is another.

Mat. 7.22.
1 Cor. 12.10
The gift of Preaching and prophesying is a spiritual gift, now this a man may
have, and yet be but almost a Christian. Judas was a great Preacher, so were
they that came to Christ and said, Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name,
and in thy name cast out Devils, etc.

You must know that it is not gifts, but grace which makes a Christian. For,

1. Gifts are from a common work of the spirit, now a man may partake of all
the common gifts of the spirit, and yet be a reprobate; for therefore they are
called common, because they are indifferently dispensed by the spirit to good
and bad, to them that are beleivers, and to them that are not.

They that have grace, have gifts, and they that have no grace may have the
same gifts, for the spirit works in both; nay in this sense, he that has no
grace may be under a greater work of the spirit (quoad hoc) as to this thing,
then he that has most grace; a graceless professor may have greater gifts,
then the most holy beleiver. He may out-pray, and out-preach, and outdo them,
that in sincerity and integrity out-go him.

2. Gifts are for the use and good of others, they are given in ordine ad
alium, as the School men speak, for the profiting and edifying of others, so
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.7. Ephesians. 4.12. Dona dantur in adjutorium gratie.
They are given to profit withal.

Now a man may edify another by his gifts, and yet be unedified himself: He
may be profitable to another, and yet unprofitable to himself.

A lame man may with his crutch point to thee the right way, The Raven was an
unclen bird yet God makes use of her to feed Eliah, though she was not good
meat, yet it was good meat she brought.
and yet not be able to walk in it himself: A crooked Tailor may make a suit to
fit a strait body, though it fit not him that made it, because of his
crookedness.

The Church (Christ Garden enclosed) may be watered through a wooden gutter:
The Sun may give light through a sluttish window; and the field may be well
sowed with a dirty hand.

1 Cor. 9.27.
The efficacy of the Word does not depend upon the authority of him that speaks
it, but upon the authority of the God that blesses it. So that another may be
converted by my preaching, and yet I may be a castaway notwithstanding. Balaam
makes a clear and rare prophecy of Christ, and yet has he no benefit by
Christ, There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Septer shall rise out of
Israel. But yet Balaam shall have no benefit by it, I shall see him but not
now, I shall behold him but not nigh. Numb. 24.17.

God may use a man's gifts to bring another unto Christ, when he himself whose
gifts God uses, may be a stranger unto Christ, one man may confirm another in
the faith and yet himself may be a stranger to the faith. Acts and Mon last
Edit. 3. vol. p. 141.
Pendleton strengthens and confirms Saunders, in Queen Mary's days, to stand in
the truth he had Preached, and to seal it with his blood, and yet afterward
plays the Apostate himself.

Scultetus tells us of one Joannes Speiserus a famous Preacher at Ausborough in
Germany, Scuitet. Annol. P. 118,
in the year 1523. who Preached the Gospel so powerfully that diverse common
Harlots were converted, and became good Christians, and yet himself afterward
turned Papist, and came to a miserable end.

Thus the candle may burn bright to light others in their Work, and yet
afterward go out in a stink.

3. It is beyond the power of the greatest gifts to change the heart, a man may
Preach like an Apostle, pray like an Angel, and yet may have the heart of a
Devil. It is grace only that can change the heart, the greatest gifts cannot
change it, but the least grace can, gifts may make a man a Scholar, but grace
makes a man a beleiver.

Now if gifts cannot change the heart, then a man may have the greatest gifts,
and yet be but almost a Christian.

4. Many have gone laden with gifts to Hell, no doubt Judas had great gifts,
for he was a Preacher of the Gospel, and our Lord Jesus Christ would not set
him in the work, and not fit him for the work, yet Judas is gone to his own
place; the Scribes and Pharisees were men of great gifts, 1 Cor. 1.20.
and yet where is the wise? where is the Scribe. 1 Cor. 1.18.


The Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness.

Them that perish, who are they? who? the wise and the Learned, both among Jews
and Greeks, these are called them that perish. Surgunt indocti and rapiunt
caelum, dum nos cum doctrina nostra in Gehennam detrudimur, said a great
Bishop, when he saw a poor Shepherd weeping over a Toad. The poor illiterate
World attain to Heaven, while we with all our learning fall into Hell.

There are three things must be done for us if ever we would avoid perishing.

We must be thoroughly convinced of sin. We must be really united to Christ. We
must be instated in the Covenant of grace.
Now the greatest gifts cannot stead us in any one of these.

They cannot work through convictions. They cannot effect our union. They
cannot bring us into Covenant relation.
And consequently they cannot preserve from eternal perishing, and if so, then
a man may have the greatest gifts, and yet be but almost a Christian.

5. Gifts may decay and perish, they do not lie beyond the reach of corruption,
Joh. 4.14.
indeed grace shall never perish; but gifts will, grace is incorruptible,
though gifts are not; grace is a spring whose waters fail not, Isa. 58.11
but the stream of gifts may be dried up. If grace be corruptible in its own
nature, as being but a Creature, yet it is incorruptible in regard of its
conserver, as being the new creature; he that did create it in us, will
conserve it for us, he that did begin it will also finish it.

Heb. 12.2
Gifts have their root in nature, but grace has its root in Christ, and
therefore though gifts may die and wither, yet grace shall abide for ever.

Now if gifts are perishing, then (though he that has the least grace is a
Christian, yet) he that has the greatest gifts, may be but almost a Christian.

covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. why must we covet them? and
covet them earnestly, if they avail not to salvation?

Luke 12.21.
Gifts are good, though they are not the best good; they are excellent, but
there is somewhat more excellent, so it follows in the same verse, yet I show
unto you a more excellent way, and that is the way of grace; one dram of grace
is more worth then a talent of gifts; gifts may make us rich toward men, but
it is grace that makes us rich toward God.

Our gifts profit others, but grace profits our selves; that whereby I profit
another is good, but that whereby I am profited my self is better.

Now because gifts are good, therefore we ought to covet them, but because they
are not the best good, therefore we ought not to rest in them; we must covet
gifts for the good of others, that they may be edified, and we must covet grace
for the good of our own souls, that they may be saved; for whoever be bettered
by our gifts, yet we shall miscarry without grace.

3. A man may have a high profession of Religion, be much in external duties
of godliness, and yet be but almost a Christian. Mark what our Lord Christ
tells them in Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, not every one that makes a
profession of Christ, shall therefore be owned for a true Disciple of Christ.

Romans 9 6
All are not Israel that are of Israel, nor are all Christians that make a
profession of Religion.

What a goodly profession had Judas, he followed Christ, left all for Christ,
he Preached the Gospel of Christ, he cast out Devils in the name of Christ, he
eat and dranck at the Table of Christ, and yet Judas was but a Hypocrite.

Most professors are like Lillies, fair in show, but foul in sent; or like
Pepper, hot in the mouth, but cold in the stomach. The finest lace may be upon
the coursest cloth.

It is a great deceit to measure the substance of our Religion, by the bulk of
our profession; and to judge of the strength of our graces by the length of our
duties. The Scriptures speak of some who having a form of godliness yet deny
the power thereof. Deny the power, 2 Timothy 3.5.
that is they don't live in the practice of those graces, which they pretend to
in their duties, he that pretends to godliness, by a specious profession, and
yet does not practice godliness, by a Holy conversation, he has a form but
denies the power. Loquitur hic ut piso, vivit ut Gallonius.


Hugo compares such to the Ostrich, qui alas habet sed non volat, which has
great wings, but yet flies not, many have the wings of a fair profession, but
yet use them not to mount upward in spiritual affections, and a Heavenly
conversation.

But to clear the truth of this, that a man may make a high profession of
Religion, and yet be but almost a Christian, take a four fold evidence.

1. If a man may profess Religion, and yet never have his heart changed, nor
his state bettered, then he may be a great professor, and yet be but almost a
Christian.

But a man may profess Religion, and yet never have his heart changed, nor his
state renewed.

He may be a constant hearer of the word, and yet be a sinner still; he may
come often to the Lords Table, and yet go away a sinner as he came, we must not
think that duties, ex opere operato can confer grace.

Many a soul has been converted by Christ in an Ordinance, but never was any
soul converted by an Ordinance without Christ.

1 Cor. 20 16.
And does Christ convert all that sit under the ordinances? surely no, for to
some the word is a savor of death unto death.

And if so then it is plain, that a man may profess Religion, and yet be but
almost a Christian.

2. A man may profess Religion and live in a form of godliness in Hypocrisy.
Isaiah 48. 1. Hear ye this, O House of Jacob, which are called by the name of
Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name
of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in
righteousness. what do ye think of these? they make mention of the Name of the
Lord, there is their profession; but not in truth, nor in righteousness, there
is their dissimulation; and indeed their could be no hypocrisy in a Religious
sense, were it not for a profession of Religion; for he that is wicked, and
carnal, and vile, inwardly, and appears to be so outwardly, he is no Hypocrite,
but is what he appears, and appears what he is

Hypocrita cupit videri justus.
But he that is one thing really, and another thing seemingly; is carnal and
unholy, and yet seems to be good and holy, he is an hypocrite.

Tollet instit Sacerd. l. 8. c. 9.
Thus the Casuists define hypocrisy to be simulatio sanctitatis, a
counterfeiting of Holiness, and this fits exactly with the Greek word (...),
which is from (...), to counterfeit.

And to this purpose the Hebrews have too words for Hypocrites, panim which
signisies facies, (...) from the root (...)
and Chanephim, which signifies counterfeits, from chanaph to dissemble; so
that he is an hypocrite that dissembles Religion, and wears the face of
holiness, and yet is without the grace of holiness, he appears to be in
semblance, what he is not in substance, he wears a form of godliness without,
only as a cover of a profane heart within.

He has a profession that he may not be thought wicked, but it is but a
profession, and therefore he is wicked.

He is the religious Hypocrite, religious, because he pretends to it, and yet a
Hypocrite, because he does but pretend to it; he is like many men in a
Consumption, that have fresh looks, and yet rotten Lungs: or like an apple that
has a skin fair, but a rotten coar, many appear righteous, who are only
righteous in appearance.

And if so, then a man may profess Religion, and yet be but almost a Christian.

3. Custom and fashion may create a man a professor, as you have many that
wear this or that garb, not because it keeps them warmer, or has any
excellency in it, more then another, but merely for fashion.

Many must have powdered hair, spotted faces, feathers in their Caps, etc. for
no other end but because they would be fools in fashion.

So many profess christianity, not because the means of grace warms the heart,
or that they see any excellency in the ways of God above the world, but merely
to follow the fashion; I wish I might not say it has been true of our days,
because Religion has been uppermost, therefore many have professed it, it has
been the gaining trade, and then most would be of that trade.

Religion in credit makes many professors but few proselites, but when religion
suffers then its confessors are no more then its converts; for custom makes
the former, but conscience the latter.

He that is a Professor of Religion, merely for custom sake, when it prospers;
will never be a Martyr for Christ's sake, when Religion suffers.

He that owns the truth to live upon that, will disown it, when it comes to
live upon him.

They say that when a house is decaying and falling, all the Rats and Mice will
forsake it, while the house is firm and they may shelter in the rooff, they will
stay, but no longer, lest in the decay the fall should be upon them, and they
that lived at top, should lie at bottom.

My brethren may I not say we have many that are the vermin, the Rats and Mice
of Religion, that would live under the roof of it, while they might have
shelter in it, but when it suffers forsake it, least it should fall, and the
fall should be upon them, I am persuaded this is not the least reason why God
has brought the wheel upon the profession of Religion, viz. to rid it of the
vermin.

He shakes the foundation of the house, that these Rats and Mice may quit the
roof, not to overturne it, but to rid them out of it, as the Husbandman fans
the Wheat, that he may get rid of the ^haff. The Halcyon days of the Gospel
provoke Hyyocrisie, but the sufferings of Religion prove sincerity.

Now then if custom and fashion make many men professors, then a man may
profess Religion, and yet be but almost a Christian.

4. If many may perish under a profession of godliness, then a man may profess
Religion, and yet be but almost a Christian.

Psalm. 50.5.
Now the Scripture is clear, that a man may perish under the highest profession
of Religion, Christ cursed the Fig tree that had leaves and no fruit, It is
said, Mat. 8.12. That the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer
Darkness. who were these? but they that were then the only people of God in
the World, by profession, that had made a Covenant with him by sacrifice, and
yet these cast out.

Mat. 7. v. 22.
In Mat. 7.22. you read of some that came and made boast of their profession to
Christ, hoping that might save them. Lord (say they) have we not prophesied in
thy name, cast out Devils in thy name, done many wonderful works in thy name.

v. 23.
Now what says our Lord Christ to this? Then I will profess unto them I never
knew you, depart from me.

Mark, here are them that prophecy in his name, and yet perish in his wrath, in
his name cast out Devils, and then are cast out themselves; in his name do many
wonderful works, and yet perish for wicked workers.

The profession of Religion will no more keep a man from perishing, then
calling a Ship the Safeguard, or the Good-speed will keep her from drowning.

As many go to Heaven with the fear of Hell in their hearts, so many go to Hell
with the name of Christ in their Mouths.

Now then if many may perish under a profession of godliness, then may a man be
a high professor of Religion, and yet be but almost a Christian.

Mat, 10.32.
he that confesses me before men, him will I confess before my Father in Heaven.

Now for Christ to say he will confess us before the father, is equivalent to a
promise of eternal life, for if Jesus Christ confess us, God the Father will
never disown us.

Sol.
True, they that confess Christ, shall be confessed by him, and it is as true,
that this confession is equivalent to a promise of salvation.

But now you must know, that professing Christ, is not confessing him, for to
profess Christ is one thing, to confess Christ is another, confession is a
living testimony for Christ, in a time when Religion suffers, profession may be
only a lifeless formallity in a time when Religion prospers.

To confess Christ is to choose his ways and own them, to profess Christ is to
plead for his ways, and yet live besides them.

Profession may be from a feigned love to the ways of Christ, but confession is
from a rooted love to the Person of Christ.

To profess Christ, is to own him when none deny him, to confess Christ is to
plead for him and suffer for him when others oppose him, Hypocrites may be
professors, but the Martyrs are the true confessors, profession is a swimming
down the stream, confession is a swimming against the stream.

Now many may swim with the stream (like the dead fish) that cannot swim
against the stream with the living fish, many may profess Christ, that cannot
confess Christ, and so notwithstanding their profession yet are but almost
Christians.

4. To come yet nearer, A man may go far in opposing his sin, and yet be but
almost a Christian. How far a man may go in this work, I shall show you in
seven Gradual instances.

First, A man may be convinced of sin, and yet be but almost a Christian, For,

1. Conviction may be rational as well as spiritual, it may be from a natural
conscience enlightened by the word, without the effectual work of the Spirit
applying sin to the heart.

2. Convictions may be worn out; they many times go off, and end not in sound
conversion, says the Church, we have been with Child, we have been in pain, we
have brought forth wind. Isa. 26.18


This is the complaint of the Church in reference to the unprofitableness of
their afflictions, and it may be the complaint of most in reference to the
unprofitableness of their convictions.

3. many take convictions of sin, to be conversion from sin, and so sit down
and rest in their conviction. That is a sad complaint God makes of Ephraim,
Ephraim is an unwise son, for he should not stay long in the place of the
breaking forth of Children. Hos. 13.13.
Now then, if convictions may be only from natural conscience, if they may be
worn out, or may be mistaken, and rested in for conversion, then a man may have
convictions, and be but almost a Christian.

Heb. 12.16.17.
Secondly, A man may mourn for sin, and yet be but almost a Christian, so did
Saul, so did Esau, for the loss of his birthright, which was his sin, and
therefore he is called by the spirit of God profane Esau, yet he sought it
again carefully with tears.

Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn?

Sure then if a man mourn for sin, he is in a good condition; you see, says
Nazianzen, Greg Naz. Jrat. 17.
(...) that salvation is joined with forrow.

Sol.
I answer, it is true, that they who mourn for sin in the sense Christ there
speaks of are blessed; but all mourning for sin, does not therefore render us
blessed.

1. True mourning for sin, must flow from spiritual conviction of the evil, and
vileness, and damnable nature of sin.

Now all that mourn for sin don't do it from a through work of spiritual
conviction upon the soul, they have not a right sense of the evil and vileness
of sin.

2. True mourning for sin, is more for the evil that is in sin, then the evil
that comes by sin; more because it dishonours God, and wounds Christ, and
grieves the Spirit, and makes the soul unlike God, then because it damns the
soul.

Mat. 8.12
Now there are many that mourn for sin, not so much for the evil that is in it,
as for the evil that it brings with it; there is mourning for sin in Hell, you
read of weeping and wailing there.

The damned are weeping and mourning to eternity, there is all sorrow, and no
comfort, as in Heaven their is peace without trouble, joy without mourning, so
in Hell there is trouble without peace, mourning without joy, weeping and
wailing incessantly, but it is for the evil they feel by sin, and not for the
evil that is in fin.

So that a man may mourn for sin, and yet be but almost a Christian, it may
grieve him to think of perishing for sin, when it does not greive him that he
is defiled and polluted by sin.

Thirdly, A man may make large confession of sin, to God, to others, and yet be
but almost a Christian.

How ingenuously does Saul confess his sin to David, I have sinned (says he)
thou art more righteous then I. Behold I have played the fool, and have erred
exceedingly. 1 Samuel 24.17. and 26.21.


Mat 27.4
So Judas makes a full confession, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.

Yet Saul and Judas were both rejected of God; so that a man may confess sin,
and yet be but almost a Christian.

1 John 1.9 Peccato rum confessio synecdoch^ce universam paenitentiam hoc loco
significat. Vorst. in loc.
if we confess our sins, God is just and faithful to forgive them? No man was
ever kept out of Heaven for his confessed badness, though many are kept out of
Heaven for their supposed goodness.

Judah in Hebrews, signifies confession, now Judah got the Kingdom from Reuben;
confession of sin is the way to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Sol.
There are some that confess sin and are saved, there are others that confess
sin and perish.

1. Many confess sin merely out of custom, and not out of conscience, you
shall have many that will never pray but they will make a long confession of
sin, and yet never feel the weight or burden of it upon their consciences.

Many will confess lesser sins, and yet conceal greater, like the Patient in
Plutarch, that complained to his Physician of his finger, when his Liver was
rotten.

3. Many will confess sin in the general, or confess themselves sinners, and
yet see little, and say less, of their particular sins; an implicit confession
(as one says) is almost as bad as an implicit faith.

Where confession is right, it will be distinst, especially of those sins that
were our chief sins.

1 Timothy 1.13.5.
Psalm. 51.4.14.
So David consesses his blood guiltiness, and adultery; so Paul, his blasphemy
persecution, and injury against the Saints. It is bad to hear men confess they
are great sinners, and yet cannot confess their sins.

Though the least sin be too bad to be committed, yet there is no sin too bad
to be confessed.

4. Many will confess sin, but it is only under extremity, that is not free
and voluntary, Pharaoh confesses his sin, but it was when judgment compelled
him.

Exodus 10.16.
I have sinned against the Lord, says he, but it was when he had had eight
plagues upon him.

Many do by their sins, as Mariners do by their goods, cast them out in a
storm, wishing for them again in a calm; confession should come like water out
of a spring, which runs freely, not like water out of a still, which is forced
by fire.

5. Many confess their sins, but with no intent to forsake sin, they confess
the sins they have committed, but don't leave the sins they have confessed.

Many men use confession as Lewis the eleventh of France did his Crucifix, he
would swear an Oath, and then kiss it, and swear again, and then kiss it again.

So many sin, and then confess they do not well, but yet never strive to do
better.

Mr. Torshel tells a story of a Minister he knew, that would be often drunk,
and when he came into the Pulpit, would confess it very lamentingly, and yet no
sooner was he out of the Pulpit, but he would be drunk again, and this would he
do as constantly as men follow their trades.

Now then if a man may confess sin, merely out of custom, if he may confess
lesser sins, and yet conceal greater, if he may confess sin only in the
general, or only under extremity, or if he may confess sin, without any intent
to forsake sin, then surely a man may confess sin, and yet be but almost a
Christian.

Act. 8, 13.
Fourthly, A man may forsake sin, and yet be but almost a Christian, he may
leave his lust and his wicked ways which he sometimes lived in, and in the
judgment of the world become a new man, and yet not be a new creature. Simon
Magus when he hears Philip preaching concerning the Kingdom of God, leaves his
sorcery and witchcraft, and believes.

to Scripture, for that says, Prove. 28.13.
He that confesses and forsakes sin shall have mercy: But I confess sin, yea,
not only so, but I also forsake sin, sure therefore this mercy is my portion,
it belongs to me.

Sol.
It is true, that where the soul forsakes sin from a right principle, after a
right manner, to a right end; where he forsakes sin as sin, as being contrary
to God, and the purity of his nature.

This declares that Soul to be right with God, and the promise shall be made
good to it, he shall find mercy.

But now pray mind, there is a forsaking sin that is not right but unsound.

1. Open sins may be deserted, and yet secret sins may be retained; now this is
not a right forsaking, such a soul shall never find mercy: A man may be cured
of a wound in his flesh, and yet may die of an impostume in his bowels.

2. A man may forsake sin but not as sin; for he that forsakes sin as sin,
forsakes all sin; a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: It is impossible for a
man to forsake sin as sin, unless he forsakes all that he knows to be sin.

3. A man may let one sin go to hold another the faster; as a man that goes to
sea, would willingly save all his goods, but if the storm arises that he
cannot, then he throws some overboard to lighten the vessel, and save the rest.
So did they Acts 27.38.

So the sinner chooses to keep all his sins, but if a storm arises in his
conscience, why then he will heave one lust overboard to save the life of
another.

4. A man may let all sin go, and yet be a sinner still; for there is the root
of all sin in the heart though the fruit be not seen in the life; the tree
lives, though the boughs be lopt off

Psa. 51.5.
As a man is a sinner before ever he acts sin, so (till grace renew him) he is a
sinner though he leaves sin, for there is original sin in him enough to damn
and destroy him.

5. Sin may be left and yet be loved, a man may forsake the life of sin and yet
retain the love of sin; now though leaving sin makes him almost a Christian,
yet loving sin shows he is but almost a Christian.

It is a less evil to do sin and not love it, then to love sin and not do it;
for to do sin may argue only weakness of Grace, but to love sin argues
strength of lust; What I hate that do I, Romans 7.15.

Sin is bad in any part of man, but sin in the affection is worse then sin in
the conversation; for sin in the conversation may be only from infirmity, but
sin in the affection is the fruit of choice and unregeneracy.

6. All sin may be chained and yet the heart not changed, and so the nature of
the sinner is the same as ever. A dog chained up is a dog still, as much as if
he was let loose to devour.

There may be a cessation of arms between enemies, and yet the quarrel may
remain on foot still; there may be a making Truce where there is no making
Peace.

A Sinner may lay the weapons of sin out of his hand, and yet the enmity
against God still remain in his heart.

There may be a truce, he may not sin against him; but there can be no peace
till he be united unto him.

Restraining Grace holds in the Sinner, but it is Renewing Grace that changes
the Nature; Now many are held in by Grace from being open Sinners, that are not
renewed by Grace, and made true Believers.

Now then if a man may forsake open sins, and retain secret sins; if he may
forsake sin, but not as sin; if he may let one sin go to hold another the
faster; if a man may let all sin go and yet be a sinner still; if sin may be
left and yet be loved; Finally, if all sin may be chained, and yet the heart
not changed, then a man may forsake sin, and yet be but almost a Christian.

Fifthly, A man may hate sin, and yet be but almost a Christian, Absalom hated
Amnons uncleanness, 2 Samuel 13 22, 28.
with his Sister Thamar, yea, his hatred was so great, as that he slew him for
it, and yet Absalom was but a wicked man.

Object
But the Scripture makes it a sign of a gracious heart to hate sin, yea though a
man do, through infirmity, fall into sin, yet if he hates it, this is a proof
of grace. Paul proves the sincerity of his heart, and the truth of his grace by
this hatred of sin, though he committed it, Romans 7.15. what I hate, that do I.

Nay what is grace but conformitas cum archetypo, a conformity of the soul to
God, to love as God loves, to hate as God hates, now God hates sin, it is one
part of his holiness, to hate all sin.

Sol.
And if I hate sin, then am I conformed to God, and if I am conformed to God,
then am I altogether a Christian.

It is true, that there is a hatred of sin which is a sign of grace, and which
flows from a principle of grace, and is grace, as for instance.

To hate sin, as it is an offense to God, a wrong to his Majesty; to hate sin,
as it is a breach of the command, and so a wicked controuling Gods will, which
is the only rule of goodness, to hate sin, as being a dis-ingenuous
transgression of that law of love established in the blood and death of Christ,
and so in a degree a crucifying of Christ afresh.

To hate sin as being a greiving and quenching the Spirit of God, as all sin in
its nature is.

Thus to hate sin is grace, and thus every true Christian hates sin.

But though every man that has grace, hates sin, yet every man that hates sin
has not grace. For,

A man may hate sin from other principles, not as it is a wrong to God, or a
wounding Christ, or a greiving the Spirit, for then he would hate all sin, for
there is no sin but has this in the nature of it. But,

1. A man may hate sin for the shame that attends it, more then for the evil
that is in it.

Some sinners there are who declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not. Isa.
3.9.
they are set down in the seat of the scornful, they glory in their shame,
Psalm. 1.1.
Phil. 3.19.

But now others there are who are ashamed of sin, and therefore hate it, not
for the sins sake, but the shames sake. This made Absalom hate Amnons
uncleanness, because it brought shame upon him and his Sister.

2. A man may hate sin more in others then in himself, so does the Drunkard, he
hates drunkenness in another, and yet practices it himself; The Liar hates
false-hood in another, but likes it in himself.

Now he that hates sin from a principle of grace, hates sin most in himself, he
hates sin in others, but he loathes most the sins of his own heart.

3. A man may hate one sin, as being contrary to another; There is a great
contrariety between sin and sin, between lust and lust: It is the excellency of
the life of grace, that it is a uniforme life, there is no one grace contrary
to another, the graces of Gods Spirit are different, but not differing; faith,
and love, and holiness are all one, they consist together at the same time, in
the same subject, nay they cannot be parted, there can be no faith without love,
no love without holiness, and so on the other hand, no holiness without love,
no love without faith.

Tit. 3.3.
So that this makes the life of grace an easy and excellent life, but now the
life of sin is a distracting contradictious life, wherein a man is a servant to
contrary lusts, the lust of pride and prodigality is contrary to the lust of
covetousness, etc.

Now when one lust gets to be the Master lust in the soul, then that works a
hatred of its contrary, where covetousness gets the heart, there the heart
hates pride, and where pride gets uppermost in the heart, there the heart hates
covetousness.

Thus a man may hate sin not from a principle of grace, but from the
contrariety of lust.

He don't hate any sin as it is sin, but he hates it as being contrary to his
beloved sin.

Now then if a man may hate sin for the shame that attends it, if he may hate
sin more in others then in himself, and if he may hate one sin as being
contrary to another, then he may hate sin, and yet be but almost a Christian.

Sixthly, A man may make great vows and promises, he may have strong purposes,
and resolutions against sin, and yet be but almost a Christian.

Exodus 8.8
1 Samuel 26 21.
Thus did Saul, he promises and resolves against his sin, Return my Son David,
says he, for I will no more do thee harm. What promises and resolves did
Pharaoh make against that sin of detaining Gods people? Says he, I will let
the people go, that they may do Sacrifice to the Lord; and again, I will let ye
go, and ye shall stay no longer, Exodus 9.28.

And yet Saul and Pharaoh both perished in their sins, the greatest purposes
and promises against sin will not make a man a Christian. For,

1. Purposes and promises against sin, never hurt sin; we say, threatened folk
live long, and truly so do threatened sins. It is not new purposes but a new
nature that must help us against sin; purposes may bring to the birth, but
without a new nature, there is no strength to bring forth.

The new nature is the best soil for holy purposes to grow in, otherwise they
wither and dye, like plants in an improper soil.

2. Trouble and afflictions may provoke us to large purposes and promises
against sin for the future; what more common then to vow and not to pay, to
make vows in the day of trouble, which we make no conscience to pay, in the day
of peace?

Many Covenant against sin, when trouble is upon them, and then sin against
their Covenant when it is removed from them.

It was a brave rule that Pliny in one of his Epistles gave his friend to live
by.

Vt tales esse perseveremus sani, quales nos futuros esse profitemur infirmi.

-- That we should continue to be such when we are well, as we promise to be
when we are sick.

Many are our sickbed promises, but we are no sooner well, but we grow sick of
our promises.

3. Purposes and resolves against sin for the future may be only a temptation
to put off repentance for the present; Satan may put a man on to good purposes,
to keep him from present attempts.

He knows whatever we purpose, yet the strength of performance is not in our
selves.

He knows that purposes for the future, are a putting God off for the present,
they are a secret will-not to a present opportunity. That is a notable passage,
Luke 9.59. follow me, says Christ to the two men; Now see what answers they
give to Christ, Suffer me first to go bury my Father, says one; this man
purposes to follow Christ, only he would stay to bury his father: Says the
other, Lord, I will follow thee but let me first go and bid them farwell which
are at my house, verse. 61. I will follow thee, but only I would first go and
take my leave of my friends, or set my house in order.

And yet we do not find that ever they followed Christ, notwithstanding their
fair purposes.

4. Nature unsanctified may be so far wrought on as to make great promises and
and purposes against sin.

1. A natural man may have great convictions of sin, from the workings of an
enlightened conscience. 2. He may approve of the Law of God. 3. He may have a
desire to be saved.
Now these three together, The workings of conscience, The sight of the
goodness of the law, A desire to be saved, may bring forth in a man great
purposes against sin, and yet he may have no heart to perform his own purposes.
This was much-what the case of them, Deuteronomy. 5. say they to Moses, verse. 27. Go
thou near and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and tell thou it to us,
and we will hear it and do it.

This is a fair prmise, and so God takes it, verse. 28. I have heard the words
of this people, they have well said all that they have spoken. So said, and so
done, had been well, but it was better said then done; for though they had a
tongue to promise, yet they had no heart to perform; and this God saw,
therefore said he v. 29. O that there were such a heart in them, that they
would fear me and keep my commandments always, that it might be well with them.

They promise to fear God and keep his Commandents, but they wanted a new heart
to perform what an unsanctified heart had promised.

Mat. 21.30.
It fares with men in this case, as it did with that son in the Gospel, That
said he would go into the Vineyard, but went not.

Now then, if purposes and promises against sin, never hurt sin, if present
afflictions may draw out large promises, if they may be the fruit of a
temptation, or if from nature unsanctified, surely then a man may promise and
purpose much against sin, and yet be but almost a Christian.

Seventhly, A man may maintain a strife and combat against sin in himself and
yet be but almost a Christian. So did Balaam, when he went to curse the people
of God, he had a great strife within himself, How shall I curse (says he)
where God has not cursed? Or how shall I desie, Numb. 23.8.
whom the Lord has not defied?

Mat. 27.24.
Mark. 15.12, 14.
And did not Pilate strive against his sin, when he said to the Jews, shall I
crucify your King? what evil has he done? I am innocent of the blood of this
just man.

Gal. ^.17
the lusting of the flesh against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
to be an argument of grace in the heart. Now I find this strife in my heart;
though the remainders of corruption sometimes break out into actual sins, yet I
find a striving in my soul against sin.

Sol.
It is true, there is a striving against sin, which is only from grace, and is
proper to beleivers, and there is a striving against sin which is not from
grace, and therefore may be in them that are not beleivers.

There is a strife against sin in one and the same faculty, the will against
the will, the affection against the affection, and this is that which the
Apostle calls the lusting of the flesh against the spirit, that is, the
striving of the unregenerate part against the regenerate, and this is ever in
the same faculty, and is proper to beleivers only.

An unbeleiver never finds this strife in himself, this strife cannot be in
him, it is impossible (as such) that is, while he is on this side a state of
grace.

Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor.
But then there is a striving against sin in diverse faculties, and this is the
strife that is in them that are not beleivers, there the strife is between the
will and the conscience; conscience enlightened and terrified with the fear of
Hell and damnation, that is against sin; the will and affection (not being
renewed) they are for sin.

And this causes great tuggings and strong combats many times in the sinners
heart.

Thus it was with the Scribes and Pharisees, conscience convinced them of the
Divinity of Christ, and of the truth of his being the Son of God, and yet a
perverse will and carnal affections cry out, crucify him, crucify him.

Conscience pleaded for him, he had a Witness in their bosoms: and yet there
wills were bent against him, and therefore they are said to have resisted the
spirit, viz. the workings and convictions of the spirit in their consciences,
Acts 7.51.

And this is the case of many sinners; when will and affections are for sin,
and plead for it, conscience is againstit, and many times frights the soul from
the doing of it.

And hence men take that which opposes sin in them to be grace, when it is
only the work of a Natural conscience; they conclude the strife is between
grace and sin, the regenerate and unregenerate part, when alas it is no other
then the contention of a natural conscience against a corrupt will and
affections.

And if so, then a man may have great strifes and combats, against sin in him,
and yet be but almost a Christian.

5. A man may desire grace, and yet be but almost a Christian; so did the five
foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.8. Give us of your Oil, what was that but true grace?
it was that Oil that lighted the wise Virgins into the Bridegrooms Chamber.

They do not only desire to enter in, but they desire Oil to light them in,
wicked men may desire Heaven, desire a Christ to save them, there is none so
wicked upon earth but desire to be happy in Heaven.

But now here are them that desire grace as well as glory, and yet these are
but almost Christians.

(...)
that desires of grace are grace? Nay does not our Lord Christ himself make it
so? Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled.

(...)
It is true, that there are some desires of grace which are grace. As, 1. When a
man desires gra^^ (...) a right sense of his natural (...) he sees the vileness
of sin, and the woeful defiled and loathsome condition he is in by reason of
sin, and therefore desires the grace of Christ to renew and change him, this is
grace. This some make to be the lowest degree of saving faith. 2. When a man
joins proportionable endeavors to his desires, does not only wish for grace,
but work for grace, such desires are grace. 3. When a man's desires are constant
and uncessant, that cease not but in the attainment of their Object, such
desires are true grace.


They are a part of the especial work of the Spirit.

They do really partake of the nature of grace; now it is a known makim,
Quicquid participat de natura totius est pars totius, That which partakes of
the nature of the whole is a part of the whole, the filings of gold, are gold.
The Sea is not more really water, then the least drop; the flame is not more
really fire, then the least spark, for these do participare de natura totius.

But though all true desires of grace, are grace, yet all desires of grace are
not true. For.

1. A man may desire grace but not for it self, but for somewhat else; not
grace for grace's sake, but for heavens sake; He don't desire grace that his
nature may be changed, his heart renewed, the Image of God stamped upon him, and
his lusts subdued in him.

These are blessed desires found only in true beleivers.

The true Christian only can desire grace for graces sake, but the almost
Christian may desire grace for Heavens sake.

2. A man may desire grace without proportionable endeavors after grace; many
are good at wishing, bad at working, like him that lay in the grass on a
Summers day, crying out, O si hoc esset laborare! Oh that this were to work.

Solomon says, Virtutem exoptant contabescuntque relicta. Pers.
the desires of the slothful kills him; How so? For his bands refuse to labor,
Prove. 21.25. He perishes in his desires.

The beleiver joins desires and endeavors together, Impii non curant quercre
quem tamen desiderant invenire, eupientes coasequi sed non and sequ. Bern.
one thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I will seek after, Psalm. 27.4.

3. A man's desires of grace may be unseasonable; thus the foolish Virgins
desired Oil when it was too late.

Eccles. 8.5.
The beleivers desires are seasonable, he desires grace in the season of grace,
and seeks in a time when it may be found. The wise man's heart knows both time
and Judgment. He knows his season, and has wisdom to improve it.

Sera sapiunt Poryges
The silly sinner does all his works out of season, he sins away the seasons of
grace, and then desires grace when the season is over; the sinner does all too
late, as Esau desired the blessing when it was too late, and therefore he lost
it, whereas had he come sooner he had obtained it.

Most men are like Epimetheus, wise too late; they come when the Market is
done, when God has shut in shop then they have their Oil to get.

When they lie upon their death beds, then they desire holy hearts.

4. Desires of grace in many are very inconstant, Hos. 6.4. Jonah 4.6.7.
and fleeting like the morning dew that quickly passes away. Or like Jonah's
Gourd, that springs up in a night and withers in a night, they have no root in
the heart, and therefore quickly perish; now then if a man may desire grace but
not for graces sake, if desires may be without endeavors; if a man may desire
grace when it is too late, if these desires may be but fleeting and inconstant,
then may a man desire grace, and yet be but almost a Christian.

6. A man may tremble at the word of God, and yet be but almost a Christian,
Dan. 5.6.
as Belshazzer did at the handwriting upon the wall.

Isa. 66.2.
But is not that a note of sincerity and truth of grace to tremble at the word?
does not God say, to him will I look, that is of a poor and contrite spirit,
and trembles at my word;

Sol.
There is a two fold trembling.

First, One is when the word discovers the guilt of sin and the Wrath of God
that belongs to that guilt, this, where conscience is awake causes trembling
and amazement; thus when Paul Preached of righteousness and judgment, Act, 24 25
it is said Felix trembled. Secondly, There is a trembling which arises from a
holy dread, and reverence of the Majesty of God, speaking in his word; this is
only found in true beleivers, and is that which keeps the soul low in its own
eyes. Therefore mark how the words run in Isa. 66.2. To him will I look that is
of a poor and contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word.
James 2.19.
God don't make the promise to him that trembles at the word, for the Devils
believe and tremble, the word of God can make the proudest stoutest sinner in
the World to shake and tremble, but it is to the poor and contrite spirit that
trembles; where trembling is the fruit of a spirit broken for sin, and low in
its own eyes there will God look.

Now many tremble at the Word, but not from poverty of spirit, not from a heart
broken for sin, and low in its own eyes, not from a sense of the Majesty and
holiness of God; and therefore notwithstanding they tremble at the word, yet
are they but almost Christians.

7. A man may delight in the Word, Isa. 58.2.
and Ordinances of God, and yet be but almost a Christian, Isa. 58.2. They take
delight in approaching to God.

And it is said of that ground Mat. 13.20. that it received the word with joy,
and yet it was but stony ground.

Psalm. 1.2.
blessed man that delights in the Law of the Lord?

Sol.
There is a delighting in the word, which flows from grace, and is a proof of
blessedness.

1. He that delights in the Word, because of its spirituality, he is a
Christian indeed; the more spiritual the Ordinances are, the more does a
gracious heart delight in them. 2. When the word comes close to the conscience,
rips up the heart, and discovers sin, and yet the soul delights in it
notwithstanding, this is a sign of grace. 3. When delight arises from that
communion that is to be had with God there, this is from a principle of grace
in the soul.
But there may be a delight in the word, where there is no grace.

1. There are many delight in the word, because of the eloquence of the
Preacher; they delight not so much in the truths delivered, as in the dress
that they are delivered in.

Ezekiel 33.323.
Thus it is said of the Prophet Ezekiel, that he was to them as a very lovely
song of one that has a pleasant voice.

2. There are very many delight to hear the word, that yet take no delight to
do it, Ezekiel. 33.2
so says God of them in Ezekiel. 33.2. they delight to hear my words, but they do
them not.

Now then, if a man may delight in the word more because of the eloquence of
the Preacher, then because of the spiritualness of the matter; if he may
delight to hear the Word, and yet not delight to do it, then he may delight in
the Word, and yet be but almost a Christian.

8. A man may be a member of the Church of Christ, he may join himself to the
people of God, partake with them in all Ordinances, and share of all Church
Privileges, and yet be but almost a Christian.

So the five foolish Virgins joined themselves to the wise, and walked together.

Many may be members of the Church of Christ, and yet not members of Christ the
head of the Church.

There was a mixed multitude came up with the Church of Israel out of Egypt,
they joined themselves to the Israelites, owned their God, left their own
Country, and yet in heart Egyptians notwithstanding.

All are not Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9.6.

The Church in all Ages has had unsound members; Cain had communion with Abel,
Ishmael dwelt in the same house with Isaac; Judas was in fellowship with the
Apostles, and so was Demas with the rest of the Disciples.

There will be some Bran in the finest Meal; the Draw-Net of the Gospel,
catches bad fish as well as good; the Tares and the Wheat grow together, and it
will be so till the Harvest.

Mat. 3.12
Heb. 12.23.
God has a Church where there are no members but such as are true members of
Christ, but it is in Heaven, it is the Church of the first born, there are no
Hypocrites, no rotten, unsound professors, none but the spirits of just men
made perfect, all is pure Wheat that God lays up in that Garner, there the
Chaff is separated to unquenchable fire.

But in the Church on Earth, the Wheat and the Chaff lie in the same heap
together, the Samaritans will be never of Kin to the Jews, when they are in
prosperity; so while the Church of God flourishes in the World, many will join
to it, they will seem Jews, though they are Samaritans, and seem Saints, though
yet they are no better then almost Christians.

9. A man may have great hopes of Heaven, great hopes of being Saved, and yet
be but almost a Christian.

Heb. 6.19.
Indeed there is a hope of Heaven, which is the Anchor of the soul, sure and
steadfast, it never miscarries, and it is known by four properties.

First, It is a hope which purifies the heart, purges out sin, 1 John 3.3. He
that has this hope purifies himself, even as God is pure.

That soul that truly hopes to enjoy God, truly endeavors to be like God.

Romans 5.2.
Secondly, It is a hope which fills the heart with gladness, we rejoice in hope
of the glory of God.

Psa. 130.5
Thirdly, It is a hope that is founded upon the promise, as there can be no
true faith without a promise, so nor any true hope; faith applies the promise,
and hope expects the fulfilling the promise; faith relies upon the truth of it,
and hope waits for the good of it; faith gives interest, hope expects livery
and seisin.

Romans 15.13.
Fourthly, It is a hope that is wrought by God himself in the soul, who is
therefore called the God of hope, as being the Author as well as the Object of
hope.

Col. 1.27.
Now he that has this hope shall never miscarry, this is a right hope, the hope
of the true beleiver, Christ in you the hope of glory.

But then, as there is a true and sound hope, so there is a false and rotten
hope, and this is much more common, as bastard pearls are more frequently worn
then true pearls.

There is nothing more common then to see men big with groundless hopes of
Heaven, As,

1. A man may have great hope, that has no grace, you read of the hope of
Hypocrites, Job 8.13, 14.

The performance of duties is a proof of their hope; the foolish Virgins would
never have done what they did, had they thought they should have been shut out
after all.

Many professors would not be at such pains in duties as they are, if they did
not hope for Heaven.

Hope is the great motive to action, despair cuts the sinews of all endeavors;
that is one reason why the damned in hell cease acting toward an alteration of
their state, because despair has taken hold of them; if there were any hope in
Hell, they would up and be doing there.

So that there may be great hope where there is no grace, experience proves
this; formal professors are men of no grace, but yet men of great hopes; nay
many times you shall find that none fear more about their eternal condition,
then they that have most cause of hope, and none hope more then they that have
most cause of fear.

As interest in God may sometimes be without hope, so hope in God may be
without interest.

2. A man may hope in the mercy and goodness, and power of God, without eying
the promise, and this is the hope of most, God is full of mercy and goodness,
and therefore willing to save; and he is infinite in power, and therefore able
to save; why therefore should I not rest on him?

Now it is presumption and therefore sin to hope in the mercy of God, otherwise
then by eying the promise; for the promise is the Channel of mercy, the Pipe
through which it is conveyed; all the blessedness the Saints enjoy in Heaven,
is no other then what is the fruit of the promise relied on, and hoped for here
on Earth.

A man has no warrant to hope in God, but by virtue of the promise.

3. A man may hope for Heaven, and yet not cleanse his heart, not depart from
his secret sins; that hope of Salvation that is not accompanied with
heart-purification, that is a vain hope.

4. A man may hope for Heaven, and yet be doing the work of Hell; he may hope
for salvation, and yet be working out his own damnation, and so perish in his
confidences.

This is the case of many, male agendo sperant, and sperando pereunt, like the
Water-man, that looks one way, and rows another; many have their eyes on
Heaven, whose hearts are in the Earth; they hope in God, but choose him not for
a portion; they hope in God, but do not love him as the best good, and the
refore are like to have no portion in him, nor good by him, but are like to
perish without him, notwithstanding all their hopes. Job 27.8. What is the hope
of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul?

Now then if a man may have great hope of Heaven that has no grace, if he may
hope in mercy without eying the promise, if he may hope without heart
purifying, if he may hope for Heaven, and yet do the work of Hell, surely then
a man may have great hopes of Heaven, and yet be but almost a Christian.

10. A man may be under great and visible changes, and these wrought by the
Ministry of the Word, and yet be but almost a Christian. Herod was, it is said,
when he heard John Baptist, Mar. 6.20
he did many things, and heard him gladly. Saul was under a great change, when
he met the Lords Prophets, 1 Samuel 10.10.
he turned Prophet too.

Nay it is said v. 9. of that 1. Sam. 10. that God gave him another heart.

Now was not this a work of grace? and was not Saul here truly converted? one
would think he was; but yet indeed he was not?

For though it is said, God gave him another heart, yet it is not said that God
gave him a new heart.

There is a great difference between (...) (lebh acher) another heart, and
(...) (lebh chadash) a new heart: God gave him another heart to fit him for a
Ruler, but gave him not a new heart to make him a beleiver; another heart may
make another man, but it is a new heart, that makes a new man.

Again Simon Magus is a great proof of this truth, he was under a great and
visible change, of a sorcerer he was turned to be a beleiver, he left his
Witch-crafts and Sorceries, and embraced the Gospel, was not this a great
change?

Act. 8.13.
If the Drunkard does but leave his Drunkenness, the Sewarer his Oaths, the
Profane person his Profaneness, they think this is a gracious change, and their
State is now good; alas Simon Magus did not only leave his sins, but had a
kind of a conversion, for he believed and was Baptized.



Sol.
Not every change makes a man a Christian, indeed there is a change that whoever
is under it, he is a true Christian.

Act. 26.18.
2 Cor. 5.17.
When a man's heart is so changed as that it is renewed, when old things are done
away, and all is become new when the (...), the new creature is wrought in the
soul, when a man is turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to
God, when the mind is enlightened, the will renewed, the affections made
Heavenly, then a man is a Christian indeed.

But now you must know that every change is not this change. For,

1. There is a civil change, a moral change, as well as a spiritual and
supernatural change.

Many men are changed in a moral sense, and one may say, they are become new
men, but they are in heart and nature the same men still; They are not changed
in a spiritual, and supernatural sense, and therefore it cannot be said of
them, they are become new creatures.

Restraining grace may cause a moral change, but it is renewing grace that must
cause a saving change.

Now many are under restraining grace, and so changed morally, that are not
under the power of renewing grace, and so changed savingly.

2. There is an out ward change, as well as an inward change; the outward
change is often without the inward, though the inward change is never without
the outward.

A man's heart cannot be sanctified, but it will influence the life; but a man's
life may be reformed, and yet never affect or influence the heart.

3. A man may be converted from a course of profaneness, to a form of godliness,
from a filthy conversation, to a fair profession, and yet the heart the same,
in one and the other.

A rotten post may be guilt without, and yet unsound within. Hypocrita in
verbis sanctus, in cord vanus; intus Nero, foris Calo. Audi, nemo melius;
specta, nemo pejus.

Mat. 23.25.
It is common to have the outside of the Cup and Platter made clean, and yet the
inside foul and filthy.

Now then if a man may be changed morally, and yet not spiritually, outwardly,
and yet not inwardly, from a course of profaneness, to a lifeless form of
godliness, then a man may be under great and visible changes, and yet be no
more then almost a Christian.

I do not speak this to discountenance any change, short of that that is
spiritual, but to awaken you to seek after that change, which is more then
moral.

It is good to be outwardly reformed, but it is better to be savingly renewed.

I know how natural it is for men to take up with any thing like a work of
conversion, though it be not conversion, and resting in that, they perish
eternally.

1 These. 5.23.
Beloved, let me tell you, there is no change, no conversion can stead your
souls in the day of judgment, on this side that saving work, which is wrought
on the Soul by the Spirit of God, renewing you throughout; the sober man
without this change, shall as surely go to Hell as the beastly drunkard.

Morality and civility may commend us to men, but not to God. They are of no
value in the procurement of an eternal Salvation.

Mat. 21.^1.
A man may go far in an outward change, and yet not be one step nearer Heaven,
then he that never was under any change, nay he may be (in some sense) farther
off, as Christ says, the Scribes and Pharisees were farther from Heaven, with
all their show of godliness, then Fublicans and Harlots, in all their sin and
uncleanness.

Because resting in a false work, a partial change; we neglect to seek after a
true and saving change.

There is nothing more common then to mistake our state, and by overweaning
thoughts misjudge our condition, and so perish in our own delusions.

Mat. 7.26
The World is full of these foolish Builders, that lay the foundation of their
hopes of eternal salvation, upon the sand.

Now my brethren, would you not mistake the way to Heaven, and perish in a
delusion, would you not be found fools at last, for none are such fools as the
spiritual fool, who is a fool in the great business of salvation?

Would you not be fools for your souls and for eternity? Oh then labor after,
and pray for a through work of conversion, beg of God that he would make a
saving change in your souls, that you may be altogether Christians, all other
changes below this saving change, this heart-change, make us but almost
Christians.

11. A man may be very zealous in the matters of Religion, and yet be but
almost a Christian: Jehu did not only serve God and do what he commanded him,
but was very zealous in his service, 2 Kings 10.16. come with me, and see my
zeal for the Lord of Hosts, and yet in all this Jehu was a very Hypocrite,
Joash was a great reformer in. Jehojadahs time, it is said he did that which
was right in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.2.
all the days of Jehojada the Priest, but when Jehojadah dyed, Joash his zeal
for God dyed with him, and he becomes a very wretch. v. 17, 18.


Mat. 11.12.
Object
But the Apostle makes zeal to be a note of sound Christianity. Gal. 4.18. It is
good to be zealously affected in a good thing, nay it seems to be the non-such
qualification for obtaining eternal life, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force.

Sol.
It is true there is a zeal, which is good, and which renders the soul highly
acceptable to God, a zeal that never misses of Heaven and Salvation.

Now this is a zeal which is a celestial fire, the true temper and heat of all
the affections to God and Christ, qui non zelat non amat.

It is a zeal wrought and kindled in the soul by the spirit of God, who first
works it, and then sets it on work.

It is a zeal that has the Word of God for its guide, directing it in working
both in regard of its object and end, manner and measure.

It is a zeal that checks sin, and forwards the Heavenly life.

Joh. 2.17.
It is a zeal that makes the glory of God its chief end, which swallows up all
by-ends, The zeal of thine house, has eaten me up.

Lev. 10.1
But now all zeal is not this kind of zeal, there is a false zeal, as well as a
true, every grace has its counterfeit, as there is fire, which is true
Heavenly fire on the Altar, so there is strange fire, Nadab and Abihu offered
strange fire upon Gods Altar.

There are several kinds of zeal, none of which are true and sound, but false
and counterfeit.

I Will instance in eight particulars.

Bernard.
Mat. 17.15.
First, There is a blind zeal, a zeal without knowledge, Romans 10.2. They have a
zeal (says the Apostle) but not according to knowledge, now as knowledge
without zeal is fruitless, so zeal without knowledge is dangerous, it is like
Wildfire in the hand of a fool, or like the Devil in the man possessed, that
threw him sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the water, zelus absque
scientia, quo vehementius irruit, eo graivus corruit.

The eye is the light of the body, and the understanding is the light of the
soul, now as the body without the light of the eye, cannot go without
stumbling, ^o the soul without the light of the mind, cannot act without erring.

Acts 22.3, 4.
Zeal without knowledge, is like an ignis fatuus in a dark night, that leads a
Traveller out of his way, into the Bogs and Mire. This was the zeal of Paul,
while he was a Pharise, I was zealous toward God, as ye all are this day, and
I persecuted this way unto the death.

And so Asts 26.9 I verily thought with my self, I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth; So Philip. 3.6. concerning zeal,
persecuting the Church.

Such a zeal was that in John 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogue,
(silence you, you shall not be suffered to Preach,) yea the time comes that
whoever kills you, will think that he does God service. This is great zeal, but
yet it is a blind zeal, and that God abhors.

Secondly, There is a partial zeal, in one thing fire hot, in another key cold,
zealous in this thing, and yet careless in another, many are first-Table
Christians, zealous in the duties of the first Table, and yet neglect the
second; thus the Pharisees were zealous in there corban, Mat. 23.23. Lyra has
these very words filius per professionem factam in religione excusatur a
subveniendo par niibus.
and yet unnatural to their Parents, suffering them to starve and perish.

Others are second Table Christians, zealous in the duties of the second Table,
but neglect the first, more for Righteousness among men, then for holiness
toward God.

But now he whose religion ends with the first Table, or begins with the
second, he is a foolin his profession, for he is but almost a Christian.

The woman that was for the dividing the child was not the true Mother, and he
that is for dividing the Commands, is not a true beleiver.

2 Kings 10.16. comp. with 29. v
Jehu was zealous against Ahabs house, but not so against Jeroboams calves,
many are zealous against sins of opinion, that yet use no zeal against the sins
of their conversation.

Now as we know that the sweat of the whole body is a sign of health, but the
sweat of some one part only, shows a distemper, Io. Fernel. de febr^bus ^. 4.
c. 19
and therefore Physicians do reckon such a heat to be symptomatical:

So where zeal reaches to every command of God alike, that is a sign of a sound
constitution of soul; but where it is partial, where a man is hot in one part,
and cold in another, that is Symptomatical of some inward Spiritual distemper.

Thirdly, There is a misplaced zeal, fixed upon unsuitable and
disproportionable Objects. Many are very zealous in trifling things that are
not worth it, and trifle in the things that most require it, like the Pharisees
that were diligent Tithers of mint annise, and cumin, but neglected the (...),
the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith. Mat. 23.23.
They had no zeal for these, though very hot for the other; many are more
zealous for a ceremony, then for the substance of Religion; more zealous for
bowing at the name of Jesus, then for conformity to the life of Jesus; more
zealous for a holy vestment, then for a holy life; more zealous for the
inventions of men, then for the institutions of Christ.

This is a superstitious zeal, Heathens will rise up in judgment against such
men Deus non superstitione coli vale sed pietate, said Cicero.
and usually found in men unconverted, whom grace never was wrought in. When
was it that Paul was so exceedingly zealous of the traditions of his Fathers,
as he says, Gal. 1.14. but only when he was in his wretched and unconverted
state; as you may see in the next verses, But when it pleased God to call me by
his grace, Gal. 1 15, 16.
then I conferred not with flesh and blood. Paul had another kind of zeal then,
acted by other kind of Principles.

Cer. 34.14, 15. comp. with v. 25 26, 27, 28, 29.
Fourthly, There is a selfish zeal, that has a man's own ends for its motive;
Jehu was very zealous, but it was not so much for God as for the Kingdom, not
so much in obedience to the command, as in design to step into the Throne, and
therefore God threatens to punish him for that very thing he commands him to
do, Hos. 1.4. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.
Because he shed that blood to gratify his lust, not to obey God. So Simeon and
Levi pretend great zeal for Circumcision, seem very zealous for the honor of
Gods Ordinance, when in truth their zeal was for covetousness and revenge upon
the Shechemites.

-- It is storyed of Dr. Aylmer that in his young days, he was very high
against the pride and covetousness of the Bishops, and in a book of his, he
thus speaks to them; come off you Bishops, away with your superfluities, yield
up your thousands, be content with a little.

1 Cor. 13.11.
But afterward when he himself came to be Bishop of London, then his profits
and preferment had eat up his zeal, and he would confess to his friends, that
he had been of another strain in his youth, abusing those words of Paul, when I
was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a child, I thought as a Child.

Fifthly, There is an outside zeal, such was that of the Scribes and Pharisees;
they would not eat with unwashed hands, but yet would live in unseen sins, they
would wash the cup often, but the heart seldom, paint the outside, but neglect
the inside. Ne appetat quisquam ultra videri quam est, ut possit ustra esse
quam videtur, Greg.
Jehu was a mighty outside reformer, 2 Kings 10.16. but he reformed nothing
within, for he had a base heart under all, v. 31. Jehu took no heed, towalk in
the Law of the Lord with all his heart. Though his fleece was fair, his liver
was rotten.

Our Lord Christ observes of the Pharisees, they pray to be seen of men, and
fast so that they may appear to men to fast. Matthew. 6.5, 16.

Pro. 7.11.
Sixthly, There is a fortasick zeal, that runs out upon others, like the candle
in the Lanthorn that sends all the heat out at top, or as the lewd Woman
Solomon mentions, whose feet abide not in her own house.

Many are hot and high against the sins of others, and yet cannot see the same
in themselves, like the Lamiae, that put on their spectacles when they went
abroad, but pulled them off within doors.

It is easy to see fault in others, and as hard to see then in our selves.
Jehu was zealous against Baal and his Priests, because that was Ahabs sin, but
not against the Calves of Bethel, because that was his own sin.

Teeum babita.
This zeal is the true Character of an Hypocrite, his own Garden is overrun
with Weeds, while he is busy in looking over his Neighbors Pale.

Seaventhly, There is a sinful zeal, all the former may be called sinful from
some defect, but this I call sinful in a more special notion, because against
the life and chief of Religion, it is a zeal against zeal, that flies not at
profaness, but at the very power of godliness, not at error, but at truth, and
is most hot against the most spiritual and important truths of the times.

Whence else are the sufferings of men for the truth, but from this spirit of
zeal against the truth?

Iam. 1.19 Rev. 12.12.
This may be called a devilish zeal, for as there is the faith of Devils, so
there is the zeal of Devils, therefore his rage is great, because he knows his
time is short.

1 Samuel 15.3.
Eighthly, There is a Scriptureless zeal, that is not butted and bounded by the
Word, but by some base and low end, such was Saul's zeal, when God bids him
destroy Amalek, and spare neither man nor beast, then contrary to Gods command
he spare the best of the Sheep and Oxen, under pretense of zeal for Gods
Sacrifice.

2 Samuel 21.2.
Another time when he had no such command, then he slaies the Gibeonites, in his
zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah.

Many a man's zeal is greatest then and there, when and where he has the least
warrant from God.

It is worth the while, to observe how zealous men are for Ceremonies and
pompousness in the worship of God, when as there is not one word in all the
Scripture for them.

I will tell you (and the Scripture adjusts me in it) that it is one of the
surest signs of an Antichrristian spirit to be zealous for unwritten and
ungrounded traditions in the Worship of God.

The true spirit of zeal is bounded by Scripture, for it is for God, and the
concernments of his glory: God has no glory from that zeal that has no
Scripture warrant.

Now then if the zeal of a man in the things of God, may be only a blind zeal,
or a partial zeal, or a misplaced zeal, or a selfish zeal, or an outside zeal,
or a forensick zeal, or a sinful zeal, or a Scriptureless zeal, then it is
evident that a man may be very zealous in the matters of Religion, and yet be
but almost a Christian.

12. A-man may be much in Prayer he may pray often, and pray much, and yet be
but almost a Christian, so did the Pharisees, whom yet our Lord Christ rejects
for Hypocrites. Mat. 23.14. Object.


But is not a praying frame an argument of a sincere heart? are not the Saints
of God called The generation of them that seek the face of God? Psalm. 24.6.

Sol.
A man is not therefore a Christian because he is much in prayer. I grant

That those prayers that are from the workings and sighings of Gods Spirit in
us.

From a sincere heart lifted to God.

From sense of our own emptiness, and Gods infinite fullness.

That are suited to Gods will, the great rule of prayer.

That are for spiritual things more then temporal.

That are accompanied with faith and dependence: Such prayers speak a man
altogether a Christian.

But now a man be much in prayer, and yet be a stranger to such prayer. As,

1. Nature may put a man upon prayer, for it is a part of natural worship; it
may put a child of God upon prayer; so it did Christ, Matthew. 26.39, 42. He went
and fell on his face and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible let
this cup pass from me. This was a prayer of Christ, which flowed from the
sinless struglings of Nature, seeking its own preservation.

2. A man may pray in pretense for a covering to some sin, so did those devout
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.14. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye
devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers, therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.

So the Papists seem very devout to pray a rich man's soul out of Purgatory, but
it is to cheat the Heir of much of his estate, under pretense of praying for
his fathers soul.

3. A man may pray and yet love sin, as Austin, before conversion, prayed
against his sin, but was afraid God should hear him, and take him at his word.

Now God hears not such prayers, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart
God will not hear my prayer.

4. A man may pray much for temporal things, and little for spiritual things,
and such are the prayers of most men, crying out most for temporal things; more
for who will show us any good? Psalm. 4 6.
then for Lord lift upon us the light of thy countenance. David copies out the
prayer of such, Psalm. 144.12, Psa. 144.12, 13, 14, 15.
etc. That our sons may be as plants, that our daughters may be as
corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a palace. That our garners may
be full, etc. Happy is the people that is in such a case: This is the carnal
hearts prayer, and this David calls vanity, verse. 11. They are strange
children, whose mouth speaks vanity.

5. Isa. 29.13
A man may pray and yet be far from God in prayer; This people draw nigh to me
with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is sar from me,
Matthew. 15.8. a man may pray, and yet have no heart in prayer and that God
chiefly looks at: Pro. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart.

The Jews have this sentence written upon the walls of their Synagogues, Prayer
without the intention of the mind, is but a body without a soul.

It is not enough to be conscionable to use prayer, but we must be conscionable
to the use of prayer.

Many are so conscientious, that they dare not but pray; and yet so
irreligious, that they have no heart in prayer, a common work of God may make a
man conscionable to do duties, but nothing less then saving grace in the heart
will make a man conscionable in the doing of them.

6. A man's prayer may be a lie; as a profession without sanctity is a lie to
the world, so prayer without sincerity is a lie to God. It is said of Israel
that they sought God, Psalm. 78.34
and enquired early after him; they were much in prayer, and yet God calls all
but a lie. Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, Some derive the
latin colu, to worship, from the Greek (...), to flatter, and the English word
Batter, from the Greek word (...) to worship.
and they lied to him with their tongues, for their heart was not right with
him. v. 36, 27.

Hearken to my prayer that goes not out of feigned lips, says David, Psalm.
17.1.

7. Afflictions and the pressures of outward evils will make a man pray, Nuper
me amici cujusdam languer admounit optimos esse nos dum infirmi sumus, Plin.
Ep. 26.17
and pray much, Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them then they sought him, and
returned and, inquired early after God. The Heathen Mariners call every man
upon his God when in a storm; when they fear drowning, then they fall to
praying, Jon. 1.5. Mariners are for the most part none of the devoutest, not
much addicted to prayer; they will swear twice, where they pray once; and yet
it is said they cry to the Lord in their trouble, Psalm. 107.23, 28. And hence
you have a proverb, Qui nescit or ared scat navigare.
He that cannot pray let him go to sea.

They poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them, Isa. 26.16.

Now then if Nature may put a man upon prayer; if a man may pray in pretense
and design; if a man may pray and yet love sin; if a man may pray mostly for
temporal things; if a man may pray and yet be far from God in prayer; if prayer
may be a lie; or if it may be only the cry of the soul under affliction, sure
then a man may be much in prayer, and yet be but almost a Christian.



Sol.
A man may pray and be answered, for God many times answers prayers in
judgment; as God is sometimes silent in mercy, so he speaks in wrath; and as
he sometimes denies prayer in mercy, so he sometimes answers in judgment: When
men are over importunate in some things their lusts are upon, and will take no
nay, then God answers in judgment, Psalm. 78.29. He gave them their own desire;
They had desired quails, and God sends them, but now mark the judgment, v.
30.31. While the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them and
slew them.

Now my affections are much stirred in prayers

So was Esau's when he sought the blessing, Sol. Heb. 12.17.
He sought it carefully with tears. A man may be affected with his own parts in
a duty; while good notions pass through his head, and good words through his
lips, some good motions also may stir in his heart; but they are but sparks
which fly out at the tunnel of the chimney, which suddenly vanish.

So that it is possible a man may pray and prevail in prayer, pray and be
affected in prayer, and yet be but almost a Christian.

13. A man may suffer for Christ, in his goods, in his name, in his person, and
yet be but almost a Christian.

Every man that bears Christ's Cross on his shoulders, does not therefore bear
Christ's Image in his soul.

Mat. 19, 29.
Mat. 19.29. every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life?

Sure they are true Christians whom Christ makes this promise to.

Sol.
There is a suffering for Christ, that is a note of sincerity, and shall have
its reward.

Col. 1.24
Mat. 5.10.11, 12.
That is, when a man suffers for a good cause, upon a good call, and with a good
conscience, for Christ's sake, and in Christ's strength, when his sufferings are
a filling up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ, when a man
suffers as a Christian, as the Apostle has it, 1 Pet. 4.6. if any man suffer
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, Mat. 14.28, 29.
when a man thrusts not himself into suffering, but stays Gods call, such
suffering is a proof of integrity.

But now every suffering for Christ, is not suffering as a Christian. For 1. A
man may suffer for Christ, for that profession of Religion that is upon him,
the World hates the show of Religion, times may come, that it may cost a man as
dear to wear the Livery of Christ, as to wear Christ himself. 1 Timothy 1.19.20. 2 Timothy 4.14.
Alexander had like to have lost his life for the Gospels sake, Acts 19.33. yet
he was that Alexander (as is generally judged) that afterward made Shipwreck of
faith, and greatly opposed Paul's Ministry. 2. A man may suffer for Christ, and
yet have no true love to Christ. This is supposed in 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give
my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits nothing.


Love to Christ is the only noble ground of suffering, but a man may suffer
much upon other ends.

1. Out of Opinion of meriting by our sufferings, as the Papists. or 2. Out of
vainglory, Vicit amor satriae, laudisque immensa cupido.
or for applause among professors, some have dyed that their names might live.
or 3. Out of a Roman resolution or stoutness of spirit. 4. Out of a design of
profit, as Judas forsook all for Christ, hoping to mend his Market by closing
with him. or 5. Rather to maintain an Opinion, then for truths propagation,
Socrates dyed for maintaining that there was but one God, but whether he dyed
rather for his own Opinion, then for Gods sake, I think it is no hard matter to
determine. Thus a man may suffer for professing Christ, and yet suffer upon
wrong principles.
Now then if a man may suffer for Christ, from the profession that is upon him,
or suffer for Christ, and yet not truly love him, then a man may suffer for
Christ, and yet be but almost a Christian.

14. A man may be called of God, and embrace this call, and yet be but almost a
Christian.

Judas is a famous instance of this truth, he was called by Christ himself, and
came at the call of Christ, and yet Judas was but almost a Christain.

whom he predestined them he called? Romans 8.30. Nay does he not say in the
same verse, whom he called them he justisied? Nay does not God call all whom he
intends to save?

Mat 20.16.
Sol.
Though God calls all those that shall be saved, yet all shall not be saved
whom God calls; every man under the Gospel is called of God in one sense or
other, but yet every man under the Gospel shall not therefore be saved. For
many are called, but few are chosen.

There is a twofold call of God. Internal, External,

1. There is an internal call of God, Now this call is a special work of the
spirit by the Ministry of the Word, whereby a man is brought out of a state of
nature into a state of grace, out of darkness into light, Act. 26.18.
from being vessels of wrath, to be made heirs of life.

Joh. 6.45
I grant that whoever is under this call of God, is called effectually and
savingly, called to be a Christian indeed. Every man that has heard and
learned of the Father comes to me.

2. There is a call of God which a man may have, and yet not be this call;
there is an External call of God, which is by the Ministry of the Word.

Mat. 22 9
Now every man that lives under the Preaching of the Gospel is thus called, God
calls every soul of you to repent and lay a sure foundation for Heaven and
salvation, by the word you hear this day.

But now every man that is thus called is not therefore a Christian, For.

1. Many under the call of God come to Christ, but are not converted to Christ,
have nothing of the grace and life of Christ, such as he Mat. 22. who when
Christ sent out his servants to bid guests unto the Marriage, came in at the
call of Christ, but yet had not on the wedding Garment, v. 11. that is, had
none of the grace and righteousness of Jesus Christ.

2. Many that are under the call of the Gospel come to Christ, and yet
afterward fall away from Christ, as Judas and Demas did; it is said, 2 Timothy
4.10.
when Christ preached a Doctrine which his Disciples did not like, that from
that time many of his Disciples went back, Joh. 6.66.
and walked no more with him.

Now then, if many are under this external call of God only, if many that come
to Christ, are not converted to Christ, but fall away from. Christ, then a man
may be called of God, and yet be but almost a Christian.

15. A man may have the spirit of God, and yet be but almost a Christian,
Balaam had the spirit of God given him when he blessed Israel, Numb. 24.2.
Balaam saw Israel abiding in Tents, and the spirit of the Lord came upon him.
Judas had, for by the spirit he cast out Devils, he was one of them that came
to Christ, and said, Lord even the Devils are subject to us. Saul had, 1 Samuel
10.10. Behold a company of Prophets met him, and the spirit of God came upon
him, and he prophesied among them.

indeed the Scripture says, If any man have not the spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9.
he is none of his, but surely if any man have the spirit of Christ, he is his.

Sol.
There is a having the spirit which is a sure mark of Saint-ship.

Where the spirit is as an effectual prevailing principle of grace, and
sanctification, renewing and regenerating the heart

To. 8.26.
Where the spirit is as a potent worker, helping the souls infirmities.

Joh. 14.16.
Where the spirit is so as to abide for ever.

But now every man that has the spirit, has not the spirit in this manner.
For,

1. A man may have the spirit only transiently, not abidingly, the spirit may
be in a man, and yet not dwell in a man, the spirit is where ever he dwells, but
he does not dwell wherever he is, he is in all, but dwells in Saints only; he
is in all, per divinitatis praesentiam, Lumb. 1. sent. did. 17
but dwells in Saints only per inhabitationis gratiam, the Hypocrite may have
the spirit for a season, but not to abide in him for ever.

2. A man may have the spirit, and yet not be born of the spirit, Joh. 3.4, 5.
every true Christian is born of the spirit, a Hypocrite may have the gifts of
the spirit, but not the graces, the spirit may be in him by way of
illumination. but not by way of sanctification; by way of conviction, but not
by way of conversion: though he may have much common grace for the good of
others, yet he may have no special grace for the good of himself, though his
profession be spiritual, yet is his state and condition carnal.

3. A man may have the spirit only as a spirit of bondage, thus many have the
spirit working only to bondage. The spirit of bondage is an operation of the
holy Ghost by the law, convincing the conscience of sin, and of the curse of
the law, and working in the soul such an apprehension of the wrath of God, as
makes the thoughts of God a terror to him.

This spirit may be, and often is without saving grace, this operation of the
spirit was in Cain and Judas.

Though none that receive the spirit of adoption, but they first receive the
spirit of bondage, yet many receive the spirit of bondage that never receive
the spirit of adoption.

4. A man may have the spirit of God working in him, and yet it may be resisted
by him; it is said of the Jews, Isa. 63.10.
they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit, and the same sin is charged upon
their Children, Acts 7.51. ye stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart, ye have
always resisted the holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye.

The Hypocrite retains not the spirit so long as to come up to Regeneration and
Adoption, but quenches the motions of it, and thereby miscarries eternally.

5. A man may have the spirit and yet sin that unpardonable sin; he may have
the Holy Ghost, and yet sin the sin against the Holy Ghost, nay no man can sin
this sin against it, but he that has some degree of it.

The true beleiver has so much of the spirit, such a work of it in him, that
he cannot sin that sin. He that is born of God sins not, to wit, that sin unto
death, for that is meant, 1 John 5.16, 17, 18. The carnal professed sinner he
cannot sin that sin, because he is carnal and sensual having not the spirit.
Jude 19.
A man must have some measure of the spirit, that sins this sin, so has the
Hypocrite, he is said to be partaker of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4. and he only
is capable of sinning the sin against the holy Ghost.

Now then, if a man may have the spirit transiently only, not abidingly, if a
man may have the spirit, and yet not be born of the spirit, if he may have the
spirit only as a spirit of bondage, if a man may have the spirit working in
him, and yet it may be resisted by him, if a man may have the spirit, and yet
sin that unpardonable sin against it, then surely a man may have the spirit of
God, and yet be but almost a Christian.

16. A man may have faith, and yet be but almost a Christian, Lu 8.13.
the stony ground, (that is, those hearers set out by the stony ground) for a
while believed. It is said, Joh. 2.23. that many believed in the name of
Christ, Fides mi nime fide, quippe ex miraculus nata.
yet Christ durst not commit himself to them. Though they trusted in Christ,
yet Christ would not trust them, and why? because he knew all men, v. 24. he
knew they were rotten at root, notwithstanding their faith, a man may have all
faith even to the removing mountains, and yet be nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.

He that beleives shall be saved? Mark 16.16.

Jam. 2.19
Sol.
Though it is true what our Lord Christ says, that he that beleives shall be
saved, yet it is as true that many believe that shall never be saved, for Simon
Magus believed, yea James says, the Devils believe and tremble, now none will
say these shall be saved.

2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
As it is true, what the Apostle says, all men have not faith, so it is as
true, that there are some men have faith, who are no whit the better for their
faith.

You must know therefore there is a two fold faith, Special and Saving. Common
and not Saving.

1. There is a saving faith.

Col. 2.12.
This is called faith of the operation of God.

It is a work of Gods own spirit in the soul.

It is such a faith as rests and casts the soul wholly upon Christ, for grace
and glory, pardon and peace, sanctification and salvation.

It is an united act of the whole soul, understanding, will, and affections,
all concurring to unite the soul to an alsufficient Redeemer.

Act. 15.9.
It is such a faith as purifies the heart, and makes it clean, it influences and
gives strength and life to all other graces.

Now whoever has this faith is a Christian indeed, this is the faith of Gods
elect. Tit. 1.1.
But then,

2. There is a common faith not saving, a fading and temporary faith, there is
the faith of Simon Magus, as well as the faith of Simon Peter, Acts 8 13 and v.
23. compar.
Simon Magus believed, and yet was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond
of iniquity.

Now Simon Magus has more followers then Simon Peter, the faith of most men
will at last be found to be no better then the faith of Simon Magus. For,

Luke 22 32.
First, The faith of most is but a temporary faith, it dures for a while, and
then dies and perishes, true and saving faith, such as is the faith of Gods
elect, cannot die, it may fail in the Act, but not in the habit; the sap may
not be in the branch, but it is always in the root.

That faith that perishes, that faith a man may have and perish.

Secondly, There is a faith that lies only in generals, not in particulars, as
there is a general and particular object of faith, so there is a general and
particular faith. The general object of faith is the whole Scripture, the
particular object of faith is Christ in the promise.

Now many have a general faith, to believe all the Scripture, and yet have no
faith to make a particlar application of Jesus Christ in the promise.

Devils and Reprobates may believe the truth of the Scripture and what is
written of the dying and suffering of Christ for sinners, but there are but few
that can close up themselves in the wounds of Christ, and by his stripes fetch
in healing to their souls.

Thirdly, There is a faith that is seated in the understanding, but not in the
will, this is a very common faith, many assent to the truth.

They believe all the attributes of God, that he is just, holy, wise, faithful,
good, merciful, etc. But yet they rest not on him notwithstanding.

They believe the Commands are true, but yet do not obey them; they believe the
promises are true, but yet do not embrace and apply them, they believe the
threatenings are true, but yet do not fly from them.

Thus their faith lies in assent, but not consent; they have faith to confess a
judgment, but none to take out execution; by assent they lay a foundation, but
never build upon it by application.

They believe that Christ died to save them that believe, and yet they believe
not in Christ that they may be saved.

To. 10 10. 1 Cor. 15.17.
Oh my brethren it is not a beleiving head, but a beleiving heart that makes a
Christian: With the heart man beleives to righteousness; without this our
faith is vain, we are yet in our sins.

Fourthly, There is a faith without experience, many believe the Word upon
hearsay to be the word of God, but they never felt the power and virtue of it
upon their hearts and consciences.

Now what good is it to believe the truth of the Word, if a man's conscience
never felt the power of the word? what is it to believe the truth of the
promise, if we never tasted the sweetness of the promise?

We are in this case like a man that believes the description others make of
strange Countries, but never traveled them to know the truth; or as a Patient
that beleives all the Physician says, but yet trys none of his potions.

We believe the word, because we cannot gainsay it, but yet we have no
experience of any saving good wrought by the Word, and so are but almost
Christians.

Fifthly, There is a faith that is without brokenness of heart, that does not
avail to melt or soften the heart, and therefore is not true faith, for the
least true faith is ever joined with a bending will, and a broken heart.

Sixthly, There is a faith that transforms not the heart; Faith without fruit,
that does not bring forth the New creature in the soul, but leaves it in a
state of sin and death.

This is a faith that makes a man a fond Professor, but not a sound believer;
he beleives the truth, Ephesians. 4.21.
but not as it is in Jesus, for then it would change and transform him into the
likeness of Jesus.

Isa. 56.9.
He believes that a man must be changed that would be saved, but yet is not
savingly changed by beleiving. Thus while others believe to salvation, he
believes to damnation; for his web shall not become a garment, neither shall he
cover himself with his works.

Heb. 6.4.
Now then if a man's faith may be but temporary, or may lie only in generals, or
may be seated in the understanding only, or may be without experience, or may
be without a broken heart, or without a new heart, surely then, a man may have
faith, he may taste of this heavenly gift, and yet be but almost a Christian.

17. A man may go further yet, He may possibly have a love to the people of
God, and yet be but almost a Christian; every kind of love to those who are
Saints, is not a proof of our Saintship: Pharaoh loved Joseph, and advanced him
to the second place in the Kingdom, and yet Pharaoh was but a wicked man. Ahab
loved Jehoshaphat, and made a league with him, and married his daughter
Athaliah to Jehoram Jehoshaphats Son, and yet Ahab was a wicked wretch.

Joh. 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren. Nay the Spirit of God puts this as a characteristical distinction
between Saints and sinners, in the tenth verse, In this the children of God are
manifest and the children of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not
of God, neither he that loves not his brother.

By brethren we do not understand Brethren by place, those who are of the same
Country or Nation, such are called Brethren, Romans 9.3. Act. 7, 23, 25.

Nor do we understand Brethren by race, those who are descended of the same
parents: such are called brethren, Matthew. 1.2.

Philemon 16.
But by Brethren we understand brethren by grace, and supernatural regeneration,
such as are the children of God; and these are the brethren whom to love is a
sure sign that we are the children of God.

Sol.
To this I answer, That there is a love to the children of God, which is a proof
of our being the children of God.

As for instance, when we love them as such, for that very reason, as being the
Saints of God; when we love them for the image of God which appears in them,
because of that grace and holiness which shines forth in their conversations,
this is truly commendable; to love the godly for godliness sake, the Saints for
Saintship sake, this is a sure testimony of our Christianity. The love of grace
in another, is a good proof of the life of grace in our selves: There can be no
better evidence of the Spirit of Christ in us, then to love the image of Christ
in others. For this is a certain truth, that a sinner cannot love a Saint as
such; An Israelite is an abomination to an Egyptian.

John 15. 1fi.
Genesis 3.15
There is a contrariety and natural enmity between the two seeds; between the
children of the World, and those whom the Father in his eternal love has
chosen out of the World.

Simile simili gaudet
It is likeness which is the great ground of love; now there is the highest
dissimilitude and unlikeness between an unregenerate sinner and a child of God;
and therefore as a child of God cannot love a sinner as a sinner, In whose eyes
a vile person is contemned, Psalm 15.4. he may love him as a creature; he may
love his soul, or he may love him under some relation that he stands in to him.
Thus God loves the damned spirits, as they are his Creatures, but as fallen
Angels he hates them with an infinite hatred. So to love a sinner, quatenus a
sinner, this a child of God cannot do, so neither can a sinner love a child of
God as a child of God.

That he may love a child of God, that I grant, but it is upon some other
consideration; he may love a person that is holy, not the person for his
holiness, but for some other respect. As

1. A man may love a child of God, for his loving, peaceable, courteous
deportment to all with whom he converseth. Religion beautifies the conversation
of a man, and sets him off to the eye of the World: The grace of God is no
friend to a morose, churlish, unmannerly behavior among men, it provokes in us
an affable demeanor and sweetness to all, and where this is found it wins
respect and love from all.

2. Iam 2.2, 3.
A man may love a Saint for his outward greatness and splendour in the world,
men are very apt to honor worldly greatness: And therefore the rich Saint
shall be loved and honored, whilst the poor Saint is hated and despised. This
is as if a man should value the goodness of his sword by the imbroidery of his
belt; or his horse for the beauty of his trappings, rather then for his
strength and swiftness.

True love to the Children of God, reaches to all the children of God, poor as
well as rich, bond as well as free, ignoble as well as noble; for the image of
Christ is alike amiable and lovely in all.

3. A man may love a child of God for his fidelity and usefulness in his place.
Where religion in the power of it takes hold of a man's heart, it makes him
true to all his betrustments, diligent in business, faithful in all his
relations; and this obliges respect. A carnal Master may prize a godly
Apprentice or Servant that makes conscience of pleasing his Master, and is
diligent in promoting his interest.

I might instance in many things of the like nature, as Charity, Beauty, Wit,
Learning, Parts, etc. which may procure love to the people of God from the men
of the world: But this love is no proof of charity. For

First, It is but natural love, arising from some carnal respect, or self ends:
that love which is made by the Scripture an evidence of our Regeneration, is a
spiritual love, Col. 1.8.
the principle lodestone and attractive whereof is grace and holiness, it is a
love which imbraceth a righteous man in the name of a Righteous man. Mat. 10.41.


2. A carnal man's love to Saints is a limited and bounded love, it is not
universal, Ester 10.3.
to all the seed; Now as in sin, he that does not make conscience of every sin,
makes conscience of no sin as sin; so he who does not love all in whom the
Image of Christ is found, loves none, for that of the Image of Christ, which
is found in them.

Now then if the love we bear to the people of God may possibly arise from
natural love only, or from some carnal respect, or if it be a limited love,
not extended to all the people of God, then it is possible that a man may love
the people of God, and yet be no better then almost a Christian.

18. A man may obey the commands of God, yea many of the commands of God, and
yet be but almost a Christian. Balaam seems very conscientious of steering his
course by the compass of Gods command; when Balak sent to him to come and curse
the people of God, says Balaam, If Balak would give me his house full of
silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, Numb. 22.18.
Numb, 23.12, 20, 26.
and so in the 38. v. says he, the word that God puts in my mouth that
shall I speak The young man went far in obedience, Mark 10.20. all these have I
observed from my youth up. and yet he was but an Hypocrite, for he for sook
Christ after all.

he that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and
he that loves me shall be loved of my Father and I will love him, and manifest
my self unto him; John 14.21. and does not our Lord Christ tell us expressly, ye
are my friends if ye do what I command you? John 15.14. and can a man be the
friend of Christ, and yet be but almost a Christian?

Sol.
I answer, that there is an obedidience to the commands of Christ, which is a
sure proof of our Christianity and friendship to Christ.

This obedience has a threefold property.

It is Evangelical, Universal, Continual.

First, It is an evangelical obedience, and that both in matter and manner,
ground and end.

In the matter of it, and that is what God requires, John 15.14. ye are my
friends, if ye do whatever I command you.

In the manner of it, and that is according as God requires, John 4.24. God is
a spirit and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.

In the ground of it, and that is a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

In the end of it, and that is the honor and glory of God, whatever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Numb. 14.24. Psalm. 119.6.
Secondly, It is an universal obedience, which extends it self to all the
Commands of God alike, it respects the duties of both Tables, such was the
obedience of Caleb, who followed the Lord fully, and of David who hadrespct to
all the commands.

Thirdly, It is a continual obedience, a putting the hand to Gods Plow without
looking back, Iucipere muliorum est, perseverare poucorum. Bern.
I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always even to the end. Psalm.
119.112.

He that thus obeys the Command of God is a Christian indeed, a friend of
Christ indeed, but all obedience to the commands of God is not this obedience.
For,

1. There is a partial obedience, a peece-meal Religion, when a man obeys God
in one command and not another, own's him in one duty and not another, when a
man seems to make conscience of the duties of one Table, and not of the duties
of another. This is the Religion of most.

Now this obedience is no obedience, for as he that does not love God above
all, does not love God at all; so he that does not obey all the commands
universally, cannot be said to obey any command truly. It is said of those in
Samaria, that they feared the Lord, and served their own Gods, after their own
manner, 2 Kings 17.33. and yet in the very next verse, it is said, they feared
not the Lord, so that their fear of the Lord was no fear: in like manner that
obedience to God is no obedience which is but a partial and peice-meal
obedience.

2. A man may obey much, and yet be in his old nature, and if so, then all his
obedience in that estate, is but Splendidum peccatum a painted sin, he that
offers an oblation is as if he offered swines blood, and he that burns
incense as if he blessed an Idol. Isa. 66.3. The nature must be renewed before
the command can be rightly obeyed, for a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit. Matthew. 7.18.

Whatever a man's performances are, they cannot be called obedience, whilst the
heart remains unregenerate, because the principle is false and unsound; every
duty done by a beleiver is accepted of God as a part of his obedience to the
will of God, though it be done in much weakness, because though the beleivers
hand is weak, Ephesians. 6.6. Romans 6.17.
yet his heart is right, the Hypocrite may have the most active hand, but the
beleiver has the most faithful and sincere heart.

3. A man may obey the law, and yet have no love to the Lawgiver; a carnal
heart may do the command of God, but he cannot love God, and therefore cannot
do it arigt, for love to God is the foundation and spring of all true
obedience, every command of God is to be done in love, this is the fulfilling
of the law, Romans 13.10. The Apostle says, Though I bestow all my goods to feed
the poor, and though I give my body to be burned; these seem to be acts of the
highest obedience, yet if I have not love, it profits me nothing. 1 Cor. 13.3.

4. I might add, that a man may be much in obedience from finister and base
selfish ends, as the Pharisees, prayed much, gave much alms, fasted much, but
our Lord Christ tells us that it was that they might be seen of men, and have
glory of men, Mat. 6.2, 5, 16. most of the Hypocrites piety, empties it self
into vain glory, and therefore he is but an empty vine in all he does, because
he brings forth fruit to himself. Hos. 10.1.

It is the end that justifies the action, indeed a good end cannot make a bad
action good, but yet the want of a good end, makes a good action bad.

Now then if a man may obey the commands of God, partially and by halves, if he
may do it, and yet be in his natural state, if he may obey the commands of God,
and yet not love God, if the ends of his obedience may be sinful and
unwarrantable, then a man may be much in obeying the Commands of God, and yet
be but almost a Christian.

19. A man may be sanctified, and yet be but almost a Christian, every kind of
Sanctification does not make a man a new creature, for many are sanctified that
are never renewed. You read in the 10. Chap. to the Hebrews and the 29. verse.
of them that count the blood, of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified an
unholy thing.

that both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all one, for
which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren? Heb. 2.11. and can a man
be one with Christ, and yet be but almost a Christian?

Sol.
To this, I answer, you must know there is a twofold work of sanctification
spoken of in Scripture.

The one common and ineffectual.

The other, special and effectual.

Romans 8.13. 1 Pet. 1.2 Heb. 13.21.
That work of sanctification which is true and effectual is a work of the spirit
of God in the soul, inabling it to the mortifying of all sin, to the obeying of
every command, to walking with God in all well-pleasing.

Ephesians. 5.30.
Now whoever is thus sanctified is one with him that sanctifies, Christ will
not be ashamed to call such brethren, for they are flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone.

Mat. 12.44.
To. 6.11.
But then there is a more common work of sanctification, which is ineffectual as
to the two great works of dying to sin, and living to God. This kind of
sanctification may help to restrain sin, but not to mortify sin, it may lop
off the boughs, but it lays not the Ax to the root of the tree, it sweeps and
garnishes the room with common virtues, but does not adorn it with saving
graces, so that a man is but almost a Christian, notwithstanding this
sanctification.

Or thus, there is an Inward and Outward Sanctification.

Inward Sanctification, is that which deals with the soul and its faculties;
understanding, conscience, will, memory and affections; Outward Sanctification
is that which deals with the life and conversation, both these must concur to
make a man a Christian indeed, therefore the Apostle puts them together in his
prayer for the Thessalonians. 1 These. 5.23.

The God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole spirit and
soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Heb. 10.22.
Non magna munera, sed immunis manus mensq, sincera deo placent.
A man is then sanctified wholly when he is sanctified both inwardly and
outwardly, both in heart and affections, and in life and conversation. Outward
sanctification is not enough without Inward, nor inward without outward, we
must have both clean hands, and a pure heart. Psalm. 24.4. the heart must be
pure that we may not incur blame from within, and the hands must be clean that
we may not incur shame from without, we must have hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and bodies washed with pure water. We must cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. inward purity is the most
excellent, but without the outward it is not sufficient, the true Christian is
made up of both.

Mat. 27.24.
Mat. 23.25.
Now many have clean hands, but unclean hearts, they wash the outside of the cup
and Platter, when all is filthy within; Now the former without the latter
profits a man no more then it profited Pilate, who condemned Christ, to wash
his hands in the presence of the people, Manus abluit and cor polluit, he
washed his hands of the blood of Christ, and yet had a hand in the death of
Christ. The Egyptian Temples were beautiful on the outside, but within you
should find nothing but some Serpent or Crocodile, He is not a Jew, which is
one outwardly, Romans 2.28. Judas was a Saint without, but a sinner within,
openly a Disciple, but secretly a Devil. Ioh. 6.70


Some pretend to inward sanctity without outward; this is the pretense of the
open sinner, though I sometimes drop an idle foolish word, says he, or though
I sometimes swear an Oath, yet I think no hurt, I thank God, my, heart is as
good as the best, such are like the sinner Moses mentions, that blessed himself
in his heart saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of
mine own heart, to add drunkness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 19.20.

Some pretend outward sanctity without inward; such are like the Scribes and
Pharisees, who outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within are full of
Hypocrisy and iniquity, Mat. 23.28. fair professors but foul sinners.

Inward sanctity, without outward is impossible, for it will reform the life;
outward sanctity without inward is unprofitable, for it will not reform the
heart; a man is not a true Christian without both, the body does not make a man
without the soul, nor the soul without the body, both are essential to the
being of man, so the sanctification of both, are essential to the being of the
new man; True Sanctification begins at the heart, but works out into the life,
and conversation, and if so, then a man may attain to an outward
sanctification, and yet for want of the inward, be no better then almost a
Christian.

20. And so I shall end this long pursuit of the almost Christian in his
progress Heavenward, with this one general conclusion.

A man may do all (as to external duties and worship) that a true Christian
can, and when he has done all, be but almost a Christian.

You must know all the Commands of God have an intra and an extra, there is (as
may say,) the body and the soul of the command.

And accordingly there is an internal and an external worship of God.

Now the internal acts of worshipping of God, are to love God, to fear God, to
delight in God, to trust in God, etc.

The external acts of Worshipping God, are by praying, teaching, hearing, etc.

Now there is a vast difference between these internal and external acts of
Worship, (and indeed such a difference there is, that they distinguish the
altogether, from the almost Christian, The sincere beleiver from the unsound
professor; and indeed in this very thing, the main difference between them does
lie.

1. Internal acts of Worship are good, propter fieri, the goodness does adhere
intrinsecally to the thing done, a man cannot love God nor fear God, but it
will be imputed to him for a gracious act, and a great part of his Holiness.

But now external acts of Worship, are not denominated good, so much from the
matter done, propter fieri, as from the manner of doing them; a man cannot sin
in loving and delighting in God, but he may sin in praying and hearing etc. for
want of a due manner.

2. Internal acts of worship put a goodness into external, it is our faith, our
love, our fear of God, that makes our duties good.

3. They better the heart, and greaten the degrees of a man's holiness; external
duties do not always do this, a man may pray, and yet his heart never the
holier, he may hear the word, and yet his heart never the softer; but now the
more a man fears God, the wiser he is, Prove. 1.7. the more a man loves God, the
holier he is; love is the perfection of holiness; we shall never be perfect in
holiness, till we come to be perfect in love.

4. There is such an excellency in this internal worship, that he who mixes it
with his external duties is a true Christian when he does least; but without
this mixture, he is but almost a Christian, that does most.

Internal acts of Worship, joined with outward, sanctify them and make them
accepted of God, though few; external acts of Worship without inward, make them
abhorred of God, though they be never so many.

So that though the almost Christian may do all those duties in Hypocrise,
which a true Christian does in sincerity, nay though in doing external duties,
he may outdo the true Christian, (as the comet makes a greater blaze then the
true Stars; if Eliah fast and mourn, Baals Priests will cut their flesh.)

Yet he cannot do those internal duties that the meanest true Christian can.

The almost Christian can pray, but he cannot love God, he can teach or hear,
etc. but he cannot take delight in God.

Mark Job's query concerning the Hypocrite, Job 27.10. This is Christianorum
pro pria virtus.
will he delight himself in the Almighty?

He will pray to the Almighty, but will he delight himself in the Almighty;
will he take pleasure in God?

Ah no! he will not, he cannot.

Delight in God, arise, from a suitableness between the faculty and the object,
now none more unsuitable then God and a carnal heart.

Delight arises from the having what we desire, Haec prrpris est delectationis
materia, si cum habeas quae desideraveris, defideratis perfruaris Pined in Loc.
and from enjoying what we have; how then can he delight in God, that neither
enjoys, nor has, nor truly desires God?

Delight in God is one of the highest exercises of grace, and therefore how can
he delight in God that has no grace?

Why then should any Saint of God be discouraged when he hears how far the
almost Christian may go in the way to Heaven, when as he that is the weakest
true beleiver, that has the least true grace, goes farther then he, for he
beleives in, and loves God.

Should the almost Christian do less (as to matter of external duties) yet if
he had but the least true faith, the least sincerity of love to Christ, he
would surely be saved; and should the true Christian do ten times more duties
then he does, yet had he not faith in Christ, and love to Christ, he would
surely be rejected.

Oh therefore let not any weak beleiver, be discouraged, though Hypocrites may
outdo them, and go beyond them in duty, for all their duties are done in
Hypocrisy, but your faith and love to God in duties, is a proof of your
sincerity.

I do not speak this to discourage any soul in the doing of duties, or to beat
down outward performances, but to rectify the soul in the doing of them.

1 Cor. 12 31.
As the Apostle says, covet earnestly the best gifts, but yet I show unto you a
more excellent way; so I say, covet the best gifts, cover to be much in duties,
much in prayer, much in hearing, etc. But yet I show you a more excellent way,
and that is, the way of faith and love, pray much, but then believe much too.
Hear much, read much, but then love God much too. Delight in the Word and
Ordinances of God much, but then delight in the God of Ordinances more.

And when you are most in duties as to your use of them, Oh then, be sure to be
above duties as to your resting and dependence upon them.

Would you be Christians indeed, altogether Christians? oh then, be much in the
use and exercise of ordinances, but be much more in faith and dependence upon
Christ and his Righteousness: when your obedience is most to the command, then
let your faith be most upon the promise.

The professor rests in his duties, and so is but almost a Christian, but you
must be sure to rest upon the Lord Christ, this is the way to be altogether
Christians, for if ye believe then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise.

And thus I have answered the first query, to wit how far may a man go in the
way to Heaven, and yet be but almost a Christian?

1. He may have much knowledge. 2. He may have great gifts. 3. He may have a
high profession. 4. He may do much against sin. 5. He may desire grace. 6. He
may tremble at the Word. 7. He may delight in the Word. 8. He may be a Member
of the Church of Christ. 9. He may have great hopes of Heaven. 10. He may be
under great and visible changes. 11. He may be very zealous in the matters of
Religion. 12. He may be much in prayer. 13. He may suffer for Christ. 14. He
may be called of God. 15. He may in some sense have the spirit of God. 16. He
may have some kind of faith. 17. He may love the people of God. 18. He may go
far in obeying the Commands of God. 19. He may be in some sense sanctified. 20.
He may do all (as to external duties) that a true Christian can, and yet be no
better then almost a Christian.
The second Question.
Why or whence is it that many men go so far as that they come to be almost
Christians?

First, It may be to answer the call of conscience, though few men have grace,
yet all men have conscience.

Now do but observe, and you shall see how far conscience may go in this work.

1. Conscience owns a God, and that this God must be worshipped and served by
the creature, Atheists in practice we have many, such as the Apostle speaks of,
Tit. 1.16. They profess they know God, but in works they deny him.

But Atheists in judgment none can be, Tully a Heathen could say, nulla gens
tam barbara, etc.

Now their being such a light in conscience as to discover that their is a God,
and that he must be Worshipped; by the help of farther light, the light of the
word, a man may be enabled to do much in the ways of God, and yet his heart
without a dram of grace.

2. Know this, that natural conscience is capable of great improvements from
the means of grace; sitting under the ordinances, may exceedingly heighten the
indowments of Conscience; though they do not sanctify conscience, it may be
much regulated; though it be not at all renewed, it may be enlightened;
convinced, and yet never savingly converted and changed.

Ye read in Heb. 6.4. of some that were once enlightened, and tasted of the
Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy ghost. What work shall we
call this? It could not be a saving work, a true change and conversion of
state, for notwithstanding this inlightning, and tasting, and partaking, yet
they are here said to fall away, v. 6.

Luke 22.32.
Deuteronomy. 33.27.
Had it been a true work of grace, they could never have fallen away from that,
a beleiver may fall, but he cannot fall away; he may fall foully, but he can
never fall finally, for underneath are the everlasting arms; his faith is
established in the strength of that prayer of Christ, that our faith fail not,
nay he tells us expressly, that it is eternal life which he gives, from which we
shall never perish, John 10.28.

This work then here spoken of cannot be any saving work, because it is not an
abiding work, for they that are under it, are said to fall away from it; but
though it be not a saving work, yet it is a supernatural work, it is an
improvement made by the word upon the consciences of men through the power of
the Spirit; and therefore they are said to taste the good word of God, and to be
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, they have not the spirit abiding in them
savingly, but striving with them, and working upon them convincingly, to the
awakening and setting conscience on work. And conscience thus stirred may carry
a man very far in Religion, and in the duties of the Gospel, and yet be but a
natural conscience.

A common work of the spirit may stead a man very much in the duties of
Religion, though it must be a special work of the spirit that steads a man to
salvation, a man may have the assisting presence of the spirit inabling him to
preach and pray, and yet he may perish for want of the renewing presence of the
spirit, inabling him to believe, Judas had the former, and yet perished for
want of the latter, he had the spirit assisting him to cast out devils, but yet
he had not the spirit renewing him, for he was cast out himself.

Thus a man may have an improved conscience, and yet be a stranger to a renewed
conscience; and conscience thus improved, may put a man very much upon duty.

I pray God none of us mistake a conscience thus improved by the word, for a
conscience renewed by the spirit, the mistake is very easy, especially when a
life of duties is the fruit of it.

3. The conscience of a natural man is subject to distress and trouble, though
a natural conscience is not sanctified with grace, yet it is often troubled at
sin, trouble of conscience is not incident to beleivers only, but sometimes to
unbeleivers also. A beleivers conscience, is sometimes troubled when his sin is
truly pardoned, and a natural man's conscience is troubled for sin, though it
is never freed from sin. God sometimes sets the word home upon the sinners
conscience and applies the terrors of the law to it, and this fills the soul
with fear and horror, of death, and hell, now in this case the soul usually
betakes it self to a life of duties, merely to fence trouble out of conscience.

2 Samuel 14.30, 31.
When Absalom sets fire on Joabs corn fields, then he runs to him, though he
refused before, so when God lets a spark of Hell (as it were) fall upon the
sinners conscience in applying the terrors of the word, this drives the sinner
to a life of duties, which he never minded before; The ground of many a man's
engaging in Religion, is the trouble of his conscience, and the end of his
continuing in Religion is the quieting of conscience; if conscience would never
check him, God should never from him.

Natural conscience has a voice, and speaks aloud many times in the sinners
ears, and tells him, this ought not to be done, God must not be forgotten,
the commands of God ought not to be slighted, living in sin will be the ruin
of the soul, and hence it is that a natural man runs to duties, and takes up a
lifeless and graceless profession that he may thereby silence conscience.

As a man sick in his stomach, what ever sweet morsel he has eaten, he brings
up all; and although it was sweet in the eating, yet it is bitter in the rising.

So it fares with the sinner, when he is Sermon-sick, or Conscience-sick,
though his sin was sweet in the practice, yet the thought of it rises bitter
upon the conscience, and then his profession of religion is the pill he rouleth
about in his mouth, to take away the bitterness of-sins taste.

4. Natural conscience enlightened by the word may discover to a man much of the
misery of a natural state, though not effectually to bring him out of it, yet
so as to make him restless and weary in it; it may show a sinner his nakedness,
and hereupon the soul runs to a life of duties, thinking hereby to stead the
misery of his case, and to make a covering for his nakedness. It is said Genesis
3.7. That when Adam and Eve saw they were naked, they sewed Fig leaves together
and made themselvelves a covering. So when once the sinner sees his nakedness
and vileness by reason of sin, whereas he should run to Christ, and close with
him, and beg his righteousness for a covering, that the shame of his nakedness
do not appear, Rev. 3.18. he rather runs to a life of duties and
performances, and thus makes himself a covering wlth the fig leaves of a
profession without Christ truly embraced, and conscience at all renewed.

Naural man would fain be his own Savior, and suposeth a change of state to be
a thing within his own power, and that the true work of grace lies in leaving
off the practice of fin, and taking up a life of duties, and therefore upon
this principle does many a graceless professor outstrip a sound beleiver, for
he rests in his own performances, and hops these will commend him to God.

a natural conscience may go thus far, then what difference is there between
this natural conscience in Hypocrites and sinners, and a renewed conscience in
beleivers? or how may I know whether the workings of my conscience be the
workings of nature only, or else of grace wrought in it.



1. It arises from that Hypocrisy that is in the best Saints, the weakest
beleiver is no Hypocrite, but yet there is some Hypocrisy in the strongest
beleiver; where there is most grace, there is some sin, and where there is most
sincerity, yet there is some Hypocrisy.

Now it is very incident to a tender conscience, to misgive and mistrust its
state, upon the fight of any sin; when he sees Hypocrisy break out in any duty
or performance, then he complains surely my aims are not sincere, my
conscience is not renewed, it is but natural conscience enlightened, not by
grace purged and changed.

2. It arises from that resemblance there is between grace and Hypocrisy, for
Hypocrisy is a resemblance of grace Pigmalion m^ae an image so lively, ib it
hedeceived himself, and taking the Victure for a person fell in love with the
Picture.
without substance, the likeness of grace, without the life of grace. There is
no grace but a Hypocrite may have somewhat like it, and there is no duty done
by a Christian, but an Hypocrite may outstrip him in it. Now when one that has
not true grace shall go farther then one that has, this may well make the
beleiver question whether his grace be true or not; or whether the workings of
his conscience, be not the workings of nature only rather then of grace
wrought in it.

But to answer the Question, you may make a judgment of this in these seven
particulars.

1. If a natural man's conscience, puts him upon duty, he does usually bound
himself in the Work of God: his duties are limited, his obedience is a limited
obedience, he does one duty and neglects another, he picketh and chooses
among the Commands of God, obeys one and slighteth another. Thus much is
enough, what need any more, if I do thus and thus, I shall go to Heaven at last.

Ps. 119.20
But now where Conscience is renewed by grace, there it is otherwise; Though
there may be many weaknesses which accompany its duties, yet that soul never
bounds it self in working after God, it never loves God so much but still it
would love him more, nor seeks him so much, but still it would seek him more,
nor does it serve God so well at any time, but still it makes conscience of
serving him better. A renewed conscience is a spring of universal obedience,
Psalm. 119.128. for it sees an infinite excellency, and goodness, and holiness
in God, and therefore would fain have its service rise up toward some
proportionableness to the object; a God of infinite excellency and goodness,
should have infinite love says Conscience, a holy God should have service from
a holy heart says conscience.

Now then, If I set bounds to my love to God, or to my service to God, if I
limit my self in my obedience to the holy God, love one command and slight
another, obey in one point, and yet lie cross in another, then is all I do but
the working of a natural conscience: But on the other hand, if I love the Lord
with my whole heart, and whole soul, and serve him with all my might, Mat.
22.37. Mark 17.33.
and strength, If I esteem all Gods precepts concerning all things to be right,
and have respect to all the Commands, then is my love and service from a
renewed conscience.

2. If a natural man's conscience check or accuse for sin, then he seeks to
step the mouth of it, but not to satisfy it, most of the natural man's duties,
are to still and stifle conscience.

But now the beleiver chooses rather to let conscience cry, then to stop the
mouth of it, until he can do it upon good terms, until he can fetch in
satisfaction to it, from the blood of Jesus Christ, by fresh acts of faith,
apprehended and applied.

The natural man seeks to still the noise of conscience, rather then to
remove the guilt, the beleiver seeks the removal of guilt, by the application
of Christ's blood, and then conscience is quiet of it self. As a foolish man,
having a Mote fallen into his eye, and making it water, he wipeth away the
water, and labors to keep it dry, but never searches his eye to get out the
Mote; but a wise man minds not so much the wiping as the searching his eye,
somewhat is got in, and that causes the watering, and therefore the cause
must be removed.

Now then if when conscience accuses for sin, I take up a life of duties, a
form of godliness to stop the mouth of Conscience, and if hereupon conscience
be still and quiet, then is this but a natural conscience; but if when
conscience checks, it will not be satisfied with any thing but the blood of
Christ, and therefore I use duties to bring me to Christ, and if I beg the
sprinckling of his blood upon conscience, and labor not so much to stop the
mouth of it, as to remove guilt from it, then is this a renewed conscience.

3. There is no natural man let him go never so far, let him do never so much
in matters of Religion, but still he has his Dalilah, his bosom lust. Judas
went far, Ioh. 12.6.
but he carried his covetousness along with him, Herod went far, Mar. 6.20
he did many things under the force of John's Ministry, but yet there was one
thing he did not, he did not put away his Brothers Wife, v. 17, 18.
his Herodias lay in his bosom still. Nay commonly all the natural man's duties
are to hide some sin, his profession is only made use of for a covershame.

Psa. 66.18
Psa. 119.128.
But now the renewed conscience, hates all sin, as David did, I hate every
false way; he regards no iniquity in his heart, he uses duties, not to cover
sin, but to help work down, and work out sin.

To. 2.23.
Now then, if I profess Religion, if I make mention of the Name of the Lord, and
make my boast of the law, and yet through breaking the law, dishonor God, if I
live in the love of any sin, and make use of my profession to cover it, then am
I an Hypocrite, and my duties flow but from a natural conscience, but on the
other hand, if I name the name of the Lord Jesus, and withal depart from
inquity, if I use duties, not to cover, 2 Timothy 2.19.
but to discover and mortify sin, then am I upright before God, and my duties
flow from a renewed conscience.

4. A natural man pride's himself in his duties, if he be much in duty, then he
is much lifted up under duty; so did the Pharisee, Luke 18. Luke 18.11, 12.
God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, and why? where lay the
difference? why I fast twice in the week, I give Tithes of all, etc.

2 Timothy 4, 2
But now take a gracious heart, a renewed conscience, and when his duties are at
highest, then is his heart at lowest; Thus it was with the Apostle Paul, he was
much in service, in season and out of season, Preaching up the Lord Jesus with
all boldness and earnestness, and yet very humble in a sense of his own
unworthiness under all, I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.9.
To me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this grace given that I
should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ Ephesians. 3.8.
and again in the 1 Timothy 1.15. of sinners I am chief: thus a beleiver when he is
highest in duties, then is he lowest in humility; duty puffs up the
Hypocrite, but a beleiver comes away humbled; and why? because the Hypocrite
has had no visions of God, he has seen only his own gifts and parts, and
this exalts him, but the beleiver has seen God, and enjoyed communion with
God, and this humbles him: communion with God, though it be very refreshing,
yet it is also very abasing and humbling to the creature, Jerome observes on
Zephaniah, 1 Chap. 1 v. where it is said that ushi was the son of Geduliah, the
son of Amariah, That Amariah signifies the Word of the Lord, Gedaliah
signifies the greatness of the Lord, and Cushi is interpreted humility, or my
Ethiopian.

So that, says he, from the Word of the Lord comes a sight of the greatness
of the Lord, and from a sight of the greatness of the Lord, comes Humility.

Now then if I pride my self in any duty, and am puffed up under my
performances, then have I not seen nor met with God in any duty.

But on the other hand, if when my gifts are at highest, my heart is at lowest,
if when my spirit is most raised, my heart is then most humbled, if in the
midst of all my services I can maintain a sense of mine own unworthiness, if
Cushi be the Son of Gedaliah, then have I seen and had communion with God in
duty, and my performances are from a renewed conscience.

5. Look what that is to which the heart does secretly render the glory of a
duty, and that is the principle of the duty, in Habakkuk 1.16. ye read of them
that Sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their drag, where the glory of
an action is rendered to a man's self, the principle of that action is self: all
Rivers run into the Sea, Eccl. 1.7.
that is an argument they came from the Sea, so when all a man's duties,
terminate in self, then is self the principle of all.

Now all the natural man's d^^^^s run into himself, he was never by a through
work of grace, truly cast out of himself, and brought to deny himself, and
therefore he can rise no higher then himself in all he does, he was never
brought to be poor in spirit, and so to live upon another, to be carried out of
all duties to Jesus Christ.

Ps. 115.1.
But the beleiver gives the glory of all his services to God, what ever
strength or life there is in duty, God has all the glory, for he is by grace
outed of himself, and therefore sees no excellency or worthiness in self.

Gal. 2.20.
I labored more abundantly then they all, says the Apostle, but to whom does
he ascribe the glory of this? to self? no, yet not I, says he, but the grace
of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. when ever the grace of Christ is
wrought in the heart as a principle of duty, you shall find the soul when it is
most carried out, with a yet not I in the mouth of it, I live, yet not I, I
labored more abundantly then all, yet not I, self is disclamed, and Christ
most advanced when it is from grace that the heart is quickened; the twenty-four
Flders cast their crowns at Christ's feet, Rev. 4.10.

There are two things very hard, one is to take the shame of our sins to our
selves, the other is, to give the glory of our services to Christ.

Gal. 6.8.
Now then, if I sacrifice to my own net, if I aim at my own credit or profit,
and give the glory of all I do to self, then do I sow to the flesh, and was
never yet cast out of self, but act only from a natural conscience; but if I
give the glory of all my strength and life in duty only to God, if I magnify
grace in all, and can truly say in all I do, yet not I, then am I truly cast
out of self, and do what I do with a renewed conscience.

6. Though a natural conscience may put a man much upon service, yet it never
presses to the attainment of holiness, so that he carries an unsanctified
heart under all. How long was Judas a professor, and yet not one dram of grace
that he had got, the foolish Virgins (you know) taok their lamps, but took no
oil in their vessels, Mat. 20 3. that is, they looked more after a profession
then after sanctification.

But now when a renewed conscience puts a man upon duty, it is successed
with the growth of holiness; as grace helps to the doing of duty, so duty
helps to the growing of grace, a beleiver is the more holy and the more
heavenly by his being much in duties.

Now then if I am much in a life of duties, and yet a stranger to a life of
holiness, if I maintain a high profession, and yet have not a true work of
sanctification, if (like children in the Rickets) I grow big in the head, but
weak in the feet, then have I gifts and parts but no grace: and though I am
much in service, yet have I but a natural conscience; but on the other hand, if
the holiness of my conversation carries a proportion to my profession, if I am
not a hearer of the word only, but a doer of it, if grace grows in seasons
of duty, then do I act in the things of God from a renewed Conscience.

7. And lastly, if a natural conscience be the spring of duty, why then this
spring runs fastest at first, and so abateth, and at last dries up, but if a
renewed conscience, a sanctified heart be the spring of duty, then this spring
will never dry up, it will run always, from first to last, and run quicker at
last then at first. I know thyworks, and the last to be more then the first,
Rev. 2.19. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9.



nature; nature is a fading root, and so are all it fruits fading; but the
duties done by a renewed conscience, are fruits that grow upon a lasting root,
and that is Christ, gifts have their root in nature, but grace has its root in
Christ, and therefore the weakest grace, shall outlive the greatest gifts and
parts, because there is life in the root of one, and not in the root of the
other: gifts and grace differ like the Leather of your Shoe and the Skin of
your Foot, take a pair of Shoes that have the thickest soals, and if you go
much in them the Leather wears out, and in a little time a man's foot comes
to the ground, but now a man that goes barefoot all his days, the skin of his
feet does not wear out, why should not the soal of his foot, sooner wear out,
then the soul of his shoe, for the Leather is much thicker then the Skin? the
reason is, because there is life in the one, and not in the other, there is
life in the skin of the foot, and therefore that holds out, and grows
thicker and thicker, harder and harder, but there is no life in the soal of his
shoe, and therefore that wears out, and waxes thinner and thinner, so it is
with gifts and grace.

Now then, if I decay and abate and grow weary of a profession, and fall away
at last, if I begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, then was all I did from
a natural conscience; but if I grow and hold out, if I persevere to the end,
and my last works be more then my first, then do I act from a renewed
conscience.

And thus I have in seven things answered that question, viz. if conscience may
go thus far in putting a man upon duties, then what difference is there between
this natural conscience in Hypocrites and sinners, and renewed conscience in
beleivers.

And that is the first answer to the main query, viz. whence is it that many
men go so far as that they come to be almost Christians.

It is to answer the call of conscience.

Secondly, It is from the power of the word under which they live, though the
word does not work effectually upon all, yet it has a great power upon the
hearts of sinners, to reform them, though not to renew them.

1. It has vim discriminationis, a discerning, discovering power, Heb. 4.12.
the Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper then any two-edged Sword,
peircing to the dividing assunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

Iam. 1.23
This is the glass where every man may see what manner of man he is, as the
light of the Sun discovers the little Moths, so the light of the Word shining
into conscience, discovers little sins.

2. The Word has vim legislativam, the power of a law, it gives law to the
whole soul, binds conscience, it is therefore frequently called the law, in
Scripture, Psa. 119 92. Isa. 8.20.
unless thy law had been my delight, etc. To the law and to the testimony, this
is spoken of the whole Word of God, which is therefore called a Law, because of
its binding power upon the conscience.

3. It has vim judicativam, a judging power, John 12.48. The word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, the sentence that God will
pass upon sinners hereafter, is no other then what the word passes upon them
here, the judgment of God, is not a day wherein God will pass any new
sentence, but it is such a day wherein God will make a solemn public
ratification of the judgment passed by the Ministry of the word upon souls
here, this I gather clearly from Mat. 18.18. whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in Heaven, and whatever ye shall loose an earth, shall be loosed
in Heaven, so that by bringing a man's heart to the word, and trying it by that,
he may quickly know what that sentence is that God will pass upon his soul in
the last day; for as the judgment of the word is now, such will the judgment
of God be, concerning him in the last day.

Indeed there is a twofold power, further then this, in the word, It has Vim
plasticam Et vim salvificam,



A begetting and saving power, but this is put forth only upon some.

But the other is more extensive, and has a great causality upon a profession
on of godliness, even among them that have no grace.

A man that is under this threefold power, of discerning, law and judgment,
that has his heart ransacked and discovered, his conscience bound and awed,
his state and sinful condition judged and condemned, may take up resolution of
a new life, and convert himself to a great profession of Religion.

Mat. 6.5.
Thirdly, A man may go far in this course of profession, from affectation of
applause and credit, and to get a name in the World, as it is said of the
Pharisees, they love to pray in the Market places, and in the corners of the
streets, to be seen of men.

Many are of Machiavels principle, that the appearance of virtue is to be
sought, because though the use of it is a trouble, yet the credit of it is a
help.

Jerome in his Epistle to Julian, calls such popularis aurae vilia mancipia, the
base bond slaves of common fame. Many a man does that for credit, that he will
not do for conscience, and owns Religion more for the sake of a lust, then for
the sake of Christ, thus making Gods stream, to turn the Devils mill.

Fourthly, It is from a desire of salvation, there is in all men a desire of
salvation, it is natural to every being, to love and seek its own preservation,
who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6.

This is the language of nature seeking happiness to its self.

Many a man may be carried so far out in the desires of salvation, as to do
many things to obtain it.

Mat. 19.16.
So did the young man, good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may
inherit eternal life? he went far and did much, obeyed many commands, and all
out of a desire of salvation: so then put these together, and there is an
answer to that Question. The call of conscience, The power of the word, The
affectation of credit, and The desire of salvation.


These may carry a man so far as to be almost a Christian.

The third Question propounded is this.

Whence is it that many are but almost Christians, when they have gone thus
far? what is the cause of this.



First, It is for want of right and sound convictions, if a man be not
thoroughly convinced of sin, and his heart truly broken, whatever his
profession of godliness may be, yet he will be sure to miscarry; every work of
conviction is not a through work; There are convictions that are only natural
and rational, but not from the powerful work of the spirit of God.

Rational conviction what?
Rational conviction, is that which proceeds from the working of a natural
conscience, charging guilt from the light of nature, by the help of those (...)
those common principles of reason that are in all men; This is the conviction
you read of, Romans 2.14, 15. It is said that the Gentiles who had not the law,
yet had their consciences bearing witness, and accusing or excusing one
another; though they had not the light of Scripture, yet they had convictions
from the light of nature; now by the help of the Gospel light, these
convictions may be much improved, and yet the heart not renewed.

Spiritual conviction what?
But then there is a spiritual conviction, and this is that work of the spirit
of God, upon the sinners heart by the word, whereby the guilt and filth of sin
is fully discovered, and the woe and misery of a natural state distinctly set
home upon the conscience, to the dread and terror of the sinner, whilst he
abides in that state and condition.

And this is the conviction that is a sound and through work; many have their
convictions, but not this spiritual conviction.

Quere
Now you will say suppose I am at any time under conviction, how shall I know
whither my conviction be only from a natural conscience, or whether they be
from the spirit of God?



1. Natural convictions reach chiefly to open and scandalous sins, sins against
the light of nature, for natural conviction can reach no farther then natural
light.

But Spiritual conviction, reaches to secret, inward, and undiscerned sins,
such as Hypocrisy, Formality, Lukewarmness, deadness and hardness of heart,
etc.

Observe then, whether your trouble for sin, looks inward as well as outward,
and reaches not only to open sins, but to secret lusts, to inward and
spiritual sins, and if so, this is a sure sign of the work of the spirit,
because the trouble occasioned by these sins bears a more immediate relation to
the Holiness of God, who only is offended by them, they being such as none
else can see or know.

2. Natural convictions deal only with a man's conversation, not with his state
and condition, with sins actual, not original; But spiritual convictions, reach
to all sins, to sins of heart as well as sins of life, to the sin of our
nature, as well as the sins of practice; to the sin that is born in us, as well
as the sin that is done by us.

Where the spirit of the Lord comes to work effectually in any soul, he
holds the glass of the law before the sinners eyes, and opens his eyes to
look into the glass, and to see all that deformity and filthiness that is in
his heart and nature.

To. 2.14.
The Apostle Paul says, I had not known sin, but by the Law, Romans 7.7. How can
this be true? that he had not known sin but by the law, when as the light of
nature discovers sin? It is said of the Gentiles, That having not the law, they
are a law unto themselves.

This sin therefore that the Apostle speaks of, is not to be understood of sin
actual, but of sin original; I had not known the pollution of nature, that
fountain of sin that is within, this I had not known but by the law, and indeed
this is a discovery that natural light cannot make; it is true the Philosopher
could say (...), that lust is the first and chief of all sins; Timon apud
Laertium.
but I cannot think he meant it of original sin, but of the inordinacy of
appetite, and desire at most; for I find that the wisest of the Philosophers
understood nothing of original sin, hear Seneca, Erras si tecum vitia nasci
putas, supervenerunt, ingesta sunt, sin is not born with thee but brought in
since. Tam fine vitio quam sine virtute nascimur.

Quintilian says, it is more marvel that any one man sins, then that all men
should live honestly, sin is so against the nature of men; how blind were they
in this point, and so was Paul, till the spirit of the Lord discovered it to
him by the word. And indeed this is a discovery proper to the spirit.

It is he that makes the sinner see all the deformity and filthiness that is
within, it is he that pulls off all the sinners rags and makes him see his
naked and wretched condition, it is he that shows us the blindness of the mind,
the stubborness of the will, the disorderedness of the affections, the
searedness of the conscience, the plague of our hearts, and the sin of our
natures, and therein the desperateness of our state.

3. Natural convictions carry the Soul out to look more on the evil that comes
by sin, then on the evil that is in sin; so that the soul under this conviction
is more troubled at the dread of Hell and wrath, and damnation, then at the
vileness and heinous nature of sin.

But now Spiritual convictions, work the soul into a greater sensibleness of
the evil that is in sin, then of the evil that comes by sin, the dishonor done
to God by walking contrary to his will, the wounds that are made in the heart
of Christ, the grief that the holy Spirit of God is put to, this wounds the
soul more then a thousand Hells.

4. Natural convictions are not durable, they are quickly worn out, they are
like a slight cut in the skin, that bleeds a little, and is soar for the
present, but is healed again, and in a few days not so much as a Scar to be
seen.

But Spiritual convictions are durable, they cannot be worn out, they abide in
the soul till they have reached their end (which is the change of the sinner)

The convictions of the spirit are like a deep wound in the flesh, that goes to
the bone, and seems to endanger the life of the Patient, and is not healed but
with great skill; and when it is healed, leaves a Scar behind it, that when
the Patient is well, yet he can say, here is the mark of my wound, which will
never wear out.

Vna eademque manus pulnus opemque tulit.
So a soul that is under Spiritual conviction, his wound is deep, and not to be
healed, but by the great skill of the Heavenly Physician, and when it is
healed, there are the tokens of it remaining in the soul that can never be worn
out, so that the soul may say here are the marks and signs of my conviction
still in my soul.

5. Natural convictions make the Soul shy of God, guilt works fear, and fear
causes estrangedness; thus it was with Adam, Genesis 3.8.
when he saw his nakedness, he ran away and hid himself from God.

Ier. 31.18
Now spiritual convictions drive not the soul from God, but unto God; Ephraims
conviction was spiritual, and he runs to God, Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned. So that there is you see, a great difference between conviction and
conviction, between that which is natural, and that which is spiritual, that
which is Common, and that which is Saving.

Yea such is the difference, that though a man has never so much of the
former, yet if he be without the latter, he is but almost a Christian, and
therefore we have great reason to inquire more after this spiritual conviction.
For,

1. Spiritual conviction is an essential part of sound conversion, conversion
begins here, true conversion begins in convictions, and true convictions end in
conversion.

Till the sinner be convinced of sin, he can never be converted from sin,
Christ's coming was as a Savior, to dye for sinners, and the spirits coming is
to convince us as sinners, that we may close with Christ as a Savior; till sin
be thoroughly discovered to us, interest in the blood of Christ, cannot rightly
be claimed by us, nay so long as sin is unseen, Christ will be unsought. They
that be whole needs not the Physician, but they that are sick. Mat. 9.12.

2. Slight and common convictions, (when they are but skin deep) are the cause
of much Hypocrisy; Slight convictions may bring the soul to clasp about
Christ, but not to close with Christ, and this is the guise of a Hypocrite; I
know no other rise and spring of Hypocrisy like this of slight convictions,
this has filled the Church of Christ with Hypocrites.

Mat. 13.5, 6.
Nay it is not only the spring of Hypoorisie, but it is also the spring of
Apostasy, what was the cause that the Seed was said to Wither away, Mat. 13.5,
6. is was because it had no deepness of earth. Where there is a through
conviction, there is a depth of earth in the heart, and there the Seed of the
Word grows, but where convictions are slight and common, there the seed withers
for want of depth, so that you see clearly in this one instance, whence it is,
that many are but almost Christians, when they have gone so far in Religion,
viz. for want of sound convictions.

Mat. 13.20, 21.
Secondly, (And this has a near Relation to the former) It is for want of a
through work of grace first wrought in the heart, where this is not, all a man's
following profession comes to nothing; that Scholar is never like to read well,
that will needs be in his Grammar, before he is out of his Primmer; Cloth that
is not wrought well in the Loom, will neither wear well, nor wear long, it will
do little service, so that Christian that does not come well off the Loom, that
has not a through work of grace in his heart, will never wear well, he will
shrink in the wetting, and never do much service for God; it is not the pruning
of a bad tree, will make it bring forth good fruit, but the tree must be made
good, before the fruit can be good, Mat. 12.33.

He that takes up a profession of Religion with an unbroken heart, will never
serve Christ in that profession with his whole heart.

If there be not a true change in that man's heart, that yet goes far and does
much in the ways of God, to be sure he will either dye an Hypocrite or an
Apostate.

Look as in nature, if a man be not well born but prove crooked or misshapen in
the birth, why he will be crooked as long as he lives, you may boulster or
stuff out his clothes to conceal it, but the crookedness, the deformity remains
still, you may hide it, but you cannot help it, it may be covered, but it
cannot be cured.

John 3.5.
So it is in this case, if a man come into a profession of Religion, but be not
right born, if he be not begotten of God, and born of the Spirit, if there be
not a through work of grace in his heart, all his profession of Religion will
never mend him, he may be boulsterd out by a life of duties, but he will be but
a Hypocrite at last, for want of a through work at first, a form of godliness
may cover his crookedness, but will never cure it.

A man can never be a true Christian nor accepted of God though in the highest
profession of Religion, without a work of grace in the heart. For,

1. There must be an answerableness in the frame of that man's heart (that would
be accepted of God) to the duties done by him, his spirit and affections within
must carry a proportion to his profession without; Prayer without faith,
obedience to the law given, without fear and holy reverence of the Law giver,
God abhors: acts of internal worship, must answer the duties of external
worship.

Now where there is not grace wrought in the heart, there can never be any
proportion or answerableness in the frame of that man's heart, to the duties
done by him.

2. Those duties that find acceptance with God, must be done in sincerity, God
does not take our duties by tale, nor judge of us according to the frequency of
our performances, but according to the sincerity of our hearts in the
performance. It is this that commends both the doer and the duty to God; with
sincerity, God accepts the least we do, without sincerity God rejects the most
we do or can do; This is that temper of spirit which God highly delights in,
Prove. 11.20. They that are of a froward heart, 1 Chronicles. 19 17.
are an abomination to the Lord, but such as are upright in their way are his
delight.

We read it Godly sincerity.
The Apostle gives it a great Epithete, he calls it in 2 Cor. 1.12. (...), the
sincerity of God, that is such a sincerity as is his special work upon the
soul, setting the heart right and upright before him in all his ways.

This is the Crown of all our graces, and the commendation of all our duties,
thousands perish and go to Hell in the midst of all their performances and
duties, merely for want of a little sincerity of heart to God.

Jer. 17.9.
Now where there is not a change of state, a work of grace in the heart, there
can be no sincerity to Godward, for this is not quid proveniens a natura, it
is not an herb that grows in natures garden, the heart of man is naturally
deceitful, and desperately wicked, more opposite to sincerity then to any
thing: as things corrupted carry a greater dissimilitude to what they were,
then to any thing else which they never were.

God made man upright, now man voluntarily losing this, is become more dislike
to himself then to any thing below himself, he is more like a Lion, a Wolf, a
Bear, a Serpent, a Toad, then to man in innocence.

So that it is impossible to find sincerity in any soul, till there be a work
of grace wrought there by the spirit of God; and hence it is that a man is but
almost a Christian when he has done all.

The fourth Question.
4. What is the reason that many go no farther in the profession of Religion,
then to be almost Christians?

It is because they deceive themselves in the truth of their own condition,
they mistake their state, and think it good and safe, when it is bad and
dangerous; A man may look upon himself as a member of Christ, and yet God may
look upon him as a Vessel of wrath; as a Child of God, by looking more upon his
sins then his graces, more upon his failings then his faith, more upon in
dwelling lusts then renewing grace, may think his case very bad, when yet it is
very good, I am black, says the Spouse, Cant. 1.5. and yet says Christ, O
thou fairest among Women. v. 8. So the sinner by looking more upon his duties
then his sins, may think he sees his name written in the book of life, and yet
be in the account of God a very reprobate.

Gal. 6.3.
There is nothing more common then for a man to think himself something, when he
is nothing, and so he deceives himself, many a man blesses himself in his
interest in Christ, when he is indeed a stranger to him, many a man thinks his
sin pardoned when alas he is still in the Gall of bitterness and bond of
liniquity. Act 8.23.
Many a man thinks he has Grace when he has none there is (says Solomon)
that makes himself rich, Prove. 13.7.
and yet has nothing; This was the very temper of Laodicea, Rev. 3.17
Thou say I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not (pray mind that) that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor,
and blind and naked.

Thou know not] as bad as she was, she thought her state good, as poor as she
was in grace, she thought she was rich; as miserable and naked as she was, yet
she thought she had need of nothing.

Now there are several rises or grounds of this mistake.

I Will name five to you.

Genesis 27.36.
Supplan tativum cor prae omni.
First, The desperate deceitfulness of the heart of every natural man, Jer.
17.9. the heart is deceitful above all things, the Hebrew is (...) the word
((...)) is the same with Jacobs name, now you know he was a supplanter of his
Brother Esau, he is rightly called Jacob (says he) for he has supplanted me
these two times.

So the word signifies to be fraudulent, subtle, deceitful and supplanting.
Thus is the heart of every natural man, (...) deceitful above all things.

Ps. 52.4.
Ye read of the deceitfulness of the tongue.

And of the deceitfulness of riches. Mat. 13.22. Prove. 31.30. Job 6.15.
And of the deceitfulness of beauty. And of the deceitfulness of friends.
Rev. 20.3
But yet the heart is deceitful above them all, nay you read of the
deceitfulness of Satan, yet truly a man's heart is a greater deceiver then he,
for he could never deceive a man, if his own heart did not deceive him.

Now it is from hence that a man presumes upon the goodness of his case, from
the desperate treachery of his own heart.

Prove. 28.26.
How common is it for men to boast of the goodness of their hearts, I thank
God, though I do not make such a show and pretense as some do, yet I have as
good a heart as the best. Oh do but hear Solomon in this case, He that trusts
in his own heart is a fool: will any wise man commit his money to a Cutpurse?
will he trust a Cheat? It is a good rule, (...), remember to distrust, and it
was Austins prayer, domine libera me a meipso. That man that trusts to his own
heart, shall be sure to find himself deceived at last.

Secondly, This mistake arises from the pride of a man's spirit; there is a
proud heart in every natural man, there was much of this pride in Adams sin,
and there is much of it in all Adams sons, it is a radical sin, and from hence
arises this overweening opinion of a man's state and condition, Solomon says,
Eccles. 7.16. Aug sent. 36;.
be not righteous overmuch, Austin speaking occasionally of those words, says,
it is not justitia sapientis, but superbia praesumentis, not meant of the
righteousness of the wise man, but of the pride of the presumptuous man. Now in
this sense every carnal man is righteous overmuch, though he has none of that
righteousness which commends him to God ( viz. the righteousness of Christ) yet
he has too much of that righteousness, which commends him to himself, and that
is self-righteousness.

A proud man has an eye to see his beauty, but not his deformity, his parts
but not his spots, his seeming righteousness, but not his real wretchedness.

Ephesians. 3.8 1 Timothy 1.15. Lu. 18.11
It must be a work of grace that must show a man the want of grace. The haughty
eye looks upward, but the humble eye looks downward, and therefore this is the
beleivers Motto, the least of Saints, the greatest of sinners, but the carnal
man's Motto is, I thank God I am not as other men.

1 Samuel 21.14.
Thirdly, Many deceive themselves, with common grace instead of saving, through
that resemblance that is between them; as many take counterfeit money for
current coin, so do too many take common grace for true, in similibus facilis
est deceptio. Saul took the Devil for Samuel, because he appeared in the mantle
of Samuel; so many take common grace for saving, because it is like saving
grace; a man may be under a supernatural work, and yet fall short of a saving
work, the first raises Nature, the second only renews Nature; though every
saving work of the spirit be supernatural, yet every supernatural work of the
spirit is not saving, and hence many deceive their own souls, by taking a
supernatural work for a saving work.

2 Timothy 3.5.
Fourthly, Many mistake a profession of Religion, for a work of conversion, and
an outside reformation, for a sure sign of inward Regeneration. If the outside
of the Cup be washed, then they think all is clean though it be never so foul
within. This is the common rock that so many souls split upon, to their eternal
hazard, taking up a form of godlinss, but denying the power thereof.

Fifthly, Want of a home application of the law of God, to the heart and
conscience to discover to a man the true state and condition he is in.

Where this is wanting, a man will sit down short of a true work of grace, and
will reckon his case better then it is. That is a notable passage, which the
Apostle hints concerning himself, Romans 7.9. I was alive without the Law once,
but when the Commandment came, sin revived and I dyed.

Here you have an account of the different apprehensions Paul had of his
condition, with and without the word.

1. Here is his apprehension of his condition without the word, Phil. 3.5, 6.
I was alive (says he) without the Law, Paul had the law, for he was a
Pharisee, and they had the form of knowledge, To. 2.20.
and of the truth of the law, therefore when he says, he was without the law,
you must not take him literally, but spiritually, he was without the power and
efficacy of it upon his heart and conscience, convincing and awakening, and
discovering sin, and so long as this was his case, he doubted not of his state,
he was confident of the goodness of his condition, this he hinteth when he
says, I was alive, but then,

2. Here is his apprehension of his condition with the word, and that is quite
contrary to what it was before, when the commandment came (says he) then sin
revived and I dyed.

When the Word of the Lord came with power upon his soul, when the Spirit of
God, set it home effectually upon his conscience, that is meant by the coming
of the Commandment; then sin revived and I dyed, that is, I saw the
desperateness of my case, and the filthiness of all my self righteousness.

Then my hope ceased, and my confidence failed, and as before I thought my self
alive, and my sin dead, so when God had awakened conscience by the Word, then I
saw my sin alive and powerful, and my self dead and miserable.

So that this is the first reason why men go no farther in the profession of
Religion, then to be almost Christians.

It is because they mistake their state, and think it good, when it is not,
which mistake has a fivefold rise.

A deceitful heart.

A proud spirit.

Taking common grace, for saving.

Outward reformation, for true Regeneration.

Want of a home application of the Law of God to the heart and conscience.

It is from Satan's cunning, who if he cannot keep sinners in their open
profaneness, then he labors to persuade them to take up with a form of
godliness; if he cannot entice them on in their lusts with a total neglect of
Heaven, then he entices them to such a profession as is sure to fall short of
Heaven. He will consent to the leaving some sin, so as we do but keep the rest;
and to the doing some duties, so as we neglest the rest: nay rather then part
with his interest in the soul, he will yield far to our profession of Religion,
and consent to any thing but our conversion and closing with Christ for
salvation, he cares not which way we come to Hell, so as he gets us but thither
at last.

It is from Worldly and carnal policy, this is a great hinderance to many,
policy many times enters Caveats against piety. Jehu will not part with his
calves, lest he hazards his Kingdom.

Among many men there would be more zeal and honesty, were there less design
and policy. There is an honest policy that helps Religion, but carnal policy
hinders it.

Mat. 10.16. Genesis 3.1.
We are commanded to be wise as Serpents, now the Serpent is the subtillist of
creatures, but then we must be innocent as Doves, if piety be without policy,
it wants secur ty, if policy be without piety, it wants integrity; piety
without policy, is too simple to be safe, and policy without piety, is too
subtle to be good.

Let men be as Wise, as Prudent, as Subtle, as Watchful as they will, but then
let it be in the way of God, let it be joined with holiness and integrity.

That is a cursed wisdom, that forbids a man to launch any farther out in the
depth of Religion then he can see the land, lest he be taken in a storm before
he can make safe to shore again.

There is some lust espoused in the heart, that hinders a hearty close with
Christ, though they bid fair yet they come not to Gods terms, Mat. 19.20.
the young man would have eternal life, and he bids fair for it, a willing
obedience to every command but one; but only one, and will not God abate him
one? is he so severe? will he not come down a little in his terms, when man
rises so high? must man yield all? will God yield nothing?

Mat. 13.45, 46.
No, my brethren, he that underbids for Heaven, shall as surely lose it, as he
that will give nothing for it; he that will not give all he has, part with all
for the pearl of price, shall as surely go without it, as he that never once
cheapens it.

The not coming up to Gods terms, is the ruin of thousands of souls, nay it
is that upon which all that perish, do perish; a naked sinner, to a naked
Christ, a bleeding broken sinner, to a bleeding broken Christ, these are Gods
terms.

Most professors are like Iron between two equal loadstones, God draws, and
they propend toward God, and the World draw, and they incline to the World;
they are-between both, they would not leave God for the world, if they might
not be engaged to leave the world for God.

2 Timothy 4.10.
But if they must part with all, with every lust, every Darling, every beloved
sin, why then she spirit of Demas possesses them, and God is forsaken by them.

Gal. 5.7.
My brethren, this is the great reason why many that are come to be almost
Christians, go no farther; some one beloved lust or other hinders them, and
after a long and high profession, parts Christ and them forever; they did run
well, but here it is that they give out, and after all fall short and perish to
eternity.

Thus having answered these four Questions, viz. 1. How far a man may go in the
way to Heaven, and yet be but almost a Christian. 2. Whence it is that a man
goes so far as to be almost a Christian. 3. Whence it is that a man is but
almost a Christian, when he has gone thus far. 4. What is the reason men go no
farther in Religion then to be almost Christians:


I proceed now to the Application.

1. That salvation is not so easy a thing as it is imagined to be, Infer. 1.
this is attested by our Lord Christ himself, Mat. 7.14. Strait is the gate and
narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it. The gate
of conversion is a very strait gate, and yet every man that would be saved
eternally must enter in at this strait gate, for salvation is impossible
without it, except a man be born again ((...), Joh. 3.3.
born from above) he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Joh. 6.37
Mat. 22.3, 5. Act. 13.46.
Not that this gate is strait simply and in respect of it self; no, for
converting grace is free, the gate of mercy stands open all the day long; in
the tenders of Gospel grace, none are excluded, unless they exclude themselves,
Christ does not say, if such and such, will come to me, I will not cast them
out, but him that comes unto me, (be he who, or what he will, if he has a
heart to close with me) I will in no wise cast him out, he says not if this or
that man will, here is water of life for him, but if any man will, let him take
the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17.
Christ grudgeth mercy to none, though salvation was dearly purchased for us,
yet it is freely proffered to us.

So that the gate which leads to life is not strait on Christ's part, or in
respect of its self, but it is strait in respect of us, because of our lusts
and corruptions, which make the entrance difficult, a needles eye is big enough
for a thread to pass through, but it is a straight passage for a Cable rope,
either the needles eye must be enlarged, or the Cable rope must be untwisted,
or the entrance is impossible. So it is in this case, the gate of conversion is
a very straight passage, for a carnal corrupt sinner to go in at; the soul can
never pass through with any one lust beloved and espoused, and therefore the
sinner must be unwisted from every lust, he must lay aside the love of every
sin, or he can never enter in at this gate, for it is a straight gate.

Heb. 12.14.
And when he is in at this straight gate, he meets with a narrow way to walk
in, so our Lord Christ says, narrow is the way that leads to life, and what
way is this but the way of sanctification? for without holiness no man shall
ever see the Lord.

Now this way of sanctification is a very narrow way, for it lies over the neck
of every lust, and in the exercise of every grace, subduing the one, and
improving the other; dying daily, and yet living daily, dying to sin and living
to God, this is the way of Sanctification; And oh how few are there who walk in
this way, the broad way has many Travelers in it, but this narrow way is like
the ways of Canaan in the days of Shamgar, it is said Judges 5.6. In the days
of Shamgar the Son of Anath, the highways were unoccupied, and the Travellors
walked through byways, in the Hebrew it is (...) through crooked ways, the way
of holiness is by the most an unoccupied way, so says the Prophet, Isa. 35.8,
9. A way shall be there, and it shall be called the way of holiness, the
unclean shall not pass over it, no Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast
shall go up thereon, but the redeemed shall walk there; the unclean, and the
lion, and the ravenous beast, they are in the crooked ways, none but the
redeemed of the Lord, walk in the way of the Lord.

Ad Coelests regaum pauce deducuntur.
It is no wonder then, that our Lord Christ says of life that few there be who
find it, when as the gate is strait and the way narrow that leads to it; many
pretend to walk in the narrow way, but they never entered in at the strait gate,
and many pretend to have entered in at the strait gate, but they walk not in
the narrow way.

It is a very common thing for a man to perish, upon a mistake of his way, to
go on in those paths that take hold of Hell, and yet hope to find Heaven at
last; those twenty paths forementioned run into destruction, and yet many choose
them, and walk in them as the way of salvation. As many profane and open
sinners perish by choosing the way of death; so many formal professors perish by
mistaking the way of life; this I gather from that our Lord Christ says, few
there be that find it, which does clearly imply, what in Luke 13.24. he does
plainly express, viz. that many seek it, 1 Cor. 9.24.
many seek to enter in and yet are not able; many run far, and yet do not so
run as to obtain; Facilis discensus Averni, sed revocare graduvs. superasque
evadaere ad auras. His labor hoe opus est, Infer. 2.
many bid fair for the pearl of price, and yet go without it, hell is had with
ease, but the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11.12.

2. If many go thus far in the way to Heaven, and yet miscarry; Oh then what
shall be the end of them who fall short of these! if he shall perish who is
almost a christian, what shall he do who is not at all a Christian? if he that
owneth Christ, and professes Christ, and leaves many sins for Christ, may be
damned notwithstanding, what then shall his doom be who disowneth Christ, and
refuses to part with one sin, one lust, one Oath for Christ, nay that openly
blasphemeth the precious name of Christ? if he that is outwardly sanctified,
shall yet be eternally rejected, what will the case be of such as are openly
unsanctified, that have not only the plague of a hard heart within, but also
the plage sores of a profane life without? if the formal professor must be
shut out, surely then the filthy adulterer, the swinish drunkard, the cheap
swearer, the profane sabbath breaker, the foul-mouthed scoffer, yea and every
carnal sinner much more; if there be a woe to him that falls short of Heaven,
then how sad is the woe to him who falls short of them that fall short of
Heaven? ah that God would make this an awakening word to sinners that are
asleep in sin, without the least fear of death or dread of damnation!

Use of Examine
Are there many in the World that are almost and yet but almost Christians? why
then it is time for us to call our own condition into question, and to make a
more narrow scrutiny into the truth of our spiritual estate; what it is,
whether it be right or no? whether we are sound and sincere, in our profession
of religion or no? When our Lord Christ told his Disciples one of you shall
betray me every one began presently to reflect upon himself, Master is it I?
Master is it I? So should we do, when the Lord discovers to us from his word,
how many there are under the profession of Religion that are but almost
Christians, we should strait way reflect upon our hearts, Lord is it I? is my
heart unsound? am I but almost a Christian? am I one of them that shall
miscarry at last? am I a Hypocrite under a profession of Religion? have I a
form of Godliness without the power?

There are two questions of very great importance which we should every one of
us often put to our selves.

What am I? Where am I?
1. What am I? am I a child of God or not? am I sincere in Religion, or am I
only a Hypocrite under a profession?

2. Where am I? am I yet in a natural state, or in a state of grace? am I yet
in the old root, in old Adam, or am I in the root Christ Jesus? am I in the
Covenant of works, that ministers only wrath and death? or am I in the
Covenant of grace, that ministers life and peace? Indeed this is the first
thing a man should look at, there must be a change of state, before there can
be a change of heart, we must come under a change of Covenant, before we can be
under a change of condition: For the new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and the new spirit is promised in the new Covenant, there is nothing of that
to be heard of in the old; now a man must be under the new Covenant, before be
can receive the blessing promised in the new Covenant; he must be in a new
Covenant state, before he can receive a new covenant heart; no mercy, no
pardon, no change, no conversion, no grace dispensed out of Covenant: Therefore
this should be our great inquiry? for if we know not where we are, we cannot
know what we are, and if we know not what we are, we cannot be what we should
be, viz. altogether Christians.

2 Cor. 13.5.
Let me then I beseech you press this duty upon you that are professors, try
your own hearts, examine your selves whether you are in the faith; prove your
own selves;

I urge this upon most cogent Arguments.

1. Because many rest in a notion of godliness, aad outward shows of Religion,
and yet remain in their natural condition; Jam. 1.22
many are hearers of the Word, but not doers of it, and so deceive their own
souls; some neither hear nor do, these are profane sinners; some both hear and
do, these are true beleivers; some hear but they do not do, these are
hypocritical professors.

He that slights the ordinances cannot be a true Christian, but yet it is
possible a man may own them and profess them, and yet be no true Christian; who
would trust to a profession that shall see Judas a Disciple, an Apostle, a
Preacher of the Gospel, one that cast out Devils to be cast out himself? He is
not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward
in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that
of the heart in the spirit, To. 2.28.
and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

2. Because errors in the first foundation are very dangerous; if we be not
right in the main, in the fundamental work, if the foundation be not laid in
grace in the heart, all our following profession comes to nothing, the house is
built upon a sandy foundation, and though it may stand for a while, yet when
the floods come, Mat. 7.57
and the winds blow, and beat upon it, great will be the fall of it.

3. Because many are the deceits that our souls are liable to in this case;
there are many things like grace, In similibus facilie est deceptio
that are not grace; now it is the likeness and similitude of things that
deceives, and makes one thing be taken for another.

Many take gifts for grace, common knowledge for saving knowledge, when as a
man may have great gifts, and yet no grace, great knowledge, and yet not know
Jesus Christ.

Some take common faith for saving, when as a man may believe all the truths of
the Gospel, all the promises, all the threatenings, all the articles of the
Creed to be true, and yet perish for want of saving faith.

Some take morality and restraining grace, for piety and renewing grace, when
as it is common to have sin much restrained, where the heart is not at all
renewed.

Some are deceived with a half work, taking conviction for conversion,
Reformation for Regeneration: we have many Mermaid Christians.

Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. Dan. 2.32.33.
Or like Nebuchadnezzars Image, head of gold, and feet of clay; The Devil cheats
most men by a Synechdoche, putting a part for the whole, partial obedience to
some commands for universal obedience to all; endless are the delusions that
Satan fastens upon souls, for want of this self-search. It is necessary
therefore, that we try our state, least we take the shadow for the substance,
and embrace a cloud instead of Juno.

4. Satan will try us at one time or other; he will winnow us, Luke 2.31
and sift us to the bottom, and if we now rest in a groundless confidence, it
will then end in a comfortless despair.

Nay God himself will search and try us, at the day of judgment especially, and
who can abide that trial that never trys his own heart?

5. Whatsoever a man's state be, whether he be altogether a Christian or no,
whether his principles be sound or no, yet it is good to examine his own heart;
if he find his heart good, Gal. 6.4.
his principles right and sound, this will be matter of rejoicing, if he find
his heart rotten, his principles false and unsound, the discovery is in order
to a renewing; if a man have a disease upon him and know it, he may send to the
Physician in time, but what a sad vexation will it be, not to see a disease
till it be past cure; so for a man to be graceless, and not see it till it be
too late, to think himself a Christian when he is not, and that he is in the
right way to Heaven, when he is in the ready way to Hell, and yet not know it
till a deathbed, or a judgement-day, confute his confidence; This is the most
irrecoverable misery.

These are the grounds upon which I press this duty, of examining our state: Oh
that God would help us in the doing this necessary duty!

But how shall I come to know whiter I am almost or altogether a Christian? if
a man may go so far, and yet miscarry, how shall I know when my foundation is
right, when I am a Christian indeed?

The altogether Christian closes with and accepts of Christ upon Gospel terms;
true union makes a true Christian: Many close with Christ, but it is upon their
own terms, they take him and own him, but not as God offers him. The terms upon
which God in the Gospel offers Christ, are, that we shall accept of a broken
Christ, with a broken heart, and yet a whole Christ with the whole heart.

A Broken Christ with a broken heart, as a witness of our humility; a whole
Christ with the whole heart, as a witness of our sincerity. A broken Christ
respects his suffering for sin, a broken heart respects our sense of sin; A
whole Christ includes all his Offices, a whole heart includes all our
faculties. Christ is King, Priest and Prophet, and all as Mediator; without any
one of these Offices, the work of salvation could not have been completed: As
a Priest he redeems us, as a Prophet he instructs us, as a King he sanctifies
and saves us. Therefore the Apostle says, He is made to us of God wisdom, 1
Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: Righteousness and Redemption
flow from him as a Priest; Wisdom as a Prophet; Sanctification as a King.

Lu 19.27
Now many embrace Christ as a Priest, but yet they own him not as a King and
Prophet; they like to share in his righteousness, but not to partake of his
holiness; they would be redeemed by him, but they would not submit to him. They
would be saved by his blood, but not submit to his power. Many love the
privileges of the Gospel, spel, but not the duties of the Gospel. Now these
are but almost Christians notwithstanding their close with Christ; for it is
upon their own terms, but not upon Gods. The Offices of Christ may be
distinguished but they can never be divided.

Ioh. 20.28.
But the true Christian owns Christ in all his Offices; he does not only close
with him as Jesus, but as Lord Jesus; he says with Thomas, my Lord and my God.
He does not only believe in the merit of his death, but also conforms to the
manner of his life; as he beleives in him, so he lives to him; he takes him for
his wisdom, as well as for his righteousness; for his Sanctification as well as
his redemption.

2. The altogether Christian has a through work of Grace and Sanctification
wrought in the heart, as a spring of duties. Regeration is a whole change; 2
Cor 5.17.
all old things are done away, and all things become new: It is a perfect work
as to parts, though not as to degrees. Carnal men do duties, but they are from
an unsanctified heart, and that spoils all. A new piece of cloth never does
well in an old garment, for the rent is but made worse. Mat. 9.16
When a man's heart is thoroughly renewed by grace, the mind savingly enlightened,
the conscience thoroughly convinced, the will truly humbled and subdued, the
affections spiritually raised and sanctified: And when Mind, and Will, and
Conscience and Affection, all join issue to help on with the performance of the
duties commanded, then is a man altogether a Christian.

3. He that is altogether a Christian looks to the manner as well as to the
matter of his duties; not only that they be done, but how they be done. He
knows the Christians privileges lies in Pronounes, but his duty in Adverbs; it
must not be only bonum, good, but it must be been, that good must be right
done.

Iam 5.16
Here the almost Christian fails, he does the same duties that others do for the
matter, but he does them not in the same manner; while he minds the substance
he regards not the circumstance: If he pray, he regards not faith and fervency
in prayer; if he hear he does not mind Christ's rule, Take heed how ye hear;
Luke 8.18
if he obeys, he looks not to the frame of his heart in obeying, To. 6 7.
and therefore miscarries in all he does, bonum oritur ex integra causa malum
ex quolibet defectu; any of these dedefects spoil the good of every duty.

4. The altogether Christian is known by his sincerity in all his performances;
whatever a man does in the duties of the Gospel, he cannot be a Christian
without sincerity. Now the almost Christian fails in this; for though he does
much, prays much, hears much, obeys much, yet he is an Hypocrite under all.

5. He thai is altogether a Christian has an answerableness within to the law
without: There is a connatural ness between the Word of God, and the Will of a
Christian; his heart is (as it were) the transcript of the Law; the same
holiness that is commanded in the Word is implanted in his heart; the same
conformity to Christ that is enjoined by the Word of God, is wrought in the
soul by the Spirit of God; the same obedience which the Word requires of him,
the Lord inableth to perform by his grace bestowed on him. This is that which
is promised in the New Covenant, Heb. 9.10 and 10.16.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Jer.
31.33. Now the writing his Law in us, is nothing else but his working that
grace and holiness in us which the Law commands and requires of us.

Psa. 40.8.
2 Cor. 3.3
In the old Covenant Administration God wrote his laws only upon tables of
stone, but not upon the heart, and therefore though God wrote them, yet they
broke them; but in the new Covenant Administration, God provides new tables,
not tables of stone, but the fleshly tables of the heart, and writes his Laws
there, that there might be (...), a law within answerable to the law without;
and this every true Christian has, so that he may say (in his measure) as our
Lord Christ did, I delight to do thy will, O my God, thy law is within my
heart; every beleiver has a light within him, not guiding him to despise and
slight, but to prize and walk by the light without him, the word commands him
to walk in the light, and the light directs him to walk according to the word.

Ioh. 1.16
Moreover from this impression of the law upon the heart, obedience and
conformity to God, becomes the choice and delight of the soul, for holiness is
the very nature of the new creature, so that if there were no Scripture, no
Bible to guide him, yet he would be holy, for he has received grace for grace,
there is a work of grace within, to answer to the word of grace without.

Now the almost Christian is a stranger to this Law of God within, he may have
some conformity to the word in outward conversation, but he cannot have this
answerableness to the word in inward constitution.

6. The altogether Christian is much in duty, and yet much above duty, much in
duty in regard of performance, much above duty, in regard of dependence, much
in duty by obeying, but much above duty by believing. He lives in his
obedience, but he does not live upon his obedience, but upon Christ and his
righteousness.

Psalm. 119, 166.
The almost Christian fails in this, he is much in duty, but not above it, but
rests in it; he works for rest, and he rests in his works: he cannot come to
believe and obey too; if he beleives then he thinks there is no need of
obedience, and socasts off that; if he be much in obedience, then he casts off
beleiving, and thinks there is no need of that. He cannot say with David, I
have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.

The more a man is in duty, and the more above it; the more in doing, and more
in beleiving, the more a Christian.

7. He that is altogether a Christian is universal in his obedience; he does
not obey one command and neglect another; Ps. 119, 6.
do one duty and cast off another, but he has respect to all the commands: He
endeavors to leave every sin, and love every duty.

The almost Christian fails in this, his obedience is partial and peicemeal. If
he obeysone command, he breaks another; the duties that least cross his lust he
is much in, but those that do, he lays aside.

Mat. 23.14.
Mat 33.23.
The Pharisees fasted, prayed, paid tithes, etc. but they did not lay aside
their covetousness, their oppression; they devoured widows houses, they were
unnatural to parents.

8. The altogether Christian makes Gods glory the chief end of all his
performances; if he prays, or hears, or gives, or fasts, or repents, or obeys,
etc. Gods glory is the main end of all; it is true, he may have somewhat else
at hither end of his work; but God is at the further end; as Moses rod
swallowed up the Magicians rods, so Gods glory is the ultimate end that
swallows up all his other ends. Now the almost Christian fails in this; his
ends are corrupt and selfish, God may possibly be at the hither end of his
work, but self is at the further end; for he that was never truly cast out of
himself, can have no higher end then himself.

Now then examine thy self by these characters, put the question to thy own
soul, do thou close with Christ upon Gospel terms? is grace in the heart the
principle of thy performances? do thou look to the manner as well as the
matter of thy dutys? do thou do all in sincerity, is there an answerableness
within to the law without? art thou much above duty, when much in duty? is thy
obedience universal? lastly, is Gods glory the end of all? if so, then art thou
not only almost, but altogether a Christian.

Oh take heed of being almost, 2 Use of Caution.
and yet but almost a Christian, it is a great complaint of God against Ephrai,
Hos. 7.8.
that he is a cake not turned; that is, half baked, neither raw nor roasted,
(...), Neque crudus neque coctus.
neither cold nor hot, as Laodicea Rev. 3.17. because thou art neither hot nor
cold, therefore I will spew thee out of my mouth.

This is a condition that of all others is, Greatly unprofitable, Exceedingly
uncomfortable, Desperately dangerous.

Iam. 2.10
Deus non vult cum exceptione coli.
First, It is greatly unprofitable to be but almost a Christian, for failing in
any one point will ruin us, as surely as if we had never made any attempts for
Heaven. It is no advantage to the soul to be almost converted; for the little
that we want, spoils the good of all our seize; We say, as good never a
whit as never the near, ad nihilum valet quod non valet ad finem suum: there is
no profit in leaving this or that sin, unless we leave all sin; Herod heard
John gladly, and did many things, but he kept his Herodias, and that ruined
him. Judas did many things, prayed much, preached much, professed much, but yet
his covetousness spoiled all; one sin ruined the young man, that had kept all
the Commands but one. Thus he that offends in one point is guilty of all. That
is, that lives willingly and allowedly in any one sin, he brings the guilt of
the violation of the whole Law of God upon his soul, and that upon a twofold
account.

1. Because he manifests the same contempt of the Authority of God, in the
wilful breach of one, as of all.

2. By allowing himself in the breach of any one Command, he shows he kept none
in obedience and conscience to God, for he that hates sin, as sin, hates all
sin; and he that obeys the Command as the express will of God, obeys every
Command. And for this cause the least sin willingly, and with allowance lived
in, spoils the good of all our obedience, and lays the soul under the whole
wrath of God. One leak in a Ship may sink her, though she be tite every where
else; Gideon had seven Sons, Judge, 8.30, 31. comp. with chap. 9. v. 5.
and but one Bastard, and yet that one Bastard destroyed all his Sons, so may
one sin spoil all our services, one lust beloved may spoil all our profession,
as that one Bastard slew all the Sons of Gideon.

Secondly, It is exceedingly uncomfortable, as appears three ways.

1. In that such a one is hated of God and men, the World hates him because of
his profession, and God abhors him, because of his dissimulation; the World
hates him, because he seems good, Rev. 3.15
and God hates him, because he does but seem so. No person that God hates more
then the almost Christian; ver. 6. Tepida evomere cons^evimus ^nde ad vomitum
ctendum quadam aqua tepid^^utuntur. Drusius.
I would thou were either cold or hot, either all a Christian, or not at all a
Christian.

Because thou art neither cold nor hot, therefore I will spew thee out of my
mouth. What a loathsome expression does God here use, to show what an utter
abhorrency there is in him against lukewarm Christians.

How uncomfortable then must that condition needs be wherein a man is abhorred
both of God and man.

2. It is uncomfortable in regard of sufferings; for being almost a Christian,
will bring us into suffering, but being but almost a Christian, will never
carry us through suffering, in Mat. 13.20, 21. It is said, he that receives
the seed into stony ground, the same is he that hears the Word, and with joy
receives it; yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when
tribulation or persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is
offended.

There are four things observable in the Words.

1. That the stony ground may receive the word with joy.

2. That it may for some time abide in a profession of it, he dureth for a
while.

3. That this profession will expose to suffering; for mark, persecution is
said to arise because of the Word.

4. This suffering will cause an apostatizing from profession, for that which
is here called offense, is in Luke 8.13. called falling away, which for a while
believe, and in time of temptation fall away.

I gather hence, a profession may expose a man as much to suffering, as the
power of godliness; but without the power of godliness there is no holding out
in a profession, under suffering. The World hates the show of godliness, and
therefore persecutes it, the almost Christian wants the substance, and
therefore cannot hold out in it

Now this must needs be very uncomfortable; if I profess Religion, I am like to
suffer; if I do but profess it, I am never like to endure.

3. It is uncomfortable in regard of that deceit it lays our hopes under; to be
deceived of our hopes, causes sorrow as well as shame; he that is but almosta
hristian, hopes for heaven, but unless he be altogether a Christian he shall
never come there.

Mat. 25.10.
Now to perish with hope of Heaven, to go to Hell by the gates of glory, to come
to the very door, and then be shut out, as the five Virgins were, to die in the
Wilderness, within sight of the promised land, at the very brinks of Jordan,
this must needs be sad, to come within a stride of the Goal and miss it, to
sink within sight of harbor; Oh how uncomfortable is this?

3. As it is greatly unprofitable, and exceedingly uncomfortable, to be but
almost a Christian, so it is desperately dangerous. For,

1. This does obicem ponere, it hinders the true work, a man lies in a fairer
capacity for conversion, that lies in open enmity and Rebellion, then he that
sooth's up himself in the formalities of Religion. This I gather from that
parable of the two Sons which our Lord Christ urged to the professing Scribes
and Pharisees, Mat. Mat. 21.28, 29.30, 31.
21.28.

There was a man had two Sons, and he came to one and said gowork to day in my
Vineyard; He said, I will not, but afterward repented and went.

And he came to the second, and said likewise; and he said, I go Sir, but went
not.

The first represents the carnal open sinner, that is called by the word, but
refuses, yet afterward repents and beleives. The second represents the
Hypocritical professor, that pretends much, but performs little; Now mark how
Christ applies this Parable, v. 31. Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans
and the Harlots, go into the Kingdom of God before you.

And upon this account it is better not to be at all, then to be almost a
Christian, for the almost hinders the altogether. It is better (in this regard)
to be a sinner without a profession, then to be a professor without out
conversion, for the one lies fairer for an inward change, when the other rests
in an outward. Our Lord Christ tells the Scribe, Mar. 12.34. Thou art not far
from the Kingdom of God, and yet never like to come there. None farther from
the Kingdom of God, then such as are not far from the Kingdom of God. As for
instance, when there lies but one lust, one sin between a soul and Christ, that
soul is not far from Christ, but now when the soul rests in this nearness to
Christ, and yet will not part with that one lust for Christ, but thinks his
condition secured, though that lust be not subdued, who is farther from the
Kingdom of God then he?

So our Lord Christ tells the young man, Mar. 20.21. One thing thou lackest,
why he was very near Heaven, near being a Christian altogether, he was almost
saved, he tells Christ he had kept all the Commands, v. 20. He lacked but one
thing; I say, but one thing, but it was a great thing, that one thing he lacked
was more then all things he had, for it was the one thing necessary, Lu. 10.42
it was a new heart, a work of grace in his soul, a change of state, a heart
weaned from the world, I, this was the one thing and he that lacks this one
thing, perishes with his all things else.

2, This condition is so like a state of grace, that the mistake of it for
grace is easy and common; and it is very dangerous to mistake any thing for
grace, that is not grace, for in that a man contents himself, as if it were
grace. Formality does often dwell next door to sincerity, and one sign serves
both, and so the house may be easily mistaken, and by that means a man may take
up his lodging there, and never find the way out again.

What one says of Wisdom, Multi ad sapientiam pervenissent, nisi se jam
pervenisse putassent, many might have been wise, had they not thought
themselves so, when they were otherwise; The same I may say of grace, many a
formal professor might have been a sincere beleiver, had he not mistook his
profession for conversion, his duties for graces, and so rested in that for
sincerity, which is but Hypocrisy.

3. It is a degree of blasphemy to pretend to grace, and yet have no grace, I
gather this from that Revel. 2.9. I know the blasphemy of them which say they
are Jews and are not. This place under-goes varieties of constructions, Grotius
and Pareus, do not make their blasphemy to lie in their saying, they are Jews
and are not; but to lie in the reproaches that these Jews fastened upon Christ,
calling him imposter, deceiver, one that has a Devil; etc.

Col. 2.14.
Bright-man goes another way, and says, this was the blasphemy of these Jews,
they retained that way of Worship that was abrogated; and thrust upon God those
old Rites and Ceremonies which Jesus Christ had abolished, and nailed to his
pross, by which they overthrew the glory of Christ, and denied his coming. So
that the retaining of Altar-Worship, and the rest of the Levitical Ceremonies
in Gospel Churches, is in Bright-mans sense, a denying Christ is come, and
consequently a degree of Blasphemy.

To. 2.29.
But I conceive the blasphemy of these Jews to lie in this, that they said they
were Jews and were not. A Jew here is not to be taken literally and strictly
only, for one of the lineage of Abraham, but it is to be taken Metonymically,
for a true Beleiver, one of the spiritual seed of Abraham; He is a Jew which is
one inwardly; so that for a man to say he is a Jew when he is not, to profess
an interest in Christ when he has none, to say he has grace when he has
none, this Christ calls Blasphemy.

But why should Christ call this Blasphemy? this is Hypocrisy, but how may it
be said to be Blasphemy? Why? he blasphemes the great Attribute of Gods
Omnisciency; he does implicitly deny that God sees and knows our hearts and
thoughts; for if a man did believe the Omnisciency of God, that he searches the
heart, and sees, and knows all within. He would not dare to rest in a graceless
profession of godliness; this therefore is blasphe my in the account of Christ.

4. It is dangerous to be almost a Christian, in that this stills, and serves
to quiet conscience. Now it is very dangerous to quiet conscience, -- Bello pax
ca deterior.
with any thing but the blood of Christ; It is bad being at peace, till Christ
speaks peace, nothing can truly pacify conscience, less then that which
pacifies God, and that is the blood of the Lord Christ.

Now the almost Christian quiets conscience, but not with the blood of Christ,
it is not a peace flowing from Christ's propitiation, but a peace rising from a
formal profession, not a peace of Christ's giving, but a peace of his own
making; He silences and bribes conscience, with a form of godliness, and so
makes it give way to an undoing, foul destroying peace; he rocks it asleep in
the Cradle of duties, and then it is a thousand to one, it never awaketh more
till death or judgment.

Ah my brethren it is better to have conscience never quiet, then quieted any
way but by the blood of Sprinkling, a good conscience unquiet is the greatest
affliction to Saints, and an evil conscience quiet is the greatest judgment to
sinners.

5. It is dangerous to be almost a Christian in respect of the unpardonable
sin, the sin that the Scripture says, can never be forgiven, neither in this
World, nor in the World to come, Mat. 12.32.
I mean the sin against the holy Ghost, now such are only capable of sinning
that sin as are but almost Christians.

A true beleiver cannot; the work of grace in his heart, that seed of God
abiding in him, secures him against it, 1 John 3.9. compared with the 5. Chap.
16, 17, 18.

Act. 7.51.
The profane, open, ignorant sinner cannot, though he lives daily and hourly in
sin, yet he cannot commit this sin, for it must be from an enlightened mind;
every sinner under the Gospel especially, sins sadly against the Holy Ghost;
against the strivings and motions of the Spirit; he resists the holy ghost, but
yet this is not the sin against the holy Ghost.

There must be three ingredients to make up that sin.

1. It must be wilful, Heb. 10.26. if we sin wilfully after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrisice for sin.

2. It must be against light and convictions, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth.

3. It must be destinata malitia, Blasphemia in s^iritum sanctum ea est qua
quis dest nata ma itia contra proprum anime sui sensum, spiritus sancti grattam
and virtutem, deique gloriam oprugnat. Luc. Brugens. in Mat. 12.
in resolved malice; Now you shall find all these ingredients into the sin of
the Pharisees, Mat. 12.22. Christ heals one that was possessed with a Devil, a
great work which all the people wondered at, v. 23. But what say the Pharisees,
see v. 24. This fellow casts out Devils, by the Prince of Devils; now that
this was the sin against the holy ghost is clear, for it was both wilful, and
malicious, and against clear convictions, they could not but see that he was
the Son of God, and that this work was a peculiar work of the Spirit of God in
him, and yet they say he wrought by the Devil. Whereupon Christ charges them
with this sin against the Holy Ghost, v. 31.32. now these Pharisees were a sort
of great professors; compare this with. Mark. 3.28, 29, 30.
whence I gather this conclusion, That it is the professor of Religion that is
the subject of this sin; Not the open carnal sinner, not the true beleiver, but
the formal professor.

Not the sinner, for he has neither light nor grace; not the beleiver, for he
has both light and grace; therefore the formal professor, for he has light
but no grace. Here then is the great danger of being almost a Christian, he is
liable to this dreadful unpardonable sin.

6. This being but almost a Christian subjects us to apostasy, he that gets no
good by walking in the ways of God, will quickly leave them, and walk no more
in them; this I gather from Hos. 14.9. Who is wise, and he shall understand
these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are
right, and the just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall
therein.

The just shall walk in them] he whose heart is renewed and made right with
God, he shall keep close to God in his ways.

But the transgressors shall faell therein] the word in the Hebrew is (...)
peshangim, from a word that signifies to prevaricate, so that we may read the
words thus; The ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them,
but he that prevaricates, that is a Hypocrite in the Ways of God, he shall fall
therein.

An unsound heart will never hold out long in the ways of God. Joh. 5.35. He
was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice
in that light.

Job 27.10
For a season] (...) for an hour, a short space and then they left him. It is a
notable question Job puts concerning the Hypocrite; Will he delight himself in
the Almighty? will he always call upon God?

He may do much, but these two things he cannot do.

He cannot make God his delight.

He cannot persevere in duties, at all times, and in all conditions.

Pro. 24.16. Deuteronomy. 33.27.
He will be an Apostate at last, the scab of Hypocrisy, usually breaks out in
the plague soar of Apostasy; Conversion ground is standing ground, it is terra
firma, but a graceless profession of Religion is slippery ground, and falling
ground, Julian the Apostate, was first Julian the professor. I know it is
possible a beleiver may fall, but yet he rises again, the everlasting arms are
underneath, but when the hypocrite falls, who shall help him up?

Eccl. 4 10
Solomon says, Woe to him that is alone when he falls, that is without interest
in Christ; why, woe to him? for he has none to help him up, if Jesus Christ do
not recover him, who can? David fell and was restored, for he had one to help
him up; but Judas fell and perished, for he was alone.

7. This being but almost a Christian, provokes God to bring dreadful spiritual
judgment upon a man.

Barrenness is a spiritual judgment, now this provokes God to give us up to
barrenness; when Christ found the fig tree that had leaves but no fruit, he
pronounces the curse of barrenness upon it; Never fruit grow on thee more; Mat.
21.19.
and so Ezekiel. 47.11 The miry places thereof, and the marish places thereof,
shall not be healed, they shall be given to salt.

2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
A Spirit of delusion is a sad judgment; why this is the almost Christians
judgment, that receives the truth, but not in the love of it, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, for this cause
God shall send them strong delusion.

Lu. 19.42
To lose either light or sight, either ordinances or eyes is a great spiritual
judgment; why, this is the almost Christians judgment; he that profits not
under the means, provokes God to take away either light or sight; either the
ordinances from before his eyes, Or else to blind his eyes under the Ordinances.

To have a hard heart is a dreadful judgment, and there is no Hypocrite but he
has a hard heart.

My Brethren, it is a dreadful thing, for God to give a man up to spiritual
judgments.

Now this being almost a Christian, provokes God to give a man up to spiritual
judgments, surely therefore it is a very dangerous thing to be almost a
Christian.

8. Being almost, and but almost Christians, will exceedingly agravate our
damnation; the higher a man rises under the means, the lower he falls if he
miscarries, he that falls but a little short of Heaven, will fall deepest into
Hell; he that has been nearest to conversion, being not converted, shall have
the deepest damnation when he is judged. Capernaums sentence shall exceed
Sodoms for severity, Mat. 11.23, 24.
because she exceeded Sodom in the enjoyment of mercy, she received more from
God, she knew more of God, she professed more for God, and yet was not right
with God, there fore she shall be punished more by God.

^he higher the rise, the greater the fall, the higher the profession, the
lower the damnation: he miscarrveth with a light in his hand, he perishes
under many convictions, and convictions never end but in a sound conversion as
in all Saints; or in a sad damnation, as in all Hypocrites; praying ground,
hearing ground, professing ground, and conviction ground, is of all the worst
ground to perish upon.

Now then to sum up all under this head.

If to be almost a Christian hinders the true work of conversion.

If it be easily mistaken for conversion.

If it be a degree of blasphemy.

If this be that which quiets conscience.

If this subjects a man to commit the unpardonable sin.

If it lays us liable to apostasy.

If it provokes God, to give us up to spiritual judgments.

And if it be that which exceedingly agravate's our damnation, sure then it is
a very dangerous thing to be almost, and but almost a Christian.

A Use of Exhort.
Oh labor to be altogether Christians, to go farther then they who have gone
farthest, and yet fell short; this is the great counsel of the holy Ghost. So
run that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. Give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Need you any motives to quicken you up to this important duty?

1. This is that which is not only commanded by God, Consid. 1
but that whereunto all the Commands of God tend; a perfect conformity of heart
and life to God, is the sum and substance of all the Commands both of the Old
and New Testament. As the Harlot was for the dividing the child, 1 Kings 3.16,
26.
so is Satan for dividing the heart, he would have our love and affections
shared between Christ and our lusts, for he knows that Christ reckons we love
him not at all, unless we love him above all. But God will have all or none. My
Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Lu. 10.27
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy might, Deuteronomy. 6.5.

Look into the Scripture, and see what that is upon which your only stands,
and you shall find that God has fixed it upon those great duties, which alone
tend to the perfection of your state as Christians.

God has fixed your Only upon beleiving, Mar. 5.36. only believe.

God has sixed your only upon obedience, Mat. 4.10. Thou shall Worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Philip. 1.27. Only let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; So that your only is fixed
by God upon those two great duties of beleiving and obeying, both which tend to
the perfection of your state as Christians.

Now, shall God command, and shall not we obey? can there be a higher motive to
duty then the authority of the great God, whose will is the eternal rule of
righteousness? O lets fear God and keep his commandments, for this is (...)
the totum hominis, the whole duty of man, so we read it.

2. Consid. 2
The Lord Christ is a Savior throughout, a perfect and complete mediator; he
has not shed his blood by halves, nor satisfied the justice of God, and
redeemed sinners by halves; No, but he went through with his undertakings, he
bore all our sins, and shed all his blood, he dyed to the utmost, satisfied the
Justice of God to the utmost, redeemed sinners to the utmost, and now that he
is in Heaven he intercedeth to the utmost, and is able to save to the utmost.
Heb. 7.25.


It is observed that our Lord Christ when he was upon earth, in the days of his
flesh, he wrought no Semiplenam curationem, no half cures, but whomsoever they
brought to him for healing, he healed them throughout, Mat. 14.35, 36. they
brought unto him all that were diseased, and besought him that they might only
touch the hem of his garment, and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.

Oh what an excellent Physician is here, none like him, he cures Infallibly,
Suddenly, Perfectly,

He cures infallibly, none ever came to him for healing that went without it,
he never practiced upon any that miscarryed under his hand.

Mar 1.31 and 2.12. Luke 8.44
He cures suddenly, no sooner is his garment touched, but his patient is
healed, The Leper Mat. 8.3. is no sooner touched but immediately cured, the two
blind men Mat. 20. are no sooner touched, but their eyes are immediately
opened, v. 34.

Mat. 14.36.
He cures perfectly, as many as were touched were made perfectly whole.

Now all this was to show what a perfect and complete Savior Jesus Christ
would be to all sinners that would but come to him. They should find healing in
his blood, virtue in his righteousness, and pardon for all their sins, whatever
they were; look as Christ healed all the Diseases of all that came to him when
he was on Earth, so he pardons all the sins, and heals all the wounds of all
those souls that come to him, now he is in Heaven.

He is a Savior throughout, and shall not we be Saints throughout? shall he be
altogether a Redeemer, and shall not we be altogether beleivers? O what a shame
is this!

3. There is enough in Religion to engage us to be altogether Christians,
Consid. 3
and that whether we respect profit or comfort, for Grace brings both.

First, Religion is a gainful thing, and this is argumentum cogens, a
compelling motive, that becomes effectual upon all, gain is the God whom the
World Worships; what will not men do, what will they not suffer, for gain? what
journies do many take by Land, what voyages by Sea, through hot and cold,
through fair and foul, through storm and shine, through day and night, and all
for gain.

Now there is no calling, so gainful as this of Religion, it is the most
profitable employment we can take up. Godliness is profitable unto all things.
1 Timothy 4.8. It is (...), a great revenue, if it be closely followed, it brings
in the greatest income; indeed some men are Religious for the Worlds sake, such
shall be sure not to gain; but they who are Religious for Religions sake, shall
be sure not to lose if, Heaven and Earth can recompense them, for godliness
has the promise of both, 1 Timothy 4.8.
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Prove. 3.13, 14.
Ah who would not be a Christian, when the gain of godliness is so great! many
gain much in their Worldly calling, but the profit which the true beleiver has
from one hours communion with God in Christ, weighs down all the gain of the
World; cursed be that man who counts all the gain in the World, worth one hours
communion with Jesus Christ; said that Noble Marquess Galeacius Garaceiola. It
is no where said in Scripture, happy is the man that finds silver, and the
man that gets fine gold; these are of no weight in the balance of the
Sanctuary, but it is said, Happy is the man that finds wisdom; and the man
that gets understanding; for the Merchandise of it, is better then the
Merchandise of silver, and the gain there of then fine gold.

By Wisdom and Understanding here, we are to understand the grace of Christ,
and so the Spirit of God interprets it. Job. 28.28. Behold the fear of the
Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding

Now of all Merchants, he that Trades in this Wisdom and Understanding, will
prove the richest man, one grain of godliness our-weigheth all the gold of
Ophir, there is no riches, like being rich in grace. For

1. This is the most necessary riches, other things are not so, silver and gold
are not so, we may be, and be happy without them; there is but one thing
necessary, and that is the grace of Jesus Christ in the heart; have this, and
have all, want this, and want all.

2. It is the most substantial gain, the things of this World, Lu. 16.11
are more shadow then substance; pleasure, honor, and profit, comprehend all
things in this World, and therefore are the carnal man's trinity.

Ambitiosus honos, and opes, and foeda voluptas.
Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet.
1 John 2.19.
The Apostle John calls them, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life, this (says he) is all that is in the World; and truly if
this be all, all is nothing; For what is pleasure, but a dream and conceit?
What is honor but fancy and opinion? And what is profit, but a thing of
naught? Why will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? (...) Et non
existu^t
Prove. 23.5. the things of the World have in them no solid subsistence, though
foolish carnal men call them substance.

But now grace is a substantial good, so our Lord Christ calls it, Prove. 9.21.
That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, (...), to inherit
that which is; grace is a reality, other things are but show and fancy.

3. Godliness is the safest gain; the gain of worldly things is always with
difficulty, but seldom with safety; the soul is often hazzarded in the
over-eager persuit of worldly things; nay thousands do pawn, and lose, and damn
their precious souls eternally for a little silver and gold, which are but the
guts and garbage of the Earth. Mar. 16.26.
And what is a man profited to gain the whole World, if he lose his soul?

But the gain of godliness, is ever with safety to the soul, nay the soul is
lost and undone without it, and not saved but by the attainment of it; a soul
without grace, is in a lost and perishing condition; the hazard of eternity is
never over with us, until the grace of Christ Jesus be sought by us, and
wrought in us.

4. Godliness is the surest profit, 1 Timothy 6.17.
as it is safe, so it is sure, men make great ventures for the World, but all
runs upon uncertainties; many venture much, and wait long, and yet find no
return but disappointment, they sow much, and yet reap nothing.

But the gain of godliness is sure, Pov. 11.18. To him that sows
righteousness; shall be a sure reward.

And as the things of this World are uncertain in the getting, so they are
uncertain in the keeping.

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri. Habent non alas passerinas,
sed aquili nas.
If men do not undo us, Moths may; if Robbery does not, rust may; if rust does
not, fire may; to which all earthly treasures are incident, as our Lord Christ
teaches us, Mat. 6.19. Solomon limneth the World with Wings. Prove. 23.5.
riches take themselves wings and fly, as an Eagle toward Heaven. A man may be
rich as Dives to day, and yet poor as Lazarus to morrow; Oh how uncertain are
all worldly things?

But now the true treasure of grace in the heart, that can never be lost, it is
out of the reach both of rust and robber; he that gets the World, gets a good
he can never keep; but he that gets grace, gets a good he shall never lose.

5. The profit of godliness, lies not only in this World, 1 Timothy 4.8
but in the World to come, all other profit, lies in this World only, riches
and honors etc. are called this Worlds good; 1 Io. 3.17
but the riches of godliness is chiefly in the other Worlds goods, in the
enjoyment of God and Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, among Saints and Angels
in glory; lo this is the gain of godliness, Psa. 149.9
such honor have all his Saints.

6. The gain of godliness is a durable and eternal gain; all this Worlds goods
are perishing; perishing pleasures, perishing honors, perishing profits,
perishing comforts; riches are not for ever; says Job, Job 38.22
have thou entered into the treasures of the Snow? Gregory upon these words
observes, that earthly treasures, are treasures of Snow; What pains do children
take to scrape and roll the Snow together, to make a Snow-Ball, which is no
sooner done, but the heat of the Sun dissolves it, and it comes to nothing. Why
the treasures of worldly men, are but treasures of Snow, when death and
judgment come, they melt away and come to nothing. Riches profit not in the
day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 11.4.

You see here the great advantage of godliness, so that if we look at profit,
we shall find enough in Religion to engage us to be altogether Christians. Or,

2. If we look at comfort, Religion is the most comfortable profession, there
are no comforts to be compared to the comforts of grace and godliness.

1. Worldly comfort is only outward, it is but skin deep, in the midst of
laughter the heart is sorrowful, Prove. 14.13. but now the comfort that flows
from godliness is an inward comfort, a spiritual joy, therefore it is called
gladness of heart. Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put gladness in my heart. Other joy
smooths the brow, but this fills the breast.

2. Worldly comfort has a nether spring, the spring of worldly comfort is in
the creature, in some earthly enjoyment, and therefore the comfort of worldly
men must needs be mixed and muddy; Iam. 3.11
an unclean fountain cannot send forth pure water. But spiritual comfort has
an upper spring; the comfort that accompanies godliness flows from the
manifestations of the Love of God in Christ, from the workings of the blessed
Spirit in the heart, which is first a Counselor, and then a Comforter; And
therefore the comforts of the Saints must needs be pure and unmixed comforts,
for they flow from a pure Spring.

3. Worldly comfort is very fading and transitory; Job. 20.5.
The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite is but for
a moment. Solomon compares it to the crackling of Thorns under a pot, Eccles.
7.6. which is but a blaze and soon out, so is the comfort of carnal hearts; But
now the comfort of godliness is a durable and abiding comfort, your heart shall
rejoice, Io. 16.22.
and your joy no man shall take from you.

The comfort of godliness is lasting, and everlasting it abides by us In life,
In death, After death.


Isa. 32.17.
Phili. 1.2. Colos. 12.
First, It abides by us in life, grace and peace go together, godliness brings
forth comfort and peace naturally, the effect of righteousness shall be peace,
it is said of the primitive Christians, they walked in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. every duty done in uprightness
and sincerity, reflects some comfort upon the soul; Psa. 19.11
In keeping the Commands there is great reward, not only for keeping of them;
but in keeping of them; as every flower, so every duty, carries sweetness and
refreshing with it.

But who more dejected and disconsolate the Saints and beleivers? whose lives
are more uncomfortable? whose mouths are more filled with complaints then
theirs? if a condition of godliness and Christianity, be a condition of so much
comfort, then why are they thus?

Isa. 50.10.
Sol.
That the people of God are often times without comfort, that I grant, they may
walk in the dark and have no light; but this is none of the product of
godliness, grace brings forth no such fruit as this, there is a threefold rise
and spring of it.

Sin within Desertion without Temptation without
1. Sin within, the Saints of God are not all Spirit and no flesh, all grace
and no sin; they are made up of contrary principles, there is light and
darkness in the same mind; sin and grace in the same will; carnal and spiritual
in the same affections; Gal. 5.17.
there is the flesh lusting against the spirit in all these, and too often, the
Lord knows, is the beleiver led away captive by these warring lusts; To. 7.23.
so was the holy Apostle himself, I find then a Law, that when I would do good,
evil is present with me; Romans 7.21. and v. 23. I see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity, to the law
of sin, and this was that which broke his spiritual peace, and filled his soul
with trouble and complaints, as you see in the 24. v. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death!

So that it is sin that interrupts the peace of Gods people, indwelling lust,
stirring and breaking forth, must needs cause trouble and grief in the soul of
a beleiver; for it is as natural for sin to bring fotth trouble, as it is for
grace to bring forth peace; every sin contracts a new guilt upon the soul, and
guilt provokes God, and where there is a sense of guilt contracted, and God
provoked, there can be no peace, no quiet in that soul, till faith procures
fresh sprinklings of the blood of Jesus Christ upon the Conscience.

2. Another Spring of the beleivers trouble and disconsolateness of spirit is
the desertions of God; and this follows upon the former; God does sometimes
disappear, and hide himself from his people, verily thou art a God that hidest
thy self, Psa. 13.1.
Isa. 45.15. But the cause of Gods hiding, is the beleivers sinning, your
iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you, Isa. 59.2. In Heaven where there is no sinning, there is no
losing the light of Gods countenance for a moment; and if Saints here could
serve God without corruption, they should enjoy God without desertion; but this
cannot be, while we are in this state remaining lusts will stir and break
forth, and then God will hide his face; and this must needs be trouble, thou
did hide thy face and I was troubled, Ps. 30.7.

Psa. 116.3
The light of Gods countenance shining upon the soul is the Christians Heaven on
this side Heaven, and therefore it is no wonder if the hiding of his face, be
looked upon by the soul as one of the days of Hell, so it was by David. The
sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of Hell gate hold upon me; I found
trouble and sorrow.

3. A third spring of that trouble and complaint that brims the banks of the
Christians spirit, is the temptaions of Satan, Mat. 13.39.
he is (...) the great enemy of Saints, and he envieth the quiet and comfort
that their hearts are filled with, when his conscience is brimmed with horror
and terror; and therefore though he knows he cannot destroy their grace, yet
he labors to disturb their peace: As the blessed Spirit of God is first a
Sanctifier, and then a comforter, working grace, in order and peace; so this
cursed Spirit of Hell, is first a Tempter and then a Troubler, first persuading
to act sin, and then accusing for sin, and this is his constant practice upon
the Spirits of Gods people; he cannot endure that they should live in the light
of Gods countenance when himself is doomed to an eternal intolerable darkness.

And thus you see whence it is that the people of God are often under trouble
and complaint, all arises from these three springs of Sin within. Desertions
without Temptations without


If the Saints could serve God without sinning, and enjoy God without
withdrawing, and resist Satan without yiedling, they might enjoy peace and
comfort without sorrowing, this must be endeavored constantly here, but it
will never be attained fully but in Heaven.

But yet so far as grace is the prevailing principle in the heart, and so far
as the power of godliness is exercised in the life, so far the condition of a
Child of God is a condition of peace, for it is an undoubted truth, that the
fruit of righteousness shall be peace: But suppose the people of God experience
little of this comfort in life, yet

2. They find it in the day of death; grace and holiness will Minister unto us
then, and that ministration will be peace. A beleiver has a twofold spring of
comfort each one emptying it self into his soul in a dying season' one is from
above him, the other is from within him; the spring that runs comfort from
above him, is the blood of Christ sprinkled upon the conscience, the spring
that runs comfort from within him; is, the sincerity of his heart in Gods
service; When we lie upon a death-bead, and can reflect upon our principles,
and performances in the service of God, and there find uprightness and
sincerity of heart running through all, this must needs be comfort, it was so
to Hezekiah, Remember O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with
a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Isa 38.3.

Nothing makes a Deathbed so uneasy and hard, as a life spent in the service
of sin and lust, nothing makes a Deathbed so soft and sweet as a life spent in
the service of God and Christ. Or put the case, the people of God should not
meet with this comfort then, yet

3. They shall be sure to find it after Death; if time bring none of this fruit
to ripeness, why yet eternity shall; grace in time, will be glory in eternity;
holiness now, will be happiness then; what ever it is that a man sows in this
World, that he shall be sure to reap in the next World; He that sows to the
flesh, Gal. 6.7.
shall of the flesh reap corruption; Gal. 6.8.
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting;
To. 6.23.
When sin shall end in sorrow and misery, holiness shall end in joy and glory;
well done thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord,
Mat. 25.23. Whoever shareth in the grace of Christ, and conformeth to the life
of Christ in this World, shall share in the joys of Christ in the World to
come, 1 Pet. 1.8
and that joy is joy unspeakable and full of glory; Lo here is the fruit of
godliness; say now if there be not enough in Religion, whether we respect
profit or comfort, to engage us to be Christians throughout.

4. What an entire resignation wicked men make of themselves to their lusts,
Consid. 4
and shall not we do so to the Lord Christ? they give up themselves without
reserve to the pleasures of sin, and shall we have our reserves in the service
of God? they are altogether sinners, and shall not we be altogether Saints?
they run and not faint in the service of their lusts, and shall we faint and
not run in the service of Christ? shall the sevants of corruption have their
ears boared, Exo. 21.6
at the Door-posts of sin, in token of an entire and perpetual service; and
shall not we give up our selves to the Lord Christ to be his for ever? Isa.
28.15
shall others make a Covenant with Hell and death, Ier. 50.5.
and shall not we join our selves to God in an everlasting Covenant that cannot
be forgotten? Acrius illi ad perniciem quam nos ad salutem? shall they take
more pains to damn their souls, then we do to save ours, and make more speed to
a place of vengeance, then we do to a crown of righteousness? 2 Timothy 4 8


Which do you judge best; to be saved everlastingly, or to perish
everlastingly? which do you count the best Master, God or the Devil? Christ or
your lusts? I know you will determine it on Christ's side: Oh then! when others
serve their lusts with all their hearts, do you serve Christ with all your
hearts; Eccle. 8.5 Ier. 3.5.
if the hearts of the Sons of men be fully set in them to do evil, then much
more let the hearts of the sons of God be fully set in them to do good.

5. If ye are not altogether Christians, Consid. 5
ye will never be able to appear with comfort before God, not to stand in
judgment of the last and great day, for this sad dilemma will silence every
Hypocrite; If my Commands were not holy, just and good, why did thou own
them; if they were holy, just and good, why did thou not obey them? If Jesus
Christ was not worth the having, why did thou profess him? if he was, then
why did thou not cleave to him, and close with him? If my Ordinances were not
appointed to convert and save souls, why did thou sit under them, and rest in
the performance of them? or if they were, then why did thou not submit to the
power of them? If Religion be not good, why do thou profess it? if it be good
why do thou not practice it? Friend how came thou in hither, not having on
a wedding garment. Mat. 22.12.
If it was not a Wedding feast, why did thou come at the invitation? and if
it was, then why did thou come without a wedding garment.

Mat. 11.22.
I would but ask an Hypocritical professor of the Gospel, what he will answer
in that day. Verily you deprive your selves of all possibility of Apology in
the day of the righteous judgment of God; it is said of this man that had no
Wedding garment on, that when Christ came and examined him, he was speechless;
he that is graceless, in a day of grace, will be speechless in a day of
judgment: professing Christ without a heart to close with Christ will leave our
souls inexcusable, and make our damnation unavoidable, and more intolerable.

These are the motives to enforce the duty, and oh that God would set them home
upon your hearts and consciences, that you might not dare to rest a moment
longer in a half work, or in being Christians within a little, but that you
might be altogether Christians.

Quere.
But you will say possibly, how shall I do, what means shall I use, that I may
attain to a through work in my heart; that I may be no longer almost, but
altogether a Christian?



First, Break off all false peace of conscience; Direct. 1
this is the Devils bond to hold the soul from seeking after Christ. As there
is the peace of God, so there is the peace of Satan, but they are easily known,
for they are as contrary as Heaven and Hell, as light and darkness.

The peace of God flows from a work of grace in the soul, and is the peace of a
regenerate state; but the peace of Satan is the peace of an unregenerate state,
it is the peace of Death, in the grave Job says their is peace, Job. 3.17.
there the wicked cease from troubling, so a soul dead in sin is full of peace,
the wicked one troubles him not.

The peace of God in the soul, is a peace flowing from the removal of guilt, by
justifying grace, Romans 5.1. being justified by faith in his blood, we have
peace with God; but the peace of Satan in the soul arises, and is maintained by
a stupidness of spirit, and insensibleness of guilt upon the conscience.

The peace of God is a peace from sin, that fortifies the heart against it, The
peace of God that passes all understanding, (...)
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Philip 4.7. the more of
this peace there is in the soul, the more is the soul fortified against sin;
But the peace of Satan is a peace in sin, the strong man armed keeps the house,
and there all is at peace, Luke 11.21. The Saints peace, is a peace with God,
but not with sin, the sinners peace, is a peace with sin, but not with God; and
this is a peace better broke then kept, it is a false, a dangerous, an undoing
peace, my brethren, death and judgment will break all peace of conscience, but
only that which is wrought by Christ in the soul, and is the fruit of the
blood of sprinkling, when he gives quietness who then can make trouble? Job
34.29. Now that peace that death will break, why should you keep? who would be
fond of that quietness which the flames of Hell will burn in sunder? and yet
how many travel to Hell, through the fools paradise of a false peace.

Oh break off this peace; for we can have no peace with God in Christ, whilst
this peace remains in our hearts; intus existens prohibet alienum. The Lord
Christ gives no peace to them that will not seek it, and that man will never
seek it, that does not see his need of it; and he that is at peace in his lust,
sees no need of the peace of Christ. The sinner must be wounded for sin, and
troubled under it, before Christ will heal his wounds, and give him peace from
it.

2. Labor after a through work of conviction, Direct. 2
every conviction will not do it: the almost Christian, has his convictions as
well as the true Christian, or else he had never gone so far; but they are not
sound and right convictions, or else he had gone farther; God will have the
soul truly sensible of the bitterness of sin, before it shall taste the
sweetness of mercy. The Plow of conviction must go deep, and make deep furrows
in the heart, before God will sow the precious seed of grace and comfort there,
that so it may have depth of earth to grow in. This is the constant method of
God, first to show man his sin then his Savior; first his danger then his
redeemer; first his wound, then his cure; first his ownvileness, then Christ's
righteousness. We must be brought to cry out unclean, unclean, to mourn for him
whom we have peirced, and then he sets open For us a fountain to wash in, for
sin, and for uncleanness, Zach. 12. and the four last verses, compared with
Zach. 13. and the first verse. That is a notable place, Job 33.27, 28. He
looked upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was
right, and it profited me not; He will deliver his soul from going into the
pit, and his life shall see the light. The sinner must see the unprofitableness
of his unrighteousness, before he profits by Christ's righteousness. The
Israelites are first stung with the fiery Serpents, Number. 21.6^8.
and then the brazen Serpent is set up. Ephraim is first thoroughly convinced,
and then Gods bowels of mercy work toward him. Thus it was with Paul,
Manasseh, the Jailer, etc. So that this is the unchangeable method of God in
working grace to begin with conviction of sin.

Oh therefore labor for through convictions, and there are three things we
should especially be convinced of.

First, Be convinced of the evil of sin, the filthy and heinous nature of it,
this is the greatest evil in the World, it wrongs God, it wounds Christ, it
grieves the holy spirit, it ruineth a precious soul; all other evils are not to
be named with this. My Brethren, though to do sin be the worst work, yet to see
sin is the best sight; for sin discovered in its vileness, makes Christ to be
desired in his fullness.

But above all labor to be convinced of the mischief of an unsound heart, what
an abhorring it is to God, what certain ruin it brings upon the soul, Oh think
often of the Hypocrites hell, Mat. 24.51.

Secondly, Be convinced of the misery and desperate danger of a natural
condition, for till we see the plague of our hearts, and the misery of our
state by nature, we shall never be brought out of our selves, to seek help in
another.

Thirdly, Direct. 3
Be convinced of the utter insufficiency and inability of any thing below
Christ Jesus, to minister releif to thy soul in this case: all things besides
Jesus Christ are Physicians of no value; Job 13 4.
duties, performances, prayers, tears, self-righteousness avail nothing in this
case; they make us like the Troops of Tema, Job. 6.19.20.
to return ashamed at our disappointment from such failing brooks.

Alas! It is an infinite righteousness that must satisfy for us, for it is an
infinite God, that is offended by us. If ever thy sin be pardoned it is
infinite mercy that must pardon it, if ever thou be reconciled to God, it is
infinite merit must do it; if ever thy heart be changed, and thy state renewed,
it is infinite power must effect it; and if ever thy soul escape hell, and be
saved at last, it is infinite grace must save it.

In these three things right and sound conviction lies. And wherever the
Spirit of God works these through convictions, it is in order to a true and
sound conversion. For by this means the soul is brought under a right
qualification for the receiving Christ.

You must know, that a sinner, quatenus a sinner, can never come to Christ, for
he is dead in sin, in enmity against Christ, an enemy to God, and the grace of
God; but there are certain qualifications that come between the souls dead
state in sin, and the work of conversion and closing with Christ, Se Nortons
Orthod. Fvangelist p. 130.
whereby the soul is put into a capacity of receiving the Lord Jesus Christ.
For no man is brought immediately out of his dead state, and made to believe in
Jesus Christ. There are termini mediantes, some qualifications coming in
between; now sound convictions are the right qualifications, for the sinners
receiving Christ, Mat. 9.12.13.
for he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; that is,
such as see themselves sinners, and thereby in a lost condition; so Luke
explains it, The son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost;
Luke 19.10.
he is anointed and sent to bind up the broken hearted, to comfort all that
mourn. Isa. 61 1, 2


Oh therefore if you would be sound Christians, get sound convictions; ask
those that are beleivers indeed, and they will tell you, had it not been for
their convictions, they had never sought after Christ for fanctification, and
salvation; they will tell you, they had perished, if they had not perished;
periissem nisi periissem.
they had been in eternal bondage, but for their spiritual bondage; had they
not been lost as to themselves, they had been utterly lost as to Christ.

3. Never rest in convictions, Direction. 3
till they end in conversion: this is that wherein most men miscarry, they rest
in their convictions, and take them for conversion; as if sin seen were
therefore forgiven, or as if a sight of the want of grace, were the truth of
the work of grace.

That is a notable place in Hos. 13.13. Ephraim is an unwise Son, for he should
not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of Children. The place of the
breaking forth of Children is the Womb; as the child comes out of the womb, so
is conversion born out of the womb of conviction. Now when the child sticks
between the Womb and the World, it is dangerous, it hazard's the life both of
Mother and Child; so when a sinner rests in conviction, and goes no farther but
sticks in the place of the breaking forth of Children, this is very dangerous
and hazards the life of the soul.

You that are at any time under convictions; Oh take heed of resting in them,
do not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children; though it is
true that conviction is the first step to conversion, yet it is not conversion;
a man may carry his convictions along with him into hell.

What is that which troubles poor creatures when they come to dye, but this, I
have not improved my convictions; at such a time I was convinced of sin, but
yet I went on in sin, in the face of my convictions; in such a Sermon I was
convined of such a duty, but I slighted the conviction; I was convinced of my
want of Christ, and of the readiness of Christ to pardon and save, but alas I
followed not the conviction.

My brethren remember this, slighted convictions are the worst deathbed
companions. There are two things especially which above all others make a
deathbed very uncomfortable.

1. Purposes and promises not performed. 2. Convictions slighted, and not
improved.
When a man takes up purposes to close with Christ, and yet puts them not into
execution, and when he is convinced of sin, and duty, and yet improves not his
convictions, Oh this will sting and wound at last.

Now therefore, has the Spirit of the Lord been at work in your souls? have
you ever been convinced of the evil of sin, of the misery of a natural estate,
of the insufficiency of all things under Heaven, to help, of the fullness and
righteousness of Jesus Christ, of the necessity of and resting upon him for
pardon and peace, for sanctification and salvation? have you ever been really
convinced of these things? Oh then! as you love your own souls, as ever you
hope to be saved at last, and enjoy God for ever, improve these convictions;
and be sure you rest not in them till they rise up to a through close with the
Lord Jesus Christ, and so end in a sound and perfect conversion, Thus shall you
be not only almost but altogether Christians.

FINIS.
THE TABLE
A AFflictions and the pressures of outward evils will make a man pray. p. 109
C Christian, What meant by it. p. 5 Many are almost, and yet but almost
Christians. p. 9 Whence is it that many go so far, as to be almost Christians.
p. 15, 160 Whence it is that many are but almost Christians when they have gone
thus far. p. 180 Caution to take heed we be not almost and yet but almost
Christians, p. 227 This condition of all other, Greatly unprofitable p. 228
Exceedingly uncomfortable p. 229 Desperately dangerous p. 232 Combat against
sin, may be In a man that is but an almost Christian. p. 70, 71 Church members
not always real Christians. p. 80 Change, Visible changes may be in a Christian
not renewed. p. 90, to 93. Christ, A man may suffer for Christ, and yet not be
sincere with Christ. p. 111 What suffering is a note of sincerity p. 112
Suffering as a Christian. p. 113, 114 Call, A man may be called of God, and yet
be but almost a Christian, call two fold. p. 115, 116. Conviction, How to know
whither our conviction is only from a natural conscience or from the spirit.
p. 18 Natural conviction what p. 180 Spiritual conviction what p. 181 Spiritual
conviction, an essential part of sound conversion. p. 187 Slight conviction,
the cause of much Hypocrisy. p. 188 Conscience, What is the difference between
a natural and renewed conscience; Answered in seven particulars p. 160 to 175

D DEsires, see grace. Delight, A man may delight in the Word and Ordinances,
and yet be but almost a Christian. p. 79 Duties, A man may do all (as to
external Duties and Worship) that a true Christian can, and yet be but almost a
Christian. p. 146 Wherein the difference between them does lie. p. 147, to 150
Directions for the obtaining a through work in the heart, the being not only
almost, but altogether Christians. p. 271 to the end

E Examination, our duty to inquire whether we are, either but almost, or
altogether Christians. p. 213 Arguments, pressing upon us its practice p. 114
to 118 Eight Characteristical Notes for trial p. 218, to 226 Exhortation, to be
not only almost, but altogether Christians. p. 246 Motives, to it. p. 247 to
270

F FAith, A man may have faith and yet not be a beleiver. p. 121 Saving, faith
what called in Scripture. p. 123 Common faith, what p. 114, to 118

G GIfts, A man may have great gifts, and yet be but almost a Christian p. 31
Gifts for the good of others p. 32 Gifts from the Common work of the Spirit. p.
32 Beyond the power of gifts to change the heart. Gifts may decay and perish.
p. 37 Desires of grace are grace, 73, 74, what not p. 75

H HOpe, Great hopes of Heaven not always true hope. p. 83 Properties of true
hope. Ibid Groundless hopes. p. 84, 85.

K KNowledge, A man may have much of it, and yet be but almost a Christian. p.
27 Threefold end men have in desiring knowledge.

L LOve, A man may love the people of God, and yet not with a true love. p. 128
What Love to the Children of God is a true love. p. 130 For what an almost
Christian Loves a Saint. p. 132 His Love only carnal. p. 133 Lust Espoused in
the heart, hinders a hearty closure with Christ p. 203

M MOtives pressing Christians to go farther then those that have gone
farthest, and yet fell short, p. 247
N NAture may put a man upon prayer p. 106
O OBedience, A man may obey the Commands of God, and yet be but an almost
Christian. p. 135 True obedience has a threefold property. It is Evangelical,
p. 135 It is Universal, p. 137 It is Continual Ibid

P PRofession, a man may have a high profession of Religion, and yet be but an
almost Christian. p. 38 Profession argues not the heart changed. p. 40
Profession, may stand with the form of godliness. p. 41, 42 Custom and
fashion, may create a man a Professor. p. 43 A man may perish under a
Profession p. 46 Objection against it answered. p. 47 Prayer, a man may be much
in Prayer, and yet but be an almost Christian. p. 105 What prayer is, from the
working of Gods Spirit. Ibid What prayers argue a man a stranger to the spirit
of prayer. p. 106, 107 Whither answer of prayer, evidence the truth of prayer.
p. 111 Whether stirring of the attentions of prayer, argue truth of Prayer.
Persecutions, see Christ. Most Professors like Iron between two Load-stones. p.
204

Q TWo Questions we should often put to our selves. p. 212
R REligion, What is the reason that many go no farther in the profession of
Religion, then to be but almost Christians, answered p. 193 1. Because they
deceive themselves in the truth of their own condition. p. 194 Several rises of
deceit and mistake about our condition. p. 125, 202

S SIn, A man may go far in opposing it, yet be but almost a Christian. p. 49
He may be convinced of it. ib. Mourn for it. p. 50 Confess it. p. 52 Forsake
it. p. 56 Though not as sin. p. 57 Open and not secret. ib. Let one go to hold
another the faster. p. 58 Sin may be left yet loved. ib. Sin may be nated by an
almost Christian. p. 60, 61 For shame. p. 62 More in another then in himself.
p. 63 As one sin is contrary to another sin Ibid Spirit, a man may have the
spirit, and yet not Spiritual. p. 117 Some kind of having the Spirit, is a sure
mark of Saintship, p. 118 All that have the Spirit, have it not in this manner.
p. 119, 1^0 Sanctification, A man may be Sanctified, and yet be but an almost
Christian. p. 14^ Sanctification Inward, p. 142 Sanctification Outward, p. 143,
144. Salvation. No easy thing. p. 206

V VOws, may be made against sin, and not kept, and upon what grounds the
almost Christian does so. Virgins, what understood by the Word. p. 17 Folish
Virgins, but almost Christians p. 20

W Word, a man may tremble at the Word, and yet be but an almost Christian. p.
77, 78
Y YOung man in the Gospel, but an almost Christian. p. 15
Z ZEal not always a sign of sincerity. p. 96 Several kinds of Zeal, none of
them true and sound. p. 96, to 104

Books printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the sign of the Three
Crowns, over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
THe Annotations on the whole Bible, or all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, together with, and according to their own Translation of all
the Text, as both the one and (...) ^ther were ordered and appoint^^ (...) of
Dort; now faith^^ (...) ^^llared for the use of Great (...), at the earnest
desire of many ^^^^ment Divines of the English and ^^otish Nation, in folio.

A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by Mr. John White in
fol.

A learned Commentary, or exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs, published for public good,
by Thomas Manton, Folio.

There is come forth Mr. William Fenner his continuance of Christ's Alarm to
drowsy Saints, with a Treatise of effectual Calling: The killing Power of the
Law: The Spiritual Watch: New Birth: A Christians ingrafting into Christ: A
Treatise on the Sabbath, which were never before Printed, bound in one Volume,
Fol. and may be had alone of them that have his other works, as well as bound
with all his former works, which are newly printed in the same Volume.

The History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piemont: Containing
a most exact Geophraphical Description of the place, and a faithful account of
the Doctrine, life and persecutions of the Ancient Inhabitants. Together with a
most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. and a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1658. Justified partly by diverse
ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther. By
Samuel Morland Esquire in Fol.

Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more secret and
undiscerned differences between the Hypocrite in his best dress of seeming
virtues, and formal duties, and the true Christian in his real grace and
sincere obedience, by Mr. Samuel Crook, in fol.

An Exposition with practical Observations continued upon the thirty second,
the thirty third, and the thirty fourth Chapters of the Book of Job. The
Substance of Forty-nine Lectures, delived at Magnus near the Bridge, London.
Being the tenth and last part extant. By Joseph Charyl, preacher of the Gospel
and pastor of the Congregation there. in quarto

The humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved; or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ the only way of salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick, in
quarto.

The Fountain opened, and the water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing
of thirsty sinners, by the same Author, in quarto.

Anatomy of secret sins, presumptuous sins, sins in dominion and uprightness on
Psalm. 19.12, 13. together with a Treatise of the sin against the Holy Ghost, by
Obadiah Sedgewick.

The hypocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed, by Mr. Samuel
Jacomb, in quarto.

A Sermon of the baptizing of Infants by Mr. Stephen Marshal, in quar.

The unity of the Saints with Christ the Head by the same Author, in quarto.

Truth brought to light, and discovered by time, or an Historical Narration of
the first fourteen years of King James, in quarto.

The Trial of the Marquess of Argyle, wherein you have his Indictment, and his
Answer, together with his last speech and words upon the Scaffold, in quar.

^ ^ of (...) of Iniquity, now a work in the Romish Church, wherein 1. The
incarnation of the Son of God is fully displayed. 2. Ceremonies in point of
worship, proved to be by Christ abrogated. 3. Christian liberty with its eight
Steps and five boundaries, by Thomas Dowglass, M. A. in quarto.

An exposition upon the whole book of the Canticles, by R R.

Moses and Aaron, or the Privileges and Boundaries given by God both to
Magistrates and Ministers.

Mr. Robinsons Christians Armor in large Octavo.

A book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon (Lights) by Robert
Farlie, small Octavo.

The one thing necessary; By Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook,
Octavo.

The Riches of grace displayed, in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners, by Obadiab Sedgewick, in Twelves.

Hidden Manna by Mr. Fenner, in Twelves.

Picturae Louventes, or Pictures drawn forth into Characters, in Twelves.

A most excellent Treatise containing the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly
Earths Vanity, to fear Hells horror, with godly prayers, and the Bell-mans
Summons, Twelves.

The Wedding Ring, fit for the finger, being a Sermon Preached at a Wedding at
Edmonton by William Secker.

The singular Actions of sanctified Christians, in several Sermons, on the 5.
of Mat. 47. by the same Author.

Tentation the Nature, Danger, Cure, in four parts; Together with the Remains
of that eminent Divine Mr. Richard Capel.

The Doctrine of Justification of a Sinner, wherein are handled the causes of a
sinners Justification, examined and applied in a plain doctrinal and familiar
way, by Charles Chaucy.

Gospel-glory without prejudice to the law, shining forth in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, for the salvation of sinners, by Richard Byfield. in octav.

A glimpse of Gospel Glory being the sum of several Sermons on 2 Cor. 3.18.
Preached by W. Sherwin, printed 1652.

An Exhortation to the Churches of Bohemiah, to the Churches of England;
wherein is set forth the good of unity, Order, Discipline and Obedience in
Churches rightly constituted; With an Exhortation premised of the Order and
Discipline used in the Churches of Bohemia: Dedicated to his most Excellent
Majesty, Charles the Second in Holland, at his departure for England, if
possibly it may be for an accommodation among the Church of Christ. By John
Amos Comenius, the only surviving Bishop of the remains of those Churches.

Grace to the humble, as a preparation to the Sacrament, in five Sermons, by
Dr. John Preston.

Johnsons Essays, expressed in sundry exquisite Fancies.

Sion in the house of mourning, because of Sin and Suffering: being an
exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D S. Pastor of
Vphingham, in the County of Rutland.

Groans of the Spirit, or the Trial of the Truth of Prayer.

A Handkercher for Parents wet eyes, upon the death of their children or
Friends.

The Dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises,
viz. On 2 Samuel 24.10. On Cant. 4.9. On John 8.15. On John 1.50. On Isa. 58.2.
On Exodus 15.11. Never published before, By Samuel Bolton D. D. late Mr. of
Christ's Colledgge in Cambridge.

Peoples need of a living Pastor, at the funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Zach. Crofton.

A Treatise against the Toleration of all Religion. By Mr. Thomas Edwards.

Chatchizing Gods Ordinance; in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister of Buttolphs Algate, London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

A Theater of Political flying Insects. Wherein especially the Nature, the
Worth, the Work, the Wonder, the manner of the right-ordering of the Be is
discovered and described. By Samuel Purcas, M. A. and Pastor at Sutton in Essex.

The second part of Man's wilful impenitency, upon Ezekiel. 18.32 By Mr. William
Fenner, late of Rochford in Essex, with some other pieces of his, preserved by
a special Providence.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mis. Elizabeth Moor the 27 of February, at
Aldermanbury.

There is in the Press an excellent Treatise of Mr. George Swinnock upon making
Religion ones Business, in Quarto.

There is in the Press several Sermons of Mr. Jerimiah Buroughs, on Isa. 62.7.
v. and Luke 10.5, 6. and on the 15. of Prove. and the 19. preached at Gilses
Cripplegate, published by those that subscribed his former Treatises.

FINIS.

