unicorn bearing Aberdeen coat of arms

Macis Macerata, OR, A Short Treatise, concerning the use of MACE, In Meat, or
Drink, and Medicine.

In six Sections, the fifth whereof contains some Hints at the Signaturs of
Simples; and the sixth, is concerning the Original and Cure of Wind, in
Mans-Body.

By MATTHEW MACKAILE Chyrurgo Medicine.

ABERDENE, Printed by JOHN FORBES, Printer to the Town and Colleges, 1677.

Unto the Right Honorable, GEORGE SKEEN, of Fintray, Lord Provest. ALEXANDER
ALEXANDER, GILBERT MOLYSON, ALEXANDER GORDON, ALEXANDER BURNET, Baylies.
CHARLES DUN Dean of Gild, Mr. PATRICK SANDELANDS, Treasurer. And, the rest of
the Honorable Council of the City of ABERDEEN
Right Honorable,
WHen I call to rememberance, that in the Year 1671 I was invited by your Ho.
Predecessors, to serve this Antien^ and Honorable City, as a Chirurgian and
Apothecarie, and the great Obligations by Them, and your Ho. (some of of You
being then Magistrates) conferred upon me, I could not but be incited to this
Address (as a demonstration of my Gratitude) wherein I cannot but reminde You,
that at that time it was prudently Overtured, that the Complement of being made
Burger, should not be conferred upon me, until my, Qualifications were tried I
had never such overweaning thoughts of my self, as to pretend to more than a
Competency of Knowledge in what I professed (which for me to deny, were
Ingratitude to my Maker) and I hope Your Ho. have been convinced of it, by the
Trial which I did then undergo, and what the Almighty has since enabled me to
do; a sufficient testimony whereof are, my Noli me-tangere tactum, or a
Treatise concerning Cancers; and the Skeleton which I made [and previously
thereto publicly did] and gifted to the Biliotheck of the Marischal. College,
in the Year 1676. I must also render most hearty thanks for Your Ho checking a
most invidious and ignorant Mountebank H. H for his impertinently and falsely
reflecting upon all the Learned Physi^^a (...) in this City, and my self, whom
he did insolently name when mounted on his Stage July 4 1677 Right Honorable; I
shall not molest Your Eyes or Ears, with any adulatory expressions neither
render my self censurable for them, seeing the Elogies d^e unto You in your
Stations, do transcend my Ability to express them, but only breath those hearty
wishes, that this City hereafter may never be served by any, but such as are
much more accomplished than my self; and that You may still persist in the
Exercise of all noble Virtues; and be isntrumental for perpetuating the
Splendour of this City by a hopeful and happy Progeny, which is the serious
desire of,

Right Honorable, Your Ho, most humble Servant, Matthew Mackaile.
ABERDEEN, August 15, 1677.
Epistle to the Reader.
IN this critical Age no doubt there will be found some of the malevolent and
severe Tribe of Zoilus, whose parcellliterature incapacitating them permanently
to criticize where there may be some ground for it (formerly given by my self)
yet will be verbally attempting it; which makes mo apprehensive, that some
will acouse me of too much scribbling. But seeing I ever levelled my Endeavors
at a far nobler End, than the Nothing of vulgar Applause, and that the temper
of my Genius, is too Stoical to be amused by the weak assaults of Detraction; I
think I may satisfy my self, and all ingenious and sober persons, when I
consider. First, that I did never obfletricat other men's Notions into the
World. 2ly, Nor medale with any Subject, which another had taken in hand, 3ly,
As I have not advantaged my self thereby, neither have I given occasion to any,
to be at much Expense, for what I offered to their consideration. 4ly, Being in
the Country sometimes a day or two, I thought this no bad way, of spending the
vacant hours. 5ly, My chief design was the advantage of others; which tho I
ingeniously acknowledge, I could not so considerably advance (as others have
dove, by their more elaborat Endeavors) by this small Treatise; yet I hope
therein will be found some things, which shall under the comprehension, only of
such, as have more than looked into the misterious Temple of Aesenlapius, of
whose favorable acceptance I am not much doubtful And as for the Invidious,
their censure, I value no more then their knowledge, prompting them to talk, as
if they were the man, with whom knowledge and skill should dye; and as if Art
had dignified them with the key of Nature-Cabin, and thinking that they are
Masters of her greatest S^crare, tho they know not how so open her House of
Offies, without raising a most noxious small. Such empty and ridiculous Railers
( the true Grievance of Societies) who vent formenting passions, only set on
work, by their own shallow surmises, will never be able to sulley the
Reputation of any scr^ing their Generation in a fairer Repure, then is their
own. Notwithstanding of which, I thought it my duty (having this opportunity, a
little to vindicat my Reputation from the Aspersions, most furiously and
without any provocation, cast upon it, by a most confident and ignorant
Mountebank, Henry Hammilton; who coming to Aberdeen in the end of May 1677, did
twice or thrice appear upon his Stage ( like Simon the Sorc^rer, giving out
that himself was some great one) whilst, I was in the Country, at every time
very directly reflecting upon me; and July 4. named me particularly: so
endeavoring to commend his own Skill, by deerying of mine; and particularly
affirming, that he had cut and cured David Craighead of a Cancor in his Lip,
which I had been about nine months, and could not effectuat; withal assuring
the Spectators that it would never break out again. Notwithstanding of which,
before the end of August, a new Tumor did appear in the same place, and was a
little V^cerat. This poor man having been recommended to my care, by a Right
Honorable Earl in this Shyre, I did by the blessing of God, cure him without
cutting, betwixt the 19 of August, and the 13 of October 1675, after which he
continued whole several months. The Winter being over, he returned to me
fearing a Recidive, but I refused to meddle with him, because he had troubled
me more, then all others in his condition had done. And particularly, at the
beginning, I had no little difficulty in persuading him to let take off his big
Beard: which made me resolve, herafter only to cut those of his quality

If this M. had only reflected upon my self, I had taken the less notice of his
Calumnies; but seeing he did also assault all the learned and skilful
Physicians and Chirurgions in this Kingdom, by his most Non-sensicall and
ridicolous printed Paper, ( which is a scandal to our Nation;) the deserved
respect which I ow unto them, has made me give the following account thereof.

First, Therein he by way of Inscription, designeth himself, Mill Opifex,
Midica^^inis Auctor, and Auspex, Primus Lecheos docuit depallere.

And afterward, Opithalmista, Lishomus, and Professor, no less then 14 times.

Secondly, He having forgot the common Proverb, Laus proprio sordescit in ore;
but more especially Solomon's, Let another man praise thee, and not thine own
mouth etc. does endeavor by his great swelling words of vanity to allure the
ignorant Vulgar, affirming, First, three several times, that No Man, ( and
once, that No Man in this Land knew the like, or) can or could come near him in
the Art. The true reason whereof St. Paul has given -- some that commend
themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselve are not wise. For this
undervaluing, be makes a mends, by promising to put all his 5 years Cures, in a
method for the Press; for the benefit of his loving Country men. 2ly, that he
cures those that are pest help, and such as are given for dead, and beyond all
hope; and offers to cure all persons who cannot be cured by any other. 3ly,
He cures the Gout infallibly, if the person be in the hight of the distemper,
in six hours; and immediately thereafter, he takes no less then 24. hour^ to
cure the Ciatica, as he calls it. 4ly, He affirms that he has cured Children
of Cataracts; by him called Catherick, 5ly, He cures all sorts of Pox; and the
falling sickness proceeding from any cause whatsomever; and especially Ruptures
( by him called Hernia Canola) without loss of time, knowledge of friends, or
neglect of bussiness. 6ly, In half an hours time, he cured a woman that had
been deaf 30 years. 7ly, ( which is best of all) He takes forth rotten Teeth
with Ingenuity. 8ly, He has an excellent preservative against Barrenness in
Women, a thousand times experienced; which must be his Mill Opifex. All which
he would have believed: because he had his Education first in America, ( the
most barbarous and ignorant Quarter of the World) and then in Europe.

Moreover, the rest of his Vocabularia (viz. Scrufusionem or Catua^ctum,
Polypum, Scroficlus, Lyentera, Descu^ima, Colica Pessio, and Ilian Passio,
Poripulmonimus, etc.) are a sufficient Touchston of his qualifications. Because
for sooth this M. by serving some other of that Profession ( tho not as an
Apprentice) has learned to cut a Cancer, a Hernia, and to do some such
Operations, (with greater confidence than knowledge,) sometimes with success
(the all knowing Chirurgians have most warrily, and sometimes anxiously
advontured upon thom) therefore must He mount himself upon a Stage, deerying
the Skill of all others, and so offering as it were to force Providence to get
Employment to him. Were it not better for such a person to live privately? as
others do; at least, until he acquyre better Language wherewith to appear,
especially amongst Scholars, ( for, even a fool, when he holds his peace, is
counted wise,) rather than by persisting, to demonstrate, that, in Medicin,
Ignorance is more surely the eause of Confidence, than in Divinity it is of
Devotion.

So eminently accomplished Virtuoso's, would do well to spend some of their
Idle hours, in the disquisition of the Cuckoo 's (or Gowk 's) nature, for
solying the many Phenomenon relating to it.

At, I. Why that Bird ( being silent all the Winter) does by its melodious
voice, disturb the pleasant and concordant chirming of the Lark, and other
delicious Birds; whose Organs are tuned of new, when Phoebus begins more
vigorously to display the native splendour of all Beings.

II. Why the vesicating Nettle, is not so often (if at all deformed, as is the
mild and fragrant Lavender, by what is called the Cuckow's spittle? which is
nothing else but the Sperm or Excrement of some despicable Insect, which being
deposed upon the Herb, and fomented by the common influence of the Sun ( which
also oberisheth the useful Silk. Worm) contracteth life and then extracteth
the juice of the Herb; for its Aliment. Wherefore in the middle of that Spuma,
or Froth, we will constantly find, a little stercoraceously colored Flee.

III. Why the mordicant Nasturtium Pratense does not slower until the Cuckoo
begin to crow? for which it is also called Flos Cuculi.

Surely the moral improvement of these Notions, and the further prosecution of
these Resemblances, betwixt the irrational Cuckoo, and those who use (too
doservedly) to be designed by the simple Name, would in some measure contribute
to the peace of Humane Societies; and to the preventing of such insolent
Impertinencies.

This Treatise is particularly recommended unto such of the Female Sex, as are
most studious, only of the Diecteticall part of Medicin ( commonly called
Kitchen Physic) it being chiefly of that nature, and most properly belonging
unto them, who do prudently forbear medleing with Vomitive and Purgative
Medicines, which some of them (and too many of my own, like a Rustic
Fisherman, offering to Pilot a Ship to the Indies) have imprudently adventured
to make use of to the prejudice of others; thinking it alse ensie thus to
arrive at Health ( the Metropolis of all our temporal mercies) as it is to go
to Edinburgh by land, from one Town to another, until they reach it. Whereas
it is rather like a Voyage thither by Sea, where the Tide and Wind do and may
often change, or blow tempestuously, to the puzling of the best Pilot and all
his Skill.

The latest and best Physicians, having written of Medicin, according to the
laesed or decayed faculties of Man's body, and the Concoction of the Stomach,
being the first, and this Simple, Mace, a most excellent remedy for it, I
thouht it might be useful for all (being altogether void of hazard) until
they should advertise and advise with the Physicians, concerning that or any
other Distemper occasioned thereby.

The Courteous Reader is earnestly desired, to pardon the disproportionable
prolixity of this Epistle, which has been swelled by my necessitated
Vindication from the Aspersions of One whom the Vulgar esteem a Licentiat; whom
thus I have eudeavoured to Answer, according to his folly, lost he be wise in
his own Conceit, for which I am altogether excuseable by him, who affirmed,
(when I accused him) that the speaking of Truth, was no Reflecting.

Farewell M. M.

Macis Macerata. OR, A Short Treatise concerning the use of the Mace, in Meat
or Drink, and Medicine.
SECTION I.
HAving resolved to write a little, concerning the use of this Simple, called
Mace, I shall begin with a short descrip^^on of it, making use only of
Schroder, as one of the best of our Modern writers.

In his Pharmacopoea Medico-Chymica, lib. 4. cap. 219. he calls it a Rind or
Bark, which grows about the Nutmeg, which is called Nux-moschata, and
Muscata, Nux Aromatica, Nux Myristica, sen Vnguentaria; and Nucista.

Clusius affirms, that there is a lesser sort, called the Female, and a
greater, the Male.

It grows in an Yland called Banda in the East Indies.

It is covered with a twofold husk or bark, the outmost of which is the
grossest or thickest (like that of the Walnut) which opens, when it comes to
maturitie; so that the other, being the Mace, does appear, surrounding the
Nutmeg, like a little Network. But there is betwixt the Mace and the Nutmeg, a
thin shell, broun without, like the skin of a Chesunt; which Schroder
mentions not, as does Perkinson.

The Mace of the Ancients (called Macer) is the lignous, or woodie Bark of a
tree, which used to be brought from Barbary.

There is also a sort of Macer in the Oriental Ylands, which, perchance, is the
same with that of the Ancients.

The Nutmeg is hot and dry, or heats and dryes, with astringency. It is good
for the Stomach, Head and Womb. It dispelleth Wind, helps Digestion,
corrects the stinking-Breath, refreshes the Conception, aideth the Suooning
and Palpitation of the Heart, lessneth the Splen (or rather the pains thereof)
stopeth Fluxes, and stays Vomiting.

The same Virtues are ascribed to the Mace. But, because it is of more delicat
parts it is therefore thought more efficacious, and penetrant in its operation.

These things Schroder affirms.

SECTION II.
IN the second place, I shall add a few words concerning its temperature (the
only competent judge whereof I apprehend to be the Taste) which I believe to
be, as is before expressed. And the learned Author not having adventured,
precisely to condescend upon the degrees of its heat and dryness, neither shall
I, who could never find the Scales and Grains, by which to measure them; and
have much admired, the confidence of many, who having neither seen nor handled
them, yet have peremptorily determined, the degrees of heat cold, moisture, and
dryness in all Concrets Vegetable or Mineral; without giving the least show or
reason for their assertions.

Although the Mace be not so grateful to the smell and taste as is Cinnamon, yet
I humbly conceive, that of all Spyces, its sulphurous parts (which are the
chief) are most amicall to the animal spirits. First, Because (if without
offense to the more refined I might aver) that in Cinnamon, there are two
degrees (if not more) of inflaming heat, for one in Mace; which is demonstrat by
the taste. Secondly, It may be used in Fevers etc. (of which more hereafter)
with much less hazard, then Cinnamon.

The debate amongst Naturalists (I mean those who wrote most acuratly,
concerning the old manifest qualities of Simples) has been so great, that they
cannot agree, anent the heat and cold of natural Bodies, All the Ancients
affirming Aromaticks (or Spyces) and Salts to be hot, and the juices o^ Limons
Sorrels, etc. and Vinegar, to be cold.

And of late, some allege most confidently the forementioned juices, and
Vinegar, to be also hot, that is such bodies, as do excite inflammations, when
admitted into the body of man.

Having formerly, and at large, offered to the consideration of the Ingenious,
my opinion concerning this affair, I shall not here trouble the Reader
therewith, but refer him to Moffet-Well, page 60. etc. to page 80.

Being thus engaged to mention that Tractat, I must desire to be excused, for
taking liberty here to insert (tho heterogeniously to this subject) two things,
which tho they did not occur to me, until after the publication of that
Treatise, yet may prove useful or delectable to some.

The first is, I being one day discoursing, with a most learned Professor of
Phylosiphy at Edinburgh, anent the nature of that Water; and he mantaining the
vulgar opinion, that it did run through Brimston, I answered thus.

Because the Water of Moffet-Well, smells most like to the dross of Gun
powder, remaining in a Gun, which has been often shot ( Gunpowder consisting
for the most part, of Brimsten and Nitre) it is the vulgar opinion of
Phisicians that this Water runeth through Brimston to which I do opose these
two reasons.

First This Water Vomiteth and Purges. But none of the forementioned
Assertors, can instance one Medicin made of Brimston which commonly does
either. I say commonly: because Brimston may cause some one or two persons
vomit or purge, by reason of some natural antipathy. As I have heard it
reported, that there is a family in France, all the branches whereof, have such
an antipathy at the Rose, that (notwithstanding it be a flower most refreshing
to mankind) they would faint at the smelling or tasting of it. Secondly, It is
sufficiently well known, to all Physicians, that all Medicines made of Brimston,
(as the Flowers, Magistery, or Lac Bolsam, Tincture, Spirit, etc.) are most
effectual in cureing Consumptions. But it is as well known, that this Water is
as inimicall to all persons who have this Disease, or whose Bodies are in a
disposition to take it: for it has often posted such unto Eternity.

I do therefore adhere to my own opinion, viz. that this Water is impregnat
with the Sulphur of Antimony, which I have separated from Antimony (in the
resublimation of its Cinnabar) and found it Yellow and inflamable as common
Brimston, and to effect the Nosetriles (when inflamed) just as common Brimston
does, by its vapor which ascends from it, when it is inflamed.

If those things had tymously occured to me, I would have inserted them in the
middle of page 60.

The Second is, Being informed, that an Englishman did extract much Salt out
of the Water and sold it in great quantities, to all sorts of persons, to be
drunk with the Water, in the Year 1669. I went thither, and essayed the
operation, extracting only the half of a drahm out of every Scottish-pynt. This
Salt I found to be so sharp, and attractive of the Air, that in August, it
dissolved into one of my pockets, tho the Salt of Tartar (which is the most
attractive of the Air, as yet known) did continue most dry in the other. When I
returned home, I did fully dissolve it in water, and coagulat it again and am
necessitated to keep it in a glass, as closs as I do my Potential Canters.

As yet I have attempted no experiments with it, and do wish that some, who
have better opportunity, would do it, for the good of our Country.

These words, I would have inserted, page 82. immediately before the use or the
Water.

SECTION III.
Thirdly, As to the use of Mace, in Meat or Drink, I shall only give my advice,
anent the manner of useing it; especially seeing the most part do not only put
themselves to much needless expense for it, but also do abuse it and deprive
themselves of the most useful part thereof, viz its sulphurous Oil.

The Vulgar use of this Spyce in the Kitchen, is either first, Boiling it
amongst Broth etc. secondly, or pulverising it for Sauces and Drink.

As to the first, It is the common custom, to put two or three pieces of whole
Mace; amongst the cold water, and to permit them to boil all the time, that
the Broth is a making, so that the spirituous and balsamic parts thereof, do
(almost totally) vaporat with the vapor, which is constantly ascending from the
Broth, which retains but very little of its Taste.

Were it not then greater frugality, when the Broth is fully boiled, to put in
a lesser quantity of the powder of Mace, which will impregnat more strongly ere
it be for the table if the pot be closly covered.

The reasonableness of this advice will soon appear to any who understand how
to make Ale. For, such persons do not take the Malt, ere it be grinded to
powder, and boil it with the water, or infuse it amongst the warm water; the
last whereof, if they should do they would waste much Malt, ere they made a
little good- Ale. But there is far more reason of caution, in the use of Mace,
seeing its spirits are richer, and far more easily extracted, or fugat by heat.

The second use of it, is pulverising for Sauces and Drink, I must here also
regrate, the too vulgar custom of depriveing the Mace, of its forementioned
spirituous Oil, by drying of it, that it may be the more easily pulverised.
The truth whereof will be soon evident to any, who will be at the pains and
expense, as to dry and pulverise only a quarter of an ounce of Mace, and then
put it up in a paper. At the same time pulverise alse much undryed, and put it
in another paper. After a few hours, the last paper, will be sound much more
altered, and oyled, than the other.

That we are necessitated to dry Mustard seeds, ere we can get them pulverised
(otherwise you shall beat them into a Paste, as if it were dough, and make
their oil, with the aqueous moisture, dissolveable amongst water, as when we
make Emulsions of the seeds called cold, etc.) is no argument, against what I
have affirmed, seeing the Oily spirits of the Mace, are much more volatile;
than those of the Mustard-seeds.

It were therefore expedient, to keep the pulverised Mace in a Box of Silver,
Tin, or Wood, which would imbibe none, or but little of its spiritous Oil. The
same advice may be asserted anent Mustard, the powder whereof, in a few hours,
will make paper transparent, as if it had been wet with Oil.

The Mace being thus prepared and preserved, a very little warmth and in a
suitable time, will make a small quantity of it, communicate its spirits and
taste, to any liquor, used as Meat or Drink.

What has been said, being most probable, it would much conduce, to the health
of many valetudinatie persons, having weak Stomachs, etc to impregnat their Ale
or Beer, with the corroborating spirits of this Spyce, by putting hal^ an ounce
(more or less, or every Scottish-Gallon) of its powder, into the Barrel;
immediately before the liquor be put into it.

SECTION IV.
IN Medicin the Mace is made use of first, either entire as Nature framed it;
that is, only reduceing it to powder, and not separating any of its constituent
parts from one another Or, secondly, it is used in its parts separated. These
commonly are, its Oils, by expression [the external use whereof is
sufficiently well known] and distillation; and its Earth, which after the
expression of the Oil, may be used by the poor, who are not able to buy the
Mace it self.

Entire Mace may be made use of, first, in a more simple way, or as Medicin it
self, secondly, Or in a more compound manner, viz. with other Medicinal Simples.

Internallie, I know no better corrobarater of the Stomach and Brain, to which
its spirits are most refreshing, when extracted by infusion, amongst any
convenient liquor. I use it most with Ale, taking alse much of the powder, as
will ly upon a large sixpence, to every pound of the liquor; which also I
sweeten a little with Sugar, and that in these cases.

First, If one have catched Cold, whereby a pain in the head, or breast (which
are rarely separat, in this condition) and the Cough, are usually occasioned, a
large draught [taken with an empty Stomack] of good Ale thus prepared; will
ordinarily occasion a sweat and sleep; whereby the Archeus fureus, or disturbed
Nature will immediately be composed, and the molesting symptoms abated after two
or three Deses (at most) taken very warm at night, or in the morning, or both.

Many can testify the truth o^ what I affirm, and do therefore never go
abroad to journey, without this powder.

Secondly In Fevers, Pleurisies, etc. when there may be need to corrobort the
Stomach, I doubt i^ the^e be any Spyce, which may be so liberally (if at all)
used, as this for aromatifting of Ptisans, Broths, etc

Thirdly. After the operation of a Vomitive [or purgative] Medicin, within one
hour, I use to give to Patients this drink and to cause them go to bed, and
sleep two or three hours; after which, they used to be als well composed, as I
have seen others (who got it not) the day after they had vomited.

Fourthly, In the beginning of Fluxes, with gripping of the Guts, there is no
better Medicin then a draught of sweet Whey, warmed with the same quantity of
Mace, and drink once or twice a day, for two or three days together.

Hermannus Vander Heyden, a Physician of Gaunt, has written a Treatise
(called, Speedy help for Rich and Poor) the first part whereof, is touching the
virtue of Whey, in the cure of the griping Flux and Dysenterie which has been
printed in French Latin, and English.

Fifthly, There is nothing [of this kind] better for the Stomach, than to mix a
little of this powder, and a little Sugar, which a cold mornings draught.

Externally used, there is no such Anodine of this nature.

First, The warm infusion of Mace, in Claret wine [which ought to be made
stronger tha^ for internal use] having a fourfold Linnen-cloath diped into it,
and applied to the Region of the Splen, or Stomach, does soon ease the pains
of them. And a Clove or two being added thereto, it will operat the more
strongly.

Secondly, it eases also the pai^, occasioned by a Pleuresie; especially if it
be of the bastard sort, which is amongst the Intercostal-Muscles.

Thirdly It is also very useful in Rheumatick-paines; which most frequently
assault the Back, about or betwixt the Shoulders. But I must tell you, that I
have often seen a little warm Salt, in a small Linnencleath do better; by
attracting and imbibing much of the Serosity, affecting the Membrans; whereas
the other does only discuss, by corroborating the Animal spirits, which are
the chief agent, in this operation. I know a very honest Carpenter who will
testify the truth of this; and who was also cured of the Sciatica, by bathing
in the Sea; which disease he contracted, after intermitting this bathing for
three years.

Seeing all are convinced of its usefulness Internally used, for expelling of
Wind or rather for strengthening the Digestion, and so prohibiting the
generation of more, I hope none will controvect, the probability of its easing
of pain, from the same cause, when Externally applied.

Fourthly, Then it must be a proper Ingredient for Epithems Cueusa's, and
Suffumigations, when needful.

Before I proceed, I can not but desire the Ingenious to observe, that when the
powder of Mace is put amongst the Ale, (which ought to be in a vessel with a
closs cover) the most part thereof swimeth above; and as the liquor warmeth, it
gradually disappeareth by falling to the bottom. Dureing this operation, if you
take the Stoop from the fire, and look into it, you will perceive the Atoms
of the Mace, continually ascending from the bottom to the top or superfice of
the Liquor, and immediately descending again, until the Liquor be fully
saturat, with the spirituous and oily parts; after which none of the powder
appears above, which will come to pass very near also soon, as the Stoop
[being set by a little fire] shall become so hot, that one can only remove it
speedily from the fire.

The consideration of this, and the Observations following did perswad me to
believe, that as the World is circular in its figure and motion, so also the
most part of one motions therein (whether natural o^ artificial) are of the
same nature.

As for the natural do we not daily perceive? first the circular motions of
the celestial Lights round about us; or, ou^s upon, and with the Earth, about
some of them. And have not Astronomers demonstrated the motions of some of them
round their own Centres. Secondly, The circulation of Water in the Macrocosm,
according to Eccles. 1. All Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full;
unto the place from whence the Rivers run thither they do return again.
Thirdly, The circulation of Blood in the Microcosm; and in the bodies of all
creatures, which have it. Fourthly, Vapors ascending from the Earth into the
Air, and descending again in Rain, Snow etc.

The artificial metions also, we see to be, for the most part, circular [as in
Clocks, Milns, Spinning-wheels, etc.] and such as are not, are either directed
by a circular motion (as a Ship, by the circular motion of the Rudder upon its
hinges; of the Cart in the Compass, upon the Prick; and of the
celestiall-bodies) or much facilitated and promoved, by one circular motion or
other. Hence it is, that Chain-Pumps are most useful in great Ships; and one
Horss will draw a greater weight upon a Cairt or Wagon, then upon a Slade.
Moreover, whilst the Weavers-shutle is moving in a straight line, from the one
side of the Web to the other, does not the Pirn move circularly within it?
Finally ^ the most difficult mechanical operations, are most easily done, by
instruments moving circularly; as is evident in the boreing of Metals or Wood,
with Drils and Wimbles, and the more blocks that be upon a Ships tackling, the
sewer men will serve to load, or unload therewith.

The following Observations do far her prove, the Artificial motions to be
circular [tho no^ sph^rical] and very pleasant to behold.

First Dureing the action of pure Aqua fortis upon crude Mereurie in a
tra^sp^rent Glass, you will clearly perceive, the continual ^scent and descent
of the Mercurial-Atoms, betwixt the superfice and bottom of the Laquor, until
it be fully sat ^at with them.

Secondly I did lately observe this circular motion, whilst the well defecat
juice of Limons, was dissolving very red and fi^e Coral; which being totally
robed of its redness [as the juice of its Aciditie] the Atoms remaining, were
almost also white as this Paper.

Thirdly, Dureing the operation of the Acidum Vitrioli [wherewith I mixed some
Borage water] upon the Limatura Chalybis, in making the Vitriolum Martis
[commonly called Sal-Chalybts] there is no doubt, the same circular motion
which tho it cannot be discerned, because of the opacitie of the Liquors, yet
may be concluded, from alse pleasant and considerable a motion, which is this.
When these Liquors are affused to the limatura, there arises immediately such a
heat and ebullition, that it there be not near three parts of four empty, they
will boil over upon the Table. This ebullition concinueth but a little, and
the Liquor no sooner setleth, than innumerable Aqueous Atoms, do constantly
ascend two or three inches above its superfice, to which they descend again. If
this operation be done in a Cupping glass (as I use to do it) many of those
Atoms (whose taste does demonstrat them to be impregnat with the Atoms of the
Chalybs) will fall upon the outside of the glass, where they will lie like dew
in a Summers morning. The action of the Menstruum being ended, this pleasant
shower cease.

Were it not better for Professors of Philosophy to pry into such Experiments
whereby they might be prompted with excellent notions and arguments, relative to
Matter and Motion, than to spend so much time, upon Ens rationis universale
etc. which can never be useful in Medicin (save to make a man Hypochondriack,
and so necessitous thereof) or Mechanicism, so as to gain one penny thereby

Many such Curiosi^ies have been little noticed by many Artists who like
covetous and ignorant Travelers, to the City where they expect most gain, take
no notice, of much more pleasant places, in their jurney; and intending only
the purchasing of coined money, do often overlook alse good lying in some
small Springs; and far less make it their business, to search for the Mines
themselves. The truth of this, is fully demonstrated to any, who will peruse
the most ingenious and learned Physic^ Theological considerations, about the
possibility of the Resurrection: written by the Honorable Robert Boil;
wherein, by such Curiosities, by him accuratly noticed, he demonstrateth, the
possibility of that great Article of our Christian faith viz. The Resurrection
of the dead at the great day of general judgment; for the further confirmation
of which, we may also consider the forementioned circular motion, in relation
to our own Bodies and Souls.

Seeing it is undeniable that we came from the Earth, and do daily return unto
it by death; and that our spirits do then return to God who gave them; Why
should any rational creature doubt? of the Soul its returning unto the Body,
its old habitation; or of the return of both to God for ever; seeing he, who is
Almighty, has given his Word for it.

I shall conclude this part of this Section, with regrateing the custom of
many, who geting Wine, that is decayed in its color and taste, and
consequently, as to its (...), by burning it with Mace, Cloves, etc. they
exhaust the most part of its remaining spirits and the best of those in the
Spyces and hen drink the worst of both. For when the spirits, are by
distillation separated from the best of Wines, that which remains in the
Still, is liker to fresh Urine, than to any other liquor.

It were then much better, only to infuse those Spyces in such Wine, and by all
means to retain the remaing spirits, by the clos^ess of the vessel.

Secondly Mace is medicinally made use of, in a more compound way and that
either entire or in its parts.

First Entire as a most excellent corrective of all Purgatives; or mixed with
other Aromaticks in a omaticall Powders Tablets. Electuaries, or Spirits.

Secondly In its parts and that either Internally or Externally.

Internally there is no better Oil, for mixing with Stomachick, Cephalic, or
Splenetick Piles etc than is its liquide.

Then what an excellent Elixir must it make, when associa ^o a convenient
Menstruum which could speedily usher it, into the Archeal Court, and make its
address, to all the noble Animal spirits, whose loyal and peaceable Actions it
would cherish, and compesce their intestin Commotions.

Externally the Oil by expression being so useful, no doubt a Balsam made of
it, and the Liquide, must be much more effectual.

When any such Medicin is made use of, it ought to be done after friction with
a warm cloth, near to the fire; in the doing of which, there are two vulgar
errors, very prejudicial to be forsaken.

First, The rubing of the Legs or Arms down wards: for thus more humors are
drawn from the Body to those Members (affected with pain) which have no way to
evacuat them, but by the pores of the Skin in sweating; whereas, when they are
by friction forced to retire to the Cavities, they may be evacuated by Vomit,
Stool Urine, Spiting Sweating etc or consumed by the concoction of the greater
natural heat, there residing.

Secondly, In such cases, people do ordinarily mix Brandie, or Aqua-vitae, with
unctuous substances (as the Grease of Hearts, Capons, etc.) and having melted
them with a little heat, by stiring they essay the mixing of them [but to no
purpose] and then do anoint the place affected with any Pain. But it were
better, first to rub with the Brandie (that what the Skin will imbibe of it, it
may do it without any let) and then the Skin being dried, anoint with the
Grease, or Oils: for these two bodies, will not mix, as Wine and Water; so
that where the unctuous substance lights first, the Brandie can not get
entrance.

SECTION V.
IN the Fifth place, I shall take notice of the Signature of the Mace, whereby
I shall have occasion, to hint at the Signatures of several other Simples,
heretofore not noticed.

And because I know no Treatise, in our Language, concerning the Signatures of
Simples, I shall first crave liberty, to give a little hint thereof, out of the
two most famous Authors, who have written expressly, concerning that affair, and
that in very few words. Because it is a most hateful thing, to rescribe and
reprint, other men's Notions but in so far as there is an absolute necessity so
to do, that what a man is about the doing of himself, may be the better
understood by others. As is the citation of Euclide, his Propositions, by a
demonstrating Mathematician; or of Legal Maxims, by a Barrester, or Advocat.

As the sweet singer of Israel said, Psalm 19.1. The Heavens declare the glory
of God and the Firmament shows his handiework; so did the old Poet express
the same thus, Prasentemque refert qualibet herba Deum.

And the famous Glauber, in the 1. page of his Treatise de signatura Salium,
writes thus, The Omnipotent God, has put upon all his Creaturs great and
small, his certain marks, and as it were, set painted Lineaments, before the
eyes of men from which they may know what is the nature and property of every
one and what profit and advantage they may or can confer upon mankind.

But this divine writing, by the divine finger is drawn upon every thing, that
frrom it we might learn the nature of all things.

And Oswaldus Crollius, in his Epistle Nuncupatorie, prefixed to his Treatise,
concerning the internal Signatures of things, calls it, A Garden furnished,
appointed, and adorned with most beautiful Simples, exhibiting and
representing in a most pleasant spestacle, from the innate signature, the most
wonderful harmenie and correspondence with the members of our body.

I shall only set down a few of his Instances, which will fully answer my
present design.

He begins with the Head, showing why such and such things are to be made use
of, for cureing its distempers; As,

First, The Chesbow with a Crown, (viz. after the flowers are fallen)
represents the Head and Brain: therefore its decoction is profitably given in
many distempers of the Head.

Then the seeds of Cicer Arietinum [which more exactly represent the Head of a
Ram] must be good for the Desease, wherewith Sheep are much troubled, viz. the
Rot, which is in them a Hydropsie. And they are by Botanists reckoned amongst
Diuretics (that is, Provockers of Vrinet) which are proper for that Disease,
in Man or Beast, for the like reason, Persicaria maculata, must be an excellent
Antiscorbutick, its spots being of the same color, with those that affect the
Legs and Arms of Scorbutic persons.

Secondly, Wal-nuts, have the entire signature of the Head their exterior
Bark, or herbaceous covering, of the Pericranium, wherefore the salt of the
barks, is singular for wounds of the Pericranium

The inner, harder, or woodie bark or shell, of the Soul.

The Membran surrounding the Kernel, of the Meninges, and Membrans of the
Brain.

The Kernel has the figure of the Brain it self.

I shall take liberty to add, that rather the woodie Membran, divideing the
Kernel in several places, resembles the Dura-Mater, which divides the
Cerebellum from the Brain, and this in two parts, by the Falx, which is nothing
but a production of the Dura-mater, and that the forementioned Membran (which
is very thin) correspondeth the Pia-mater.

Therefore it is good for the Brain, and hebetateth poisons. The Kernel beaten,
if it be moistened with the quintessence of Wine it does powerfully comfort the
Brain and Head.

Thirdly, Page 47. Calamus Aromaticus and Cassia Fistula, for the Intestines,
to which they are very like.

Fourthly, Page 52. The perforated leaves of St. John's Woort have a signature;
they take away the obstruction of the Pores of the Skin, and force sweat. And
page 70. The perforated leaves are good for all external and internal hurts of
the Skin. And because its flowers also after putrefaction do go away inform
of blood they show a peculiar use for wounds.

I can not but admite, that he mentions not the Fungus Sambuci, which most
exactly represents the Ear of a Man; wherefore it is ordinarily called
Auricula Iudae, or Indas his Ear. Neither the Accorn, representing the Uvula;
but rather the Penis, whose Praputium its Cupula resembles very much, as the
Accorn does the Glans. However, it may be made use of for the distempers of
both these members, when they need Astringents.

I shall now set down his Opinion, concerning the Signature of the Mace, which
makes the fifth and last Instance, which I have excerped from him.

Fifthly, Page 51. Mace also resembles the Signature of the Womb: for the Mace
contains the Nutmeg (the Signature of the Child in the Womb) as the Womb the
Conception or Embrio.

Having in the first Section given a description of the Mace and Nutmeg, I
shall here offer my opinion, as to the Signature of both. And seeing all
resemblances of this nature, are not to be expected exact, as to every part
(for Omnis similitude claudicat) I hope the Ingenuous will censure it little.

I think then, that the exterior green and gross Husk containing the Mace and
Nutmeg, resembles the Musculous skin of the Head, the Mace is like the
Pericranium, the hard shell is like the Scul, and the Nutmeg represents the
Brain it self, most exactly; as will appear to any, who will but scrape off a
little thereof with a knife: for it is white, mixed with turning and winding
blackish divisions as is the Brain, whose upper part is called Varicous,
because of them.

The truth of this may probably appear to any, who will [after Dr. Nehemiah
Grew his method] Anatomise those Simples, with the help of Microscops and
possibly in the gross Husk, there may be found different parts resembling the
Musculous skin: and within the shell, some things like the Meninges.

However Schroder his forecited account of the Virtues of both, does quadrat
much with both these opinions of the Signature, I can not but add, that I am
experimentally convinced, that when the Stomach, being oppressed with Bilious
and Acida Humors causes a great pain in the Head, by affecting the Meninges
and Pericranium (of the realitie of which I have no doubt, but only of the
manner how it comes to pass) after vomiting those Humors, the infusion of Mace
being drunk, will more speedily and effectually ease the pain, than that of the
Nutmeg.

I shall not deny that there is much truth in those words of Glauber and
Crolliut in Thesi, nor controvert Crolli' his forecited hypotheticall
instances, or any other of them. Yet I do not think those Signaturs, the only
or chief mean, by which Man has acquired the knowledge of the usefulness of
natural Concrets or Simples (whether Mineral, Vegetable, or Animal) for
preserving his own body (or his Beasts) in health, or restoring it to health,
when impaired: because there are two other, viz. Revelation and Imitation.

The first is demonstrate by the Prophet Isaiah his advice, [2. Kings 20.7.]
concerning the application of a lump of figs, to Hezekiah his Boil.

If it should be alleged, that the Prophet did give this advice according to
his knowledge of the doctrine of Signaturs (a fig representing a Tumor of that
nature) I shall not deny it. But it being impossible, from the said Doctrine, to
give a reason for the many known virtues of many Simples, we must in the first
place own Gods revealing them, as the cause of our knowledge of them.

Who could ever, according to the Signaturs, give a reason why (or have
discovered, that) Antimonie is Vomitive Purgative, and Diaphoretick; seeing
none of these faculties do proceed from it, when used as Nature framed it, but
after it has daunced, once twice, or thrice upon Vulcan's stage, in Nator's
arms. Or, that one ounce of a Medicin made of it should for many years,
continue to impregnat the frequently affused Menstruums, without any sensible
diminution of its quantity, weight, or color; which I affirm because I have
had these 19 years, such a one; of which I may say as of the Memory, excolendo
augetur: for these seven years bygon it never failed, to enervat the
Tertian-Aguish ferment, at the very first exhibition of it. Or, that the
distiled Oil of our Lithanthrax, is a good Antipodagrick Medicin, either
alone, or mixed with others; and that its Acide spirit, is a most excellent
Anodine for Luxated Ioints, when mixed with an emollient and anodine Decoction,
than which I know no better Fomentation, in this case. If I had discovered this
sooner, I would have inserted it, in my little Treatise, concerning the Oily
Well at Libberton.

God has revealed such things unto Man, two several ways.

First, In a more extraordinary way,

Thither may be reduced, First, what we read in the holy Scripturs; as the
forementioned instance of the Figs; and that with greater prabability, than to
the Signature: seeing at the same time, the prolongation of the Kings life, was
also revealed unto, [and intimated by] the Prophet. No doubt also, the
qualifications of Iubal and Tubal Cain (Genesis 4. in the Worlds infancy) for
Inventing and instructing in Music, and working in Brass and Iron, and the
skill of those who did build Noah's Ark, as also the knowledge of Bezaliel and
Acholiab [ Exodus 15.] For making any manner of cunning work, and Solomon his
knowledge, whereby he spoke of Trees from the Cedar in Lebanon, even unto the
Hysop; that springs out of the Wall etc (1. Kings 4.) were of the same nature.

Secondly. The following, or like story, may be comprehended here also.

I was informed, by a very honorable and worthy Lady (in this same Country)
who living in her Grand fathers house in the Harvest, one of the maids being
very warm, with cutting down Corns, when dinner was brought to her, and to
the rest, she did take a large draught of small Ale, which immediately
occasioned a giddines in her head, and necessitated her to ly down upon the
ridge, with her hands beneath her brow. The rest having dyned, she was not able
to open her Eyes, which perceived no object, when they were opened to her by
others, although they had no blemish perceptible, more than when she was in
perfect health. She being carried home, was presently bled in the Arm, and
Physicians (who affirmed her to have the Gutta serena, which is an obstruction
in the Optic Nerve) being employed, she was often Purged, and Ventosed in 14
days time, but to no purpose. When all hope of recoverie was gone, about a
month (all which time; she could not open her Eyes, without the help of
others) after she contracted the distemper, and had resolved to quyte her
service, in the night time she dreamed, That one did beat raw Onions in a
mortar, and did apply them to her Eyes, and that she recovered her sight. The
next morning, she having told this to the Ladies Waiting, maid (who persuaded
her, that she could not be the worse to try it) the application was tried at
night, with one of her Eyes. which the next morning she was able to open; and
therewith perceived Daylight. So the next night, they did beat many, and
applied them to both her Eyes, which by this Remedy only, did the next
morning, recover their former health.

The reason of this effect, I conceive to have been; that seeing the Eyes do
water much, upon the approximation of Onions, from which (as from the
Horss-Radish, prepared Mustard, etc.) there are perpetual effluvia's of sharp
and spirituous Atoms, which occasion the humors within, to contract a brisk
motion, whereby the little matter obstructing the Nerve, as by a Torrent, was
removed from that place, where it had fixed it self; as when a Bridge or Dam,
is overturned by the violence of Water.

Yet in this case, none would adventure to use prepared Mustard seeds (than
which there is no better Medicin, for several cutaneous distempers) because
their effluvia's are for the most part sulphurous and consequently much more
inflaming, and so would occasion an Ophthalmia; whereas those of the Onion, are
more saline, and only deobstruent, and [as all Acides] cooleing; the truth of
which Paradex, may thus be evinced, to any intelligent person.

In Fevers, none durst ever make use of the Oil of Cinnamon [or of any other
Spyce, so hot, either alone, or mixed with other things] amongst Prisans, or
Iuleps, for quenching of Thirst, provoking of Urine, or deebstruating any part
of the body; whereas nothing is more ordinary [to those who know a little,
above the common method] than in such cases, to use the salinous spirits, of
all sorts.

This effect of the Onion, might also have been conjectured from its Signature:
for it may be well alleged, that by its round figure, many Tunicles, and
spirituous effluvia's [resembling the emission of rays, by which some allege
that we do see] it resembles the Eye; the hairs of whose Lids, are also
represented, by the roots of the Onion; whose Stem also resembles the Optic
Nerve.

From what has been said, it may be probably conjectured, that it were better
to contuse raw Onious, and to mix them with Cataplasines; for Schirrhous
Tumors; which is contrary to the common practice, and to the learned and
accurat Joan. Vigerius, who in his Armamentarij Medico-Chirurgici cap. 14. de
Medicamentis Maturantibus, writes thus, Cepa cruda acr is est and mordax, sed
sub cineribus cocta, acrimoniam amittit and pus movet, praesertim in his
tumoribus, qui agree suppurant.

Considering the most lamentable loss, of our most accomplished Country Man,
Mr. James Gregory, Pofessor of the Mathematics at Edinburgh, (who in October
1675 was suddenly seized with a Gutta serena, having got cold by standing long
bare-headed sub die, after which he dyed, within 14 days) I thought the
noticeing of the forementioned Observation, might possibly prevent the like
Disaster, in some other person hereafter.

Secondly, In a more ordinary way ( James 1.17. Every good gift comes down
from the Father of lights, etc.) gradually suggesting to our minds, that this
Simple may be good for one Disease, and that for another (though not always by
the mediation of Signatures) and so prompting us, rationally and cauteloufly,
to attempt the trial of their Energies, upon our selves, when there was little
or no ground to fear danger, or upon Beasts, when otherwise. Thus empirically
began Medicin; which gradually made its progress, according to the Proverb,
Facile est inventis addere; and so became Dogmatical.

This sort of Knowledge in Man may be called Wisdom and Invention.

The second way how Man has attained the discovering of the medicinal virtues
of Simples, was Imitation of Beasts (which no man needs to cavil at, seeing the
Almighty; challenges men for not learning from their practices; our duty to
himself, Psalm. 84.3.4. Isai. 1.2.3. and 43 20.21.22. and Ierem. 8.7.) to all
which, no doubt, their Creator has given a competent knowledge, of what may be
good for, or prejudicial unto themselves, or their Masters, which we may call
Instinct; as also a docibitie by Man (for James 3.7. All sorts of Beasts have
been tamed by man and, Longa dies homini, docuit parere Leones) which in them
may be called sagacitie, and is most conspicuous in Dogs and Horses* Yea, I
have been informed by very credible Persons, that some Dogs have offered to
hinder their Owners, from going to places of hazard or danger, and when
disobeyed have absented themselves from beholding it; and that others have
discovered the perpetraters of Murders committed upon their Masters: which
things are worthy of the disquisition of Divines and Philosophers.

For proose of what has been asserted, concerning Man's imitation of Beasts, in
the Medicinal use of Simples, I shall only trouble the Reader with these few
Instances.

First, Celandin was first used for distempers of the Eyes: because the Swallow
was observed to apply its juice, to the distempered eyes of her young ones; for
which cause also it got its name Chelidonia, from the Greek word (...), which
signifies a Swallow.

Secondly, I was informed by a worthy and credible Gentleman, that his Brother
in Law (living six miles West from Edinburgh) had a Dog, subject to the
Epilepsie; for which, when he found the Paroxism beginning, he did immediately
(in the Summer) run to the Meadow, where he snatched up some Herb, which did
preveent his falling, if he reached thither; and in Winter he got toward the
Hay-stack, with the same success. As did my Informer, so must I, regrate, that
none did watch the Dog, for discovering what the Herb was.

Thirdly, It is sufficiently well known, that wild Hawks do swallow small
white stones (lying by the brinks of Rivers) for to cause them vomit viscide
humors, oppressing their Stomachs; for which cause Falconers give the same
Medicin to their tame ones. Moreover, I knew a friend of my own, who was much
troubled with Colicall pains, which were most eased, by his swallowing 4 or 5
of such stones: for they did purge him downwards several times, and did
immediately cure the paroxismes, for which he did often make use of the same
individual stones.

Before I conclude this Section, I cannot forbear to mention Dr. Levin.
Lemnius, his excellent Treatise (which might be very useful to Divines)
Entitled, Similitudinum ac Parabolarum, quae in Bibliis ex herbis at que
arboribus desumuntur, dilucida explicatio. In which Treatise he shows, that
the dictating Spirit of God, from the Signaturs [tho not expressed] of some
Simples, and the known Qualities of others, does teach us divine Lessons. The
consideration whereof does fully refute the old Atheist, who said Non rebus
exiguis vacat adesse Iovi.

I shall only mention one, viz. the Willow-Tree, of which in his 8 chapter, the
sum whereof take in these few words.

The Evangelical Prophet Isai. chapter 43. having foretold the ruin of
Babylon, alse easily as Tow is consumed by fire, in the 44 chapter God
comfort his Church, promising the affluance of all worldly comforts, and
particularly ( v. 4) That they shall spring up as among the grass; as Willows,
by the water courses. For, this Tree by the Latins was called Salix, a
Saliendo, from jumping, or louping because it arises speedily, and soon
becomes a Tree And the Germans call it Willige, [hence Willow] because it is
prompt and voluntary in growing. It was of that fort, whose Leaves are
whitish, have a pleasant smell, and do mitigat the heat of the Air; for which
cause the Hollanders, do therewith garnish the Beds of Sick-Persons.

Secondly, According to Psalm. 137. the Jews being c^ptives in Babylon, and the
Heathens in derision, desireing them to sing one of the songs of Zion; they
wept, and hanged their Harps upon the Willows, and that appositely: because
this Tree is either barren, or loses its Fruit or Seed, ere it come to
maturitie. Moreover, it is bitter to the Taste, neither so beautiful or
pleasant in aspect, as are the Plain, Cedar, and Cypress-Trees. Wherefore Exyle
is fitly compared to it.

SECTION VI.
IN the next place, I thought it would be very suitable to the Premises, by
way of Conclusion, to add a few lines concerning Wind or the Flatuosity in the
Stomach and Intestines for the dispelling of which, the Mace is so much
commended.

Having lately seen and perused, A new and needful Treatise of Wind offending
Man's body, In which is described, the nature, Causes and Symptoms of Wind,
together with its speedy and easy remedy. By W. R. M. D. one of the
Trinm-viri, who translated Riverius, his Practice of Medicin, to whose Epistle
to the Reader, he has subjoined a few pitiful Verses, showing who are
Doctors, and who not. Printed 1676. I cannot but regrate, that in this learned
and accurat Age, any pretending to Degrees should have obtruded upon his
Contemporaries a fardle of such antique, reasonless (for the most part)
Assertions, whose Errors have great need to be purged, Ignorance corrected, and
Lameness reformed; as will be evident to any* who will but take notice of the
few Instances, after mentioned.

Er I proceed further, I must here so far exercise your Candor and Patience, as
to tolerat a short Digression concerning this Book.

After I had perused it, and taken notice of many things, which cannot but
offend the Eyes and Ears of any Person related to Medicin, I did meet with a
Gentleman, who having accidentally also met with it, in my Patients chamber, he
produced it to me, with Ioannis Fieni Andoverpiani de flatibus, humanum corpus
molestantibus, Commentarius novus ac singularis, in quo flatuum natura causa
and Symptomata describuntur earamque, remedia facili and expedita methodo
indicantur. Telling me, that the former was on ly a Translation of this (which,
by comparing them, we presently discovered) without making any mention of the
first Author, which Plagiarie Act, is rarely to be paralleled. The Author [or
rather Translater] being conscious to himself of this guile, did in the Epistle
Dedicatorie, provide for himself, a poor refuge, from the deserved challenges
of the Ingenuous, in these words. I shall not cease to hope, but this
translation, and Contribution of this kind of knowledge to the English, and
its humble Dedication, will have a fair and kind acceptance, with your
Wisdoms. Not in the least supposing either the Subject, [being of Wind and
Spirits] or this discourse, can be strangers to your general reading.

A Critic did deservedly give this extemporarie Verdict of this Translation,
Fienus is my father, and its a shame,
For such a Cox-comb to suppress his name:
For silly Beggars, who possess no wealth,
Yet much disdain solely to live by stealth.


Before I mention any of the promised Instances, I shall desire you to consider.

First, That this Treatise is dedicated to one of the most learned and famous
Societies, [viz. To the Royal Society, the Virtuosi] in the World, which has
hudgely improven the Knowledge of Natural Philosophy, and Medicin, by many new
Experiments, for solveing many Phenomenon, which puzzled the Pates of our
Ancestors. Yet in all this Book there is not the shadow of an appearance, that
either the Author (who is more excuseable, considering the time when he wrote)
or the Translater, did ever hear of the Fermentation of Humors. Only it seems,
that some few Chymicall words, have been Echoed into their Ears, for, page 80.
he orders a Decoction to be made in B. M. page 104. Cinnamon Water, Aqua Vita
Ol. Anisi page 106. the Oils of Spike, Nutmegs. and Mace. page 144. and the
Ashes of a Fig Tree, or Juniper, are mentioned, which is all the Chymistrie, to
be found in this Treatise; whose Dedication to the Royal Society, is alse
impertinent, as if one should dedicat a System of Aristotelian-Phylosophie,
unto a Cartesian Society.

Secondly, In the Epistle to the Reader (which in the Translation, is made up
of the Authors two Epistles) both these Blades do pay their respects, to the
most deservedly famous, and admirably ingenious Hippocrates, in these words. Of
Wind, Hippoc. has written so that little benefit is to be gotten thereby -- he
uses Arguments far fetched; and such as teach rather the wit of the Author,
than the knowledge or cure of the Diseases that come from them. -- Who wrote on
this Subject, more learnedly than profitably. But I am confident, that all, who
are void of Interest, and purged from the dregs of adhaerence to any thing but
Truth, will be easily convinced, that in all that long flux of Time, betwixt
Hipp. and us, no one amongst the numerous swarm of Pathologists, has showen
less Wit, or spoken less to the business taken in hand, than have these, the
Author and Translater, from the contagion of whose unequal undertakeings, the
reputation of that most ancient pillar of Medicin (whose memory has been, and
still will be, embalmed, with the Elogicall commendations, and admirations of
the judicious and learned in all Ages,) will never suffer detriment,
disparagement, or obscurity, in this or any other matter; which we hope, some
more judicious and elegant Hand, will set about to demonstrat more fully, then
we have here only intended to hint at.

The first Instance which I mention, is the lame description of Flatus or Wind
(mentioned page 9. which he calls, an abundance of vapors from spirits, or
meat or drink, of phlegm or melancholy, raised from a weak heat in the body.
Yet page 1. he says, That substance whether Air, Wind, or Blast -- is called
a spirit.

Secondly page 16. Wind troubles such commonly, that drink thick sweet Ale,
Milk, or Water betwixt Meals chiefly: for that corrupts concostion, and
weakneth the action of the Stomach, as if you should pour cold water into a
boiling Kettle.

Thirdly, Page 26 Galen says, all the faults of water are from its coldness,
by which it lies long in the Stomach, and causes fluctuations, and turns to
wind, and corrupts and weakens the Stomach, so that it concocts worse.

Fourthly, Page 28. If you drink presently after meat, the concoction is
interrupted, and there will be crudities, which cause fluctuation and inflation
of the Belly, like a Drum.

The falsity of these three last Assertions, as to cold water, shall be shown
hereafter.

Fifthly, Page 29. Keep thy feet from cold (which our High-Landers do not: for
they use every morning to bath them in cold water, for preventing of Diseases)
for Nerves go from thence to the Stomach and presently cool it, and the Colic
and all inflations, are caused thereby.

This is alse excellent an Anatomical Notion, concerning the original of
Nerv's, as was that of another, who affirmed that the Blood was first generat
in the Brain; tho the Assertor might more probably, but alse falsely, have
affirmed, that the Chile owed its original to it.

Sixthly, Page 22. What oppresses the natural heat of the Stomach, is the
cause of Wind, as Pulse, etc Boil Beans alse much as you will, they are windy.
-- but fry them, or any other Pulse, and they are not windy but very hard of
concoction [which must certainly be, by their oppressing the natural heat,
which is the cause why] they pass away slowly and make gross juice. But any way
dressed they swell the body. Notable Contradictions Also all Summer-fruits, are
like these. -- they are phlegmatic and Windy. O brave Cherries and
Strawberries, notwithstanding!

Seventhly. Page 24. Onions, and all Roots except a Parsneep and Schiroots
(with which Parsley's might have been associat) Leeks, and dry Figs (how come
these here,) are windy. Yet page 12. of Beans he says, that some add Onions
to prevent wind: because hot and attenuating things correct Wind.

Eighthly, Page 55. Begin not Dinner, nor Supper with Drink (and why not the
Breakfast also?) nor drink a great draught, as the custom is, after they have
eaten a bit or two. -- Let liquide things be eaten before hard, and loosners
before Astringents. Excellent coherence.

Ninthly, Page 61. I allow not Cassia it is windy. Yet page 65. he prescribes
Diacathol. etc. and page 88. Confectio Hamech, and Diaphaenicon, which to the
Stomach, in comparison with Purgative Tinctures, are like Bread made of Malt,
compared with Ale.

Is it not evident, from all those witnesing citations, that the Author Fienus,
has been ignorant of the Doctrine and Nature of Fermentation; and that this
Translater, has never read the most ingenious and learned Diatriba de
Fermentatione, written by his Countreyman, Dr, Tho. Willis, neither his
Pharmaceutice Rationalis par. 1. (Printed in the Year 1674.) in the 3 Sect.
whereof, and Chap. 1. He, most ingeniously (according to his forementioned
Treatise, and Principles therein) describes the manner how Wind (by him called
Flatus) is bred in the body of Man.

Dum Alimenta invisceribus subacta and digesta a fermentis and calore ipsorum
dissolvuntur, effluvia quamplurima decedunt, quae si spatium liberum and
apertum obtinerent, in auras migratura evanescerent; verum ea membrana conclusa
and simul aggesta, vaporum congeriem quasi ventum constituunt qui intestina
saepe inflat ac distendit, and qua data via ruens secum excretiones promovet;
conclusus vere tormina, and non rare ventris inflationem creat. -- Hoc etenim
insigniter praestat, succorum non rite miscibilium colluctatio and
effervescentia. Quippe dum humores adventitij aut ingesta heterogenea, ac
imprimis Medicamenta, cum alijs intestinorum contentis fermentescunt, a mutua
particularum refractione corpuscula quamplurima decedentia, in vaporem
aggeruntur. etc.

My Design being chiefly to inform the Vulgar (who know not the many different
parts and humors in Man's body) how this Wind is bred in the Stomach and
Intestines, I shall only illustrat the manner thereof (and that conform to Dr.
Willis his Principles) by this familiar simile; daily obvious to the Eyes, and
Capacities of any.

Meat and Drink, whilst they are digesting in the Stomach [and further in the
Intestines] by the help of a little Liquor (called the Ferment) and heat, they
are so altered, that they become like Milk, called Chile. And if either,
through the too great abundance or diversity of Meats and Drinks received,
[which are great impediments in Digestion, wherefore it is, that simple
Brandie, does not occasion such belching of wind, as do the other
Strong Water, for which one called it unthankful; and one dish of Meat, is
more easily digested, then is a mixture of many) or the superabounding heat
(occasioned by too much strong drink) or deficient [proceeding from the
oppression of too much grosness, or great variety in the Stomack] the
digestion be perverted, the Chile and other humors, contained in those places
do become altered, as is the decoction of Malt (called Woort) when the Yest or
Barm [which is the Ferment] is mixed with it: for when the Liquor in the
Hogs-head swells and bubleth or belleth, the vapors ascending from them as
they break, do resemble (or, are resembled by) the belching of Wind, either
upward or downward. And as a Barrel filled with Ale, in this motion, if closly
stoped, would burst asunder; so when those vapors, arising in our Bodies (as
is said) can not get vent, by either of the forementioned ways, first
swelling, and then pain [occasioned through the distending of the Stomach and
Intestins] do arise. Moreover, when the natural heat is in a good condition,
and the digestion is performed aright, the Chile is uniforme, having all its
constituent parts proportionably mixed, as has recent Milk: but when the
Fermentation becomes irregular [as is ordinary, after taking too much,
especially of different Meats and Drinks] and the salinous parts begin to
pred^^^^e over the rest, (which Dr. Willis calls Sal fluorem adeptus) as when
Milk in a Churne, or Kirn, becomes Acide or Sour; then the vapors arising
from thence, do excite dullness, oppression of the spirits oscitation or
gaunting, and pain in the head. For which I know nothing better, (if the person
be unwilling to provok Vomiting) the^ to take a draught of Spring Water, an
hour or two after Meat, when those symptoms begin to arise; or to take it
immedially after Meat, for preventing of those symptoms. For the cold water
constringeth the upper orifice of the Stomach, whereby the digestion is helped,
and debilitateth the activity of those salinous parts, and so does rectify the
irregularity of the Fermentation; as when a Pot is boiling over, a little cold
water, does sedat the furious ebullition. Thus I hope the forementioned
Assertions, concerning cold water, [in the 2.3. and 4. Instances] are in some
measure refuted.

Likewise is not Hermannus Vander Heyden [formerly mentioned] his Treatise
(contained in his Speedy help for Rich and Poor) concerning the cure of the
Gout by cold water, internally and externally used, a greater evidence of the
falsity of those Positions.

But it is not in this case, that persons are troubled with the belching of
Wind, so much as when through the debility of the natural heat, viscide Phlegm
is generated in, and becomes fixed to the sides of the stomach [for the
prevention of which, doubtless the Mace is good] where, by its long stay and
the action of the natural heat, it becomes a praeternaturall ferment,
occasioning the boiling of humors, the hubles or bells whereof, when they
burst a sunder do occasion the unpleasant Eructations (like to the smell of
too much rofled Eggs, etc) of Wind, either upward or downward.

Any may be convinced of the probability of this, who will consider that if
unfermented Ale (which we call Woort) be put into a Barrel, containing the
Dregs and old Barm of Ale, or have them mixed with it; that tho the
fermentation will begin and proceed, yet the Ale thus made, will not be so
good, or pleasant, as that which was Fermented with recent Barm.

Here I can not but inform you, that I once was called to a Merchants wife who
had been for two hours troubled thus. For a little time she did uncessantly
belch wind upward, abour 30 or 40 times; then she had alse long respite; and
immediately she moaned grievously alse long, because of a pain in her
left-Iawes, amongst her Teeth [the discase by this Author called, The Toothache
from Wind] which ceasing, within a little time she began to belch Wind, as
before; and continued so doing interchangeably, for the space of one other
hour.

Lastly, Is it not sufficiently well known (...) that as pains in the Stomach
and Colon (the Theater, upon which the cruel Colic, has acted many a
Tragedy) are occasioned either by Acrimonious humors, or Wind, excited by
them; so when hot Medicines (as Spanish wine, Spyces, etc. which are most
proper, when Wind troubles) have been ineffectuall, cold water has been most
succesfully used: because thereby the Acrimony of the Humors has been blunted
(as when you mix with one ounce of Vinegar, or Salt water, 4. or 5. times alse
much of Fresh water) and they excerned by Urine and Stool.

My design being only, to inform the Vulgar, concerning those ordinary Means
of Health, I shall not offer any thing relative to the rectification of peecant
Humors, by Spagyricall Medicines: but refer the same to a more accuratpen.

FINIS.

