THE APOSTASY OF THE LATTER TIMES.

In which, (according to divine prediction) the world should wonder after the
Beast, the Mystery of Iniquity should so far prevail over the Mystery of
Godliness, whorish Babylon over the virgin-Church of Christ; as that the
visible glory of the True Church should be much clouded, the True unstained
Christian Faith corrupted, the purity of true worship polluted.

OR, THE GENTILES THEOLOGY OF DEMONS, i. e. inferior divine powers: Supposed
to be mediators between God and man: Revived in the LATTER TIMES amongst
Christians, in worshipping of Angels, deifying and invocating of Saints,
adoring and templing of Relics, bowing down to Images, worshipping of
Crosses, etc.

All which, together with A true discovery of the Nature, Original, Progress,
of the great, fatal, and solemn Apo^tasy, are cleared.

Delivered in public some years since upon 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. By JOSEPH MEDE
B. D. and late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

1 John 5.21. Little children, keep your selves from Idols.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for SAMUEL MAN dwelling at the sign of the
Swan in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

The Preface to the Reader.
VIno vendibili non opus est suspensa hedera: A cup of good wine will be known
where it is without an Ivy bush; such is the following discourse, and so I am
persuaded it will approve it self unto all unpartiall and judicious Readers.
Many years ago I was acquainted with it, by the Authors own hand: For such was
his scholasticall ingenuity; I found him most free in communicating his
studies; right like unto the description of the Scholar in Chaucer: Sounding in
moral virtue was his speech,
And glady would Learn, and gladly teach.


And sometimes he dealt plainly with me, in telling me the reason why; and that
was, because he found me so inquisitive after his meditations, whereas those
with whom he familiarly conversed, were nothing so. The truth is, I was
exceedingly taken with his notions; for he had a Critical wit, and affected to
correct common errors: and herein he seemed to me exceeding happy,
Demonstrating not only acuteness of wit, and clearness of conceit, but
solidity of judgment. And therefore from the first time, that I grew acquainted
with him, I made bold to improve my acquaintance to the uttermost of mine own
advantage scholasticall, encouraged thereunto by his facility and ready
condescension to my requests.

2 The beginning of our familiarity was occasioned by a rumor spread of his
opinion, concerning the glorious Kingdom of Christ here on earth, which many
hunderd years ago was cried down, as the Error of the Millenaries: and
Augustine himself, though confessing that at first he liked the same, yet
shows how that afterward he was taken off from it, and upon what ground. And
it seemed wondrous strange to us, that such an opinion should after so many
hundred years be revived; and that in so strange a manner, as now we find,
both amongst us, and amongst outlandish Divines. Nevertheless my self being
firmly set upon studies of another nature, I had no great edge so much as to
hearken to it, much less to take it into consideration. But a friend in the
Country sometimes urged me to write to an acquaintance in London; and to
entreat him to enquire of Master Mede, whether he were of the same opinion
with Piscator and Alstedius concerning the first resurrection* and the glorious
kingdom of Christ. And hereupon shortly after, word was sent me, that he did
agree with Piscator in this, that some shall rise a thousand years before
others, but he differed from him in this, that Piscator thought this Reign of
Christ should be in heaven; but I (said Master Mede) agree rather with
Alstedius and conceive, that the thousand years reign of Christ shall be on
earth. Yet herein he differed from Alstedius; that whereas Alstedius was of
opinion, that the thousand years reign of Christ should be after the day of
judgment, Master Medes opinion was that it should be in and Durante die
judicii, in an^ during the day of judgment; which day of judgment should
continue a thousand years, beginning with the ruin of Antichrist, and ending
with the destruction of cog and Magog. And that Camerarius writing upon Plato's
Alcinous, testifies that the Rabbines among the Jews write, that the seventh
thousand years shall be the great day of judgment, or the judgment of the
great day. And Hierome upon the sixty fifth chapter of Esaias confesses, that it
was a tradition among the Jews, that the Messiah should reign a thousand
years in new Jerusalem.

3. When I heard this, my Spirit was stirred up in me to lay aside for a while
my ordinary studies, and to take this into consideration; and I prayed Master
Mede to give me leave to propose my reasons against this opinion of his. And
the truth is, the improbability of it seemed very pregnant unto natural
reason; and diverse arguments that way offered themselves, which seemed to be
of very difficult (if at all possible) solution. And over and above it seemed
very contradictious to diverse plain passages of holy Scripture. Master Mede
very redily enterteyned the motion, and prescribed me a time after which he
should be at leisure for me; and in a letter after this, in his familiar manner
asked me saying; when come your Queries? I accepted his courteous answer, and
sent up unto him, first and last, twelve arguments against that opinion of his;
and at the first I sent him ten, with an answer devised by my self to nine of
them; for so I had promised him, namely that I would bethink my wits of what
possibly might be said in the solution of them, according to the straitness
of my invention, leaving it to him to approve, or correct, or add, as he
thought good. And whereas I could devise nothing at all in answer to my tenth
argument, he sent me a large answer thereunto in three sides of a sheet of
Paper; whereby I well percieved, that my best arguments had been known to him,
and examined before I devised them.

4. After this, I came acquainted with many discourses upon the same argument,
one Printed at Hanow in Germany, De die novissimo, Of the last day; a few only
were Printed; Two copies (and no more) were brought into England; Master Mede
bought them both, and sent me one of them to Copy it out, which we did After
this, no less then seven manu-scripts were sent me from one Divine, treating
of this and other mysteries. Now here I cannot but confess my corruption, for
I received them by way of a bribe. And indeed I was to do him a favor (which
yet was never done, the death of a special Friend preventing it) and I dealt
plainly wiih him, and told him I would not sell my favors Gratis; I would be
well paid for them. And therefore whereas I heard he had strange notions upon
the Revelation, and touching the mysteries of the first resurrection, and
Christ's Kingdom; I looked to be see'd with the communication of them; with
promise to return them safely, after I had sucked the honey out of them, though
he had never a whit the less for that, such is the nature of spiritual
commodities. The good man sent me word, that such bribes would never make me
rich: But I returned answer, that they would make me more rich then the
enjoying of all the treasures of Aethiopia, and the hill Amara to boot: And
here I found rich mines indeed, even all the mysteries belonging to Christ's
glorious kingdom set down apart, by way of question, and a solemn resolution
thereof, with proofs adjoined out of holy scripture. Since that, I have met
with diverse choice pieces of the same argument; some prosecuting a few parts
thereof only, and others more. But let that pass, I return to Master Mede.

Many letters passing between us, he had occasion sometimes to touch upon
somethings, whereof he had written more at large, either by occasion of
Chapel exercises, as he called them, or in more operous and large discourses.
I was glad to observe such pre^ious birds of Paradise spring; and thereupon
insinuated with him further, entreating him to communicate such exercises of
his to me. And truly I found such exemplary favor with him, that he would
scarce deny me any thing. Thus I came to be partaker of diverse Chapel
exercises of his, one whereof was a notable discovery of the common error,
about Zipporahs circumcising of her child, as if she did it in discontent and
in spleen, throwing the foreskin at Moses feet, and saying, Thou art a bloody
husband. But Master Mede brings it about to signify the ordinary form of
expression used in that Sacrament, which was to this effect, Thou art my blood,
son; and he proves it both out of notable circumstances of the story of
Moses, and out of the Rabbines, acknowledging that form, and applying it to
that fact of Zipporah.

5 I confess there has been some difference between us about ceremonies, as
about the lawfulness of bowing toward the Altar, and about the holiness of
Churches, whereof he was as zealous as his Lord of Canterbury, or rather more;
for he held it unlawful to pull down Churches, they being places separated
for Gods use, and his peculiar: wherein he followed Master Hookers conceit, in
the fifth Book of his Ecclesiastical Policy. But his Lord of Canterbury did
not hold it unlawful to pull down Saint Gregory's. That axiom, Eadem est
ratio loci and temporis, There, is the same reason of time and place, deceived
him, as it deceives many, for where it does hold, it holds only in reference
to time, and place, natural. And indeed, time is only natural; but place may
be artificial, and such is a Temple. That is for the general notions of them;
then as touching the special notions of them, herein is a vast difference. For
the proportion of time is very considerable for the advancing of Gods service;
as one day in seven, rather then one day in a fortnight, or one day in a
month; the like cannot be said of the proportion of place. And lastly, the
time of Gods worship is defined by God still even under the Gospel, namely,
the Lords day; not for any place defined by him. And truly the Lord seemed to
me by special providence to cast us upon a debate about the holiness of
Churches. And it was high time to enquire into it, superstition in this kind
of late strangely increasing. The Austine disputations in Oxford, which were
wont to be kept in Saint Mary's of late I hear, are excommunicated thence. I
wonder the Act, and the exercises thereof, are not translated to some other
places, for fear of profanation: and the Terrae-filius, or Praevaricator,
must take heed of observing the old form of exercising their pleasant wits in
facetious discourse, for fear of profanation, which cannot he salved by ought
but Doctor Cozens his Devotions: Yet were not the same kinds of exercises
performed at the same time, and in the same place, in the time of Popery?
Whence it follows, that either they were mrre profane than we now adays, or
we more superstitious than they.

6 But whereas some were too forward in censuring Master Mede, as complying
with the times in this, it is well known, that twenty years and more, before
that last Sermon of his, whereat diverse took great offense, he had maintained
his opinion that way, and upon a text very plausible at first sight to justify
it, Lev. 19.30. Ye shall reverence my Sanctuary, which text may easily miscarry
an honest man, and a good scholar, into an opinion of reverence due unto
Churches, either civil or religious, or of a middle size betwixt them, as some
(I hear) have very unhappily set their wits on work to devise; as if man, made
after Gods image, were bound to perform reverence to the work of his own
hands. But if we seriously consider the two parts of the text, and duly weigh
and compare them together, we shall soon find, how the meaning of the one,
will give light to clear the meaning of the other: for thus it runs, Ye shall
keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. Now the keeping of the Sabbath is
clearly no other, than the reverenceing of God upon the Sabbath: so say I, the
reverencing of the Sanctuary is no other, than the reverencing of God in the
Sanctuary. In all this I have spoken nothing of the vast difference between the
Temple at Jerusalem, and our Temple and Chapels; every one where of amongst
us, for devotion thereunto, is compared with the Temple of King Solomon;
whereas there was but one Temple for all the Scribes, and into that Temple none
presumed to come but the Priests and into the Sanctum Sanctorum no Priests, but
the High Priest, and that but once a year. The truth is, both the Sanctuary,
at the first, and the Temple throughout, were Ceremonial, both whole and part,
and all the services thereof; and so God made use of it, as of sacrifices to
communicate mysteries of godliness unto his people. Yet I confess I have
heard some in great state, to profess that the Temple was moral, that is, the
building of it a moral duty: But I prove it was not; if it were moral, then
all the Church of God for 1600. years before the flood, and some 1200. after,
till the building of the Temple, failed of the substance of a moral duty; for
till then they had none. Again, if it were a moral duty, then God commanded
it from the first, either by word, or by writing it in man's heart; not by word,
as appears by Gods own profession made to David, 2 Samuel 7.7. In all the
places wherein I have walked, with all the children of Israel, spoke I one word
with any of the tribes of Israel, when I commanded the Judges to feed my people
Israel; or said I, Why build ye not me an house of Cedar trees? If written in
man's heart, then all along so many ages, the people of God sinned against their
consciences, in not building a Temple unto God.

7. But perhaps there is some color at least, or show of reason to prove this?
and what may that be? is it that of Solomon to the King of Tyrus? 2 Chronicles. 2.5.
The house which I build is great, for great is our God above all gods. Here
seems to be an intimation, that the house must be answerable to the greatness
of God: whereto I answer: Then belike it is a moral duty to build an house
answerable to Gods greatness. But, say I, this was utterly impossible to man
in the state of Innocence; therefore this is no moral duty. Such an house had
need be as big as all the world, from the outermost cope of heaven, to the
center of the earth, yet that not answerable; for as Solomon says, verse 6.
The heavens of heavens cannot conteyne him; but I do it to burn incense before
him. Yet it became Solomon in undertaking it to go through with it answerably
to the glory, wherewith God had adorned him: But the pattern of it was
delivered to him by David his Father, and his Father received it by revelation.
Surely it has been in the power of heathens since that time to build temples
exceeding the glory of the Temple built by Solomon: witness the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus: and that of Fez at this day. Surely the richer Potentates
are, the more they are enabled to build more glorious Temples: And the greatest
States of the world at this day are heathenish, not Christian.

8 But to the matter in hand, Amongst the chief pieces which Mr. Mede was
pleased to communicate unto me, this of the Apostasy of Latter times, as it
was the largest of all the rest, so it gave me greatest content; both for the
interpretation he makes of the text in Paul, different from all former
interpretations of course, which he shows to be most agreeable to the text;
and that it affordes new and more plentiful matter of meditation, both as
touching the doctrines of Demons, opening the meaning thereof, and showing
what they are: and as touching the description of those persons, who were the
founders of them; which opens a large field of discourse, and that so
pertinently and fully exemplified by the Author, as cannot but give great
content to the Protestant Reader; the foul superstitions and corruptions in
use among the Romanists, being represented to the life, and that with great
variety of reading, together with the explication, and illustration of some
very obscure passages in Daniels prophecy.

9. I had sometimes a dispute with Doctor Sibs about Master Medes explication
of Saint Paul's phrase, the doctrines of Demons, which he took to be somewhat
violent and strayned, But I professed freely, I saw no just reason for such a
censure. It is true we commonly conceived the word Daemoniorum, to be Genitivus
efficientis, a genitive case noting the Author or efficient cause. But Master
Mede takes it to be Genitivus materiae, the genitive case noting the matter, or
subject. Now all the learned and judicious know it to be as usual to take the
genitive case in this latter sense, as in the former; and therefore no racking
of the text is committed by him in this: Whereas on the other side, Beza
despaires of making Paul speak true Greek, unless by Demons we understand
false Prophets. But Master Mede, by his interpretation is driven to no such
shift, but preserves the integrity of the language, as well consisting with his
interpretation.

10. I have heard others highly commend this discourse of Master Medes, as a
choice piece, as Master Steven Marshall by name, that worthy Preacher. My
opinion is, that never was the defection of the Church of Rome, and the native
genius thereof more lively, and clearly, and learnedly set forth, as most
exactly answereable to that which the Scripture has foretold, then by Master
Mede in the opening and expounding of this text, whereupon he insists, and
accommodating the manners of the Church of Rome in the latter days thereunto;
and by Master Potter in his learned and accurate discourse of the number of the
Beast 666 whereof Master Medes judgment was, that it was the greatest
discovery that has been made since the world began. Much ado I had to draw
him to peruse it, and give me his judgment of it: for he feared it would prove
but a fancy; but after he had perused it, he sent me word, that he did not
think it possible that a matter of such reality and solidity could be wrought
out of it.

WILLIAM TWISSE.

The Catalogue of the Authors.
A
ACta Stephani Monachi. Aemilius Sura apud Paterculum. Ambrosius. Ammianus
Marcellinus. Apuleius. Arnobius. Athenagorae legate. pro Christ. Augustinus.
B
Balaeus. Baronius. Basilius. S. Benedicti Reg. Beza. Budaeus.
C
Caesarius. Calvinus. Castellio. Cedrenus. Celsus apud Originem. Chemnitius.
Chrysostomus. Cicero. Clemens Alexandrinus. Clementis alterius constitutiones.
Concilium Chalcedonense. Concilium Constantinopolitanum. Concilium Laodicenum.
Concilium Nicenum 2. Constantinus Morossa. Cosma Megalianus. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus. Cyrillus Hierosolym.
D
Damascenus. Diodorus apud Eusebium.
E
Epiphanius. Evagrius. Eucherius. Eunapius. Eusebius.
F
Fasciculus temporum. Florus. Franciscus Junius. Fridericus Sylburgius.
G
Gennadius de viris ilillustribus. Graserus. Gratianus. Gregorius magnus.
Gregorius Nazianzenus. Gregorius Nyssenus. Gregorius Turonensis.
H
Hermes Trismegistus. Herodotus. Hesiodus. Hieronymus. Hilarious. Hyperius.
I
Iamblycus. Interpres Aretae. Interpretes Septuagint. Interpres Syrus.
Interpres Vulgatus. Joannes Curopalata. Ioannes de Nicol. Jonathan. Iornandes.
Josephus. Irenaeus. Justinius Martyr.
K
Kircheri concordantia.
L
Lactantins. Legenda aurea. Leo magnus. Linacer.
M
Martini Lexicon. Melancthon. Melchior Canus. Miracula B. Virginis, lib. Ital.
O
Oecumenius. Oenomaus apud Eusebium. Onkelos. Origines.
P
Paterculus. Paulus Diaconus. Philo Biblius. Plato. Plutarchus. Porphyrius.
Possevinus. Procopius. Psellus. Ptolomaeus. Purchase pilgrimage.
S
Sammon. Serenus apud Macrobium. Sanchuniathon apud Eusebium. Servius.
Sigonius. Simeon Metaphrastes. Sleidanus. Socrates, historicus Ecclesiasticus.
Stephani, Robertus and Henricus. Suidas. Surius. Synesius
T
Targumin and Targumistae. Tertullianus. Theodoretus. Theodorus apud Baronium.
Theophanis miscel. hist. Theophanes presbyter apud Baron. Theosterictus.
Tremelius. Trithemius.
V
Varro. Vatablus. Venantius Fortunatus apud Biblioth. Patrum. Vincent. histor.
Virgilius.
Z
Zozomenus.
Errata.
Page 2. line 17. read discrete, p. 7. l. 2, (...), p. 9. l. 28. profecta, p.
10, l. 13. (...), l. 17. (...), l. 18. (...), l. 28. suppetias. p. 11. l. 5
(...), p. 13. l. 6. Idololatrae, l. 7. Idola, l. 9. Es. 65. l. 10. Idolis, p.
18. l. 4. which, p. 31. l. 12. (...), p. 34. l. 18. that, p. 42. l. 31.
induxit, l. 33. pro Pandiis, p. 45. l. 26. attended, p. 47. l. 5. characters,
p. 59. l. 25. beautiful, p. 61. l. 8. not, p. 70. l. 22. (...), p, 71. l. 34.
after sackcloth make a colon, p. 77. l. 19. and p. 78. l. 14. Iohojachin, p.
83. l. 22. contained, p. 93. verse 36. proficietque p. 94. ver. 39. honorem, p.
100. l. 17. (...), l. 7. polity p. 113. l. 14. he, p. 114. l. 8. sententiae.

In the Margin.
Page 7. (...), etc. p. 13. (...), p. 22. perspici, p. 46. (...), p. 84.
I^rnandes, p. 97. (...), p. 48. habebatur. p. 125. for Rem r. Hom.

THE APOSTASY OF THE LATER TIMES.
A Treatise on 1 Timothy Chap. 4. Ver. 1, 2. (...), etc.

Which I conceive may be thus translated, viz.

Howbeit the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall
revolt from the Faith, attending to erroneous spirits and Doctrinis Deastror^m.
Doctrines of Demons, through the hypocrisy of liars, having seared
consciences, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, etc.


THe words I have read, are a prophecy of a revolt of Christians from the
great mystery of Christian Worship, described in the last verse of the former
chapter; which according to the division of the Ancients, should be the first
of this: for that last verse, together with the first six verses of this and
half the seventh verse, make the seventh title or main Section of this
Epistle, expressed in the Edition of Robert Stephen; and so supposed, from the
grounds of that division, to belong all to one argument. The words therefore of
my Text, depend upon the last of the former chapter, as the second part of a
discreet proposition; that howsoever the (...) the mystery of Christian
Religion, which is, God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen
of Angels, and assumed into glory: Though this mystery was a great one, and at
that time preached and believed in the world; nevertheless, the Spirit ((...))
speaks expressly, that in the later times there shall be a revolt or departing
from the faith, though not in all parts of it, yet from a main and fundamental
part thereof, namely, the assumption of this God and Man to the throne of
glory, and the incommunicable majesty in Heaven, where he has a name given him
above every name, and whereof no creature in Heaven or in earth can be capable:
which connection is the reason why the Apostle puts this assumption into
glory in the last place of his description, which should else in the true order
have followed the words, justified in the spirit, and been before preached
unto the Gentiles, and believed on in the world. But it is the method of the
Scripture, sometimes to translate the proper order, and to mention that in the
last place whereunto it is to join, and from whence it is to infer the next
words that follow after. And unless this reason be allowed here, there will
hardly be found any other reason of this misplacing. But more of this shall be
both spoken and made better to appear hereafter.

I come now more near to my Text; the words whereof I divide into two parts:
First, a description of this solemn Apostasy, in the first verse. Secondly,
the manner or means whereby it was to come to pass in the following verse,
viz. through the hypocrisy of liars, who had seared consciences, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.

For the description of the Apostasy it self, we shall

Then particularly, 1 what these erroneous Doctrines totidem verbis or in
express words. For the second part ( viz.) the means; Consider first the
manner or method used, by lying hypocrisy or hypocritical lying; Secondly,
the quality and description of the authors and furtherers thereof, they should
be such as had their consciences seared, who forbade marriages and meats.
Where, before I go any further, I must give an account of thus translating
these later words which I make the second part, because they are commonly
translated otherwise, ( viz.) intransitively, as referring the words of the two
last verses to the persons mentioned in the first ( viz.) those some who should
apostatize and give heed to erroneous spirits and doctrines of devils, as they
usually translate it: so that the words of the second and third verses should
be the expression by particulars of that which was before generally comprised
under erroneous spirits and doctrines of devils, which should consist partly in
forbidding lawful marriage, and partly in commanding abstinence from meats,
thereby abridging Christian liberty. But this interpretation seems very
unlikely; for first, since S. Paul intends here to describe that great
apostasy of the Christian visible Church, as is evident by the pointing out of
the time (...) in the later times; who can believe that he who aymeth at this,
would instance only in the smaller and almost circumstantiall errors, omitting
the main and fundamental, which the Scripture elsewhere tells us should be
Idolatry or spiritual fornication. Secondly, as for errors about marriages
and meats, they were not proper to the last times, but found more or less in
the Apostles own times, as may be gathered by some passages of their Epistles:
why should then our Apostle, here speaking of the Apostasy of the last times,
instance only in these things which the first times in some measure were never
free from? Lastly, which I take alone to be sufficient, the Syntax of the words
will not bear it, to have them so translated; for the persons in the first
verse (...) are expressed in casu recto, whereas the persons in the verses
following (...), are in the genitive: now by what Syntax can these be construed
intransitively? how will (...) agree with (...) etc. without breach of Grammar,
unsampled in our Apostles Epistles? If any say, they may be referred then and
agree with (...), that indeed would be a strange sense, and nothing to their
purpose, to say that Devils lie, have seared consciences, and forbid marriages
and meats. But to construe it transitively, and to make all these genitive
cases to be governed by (...) and take the preposition (...) to signify Caus^m
or Modum actionis, Hy^erius (...) exp^unds it in his Comm. on this Epistle.
as is most usual in Scripture: this, as it keeps the Syntax true, so I hope
to make it appear hereafter to be the very meaning and the event most
answerable thereunto, when you shall hear proved out of Story, that the
Apostasy of the visible Church came in by lying wonders and all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, managed by those who either professed or
doted upon Monastical hypocrisy, the affectation of which errors, at length
surprising the body of the Church, is that which S. Paul 2 These. 2. calls not
the Apostasy it self, but a not-love of the truth, for which God gave them
over to strong delusions that they might believe a ly. But this is out of its
place, only I have anticipated thus much, lest you should be too long in
suspense of the grounds of this novelty in translating: and yet this difficulty
concerning the Syntax, has stumbled many of our later interpreters, as amongst
others Beza, who solves it only by saying, that the Apostle more regarded the
matter than the construction; which for my part I cannot believe: others who
can, may if they please. I return now unto the first part of my Text, the
description of that solemn Apostasy; where I will consider the five parts or
points thereof as I have propounded them, though it be not according to the
order of the words. And first in the more general expression of the words, as
I called it: I say in these words, (...), and (...) ((...)) is as much as to
say, they shall make an Apostasy; now (...) in Scripture use, when it looks
toward a person, signifies a revolt or rebellion; when toward God, a
spiritual revolt from God or rebellion against divine Majesty, whether total,
or by Idolatry and serving other gods; for the Seventy, whence the new
Testament borrows the use of speech, usually translates by this word the verb
(...) to rebel, and (...) rebellion; both which when they have reference to a
spiritual Sovereignty, mean naught else but Idolatry and serving of other
gods, as may appear Josuah 22.19. where the Israelites supposing their
brethren the Rubenites and Gadites, in building another Altar upon the banks of
Jordan, had meant to have forsaken the Lord and served other gods, they said
unto them, (...) you have rebelled against the Lord, and presently, rebel not
against the Lord, nor rebel against us; where the Seventy has (...), and in
the two and twenty verse (...) rebellion is translated (...) in the words, the
Lord God of gods he knows if it be in rebellion or transgression against the
Lord; also Numb. 14. ver. 9. when the people would have renounced the Lord upon
the report of the spies, Josuah and Caleb spoke unto them, saying, (...) rebel
ye not, where the Seventy has (...) be not apostates from the Lord; so Nehem.
9.26. in that repentant confession which the Levites make of the Idolatry of
their nation, they were disobedient say they (...) and rebelled against thee;
the Seventy has (...), and Daniel in the like confession chap. 9. ver. 9.
(...) the Seventy (...) we have rebelled; so the Idolatry of Ahaz 2 Chronicles. 28.
and 29. is by the same interpreters called (...) and he (...) revolted greatly
from the Lord.

I will not trouble you with the places where (...) translated (...) is used
for treason and rebellion against earthly Princes, which are many: it is
sufficient to gather from what we have quoted, that apostasy having reference
to a sovereignty and lordship, betokens a withdrawing of subjection and service
therefrom; which if the sovereignty and majesty be divine, is done by Idolatry
H^nce the phrase in Scripture fornicaria Deo, to apostatize from God by
spiritual fornication: vide Psalm. 73. Hosea 9.4. Ezekiel. 23. see Concord. Kirch.
, and service of other gods, as well as if the majesty of the true God were
renounced altogether. The use of the New Testament is answerable, Hebr. 3.12.
Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, (...) in
departing from the living God, and which is more near to our purpose S. Paul in
his 2 These. 2. means no other thing in his prophecy of the man of sin by
(...) than Christian Idolatry, (...) ( Sir. (...)) (...) unless that apostasy
come first, that is, unless there be a breach of allegiance and faith given
unto Christ, by Idolatry under Antichrist: the like therefore I conclude to be
intended in my Text by (...), namely, that in the later times men should break
their oath of fidelity to Christ, that in and through him alone they should
approach and worship the divine Majesty: and so has the use of the word (...)
taught us something, at least it has wrought an indefinite suspicion of what
should befall Christians in the later times; howsoever we are yet in suspense
whether this departing from Christ and the mystery of godliness should be
total in not acknowledging him at all, or whether heretical in serving other
gods besides him. For the Jews we know, when they forsook the Lord most, yet
did not forsake him altogether, but their apostasy was in not serving him only
and alone, but others besides him, as Calves, the host of Heaven, and Baalim.

Let us therefore see if the next general words will affords us yet further
information, (...) and (...) i. e. (...), Chaldaeis and Targumis^is est Idolum,
and (...) est Idola colere and scoriari. Romans 1.27. 2 Pet. 2.18. 2 These. 2.18.
viz. (...) attending to erroneous spirits, or as some read, (...) spirits of
error. It would be unprofitable and tedious here to tell of the diverse use of
this word spirit, in Scripture: some take it in this place for Doctors of
spiritual things, and so (...), or as some read (...) should be Doctors of
error.

But I had rather take Spirits in this place for doctrines themselves, for so
Divines observe it to be used 1 John 4.1. (...) believe not every spirit, i. e.
every doctrine (...) but try the spirits (...) if they be of God: (...),
because many false Prophets, etc. and so onward in that chapter (...) signifies
the false doctrine of Antichrist; so if this sense be admitted, we are
something less in suspense than we were, and may guess that this revolt
should not be total but heretical, for we shall not easily find the word
spirit to be otherwise used but either for the doctrines or Doctors of
Christianity, or for heresies under the same: It seems therefore to be some
revolt from Christ by Idolatry, even in those who would seem to worship him.

But suppose it be so, yet still are we in suspense what these erroneous and
idolatrous doctrines might be: For Idolatry, as we may see in the Jewish
apostasies, was of diverse kinds, as worshipping the host of Heaven, Baalim,
and the Gentiles other things besides them. But we shall not be long in doubt,
the next words will clear the case, (...) Ier. 10.8.
and tell us they shall be (...) doctrines of Demons, not which Demons or
Devils are authors of, though it be true, as if the genitive case were
active; but doctrines concerning Demons, the genitive case (...) being here to
be taken passively, for the object of these doctrines, as in Heb. 6. we have
(...) doctrines of Baptismes, and doctrines of laying on of hands, of the
resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, and doctrines about and
concerning all these; and the same use may elsewhere be found even with the
word Doctrine, as Acts 13.12. (...) the doctrine of the Lord, i. e. concerning
him; so Titus 2.10. and Gal. 2.20. we have (...), the faith of the Son of
God, i. e. concerning him So (...) Acts 3.^6. Phil 3.9. (...) 2 These. 2.13.
. Semblably in my Text (...) are doctrines of Demons or Doctrinae Deastrorum,
that is, the Gentiles idolatrous Theology of Demons should be revived among
Christians: for I take the word (...) or (...) (for all is one) not in that
worst sense, which no author but the Scripture uses, but in the better and
more indifferent sense, as it was supposed and taken among the Theologists and
Philosophers of the Gentiles, and as it is also sometimes taken in Scripture,
as I shall show in due time.

Mean while let us first see what the Gentiles and their Theologists understood
by Demons: which when you have heard, I doubt not but you will confess the
deifying and worshipping of Saints and Angels, with other parts of their
Idolatry, which do this, to be as lively an image of the doctrine of Demons
as could possibly be expressed; and such a one, as whereby the apostasy of the
later times is as by a character distinguished from the heresies, false
doctrines, and corruptions of all other times whatsoever.

Demons, in the Gentiles Theology, were Deastri or an inferior sort of
deified powers, as a middle between the Sovereign Gods and mortal men: so
says Plato in Symposio (...): so say all the Platonists, and well nigh all
other sects of Philosophers; I am sure most do: for it is a very ancient
doctrine, insomuch that Plutarch (de deffectu Oraculorum) fetches this
distinction between (...), i. e. Sovereign Gods, and Demons, as far as the
antiquity of Zoroaster; magnas and difficiles dubitationes (says he) videntur
solvisse qui (...), medio inter Deos and homines loco constituerunt, and quod
nos cum his quodammodo conciliat and conjungit, invenerint, sive haec Magorum,
and Zoroastris doctrina sit, sive Thracica ab Orpheo perfecta, sive Aegyptiaca
sive Phrygica, etc. The Sovereign or highest Gods which amongst them were
properly called (...), were those whom they supposed to be in the Heavens, yea
in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, whence they called them Dii Superi, Dii
Coelestes, whom they affirmed to have neither beginning nor ending, as Apuleius
speaks de Daemonio Socr. Immortales sine ullo vel fine vel exordio, sed prorsus
a retro aeviterni. And because they dwelt in the heavenly lights, as it were
souls in bodies, Plato thinks the name (...) first came quasi (...) of the
everlasting running and uncessant motion of the heavenly bodies, Plat. in
Cratylo.

Now these Sovereign Celestial Gods they supposed so sublime and pure as
might not be profaned with approach of earthly things, or with the care or
mannaging of mortal men's businesses; and therefore they bring in that middle
sort of divine Powers which they call (...) or (...) to be as mediators and
agents between the Sovereign Gods and mortal men: thus says Plato in his
Symposium (...) God is not approached by men, but all the commerce and
inter-course between Gods and men is performed by the mediations of Demons.
Will you see the particulars (...) (says he) (...); Demons are reporters and
carriers from men to the Gods, and again from the Gods to men; of the
supplications and prayers of the one, and of the injunctions and rewards of
devotion from the other. And Apuleius in the place forequoted describes them,
mediae potestates per quas and desideria nostra and merita ad Deos commeant,
inter mortales Coelicolasque vectores, hinc precum, inde donorum; qui ultro
citroque portant hinc petitiones, inde suspetias seu quidam utrinque
interpretes and salutigeri: For, says he, neque enim pro majestate Deum
Coelestium fuerit haec curare, it beseems not the majesty of the Sovereign
Gods to manage these things of themselves. Whence it is that Celsus in Origin
terms his Demons summi Dei Satrapas, praesides, procuratores, Duces, qui
neglecti non minus laedere possunt, quam Persarum, Romanorumve Regis Satrapae,
praesides, ministri, etc. lib. 8. contra Celsum. page 940. Where note by the
way, that Celsus as some others did, acknowledges but one Sovereign God.

By reason of this office of mediation, Plutarch calls the order of Demons
(...). Also (...) etc. agreeable to the doctrine of Plato, lib. de defec.
Oracul. the order of agents, and ministers etc. To stay no longer here, take
the sum of all in the words of Apuleius in the book forenamed, cuncta
Coelestium voluntate, numine, and autoritate fiunt, sed Daemonum obsequio,
opera, and ministerio. And if I should bring all which I might to this purpose,
I should be too tedious. Porphyrius in Eusebius, Plutarch, skillfull men in
this kind of Philosophy, will satisfy them fully, to whom this is not
sufficient. This was the Occumenicall Philosophy of the Apostles times, and of
the times long before them: Thales, Pythagoras, all the Academicks and Stoics,
and not many to be excepted, unless the Epicures, taught this Divinity. He
that had rather read a Father of the Church, let him but turn over the eighth
and ninth books of S. Austin de Civ. Dei, the eighteenth chap er of the former
book, having this Title; Qualis sit religio in qua docetur, quod homines ut
commendentur Diis, bonis Daemonibus uti debeant Advocatis: of the one and
twenty chapter this, An Daemonibus nuntiis and interpretibus Dii utantur? And
of the ninth chapter of the ninth book the Title is this, An amicitia
Coelestium Deorum per intercessionem Daemonum possit homini provideri? And of
the seventeenth chapter this, Ad consequendam vitam beatam non talimediatore
indigere hominem qualis est D^mon, sed tali qualis est unus Christus. The
reading of which Titles alone were sufficient to show what was the supposed
office of the Demons among the Gentiles.

This Philosophy therefore so general was that, without doubt, whereof S. Paul
admonishes the Colossians to take heed lest they were spoiled with the vain
deceit thereof, as being after traditions of men, and rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ. For some Christians even then under a pretense of
humility, of not approaching too nearly and too boldly to God, would have
brought in the worshipping of Angels in stead of this of Demons; but S. Paul
tells them, that as in Christ dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, so
that he needed no colleagues of mediation; so also were they complete in him,
and needed therefore no agents besides him. Let no man therefore (says he)
beguile you of your reward through humility, and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, and not holding the head.

Neither is the holy Scripture ignorant of this distinction of Sovereign Gods
and Demons: the first whereof the Celestial and Sovereign Gods, whether
visible or invisible, it calls (...) the Host of heaven; The other sort it
styles by the name of Baalim, that is, Numb. 25. the Mid^anites called the
people to the sacrifices of their Gods, and the people did eat. And Israel
joined himself to Baal P^or: But Psalm. 106. it is said, they joined themselves
unto Baal Peor and ate the sacrifices of the dead.

Deuteronomy. 32.17. In the prophetical song of Isreal's Apostasy, they sacrificed
unto Demons, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new ones that came
newly up, whom the Fathers feared not. The Seventy (...) Heb. (...)

For cutting and launcing were funeral rites, as appears Levit. 25.5. and
chap. 19.28. and Deuteronomy. 14.1. Ier. 48.37. and chapter 16.6. and therefore
retained in the funeral worship (as they call it) of those that were deified
after death: qu^re; did not God forbid his people this rite because abused to
Demon Idolatry? yet did some transg^esse it, as Ier. 41.5. Moses body
therefore hidden.

Vide Isa. 65.4 Idolatrae in sepulchris, Item cap. 8. ver. 19. pro vivis ad
mort^os. Loc. Isa. 8.19. Targ. vertit nonne haec via enim populo^um colentium
Idolam. Vnusquisque populus ab^^dolo su^ req^irit, vivi a mortuis: the Seventy
sic: (...). Loc. Es. 63.3.4 Targ. sic; in (...) sacrificant Idolii and adol^nt
aromata super lateres. 4. Qui habitant in domibus, quae edificantur de ^ulvere
sepulchorum (...) and eum cadaveribus filiorum hominum morentur. Seventy* (...).


Domini, or Lords. And Manasses the king of Idolaters was complete for both of
them: so we read 2 Chronicles. 33.3. that he reared up Altars for Baalim, and made
groves, and worshipped all the Host of heaven, and served them: and 2 King.
23.5. that good Josiah is said to have put down all the Idolatrous Priests
which burnt incense to Baal, to the Sun, and to the Moon, and to the Planets,
and to all the host of heaven: now that these Baalims were no other than
Daemon-gods, appears by their cutting and launcing themselves, who worshipped
them: 1 King. 18. for these tragyck ceremonies are counted by those who treat
about these mysteries, as certain characters of Demons but this you shall
have further confirmed in due place, where the arguments may be better
understood.

This distinction also of Sovereign Gods and Demons, I suppose our Apostle
alludes to, 1 Cor. 8.5. where he says, though there be many that be called
gods, whether in heaven, or in earth; as there be (...) gods many, that is, Dii
Coelestes Sovereign Deities, (...) Lords many, i. e. (...) Demons Presidents
of earthly things; yet to us Christians there is but (...), one Sovereign God
the Father, of whom are all things, and we to him, that is, to whom as
supreme, we direct all our services; and but (...) one Lord Jesus Christ, in
stead of their many mediators and Demons, (...), by whom are all things which
come from the Father to us, and through whom alone we find access to him. The
allusion, me thinks, is passing elegant, and such as I think cannot be well
understood without this distinction of superior and inferior Deities in the
Theology of the Gentiles, they having a plurality in both sorts; and we
Christians but one in each, as our Apostle affirms; there wants but only the
name of Demons, in stead of which the Apostle puts Lords, and that for the
honor of Christ, of whom he was to infer (...), the name of Christ being not
to be polluted with the appellation of an Idol: for his Apodosis must have
been otherwise (...): or may be he alludes unto the Hebrew name Baalim,
which signifies Lords: and those Lords, as I told you, were nothing else but
Demons; for thus would S. Paul speak in the Hebrew tongue, there are (...) and
(...) many Gods and many Lords.

And thus have I showed you, though but briefly in regard of the abundance the
argument would afford, the nature and office of these Demons according to the
doctrine of the Gentiles: I come now unto another part of this doctrine, which
concerns the original of Demons, Tertult. Idolatria parentationis est
species, cap. 12.
whom you shall find to be the deified souls of men after death; for the
canonizing of the souls of deceased worthies is not now first devised among
Christians, but was an idolatrous trick even from the days of the elder world,
so that the devil, when he brought in this Apostaticall doctrine amongst
Christians, swarved but little from his ancient method of seducing mankind.

Let Hesiod speak in the first place, as being of the most known the most
ancient, he tells us that when those happy men of the first and golden age of
the world were departed this life, great Jupiter promoted them to be Demons,
that is, keepers, and protectors, or patrons of earthly mortals, and overseers
of their good and evil works, givers of riches; and this, says he, is the
kingly royalty given them. But hear his own words: (...),
(...) AIMONES (...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).


And hence it is that Oenomaus, quoted by Eusebius, calls these Daemon-gods
(...) Hesiods gods.

The next shall be Plato, who in his Cratylus says, that Hesiod, and a great
number of the rest of the Poets, speak excellently, when they affirm that good
men when they die attain great honor and dignity, and become (...), which is
(says he) as much to say as (...), that is, wise ones; for wise ones (says
he) are only good ones, and all good ones are of Hesiods golden generation.

The same Plato, de Repub. would have all those who die valiantly in the field,
to be accounted of the golden kind, and (...) effici, to be made Demons, and
the oracle to be consulted, how they should be buried and honored; and
accordingly ever afterward (...), i. e. their sepulchers to be served and
adored as the sepulchers of Demons: In like manner should be done unto all who
in their life time excelled in virtue, whether they died through age or
otherwise: this place Eusebiu^ quotes (lib. 14. Prep. Evang.) to parallel with
it the then harmless practice of Christians, in honoring the memory of
Martyrs, by holding their assemblies at their sepulchers; to the end that he
might show the Gentiles, that Christians also honored their worthies in the
worthiest fashion. But would to God that in the next ages after, this custom
of Christians then but resembling, had not proved the very same doctrine of
Demons which the Gentiles practiced.

But I go on, and my next author shall be Hermes Trismegistus, whose
antiquity is said to be very near the time of Moses; I will translate you his
words out of his Asclepius which Apuleius made latin. There having named
Aesculapius, Osyris, and his grandfather Hermes, who were (as he says)
worshipped for Demons in his own time; he adds further, that the Egyptians
call them (namely the Demons) Sancta animalia, and that amongst them (namely
the Egyptians) per singulas Civitates coli eorum animas, quorum sunt
consecratae virtutes. And here note by the way, that some are of opinion, that
the Egyptian Serapis, whose Idol had a bushel upon his head, was Joseph,
whose soul the Egyptians had canonized for a Demon after his death.

Philo Byblius the translator of Sancuniathon the ancient Phaenician Historian,
who lived before the times of Troy, and wrote the Acts of Moses, and the Jews
(says Eusebius) very agreeable to the Scripture, and faith, he learned his
story of Ierom-baal a Priest of the God JEVO: Philo Byblius (I say) in a
preface to his translation of this Author, sets down what he had observed,
and learned out of the same story, and might serve to help their understanding
who should read it: namely, that all the Barbarians, chiefly the Phaenicians
and Egyptians, of whom the rest had it, accounted of those for Dii maximi, who
had found out any thing profitable for the life of man, or had deserved well of
any nation, and that they worshipped these as Gods, erecting Statues, Images,
and Temples unto them, and more especially they gave the names of their Kings
(as to the elements of the world, so also) to these their reputed Gods: for
they esteemed the natural Deities of the Sun, Moon, and Planets, and those
which are in these, to be only and properly Gods: so that they had two sorts of
gods, some were Immortals, and others were Mortals.

Thus says Philo Byblius out of the Phaenician History, from which testimony
we may borrow some more light concerning those Baalims in Scripture. Hieron. in
cap. 23. Ezech. Idolum autem Baal sive Bell, Assyrio^um religio est, consecrata
a Ni^o Belis silio in honorem patris.

Idem in Hos. cap. 2. Ninus in tantam pervemt gloriam ut pa^trem suum B^lum
referret in Deum, qui He^raice dicitur (...) and in multis prophetis, maximeque
in Daniele: (...) juxta Theodosionem sub Idolo Babylon^ hoc appellatur nomine,
Hunc Sidonii, and Phaenices appellant, (...)


For Baal or Belus, whose worship Iezabell the daughter of Ithabaal King of
Tire brought into Israel, was a deified Phaenician King of that name, as Virgil
will tell us in that verse concerning the Phaenician Queen Dido: Implevitque
mero pateram, quam Belus and omnes A Belo soliti, etc.

Nay, Baal, or in the Chaldee Dialect, Bell (for all is one) was the first King
of Babel after Nimrod, Eusebii Chron. Chronicon Alexandrinum se^ Fasti siculi.
Hieron. ^aulo post lecum proxi. me citatum. Didicimus, in. quit exordium
Daemonis, imo hominijs in Daemonem consecrati: Omnia enim Idola ex mortuorum
errore creverunt. Idem in c. 46. Isa. Quem (i. e. Baal^ Graeci Belum, Latini
Saturnum dicunt, cujus tanta fuit apud veteres religio ut ei non solum humanas
hostias ca^tivorum, ignobi iumque mortali^m, sed and suo^ liberos immolarum^.
Cyrillus contra Iulianum versus finem, Primus (inquit) regnavit in Assyriorum
terra, (...), vir superbus, and arrogans, Belus qui and primus hominum dicitur
a subditis no men Deitatis accepisse; hic interpres vitio^e transfert Arbelus,
and ubi mox s^qui ur (...) Interpres Arbeli, etc. Lactant. de sals. relig c.
23. and ult. originem Idolatry ad Belum refert.
and the first (as is written) that ever was deified and reputed a God after
death; whence afterward they called all other Demons Baalim; even as because
the first Roman Emperor was called Caesar, thence were all the Emperors after
him styled Caesar's: and it may be this is part of that which Philo Biblius out
of Sancuniathon would tell us; That the Barbarians, especially the Phaenicians,
etc. gave names from their Kings to such as were canonized after death: For so
we see here that the Babilonians, and the neighboring Countries, which spoke
the Hebrew tongue, or some Dialect thereof, called all Demons Baalim, of the
first Demon, or deified King in the world, Baal, or Belus: for at that time
when Belus reigned in Babel, was Phaenicia, with the neighbor people, under
the kingdom of Babel: Whence may seem also to have come their community of
language and ceremonies; and here note a wonderful mystery, that old Babel,
the first pattern in the world of ambitious Dominion, was also the Foundresse
of Idols, and the Mother of the fornication, and abominations of the earth.

And because we have fallen upon the naming of Demons, let us observe another
mystery of names, out of Plutarch (de defect. Orac.) which may help us out, or
prevent some difficulties, namely, that Demons are sometimes called by the
names of those Celestial gods, whose Ministers and Proctors they are, and from
whom they receive their power and Divinity: As Apollo's Demon. Apollo;
Jupiter's Demon, Jupiter, and so the rest. (...) (...); Sicut and nostrum
alius Iovius, alius Minervius, alius Mercurialis, etc. dicitur.

Thus Plutarch, with Cleombrotus there says, he learned of a wonderful and
profound Egyptian Hermit, who lived about the red Sea, etc.

To which is agreeable what Eusebius Praepar. Evang. lib. 3. cap. 2. quotes out
of Diodorus, viz. Aegyptios asserere mor^ales multos propter beneficia in Deos
relatos, and eorumaliquos coelestibus Diis cognomines.

The same Plutarch in the same place does acquaint us with this pretty conceit,
which being to the purpose I will not omit; namely, that the souls of men
took degrees after death, Dii (...) de quibus Lab^o libros scripse^a^, in
quibus a^ebat (verba S^rvii) esse quaedam sacra quibus animae vertantur in
d^os, qui appellantur animales, quod de animis sia^t.
first they commenced Heroes, who were as Probationers to a Daemonship; then
after a time sufficient, Demons; and after that, if they deserved well, to a
more sublime degree. Howsoever it be, Demons, and Heroes differed but in more,
and less antiquity, the more ancient Heroes, being called Demons, and the
younger Demons Heroes.

But that we may return again more close to the matter in hand, this order of
Demons, or soule-gods, as I may call them, found place in the Religion of the
elder Romans, who called them Penates, Lares, and Manii Dii; and when once they
began to canonize their deceased Emperors, which was from the time of
Augustus, they called them Divi, which word before that time was more general.
Tully in his second book de Legibus, shall be my witness, that his
contrymen acknowledged this distinction of Sovereign Gods, and
Soule-deified powers, for there you shall find this law; Divos and eos, qui
coelestes semper habiti, colunto; and illos, quos in coelum merita vocaverint.
And again, Deorum Manium jura, sancta sunto. Hos letho Datos Divos habento;
would God the present Christian Romans had not renewed this Law.

Yea, so strongly was this doctrine embraced amongst the Gentiles, that some of
their later Theologists thought, that even the souls of wicked men and Tyrants
had a power after death, and that of these came mali Daemones, which hurt men;
and yet to these they ordained Temples, and sacrifices to keep them from
hurting them, as well as to the good Demons for helping them; but the Ancients
gave this honor to the souls of virtuous men only.

Thus have you heard the original of Demons, according to the most ancient,
and general opinion of the Gentiles. But besides these Demons, whose
original you have heard, I mean besides soule-Daemons, and canonized mortals;
their Theologists bring in another kind of Demons more high and sublime,
which never had been the souls of men, nor ever were linkt to a mortal body,
but were from the beginning, or without beginning, always the same Plutarch.
de defect. Orac. in the person of Amonius the Philosopher makes two sorts of
Demons, (...), souls separate from bodies, or such as never dwelt in bodies
at all: Though both these sorts have the name of Demons given them in common,
yet are these which were the souls of men, otherwhile for distinctions sake
called Heroes, ( Plutarch de Plac. Philos. c. 8.) though some extend not this
name in general to all, but only to such as are either of an inferior rank,
or but no vices, not yet promoted to the office of Demons; as Punies, not yet
called to the bar.
. So Apuleius tells us in the book forenamed; Est and superius aliud
augustiusque Daemonum genus, qui semper a corporis compedibus, and nexibus
liberi certis potestatibus curentur, Ex hac sublimiori Daemonum copia autumat
Plato singulis hominibus in vita agenda, testes and custodes singulos additos.
This sort of Demons does fitly answer and parallel that sort of spiritual
powers, which we call Angels, as the former of soule-Daemons does those, which
with us are called Saints.

But lest I might seem to have no measure in raking up this Ethnicall
dunghill, I will now leave the Theology of the original of Demons, and show
you yet another piece of that doctrine of Demons, namely, concerning the
manner how Demons were to be worshipped, and as it were brought to the lure of
men, when they had occasion of devotion with them. Vid. Athenag. Legate. pr^
Christ in Bibliot^. Patr. p. 133.6. qui dicunt non alio modo homines conve^ire
deos posse, scil. quam p^r simulac^ra.
And this* was done by sacring of Images; this you shall hear from an ancient
Author, and passing skillful in the mysteries, even Hermes Trismegistus, who
in his Asclepius, speaks, in English, thus, It is a wonder (says he) beyond
all wonders, (and he says truly) that man should find out a way to make Gods:
Yet because (says he) our forefathers erred much through unbelief concerning
Deities, and had small regard of Religion, and Divine worship, therefore they
devised an art to make Gods (he means Images) and because they could not make
souls (he means to these senseless bodies) therefore they called the souls
of Demons, and Angels, and put them into their Images, and holy mysteries, by
which means alone these Images have power of helping, and hurting; which thus
incorporated (he says) are called by the Egyptians, Animalia sancta. And in
another place, that kind of Gods (says he) which men make, is composed of two
natures, of a divine, which is first and more sacred; and of that which is
amongst men, namely, the matter whereof they are made. The sum of all this
mystery is, that Images were made as bodies, Tertul. de Idol c. 7. Artifices
Idolorum Daemoniis corpora conf^rre.
to be informed with Demons as with souls: For an Image was a trap to catch
Demons, and a devise to tie them to a place, and to keep them from flitting.

The like has Eusebius out of Porphyrie, Imagines a Diis peramari, iisdemque
circumscribi, quasi in sacra quadam terra in sacrata imagine contineri; qua
sublata, illud statim solvitur, quo Deus continetur. This is that which Psellus
calls (...), the approaching or presencing of Demons. And Iamblychus terms
these consecrated Idols, (...), Images filled with divine fellowship, or with
divine society. And our forementioned Hermes calls them Statuas animatas
sensu and spiritu plenas.

Hence came that answer, or defense of the Gentiles, as Arnobius (lib. 6.
advers. Gent.) makes them speak, Neque nos era, argenti materias aurique,
neque alia quibus signa conficiunt, eas esse per se Deos, and religiosa
discernimus numina; Sed eos in his colimus, e^sque veneramur, quos dedicatio
infert sacra, and fra^rilibus efficit habitare simulachris. And in another
place he makes this objection for their behalf; An numquid dicitis forte
praesentiam vobis quandam sub his numinum exhiberi simulachris, and quia Deos
vider^ non datum est, eos ita coli, and munia officiosa praestari? And thus
have we seen the ground of the idolatrous use of Images, and found that the
worship of them also is a doctrine of Demons: for as at first they were
ordained for Demons, so whatsoever Deity is worshipped in this manner, though
it were the true, and Sovereign God, is thereby made a Demon.

What I say of Images, must be understood also of Pillars, and Columns,
whereof we read, Levit. 26. Ye shall make no Idols, nor graven Images, nor
rear you up a pillar to bow down unto it: for howsoever Pillars and Images,
through some confusion, at length surprising the Gentiles superstition, may
afterward seem to be ascribed to other Deities besides Demons; yet by
original institution they were proper unto Demons, and no other. The
sovereign, and celestial gods, they were worshipped in the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, where they were supposed to dwell, but Images, and Columns were for
Demons; and if they seemed to be made for any other, Plutarch's Hermit would
resolve us, that they were but Demons, called by the name of some sovereign
gods, whose Agents they were. The truth of this, the History of the beginning
of Idolatry makes evident; for that Images and Pillars were at first devised
and erected to the honor of dead men Vide Herod. Clio. c. 131. Persas statuas
non* erigere, quod non ut Gr^ci sentiunt Deos ex hominibus esse ortos; ex
opinione Herod.
; this the fourteenth Chapter of the book of Wisdom will tell us, that by the
vainglory of men they first entered into the world; no less will the long
continuing custom of the world, using thus to honor not only the dead, but
since also the living, be sufficient to persuade the truth: Minutius Faelix in
his Octavius, will put us forth of doubt, Majores nostri (says he) dum Reges
suos colunt religio^e, dum defunctos eos desiderant in Imaginibus videre, dum
gestiunt eorum memorias in statuis detinere, sacra facta sunt, quae fuerant
assumpta solatia. When therefore those whom they thus honored and remembered,
were canonized for Demons, then were these memorials also worshipped for some
supposed presence, or divine respect of such Demons, in or to them. The
worshipping therefore of Images, and Columns, is by its original and
institution, a piece of the doctrine of Demons Nam quod potest inte^ligentia
so^um ^ros^ici and comprehendi mente nec appetit formam, qua cognoscatur, nec
figuram admittit, ut imaginem and effigi^m. Ve^um ista omnia ad gra^iam
mortuorum reseruntur: dum enim vixerunt homines, ^rant corporum compagibus
inclusi, Canstantin. Orat ad Sanctorum Coe^um. c. 4.
; so that whatsoever is thus worshipped, yea, the glory of the incorruptible
God himself is thereby changed into a Demon.

Thus much of Images and Idoll-Pillars, of the reason of their supposed
Divinity, and of the original, and first occasion of worshipping them. But yet
we have not done, there is another piece of Daemon-devotion yet behind,
namely, the worshipping of Demons in their relics, shrines and sepulchers In
mortuo^um Idolis Daemonia consislunt. Tertul. vide de Spectac. cap 11, 12, 13.
sere totum.
, for this was also a part of the doctrine, and Theology of Demons. Plato,
whom before we quoted for the Canonizing of Demons, of the ghosts of such as
died valiantly in the field, would have their shrines and coffins to be
worshipped, (...), as the coffins of Demons: here also what Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks of this Daemon-doctrine, Strom. lib. 6. Existimant (scil.
Graeci) nihil refer an has animas (scil. Daemones quos invocant) Deos, an
Angelos dicamus: Jam vero qui sunt eorum doctrinae periti in multis Templis
tanquam Deorum statuas, omnes fere mortuorum loculos posuere, Daemones quidem
vocantes eorum animas, eas autem coli ab hominibus docentes, ut quae divina
providentia propter vitae puritatem, potestatem acceperint, ut ad hominum
ministerium, locum qui est circa terram, obi^ent: sciebant enim aliquas animas
ex natura corpore teneri. Out of which words observe, that they supposed the
like presences, and power of Demons at their coffins and sepulchers, which
before we observed and heard of in their Images, as though there always
remained some natural tie between the souls deceased, and their relics, and
therefore they there builded Temples unto them, where their bodies, and ashes
were entombed; and hence it is that the Primitive Fathers which write against
the Gentiles, do so often upbraid them, that their Temples were nothing else
but the sepulchers of dead men; Specioso quidem nomine (says Clemens in his
Protrepticon) Templa dici, fuisse autem sepulchra, id est sepulchra ipsa vocata
fuisse Templa. He goes on speaking to the Gentiles; Vos autem vel nunc saltem
Daemonum cultus obliviscamini, sepulchra colere erubescentes. To the like
purpose Arnobius lib. 6. advers. Gent. Quid quod multa ex his Templa, quae
tholis sunt aureis, and sublimibus elata fastigiis, auctorum conscriptionibus*
comprobatur contegere ciueres, at que ossa, and functorum esse, corporum
sepulturas? Nonne patet and promptum est aut pro Diis immortalibus mortuos vos
colere, aut inexpiabilem fier^ Numinibus contumeliam, quorum delubra and Templa
mortuorum superlata sunt bustis?

I might further add to these Oecumenicall doctrines of Demons, that
monstrous one of the Egytians, for which their fellow Gentiles derided them,
who worshipped living bruit beasts, yea, onyons and garlic, and water it
self, with divine worship, as supposing some Demon or other to dwell in them;
such were their Cow-god Apis, and their Bull-god Mnevis, and their Water-god
Nilus, which it shall be enough only to have named, to make the former
complete, and that from it, and the rest of that kind of abominations, we may
gather this conclusion once for all, that since the Sovereign and Celestial
gods, (as you heard before) might not be approached nor polluted by these
earthly and material things, but kept always immovable, without change of
place or presence, their heavenly stations; therefore the adoring or
worshipping of any visible or material thing, for any supposed presence, or
other relation of a divine power therewith, is to be accounted amongst the
doctrines of Demons.

And thus have you seen the Theology of Demons; first, for their nature and
degree, to have been supposed by the Gentiles an inferior, and middle sort of
divine powers, between the sovereign, and heavenly gods, and mortal men.
Secondly, their office to be as Mediators and agents between these sovereign
Gods, and men. Thirdly, their original, to be the deified souls of worthy men
after death; and some of an higher degree, which had no beginning, or ever were
imprisoned in mortal bodies. Fourthly, the way to worship them, to find and
receive benefits from them, namely, by consecrate Images and Pillars, wherein
to have, and retain their presence at devotions to be given them. Fifthly, to
adore their relics, and to Temple them.

Now therefore judge impartially whether Saint Paul's prophecy be not fulfilled
already amongst Christians, who foretold that the time should come that they
should Apostatize and revive again (...), Doctrines of Demons? whether the
deifying and worshipping of Saints, and Angels, whether the bowing down to
Images, whether of men, or other things visible, breaden Idols, and Crosses
like new Daemon-Pillars, whether the adoring or templing of relics, whether
these make not as lively an image of the Gentiles Theology of Demons ((...))
as possibly could be expressed? and whether these two words comprehend not the
whole pith and marrow of Christian Apostasy, which was to consist in
spiritual fornication or idolatry, as appears by that name and denomination
thereof given by Saint John in his Revelation, The whore of Babylon? Is not she
rightly termed the Babylonish whore, which has revived and replanted the
doctrines of Demons, first founded in the ancient Babel. And is not this now
fulfilled which Saint John foretells us, Apoc. 11. That the second and outmost
court of the Temple (which is the second state of the Christian Church)
together with the holy City, should be trodden down, and overtrampled by the
Gentiles (that is, overwhelmed with the Gentiles Idolatry) forty two months.

But perhaps I am yet too forward in my application; some things in our way
must first be cleared, for howsoever the resemblance indeed be evident, yet
first the Text seems not to intend or mean it, because the word (...), is in
the Scripture never taken in the better or indifferent sense, howsoever
profane Authors do so use it, but always in an evil sense for the devil,
or an evil spirit; now the signification of words in Scripture is to be
esteemed and taken only according to the Scriptures use, though other Writers
use them otherwise. Secondly, for the charge of Idolatry, though much of that
wherein we have instanced, may be granted to be justly suspected for such
indeed, yet nevertheless, that whereupon this application mainly relieth,
namely, the praying to Saints glorified, as Mediators and Agents for us with
God, should not seem to deserve so foul a name; for suppose it were a
needless, yea, and fruitless Ceremony, yet what reason can be given why this
should be more tainted with Idolatry, then is the like honor given to Saints
and holy men whilst they live on earth, whom to desire to mediate and pray to
God for us, was never accounted so much as an unlawful matter? when these two
scruples are answered, I will return to continue my former application.

To the first therefore, for the use of the word (...) in Scripture, I say,
that because those which the Gentiles took for Demons, and for Deified souls
of their Worthies, were indeed no other then evil spirits, counterfeiting the
souls of men departed, and masking themselves under the names of such supposed
Demons, under that color to seduce mankind; therefore the Scripture uses
the name Demons for that they were indeed, and not for what they seemed to be;
for no blessed soul or good Angel would admit any honor which did derogate
from the honor of the only true God, who made them: neither do the glorified
Saints in heaven, or the blessed Angels, though Apostate Christians now
invocate and worship them, accept of this honor, hear their prayers, or
condescend to their devotions, by any sign or act whatsoever; but whatsoever
is made seem to be done by them, is done by the self same wicked spirits,
which heretofore were masked under the names of Demons; and therefore in this
regard the one may as well bear the names of Demons as the other, and be as
likely to be intended by the use of that word. Secondly, though the Scripture
often uses this word in the worst sen^e, yet follows it not it always should
do so, because the word (...) it self, which the Scripture has appropriated
to signify Satan the prince of hell hounds, following therein the Seventy (who
first gave it this notion, no where else sampled in any Greek Author) yet is
this word (...) in the New Testament it self three several times used in the
common sense for a slanderer or false accuser, and that in three several
Epistles, in both to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.11. 2 Timothy 3.3. Tit. 2.3.
and that to Titus; and why should the like seem improbable for the word (...)
or (...)? Nay, most certain it is so, as I come now to make manifest.

And first, Act. 17.18. where Saint Paul our Apostle, having at Athens preached
Jesus risen from the dead, the Philosophers thus encountered him saying, This
fellow, (...), which we translate, He seems to be a setter forth of strange
gods, namely, Daemon-gods: for hearing of one Jesus after death to become a
Lord and Savior, and to be adored with divine worship, they took him
presently, according to their own principles in that kind, to be some new or
foreign Demon, for so it follows in the text, that they said thus, Because
he preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection: Upon the same ground Celsus
in Origin lib. 8. cont. Cells. calls the same Christ our Savior the Christians
Demon; for whereas the Christians said, that they without hurt and danger
blasphemed and reproached the Gentiles gods, Celsus replies, (...).
Nonne vides bone vir, quod etiam tuo Daemoni opponens se quispiam, non solum
convitiatur* sed terra marique illum exigit? where Origin answers Celsus, (...).
Qui nullos scit malos Daemones, nescio quomodo sui oblitus, Iesum vocarit
Daemonem. But Saint Paul thus charged by the Philosophers, coming to make his
Apology in Areopagus, retorts their accusation, Ye men of Athens (says he) I
see you in all things, (...), too full of Demons already, I shall not need
bring any more amongst you; for thus the word (...) by Etymology signifies a
worshipper of Daemon-gods, and was anciently used in this sense; and so shall
you find it often in Clemens Alexandrinus his Protrepticon Et Strom. l. 7. p
504. (...).

Lactant. lib. 4. Instit. Divin. ait, Superstitiosi vocantur aut ii qui
superstitem memoriam defunctorum ^olunt, aut qui parentibus su^ superstites,
celebrant ^magines eorum domi tanqua^ Deos Penates. Nam qui novos sibi ritus
desumebant, ut Deorum vice mortuos honorarent, quos ex hominibus in coelum
receptos putabant; ^os superstitiosos voca^ant. Eos vero qui publicos and
antiquos Deos colerent, religiosos nomina^ant, unde Virgilius, Vana superstitio
veterumque ign^ra Deorum. Martin. Lex. quem ulterius vide.


, not to speak of others, though afterward from signifying (...), as Budaeus
speaks, it came to be applied to those who were too precise and anxious in
their devotions: I (says the Apostle) preach no new Demon unto you, but that
Sovereign and celestial God, who made the world, and all things therein, who
being Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not (as your Daemon-gods do) in
Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he
needed any thing (as you conceive of your Demons) seeing he gives to all,
life, and breath, and all things: This God I preach unto you. And this place I
take to be so unanswerable for the indifferent and common acception of the word
(...), that I care not now though the rest should fail me; but let us see what
they are.

In Revel. 9.13. etc. The sixth Trumpet from Euphrates brings an huge army upon
the Christian world, which destroys a third part of men, and yet those which
remained repented not of those sins ( verse. 20.) for which these plagues came
upon the earth, viz. That they should not worship (...), and Idols of gold,
silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood which can neither see, nor hear,
nor walk. Is not this a Comment upon the Apostles prophecy in my Text?

The time which it concerns must needs fall into the last times, for it is the
last Trumpet save one. The place must be the Roman Empire, or Christian world,
for that is the Stage of all the Seals and Trumpets and how could it be
otherwise, seeing Saint John at Pathmos saw them coming from the great River
Euphrates? whatsoever comes from thence, must needs fall upon the territory of
the Roman Empire. To hold you no longer, the best Expounders make it the
Ottoman or Turkish invasion, which has swallowed so great a part of
Christendom. But what people are they, who in the Roman territory, do in
these later times worship Idols of gold, silver, brass, and stone, and wood?
Are they Ethnicks? there is none such. Are they Jews? they cannot endure the
sight of them. Are they Mahumetans? nay, they abhor it also. Then must they
needs be Christians, and then must Christians too worship (...), for both are
spoken of the same men. But what Christians do, or ever did worship devils
formally? But Daemon-gods (alas) they do, and long have done. Here therefore
(...) is again taken in the common and Philosophical sense, or at least,
which is all one, for evil spirits worshipped under the names of Demons and
deceased souls.

Besides my Text, there is but one place more in all the Epistles of Saint
Paul, where the word (...) is used, namely, 1 Cor. 10. where if there be any
allusion to the Gentiles conceit of Demons, then all the places of Saint Paul's
Epistles are bending that way: But some there are, says Stephen in his
Thesaurus who think the Apostle in his (...), or Cup of Demons, alludes unto
that poculum (...), used amongst the Gentiles. And further to strengthen the
conceit of the Apostles allusion to the heathenish notion of Demons S^e
Tertuli. ^^^spectac. c. 13.
, the words of the former verse make much; for the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice (says he) to Demons, and not to God. Now this was
the very tenet of the Gentiles, that the Sovereign and Celestial gods were
to be worshipped only, pura mente, and with hymns and praises, and that
sacrifices were only for Demons, vid. Porphyr. in Eusebius. praep. Evang. Her.
Trismeg. in Asclepio Apuleium de Daemonio Socratis. He therefore who had given
his faith to that, (...), One Lord, to the (...), to the only Potentate, to
the (...), to the only Mediator Jesus Christ, must have no communion, have no
part in the service of these many Mediators, Lords or Daemon-Gods of the
Nations; for Christ's monarchical Mediation excludes all other Mediators and
Demons: not that the wooden Idol was ought of it self, but that the
Gentiles supposed there dwelt some Demon therein, who received their
sacrifices, and to whom they intended their services. Thus may this place be
expounded, and so the use of the word Demon in the worst sense or directly for
a Devil, will be almost confined to the Gospel: where the subject spoken of
being men vexed with evil spirits, could admit no other sense or use; and yet
S. Luke, the best languaged of the Evangelists, knowing the word to be
ambiguous, and therefore, as it were, to distinguish it once for all, does, the
first time he uses it, do it with an explication, chapter 4. verse 33. There
was, says he, a man in the Synagogue (...), having the spirit of an unclean
Demon.

Thus much of the word Daemonium (...) in Scripture, whereby I hope that it
appears, that this place of my Text is not the only place where the word is
used according to the notion of the Gentiles, and their Theologists: But you
will say, did any of the Fathers, or Ancients expound it thus in this place? if
they had done so, the mystery of iniquity could never have taken such footing;
which because it was to come according to divine disposition, what wonder if
this were hidden from their eyes. Howsoever it may seem that God left not his
spirit without a witness; For, as I take it, Epiphanius, one of the most
zealous of the Fathers of his time against Saint-worship then peeping, took
(...) in my text for a doctrine of worshipping of dead men; you may read him in
the seventy eighth Heresy toward the conclusion, where, upon occasion of some
who made a Goddess of the blessed Virgin, and offered a cake unto her as the
Queen of heaven, he quotes the place of my text concerning them, saying,
(...), which in English sounds thus, that also of the Apostle is fulfilled of
these, some shall apostatize from sound doctrine, giving heed to fables and
doctrines of Demons, for (says he) they shall be worshippers of dead men, as
they were worshipped in Israel; are not these last words for an exposition of
(...)? But what (will you say) does he mean by dead men worshipped in Israel?
I suppose he means their Baalim, who (as is already showed) were nothing else
but Demons, or deified Ghosts of men deceased: yet he brings in two examples
besides; one of the Sichemites, in his time, who had a Goddess or Daemonesse
under the name of Jephta's daughter; another of the Egyptians, who worshipped
Thermutis, that daughter of Pharaoh, which brought up Moses. Some, as Beza,
would have these words of Epiphanius to be a part of the text it self in some
copy which he used. But how is that likely, when no other Father once mentions
any such reading; nay it appears moreover, that Epiphanius intended to
explain the words as he quoteth them, as he does (...) by (...), and (...) by
(...), and so (...) by (...). Otherwise we must say he used a very corrupt
copy, or quoted very carelessly. But grant that Epiphanius read so, either this
reading was true, and so I have enough; because then the Apostle with his (...)
etc. should expound himself by (...), to mean the deifying of the dead: or it
was not the original reading, but added by some other for explication sake;
and so it will follow, that those who did it, made no question, but that the
words there, contained some such thing as worshipping the dead: Therefore take
it which way you will, it will follow, that some such matter as we speak of,
was in times past supposed to be in this text and prophecy.

Now I come to the second point, to maintain and prove, that praying to Saints
glorified, as mediators and agents for us with God is justly charged with
Idolatry: for this is the hinge whereupon not the application only of my text,
but the interpretation thereof chiefly turns: for this is that which I told
you in the beginning, that my text depended upon the last words of the former
chapter and verse; received into glory: which were therefore out of their due
order, put in the last place, because my text was immediately to be inferred
upon them; the like mis-placing, and for the like reason, see Heb. 12.23 See
also Apocal. cap. 1. ver. 5. where Christ is named after ^he seven ^pirits for
the like reason.
. where, in a catalogue or recension of the parts of the Church, Christ the
head, and the sprinkling of his blood, is mentioned in the last place, and
after the spirits of just men, because the next verses are continued upon this
sprinkling of Christ's blood: Ye are come to the general assembly, and Church
of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all,
and to the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Covenant, and to the blood of Sprinkling, which speaks better things than
that of Abel: whereas the right order should have been; first, God the judge
of all: Secondly, Christ the mediator of the new Covenant: Thirdly, in the last
place, the Spirits of just men made perfect; agreeable therefore to this
dependence of my text I am to show, that the Invocation of Saints glorified
implies an Apostasy from Christ, and a denial of his glory and majesty
whereunto he is installed by his assumption into heaven, to sit at the right
hand of God: which before I do, I must premise some general grounds, which
are as follows.

That as God is most one, and without all multiplicity, so must the honor and
service which is given unto him have no communicability: Esa. 42.8. I am the
Lord, that is my name, my glory will I not give unto another, nor my praise to
graven Images; for the one-most God must have an one-most service; Therefore in
that action whereof God is the object, nothing must be an object but God, or in
the Scripture phrase thus, in those actions which look toward the face of God,
nothing may come between, whose face such actions may look upon besides him,
whether by way of subordination to him, or representation of him: for I am the
Lord thy God (says he) thou shall have no other Gods before my face.
Secondly, this face of God is not only the object of his person, but also the
place of his presence, where his glory is revealed in the heavens, where we
shall see him face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. Revel. 22.4. and where the Angels in
heaven behold the face of the Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 18.11. No
action therefore directed thitherward, to the face of his revealed presence and
glory, may so much as look asquint upon any other object, or behold any other
face but the face of God alone, for we must have no other Gods before his face.

I say not, that a man may not turn his face upon the face of any other thing
when he turns his face toward the face of God; for how then should we worship
him at all, seeing which way soever we turn us, something will always be
before us? but it is not the face of our bodies, or their posture, but the face
and posture of the act we do, which must not have the face turned upon any
thing else, when it is directed at the face of God: namely, that action in
which God is faced, must face nothing else but God, where God is the object,
whether in regard of his person when we pray unto him, or of his throne of
presence when we would approach it or direct our supplica-towards it, there
nothing is to have any respect of an object, but God alone. So although when we
pray unto God, we turn the face of our bodies toward Heaven, the Sun* the
Moon, and Stars, yet do we not worship the host of heaven therefore, because
our action has no relation to them as to an object, but to God alone; and
howsoever they are between God and us in place, yet as an object of our
devotion neither they nor any thing in them come any way between us and him:
Now for the reason (if you ask it) of this incommunicablenesse of all actions
and services directed to Godward, you shall have it, because the Lord whose
name is jealous, is a jealous God, jealous not only lest he should not be
honored as God, but jealous lest he should not be honored as one God; for as
by honoring him, we acknowledge him God, so by the incommunicablenesse of
honor we acknowledge him one God: For this cause, God being to give us a
Mediator, by whom we should have access unto his presence, and whom, without
his jealousy, we might interpose in our devotions and supplications unto
himself, or offered at the throne of his majesty and glory in the heavens,
provided that admirable mystery of communicating to the nature of a man borne
of a woman, the hypostaticall union of the second Person of the Deity: and him,
after he had vanquished death, to exalt, to sit at his right hand of glory, and
power, in the heavens, there in his own presence and throne, to receive our
requests, and to deal as an agent between us and him.

Thus at length I am arrived at that port which I all this while made for: viz.
to show that this glory of Christ which is styled his sitting at the right hand
of God, is that incommunicable royalty to which of right belongs in the
presence of God to receive and present our devotions to the divine Majesty, as
in it, which now follows, shall appear. Sessio ad dextram Dei is to be
installed in Gods throne, or to have a God-like royalty, which is defined in
Scripture (...), the Majesty of Christ in heaven; whence it is said, Heb. 1.
(...) he sat down on the right hand of Majesty on high. Heb. 8.1. it is
called (...) the right hand of the throne of Majesty in the heavens: it is
called also by Christ himself, Mark. 14.62. (...), Luke 22.69. (...), the
right hand of power, and the right hand of the power of God: For as to the
right hand belongs both dignity and strength, so does this glory of Christ
include both a God-like sublimity and a God-like power; the first (...), the
second (...). The proper place where the Majesticall glory is revealed, is the
heavens, as may appear almost wheresoever this sitting at the right hand of
God is mentioned, Ephesians. 1.20. (...): Colos. 3.1. (...). Heb. 1. (...), Heb.
7.26. (...), 1 Pet. 3.22. (...) etc. heaven, heavenly places, high places and
the like, being always thereto annexed, and everywhere appears to be a
consequent of his ascension into heaven, as we say in our Creed, he ascended
into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God; and therefore in the words
whereon my text depends, is expressed by assumed or taken up into glory, (...),
for as God himself is styled Pater in Coelis, not because not elsewhere, but
because his glory is there revealed: So Christ sits ad dextram in Coelis,
because there the beams of the Majesty given him by his Father, are revealed;
whence it comes that his Kingdom is called the Kingdom of heaven, a Kingdom
whose Kings residence and Kingly Throne are both in heaven: This glorious
Throne of Majesty, this sitting at the right hand of the power of the Almighty
is a name incommunicable, an exaltation whereof no creature in heaven or earth
is capable, which is that the Apostle means to tell us when he says, Ephesians.
1.21. Far above all principalities and powers, and might, and dominion, and
every name that it named, not only in this world, but in the world to come: and
Phil. 2.9, 10. wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name (that is created name) that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth. Revel. 3.21. he that overcommeth (says Christ) I will
give him to sit with me in my throne, even as I have overcome, and am set with
my Father in his throne; here is mention of two thrones, you see, of which, my
throne, that is, Christ's throne, is the condition of a glorified man; in this
throne his Saints shall sit with him; but his Fathers throne is the power of
divine Majesty, wherein none must sit but God, and the God-Man Jesus Christ.

These grounds laid, I say, that the honor of being prayed to in heaven, and
before the throne of presence, is a prerogative of dextra Dei, and to receive
our devotions there, a flower of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, as
S. Paul, Romans 8.34. conjoines them, saying, Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is at the right hand of
God, and who makes intercession for us: for by right of this his exaltation and
majesty he comes to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, as appears
Psalm 110. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make
thine enemies thy footstool; then follows the effect thereof verse 4. The
Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech; and by the same right also he becomes the only and
eternal Priest which has to do in the most holy place, the heavens: For as
the high Priest only entered the most holy place beyond the veil in the earthly
Tabernacle; so Christ Jesus our only high Priest, through his body, as the
first Tabernacle, by his own blood, entered into the second Tabernacle or holy
place, not made with hands, as was the figure, but into heaven it self, (...),
to appear in the presence of God for us: all this you have in the same words
at large, Heb 9 7.11.12.24. Now in the Tabernacle of this world, as was in the
first Tabernacle, we may happily find many Priests whom to employ as agents
for us with God: But in the second Tabernacle which is heaven, there is but one
agent to be employed, but one who has royal commission to deal between God
and men, that Angel of the presence, as Isaiah calls him, 63.9. and one only
Mediator Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, who in this prerogative is above both
Saints and Angels: For to which of the Saints and Angels, said God at any
time, Sit on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, Heb.
1.4.9.13. neither will this demonstration admit that vulgar acception to be of
any force, namely that expiatory mediation, or meritorious intercession in
heaven should indeed appertain to Christ alone, but favorable intercession to
pray for us, not so: and therefore for this, we may without derogation to
Christ solicit either Saints or Angels; I could say, that this ragge is too
too narrow and short to cover their nakedness, who lay hold of it, in whose
supplication to Saints and to God too in their names, nothing is more usual
than the express mention of their merits, blood, and sufferings, as motives to
God to hear them; but we shall not need this answer; for we have demonstrated,
that as in the Law, none but the high Priest alone was to do office in the
holiest place; so Christ Jesus now is the only agent for whatsoever is to be
done for us in the holiest Tabernacle of heaven: besides, we read that none
but the high Priest alone was to offer Incense, or to incense the most holy
place when he entered into it: But Incense is the Prayers of the Saints, sent
thither from this outward Temple of the militant Church as the Incense of the
Law was fetched from without the veil: This therefore none in heaven but
Christ alone must receive from us, to offer for us; and this is that Angel with
the golden Censer, Revel. 8. who there offers the Incense of the prayers of the
Saints there given him to offer upon the golden Altar before the Throne,
alluding expressly to the golden Altar before the Testimony.

For the fuller understanding, and farther confirmation of what has been
spoken, take this also; that notwithstand^ng the man Christ Jesus in regard of
his person, being God as well as Man, was from his first incarnation capable of
this royalty and glory; not only for the incomparable sufficiency of his
person, which by reason of his twofold nature, is always and in all places
present both with God and men; and so at one instant able and ready at every
need, to present to the one what he should receive from the other; but chiefly
and most of all, for that being very God himself, his Fathers jealousy, which
could never have brooked the communication of this glory to any other, which
should not have been the selfsame with himself, was by this condition of
his person prevented and secured.

Nevertheless and notwithstanding, all this capability of his person, it was
the will of his Father in the dispensation of the mystery of our redemption,
not to confer it upon him, but as purchased and attained by suffering and
undergoing that death which no creature in heaven or in earth was able to
undergo but himself, being a suffering of a death, whereby death it self was
overcome and vanquished, to the end that none by death save Jesus Christ alone
might be ever thought or deemed capable of the like glory and sublimity; but
that it might appear for ever to be a peculiar right to him.

And this, I think, is not only agreeable to the tenor of the Scripture, but
express Scripture it self, Heb. 2.9. But we see Jesus who was made a little
lower than the Angels by the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor:
for it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons to glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect
by sufferings. Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion of a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: and the
ninth verse, Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Heb. 10.12.
But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down
on the right hand of God. Romans 14.9. For to this end Christ both died, rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living: See besides,
Acts 5.30, 31. Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 1.20. 1 Pet. 1.11.

Lastly, for that particular parcel of this glory of Christ ( viz.) to be that
only name in which we are to ask at the hands of God whatsoever we have to ask,
is not this also annexed and ascribed to his triumph over death? John 14.13. I
go unto my Father, viz. through death, and whatsoever ye ask in my name, that
will I do. John 16.16. and 23. A little while ye shall not see me, and a
little while ye shall see me, because I go to my Father, and in that day when
I am gone to my Father, ye shall ask me nothing: Verily, verily I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you, verse.
24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall receive. Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, for such an high
Priest became us who is made higher than the heavens.

How is it then that some extenuate that kind of Saintworship, wherein prayers
are not made unto them directly, but God is prayed unto in their names, and for
their mediation sake to grant our requests. Is it not a denial of Christ's
prerogative, to ascribe unto any other, for any respect of glory or neernesse
to God after death or otherwise, that whereof he alone is infeoffed by his
unimitable Death, triumphant Resurrection, and glorious Ascension? certainly
that which he holds by incommunicable title, is it self also incommunicable.
To conclude therefore with the words of S. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is but one
God and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus: as God is one,
so the Mediator is one, for it is a God-like royalty, and therefore can belong
but to one: There is but one God in heaven, without any other gods subordinate
unto him; therefore but one Mediator there, without any other mediators besides
him: as for the Angels and blessed Saints, they have indeed a light of glory
too, but they are but as lesser lights in that heaven of heavens: And therefore
as where the sun shines, the lesser stars of heaven, though stars, give not
their light to us: so where this glorious Sun Christ Jesus continually
shines, by his presence, sitting at the right hand of God; there the glory of
the Saints and Angels is not sufficient to make them capable of any flower of
this divine honor, which is God-like and so appropriate to Christ, by right of
his heavenly exaltation in the throne of Majesty; whatsoever Spirit says
otherwise, Colos. 2.19.
(...), holds not the head, but is a Christ-apostate-spirit which denies the
faith of Christ's assumption into glory, and revives the doctrines of Demons.

The way being now cleared, I may (I hope) now safely resume my application
which I have already given some taste of, that the doctrine of Demons
comprehends in most express manner the whole idolatry of the mystery of
iniquity, the deifying, and invocating of Saints and Angels, the bowing down
to Images, the worshipping of Crosses as new idol-columnes, the adoring and
templing of relics, the worshipping of any other visible thing upon supposall
of any Divinity therein: what copy was ever so like the sample, as all this to
the doctrine of Demons? and for the Idolatry of the Eucharist or
bread-worship, though it may be reduced to Image Worship, as being the
adoration of a sign or symbol; yet let it be considered whether for the
equality thereof it may not be taken rather for an idolatry of relics, the
body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament being the mystical relics which he
left us as monuments of his death till he come: whichsoever it be I must
confess it has a strain above the abomination of the Gentiles, who though
they supposed some presence of their Demons in their Images and relics, yet
were they never so blockish, as to think their Images and relics to be
transubstantiated into Demons: But to come to the maine again, I will
confess for my self that I cannot think of this Daemon-resemblance without
admiration, nor do I believe that you will hear without some astonishment,
that which I am now to add farther: That the advancers of Saint-worship in the
beginning did not only see it, but even gloried (sed gloriatione non bona) that
they had a thing in Christian practice so like the doctrines of Demons: we
heard before, that Plato in his Repub. would have the souls of such as died
valiantly in the battle, to be accounted for Demons after death, and their
Sepulchers and Coffins to be adored and served as the Sepulchers of Demons.
Eusebius lib. 13. Praepar. Evangel. quoting this place, adds with it, (...),
these things do befit at (or after) the decease of the favorites of God, whom
if thou shall affirm to be taken for the champions of true Religion, thou
shall not say amiss, (...), whence it is our custom to go unto their tombs,
and to make our prayers at them, and to honor their blessed souls.

The purpose of Eusebius was here to show, as a preparation to draw men to
Christianity, how well the present use of Christians in honoring the memories
of their Martyrs, by keeping their assemblies at their Sepulchers, did agree
with that of the Gentiles (so much by Plato commended) in honoring their
champions and worthies for Demons after death: But alas, in the age next
after, it proved too too like it indeed: For these earerings which the
Christians had borrowed or stolen from the Gentiles at their coming out of
Egypt, presently became a golden calfe, as soon as the woman the Church came
into the wilderness, yea and Aaron the Priest had a foul part in it too.

Read the eighth book of Theodoret de curandis Graecorum affectionibus, whose
title is de Martyribus, or in the mean time take these few passages thereof:
Thus he speaks having quoted that passage of Hesiod for Demons, commended by
Plato; Quod si Poeta Hesiodus auxiliares custodesque mortalium eos vocat qui
sancte olim beneque vixerunt, eamque hujus Poetae sententiam, Philosophorum
optimus Plato adeo confirmavit, ut eorum hominum Sepulchra ^olenda esse atque
adoranda censuerit; Quid ita quaeso, boni viri (i. e.) Graeci, quae ipsi
facimus, accusatis? nos etenim pari modo (N. B.) eos qui illustri pietate
viguerunt, proque ea jugulati ac caesi sunt, and auxiliares and medicos
nominamus; at non Daemones tamen; absit a nobis absit hic furor: sed amicos
Dei, fidelesque servos dicimus fuisse -- Ibid. posse sanctorum animas, vel cum
extra hoc corpus fuerint hominum curare negotia, Plato etiam II legum libro
affirmat verba Platonis citantur --

Cum itaque Philosophus credendum esse rumoribus censeat (id est sermonibus qui
vulgo habentur de illa animarum defunctarum cura circa homines) vos tamen nobis
non solum fidei nihil habetis, clamantemque eventorum vocem audire non vultis,
etc. Ibid. Martyrum templa conspicua --

Quique homines prospera valetudine sunt, conservari eam sibi a martyribus
petunt: Qui vero agritudinem aliquam patiuntur, sanitatem exposcunt, -- Insuper
and steriles etc. -- Item qui peregre proficiscuntur etc. -- non qui se ad Deos
accedere arbitrentur, sed qui orent Dei martyrs tanquam divinos homines,
intercessoresque sibi eos apud Deum advocent and precentur --

Pie vero and fideliter precatos ^a maxim consequi quae desiderant, testantur
illa quae votorum rei dona persolvunt, manifesta nimirum sanitatis adepti
iudicia:

Nam alii oculorum, alii manuum simulachra suspendunt, exargento auroque
confecta, -- paulo post -- Quid, quod eorum qui passim Dii ferebantur memoriam
e mente hominum martyrs aboleverint -- Suos mortuos Dominus Deus noster in
templa, pro Diis vestris (i. e.) Daemonibus iduxit, ac illos quidem cassos
gloria vanosque reddidit, suis autem martyribus honorem illorum dedit:

Propandiis enim Diasiisque, and Dionysiis (i. e.) Jovis, Liberique Patris
solennitatibus; Petro, Paulo, Thomae, Sergio, aliisque sanctis martyribus
solennitates epulo populari peraguntur: Cum itaque tantam utilitatem ex honor
martyribus collato provenire, homines videatis, fugite (quaeso) errorem
Daemonum, pravioque ductu martyrum, facibusque utentes, viam capessite quae ad
Deum perducit, etc. Now judge whether hitherto (...) has been fitly applied
or not: I will go on.

Having therefore by so many arguments made apparent (I hope) what I
endeavored to prove: I desire we may observe, among so many corruptions, both
now and heretofore overwhelming the Church of Christ, what it is wherein the
Holy Ghost places the essence, and counts as the very soul of the great
Apostasy under the man of sin, and would have us to make the pole-starre of
our discovery thereof.

Not every error, not every heresy, how foul soever; but (...), Idolatry,
and Spiritual fornication: as for other heresies, though accompanying this,
yet are they but accidental, and not of the essence of the great Apostasy
which was to come.

Even as whores are seldom without other great faults, which yet are no part
of whoredom: so has the spiritual whore many other heresies, but her
whoredom is only Idolatry and the doctrine of Demons.

Neither is heresy of it self, no though damnable heresy, a character
whereby the great Apostasy can be known from other sects and blasphemies.

Foul heresies were in the first ages of the Church, yet Antichrist and his
time were neither of them yet, come; when his time approached nearer, the
Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, were abominable heretics.

And the Arrians possessed for a time the face of the visible Church; yet was
not theirs the solemn Apostasy looked for.

But Idolatry or spiritual whoredom, 1 These. 1.9. Conversion to Christianity
is described a turning from Idols to serve the true* and living God, and to
wait for his Son Jesus Christ; therefore Ap^stasie is a return to Idols from
the living and true God and his Son Jesus Christ.
which in that storm the Devil was a working, this is the only character and
note whereby the Apostasy under the man of sin is discovered and
distinguished from all other blasphemies, sects, and heresies of what age or
time soever. Which that I may not seem to ground only upon the exposition of my
text, which whatsoever the probability thereof be, may yet be thought alone too
weak to support the weight of so maine a conclusion: I desire you to take these
arguments for a full confirmaiion thereof; some of them have already been
intimated, but now all are mustered up together.

First, that Babylon is entitled in the Revelation of S. John, not the Liar of
Babylon, not the Tyrant of Babylon, not the Heretic of Babylon, nor the
Murdresse of Babylon, but the Whore of Babylon, yea that Great Whore and the
Mother of fornications, and abominations of the earth. Does not God (think we)
give the name as he accounts the nature? or is there any one will deny that
this Babylon is that mystery of iniquity which our Apostle so calls, as being
in opposition to the great (...) mystery of true worship and Religion? if any
should (...) mystery Babylon in her forehead, would help to reclaim him: And
what Whore is that with whom the Kings and Nations and Kingdoms of the earth
commit fornication* can it be any other but a spiritual Whore? Without
question therefore S. John means no other thing here than what he foretold in
the eleventh chapter, That the Second and outmost court of the Temple (which is
the second state of the Christian Church) together with the holy City, should
be trodden down, and overtrampled by the Gentiles forty two months, that is,
overwhelmed with the Idolaty of the Gentiles, which is, (...), as long as power
shall be given to the Beast to make war with the Saints, as long as the
witnesses must wear sackcloth, and the woman which escaped the fury of the
Ethnicall Dragon, be fed in the wilderness.

Secondly, S. Paul tells us, that the great Apostasy should enter by strong
delusions, by signs and lying wonders; consider then what corruptions of the
Christian faith were thus ushered in to begin with the beginning and first
corruption of that kind; Invocation of Saints; with the adoration of their
shrines; and relics; how were these advanced in the Church, was it not by
miraculous cures of the sick, healing of the lame, restoring of the blind, yea
raising of the dead (as seemed) sometimes by the only touch and air, sometimes
of the shrines and relics of souls deceased? was it not still confirmed by
strange apparitions, and other means wonderful to hear? for discovery of
bones and relics unknown and forgotten, yea of men whose names they never
heard of before. And which I shall show better hereafter: no such experience
for thirty years together observed in the Church, until the total and fixed
time began to enter. The worshipping of Images, the second, for time, of the
Churches fornications: was not this also allowed and at length fully ratified
by like signs and miracles, showed upon those who approached them in their
devotions? Read the legend, and see what store there is of strong delusions and
lying wonders. That which for time came in last, but deserves a place among the
foremost, I mean the Idolatry of the Mass, and adoration of the breaden god;
search and see if it be not also thus attented!

If all this be true, then would I know what doctrine of theirs besides was
installed with these solemnities; there is but one only left for exception, and
it is Purgatory; but what if all the delusions of Purgatory, with all the
apparitions of Purgatorian Ghosts, were but an indirect device of Satan aiming
partly to advance the Mass into an Idol by the miraculous efficacy (forsooth
as the Ghosts report) of the oblation thereof for them; partly to install the
Son of perdition (a Demon I yet speak not of, and yet a Demon) to sit as
God in the Temple and Throne of Christ, with the keys of Apocal. 1.13.
Hades and death, to deliver them? what stronger presumption can there be of
this than the event; and that the error of Purgatory had so long been working
before the Devil seemed to know how to make this use of it, which at length he
spied out and plied lustily with signs and wonders. If all this be true, then
it follows still that it is spiritual fornication which the Holy Ghost in
Scripture intends, and the event has marked out for the soul of
Antichristian abomination and impiety; But of the matter of miracles and lying
wonders more in the second part of my text, which is the proper place thereof.

Thirdly and lastly, the great Apostasy is a thing proper to the (...) the
latter times; which I will show (when I come at it) to be the last times of the
fourth kingdom of Daniel, Dan. 7.25. and alibi; but amongst all other
corruptions, only the spiritual fornication of the Church and spouse of Christ
will be found proper to these times.

But you will say, if Idolatry and Spiritual fornication be the matter, why
should not this rather be laid upon Painims, and Turks, and Saracens, who
acknowledge not Christ, rather than upon Christians who do?

I answer, S. John and S. Paul prophesied of things to come, not of that which
was in being when they prophesied. But Ethnicall and Painim Idolatry at that
time overwhelmed the whole earth, yea and persecuted and made war with the
Saints, and no time has yet been when this Idolatry was not to be found. It
must needs be then some other whoredom (for whoredom it was to be) which was
prophesied of to come.

In Saracen. Frid. Sylburg. citante Martins ^. p. 1903. Lex. (...).
Again, neither Saracen nor Turk (the greatest unchristian States since Christ)
neither of these, I say, can be Antichrist we speak of, nor their blasphemy
that mystery of iniquity foretold by the Apostles and Prophets.

For there are two unquestionable charactes of that mystery, which will neither
of them, Mahomet in Alcorano inducit Deum ad se ita loquen^em: Pauper fuisti
and ditavi te, Idolis servist^ and vocavi te: Interpres Aretae in Praefatione
sub finem.
without doubt not both of them, agree to Turk or Saracen; videlicet, first,
that it should sit in the Great City, which in S. John's time reigned over the
nations of the earth. Secondly, that it should be an Apostasy from the
Christian faith once embraced: But the Turk, whatsoever he be, is no Apostate,
being of a nation which never was Christian; nor was the seat of the Saracen
Empire, whilst it stood, either in the old or new Rome, or near unto either;
Mahomet was a Paynim, neicircumcised as the other Arabians were, nor bap^ized
till he b^gun his false prophesy: when Abdalla the I^w did ^he one unto him,
and Sergius the Monk conferred the other, vid. Purchase P^^gr.
for I would seem to yield for this time, that new Rome or Constantinople
would serve the turn, though I am far enough from believing it. Nor will I
allege, that Mahomet himself and his nation were both Painims when they
began their blasphemies; for you would tell me, that Sergius the Monk taught
him to make the Alchoran: nor will I question now, whether the Christian or
Mahumetan be the greater Idolater, though the doubt might soon be resolved,
seeing it is well known the Mahumetans worship no Images. But I have alleged
nothing save what is without exception, that both these characters I spoke of
cannot be applied either to Turk or Saracen, though I believe that neither can
be. When I spoke of Painims and Mahumetans, I would have you remember, that
there were some blasphemous sects in the first ages of the Church, which are no
more to be accounted of as Christians than Mahumetans and Painims are; nay
Mahumetanism is nearer Christianity than many of them were: for amongst whom
the Christians Deity is not worshipped and received; those, though they spring
up in imitation of Christianity, I account but new Painim blasphemies and not
Christian heresies: such were the Tertul. calls these Heretics, Alterius
divinitatis Haeretici.
Cerinthians, Marcionites, Saturnians, Valentinians, and Manichees, etc. which
neither professed the same Deity, nor acknowledged that divine word which we
Christians do; whereas yet the Mahumetans worship the same God with Jews and
Christians, God the Creator of heaven and earth, and God the father of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; howsoever they conceive otherwise of his nature and
properties than Christians do: But this by the way (lest it may put a rub in
our discourse) of spiritual fornication.

But you will still allege in her behalf, who seems all this while to be
charged, that Antichrist, and the man of sin in Scripture, is set forth as the
most hateful and execrable thing that can be in the eyes of God Almighty. But
how can such a thing be said, and comparatively to be where the true God, with
Christ his son, God and man, are in any sort acknowledged and worshipped?

Lord! that the whole strain of Scripture, in the Prophets especially, and the
example of the Church of Israel, should not cure this web, and take this filme
from the eyes of men! Does not the Lord say of Israel, that he had chosen them
to be a special people to himself, above all people that are upon the face of
the earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. You only have I known (says he) of all the families of
the earth, Amos 3.2. And is not Christ the Lord of Christians? and is not the
Church his Spouse? (...), says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5. This is a great mystery
No warvell then where this mystery is not considered, if the mystery of
iniquity be not understood. Alas poor Church of Israel, thy case it seems
should have been a very hard one! for what Nation in the world ever suffered
so much rebukes, so many plagues, so much wrath, as thou have done? yet
could thou say for thy self, thou never forsakedst the true God altogether,
but wast still called by his name; only thou would feign worship him in
Calves and Images, as other Nations thy neighbors did their Gods; thou
would needs follow the fashion, and this was thine error; thou never
meanedst to cast of thy Jehovah altogether, but still would have him to be
thy God, and thy self to be his people; yet thou tookest this liberty, to have
other gods besides the Lord thy God, viz. thy Baalims and Demon gods of other
Nations about thee, and yet hopedst Jehovah the God of heaven, thy only
Sovereign God, would not be offended thereat, since thou retainedst him in
chief place and honor with thee still.

Why was thy God then so unkind and cruel unto thee, to call thee Whore, and
Prostitute Whore, so often? All his Prophets continually baiting thee with that
so foul and odious a name of abominable Harlot? Why did he scatter thee, and
cart thee even naked among the Nations, before his Jealousy would be satisfied?
for it seems he is far more indulgent to his second wife the Church of the
Gentiles, for she worships her God in Images and Crucifixes, yea calls a piece
of bread, her Lord and her god, and yet says, he is no whit jealous of her,
but well pleased. She, though espoused to Christ Jesus the Son of the living
God, as the sole Intercessor and Mediator in the presence of God his Father,
yet thinks she may fall down to Saints and Angels, yea to as many Images of
them as ever the Jews had of their Baalims, or the Gensiles of their Demons.

And yet forsooth because she makes her Lord the chiefest still in the honor
of her affections, and uses the rest of her lovers no farther than she may
still yield the first and chief place to him, she verily supposes he is no
whit offended with her; whereas Israel should have been called Whore a thousand
times over for as little as this; yea and like enough to have been carted too,
and her nose slit, Ezekiel. 23.25. long before this time.

Nay but she wipes her mouth, and asks why her Lord should be angry, for she
calls him still her Lord, and acknowledges and professes him still to be her
Husband. If he has a mind to be angry with any, let him go to the Turks,
Tartars, and other Mahumetans, or to the Painims, who will not acknowledge him
at all to be their Lord God, though he has offered himself, and perhaps woo^d
some of them, but they would none of him, but married themselves to other
husbands: here if he will be jealous, is matter for his jealousy.

But thou Christ-apostaticall S^rumpet, know thou not the first Commandment
of thy Christian Decalogue to be, Hieron. in ca. 43 Ezekiel. Ego hoc arbi^ror,
quod non polluat nomen Domini, nisi ille qui v^sus est nomini ejus credere: and
^uomodo tollit membra Christi, and ^acit membra meretricis, qui priu^ Christo
^redidit; sic ill^ polluit nomen Domini, qui prius nominis eius fidem
susceperit.
Thou shall have none other Gods (nor Christ's) but m^. What do thou with so
many Christlings? know thou not that an husband is more grieved and
dishonored by his wises adultery, than if any other woman whatsoever, yea
suppose his kinswomen and daughters, should play the harlots?

What are Turks and Tartars, and any other unbeleeving Nation under heaven,
unto thy Lord and Savior? are they not all as strangers to him, and he to
them? But as for thee, he had chosen thee out of many nations to espouse thee
to himself; so that thou may say with Israel, Isay 63.19. We are thine, but
as for them, thou never barest rule over them, they were not called by thy
name: but to thee, to use the words of Ezekiel, c. 16. he swear an oath, and
entered into a covenant with thee, and thou becamest his, and were called and
wilt still be called by his name: Thee he washed with water, yea, thoroughly
washed thee from the pollution of thy birth, and anointed the^ with oil. Thou
wast decked with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine linen, and
silk, and broydered work, thou did eat fine flower, and honey, and oil,
and wast exceeding beautiful, and did prosper into a kingdom. And thy
renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty; for it was perfect through
the comeliness which the Lord thy God had put upon thee. But thou did trust
i^ thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy (...), and
pouredst out thy fornications upon every one that passed by. And of thy
garments th^^ did take, and deckedst thy high places with diverse colors, and
playedst the har^^ thereupon. Thou have also taken thy fair jewels of thy
Lords gold, and of thy Lords silver, which he had given thee, and made to thy
self images of men, and did commit whoredom with them. And tookest thy
braydered garments and coveredst them: and thou have set the Lords oil and hi^
incense before them. Judge now between the Lord and his people ye that have
wives, and give sentence ye husbands whether of the two in question has most
dishonored our Lord and Savior, which of the two is most like to fret him,
and kindle the co^les of fury and jealousy: those who never yet were in
covenant with him, nor yet are called by his name: or whether his Spouse, his
darling, his beloved one, to whom he was betrothed and married? Judge according
to the manner of wedlock, and the notorious president of Israel* he that is a
father (we say) is best able to understand the love of a father, and therefore
Gods love to his children for the like reason: he that is an husband is
sensible of the jealousy of an husband, and so of the case of Christ with his
unfaithful and treacherous Spouse the Christian Jezabel.

The decision and sum of all this, is this, That the whoredom of the Church
of God is a spiritual adultery; and therefore between the Idolatry of
Christians, and that of Infidels, and of Painims, is as much difference in Gods
esteem, as is between adultery and simple fornication. The one, as equal to
murder, was in the law punished with death; the other with a much lighter
punishment: whence in Ezekiel (in whose words I have been so long) chap. 16.
ver. 38. God says to Jerusalem for their Idolatry, that he would judge her as
women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged: he would give her blood in
fury and jealousy. And this was the resolution of God himself against Israel,
Amos 3.1, 2. Hear the word that the Lord has spoken against you, O children
of Israel, saying, You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities. And the same will be the
judgment of the Christian Jezabel (howsoever Painims and Infidels speed) when
Great Babylon shall come in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. This I would have well considered and
weighed by those whom the Mahumetan blasphemy has so dazeled, that they can
hardly believe that so hated and execrable a name of Babylon should belong unto
any other, unless there be yet to come some other like barbarous Tyrant and
Seducer after them: the cause of which error is, That men have fancied another
manner of Antichrist than the Holy Ghost meant of, and placed their eyes far
wide of the ground of Gods hatred, and of the nature of that mystery of
abomination. But Isreal's Apostasy, Gods Jealousy, and their unparalled
punishment therefore, such as no Nation in the world, how Idolatrous soever,
endured besides themselves, are in this case the only Polestarre to direct us.

But even this mistake, which is and has been of the mystery of iniquity, is
it self a kind of mystery, or not without one; for Antichrist is a
Counter-Christ, and therefore his coming to be a counter-resemblance of the
coming of Christ.

Christ was both to come, and accordingly looked for in the last times (that
is) in the time of the fourth kingdom of Daniel; so Antichrist and his mystery
of impiety was to be, (...), in the latter times of these last times, that is
(as I shall better show hereafter) in the last times, or last Scene (as I may
so speak) of the fourth kingdom of Daniel. When Christ came the Scepter was
to depart from Judah, and that Commonwealth to be dissolved: so when Antichrist
was to come, the Roman Empire was to fall, and he that hindered was to be taken
out of the way, 2 These. 2.8. The Jews expected Christ to come when he did
come, and yet knew him not when he was come, because they had fancied the
manner and quality of his coming like some temporal Monarch, with armed power
to subdue the earth before him: So the Christians, Gods second Israel, looked
the coming of Antichrist should be at that time when he came indeed, and yet
they knew him not when he was come, because they had fancied his coming as of
some barbarous Tyrant, who should with armed power not only persecute and
destroy the Church of Christ, but almost the world, that is, they looked for
such an Antichrist as the Jews looked for a Christ.

Wherefore as Christ came unto his own, and his own received him not; so
Antichrist came upon those who were not his own, and yet they eschewed him
not: but yet as some Jews, though few, knew Christ when he came, and received
him; so did some Christians, though but few, keep themselves from the pollution
of Antichrist. Lastly, as the Jews ere long shall acknowledge, and run unto
him, whom they pierced as not knowing him; so has the Christian Church, for a
great part, discovered that Son of perdition, whom a long time they had
ignorantly worshipped, because they knew him not. O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! But for our part, seeing our case is so like
unto that of the Jews, let their lamentable and woeful error, in mistaking
their Messiah by wrongly fancying him, be a warning and a caveat unto us, that
we likewise upon like conceits and prejudice mistake and misdeeme not the Man
of sin.

TINES, Some.
NOw I come unto the second point expressed in this description of the great
Apostasy, viz. the Persons Revolters, they shall not be all, but (...), some,
(...), some shall Apostatize: some, that is not, as we in ou^ English do often
use it, a few, but some, that is, not all, yet some, that is, so many as that
the whole visible Church should be said thereof to be Apostatized; so many as
should like a cloud overspread the face of the Christian firmament, in such
sort, as the stars and lights therein should not easily be discerned. For the
great defection so much prophesied of, was to be a solemn and general one;
such a one, as wherein the chiefest of the Churches, honored as a mother in
Israel, should become a Babylonish whore, a mother of harlots, and of the
abominations of the earth, Rev. 17. such a one as whereby the outmost court of
the Temple of God should not only be profaned, but trodden down by
Gentilisme, Rev. 11. such a one as the world is said to wonder after the beast,
and to worship him; and such a one as should not only make war with the
Saints, but overcome them, Rev. 13. Otherwise if our Apostle here, and Saint
John there, should mean no more than the errors of some particular ones, and
their revolt from the faith of the Church, they should make either no prophecy
at all, or at the best, but a needless one.

For who knows not, that in Saint Paul's, Saint John's, and the Apostles own
times, were many Heresies and Heretics grown up as weeds in the wheat field
of Christ? but as yet the wheat overtopped them, and the visible body of the
Church disclaimed them. If these had been the worst the Church should look
for, the Apostles should seem to prophecy of things present, and not, as they
do, of things to come, yea and more than this, they should foretell of a thing
as proper and peculiar to the last times, which was no novelty in their own
times.

We must take notice therefore that the Apostasy and corruption of faith so
much prophesied of, was another manner of one, than that which was so frequent
in those first times; such a kind of one as should not be disclaimed by the
visible body of the Church, but should surprise, e^lipse, and overcloud the
beautiful face thereof: which manner of defection never had been before, nor
should there be the like after it.

Now that the word (...), or some, uses in Scripture to to imply no small
number, but only serves to intimate an exception of some particulars, though
there were but two or three to be excepted, I will make manifest by a few
examples, lest our English use might deceive us.

First, John 6.60. Many of the Disciples (says the Text) when they heard this,
said, This is an hard saying: and verse 66. Many of his Disciples from that
time went back and walked no more with him; nevertheless concerning these many
Christ himself says verse 64. (...), but there are some of you which believe
not: here we see that some is a great many: So Romans 11. S. Paul there says of
the rejection of the Jews, some of the branches are broken off; now what a
some this was, appears in the same chapter, when he says, God has included
them all in unbeleefe, that he might have mercy upon all: but to search no
further, 1 Cor. 10. will store us with examples, as verse 7. neither be ye
Idolaters, (...), as some of them were, this was a great some, for Moses says
of it, Exodus 32.3. And all the people brake off their golden earerings and
brought them to Aaron: in verse 8. Neither let us commit fornication as some of
them, which were so many, Numb. 25.4. that the Lord said to Moses, Take all the
heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord, that the fierce anger of
the Lord may be turned away from Israel: and verse 5. it is said in general,
And Israel joined himself to Baal-Peer: again in the same Epistle verse 9. it
is said, Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted and were
destroyed of Serpents: and verse 10. Neither murmr as some of them also
murmured; this some was a great some indeed, even all the people, save Moses,
Joshua, and Caleb; whereof is said Numb. 14.1. And all the Congregation lifted
up their voice and wept: and verse 2. And all the Congregation murmured against
Moses and Aaron, and the whole Congregation said unto them, would God that we
had died, etc. wherefore they were as largely punished, all of them dying in
the wilderness, Joshua and Caleb excepted. These places of many will suffice,
to show that the word [ some] in my text, intends not to extenuate the number
of Apostates, as implying they should be but few, but only shows they should
not be all, for where the Apostates are but (...), some, there some also are
not Apostates but exempted from the common defection, wherewith the rest were
miserably overwhelmed. The observation therefore which this (...) affords us,
is, That the true Church of Christ was never wholly extinguished, nor the light
of his Gospel ever quite put out, no, not in the greatest darkness that ever
was to overwhelme it. By the true Church of Christ I understand that holy
society and company of believers, which as they accord and are joined together
in one common faith of all divine truths needful to salvation, so are they
also free from the fellowship of such erroneous abominations and mortal
errors as destroy and overturne it. This is that society, whereof by the grace
of Almighty God, we glory to be the members; this that society, which in the
primitive times grew and flourished: this that society, which (when the times
foretold of the Churches eclipse came, and the great Apostasy had overspread
the face thereof) was indeed much impaired, endangered, and obscured, but never
was totally extinguished, but continued even under the jurisdiction of the man
of sin, yea in Babylon it self where he had this throne; for does not Christ
at length say? Apoc. 18.4. Come out of her my people: how could they come out
thence unless they had been there? or how should Antichrist sit in the Temple
of God, 2 These. 2.9. unless Gods Temple were even there where Antichrist sat?
as a few living embers in a heap of dying ashes: as a little wheat in a field
overgrowne with weeds: as the lights of the heaven in a firmament overcast with
clouds: as a little pure gold in a great mass of dross and mixed metal: such
was the faithful company of Christ in the Apostate body of Christendom, the
Apoc. 14 4.
Virgin Church in the midst of Babylon.

But will our adversaries say, this is not sufficient to make you the true
Church of Christ, because some of you have always been; but you must prove
also that you have always visibly been; for the true Catholic Church must
not only never have been interrupted or extinguished, but it must have been a
society visibly known unto the world, and not as embers in the ashes, but as a
burning and shining flame.

But this objection deserves no answering: because our adversaries, howsoever
they would dissemble it, do but play upon the present advantage which they
think their own Church has in this point above ours: otherwise* when they
forget the contention they have with us, and are in a calmer mood, they can be
pleased to deliver other doctrine, which (if they would be ingenuous so much as
to remember it) we needed not such a stir about the point of the Churches
visibility; for the difference between them and us hereabout, is not so great
as they would make it seem: They themselves and the Fathers also teach, that
when Antichrist comes, the visibility of the Church shall be eclipsed: nay,
they affirm more than we usually in that case require; for then they say the
use of the Sacraments shall cease, no Eucharist, no Mass, no public
Assemblies, yea all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be extinguished; but
here lies all the difference, they hold the glorious visibility of the true
Church to have continued from the beginning unto this present, and the
overshadowing of the light, and eclipse of the glory thereof under Antichrist
to be yet to come; we on the contrary maintain, the clouding of the Churches
visibility under the man of sin to have been already, and some part of the
visible splendour thereof to be yet to come: both agreeing in this, that in the
fatal Apostasy the Churches visibility and glory should cease; but we say
that the time has been already, they say that it is yet to come; we say, that
time of darkness was to continue many ages, they say, when it comes it shall
last but three single years, and a half. Seeing therefore the whole
controversy lies in the point of time, whether the Churches fatal Apostasy
be already past or yet to come, it would be much the shorter and quicker course
both for them and us to decide this controversy, to examine the condition and
quality of both religions by the holy Scripture, where we have also, as Saint
Peter speaks, a most sure word of prophecy, whereunto we shall do well if
we take heed, as to a light shining in a dark place.

Now though this answer be sufficient enough for the objection of our
Adversaries, yet for the better understanding and clearer insight into the
matter questioned, we will further consider whether and in what manner or
measure our Church may be said to have been visible, during the prevailing
Apostasy, and in what respects again it was not visible, and in both agreeable
unto the state of the true Church under the frequent Apostasies of the Church
of Israel.

First therefore we must know that by a visible Christian society in this
question is meant a society or company of Christian believers joined together
in one external fellowship, and communion of the same public profession, and
rule of faith, use of Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; for these
make the outward form, and as it were the shape of a Church, whereby this
society is discernable from other societies of men: so that a society by this
outside severed and distinguished from other societies, is a society visible
and conspicuous to other societies of men. The question therefore is, whether
that holy society of believers before mentioned, who accorded together in one
common faith with us of all divine truths needful to salvation, and kept
themselves free from such enormious abominations and mortal errors which we
now disclaim, as utterly annihilating that common faith; whether such a
society as this has been in all ages, joined and distinguished by such a
common outside from other companies, either of men in general, or Christians
in special? or in shorter and perhaps plainer terms thus: whether the society
of men of our Christian belief has been in all ages for the outside a
distinct ecclesiastical corporation from other societies of men?

My answer is, That for the first ages it was so not only thus visible, but
easily discernable from all other societies of men whatsoever; but afterward
when the great Apostasy we spoke of surprised and deformed the bountiful
Spouse of Christ, then was not that virgin company of Saints, our Mother, a
distinct external society from the rest of Christendom, but a part, yea and
the only found part of that external and visible body whereof our adversaries
boast their predecessors to have been members: for howsoever this our
Virgin Mother, for the internal and invisible communion of her sincere and
unstained faith, we^e a distinct and severed company from the rest with whom
she lived, yet, for the common principles of the Christian faith still
acknowledged in that corrupt body of Christendom, she retained communion with
them; and for the most part of that time of darkness continued an external
part of the same visible body with the rest in gross called Christians, as
being begotten by the same Sacrament of Baptism (as the Israelites in like
case of Circumcision) taught in some part by the same word, and Pastors still
continued amongst them, and submitting to the same jurisdiction and government,
so far as these or any of these had yet some soundness remaining in them;
but for the rest which was not compatible with her sincere and unstained faith,
and which annihilated in those it surprised, even those common grounds of
Christianity otherwise outwardly professed, she with her children either wisely
avoided all communion with it, or if they could not, then patiently suffered
for their conscience sake under the hands of Tyrants, called Christians, until
that Tyranny growing insupportable, and that mortal contagion unavoidable, it
pleased God, lest we might have been as Sodom and Gomorrah, to begin to call
us thence at the time appointed, unto a greater liberty, as we see this day. As
therefore when a little gold is mixed with a great quantity of base and
counterfeit metal, so that of both is made but one mass or lump; each metal
we know still retains its nature diverse from the other, and yet outwardly and
visibly is not to be discerned the one from the other, but both are seen
together as they are outwardly one, but cannot be distinguished by the eye, as
they are diverse and several; the gold is visible as it is one mass, and
under the same outside and figure with the rest, yet it is truly invisible as
it is diverse from the rest: But when the Refiner comes and severs them, then
will each metal appear in his own colors, and put on his own outside, and so
become visible apart from the rest. Such is the case here, and such was the
state and condition of the Church in the prevailing and great Apostasy; the
purer metal of the Christians visible body outwardly was not discernable from
the base and counterfeit, while one outside covered them, and so much the
rather, because the Apostate part in a great proportion exceeding the sound,
made it imperceptible; but when the time of refining came, then was our Church
not first founded in the true faith (God forbid) but a part of the Christian
body newly refined from such corruptitions as time had gathered, even as gold
refined begins no then first to be gold, though it begin but then to be refined
gold.

Whatsoever we have hitherto spoken of the state of the true believers under
the Apostasy of Antichrist, is the same which befell the true Israelites in
the Apostasy of Israel. And does not Saint Peter intimate that the Apost^sie
which should betide Christians should be like to that which we read to have
befallen Israel, 2 Pet. 2.1. There were (says he) false Prophets also among
the people i e. Israelites) even as there shall be false teachers among you,
who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them. If the Apostasy of Christians were to be of the same stamp with that of
Israel, and the Heresies brought into Christendom by the false Doctors of
Babylon, like unto those wherewith the false Prophets of Israel infected and
poisoned the ancient people of God; surely we cannot find a better pattern
whereby to know what was the estate and condition of the unstained Christian
believers under that Apostasy of the man of sin, than that which was of the
true Israelites under the Apostasy of Israel: for the right understanding
whereof we must always remember, That the Israelitish Church did at no time
altogether renounce the true and living God, not in their worst times, but in
their own conceit and profession acknowledged him still, and were called his
people and he their God, though they worshipped others beside him: so
Christians in their Apostasy neither did nor were to make an absolute
Apostasy from God the Father, and Christ their Redeemer, but in an outward
profession still to acknowledge him, and to be called Christians, though by their
Idolatry and spiritual whoredoms they denied the Lord that bought them (i.
e.) whom they professed to be their Redeemer; just as Israel for the like is said
to have forsaken the Lord their God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt:
here therefore the case of both is alike, let us also see the rest. You ask,
where was the true Church we speak of in Antichrists time? I ask likewise,
where was the company of true worshippers in Ahabs time? was it not so covered
and scattered under the Apostate Israelites, that Elias himself, who was one
of it, could scarce find it? I am very jealous (says he) for the Lord God of
hoasts, because the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown
down thy Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I even I alone am
left, and they seek my life to take it away, 1 Kings 19.14. yet the Lord tells
him verse 18. I have yet left me 7000. in Israel, all the knees which have not
bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him: yet I trow these
7000. were not outwardly severed from the rest of Israel, but remained still
external members of the same visible body with them. But you will except, that
the true and unstained Church in Judah was still visible and apparent: I ask
you then, where was the company of the true worshippers of Jehovah in Manasses
time, the worst time of all others? when the ten Tribes were carried captive,
and but Judah and Benjamin only left, and they, as far as the eye of man can
see, wholly and generally fallen from the Lord their God to all manner of Idols
and Idolatries, 2 Chronicles. 33.
like unto the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord had cast out before
the children of Israel, when in the Temple it self, the only place where the
true God was to be worshipped legally, were Idolatrous Altars erected, even in
the house whereof the Lord had said, In this house and in Jerusalem will I put
my name for ever; even in this house, this holy house, were Idols and graven
Images erected, and in both Courts Altars to Baalim, the Sun, the Moon, and
the whole host of heaven, the like whereof never had been until that time.
Besides also, who is able to name the man almost 50 years together that
remained a faithful servant and true worshipper of the living God in the midst
of this hideous profanation? Nor is it easy to be conceived how it was
possible all that time to offer any legal sacrifice without Idolatry, when
Gods own Temple and house was made a den of Idols, nay his Altar, the only
Altar of Israel destroyed, to make room for Altars erected to Idols, as may be
gathered 2 Chronicles. 33.15, 16. where was the true Church of Israel now? or had
the Lord no Church at all? yes certainly, he had a Church and a company which
defiled not their garments, a company (I say) but not visibly distinguished
from the rest of their nation, but hidden as it were in the midst of that
Apostate body, and yet known together with the rest to be Israelites and
people of Jehovah; but known to God only and themselves to be true Israelites
and faithful servants to Jehovah their God. And that such a company there was,
and a strong party too, though not seen, appeared presently upon the death of
Manasses and his wicked son, when Josiah began to reign at eight years of age,
for they then prevailed even in the Court it self, and so brought up the King,
that even yet while he was young, in the eighth year of his reign, he began
to seek after the Lord God of David his father, and in the twelfth year to
make a public and powerful reformation, such as the like was never done
before him. Could all this have been done so soon, and by a King so young in
years, and to carry all before it like a torrent, unless there had been a
strong party, which now having a King for them, began quickly to show
themselves, and to sway the state, though before they were hardly to be seen.

When therefore our adversaries ask us where our Church was before Luther, we
see by this what we have to answer.

OF the two first particulars of the four, whereby the great Apostasy of
Christian believers is here deciphered, I have spoken sufficiently; viz. first,
for the kind and quality thereof, it should be a new Doctrine of Demons:
secondly, that for the persons revolting, they should not be all, but some. Now
I am to speak of the third, the time when, (...), in the latter times.

For the easier understanding whereof, we must know that speeches of last times
in Scripture mean sometimes a continuation or length of time, sometimes an end
of time: A continuation of time I mean, as when we say the winter is the last
time or season of the year, or old age the latter time of life, neither of
them being the very end, but a space of time next the end, which therefore, in
respect of some whole systeme of time, whereof it is the last part, is truly
termed the last time thereof. Man's life is a systeme of diverse ages, the last
space whereof is the last time of life. The year is a systeme of four
seasons, and therefore the last season thereof, winter, may be called the last
time of the year. But by an end of time I meanethe very expiring of time, as
the last day of December is the end or last time of the year; the moment when
a man dies, is the last time (i. e.) the end of his life. Now in the New
Testament, when by mention of last time is meant an end or terminus temporis, I
observe it to be expressed in the singular number* as (...) being four times
mentioned in the sixth of John, and once in the eleventh, is in every one of
them meant of the day of the resurrection at the end of the world; I will raise
him up, says our Savior, (...), in the last day, John ^.39, 40.44, 54. And
Marthae of her brother Lazarus, I know (says she) he shall rise again in the
resurrection, (...) at the last day, John 11.24. So 1 Pet. 1.5. (...) the last
time, is used in the self same sense, being spoken of the incorruptible
inheritance reserved in heaven, and to be revealed (says the Apostle) (...) in
the last time; in all which is meant the end of the world. But in 1 John 2.18.
we have (...) the last hour; Little children it is the last hour, where no
doubt he means an end of some time, but not an end of the world, which was
then afar off; but an end of their time, to whom he then wrote his Epistle (
i. e.) an end of the Jewish state, and religion, which was then at the very
door: which exposition I will make more plain hereafter.

But when a continuation or longer space of time is signified, then I find the
plural number to be used, as 1 Pet. 1.20. of the Incarnation of Christ it is
said, that he was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
made manifest (...) in the last times, which times have continued these 1600
years at the least: so Heb. 1.2. God (says Saint Paul) (...) in these last
days has spoken unto us by his son; and 2 Timothy 3.1. This know also (...)
that in the last days perilous times shall come. Again, Acts. 2.17. In the
last days I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and in 2 Pet. 3.3. (...)
in the last days shall come scoffers. And so in my Text, (...), In the latter
times some shall revolt from the faith, and give heed to doctrines of Demons.

Whatsoever the validity of this observation be, for the rest I make no
question but it will be granted, that (...) in my Text means some continued
space of time, and not terminus temporis, or the very end of time: which
therefore presupposed, I approach one step nearer, laying this for a second
ground of our discovery, that these (...), whereof Saint Paul speaks and
means, were times not then present, but afterward to come; for the words of
the Text are not a narration of things present, but a prediction (as I have
already admonished) of what should betide the Christian faith in after times,
yet notwithstanding were the times wherein Saint Paul lived, and all the times
of Christianity, the last times, and so styled in Scripture even by our Apostle
himself, as by some of the forecited examples evidently appears: wherefore
it must needs follow, that times here meant and mentioned in my Text, are not
the last times in general and simply, but the last times in special and
comparatively (i. e.) the latter times of the last times. That as the last
times in general were the times wherein Christ the Sun of righteousness was
to be revealed, and his kingdom founded in the world; so the latter times of
these last times should be the times wherein the Apostasy of the Christian
faith should prevail, and that wicked one usurp the throne of Christ.

Before therefore that we can know what are the last times comparatively (i e.)
the latter times, or the last of the last, we must first understand, what are
the last times simply and in general, why so called, whence reckoned, and how
limited; for then will these latter times in my Text, which are the last part
of them, be easily found, and in a manner demonstrated.

Targ. Eccles. 1.11. expounds In novissimis diebus Regis Christi.
As for the last times therefore in general, most use to describe them only
thus, to be the times of the kingdom of Christ which began at his passion to
continue to the end of the world, which in respect that it succeeds the legal
worship and no other shall succeed, it is therefore the last time. In like
manner the (...) allotted to the man of sin are (as I take it) usually no
otherwise described, then to be the times wherein the Apostasy should appear,
which in that it should immediately precede the second coming of Christ, is
therefore to be esteemed the last times of all; but these descriptions are
obscurum per magis obscurum, they do declare an obscure thing by that which
was and is more obscure than it, and therefore come short of making good the
intent of the Holy Ghost in his so often mention of the last times, especially
in the New Testament; for the lact times or fullness of time were both a ground
of the Jews expectation of Christ when he came, and are without doubt so often
propounded and alleged by the Apostles for a confirmation of the truth of his
coming: (...), 1 Timothy 26.
but if the last times could not be known but by his coming, how should his
coming be known by them? so also the Holy Ghost in my Text mentions these
(...) for an argument or sign of the Apostasy to fall out therein, or for a
note or mark of time wherein we should look for it, and therefore as forewarned
beware of being carried away in that defection; but if these times cannot be
known nor described any other way than by the defection to fall out in them,
we should be never a whit the nearer, and this mark of time which the Holy
Ghost gives us would stand us in no stead at all. Let us therefore now take
this as a truth to be supposed, that the times are set out unto us to be as
marks to inform us when that should come to pass which was to fall out in
them, and not the things which were to befall, intended for signs to know the
times by; and therefore we are not to doubt but that the Holy Ghost has
somewhere else, by some other marks and grounds of computation, made known
unto us when to reckon both the last times, wherein was foretold that Christ
should be anointed, and these latter times of them wherein the Christian
Apostasy should be revealed, that so we might have a sure belief in the one,
and a certain and sufficient mark when to beware of the other.

The profanation of the legal Sanctuary, and trampling down the holy people
by Antiochus Epiphanes was marked out in Daniels prophecy by the like
circumstance and determination of time, as is this Apostasy here in our
Apostles prediction, Dan. 8.23. In the latter time, or, in the latter end of
the kingdom of Graecia, (...) LXX. (...).
a King of a fierce countenance shall stand up, viz. he who should magnify
himself against the Prince of the host of heaven, and take away the daily
sacrifice, etc. as it is in the vision which was foreshewed of him ver. 10.11.
where it would be preposterous to think, that this latter time or end of the
Greeks kingdom could not be defined otherwise than by the event to fall out
therein, and not rather conceive that this determination of time, being such as
might otherwise well enough be known, was therefore intended for a character
to observe the event by. For when was this latter end of the Greeks kingdom
to be taken notice of, but then when they should see that kingdom begin to be
given to another people? when the fourth kingdom, the Roman state, should
once begin to encroach upon the third, especially when they should see the head
Province thereof Greece it self to come under their obedience: when they
should see this, then were they to prepare themselves for the abomination of
desolation that was now at the door. And surely the event was most punctual;
for this Roman encroachment, having been for 28 years together attempting
manifestly and advancing, was at length accomplished, when Aemilius the Consul
having quite vanquished Perseus the King of Macedon, all Greece came under the
Roman obedience, 166 years before the birth of Christ; which no sooner was come
to pass, but the very self same year, within less than three months after,
Antiochus sets up the abomination of desolation in the Temple of Jerusalem. Why
should we not then believe that the Holy Ghost intends here to give us as
sure a watchword, when to beware of the man of sin, by this circumstance of
latter times here in my text, as we see he gave the Jews to look for the
persecution and profanation by Antiochus.

Therefore without any more preambles, I come now directly to resolve what was
before propounded, viz. what is meant by last times in general, whence and how
we are to reckon them; and then in the second place what are these (...) in my
text, which must be, as I said before, a latter part of that general.

For the true account therefore of times in Scripture, we must have recourse to
that SACRED CALENDAR and GREAT ALMANAC of PROPHECY, the four kingdoms of
Daniel, which are a prophetical chronology of times measured by the succession
of four principal kingdoms, from the beginning of the captivity of Israel,
until the mystery of God should be finished; a course of time during which the
Church and Nation of the Jews, together with those whom by occasion of their
unbeleefe in Christ, God should surrogate in their rooms, was to remain under
the bondage of the Gentiles, and oppression of Gentilisme; but these times once
finished, all the kingdoms of this world should become the kingdom of our
Lord and his Christ. And to this great Calendar of times, together with that
other but lesser Calendar of 70 weeks, all mention of times in Scripture
seems to have reference. Now these four kingdoms, according to the truth
infallibly to be demonstrated if need were, and agreeable both to the ancient
opinion of the Jewish Vide Targ. Habac. 3.17.
Church whom they most concerned, and to the most ancient and universal Vide
Cyril. Hierosol. (...), ^^. p. 337. and Hieron. locum infra ci^atum.
opinions of Christians derived from the times of the Apostles (until now of
late time some have questioned it) are, 1 The Babylonian. 2 That of the Medes
and Persians. 3 The Greeks. 4 The Roman. In which quaternary of kingdoms, as
the Roman, being the last of the four, is the last kingdom, so are the times
thereof these last times we seek for, during which times says Daniel, cap. 2.
v. 44. The God of heaven shall set up a kingdom which shall never be
destroyed, nor left unto another people, but it shall break in pieces, and
consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever: which is figured by a
stone hewn out of the mountain without hands, before the times of the Image
were yet spent: which stone at length smote the Image upon his feet of Iron and
Clay, and so utterly destroyed it; that done, the stone that smote the Image
upon the feet became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth: the meaning
of all which is, that in the last times, or under the times of the last
kingdom, (the Roman) should the kingdom of Christ appear in the world, as
we see it has done; and this is that which the Apostle says Heb. 1.2. God in
these last days, or last times, has spoken to us by his Son: and Saint
Peter 1 Ep. 1.20. that he was foreordained before the foundation of the world,
but was manifested in these last times. This is that fullness of time whereof
the Apostle speaks Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth
his Son made of a woman: and Ephesians. 7.10. Having made known to us the mystery
of his will, that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one all things in Christ.

Add here that of Christ himself, Mar. 1 15. The time is fulfilled, and i. e
kingdom of God is at ^and Hue quoque p^r^inet illu^, 1 Timothy 2.6: (...).
Agreeable unto all which is that Heb. 9.26. Christ has once appeared (...) in
the end of times, or ages, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: where
these last times, fullness of time, and conclusion of ages, are nothing else
but the times of the fourth kingdom, whose times are the last period of
Daniels four; the fullness of prophetical chronology, and conclusion of the
sacred Calendar: during these times, Christ was looked for, and accordingly
came, and reigned; whose kingdom shall at length abolish the brittle remainder
of the Roman state, according to the other part of the prophecy, when the
fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and our Lord subdue all his enemies
under his feet, and at the last death it self.

Having thus found what times are termed the last times in general, let us now
see if we can discover which are the latter times of these last times, or the
last times in special, which are these (...) in my Text: which will not be
hard to do; for if the last times in general are all the times of the fourth
kingdom, then must our latter times as a part thereof needs be the latter
times of that kingdom. Let us therefore again to our prophetical Calendar,
and survey Daniels description of the fourth or Roman kingdom as it is cap.
7. from ver. 29. where we shall find the latter times thereof to be that
period of a time, times, and half a time, (...).
during which that prodigious Horn with eyes like a man, and mouth speaking
great things, should make war with the Saints, prevail against them, and
wear them out, and think to change times and laws, until the judgment
should sit, and his dominions be taken away; and in him that long-lived Beast
finally be destroyed, and his body given to the burning flame, v. 11. for this
Hornish sovereignty is the last Scene of that long Tragedy, and the conclusion
of the fourth beast, and therefore the times thereof are those (...) whereof
the Spirit speaks expressly, that in them there should be an Apostasy from the
Christian faith.

Concerning these times thus found, we will now further enquire, 1 What durance
they may be of. 2 When they take beginning, and by what mark their beginning
may be known. For the first, we will make no question but these are the self
same times whereof Saint John speaks, telling us the Church should be in the
wilderness a Time, Times, and half a Time; the same with those two and forty
months wherein John's restored beast should domineere, and play the selfsame
reax which Daniels hornish tyrant does; the same time with those two and forty
months during which the Church is trodden down of the Gentiles: lastly, the
same times with 1260. days, during which the witnesses of Christ prophesied in
sackcloth, for a time, times, and half a time; or a year, two years, and
half, are 42 months, and 42 months make 1260. days: if therefore we can
find the beginning and continuance of any of these, we have found the
beginning and continuance of them all. For the duration and length of them,
they must imply some definitive times, because the Scripture follows that use
of speech, and uses no number indefinitely, but those which the use of speech
had made such, as 1.10.1000. but mixed and compound numbers, as these are,
3.42.1260. are neither in the Hebrew, nor I think in any other language used
indefinitely.

Our adversaries would have them literally understood for three single years
and a half, as though it were an History, and not a Prophecy: but besides the
use of prophecy to reckon days for years, I think it would trouble any man to
conceive how so many things as should be performed in this time, should be done
in three single years and a half. 1 Ten kingdoms founded at the same time
with the Beast. 2 Peoples, and multitudes of nations and tongues to serve and
obey him. 3 To make war with the Saints and overcome them. 4 To cause all
that dwell upon the earth to worship him. 5 Babylon to ride the Beast so long,
that all nations shall drink of the wine of her fornication, the Kings of the
earth commit fornication with her, yea the Merchants and all those that had
ships in the sea, to grow rich by trading with her. Me thinks all this should
ask much more than three years works, or four either. To which I add
moreover, that that state of government, sovereignty or seigniory, or what you
will, of the Beast, under which the whore should ride him, follows
immediately upon a former, which in comparison is said to last but a short
space, Rev. 17.20. But if the Antichristian state should continue but three
years and a half literally taken, how short must the time of that foregoing
King or sovereignty be which should occasion the Holy Ghost to insert so
singular a note of the difference thereof from that which followed, that it
should continue but a short space: does not this imply, that the next state
wherein the whore should ride the beast, was to continue a long space: therefore
3 years and a half historically taken, cannot be the time of the Churches
Apostasy, and the Antichristian sovereignty of Rome: and if it cannot be taken
historically, it must be taken prophetically, every day for a year, and so 1260
days counted so many years, shows the extent of those (...) to be 1260 years.

Now for the second thing proposed, the beginning of these (...); Saint John
tells us in the Revelation, that his blasphemous Beast of 42 months
continuance should succeed upon the mortal wound of the Caesarian or Imperial
sovereignty of Rome: And Apoc. 17. the Idolatrous Beast which carries the great
Whore upon his back, should have a plurality of Kings start up at the same time
with him, who should agree to submit their power and kingdom unto this
whore-ridden Beast; and would not he also in the same chapter have us take
notice, that the Antichristian state of the Beast which was to come, should be
next to that of the Caesar's which then reigned? for the Angel there tells him,
that that state of the beast, wherein the Whore should ride him, which was then
not in being, but should afterward ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go
into perdition; that this state or head of the beast should succeed so
immediately upon the sixth state or head, viz. the Caesarian then reigning,
that howsoever in some respects it might be called an eighth, yet should in
very deed be but the seventh; for how could it be otherwise, when the Beast in
the vision has but seven heads and no more? vide ver. 8.10.11. Agreeable to
this is Saint Paul's Epoch, 2 These. 2.7. who tells us, that as soon as the
Imperial sovereignty of Rome, which then hindered, should be taken out of the
way, then should that wicked one be revealed: Tertul. de resurrect. c. 24.
Ambros. comment* in hunc locum. Hieron. q 11. ad Algasiam. and prasat. in l. 8.
comment. in ^zek. Chryso^l. comment. in hunc locum. Aug. lib. 19 c. 20 de
Civit. Dei, sed non tam asseveranter ut caeteri Cyrillus Hierosol^m (...).
thus the Fathers generally expound it. Hence was that custom in the Church,
in the most ancient times of it, to pray in their Lyturgy for the lasting of
the Roman Empire, that so Antichrist might be long acomming, Tertul. apol. cap.
32. and 39. Ad Scap. c. 2. Upon this ground Saint Jerome, when ho heard of the
taking of Rome by Alaricus the Goth, presently expected the coming of
Antichrist, Ad Ageruchiam de Monogamia; Qui tenebat (says he) de medio sit,
and non intelligimus Antichristum appropinquare. Idem praefat. l. 8. Comment.
in Ezec. Pascitur animus, and obliviscitur saeculi calamitatum, quod in extremo
fine jam positum congemiseit, and parturit, donec qui tenet de medio fiat, and
pedes statuae quondam ferrei fragilitate digitorum fictilium conterantur: Cadit
mundus, and Cervix erect a non flectitur, etc. Thus he. Postquam clarissimum
terrarum omnium Lumen extinctum est, imo Romani Imperii truncatum caput, and in
una urbe totus orbis interiit, as he elsewhere deplores that woeful calamity,
Praef. l. 1. Comment. in Ezekiel. Answerable to that which Saint John told us;
Daniels Calendar also informs us, that the hornish Tyrant who was to act the
(...), should then begin to appear, when ten kings should arise in the fourth
kingdom, for the ten horns which at last he espied upon the Beasts head, and
observed a little horn with eyes and a mouth to spring up amongst them, and
displant three of them, v. 8. the Angel v. 24. expounds to be ten kings which
should arise out of that kingdom, and another, to wit Antichrist, should arise
Chald. (...)
behind them, so it should be translated as the 70 does (...), which should be
diverse from the first; (that is, a King of another nature) and should bring
down or humble three Kings, (...) a Vulg. humiliabit. LXX. (...) Irenaeus,
deminorabit, vol, (ut in alio exemplari) dehonorabit. Va^ab. opprimet. Iunius,
deprimet.
and play those reax which follow in the Text. Thus the Fathers universally and
from the utmost antiquity expound this Scripture: Justin. Mart. Dialog. cum
Tryphone takes it for granted that this horn is (...)* qui iniqua in nos
Christianos andebit. Irenaeus scholar to Policarp, l. 5. c. 21. aliis 25.
says, Daniel novissimi regni finem respiciens, id est, novissimos december reges,
in quo divideretur regnum illorum, super quos filius perditionis veniet, cornua
dic^^ dec^m ^asei bestiae, etc. Yea a little after he tells us, that Saint John
in his ten Kings which should rereceive their kingdoms at one hour with the
Beast, expounds this of Daniel, Manifestius adhuc d^ novissimo tempore and de
his qui sunt in eo december regibus, in quos divid^tur quod nunc regna^ imperium;
significavit Johannes Domini discipulus in Apocalypsi edisserens quae fuerint
december cornua qu^ a Daniele visa sunt, etc. Nay Saint Jerome in his Comment upon
this seventh chapter of Daniel will give us to understand, that all the
Ecclesiastical Writers delivered this to be the true exposition; for having
there confuted Porphyrie, who to derogate from the divinity of this prophecy
would have it meant of Antiochus Epiphanes, and therefore written when the
event was past: he concludes thus, Ergo dicamus quod omnes Scriptores
Ecclesiastici tradiderunt: in consummatione mundi, quando regnum destru^ndum
est Romanorum, december futuros reges, qui orbem Romanum inter se dividant, and
undecimum surrecturum esse Regem parvulum, qui tres reges de december regibus
superaturus sit, in quo totus Satanas habitaturus sit corporaliter. Who these
three Kings were which this horn displanted to make himself elbow-roome, you
shall hear more anon: but I will not conceal what I have heard of another
exposition, which fits our turn for the beginning of the Apostasy no less
than that of the Fathers; namely, that by ten kingdoms may be meant the full
plurality of the Roman Provinces, so much whereof as three is of ten should
have the Imperial power rooted out of them, and fall under the Dominion of the
Antichristian Horn, who should act the sovereignty of the latter times, or the
last sovereignty of that kingdom. Now it is most true that the Popes
Patriarchdome in the West holds just that scantling of the ancient Territory of
the Roman Empire, which a man may judge by his eyes, or compasses in a Mapp:
and yet I prefer the other exposition before it.

To come up to an issue: It is apparent by all that has bin said, that these
(...), with that wicked sovereignty which should domineer in them, was to take
beginning from the wound, the fall, the ruin, the rending in pieces, or
rooting up of the Imperial sovereignty of the City of Rome, when that City
should cease to be the Lap of that sovereignty which the Casars once held over
the Nations; and many new upstart Kings should appear in the place and
Territory of that once one Empire; then should the Apostasy be seen, and the
latter times with that wicked one make their entrance. Now in what age this
fell out I think no man can be ignorant, who has but a little skill in
History.

But you will say, The Imperial sovereignty of old Rome fell not all at once,
but had diverse steps and degrees of ruin, so that the doubt will be
notwithstanding, from which of these steps of the fall thereof these latter
times must be reckoned?

I answer, From any of them. For as the Imperial sovereignty fell by degrees,
so the Apostasy under the lattermost sovereignty grew up also by degrees; and
for every degree which the ruinous Empire decayed, was the rising son of
perdition a degree advanced. Secondly, all the maine and evident degrees of the
Empires ruin fell in the compass of an age, and the knowledge and observation
of that age only, within which the times of this fall were comprehended, was
sufficient both to warn them which then lived, that that which was to come, was
then a coming, and to inform us who now live, that it is already come.

Now which were these maine and evident degrees of the Empires falling, and at
what time, I will tell you as soon as I have removed an usual mistake in this
business, which is to reckon the time of the Empires ruin, and so likewise
the Apostasy attending, only from the (...) or full height thereof; but this
is too much against reason, and not agreeable to the course we otherwise use
in the like: for as when we reckon the age of a man, we reckon not from the
time since he came to man's estate, but from his birth; so should we do here
for the times of the man of sin: I say not, we should begin to count his age
from his conception, for that we use not in other things; but from the time he
was first editus in lucem, when he first began to appear in the world: and so
likewise the fall of the Empire and the Apostasy, not from the time they were
consummate, but from the time they first evidently appeared; as therefore I
hold their opinion the best and most agreeable to truth, who begin the 70
years of the Jewish captivity in Babylon, not from the consummation thereof
under Zedekiah, when the City and Temple were utterly rased, for that is
impossible, there being not As infall^bly appears in that long wanting
Mathem^ticall Canon of Ptol^my, now of l^te bro^ght to light out of one of our
Libraries.
60 years in all between the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar, and the last of
Cyrus; but from the beginning thereof under Jehojakim, eighteen years before,
or at the most but from Jehojakim. So are these (...) of the Roman state to
begin when the Empire first began to fall, and not when it was utterly rooted
up. Take for another example, that computation of the time allotted to the
calamity of the Jews under Antiochus, which I the rather allege, because he
is commonly counted for a type of Antichrist: the beginning of that 2300
evenings and mornings, or six years, or somewhat more than a quarter, which
that calamity was to continue, from the beginning thereof, until the Temple
should again be cleansed, Dan. 8.13, 14. was not to be reckoned from the height
thereof, when the daily sacrifice should be taken away (for thence it is but
three years, 1 Mac. 1.54. etc. with c. 4.52.) but from the beginning of the
transgression which occasioned this desolation, and is described 1 Mac. 1.11
etc. so likewise the end of the kingdom of the Greeks, wherein this calamity
was to happen, is not to be counted only then when Aemilius the Consul had
quite finished the conquest of Macedon (for this points out only the height of
that calamity) but from the beginning of the last fatal Bellum. Macedo icum
secu^dum.
war which put an end to that kingdom; which was about some three years and
an half before, and jumps with the beginning of the transgres^ion of
desolation, as the finishing of the conquest does with the taking away of the
daily sacrifice.

But leaving this, let us return again and see which were these maine and
evident degrees of the Empires downfall, and when they befell; which I suppose
may not unfitly be sampled by those of the Babylonish captivity. As therefore
the Babylonish captivity had three steps or degrees, the first in the days of
Jehojakim, when Daniel went captive; the second under Jehoiachim, or Jechonias,
when Ezechiel went captive; the last under Zedekiah, when the Temple and City
were wholly razed and consumed: so (omitting the Political change under
Constantine) the chief and principal moments of the ruin of the Empire by
the sword (and by the sword the Beast had his deadly wound, Apoc. 13.14.) may
fitly be reduced unto three.

1 The first was presently after the death of Julian, the last of heathen
Emperors, about the year 365. ominously marked with that universal,
stupendous, and never but then sampled earthquake, Ammian. Marcel. lib 26. c.
31. Horrendi tremores per omnem orbis ambitum grassati sunt subito, quales nec
fabulae nec veridi ae nob^s antiquitates exp^nunt, etc. Hieron. in vita
Hilarionis.
whereby the waters of the Sea were rolled out of their channels, and left
ships hanging upon the tops of houses. From this time forwards all the nations
on every side seem as it were with one consent to have conspired the ruin of
the Empire. H^c tempore velut per universum Orbem Romanum canentibus buccinis,
excitae gent^s saevis^imae, ^^mites sibi proximos persuliabant, Gallias,
Rhetiasque, simul Alemanni po^ulabantur; Sarmatae, Pannonias, and Quadi, Picti,
Saxones, and Scoti, and Attacotti Britannos, aerumnis vexavere continuis:
Thracias deripiebant praedatorii Globi Gotthoru^, etc. Ammian. ibid. cap. 10.
Now that terrible and fatal storm of the nations of the North, Almaines,
Sarmatians, Quades, Picts, Scots, and Saxons, especially the Goths, began to
break in upon it almost without intermission, harrying, burning, wasting,
destroying the most part of the Provinces thereof almost for Hieron. epist. 3.
Ante annum 400. viginti and co amplius anni sunt quod inter Constantinopolin
and Alps Iulias quotidie Romarus sanguis effunditur. Scythiam, Thrac^am,
Macedoniam, Daciam, Dardaniam, Thessalonicam, Achaiam, Epiro^, Dalmatiam,
cunctasque Pannonias, Gothus, Sarmata, Quadus, Alanus, Hunni, Vandali,
Marcomanni vastant, rapiunt, Romanus orbis ruit* Quid pu^as nunc animi habere
Corinthios, Athenienses, Lacedaemonios, Arcadas, cunctamque Graeciam, quibus
imperant Barbari?
45 years together. And to mend that matter, the Goths son after their
coming were admitted as Inhabitants, and dispersed as free Denizens into the
bowels and heart of the Empire, advanced to be Commanders, and bore the
greatest sway in their Armies. Synesius Orat. ad Arcadium August. Quomodo enim
far possumus parts vir^les, in nostra Republica, alienorum and externorum
esse, and fortissimu^ Imperium concedere aliis bellicae gloriae principatum?
neque enim dubitandum est sore, ut illi aliquando armis instructi hominum
urbanorum se Dominos esse velint. Quod priusquam eveniat, revo^and^ sunt nobis
Romanorum anim^, and ita assuefaciendi, ut ipsi suo Mart vincere and possint
and velint* ne^ omnino societatem cum Barbaris incant, sed eos omnes
despiciant, omnique loco funditus pell^nt. Primum igitur Magistratu ejiciantur,
and procul a Curiae honoribus arceantur, quibus per suminum dedecus ea
obvenerunt, quae diu apud Romanos habita sunt, and reipsa fuerunt apud eos
honestissima: Nam and Deam Themidem, quae Senatui, and Bellon^m, quae Exercit^i
praesidet, obvelare se arbi^ror, cum cernant hominem penula scortea indutum
ducem esse chlamydatorium, and villosam penulam exuentem, togam sumere, and de
summa rerum cum Romano Magistratu consulere, prope ipsum consulem sedentem,
long post eum sedentibus iis, quibus honos ille jure optimo debebatur. Paulo
post. Apud nos Exercitus magni sunt, nostrisque servis Scythis sanguinae
conjuncti, qui nescio quo infoelici fato in Romanum Imperium irruerunt, illi
suos duces habent magnae authoritatis viros non solum apud eos ipsos, sed etiam
apud nos, quod malum nostra dedit socordia nobis. Paulo post de Theodosio. Ille
supplicantes ( scil. Gothos) erexit, and belli socios ascivit, and civitate
donavit, and omnium bonorum par^icipes fecit, and partem Romani agri iis
attribuit; At ^lli quod pater tuus mit^m se iis praebuit, nos in hun^ usque
diem derident, sed id prius fecerat Valens, Anno 374. -- ( Vide Socratem lib.
4. cap. 27.) -- De quo sic Paulus Diaconus Histor. Miscell. lib. 12. cap. 14.
Hunnos, Gothi, transito Danubio, fugientes, a Valente sine ulla faederis
pactione suscepti sunt, ^ribuens eis terras Thraciarum ad habitandum,
arbitratus praepar^ u^solatium ab eis habere contra omnes barbaros; hac pro re
Milites de coe^ero negligebat, and eos qui dudum contra hosts ^laboraverant,
Imperator despiciebat, etc. -- Hoc ergo ^uit initium, ut in illo tempore Romana
Re^publica calamitatibus subdere^ur. Barb^ri nam^ue c^m Thracias tenuissent,
licenter Romanorun va^tabant pro^inc^^s, etc.
By which fatal error the Empire received her bane, and the Romans were no
longer masters of their own strength, which they quickly and often repented;
but even that cost them dear, when they had indeed eyes to see it, but never
ability to amend it. This was the first degree of the Empires ruin.

2 The second was about the year 410, when Alaricus the Goth sacked Rome it
self, the Lady of the world, when, as Saint Jerome says, Capiebatur urbs quae
totum cepit orbem, imo fame periit antequam gladio, and vix pauci qui
caperentur inventi sunt. And from th^s very year the plurality of Kings
foretold of, began to come upon the stage; five or six new kingdoms presently
appeared within the Territories of the Empire, of the Goths, of the
Burgundians, and though somewhat later, of the Franks in Gallia, of the
Suevians and Alans, and of the Vandals in Spain, and, as Sigonius thinks, of
the Huns in Pannonia: certainly they could not be much later than this very
year. But this number of Kings we will leave till they be better increased, as
continually they did. And thus you see the second degree of the ruin of the
Empire.

3 The third was about the year 455, presently upon the death of the third
Valentinian, the last (as Sleidan well observed) of the Emperors of the West,
and consequently of the ancient Rome; then when Gensericus the Vandall took
the City now the second time, fired it, and spoiled it of all the goodly and
glorious ornaments which Alaricus had spared, amongst which were the golden and
silver vessels of the Temple of Jerusalem, Paulus Diaconus His. Misc. prout ex
c^dice Palatino edidit Ianus Gruterus. Quatuordecim interim dies secura and
libera direptione omnibus opibus suis and miraculis Roma vacua^^ est. In quibus
erant Ecclesiastica (...) tota ex auro and lapidibus pretiosis ornata, and vasa
Hebrai^a quae Titus V^spasiani filius post captivitatem Hierosolymitarum Romam
detulerat; multaque millia captivorum. -- Cum Regina Eudoxia quae Gensericum ad
hoc sacinus invitaverat, duabusque ejus filiabus, Carthaginem abducta sunt.
brought thither by Titus: All which, with an innumerable multitude of Roman
captives, he carried away with him. Now was the prediction which Varro reports
that Vect^us Valens the Augur made of 12 Vulturs to Romulus the founder, that
his city should continue 12 hundred years, fulfilled, and those years newly
expired; and, which is more to be heeded, now was the plurality of Kings lately
risen in the ancient Territory of the Empire, as Daniel and Saint John had
prophesied, increased unto the full number of ten, which, together with the
Provinces wherein they were seated, and the names of the Kings which reigned
the next year after the City was taken, are these which follow.

ANNO DOMINI 456.
Kingdoms of the Provinces. Names of the Kings reigning. Somewhat of their
changes. 1 Britans. In Britain. Vortimer. 2 Saxons. Hengist. 3 Franks. In
Gallia. Childericke. An. 526. this kingdom was subdued by the Franks, but to
fill up the number, that of the Ostrogoths became two by the coming of the
Longobards into Pannonia the same time. 4 Burgundians. Gundericke. 5
Wisigothes. In the South of Gallia between the Rhene, Loyr and the Sea, and
part of Spain. Theodorick. 6 Swevians and Alanes. Spain in Gallicia and
Portugal. Riciarius. 7 Vandals. In Afric, but first in Spain. Gensericus. 8
Almaines. Germany in Rhetia between the Rhene, etc. Sumanus. This kingdom
became one with a part of the kingdom of the Herules, 475. during their short
reign in Italy. 9 Ostrogothes. In Pannonia, where they subdued the Huns, and
not long after propagated their kingdom into Italy. Theodemir. The Longobards
succeeded the Ostrogoths first in Pannonia, upon the death of Theodorick of
Ve^ona An. 526. Then in Italy, called in by Narses discontented, soon after he
had destroyed the kingdom of the Goths. 10 Greeks. In the residue of the
Empire. Marcianus. Ancient Romes Empire finished, that of the Greeks is but on^
of the kingdoms wh^reinto (...) was divide^*

Thus was the Empire divided and shared An. 456. the year after Rome was
sacked by Gensericus, and the offspring of these Nations through many
alterations (partly by the inconstancy of humane things, unions and
dis-unions, partly by the further enlargement of the Christian faith) are the
body of the most of the Kingdoms and States of Christendom at this day. Three
of these Kings, says Daniel, should the Antichristian horn depresse and
displant, to advance himself, which three are those whose dominions extended
into Italy, and so stood in his light.

1 That of the Greeks, whose Emperor, Leo Isaurus, for the quarrel of
Images, he excommunicated, and revolted his subjects of Italy from their
allegiance,

2 That of the Longobards, successors of the Ostrogoths, whose kingdom he
caused, by the aid of the Franks, to be wholly ruinated, thereby to get the
Exarchate of Ravenna (which since their revolt from the Greeks they were
seized on) for a Patrimony to Saint Peter.

3 The last was the kingdom of the Franks it self, continued in the Empire of
Germany, whose Emperors from the day of Henry the fourth he excommunicated,
deposed and trampled under his feet, and never suffered them to live in rest,
till he made them not only quit their interest in election of Popes, and
investiture of Bishops, but that remainder of jurisdiction in Italy, wherewith,
together with the dignity of the Roman name, he had once infeoffed their
Predecessors,

These are the Kings, by displanting, or, as the Vulgar has it, by humbling of
whom the Pope by degrees got elbow-roome, and advanced himself to the height
of temporal Majesty, and absolute greatness, which made him so terrible in
the world.

This third blow therefore I suppose is to be counted the last of the ruin of
the Roman Empire, the Imperial power of ancient Rome (until the Pope some 345
years after revived the name) henceforth ceasing; for as for those who yet for
some twenty years after our date scuffled for that name, one of them deposing
another, they were indeed but shadows of Caesar's, and as it were struglings
with the pangs of death, until with Augustulus it gave up the ghost: yea it is
to be observed, that two of them, Avitus (the very next) and Glycerius, being
deposed from the Empire, were made Bishops, the one of Placentia or Piacenza,
the other of S^lona ^orna^des, quem vide c^m Paulo Dia^ono.
Portus, as a sign perhaps that the Emperor of Rome henceforth should be a
Bishop, and a Bishop the Emperor.

To conclude therefore with the application of our Apostles prediction, whether
the Christian Apostasy in worshipping new Daemon-gods began not with the first
of these degrees, notably increased with the second, and was established by the
last, I leave you to judge, when you shall have surveyed the monuments and
records of those times.

It is commonly and truly affirmed by our Ecclesiastical Vide Can. 9. Council
La^dicen. 3 an. ^64. (...).
Antiquaries* that before the year 360, there is no word to be found of the
invocation of Saints glorified, or worshipping their Relics, to which I add,
no not of any miracles done by them; but presently after that year, when our
first date of the Empires ruin began, search and you shall find: I spare to
name the Authors, not willing to discover the nakedness of the Fathers; but
whosoever reads them, will admire to see so truly verified what the Spirit foretold
should be (...), in the latter times* And to make an end, if any shall think
this speculation of times to be a needless curiosity, I desire him to
remember how our Savior reproved the Jews for neglect hereof, Mat. 16.3. O ye
Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the skies, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times? or as Saint Luke 12.56. How is it that ye do not
discern this time? they through neglecting the signs of the times, when
Christ came, received him not: how many through ignorance of these (...), when
the Apostasy has appeared, eschewed it not?

From which of these three beginnings of the Apostaticall times, or whether
from some other moment within or between them the Almighty will reckon that
his computation of these (...), which ended, will finish the days of the man
of sin, I curiously enquire not, but leave unto him who is Lord of times and
seasons: nor do I think that the Jews themselves could certainly tell from
which of their three captivities to begin that reckoning of 70 years, whose
end should bring their return from Babylon, until the event assured them
thereof.

AN APPENDIX.
I Should now presently come to speak of the fourth particular which I observed
in the verse, but because in this discourse of times, besides the great
Calendar of times which I so much spoke of, there was some mention of a lesser
Calendar, viz. of Daniels 70 weeks, give me leave to note some places of
Scripture which I suppose to have refe^ence thereto, for the better clearing
not only of our former discourse, but of some scruples that might trouble our
minds, when mention is made of an end then supposed near, though the world
has lasted so many hundred years, and no end thereof is yet come.

Know therefore, that these 70 weeks are a little provincial Calendar,
containi^g the time that the legal worship and Jewish state was to continue
from the re-building of the Sanctuary under Darius Nothus, until the final
destruction thereof, when the Calendar shall expire, within the space whereof
their Commonwealth and City should be restored, and 62 weeks after that, the
Messiah be slain for sin, and at the end of the whole 70 their City and Temple
again destroyed, and their Commonwealth utterly dissolved. To these weeks
therefore, whose computation so especially concerns the Jews, is reference
made in those Epistles which are written to the Christian Churches of that
Nation, whether being in Iewry, or abroad dispersed, in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia. Such is S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, both
Saint Peter's to the Dispersion, the Epistle of Saint James to the twelve
Tribes, and likewise the first Epistle of Saint John, which though the
salutation expresses not as in the former, yet may appear both because Peter,
James, and John, were all three Apostles of the circumcision, and from that
passage cap. 2.2. Christ Jesus is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but for the sins of the whole world; that is, not for the sins of
us only who are Jews, but for the sins of the Gentiles also. And does not
the name of general or catholicall Epistle given unto this, as well as those
of Saint James and Peter, imply thus much? for it cannot be thus called, as
written to all Christians indefinitely, and generally, since the contrary
plainly appears in the former; but because this as well as the rest was
written to those of the circumcision, who were not a people confined to any one
City or Region, but dispersed through every Nation, as we read in the Acts,
cap. 2.5. etc. that at the Feast of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost came down
upon the Apostles, there were sojourning at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of
every nation under heaven; Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and the dwellers of
Mesopotamia, Iudaea, and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, and strangers of Rome,
Jews and Proselites (Jews by race, and Jews by religion) etc. for we must
not mistake those there numbered to be Gentiles, but Israelites; both of the ten
Tribes captivated by Shalmaneser, and the other two; some of whom never
returned from Babylon, but lived still in Mesopotamia: but of these who
returned, great multitudes were dispersed afterward in Egypt, Lybia, and many
other Provinces before the time of our Saviors appearing in the flesh. So that
the Apostles of the Circumcision had their Province for largeness not much
inferior to that of the Gentiles.

But I come to note the places I spoke of: and first out of the forenamed
Epistle of Saint John, where from that prediction of our Savior in the Gospel,
that the arising of the false Prophets should be one of the near signs of the
nigh approaching end of the Jewish state: the Apostle thus referres to it cap.
2. ver. 18. Little children this is the (...), the last hour: and as you have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby
we know that it is the last time: here by the last time I suppose no other
thing to be meant but the near expiring of Daniels 70 weeks, and with it the
approaching end of the Jewish Commonwealth: and why might not this Epistle be
written in the last week, at the beginning whereof Jesus Ananiae began that
woeful cry, Woe unto Jerusalem, and the Temple, Joseph. l. 7. belli Judaici.
By (...), many Antichrists, Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 6. expounds his of John to
mean Simon Magiss.
are meant no other but false Prophets, Counter-prophets to the great Prophet,
pretending an unction and commission from heaven (as he had) to teach the world
some new revelation and doctrine: for the name Christ implies the unction of
prophecies, as well as the unction of a kingdom, and accordingly the name
Antichrist: and therefore the Syriack here turns it, false Christ's, that is,
such as should falsely pretend some extraordinary unction of prophecy like
unto him. And the coming of such as these, our Savior in Saint Matthews
Gospel, a Gospel for the Hebrews, makes one of the last signs ushering the
destruction of Jerusalem; and if the harmony of this prophecy in the three
Evangelists be well considered, there was no more to come but the compassing of
Jerusalem with armies. Well therefore might Saint John, when he saw so many
Antiprophets spring up, say, Hereby we know that it is the last time.

Again, because the desolation of the Jewish state and Temple would be a great
confirmation to Christian faith, therefore the believing Jews, whom nothing
could so much stagger as the standing glory of that Temple and Religion, are
encouraged by the neerenesse of that time of expectation, when so great a
confirmation of their faith of their Messiah already come should appear. Heb.
10.23.25. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, and so
much the more as you see the day approaching; namely, that day when you shall
be sufficiently confirmed: so I take the 35. and 37. verses of the same
Chapter, Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of reward,
for ye have need of patience. For yet a little while, he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry. What (he) is this, but even he of whom Daniel says,
The people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary, Dan. 9.26. For even as the destruction of Papal Rome would be a
great confirmation of the reformed Christian, who has forsaken the Communion
of that Religion, the continuance and supposed stability of the glory thereof
being that wherewith their Proctors endeavor most to shake and stager us: so
was the destruction of the Jewish state and Temple to be unto those Jews, who
had withdrawn themselves from that body and Religion whereof they had once
been, to embrace the new faith of the Messiah, preached by the Apostles. For
if at the end of the 70 weeks approaching, the legal Sanctuary were rased, and
the Jewish state dissolved, then would it be apparent indeed, that the Messiah
was already come and slain for sin; because this was infallibly to come to
pass within the compass, and before the expiration of those 70 weeks, or 490
years allotted for the last continuance of that City and Sanctuary, when it
should be restored after the captivity of Babylon.

Not without cause therefore does Saint Peter in his second Epistle say to the
Christian Jews, We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do well
that you give heed as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: yea and besides, because Jesus
also as well as Daniel had prophesied of the approaching desolation of that
City and Temple, mentioning all the signs that were to usher it; if the event
when time come should fall out accordingly, then must Jesus of Nazareth, who
foretold the foregoing signs thereof, be approved as a true Prophet, by whom
of a truth the Lord had spoken. Now for the last place I mean to allege: thus
must the last of Saint James also be expounded, because the fall and shock of
that state might shake the whole nation wheresoever dispersed, unless God had
spared the Christians, and made them alone happy in that woeful day, or rather
because Christ had foretold that one of the next forerunners thereof should be
a general persecution of Christians, as it happened under Nero. Therefore the
remembrance of the end of these 70 weeks so near the expiring, was a good
caution to all the Christian Jews to watch and pray: to this sense therefore I
take that of Peter, 1 Pet. 4.7. (...), the end of all things is at hand, be ye
sober therefore, and watch unto prayer; that is, the end of all your
Commonwealth, legal worship, Temple, and service, is now within a few years:
be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer, that ye may be more happy in the
day of vengeance and wrath upon our Nation. Neither need we wonder that this
desolation should be called the end, for our Savior himself taught them so to
speak in his prophecy concerning it, as may appear if we consider that
Antithesis in Saint Luke, cap. 21.9. Ye shall hear of wars, and commotions,
but the end is not by and by. Ver. 20. But when ye shall see Jerusalem
encompassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh.

And thus much I thought to add to my former discourse of latter times, lest
through ignorance thereof we might incline to that little better than
blasphemous conceit which An. 57.. 189. Ann. 72.. 26. Ann 82.. 3.
Baronius by name, and some other of Romes followers have taken up; viz. that
the Apostles in such like passages as we have noted, were mistaken as believing
that the end of the world should have been in their own time; God of purpose
so ordering it, to cause in them a greater measure of zeal, and contempt of
worldly things; an opinion I think not well beseeming a Christian.

1 For, first, whatsoever we imagine, the Apostles might here conceive in their
private opinions as men; yet we must know that the Holy Ghost, by whose
instinct they wrote the Scriptures, is the Spirit of truth, and therefore what
is there affirmed must be true, yea, though the Penman himself understood it
not.

2 Secondly, it was not possible the Apostles should expect the end of the
world to be in their own time, when they knew so many things were to come to
pass before it, as could not be fulfilled in a short time: As first, the
desolation of Jerusalem, and that not till the 70 weeks were expired. Mat. 24.
Mar. 13 Luke 21. Dan 9.24.
Secondly, then the Jews to be carried captives over all Nations, and
Jerusalem to be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles
be fulfilled, Luke 21.24. Thirdly, that in the mean time the Roman Empire must
be ruined, and that which hindered taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.7. Fourtly,
that after that was done, the man of sin should be revealed, and domineere his
time in the Temple and Church of God, Ibid. Fifthly, after all this, viz. when
the fullness of the Gentiles should come in, that Israel should be received
again to mercy, Romans 11.27. Sixthly, that Christ should reign in his Church
on earth so long, till he had put down all rule, all authority and power, and
subjected all his enemies under his feet, before he should subdue the last
enemy, which is death, and surrender his kingdom into the hands of his Father,
1 Cor. 15.24, 25, etc. Heb. 2.8. Seventhly, that the time should be so long,
that in the last days should come Scoffers, saying, Where is the promise of
his coming, 2 Pet. 3.4. How is it possible they should imagine the day of
Doom to be so near, when all these things must first come to pass, and not
one of them was yet fulfilled?

And how could the expectation of this day be made a ground of exhortation, and
a motive to watchfulness, and prayer, as though it could suddenly and unawares
surprise them which had so many wonderful alterations to foregoe it, and yet
none of them come to pass. I have spoken hitherto of what was revealed to all
the Apostles in general; but if we take Saint John apart from the rest, and
consider what was afterward revealed to him in Patmos, we shall find in his
Apocalypticall vision, besides other times more obscurely intimated, an
express prophecy of no less than a thousand years, which whatever it mean,
cannot be a small time, and must be fulfilled in this world, and not in the
world to come. Notwithstanding all this, I make no question but in the Apostles
times many of the believing Gentiles, mistaking the Apostles admonition to the
Jews of the end of their state approaching, thought the end of the whole world
and the day of the Lord had been also near, whom therefore Paul 2 These. 2.
beseeches to be better informed, because that day should not come until the
Apostasy came first, and that man of sin were revealed.

(...), Expressly, or, in express words.
NOw I come to the fourth part of this prophecy, the warrant or proof thereof.
The Spirit has foretold it (...), or in express words, in some place or other
of divine Writ. The Spirit told Peter Acts 10.19. Behold three men seek thee.
The Spirit said, Separate Barnabas and Saul, Acts 13.2. The Spirit forbade
Saint Paul to preach in Asia. The Spirit said that the Jews should bind Saint
Paul at Jerusalem, Acts 21.11. But in all these the Spirit spoke not (...): for
these things were no where written, and therefore what it spoke, it spoke
(...), only by secret Instinct or Inspiration: but that which the Spirit
speaks in the written Word, that it speaks (...), verbatim, expressly. If
therefore concerning this Apostasy of Christian believers, to be in these
latter times, the Scripture speaks (...), then is it to be found somewhere in
the Old Testament: for there alone the Spirit could be said to speak (...), or
verbatim, in the Apostles time. Having therefore so good a hint given us, let
us see if we can find where the Spirit speaks of this matter so expressly.

There are three maine things in this our Apostles prediction, whereof I find
the Spirit to have spoken (...), or, in express words, and that in the
prophecy of Daniel. 1 Of these last or latter times. 2 Of the new worship of
Demons in them. 3 Of a Prohibition of marriage to accompany them. As for the
first of these, the (...), Daniel, as you heard before, expressly names them,
(...), a time, times, and half a time; being those last times of this last
kingdom, wheren the Hornish Tyrant should make war with the Saints, and
prevail against them. For the second, a worship of new Demons or Demigods
with the profession of the name of Christ: you will perhaps think it strange if
I should show it (...): but if I do, it was the Appendix of hindering or
debarring marriage, mentioned in the next verse, which as a thread led me the
way to the end of the eleventh chapter of Daniel, where I found it, and in a
place too very suspicious, being taken I think by almost all the Ancients for a
prophecy of Antichrist; yea and so expounded by the greatest part of our own,
though with much variety of reading and application. But hear the words
themselves in the 36, 37, 38, 39 verses of the eleventh chapter of Daniel,
translated as I think (...), verbatim, without any wresting or straining the
Hebrew text: they are a description of the last or Roman Kingdom, with the
several states thereof; conquering nations, persecuting Christians, false
worshipping Christ.

The words are these, Daniel cap. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. verses.
36 Then a King shall do according to his will, and shall exalt and magnify
himself above every god, yea against the God of gods shall he speak
mavelous things, and shall prosper until the indignation be accomplished:
for the determined time shall be fulfilled. 36 Tunc faciet pro libitu suo Rex,
and extollet ac magnificabit seipsum supra omnem deum, etiam contra Deum deorum
loquetur stupenda, proficitque donec consummata fuerit indignatio: nam statutum
perficietur. (...) 37 Then he shall not regard the gods of his Ancestors, nor
shall he regard the desire of women, no nor any god: but he shall magnify
himself above all. 37 Tunc ad Deos ma jorum suorum non attendet, nec ad
desiderium mulierum, nec ad* ullum numen attendet: sed supra omne se
magnificabit. (...) 38 For to [or together with] God, in his seat, he shall
honor Mahuzzims: yea together with that God whom his Ancestors knew not,
shall he honor them with gold, and with silver, and with precious stones, and
with pleasant things. 38 Nam ad [vel juxta] Deum, Mahuzzimos, in sede ejus
honorabit: scilicet ad Deum, quem non agnoverunt majores ejus, honarabit eos
auro, and argento, and lapidibus pretiosis, and rebus desideratissimis. (...)
39 And he shall make the holds of the Mahuzzims withal (or jointly) to the
foreign god: whom acknowledging, he shall increase with honor, and shall
cause them to rule over many, and shall distribute the earth for a reward. 39
Et faciet munimenta Mauzzimorum una deo peregrino (seu exotico): quem
agnoscendo, multiplicabit honores, and dominari faciet eos in multos, terramque
partietur in mercedem. (...)

1 Now for the understanding of this Prophecy, we must take notice that the
Prophet Daniel at the beginning of these verses, leaves off the Greek kingdom
with Antiochus, of whom he was speaking before, and falls about the Roman: the
reason being, because after Antiochus, in whose time Macedonia (whence that
kingdom sprung, with all the rest of Greece) came under the Roman obedience;
the third kingdom comes no more into reckoning, Daniel himself calling the
time of Antiochus reign, the latter end of the Greek kingdom, cap. 8.23. and
as I take it, he intimates the same in this chapter in the verses immediately
foregoing: these we have now to deal withal: from thence forward therefore
the Roman succeeds in the account of the Great Calendar of time.

2 Under the name King we must understand the whole Roman State under what kind
of government soever: for the Hebrews use King for kingdom, and kingdom for
any Government, State or Policy in the world: for the Devil in the Gospel is
said to have shown Christ all the kingdoms of the world, Monarchies,
Aristocracies, Democracies, or what other kind soever.

3 Where it is said, this King shall exalt himself above every God, nothing is
thereby meant, but the generality, and the greatness of his conquests and
prevailings: and the reason of that phrase or manner of speech should seem to
be, because in the time of Paganism every City and Country was supposed to
have their proper and peculiar gods, which were deemed as their guardians and
protectors: whence in the Scripture, according to the language of that time, we
may observe a threefold use of speech. First, The Nations themselves are
expressed and employed under the names of their gods: The Israelites were called
the people of Jehovah, so are the Moabites the people of Chemosh, Numb. 21.29.
The Lord threatened, Deuteronomy. 4.28. and 28.64. Jer. 16.13* to scatter Israel among
the nations, from one end of the earth even to another, and that there they
should serve other gods day and night; gods the work of men's hands, woed and
stone, which neither they nor their fathers had known: that is, they should
serve them, not Religiously but Politically, insomuch as they were to become
slaves and vassals to So Targum, On^kel^s and Jonathan both render it expressly
Deuteronomy: 28.36.64. allo c. 4.28. n^cn^n Targum Jonathan, Ier. 16.13. 1 Samuel 26.19.
that is in all the places forecited.
Idolatrous nations; even such Idolaters as neither they nor their fathers had
ever heard of. For as for a religious service of Idols, the Jews were never so
free as in the captivity, as we see by experience at this day: but with the
service of bondage they may be said Politically to have been the vassals of
Idols, as being in bondage to the servants of other gods. As a Christian taken
by the Turks may in the like sense be said to come in bondage, and be a slave
to Mahomet: for a slave to the servants is in a sense servant to their masters.
Let it also be considered whether that of David, 1 Samuel 26.19. be not to be
expounded according to this notion, They have driven me out this day from
abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, go serve other gods; that is,
banished me into a nation of another Religion. Secondly, The exploits of the
nation are said to be done by their gods, even as we by like privilege of
speech ascribe unto our Kings what is done by the people under them: thus 2 Chronicles 28.23. the gods of Damascus are said to have smote Ahaz; he sacrificed to
the gods of Damascus that smote him: and he said, Because the gods of Syria
help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. Jer.
51.44. it is said of the dominion of Babylon, that the nations flowed together
unto Bell, and that he had swallowed up their wealth, which the Lord threatened
there to bring forth again out of his mouth. Thirdly, and that most frequently
of all others, What is attempted against the nation, is said to be attempted
against their gods: Even as Generals bear the name not only of the exploits,
but also of the disadvantages of the armies led by them: so here the gods are
said to receive the affronts, defeatures, and discomfitures given to the people
under their patronage. 2 Samuel 7.23. God is said to have redeemed Israel from
Egypt, from the nations and their gods. See Tremel. who turns it more to our
purpose
Rabshakeh vaunts in his masters name, 2 Kings 28.33. Has any of the gods of
the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the King of Assyria?
where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim?
Esaias 46.2. prophecieth thus of the taking of Babylon by Cyrus; Bell boweth
down, Nebo stoopeth, they could not deliver the burden, but they themselves
are gone into captivity. In the like strain prophecieth Jeremy, cap. 50.2.
Babylon is taken, Bell is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces, her Idols
are confounded. And again, Jer. 51.44. I will punish Bell in Babylon, and I will
bring out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up, and the nations shall
not flow together any more unto him: yea the wall of Babylon shall fall. The
same Prophet says of Moabs captivity, cap. 48.7. Thou shall be taken, and
Chemosh shall go into captivity with his Priests and his Princes together. Moa^
likewise in his affronts and derision of Israel is said to have magnified
himself against the Lord: according to which manner of speech the success and
prevailing of the Roman in the advancing his dominion, and subduing every
nation under him, is here expressed by his exalting and magnifying himself
above every God. This I suppose to be the ground of that manner of speech;
though if any had rather, as others do, take gods here for Kings and
Potentates of the earth, it will I confess come all to one purpose.

4 By the gods of their Ancestors, whom the Roman State should at length
cashiere and cast off, are meant all the Pagan Deities, and heathen Gods, which
were worshipped in that Empire.

5 By desire of women, which the Roman of that time should not regard, as he
was wont, is meant the desire of wiving, or desire of having women for the
society of life; conjugall affection which is expressed Genesis 2.24. to be such a
desire for which a man should leave father and mother and cleave to his wife,
and they shall be both one flesh: and it might have been in this place, desire
of wives, as well as desire of women; for there is no other word used in the
Original for wives above once or twice in the whole Scripture, but this (...)
which is here turned women. With the like use of the word desire, the Spouse in
the Canticles, cap. 7.10. expresses her wel-beloved to be her husband: I am my
wel-beloveds (says she) and his desire is toward me; that is, he is my
husband: for so twice before she expressed her self, cap. 2.16. My beloved is
mine; and I am his. Cap. 6.3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. So
Ezekiel. 24.16. the Lord threatening to take away Ezekiels wife, says, Behold,
(...)
I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes; and afterward ver. 18. it
follows, and at even my wife died. Yea, the Roman language it self is not
unacquainted with this speech: Cicero ad uxorem, En mea lux, meum desiderium.
This desire of women and married life, the Roman should discountenance, when he
shook off the gods of his Ancestors.

6* By the strange and foreign God whom the Roman should at length
acknowledge, is meant See the oration o^ Licin^us to his Soldiers, Eusebius. de
v^ta Constant. lib. 2. c. 5.
Christ; for though to the Jew every strange and foreign god were a false god,
yet to the Gentiles, who worshipped none but Idols, the foreign god was the
True: therefore the Philosophers at Athens, when Saint Paul preached Christ
unto them, said, he preaches Sir. (...) The Altar ^e there speaks of in his
defense was inscribed (...), which God (says he) I preach unto you.
(...), a foreign god. The want of which consideration has much obscured
this Prophecy, this foreign god being still supposed to be a false god; when
to those who worshipped all kinds of false gods, as the Ro^a cum pene omnibus
dominaretur gentibus, omnium gentium serviebat errorib^s, and magnam sibi
videbatur assumpsisse Religionem, quia nullam respuebat falsitatem, Leo mag. in
Ser. 1. in not. Apo. Pet. and Paul Hic confutandi Daemonumcultus, hic omnium
sacrificio^um impietas destruenda, ubi diligentisima superstitione habeatur
collectu^ quicquid usquam fuerat variis erroribus instructu^. Id. ib.
Roman did, a foreign god, whom their fathers knew not, must needs be the
True.

7 Where it is said, With this foreign god he shall honor Mahuzzims: these
Mahuzzim, or Mauzzims, are these Daimons we seek for, whom the Roman should
worship with Christ, whom he should embrace: For Mahuzzims are Protectores dii,
such as Saints and Angels are supposed to be, as I shall show by and by; where
though I shall be new for the particular, yet for the general I shall agree
well enough with the Fathers, who constantly thought that under this Mahuzzim
was some Idol meant which Antichrist should worship, and many of our times have
taken it for the Mass.

But I must first say something of the translation of this verse, and then will
come to the signification of this word Mahuzzims.

For the first, whereas the preposition (...) in (...) is usually neglected,
and the words (...), God and Mahuzzim construed together as one thing, viz. God
Mahuzzim, or, as some, the God of forces; I express the Preposition Lamed, and
construe God and Mahuzzim apart, as here, viz. to, or, together with God he
shall honor Mahuzzims, etc. Ad, vel juxta Deum, Mahuzzimos honorabit. For the
preposition (...) is made of (...) and signifies the same with it, viz.
addition of, or joining of things, ad, juxta, apud, pro (...) in, pro (...) pro
(...) contra, super, to, together, and besides with, as See this use of (...)
Ezra 1.5. Vulg. and Angl. with Lev. 16.21. Vulg. and LXX. Number. 9.15. LXX. Ibid.
cap. 33.2. LXX. cap. 32.33 LXX. Vulg. cum. Angl.
Lev. 18.18. Thou shall not take a wife to her sister, (...), that is, together
with her sister^ By this means the controversy between Junius and Graserus
is taken away: for Junius, as should seem, seeing no reason why the
Preposition (...) should be neglected, and that by so doing the Verb (...) was
made irregularly and against use to govern a Dative case, he expresses the
Preposition by Quod ad, or Quod attinet ad, (id est) as concerning. But the
words God and Mahuzzim he separateth not, but turns them as in statu
constructo, viz. the god of might and of forces; understanding thereby the true
and Almighty God himself. Against which Graserus excepts, first, that to
render the Preposition (...), ad, as concerning, savours of a Latinisme rather
than of an Hebraisme. Secondly, that he does as good as strike out the
distinctive accent Athnach () which is a Colon; in as much as he makes the
sentence being a full member to be imperfect and defective, and yet would seem
to stand in awe of that smaller distinction Zakeph-katon (:) over the word
Mahuzzim, which yet stands there, as viz. ver. 42 of this cha. over (...) and
ver. 3. of the next chapter over (...) where it is impossible it should
distinguish, and so elsewhere.
elsewere it does, but for a nota been. Thirdly, that to expound god Mahuzzim
to be the true God, against the consent not only of the Jews who ever take it
for some Idol or other, but of the ancient Christian writers who understand by
it some Idol of Antichrist, yea some, the Devil himself, and many of our own
who take it for the Idol of the Mass, and some otherwise, yet for some
Idol-deity. To expound this of the true and mighty God without example in
Scripture Graserus thinks not tolerable; wherefore himself had rather yield
the construction of the verb (...) to be irregular: Junius himself having
admitted it in the next member of the verse, and to suppose it to be a
mystical Solecisme, the Spirit intending by the Anomaly or incongruity of the
Syntax to signify an Anomaly or incongruity of Religion: but their
inconveniences on both sides, as far as I can see, are wholly accorded by
that translation we have given. Whereof let the Reader judge.

I come now to unfold the signification of the word Mahuzzim; a word which most
translations retain, the Septuagint calling it (...); Saint Jerome and the
Vulgar Latin, Maozim; the Geneva and others, Mahuzzim: this (...) Mahuzzim I
say is in the Plural number, the singular (...) Mahoz, which in the abstract
signifies sometimes strength, sometimes a Fortress, or Bulwark; of (...)
robustus fuit: but the Hebrews use Abstracts for Concretes: examples are many
in the Old Testament, as justitia pro justis; captivity for captives, etc. In
the New Testament, Principalities, Powers, and Dominions, for Princes,
Potentates, and Dominators; so Mahoz, strength, or a Fortress, for him that
strengthens or fortifies, that is a Protector, Defender, Guardian, and Helper.
Wherefore the Septuagint five times in the Psalms render the word (...) Mahoz,
(...), and the Vulgar Latin as often Protector: the places are these, Psalm.
27.1. The Lord is (...) the protector of my life, of whom should I be afraid?
Psalm. 28.8. The Lord is their strength, and he is (...) Mahoz Jeshuoth, the
Mahoz of salvation of his anointed: Some render it not of, but is his
Anointed or Messiah, that is, Messiah is Mahoz Ieshueth.
where the Septuagint, (...), and the Vulgar, Protector salvationum. Psalm.
31.1. Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily, be thou unto me (...)
for a Rock Mahoz: Septuagint, (...); Vulg. in Deum Protectorem: again verse 5.
Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me. (...) (...) Thou art
my Protector; Septuagint, (...); the Vulgar, Protector. Psalm. 37.39. The
salvation of the righteous is from the Lord, he is (...) Mahuzzam, their Mahoz
in the time of trouble: where the Septuagint and the Vulgar render as before
(...) and Protector. How think you now, are not Saints and Angels worshipped as
Mahuzzims? True Christians have with David, in the Psalm before quoted, one
Mahoz, Jehovah Mahoz, that is, Christ; but Apostate Christians have their many
Mahuzzims. Oh, would they worshipped only (...) Mahoz of salvations, as you
heard David even now call him, Psalm. 28. You may if you please compare with
these places of the Psalms that in the first verse of this eleventh of Daniel,
where the Angel said he stood in the first year of Darius the Mede to confirm
and be a Mahoz to him, (...) which we translate, to strengthen him; by which we
may see how fitly this name may be applied to Angels and so to Saints, supposed
in helping, protecting, assisting, to be like them. Thus you see the concrete
sense of Mahoz for Helper, Protector, and Defender, is not new. But what if we
take the word passively, force and strength, for forts and strong ones; will
not then the valiant Martyrs and Champions of the faith well bear the name of
Mahuzzims? and these are they whom at the first Christians worshipped only in
this sort, as an honor peculiarly due unto their sufferings. Moreover, that
you may not think this word and the notion thereof unproper to be given unto a
Deity, observe that the true God is called a Rock (...) seven times Deuteronomy. 32.
which the Vulgar turns as often Deus; yea in the same place false gods are
termed also (...) Rocks, ver. 31. Their Rock, i. e. the Gentiles Rock is not
as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being Judges: and ver. 37. Where are
their gods (that is, Baalim) their Rock in whom they trusted? which did eat the
fat of their sacrifices, etc. The like you shall find in Hannahs song, and
other places of Scripture. See now the parity: The True God, or Christ himself
is often by David called Mahoz, why may not then False gods, or Plurality of
Christ's be called Mahuzzim? Rock and Fortress are not words of so great
difference.

Thus having cleared the chiefest difficulties in the Text, and made the way
smooth, let us read over the words again, and apply the interpretation unto
them.

DAN. II.
See the notice hereof at that time taken by the Jews 1 Mac. 8 a principio
adver. 13. inclusive.
Verse 36. Then a King shall do according to his will, and shall exalt or
magnify himself above every god. 36 That is, toward the end of the reign of
Antiochus Epiphanes the Roman shall prevail, and set up the Fourth Kingdom,
making himself master of the kingdom of Macedon, and advancing himself from
this time forward by continual conquests, shall Lord it over every King and
Nation. Yea against the God of gods shall he speak mavelous things, and
shall prosper, until the indignation be accomplished; for the determined time
shall be fulfilled. Yea Christ the God of gods, and King of the kings of the
earth, who in those times should appear in the world, the Roman shall mock,
blaspheme, and crucify, and by most bloody edicts shall persecute and massacre
his servants the Christians, and yet shall prosper in his Empire, until these
outrageous times be ended, that is, until the days of Constantine; for the
time God has appointed must be fulfilled. Verse 37. Then he shall not regard
the gods of his Ancestors, nor shall he regard the desire of women, no nor any
God: but he shall magnify himself above all. 37 When that appointed time for
the date of his prosperity comes to his period, and the time of his ruin and
change of his dominion draws near, then this Roman state shall cashiere and
forsake the Idols and False gods, whom their Fathers worshipped, and shall
acknowledge Christ a God whom their fathers knew not: at that time the desire
of women and married life shall be discountenanced, and shall not be of that
account and regard it had been; but contrary to the long continued custom of
the Romans, single life shall be honored and privileged above it; yea and
soon after the Roman shall bear himself so, as if he regarded not any God;
and with Antichristian pride shall magnify himself over all. Verse 38 For to
(or together with) God in his seat, he shall honor Mahuzzims: yea together with
that God, whom his Ancestors knew not, shall he honor them with gold, and with
silver, and with precious stones, and with pleasant things. 38 That is,
together with the Christian God, who is a jealous God, and to be worshipped
alone, he shall worship Mahuzzims, even in his seat and Temple; even with a
foreign God, whom his Ancestors acknowledged not, shall he honor Mahuzzims,
with gold and silver, and with precious stones, and with pleasant things. Verse
39. And he shall make the holds of the Mahuzzims withal (or jointly) to the
foreign god: whom acknowledging, he shall increase with honor, and shall
cause them to rule over many, and shall distribute the earth for a reward. 39
And though the Christian God, whom he shall profess to acknowledge and
worship, can endure no compeers, yet shall he consecrate his Temples and
Monasteries (Ecclesiastical holds) jointly to the Christian God and to his
Mahuzzims, Deo and Sanctis; yea he shall distribute the earth among Mahuzzims,
so that beside several patrimonies which in every Country he shall allot
them, he shall share whole Kingdoms and Provinces among them. Saint George
shall have England; Saint Andrew shall have Scotland; St. Denis, France; St.
James, Spain; S. Mark, Venice; etc. and bear rule as Presidents and Patrons
of their several Countries.

Thus we see how (...), how expressly the Spirit foretold the Roman Empire,
having rejected the multitudes of gods and Demons worshipped by their
Ancestors, and betaken themselves to that One and Only True God which their
Fathers knew not, should nevertheless depart from this their Faith, and revive
again their old Theology of Demons by a new Superinduction of Mahuzzims.

Now although this Prophecy thus applied, be so evident, that the only
pointing at the event were able almost to convince the Reader, yet that we may
the more yet admire the truth of God in the contemplation of an even so
suitable, I will add these following observations concerning it.

1 First, that agreeably with the date of the Holy Ghost, the Roman Historians
themselves have observed and marked out this time of their prevailing against
Macedonia (which I said was accomplished toward the end of the reign of
Antiochus Epiphanes) for the beginning of the Dominion over the world. Lucius
Florus lib. ^ cap. 7. Cedente Hannibale praemium victoriae Africa ^uit* and
secut^s Africam t^rrarum orbis; post Carthaginem vinci neminem puduit; secutae
sunt statim Africam, Gentes; Macedonia, Graecia, Syria, caeteraque omnia quodam
quasi aestu, and torrente fortunae: sed primi omnium Macedones, affectator
quondam imperii populus. In Velleius Paterculus lib. 1. cap. 6. is an
Annotation out of one Aemilius Sura, in these words. Aemilius Sura de annis
populi Romani. Assyrii, Principes omnium Gentium, rerum potiti sunt, dei^de
Medi, postea Persae, deinde Macedones, exinde duobus regibus, Philippo and
Antiocho, qui a Macedonibus oriundi erant, haud multo post Carthaginem
subactam, devictis, summa Imperii ad Populum Romanum pervenit. Inter hoc tempus
and initium Nini Regis Assyriorum, qui Princeps rerum potitus, intersunt anni
mill nongenti quinque. Here the time of the Romans prevailing against the
Macedonian King is made the beginning of their Empire; even as Daniel also
begins the Roman account from thence; but with this difference, that whereas
Aemilius Sura seems to reckon from the beginning of these prevailings in the
victories against Philip, Daniel counts from the victory against Perseus his
son; when that conquest was now perfected, and Macedonia brought into a
Province; which happened (as I have already said) the same year that Antiochus
Epiphanes profaned the Temple of Jerusalem.

2 That no Kingdom in the world that we know of, could more literally be said
in their conquests to exalt and magnify themselves above every God, than the
Roman; in respect of a solemn custom they used in their wars, by a certain
charm to call out the gods of any City when they besieged it. The form whereof
Macrob. gives us, l. 3. Saturn. c. 8. as he found it in Sammon. Serenus his
fifth book of hidden secrets, namely this. -- If it be a god, if it be a
goddess that has the City of Carthage in protection. -- And thou especially,
whosoever thou art, the Patron of this City and people, I pray and beseech, and
with your leave require you to abandon the people and City of Carthage, to
forsake the places, Temples, Ceremonies, and Enclosures of their City; to go
away from them, and to strike fear, terror, and astonishment into that people
and City; and having left it, to come to Rome to me and mine; and that our
Cities, Places, Temples, Ceremonies be more acceptable, and better liked of
you; that you would take the charge of me, of the people of Rome, and of my
soldiers, ^o as we may know and understand it: If you do so, I vow to build
you Temples, and to appoint solemn sports for you.

3 That Constantine, the first Emperor under whom that State forsook the gods
of their forefathers, and became Christian, together with this alteration,
abrogated those ancient Roman laws, Julia and Papia, wherein the desire of
women and married life was so much privileged and encouraged, and single and
unmarried life disadvantaged. Hear it in the words of Zozoman lib. 1. cap. 9.
Hist. Ecclesiast. There was (says he) an ancient law among the Romans,
forbidding those who after five and twenty years old were unmarried, to enjoy
the like privileges with married ones; and besides many other things, that
they should have no benefits by Testaments and Legacies, unless they were next
of kindred, and those who had no children to have half their goods
confiscated: therefore the Emperor seeing those, who for Gods sake were
addicted to chastity and virginity, to be for this cause in the worst
condition, he accounted it a folly for men to go about to increase their kind
with such carfulness and diligence; when as Nature, according to divine
moderation, continually receives as well diminution, as increase. Therefore he
published a law to the people, that both those who lived a single life, and
those who had no children, should enjoy the like privileges with others: yea
he enacted that those who lived in chastity and virginity, should be
privileged above them, enabling both sexes, though under years, to make
Testaments, contrary to the accustomed policy of the Romans. This alteration of
the Roman law by Constantine, Eusebius also witnesses lib. 4. cap. 26. de vita
Constantini: and again, cap. 28. where he says, that above all he honored
most those that had consecrated their lives to divine Philosophy; he means a
monastical life; and therefore he almost adored the most holy company of
perpetual Virgins. That which the fathers had thus enacted, the sons also
seconded; and some of the following Emperors by new edicts, till there was no
Relic left of those ancient privileges, wherewith married men had been
respected; which Procopius says (how rightly I examine not) was the cause of
the ruin of that Empire, which was so much enfeebled, and weakened through
neglect of the procreation of children, that it was not able to match the
numerous armies of barbarous nations. This was the first step of dis-regarding
marriage, and the desire of wiving; which was not an absolute prohibition, but
discouraging. But no sooner had the Roman Bishop, and his Clergy got the power
into their hands, but it grew to an absolute prohibition; not for Monks only,
but for the whole Clergy: which was the highest dis-respect that could be to
that which God had made honorable among all men.

4 Lastly, it is a thing not to be passed by without admiration, that the
Fathers and others, at the beginning of Saint-worship, by I know not what
fatal in^^inct, used to call Saints and their Relics, Towers, Walls,
Bulwarks, and Fortresses, that is, (...) Mahuzzim, in the prime and native
signification. Basil in his Oration upon the forty Martyrs, whose Relics were
dispersed over all the Countries thereabouts, speaks in this manner: These are
those who having taken possession of our Country, as certain conjoined Towers,
(...), secure it from the incursions of Enemies. The same Basil concludes his
Oration upon Mamas a Martyr in this manner; that God who has gathered us
together in this place, and disposes of all that is to come, keep us safe
from hurt, and secure us from the ravening Wolf, and preserve steadfast this
Church of Caesarea, being guarded with a mighty Tower of Martyrs, (...).
Chrysostom in Hom. 32. upon the Epistle to the Romans, speaking of the
Relics of Saint Peter and Paul; This corpse (says he) meaning of Saint Paul,
fortifies this City of Rome more strongly than any Tower, or ten thousand
rampires, as also does the corpse of Peter, (...), etc. Are not these strong
Mahuzzims?

The like whereunto is that of Venantius Fortunatus a Christian Poet, not above
an age younger than Chrysostom.

A facie hostili duo propupnacula praesunt,
Quos fidei turres urbs caput orbis habet.
The Faith's two Towers in Lady Rome do lie,
Two Bulwarks strong against the Einmy.
At the same thing aims Gregory lib. 7. Ep. 33. ad Rusticanam Patriciam,
entreating her to come to Rome: Si gladios Itali^ and bella formidetis, if you
fear the swords (says he) and wars of Italy, you ought attentively to
consider, how great the protection of blessed Peter, the Prince of Apostles, is
in this City, wherein without any great number of people, without the aid of
soldiers, we have been so so many years in the midst of ^words, by Gods
providence safely preserved from all hurt.

But to return again to Saint Chrysostom, who in his Homily upon the
Egyptian Martyrs, Hom. 70. ad populum Antiochenum, speaks after this manner:
^hese Saints bodies says he) fortify (...) our City more strongly, than an
impregnable wall of Adamant; and as certain high rocks hanging on every side
repel not only the assaults of those enemies, which are sensible and seen
with the eye; but also overthrow and defeat the ambuscadoes of invisible
fiends, and all the stratagems of the Devil. Here you see are Mahuzzims too.

So long before, in the days of Constantine, James Bishop of Nisibis, renowned
for holiness, was according to order given by Constantine in his life time,
says Gennadius, buried within the wall of that City, being a Frontire of the
Empire, ob Custodiam, viz. Civitatis. Gennad. de vir. illustr. cap. 6.

Evagrius lib. 1. c. 13. tells us that the Antiochians offered^ up a
supplication to the Emperor Leo the first, about the year 460. for the
keeping of the corpse of holy Simeon, surnamed Stylita, or the Pillarist, in
this form: Because our City has no wall (for it had been domolished in a
Fury) therefore we brought hither this most holy body, that it might be to us
(...), a Wall and a Fortress, which would be in Hebrew Language (...) Leshur
vlemahoz.

Saint Hilary also will tell us, that neither the guards of Saints, nor
Angelorum munitiones, the Bulwarks of Angels, are wanting to those who are
willing to stand: here Angels are Mahuzzims, as Saints were in the former.

The Greeks at this day, in their Preces horariae, thus invocate the blessed
Virgin: O thou Virgin mother of God, thou impregnable wall, thou Fortress of
salvation, (...) Psalm. 28. we call upon thee, that thou would frustrate the
purpose of our enemies, and be a fence to this City: thus they go on, calling
her the hope, safeguard and Sanctuary of Christians: here is (...) Mahoz
Mahuzzim, a strong Mahoz indeed.

To conclude, the titles of Protectors, Guardians, and defenders, which is the
signification of Mahuzzim, when a person is meant, as they are more frequent,
so are they no less ancient: Greg. Nyssen. in his third oration of the forty
Martyrs, calls them (...), Guarders and Protectors.

Eucherius his Saint Gervase, the perpetual Propugnator, Protector of the
faithful. Theodoret. lib. 8. de curandis Graecorum affectionibus, calls the
holy Martyrs Guardians of Cities, Lieutenants of places, Captains of men,
Princes, Champions, and Guardians, by whom disasters are turned from us, and
those which come from Devils debarred and driven away. I might here add
something also concerning Images, whose worship is another part of the doctrine
of Demons, and show how well the name Mahuzzim would befit them, which the
Iconomaci^all Council of Constantinople calls so unluckily (...), But
Constantinus Morossa the Greek Histo^ian inveighing against Leo ^saurus for
demolishing images, calls them, turres atque munit^ones religios^cultus.
the Fortresses, or Mahuzzim of the Devil; and perhaps the nine and thirtieth
verse in the fore-alledged Prophecy might be yet more literally translated, if
the word (...) facere were taken in a religious sense: And he shall do unto,
or offer unto the holds of Mahuzzim, together with foreign gods; etc. that
is, he shall do religious service to the Images of Saints, together with
Christ. I might also put you in mind of the term munimentum, given to the
Cross, and that so usual Latin phrase of Munire signo Crucis, to fortify,
that is, to sign with the sign of the Cross; but I will not engage my self
too far in these Grammatical speculations.

As for the following verses of this Prophecy, if any desire to know it, they
may, as I think, be interpreted and applied thus.

Ver. 40. And at the time of the end, that is, in the Romans (...), or latter
times, shall the King of the South (that is, the Saracen) push at him, and the
King of the North (the Turk) shall come against him, like a whirlewind, with
charets, and horsemen, and with many ships, and he shall enter into the
Countries, and shall overflow and pass over.

Ver. 41. He shall enter also into the glorious Land (Palestina) and many shall
be overthrown, but these shall escape out of his hands, Edom and Moab, and the
chief of the children of Ammon: that is, the Inhabitants of Arabia Petraea,
which were never yet Provincialls of the Turkish Empire; yea with some of them
he is feign to be at Pension for the safer passage of his Caravans.

Ver. 42. He (the Turk) shall stretch forth his hands also upon the Countries,
of those parts, and the land of Egypt (though it should hold out long under the
Mamalukes, even till the year 1517) shall not escape.

Ver. 43. But he shall have power over the treasures of gold, silver, and all
the precious things of Egypt; and the Libyans and the Cushites, that is, the
neighboring nations, whether of Afric, or Libya, as in those of Algiers,
etc. or of the Arabians in Scripture called Cushim shall be at his steps, that
is, at his devotion. That which remains as I suppose is not yet fulfilled, and
therefore I leave it: Time will make it manifest.

PART II.
Verse. 2. Through the hypocrysie or faining of liars, (...): of those who have
their consciences seared, (...).

Verse. 3. Of those who forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats,
(...); which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them that
believe, and know the truth, (...).


OF the first part of this Prophecy, being a description of the Condition of
that solemn defection which was to come, I have spoken hitherto. I come now to
the second part of the division, the quality of the persons, and the means
whereby it was to enter, and to be advanced, which is set forth in the verses
now read; which though you may find by others otherwise translated, yet I hope
the translation which I have propounded, if the judicious Reader please to
examine it, will approve it self not only not to be an enforced one, but such
as salves that incongruity of construction, which the other could not avoid,
for it is usually translated intransitively, with reference to the persons
expressed in the former verse, viz. that they should speak lies in hypocrisy,
having their conscience scared with an hot iron, and forbidding marriage, and
commanding to abstain from meats; so as that which in the former verse, is
named Doctrines of Devils, should only mean that in general terms, which
in these verses is particularly instanced, to be doctrines of prohibiting
marriages, and abstaining from meats, as two branches of that devilish
doctrine; for so Calvin, Melancton, and some others seem to expound it. But
why this interpretation should not be the most likely: my first reason is:

First, because it makes Saint Paul, who speaks of that great Apostasy of
Christians, which was to be in the Later Times, to instance only in the
smaller; and if I may so say, almost circumstantiall errors; and to omit this
maine and principal, which the Scripture elsewhere tells us, should be
Idolatry, or spiritual fornication; who can believe that we could so balk the
substance, and name that only, which in comparison is but an Appendix thereto.

Secondly, He prophesies here in express words, of such things as were to
come, (...), in the Later Times; but errors about marriage and meats, were no
novelty in the Apostles own times, as the diligent Reader may easily collect
out of their Epistles; which makes it improbable that he would specify the
Apostasy of the later times in these alone.

Thirdly, But my last reason whereunto I think I may trust, is, that the
Syntax of the words in the Greek is incapable of such an intransitive
construction, and consequently of the sense depending thereon; for the persons
intimated in the former verse, are expressed in casu recto, (...); but the
persons here intended, we find in the genitive; (...), which I cannot see how
they can agree with (...), after the manner of intransitive construction,
without breach of grammatical congruity, not elsewhere sampled in our Apostles
Epistles; indeed they would agree with (...), but that would be a harsh sense
every way; for either we must say as some do, Calvin, Beza.
that by devils are meant devilish men, or men led by the devil, which is an
hard signification; or else it would be a stranger sense, and I think not
over-pliable to the usual exposition, to say that devils should lie, have
seared consciences, and forbid marriages, or meats: So that Beza, with others;
had rather confess a breach of Syntax, than incur the inconvenience of such
a forced sense. Major est habita (says he) sententia, quam constructionis
ratio; the Apostle heeded more the matter than he did the Grammar. But what
needs this, so long as there is a better way to salve it? namely, to conster
the words transitively, making all these genitive cases to be governed of
(...), as, (...), by, or through the faining of liars; (...), through the
faining of those who had their consciences seared; and so forward: which
construction is observed and followed by Andreas Hiperius, one of our reformed
Writers, who translates it, per simulationem falsiloquorum, etc. and expounds
it, de modo qu^ fallent spiritus impostorum, fallent per simulationem, seu
hypocrisin falsiloquorum, etc. and I believe that So Cafiellio seem^s to
understand it, translating it per ^^mulationem hominum falsiloquorum.
many others have so taken it; for our late translations are indifferent to be
taken either way: howsoever it be, I see no way but this, to keep the Syntax
true and even, and wholly to avoid the forementioned inconveniences: which as
it is easy and obvious, and not strained, so I hope to let you see the event
to have been most answerable thereunto: That this was the manner, and this the
means, this the quality of the persons, whereby the doctrine of Demons was
first brought in, advanced and maintained in the Church, viz. through the
hypocrisy, faining craft, or counterfeiting of those who told lies, of those
who had their consciences seared, etc.

As for the use of the Preposition ((...)) to signify causam instrumentalem,
or modum actionis, he that is not a stranger in the Scripture, knows to be
most frequent, the Greek text borrowing it from the use of the Hebrew
Preposition (...) which the Hebrews call (...) as when it signifies In, (...)
(1) subjecti. But two or three examples will not do amiss: Mat. 5.13. If the
salt has lost its savor, wherewithal shall it be salted? (...)? Acts 17.31.
Because God has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, (...), by the man whom he has ordained. 2 Pet. 3.1. I stir
up your pure minds, (...), by way of remembrance. Tit. 1.9. That he may be
able, (...), Vide etiam Ephesians. 4.14.
by sound doctrine, to exhort and convince the gainsayers, and most naturally
to the business we have in hand. 2 These. 2.9, 10. Of the man of sin, whose
coming (says the Apostle) is after the working of Satan, (...), with all
powers, and signs, and lying wonders (or through them) and through all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, etc. So in my Text, (...), etc. through
the hypocrisy of Liars.

Now for the unfolding of these words, this must first be observed in general,
that they are not so to be underderstood, as if these, who are the bringers in,
and advancers of the doctrines of Demons, In o^ni distribut^^^e omitti^
copulativa videtur, vix apponi. Li^acr. Nonne sic etiam in Graecis.
should every one of them be guilty of all the several imputations in this
description; but they are to be construed rather as an a syndeton, by
understanding the Conjunction, as if it had been thus uttered: Through the
hypocrisy of Liars, and through the hypocrisy of men of seared consciences,
and lastly, by the hypocrisy of those who forbid marriages, and meats. Or
thus: through the hypocrisy, partly of Liars, partly of men of seared
consciences, partly of those who forbid marriage, and command to abstain from
meats: and so though many were guilty of all, yet some may be exempt from some;
as namely some may be guilty of the last note, of forbidding marriage, and
abstaining from meats, and yet free of the former, of being counterfeit Liars,
and men of seared Consciences: which I speak for reverence of some of the
Ancients, who though otherwise holy men, yet cannot be acquitted from all the
imputations here mentioned, nor altogether excused from having an hand, through
the Fate of the times wherein they lived, in laying the groundwork, whereon
soon after the great Apostasy was builded.

This therefore being remembered, I come now to the unfolding of them in
several: and first of the first, the hypocrisy of Liars, (...). The word
(...) signifies dissimulation, a faining, counterfeiting, a semblance, and show
of that which is not so indeed, as it seems; and this word we must repeat,
(...), as belonging, in common, with the rest which follows; for all should be
counterfeit: lying should carry the counterfeit of truth; the seared
Conscience, a semblance of devotion; the restraint of Marriage should be but a
show of chastity; and abstaining from meats, a false appearance of abstinency:
for the persons of whom they are spoken, should either make a show of what
themselves knew was not; or that which they thought they had, should be no
better than a false show, and counterfeit of that they took it for.

The Vulgar Latin in Mar. 12.15. and the Syriack in the same place, turn the
word hypocrisis, versutia, dolus, craft and subtlety: which sense, if need
were, would not be denied admittance here. But I return to (...), the
hypocrisy of Liars, which I conceive to be the same, and no other, than that
which our Apostle speaks in the same case, 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he tells us, that
the coming of the man of sin, and the Apostasy attending him, should be
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders; and
with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, or unrighteous and ungodly
deceiving; and that God should send them strong delusions, that they might
believe a lie, etc. Yea some of this, and of that which follows in that place,
may extend also to the rest which follows in my Text, howsoever the most
thereof, as you hear, does most evidently expound this (...), this hypocrisy
of Liars. Now according to the event, this hypocrisy of Liars does appear in
three things: 1 Lies of Miracles. 2 Fabulous Legends of the Acts of Saints, and
sufferings of Martyrs. 3 Counterfeit writings under the name of the best and
first antiquity. Lies of Miracles will display their hypocrisy in three
particulars. 1 Forgery. 2 Illusion, 3 Misapplication. 1 Forgery of Miracles
never done, as were the reports of wondrous dreams, and visions, which had no
other credit, but the Authors honesty; or miraculous Cures, by the power and
relics of Saints deceased; as when those who never were blind, made others
believe they had newly received sight. 2 Illusion; when though something were
done, yet it was but a seeming, and a counterfeit only of a miraculous work,
indeed some juggling trick of the Devil, or of his instruments. Lastly,
Misapplication; either when that was attributed to a divine power, which was
nothing but (...), the work and operation of the Devil: or when it was
interpreted, and abused to invite and confirm men in some Idolatrous error,
as it happened in the miracle of the Shrines and Sepulchers of the holy
Martyrs, which were interpreted to be for the confirmation of their Power,
Presence, and notice of humane affairs after death, and to warrant us, and
encourage men to have recourse unto them by prayer, and invocation, as unto
Mediators; and to give that honor unto their Relics, which was due unto God
alone. The like is to be said of the Miracles of Images, and of the Host, which
though they smelt strong of Forgery, or Illusion, were supposed by a divine
disposition to be wrought for the like end and purpose. All which was (...),
the power of seduction, or strong delusion, to make the world believe a Lie, as
Saint Paul speaks 2 Thessal. 2.11.

Concerning the hypocrisy of fabulous legend-Writers of the Acts of Saints and
Martyrs, you know what it means, as also the last which was named Counterfeit
Authors, under the name of Antiquity; as approving those errors which latter
times devised; I shall not need here to use any further explication: and thus
you see what is comprehended under (...), the hypocrisy, counterfeiting, or
faining of Liars. I should now come to display the truth of this particular of
this Prophecy in the event; but I will first unfold the next imputation,
(...), the hypocrisy of those who have their consciences seared; which though
it might be exemplified in other things, yet I mean to instance only in that
aforementioned, and so must give you the story of both together.

(...), etc. Through the hypocrisy of those who have their consciences seared.
For (...), as I said before, is to be repeated (...) signifies both the place
seared, and the mark printed by the searing with an hot iron. (...) is to
cauterize, to sear with an hot iron, or cut off with searing, as Chirurgions
do rotten members: now that which is seared, becomes more hard and brawny, and
so more dull, and not so sensible in feeling as otherwise. In this sense (...)
signifies those who have a hard and a brawny Conscience, which has no feeling
in it: in the other sense as (...) is to cut off by searing, it must signify
those who have no conscience left; there is not much difference; but I follow
the first, a hard and unfeeling Conscience. And whether those (...), whereof we
spoke before (to use no other instances) were not of such metal, for their
Conscience, I think no man can deny. Who could have coined, or who could have
believed such monstrous stuff, as the Legends are stored with, but such as
were cauterized? If they had had any tenderness or feeling, not only of
Conscience, but even of sense, they could never have believed, or vented such
stuff as there is. As Vincent. hist. lib. 7. cap. 84. That the Virgin Mary
should draw out her breasts, and milk in I know not what Clerks mouth. That she
played the Midwife to an Abbess, got with child by her Cater, and sent the
Bastard by two Angels to a certain Hermit to be brought up. Idem ibid. c. 86.
That she came and lay the first night in the midst between a certain
Bridegroom and his Bride. Idem lib. 7. cap. 87. Caesarius in his seventh book
cap. 34. reports, that the Virgin Mary, for twelve whole years together, did
supply the place of a certain Nun, called Beatrice, while she lay in the
Stews, till at length returning, she freed the Virgin from standing Sentinel
any longer. And lib. 7. cap. 33. That she said to a certain Soldier, I Will be
thy wife, come and kiss me, and made him do so. That she took a Monk about
the neck and kissed him. In an Italian book called, The miracles of the blessed
Virgin, printed at Millaine 1547. a certain Abbess being great with child,
the holy Virgin willing to cover the crime, did in her stead present her self
before the Bishop in form of an Abbess, and showed by ocular demonstration,
that she was not with child. Fasciculus temporum, written many years ago,
tells us of Saint Gilgols wife used to sing with her lower mouth, because she
scoffed at her husbands Miracles.

But that which Johannes de Nicol. in his reformed Spanyard tells, that he read
taken out of Trithemius, is the more worthy to be remembered, as being a
principal motive in his conversion, who was till then extremely addicted to
the Idol-worship of the blessed Virgin; which was much cooled, when he read
that she came into the chamber of Friar Allen (a Dominican that made her
Rosary) made a ring of her own hair, wherewith she espoused her self unto
him, kissed him, let him handle her breasts, and conversed as familiarly with
him, as a Bride is wont with her Bridegroom: whether think you not that these
fellows were seared in their conscience? what block could have been more
senseless? Melchior Canus speaking of the golden legend, as they call it, a
book fraught with such stuff, as you have heard, me thinks almost expresses
the meaning of a cauterized conscience. Hanc homo scripsit (says he) ferrei
oris, and plumbei cordis, a fellow of an iron mouth, and leaden heart, as if he
had said, (...), of a brawny and unfeeling conscience.

But I come to show how this prediction of our Apostle has been accomplished,
how (...), the cousening and feigning of liars, was the means whereby the
doctrine of Demons was advanced in the Church, I mean the deifying and
worshipping of Saints and Angels, the adoring and templing of relics, the
bowing down to Images, the worshipping of Crosses as new Idoll-columnes, the
worshipping of the breaden god, or of any visible thing whatsoever upon
supposall of any divinity therein: all which I have proved to be nothing else,
but the Gentiles idolatrous Theology of Demons, revived amongst Christians.

The first of these, the deifying and invocating of Saints, and adoring relics
is the most ancient for time of all the rest, and began to appear in the
Church presently after the death of Julian the Apostate, who was the last
Ethnicall Emperor; the grounds and occasions whereof were most strange reports
of wonders showed upon those who approached the shrines of Martyrs, and prayed
at their memories, and sepulchers: devils charmed, diseases cured, the blind
saw, the lame walked, yea the dead revived, and other the like, which the
doctors of those times for the most part avouched to be done by the power and
prayers of glorified Martyrs, and by the notice they took of men's devotions at
their sepulchers; though at the beginning those devotions were directed to God
alone, and such places only chosen for the stirring up of zeal and fervor, by
the memory of those blessed and glorious Champions of Christ. But whiles the
world stood in admiration, and the most esteemed of these wonders, as of the
glorious beams of the triumph of Christ; they were soon persuaded to call
upon them, as patrons and mediators, whose power with God, and notice of
things done upon earth, they thought that these signs and miracles approved.

Thus the relics of Martyrs beginning to be esteemed above the richest
jewels, for the supposed virtue even of the very air of them, were wonderfully
sought after, as some divine Elixar, sovereign both to body and soul.
Whereupon another scene of wonders entered, even of visions, and revelations,
wonderful and admirable for the discovery of the sepulchers and ashes of
Martyrs, which were quite forgotten, yea of some whose names and memories, till
then, no man had ever heard of; as S. Ambrose's Gervasius, and Protasius. Thus
in every corner of the Christian world were new Martyrs bones ever and anon
discovered, whose verity again miraculous effects and cures seemed to approve;
and therefore were diversely dispersed, and gloriously templed, and enshrined.
Hill. lib. ad Constantium intimates miraculous cures of the relics of Martyrs
to have been as ancient as his time, yea as the time of the Churches peace Plus
crudelitati vestrae, Nero, Deci, Maximiniane debemus. Diabolum ^nim p^r vos
vicimus, Sanctus ubique beatoru^ Martyrum sanguis exceptus est; dum in his
Daemones mugi^nt, dum ^^gritudines depelluntur etc. At tu (id ^st Constanti)
omnium crudelitatum crudeli^^me damno majore in nos, and venia minore,
desaevis, etc.
. All these things happened in that one age, and were come to this height in
less than 100 years. But here is the wonder most of all to be wondered at,
that none of these miraculous signs were ever heard of in the Church, for the
first 300 years after Christ, until about the year 360; after that the
Empire under Constantine and his sons, having publicly embraced the
Christian faith, the Church had peace, and the bodies of the despised Martyrs,
such as could be found, were now bestowed in most magnificen^ Temples, and
there gloriously enshrined. And yet had the Christians long before used to keep
their Assemblies at the Sea Clem. Con. fol. 106.
Caemiteries and monuments of their Martyrs; how came it to pass, that no such
virtue of their bones and ashes, no such testimonies of their power after
death, were discovered until now?

Babylas his bones were the first that all my search can find, which charmed
the devil of Daphne, Apollo Daphneus, when Julian the Apostate offered so many
sacrifices to make him speak; and being asked why he was so mute, forsooth, the
corpse of Babylas the Martyr, buried near the Temple in A delicate subu^bs of
Antioch.
Daphne, stopped his windpipe. I fear, I fear here was some hypocrisy in
this business, and the devil had some ^eate to play: the very name of Babylas
is enough to breed jealousy, it is an ominous name, the name Babylas; yea, and
this happened too at Antioch, where Babylas was Bishop and Martyr in the
persecution of Decius. Would it not do the devil good, there to begin his
mystery, where the Christian name was first given to the followers of Christ?
howsoever this was then far otherwise construed, and a conceit quickly taken,
that other Martyrs bones might be found upon ^riall, as terrible to the
devil, as those of Babylas; which was no sooner tried, but experience
presently verefied with improvement, as you heard before; so that all the world
rung so with wonders done by Martyrs, that even holy men, who at the first
suspected, were at length surprised, and carried away with the power of
delusion.

Besides the silence of all undoubted Add, that no such thing could be, so
long as they used to pray for Martyrs, as well as others of the dead. See
Clement. and ali^s.
antiquity of any such sepulchral wonders to have happened in the former ages,
the very manner of speech, which the fathers living in this miraculous age
used, when they spoke of these things, will argue they were then accounted
novelties, and not as continued from the Apostles times. Chrysostom in his
oration contra Gentiles, of the business of Babylas speaks thus: (...)* If
any man believes not these things, which are said to be done by the Apostles,
let him now beholding the present, desist from his impudency. Ambros. Epist. ad
sororem Marcellinam, relating of a piece of the speech he made, upon the
translations of the bodies of Gervasius and Protasius, and the miracles then
showed, reparata (says he) ve^usti temporis miracula cer^itis: You see the
miracles of ancient times (he means the time of Christ and his Apostles)
renewed. S. August. lib. de civ. Dei 22. cap. 8. in a discourse of the miracles
of that time, says; We made an order to have bills given out of such miracles
as were done, when we saw the wonders of ancient times renewed in ours: Id
namque fieri volumus, cum videremus antiquis similia divinaru^ signa virtutum,
etiam nostris temporibus frequentari, and ^a non debere multorum notitiae
deperire. But alas, now began the (...), this was the fatal time, and thus the
Christian Apostasy was to be ushered; If they had known this, it would have
turned their joyous shoutings and triumphs, at these things, into mourning.

The end, which these signs and wonders aimed at, and at length brought to
pass, In which respect (...), though the Genitive case were taken actively,
would signify the Idolatry of Saint-worship, viz. the worship of the dead,
which the Devils are wont thus to counterfeit.
should have made them remember that warning which was given the ancient people
of God: Deuteronomy. 13. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams,
and gives thee a sign or a wonder; and that sign or wonder come to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods and serve them;
thou shall not harken unto the words of that Prophet, or dreamer of dreams:
for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God
with all your heart, and with all your soul. But why should I go any further,
before I tell you, that even in this also, the idolatry of Saint-worship was a
true counterfeit of the Gentiles idolatry of Demons? Did not Daemon-worship
enter after the same manner? was it not first insinuated, and afterward
established by signs, and wonders of the very self same kind, and fashion?
Listen what Eusebius will tell us in his fifth book Praeparat. Evangel. cap. 2.
according to the Greek edition of Rob. Stephen, when (says he) those wicked
spirits (as he proved them to be which were worshipped under the names of
Demons) saw mankind brought off to a deifying of the dead (he means by
erecting statues, and ordaining ceremonies and sacrifices for their memorialls)
(...); they insinuated themselves, and helped forward their error: (...); by
certain motions of the statues, which anciently were consecrated to the honor
of the deceased: as also (...); by ostentation of oracles and cures of
diseases, whereby they then superstitious ran headlong, sometimes to take
them to be some heavenly powers and Gods indeed, and sometimes to be (...); the
souls of their deified worthies. And so (says he) the
earth-neighbouring-Daemons which are the princes of the Air, those
spiritualities of wickedness, and ringleaders of all evil, were on all hands
accounted for great Gods: (...); and the memory of the ancients deceased was
thought worthy to be celebrated with a greater service; the features of whose
bodies the dedicated images in every city seemed to represent; but the souls
of them, and those diviner and incorporeall powers, (...); the wicked Demons
counterfeited by working many miracles.

Hear Tertullian also speak in his Apology to the Gentiles, cap. 21. in fine.
Quaerite ergo si vera est ista divinitas Christi* si est ea qua cognita ad
bonum quis reformetur, sequitur ut falsa renuntietur, compertaimprimis illa
omni ratione, quae delitescens sub nominibus and imaginibus mortuorum,
quibusdam signis and miraculis, and oraculis, fidem divinitatis operatur.
Search therefore this Deity of Christ, whether it be true, or not; if it be
that, by the knowledge whereof a man shall be reformed to good, it follows
then, that the false be renounced; especially, that whole mystery (he means
of Gentiles Idolatry, and Daemon-worship) being discovered, which under the
names and Images of the dead, through Signs, Miracles, and Oracles, obtains
an opinion of divinity.

Chrysostom shall conclude, who in his Oration In Savil. Tom. 6. p. 376. alii
Rem. prima adversus Iud^os.
Judaizantes says, that the Demons of the Gentiles wrought Miracles for the
confirmation of Paganism, (...). For (says he) they oftentimes by their skill
cured diseases, and restored to health those that were sick; what should we
partake therefore with them in their impiety, because of this? God forbid. Then
he adds out of Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. that which we even now quoted; which, had it
been as well applied to the miracles amongst Christians present, as it was to
those of the Gentiles past, perhaps he that spoke it, would have questioned
something which he inclined to believe.

The second particular I named of (...), was fabulous Legends of the Acts of
Saints and Martyrs; this was also another means to advance the doctrines of
Demons. For the true acts and stories of Martyrs being extinguished for the
most part, by the bloody Edict of Dioclesian, they now began to supply again
that loss, by collecting such tales as were then current of them, and adding
thereto such miracles as were fabled after death, fashioned all to the best
advantage of what they meant to promote in the Church, and was already on foot
in the same. Such was that wherewith the good Father Greg. Nazi^^* was abused in
his funeral Oration upon Cyprian, and many others of the Greek Churches: that
Cyprian, that great Cyprian, who was both Citizen and Bishop of C^rthage, in
the reign of Decius (for of him Gregory speaks expressly) even being formerly
a Conjurer, and falling into love with a Christian Virgin Justina, some say of
An^ioch, when (...) by wooing and ordinary means he could not with her unto
his will, he went about to prevail with Magic spells and conjurations; which
the damsel perceiving, she having recourse to God, sell to work against him
with prayer and fasting, and in her devotions also be^ought the Virgin Mary to
succor her a Virgin in that jeopardy: by which means Cyprians Magical
enchantments were frustrated, and he convinced thereby, became a Christian. All
which Baronius himself confesses to be a fable, as well he might, it being
unknown both to Pontius his Deacon, who lived with him, and wrote his life;
and to the western, and African Churches, where he lived and died: who knew,
and who could know better, that in his Paganism he was not a Magician, but a
Professor of Oratory at Carthage, far enough from Antioch, and converted by
one Caecilius? Nevertheless, we have cause to think, that this tale, together
with the like, served not a little for the advancement of the mystery of
Demons in the Eastern Churches; when we see our Adversaries so willing to
have that passage (as seems by their often alleging it) of calling upon the
blessed Virgin to be authentical; notwithstanding they know (which the Greeks
so well could not, he being a Latin Bishop) that the whole story must needs be
a fable. Of this stamp are the well known Legends of our Latin Churches, which
almost all of them drive principally at this mark; it being also the ordinary
conclusion of their tales (sure of our English) that since God has done thus
and thus by this holy Martyr, or since God has with such miracles honored this
martyr, let us pray unto him, that by his merits and Intercession we may
obtain salvation. Nor is it a late device; Greg. Turonensis above a thousand
years ago in his two books de miraculis martyrum, as his fabulous narrations,
This Gregory of Towers died Anno 596.
(which yet many of them he referres to others before him) are excellently
well framed for the promotion of Saint-worship; so in the Conclusion of them
he plainly confesses, that that was his aim shutting up his first book thus.
Vnde oportet et nos ^^rum Patrocinia expetere, ut, eorum mereamur Suffragiis,
vel quod nostris digninon sumus meritis obtinere, eorum possumus
Intercessionibus adipisci, etc. His second thus; Ergo his miraculis lector
incend^us intelligat, non aliter nisi Martyrum reliquorumque amicorum Dei
adjutoriis se posse salvari. etc:

But among the Greeks Simeon Metaphrast^s has a strain beyond us all, But I
find now the same in the Aurea Legenda of all the foling Martyrs, save the
first, which is not there. S. Barbara is but the Appendix.
who makes prayers for many of his Martyrs, wherein they desire of God, that
whosoever should pray unto him in their names, or have recourse to their
sepulchers, when they were glorified, might obtain whatsoever they ask, yea
remission of sins itself: which because it is so singular a counterfeit of a
lying Greek I shall not do amiss to insert the particulars, together with
something about the occasion and time of this device.

In the Martyrdom of Anastasia a Roman Virgi^ under Diocletian, he tells us if
we be so wise as to believe it,
That at the time of her suffering, when she had, as was fit, given thanks unto
God, and prayed for the happy accomplishment of her Martyrdom, and afterward
made suit for those who being si^k should have recourse unto her ( viz. after
death) she heard a voice from heaven certifying, that what she had asked was
granted her.

Saint Barbara, a Virgin of Heli^polis, martyred under Maximilianus, he makes,
under the Executioners hand, to pray in this manner:
And thou O King (God) now hear my prayer, that whosoever shall remember thy
name, and this my conflict, no pestilent disease may enter upon this house, nor
any other of those evils, which may bring damage, or trouble to the bodies of
men. She had no sooner spoken, says he, but a voice was miraculously heard
from heaven, calling her and her fellow Martyr Julian to the heavenly places,
and promising also that those things, which she had asked, should be
accomplished.

In Saint Blasius (who suffered, says Baronius, under Licinius) our Simeon
tells us,
That when a woman came unto him to cure her son, who had a fish-bone sticking
in his throat, he prayed in this manner: Thou O Savior, who have been ready to
help those who called upon thee, hear my prayer, and by thy invisible power
take out the bone which sticks in this child, and cure him; and whenever
hereafter the like shall befall men, children, or beasts, if any of them shall
remember my name, saying, O Lord hasten thy help through the intercession of
thy servant Blasius, do thou cure him speedily, to the honor and glory of thy
holy name.

Again he tells us, while they were carrying him before the President, he
restored to a poor widow a hog, her only hog, which a Wolf had taken away
from her. And when as afterward, in sign of thankfulness she brought the hogs
head and feet boiled to the Martyr in prison, he blessing her, spoke in this
manner: Woman in this habit celebrate my memorial, and no good thing shall ever
be wanting in thy house from my God: yea and if any other, imitating of thee,
shall in like manner celebrate my memorial, he shall receive an everlasting
gift from my God, and a blessing all the days of his life.

When he comes to suffer, he makes him pray to God thus: Hear me thy servant,
and whosoever shall have recourse to this thine Altar, (he means himself) and
whosoever shall have swallowed a bone, or prickle, or be vexed with any
disease, or be in any affliction, necessity, or persecution, grant Lord to
every one his hearts desire, as thou art gracious and merciful, for thou art
to be glorified now and evermore.

When he had thus prayed (says he) Christ descended from heaven in a cloud,
and overshadowed him: and our Savior said unto him, O my beloved Champion, I
will not only do this, but that also which thou did request for the
widow; and will bless also every house which shall celebrate thy memory, and I
will fill their storehouses with all good things, for this thy glorious
confession, and thy faith which thou have in me.

Saint Catharine, whom he calls Aecatharina, a Martyr of Alexandria, under
Maximilianus, he makes to pray thus at her Martyrdom.
Grant unto those, O Lord, who through me shall call upon thy holy Name, such
their requests as are profitable for them, that in all things thy wondrous
works may be praised now and evermore.

But above all the rest, Marina's prayer, whom we Latins call Saint Margaret,
is complete, and for the purpose; she suffered under Dioclesian, and thus she
prayed, if your dare believe Simeon.
And now, O Lord my God, whosoever for thy sake shall worship this Tabernacle
of my body, which has fought for thee; and whosoever shall build an Oratory in
the name of thy handmaid, and therein offer unto thee spiritual sacrifices,
oblations, and prayers; and all those who shall faithfully O happy Simeon.
describe this my conflict of Martyrdom, and shall read and remember the name
of thy handmaid; give unto them, most holy Lord, who art a lover of all the
good, and a friend of souls, remission of sins; and grant them pr^pitiation
and mercy, according to the measure of their faith, and let not the revenging
hand come near them, nor the evil of famine, nor the curse of pestilence, nor
any grievous scourge; nor let any incurable destruction either of body or soul
betide them. And to all those who shall in faith and truth adhere to my house
(her Oratory or Chapel) or unto my name, and shall unto thee, O Lord, offer
glory and praise, and a sacrifice in remembrance of thine Handmaid, and shall
ask salvation and mercy through me, grant them, O Lord, abundant store of all
good things; for thou alone art good and gracious, and the giver of all good
things for ever and ever. Amen.

While she was thus praying with her self ( If she prayed this prayer with her
self, by what revelation was it made known to others?
says Simeon) behold there was a great earthquake, yea and the Lord himself,
with a multitude and host of holy Angels standing by her, in such sort as was
perceptible to the understanding, said; Be of good cheer Marina, and fear
not, for I have heard thy prayers, I have fulfilled, and will in due time
fulfill whatsoever thou have asked, even as thou have asked it.

Thus says Simeon; who nevertheless in the very entrance of this his tale of
Marina, or Margaret, complains much, forsooth, that not a few of these
narrations of the acts of Martyrs, were at the beginning forgot, yea profaned
(as he says more truly than he was aware of) Evidentissimis Daemoniorum
doctrinis. Besides, he calls I know not what narration of the Virgins
Martyrdom, in that sort corrupted, dictio Daemoniaca; but for his own part, he
would reject all counterfeit fables, and tells us nothing but the truth; which
how honestly he has performed, and what touchstone he used, let the Reader
judge. In notis ad martyrologium ^oman. ^ul. 13.
Baronius I am sure is quite ashamed of him, who though he can be sometimes
content to trade with not much better ware, yet this of Simeons he supposes
will need very much washing and cleansing, before it be merchantable.

But for the better understanding of this mystery of iniquity, and what
necessity there was of such desperate shifts, when time was; ye shall know,
that this Simeon lived toward the end of that time of great and long
opposition against Idolatry, in the Greek and Eastern Churches, by diverse
Emperors, with the greatest part of their Bishops, Peers, and people, lasting
from about the year of our Lo^d 720, till after 840, that is, 120 years; which
was not against Images only, though they bore the name; but the worship of
Saints, and their relics; the state whereof shall not be amiss to represent
out of such records of Antiquity, as our Adversaries themselves have been
pleased to leave us; if it be but for their sake who so often ask us, whether
there were ever any of our religion before Luther. Let us therefore hear what
Writers of their own sect, such as then lived, and were eyewitnesses, will tell
us. Leo Isaurus (says Theophanes, miscel. lib. 21. cap. 23.) erred not only
about the (...).
respective adoration of venerable Images; but about the intercession of the
most chaste Mother of God, and all the Saints, whose relics also the most
wicked man abominated, like unto his masters the Mahumetans. This was the first
of those Emperors: the next was Constantinus, whom they surnamed Copr^nimus,
of whom the same Author ( ibid. cap. ult.) speaks as follows: This
pernicious, (says he) inhumane, and barbarous Emperor abusing his authority
tyrannically, and not using it lawfully, at the very beginning made an
Apostasy from God, and from his undefiled Mother, and from all his Saints.
Again, lib. 22. c. 4^. Upon the twenty sixth year of his reign he showed
himself wicked, beyond the frenzy of the Mahumetans, to all that were Orthodox
(so he calls Idolaters) under his Empire, Bishops, Monks, Laymen, and others
his subjects: every where, as well by writing as by speech, banishing, at
unprofitable, the Intercession of the holy Virgin and Mother of God, and of all
the Saints, through which all succor is conveyed unto us; and causing their
holy relics to be rejected and despised: and if the relics of any notable
Saint, sovereign both to body and soul, were known to lie any where, and
were, as the manner is, honored by those which were religious, presently he
threatened such as these with death, as wicked doers, or else with banishment,
proscriptions, and torture. As for the relics acceptable to God, and esteemed
by the possessours as a treasure, they were taken from them, from thence
forward to be made hateful things.

Again, cap. 48. of the next year.

If one getting a fall, or being in pain, chanced to utter the usual language
of Christians, saying, O Mother of God help me; or were found keeping vigils,
etc. he was adjudged as the Emperors enemy, and styled Immemorabilis, unworthy
of memory; this was a title of infamy.

Again, cap. 54. anno regni 31.

If one were found to have a relic but to keep (that is, though he worshipped
it not) yet nevertheless did Lichanodraco the Emperors President burn it, and
punish him that had it as a wicked doer. Thus far Theophanes.

Habetur in op^ribus D^m^sceni auctis, interpret Jacobo Billio, ex Reginae
matris bibliothe^a, and apud Surum, Tom. 6 Nov. 28.
Hear now what the Author of the Acts of Monk Stephen, whom the same Emperor
made one of their Martyrs for patronizing Idols, can tell us; hear what he
says of the great Council of Constantinople, held in this Emperors reign
against Images.
O Christ, how should I not admire thy lenity! -- To that height did those most
impodent tongues yet: further break out, that they were not afraid to utter
that monstrous and impious speech, viz. that the very Virgin Mother of God her
self was now after her death unavailable, and no use to be made of her, nor
could she help or protect any one.

The same Author thus deplores the state of those times, abusing the words of
Psalm 79.
O God the heathen are come into thine Inheritance; thy holy Temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones; The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given to be meat to the fowls of the air, and the flesh of
thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth; that is (says he) the venerable and
sacred relics of the Martyrs, quas partim igni, partim mar^, partim denique
(o facinus orbi universo damnum ferens) praecipitiis tradiderunt; which they
cast partly into the fire, partly into the water (O villainous act whereby the
whole world is damnified) partly threw down into precipices.

There is nothing yet in these relations will do any man hurt, by engendring a
misconceit, especially if he remember the tale is told by malicious
Adversaries, that counterfeit relics were plentiful in those days as well
as now: That Hezekiah brake in pieces that brazen Serpent, made by Gods own
Commandment, a holy monument and type of Christ, when it was once abused to
Idolatry.

After the death of this Emperor Constantine, and his son, who reigned not
long after him, the idolatrous faction, under Constantine his nephew, and the
Queen mother Irene, again for some years prevailed; and that so far, as to
pack a Called the second of Nice
Council, the Bishop of Rome having a maine stroke therein; whereby the former
Council of Constantinople was condemned, and the worship of Images again
established. But Leo Armin^^s coming to the Empire, the Orthodox part again
prevailed, as before they had done, during the reign of three Emperors more.
The last Emperor of the opposers of Idols was Theophilus, the last Patriarch
John, and that to the very end; the Idolatry of Saint-worship was opposed more
or less, as well as that of Images, as may be gathered out of that (...),
Habetur apud Baron an. 842.28.
or the song of triumph, which the Greeks used to sing the first Sunday in
Lent, for a memorial of their last and final conquest of the opposers of
Images, ever since that time, where in the hymn of Theodorus Ode 8. I find
this verse, (...): (i. e.) The sacred relics of the Saints, and their Images,
were not at all to be worshipped, said most wickedly the renouncers of piety,
the barbarous L^zick and John. This John is that Patriarch of Constantinople
which I said was the last of the opposers of Idols, and is often mentioned in
this song, as is also Lezick, but what he was in uncertain. But the whole
story being delivered unto us only by professed enemies, if they should fasten
no worse calumnies upon the opposite side than yet you have heard, you would
think perhaps that the Patrones of Idols then were far more ingenuous to
their Adversaries, than we find their Successors now.

Hear therefore something of this kind also, that you may see as they agreed
with us in the same profession against Idols, so did they also in suffering the
like slanderous lies from their Adversaries; in discoursing whereof I shall be
nearer to (...), than I was before.

In that great Council of 338 Bishops, held at Constantinople against Idols,
under Constantinus Copronymus, were, by some that wished well to Saint-worship,
though they consented against Images, these two Canons inserted into the first
draught of the definition of the Synod. First, if any one should not confess
the holy and ever blessed Virgin Mary, truly and properly Deipara, (the Mother
of God) to be higher than any visible or invisible creature, and with a sincere
faith implores not her intercession, let him be Anathema. Secondly, If any one
shall not confess all the Saints which have been from the beginning of the
world until now, to be honorable before God both in soul and body, or shall
not entreat their prayers, let him be Anathema: which, when the definition came
to be read in the Council, the prevailing part of the Fathers caused to be
blotted out; (...), says the Con^u^er Co^^, Nic. 2. act. 6. tom. 6.
whereupon that slander, fastened on them by their enemies, may seem to have
taken the first hint, as if forsooth by their rejecting these two foisted
Canons, they had therefore denied whatsoever was contained in them, as that the
Virgin Mary was Deipara, or Mother of God; or that the Saints were to be
honored so much, as with that honorable title of Saints.

For Cedrenus would make us believe, that this Emperor Constantine published a
general law, (...), that none of the servants of God should in any wise be
called Saints: yea that such of their relics as were found, should be
despised, and their intercession not to be prayed for; because, said he, they
can avail nothing. The profane wretch added (says the same Author) Let no
man pray for the intercession, no not of Mary, for she can do him no good,
(...); moreover, that she could not be called Deipara, the Mother of God. Then
he tells us, that he compared the blessed Virgin, after she was delivered of
Christ, to a purse of gold, after it is emptied of the gold that was once in
it. The same with Cedrenus, almost word for word, has Suidas, so that the one
may seem to have been transcribed out of the other.

But Theosterictus, one who lived at the same time, Apud Surium Apr. 3. tom. 2.
whereas Cedrenus was more than 240 years after, seems much more ingenuous,
for in his funeral Oration upon Nicetas, a Under Leo Arm^nius.
Confessor of those times, whose Disciple he was, relating otherwise the same
things that Cedrenus and Suidas does; yet when he comes to the story of the
purse, he brings in the Emperor, expressly calling the Virgin Mary, Deipara; but
finds fault, that he would not vouchsafe her the name Saint. Ita Deiparen^
Maria ( Viz. The Emperor.
says he) neque enim sanctam dignabatur nominare illam (says Theosterictus)
indignus ille; quo tempore Christum in se habebat, valde honoranda illa erat;
ex quo autem tempore illum peperit, nihil differebat a reliquis. Indeed it
seems at the wiping out of these forementioned Canons, there passed something
in the Council (as is wont in such disputes) concerning an indifference or
lawfulness in ordinary speech to mention such places, as were dedicated to the
memory of Saints, without the addition of the name Saint. For I find that
Stephen the Monk, afterward forsooth a Martyr, at what time the Emperor sent
some of the Bishops and others unto him, to require his subscription to the
decree of the Council, thus expostulates with them: Did ye not (says he)
discard that adjective Saint from all the Just, from all the Apostles, from the
Prophets, from the Prophets, Martyrs, and other godly men? for it was bravely
decreed by you, That when any one were going to any of these, and were asked
whither he went, he should answer, to the Apostles, to the forty Martyrs; or
being asked whence he came, he should in like manner say, From the Temple of
Martyr Theodore, or from the Temple of the Martyr George.

But Theosterictus tells the same thing of the Emperor Constantine himself.
Sanctos Martyrs (says he) quantum in ipso erat, honor privavit, cum
praeceperit illos non esse Sanctos appellandos; sed simpliciter nominari
Apostolos, quadraginta Martyrs, Theodorum, Georgium, and alios similiter: he
deprived, as much as in him lay, the holy Martyrs of honor, in that he
commanded, they should not be styled Saints, but simply named the forty
Martyrs, Theodore, George, etc. Whereby it appears, that this law (whatsoever
it was that these Authors charge the Emperor with) was something which
proceeded from the Council it self, as Monk Stephen even now charged them.
Besides, that it was something only about the calling of places dedicated to
Saints, though our Authors (as Calumniators use) tell it of Saints at large.

Lastly, it seems to have grown upon some question, how far, and in what
kind, Saints were to be honored, which was occasioned by the wiping out of
those Canons aforementioned.

Johannes Curopalata and Cedrenus relate, that Michael Balbus, the last save
one of the Emperors that opposed Idols, (...) ((...)) (...); ordained, that
the word Saint should not be set upon any Images wheresoever they were painted
(for this was, and as some say Possevinus in sua Moscovia.
is yet, the fashion of the Greeks, to add the names of the Saints to the
Images that represent them) now if any such thing as this were done, or
discoursed of, in the days of Constantinus, whom they call Copronimus, you may
easily guess what fuel it might add to the fire of that slander we speak of.

But why should we trouble our selves any longer to find out the original of
that, which we are certain was a notorious lie? for it is apparent in the
definition of the Council it self, which is thus calumniously charged, that
they both give the title of Saints often to the Apostles, Fathers, and others,
and of Deipara to the blessed Virgin. I shall not need to recount every place
where they give the title of Saint to particulars; hear but what they say in
general: Sancti qui Deo placuerunt, and ab ipso sunt, (...), dignitate
sanctitatis honorati vivunt semper Deo, licet hinc migraverunt: the Saints
which pleased God, and are by him honored with the dignity of Saint-ship,
though they be departed hence, yet to God they live always. Again, N^fas est
Christianis, (...), D^monum cultricum Gentium moribus uti, and Sanct^s qui tali
and tanta gratia resplendebunt (sc. conregnar^ cum Christo, and judicare orbem
^errarum, and conformes fieri gloria ipsius) in ingloria and mortua materia,
(...), contumelia afficere: It is unlawful for Christians to use the fashions
of Gentiles, who worshipped Demons or Devils; and in a base and livelesse
matter (they mean Images) to dishonor the Saints, who shall one day shine, in
such and so great grace and glory, viz. to reign with Christ, and to judge the
world, and to be made like to his glory, as they said a little before, Council.
Nicen. 2. Art. 6. Tom. 4.

As for the other part of the calumny, about stiling the the Virgin Mary,
Deipara, hear not only what they practiced, but what they expressly decreed,
ibid* Tom. 6. (...): If any one shall not confess God to be truly Emmanuel,
and therefore the holy Virgin to be Deipara, the Mother of God, let him be
Anath^ma. Here the blessed Virgin has both the name of Saint ((...)) and
(...), mother of God given her. All this you shall find in the sixth act of the
idolatrous Council of Nice, where the enemies, while they would confute the
definition of the Synod of Canstantinople, have preserved it, which else had
utterly perished* as the Acts thereof have done.

Now judge whether Constantine and his Council were guilty or not, of what the
idolatrous faction charged them with. We may wonder the less at this notorious
impudency of lying companions, seeing we have like experience of such calumnies
fastened upon our selves this day; though there be so many thousand eyes and
ears, and writings too, which confute them.

And thus you have seen what manner of times they were, about the end of which
our Simeon Metaphras^es lived. Was it not high time for him think you, and
those hands to which he was beholding (for I will not charge him with all) to
ply the old craft, and reenforce the Legends with new lies, when the credit of
Saint-worship lay thus a bleeding? It is not credible they would be so much
wanting to themselves. And it is as apparent, that those tales of the new
strain, which we had out of Simeon, were coined in this age, and not before;
For if any such thing had been known, or delivered from elder times, how came
it to pass, no notice thereof was given us by any writer of Ecclesiastical
story, by any father, by any Compiler or forger of Martyrs lives and miracles
till now? Certainly so miraculous and wonderful things, as voices from heaven,
and Christ descending thence in a cloud, and the like, had been worth the
telling: But alas, they could speak but little of these Martyrs, save only the
names and times of their sufferings. And thus I end my digr^ssion, which yet I
hope has not been altogether impertinent to the present argument.

The last particular of (...), the Hypocrisy of liars I made to be counterfeit
writings, under the names of the first and best Antiquity: S. Pet^rs liturgy;
the Liturgy of S. James; Matthew; Mark; the Apostles Council at Antioch;
foisted works under the names of Austin, Origin, Cyprian, Athanaesius and
others: Through which we need not doubt, but the doctrine of Demons was
promoted, when we see some not ashamed still to maintain it* by these
counterfeit authorityes.

Thus you see, how the firstborn and the most ancient part of the doctrine of
Demons, the Deifying of Saints and Martyrs was advanced by the hypocrisy of
liars. The same you shall find to have bin verified also in the advancing of
the next-born D^mon-changling Image Worship, and of the third, the Idolatry of
the Masse-God, all brought in, and established by the means and ways
aforesaid. I need not spend time in Historical allegations, they are well
enough known; and primu^ in unoquoque genere est mensura consequentium. By
that I spoke of the first, you may Judge of those which follow; yet for Images
I will tell you a story or two for a taste: Bale our Countryman ( Script.
Illust. Britan, Cent. 11. ca. 91.99.) relates, that about the year 712, one
Egwin of Worcester published in writing certain Revelations, yea express
Visions he had seen, wherein he was enjoined to set in his Diocese of
Worcester the Image of the blessed Virgin, for the people to worship; which
Pope Constantine the first having made him confirm by oath, not only ratifyed
by his Bull; but caused Brithwald the Archbishop to hold a Council of the
whole Clergy at London, to commend them to the people.

In that Idolatrous Council of the second of Nice, one of their proofs, among
many the like for worshipping of Images, is a tale quoted out of I know not
what Sophronius, of a certain Recluse, who using to worship an Image of the
Virgin Mary, holding Christ in her arms, had been a long time tempted by the
devil to fornication; whereat on a time the old man being much aggrieved, the
Devil visibly appearing told him in plain terms (but under an oath of
secrecy) that he would never cease to vex him, until he left worshipping the
Image of the blessed Virgin. The Monk notwithstanding he had made him swear
by the most high, he should tell no body, yet acquaints one Abbot Theodore
with the business, who not only allows of his perjury in revealing it, but
gives him this ghostly resolution: (...). It were better he frequented all the
Stews in the City, than not to worship Christ and his mother, in an Image. I
am afraid some of their Monk successors still observe this wholesome counsel.

I must tell you also some of the miracles and lies for laying the foundation
of Transubstantiation, and thence advancing the Idol of the Mass. A certain
Monk reports, that he saw Jesus Christ in form of a child sitting upon the
Altar. Another says, yea more then one, that Wittikind King of the Saxons
entering disguised into a Church, and diligently observing the Christians
fashion of receiving the Communion, saw them put a little pretty smiling boy
into their mouths. These wonders and others of the like apparitions of flesh
and blood began not, till about the end of the 800 years. But that they might
seem ancienter, Simeon Metaphrastes has a forged Legend of Arsenius the
Hermit; and some body counterfeited the life of Saint Basil, under the name of
Amphilochius his companion, which now they begin to be ashamed of. And for
fear the people might suspect that these were illusions, they keep yet some
of the flesh and blood which was thus transubstantiated, for a monument, in
many Churches. To these apparitions, to make all complete, they tell us of a
hive of Bees seen in Saint Gervais his Monastery in Paris, which built a
Chapel of wax in honor of the Host, which some body put into the hive; and a
miracle of an Ass that left his provender to worship the Host; and many other
the like: but I have stayed too long amongst them, and therefore let here be
the conclusion of (...), that we may pass on to that is yet behind.

(...), Vide opus Hierarchicum seu Cousin. Migalian. in Timoth. ubi ex Home^^
(...), l^. O^cu^.
(...), etc.
I come now to the last description of the means whereby the doctrine of
Demons was to be advanced, viz. through the hypocrisy of such as forbid
marriage, and command to abstain from meats. Who are these? The wonderful
correspondence of the event makes me verily believe, that the Holy Ghost
intended here (at least chiefly) to decipher unto us Monks, and Doctors of
Monkery, by two such marks, as ar^ the chief points and grounds of that
singularity of life. For prohibition of marriage, and difference of meats are
inseparable characters of Monastical profession, and go common to all that
crew of hypocrites, whether solivagant Hermites, or Anchorites which live
alone, or Coenobites which lived in society. And if we take them joined
together, as our Apostle does, I think they can befit no other kind of men by
way of rule and precept, but these alone. It Is true, all Antichrists Priests
are forbidden marriage, generally and absolutely; but meats they are not, save
only upon certain days and times, which is not their case alone, but the
people also partake with them in the like restraint. But Monks are bound by the
vowed rule of their profession, to abstain from both absolutely and
perpetually. Concerning the first hear S. Chrysostom speak; hom. 7 in Math.
Nobis and Monachis (says he) omnia mandata Dei sunt communia, praeter
connubium: all the commandments of God are common to us, with Monks, besides
marriage. Wherefore in the Council of Chalcedon is an express Canon, cap. 16.
Vt nec Deo dicata Virgo, nec Monachus nubant: that no Nun or Monk should marry,
( i. e.) they might not forsake their profession.

For the second, the abstaining from meats, Saint Bennet can tell us best, who
is the father and founder of welnigh all the Monks of the West. His rule, which
they all bind themselves to observe, ^aith; a carnibus omnes abstineant, let
all abstain from flesh. Again, Carnium etiam quadrupedum omnino ab omnibus
abstineatur comestio: let all abstain together from the eating of flesh of
four footed beasts. Hence is that decree of Bishop Fructuosus in Gratian did.
5. Carnem cuiquam Monach^ nec gustandi, nec sumendi est concessa licentia: no
Monk has leave granted him to take, or so much as to taste a piece of flesh.
And these were the two principal observations of the first Monks, before they
came to be gathered into a society of a common life, under certain set rules.
Paulus Thebaus the first pattern of this kind of life, abstained as from
marriage (whereof there is no question) so from all meats, save bread and
dates. Anthony the next eat naught but bread and salt, and both drank no other
drink but water. Epiphanius in his Anchorato tells us of differing observations
in this kind. Some eat no flesh, but fish; some neither of both, but fruits and
herbs: some eat flying creatures, but abstained from all besides. But if you
will take meats in this place in a larger sense, you shall have a full
definition of Monkery, and take in that other Monastical principle of
renouncing possessions, and having no propriety in any thing, which they
account the second fundamental principle, next to the vow of chastity or
single life. Now may not (...), meats, be expounded in this sense? We know the
word (Bread) in Scripture signifies all thing needful for the maintenance of
life; omnia vi^ae subsidia; and therefore we ask them a^l in the Lords prayer
under that name, Give us this day our daily bread. Mark the words of David to
Ziba, 2 Samuel 9. Thou and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for
him (Mephibosheth) and shall bring in the fruits, that thy masters son may
have (...) food to eat. Here bread, or food, is taken for Mephibosheths whole
maintenance, the whole profit of the land which Ziba tils. Matthew. 10.9.10.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip for your
journey, neither coats, nor shoes, nor yet staves; for the workman is worthy
(...). Here gold, silver, brass, clothes, and staves, and all come under
(...), that is, meat. In stead whereof Saint Luke chap. 10. ver. 7. puts
(...), his hire. Pro. 30.8. Agur says, Give me neither poverty nor riches,
feed me with food convenient for me, (...). By all which appears, that food
and meat in Scripture is often taken for (...), as Saint James speaks cap. 2.
ver. 16. for all provision of things for the use of the body, and this life;
maintenance, revenue, estate, possession* why may not then abstaining from
meats in this Prophecy mean or include abstaining from possessions, votum
paupertatis, the vow of poverty, and renouncing of the world, as the hypocrites
call it? to which the following words, (...), are every way as pliable as to
the stricter sense, and may be read thus: which God has created to be enjoyed
with thankesgiving of them which, etc. Let us hear S. Bennets rule speak for
all^ Nemo aliquid proprium habeat, nullam omnino rem, neque codicem, neque
tabulas, neque graphiarium, sed nihil omnino: Let no man have any thing proper
or as his own, no kind of thing, neither book, nor writing, nor Inkehorne, nor
any thing at all. And those who had once imposed upon themselves this law, were
prohibited forever to return to the world again. Monachis non licere ad
s^culum redire, says the Canon of a great Council. Hear a story of S.
Hierome Epist. ad Eustochium. A certain Monk being dead was found to have been
so good an husband, as to have had lying by him one hundred Solidi, which he
had gotten by weaving of linen; hereupon great doubt there was, what it should
be done withal, whether given to the poor, to the Church, or to what use. But
Pambo, and Isidorus, and the other Fathers (of the Monks) laid their heads
together, decreed it should be buried with him, with this blessing; Pecunia tua
sit tecum in perditionem; thy money perish together with thee. The like
sentence gave Gregory the great against Justus a Monk, for the like fault,
Dial. ^. c. 55.

I conclude therefore, that these words, are a description of Monkery by such
notes as are fundamental, which way soever we take them, either containing
single life and discrimen ciborum, the differencing of meats, or the two vows
of chastity and poverty, or all three of them, Chastity, Poverty, and
abstaining from meats. As for that other vow of obedience, it was not from the
beginning, nor common to all; not to Hermites and Anchorites, but such as lived
in common under an head. And these are the men through whose hypocrisy, and by
whose means the doctrine of Demons should be brought in, and advanced among
Christians in the latter times.

Now let us see and behold with admiration the truth of this part also of the
prophesy. Where first observe that this singular kind of life began even just
at the time when the doctrine of Demons was to enter. For Paulus Thebaeus, and
Anthony, the first patterns thereof, died, the former in the reign of
Constantine, the latter a little before the year 360; whence, or near unto
which time, we began our reckoning before of the first entrance of
Saint-worship into the Church. About that time (Monks till then having been
confined to Egypt) Hilarion brought them into Syria, and presently Saint Basil
gave them a certain rule to live together in form of a Polity; and with the
assistance of his brother Gregory Nyssen and Gregory Nazianzen (who all entered
this new kind of life) dispersed them over all Asia amd Greece; whose increase
was so wonderful, that almost in an instant they filled the world, and their
esteem was so great, that there was scarce a man of note, but took upon him
this kind of life.

Though therefore it be most true, that our Apostles prophecy will be
verified, whichsoever of the two, either such as themselves entered the
restraint of a Monastic life, or those who approved, taught, and maintained
the holiness of tht profession (as the rest did) were the ringleaders and
Foster-fathers of this defection; (for both come within the verge of such as
forbid marriage, and command to abstain from meats) yet we will not content
ourselves with so loose an application, but see what an hand Monks and Friars
themselves (chiefly I suppose intended by the holy Ghost) had in this business.

And first in the doctrine of Demons, adoring of Relics, and Invocation of
Saints: where that which I first speak of shall be in the words of Chemnitius,
lest some more tender of the honor of our fathers upon earth, than of the
glory of our father in heaven, might take exception. Hear therefore not me,
but Chemnitius in his examen Concilii Tridentini: About the year of our Lord
God 370 per Basilium, Nissenum, et Nazianzenum in publicos Ecclesia conventus,
occasion orationum Panegyricarum Invocatio Sanctorum invehi coepit; eodem
tempore cum ab iisdem authoribus Monachatus ex Aegypto et Syria in Graeciam
introduceretur, Et videtur (says he) haec sive portio, sive Appendix
Monachatus fuisse. By Basil, Nissen, and Nazianzen, upon occasion of
Panegyricall orations, Invocation of Saints began to be brought into the
public Assemblyes of the Church, at the same time, when by the same Authors
the profession of Monastical life was was brought out of Egypt and Syria into
Greece; and it seems (says he) that this was either a part, or an
appurtenance of Monkery etc. Again speaking of St. Ambrose when he had once
turned Monk, howsoever he was before; Non tamen nego (inquit) Ambrosium,
tandem cum Monochatum a Basilio mutuo sumpsisset, etiam ad Invocationem
Sanctorum inclinare coepisse, ut patet ex libro de viduis. I deny not (says
he) but Ambrose at length, when he had once borrowed Monkery from Basil, began
also to incline to the Invocation of Saints, as appears in his book De viduis.
Thus Chemnitius.

And that you may yet further see how operative Monks were in this business,
hear Saint Augustine de opere Monachorum, cap. 28. Tam multos hypocritas sub
habitu Monachorum usquequaque dispersit Satan, circumeuntes provincias, nusquam
missos, nusquam fixos, nusquam stantes, nusquam sedentes. Alii membra Martyrum,
si tamen Martyrum venditant; and omnes petunt, omnes exigunt, aut sumptus
lucrosae egestatis, aut simulatae pretium sanctitatis. The Devil (says he)
has dispersed in every corner such a crew of hypocrites, under the habit of
Monks, gadding about every Country, sent no whither, staying no where, every
where restless, whether sitting or standing; some sell the limbs of Martyrs,
if so be of Martyrs; and all asking, all exacting either the expense of a
gainful poverty, or the hire of a counterfeit sanctity. These were those
surely which occasioned that rescript of Theodosius the Emperor, Nemo Martyrem
distrahat, nemo mercetur; let no man sell, let no man buy a Martyr: whereby we
may gather what honesty was like to be used amongst them: we know, Laudat
venales qui vult extrudere merces; Merchants use to commend their commodities.
Gregory of Tours, who lived and died somewhat before the year 600, tells us
this, Monachos quosdam Romam venisse, ac prope templum Pauli corpora quaedam
noctu effodisse, qui comprehensi fassi sunt in Graeciam se ea pro Sanctorum
reliquiis portaturos fuisse; That certain Monks came to Rome, and near unto
Saint Paul's Church, in the night time, dug up certain bodies; who being
apprehended, confessed they meant to have carried them into Greece for relics
of Saints. The same Author, l. 9. c. 6. Hist. Franc. relates a story of another
counterfeit Monk, who pretended to come out of Spain with Martyrs relics;
but being discovered, they were found to be certain herbs, with bones of Mice,
and such like stuff: and he tells us there were many such seducers which
deluded the people. And he said true, there were many indeed, and many more
than Gregory took for such, even those h^e took for honest men. For though it
must not be denied, but God had some of this order which were holy men, and
unfainedly mortified, notwithstanding their errou^ in thinking God was pleased
with that singularity of life; yet must it be confessed, that the greater part
were no better than hypocrites, and counterfeits, and that the lamentable
defection of the Christian Church chiefly proceeded from, and was fostered by
men of that profession, as in part we have heard already.

And if you can with patience hear him speak, I will add the testimony of
Eunapius Sardianus, a Pagan Writer, who lived in the days of Theodosius the
first, about the year 400, in the life of Edesius, most bitterly inveighing
against the Christians for demolishing the renowned Temple of Serapis at
Alexandria in Egypt: he speaks in this manner: When they had done (says he)
they brought into the holy places those which they call Monks, men indeed for
shape, but living like swine, and openly committing innumerable villainies, not
to be named; who yet took it for a piece of Religion thus to despise the
Divinity (he means of Serapis:) for then (says he) whosoever wore a black
coat, and would demean himself absurdly in public, got a tyrannical
authority; to such an opinion of virtue had that sort of men attained. These
Monks also they placed at Canopus, in stead of the intelligible gods, to
worship slaves, and those of no good condition; thus bringing a bond of
Religion upon men. For having powdered the bones and skuls of such as had been
condemned of many crimes, and punished by a legal course of justice, they made
Gods of them; prostrating themselves unto them, and thinking themselves the
better for being polluted with Sepulchers; they called them forsooth Martyrs,
and some Deacons, yea and Solicitours of their prayers with the gods; being
indeed but perfidious slaves, who had been well basted with the whip, and
carried the scars of their lewdness upon their bodies, and yet such gods as
these the earth brings forth.

Thus the wretched caitiffe, and damned dog, blasphemes the Saints and servants
of Christ, who loved not their lives unto death; the dust of whose feet he was
not worthy to lick up. Yet may we make a shift to gather hence, what manner of
offices Monks were then busied in. And if Baronius took leave to use his
testimony for the antiquity of Saint-worship, why may not I with the like
liberty allege it, to show that Monks and Friars were ringleaders therein?

But when the Idolatry of Image Worship came to be added to those of Saints,
whether Monks and Friars were not the chief sticklers therein, judge when you
shall hear how it fared with them in that great opposition against Idols in the
East.

Of Leo Isaurus, the first of those Emperors that opposed Images, we have this
in general out of the Greek Menology: That he raged most cruelly against
Bishops and Monks, which maintained the worship of Images; and that he burnt a
whole cloister of such kind of people in their Monastery, together with a
famous Library, and all their furniture.

But Constantine his son made a worse fray amongst them. For the Author of the
Acts of Monk Stephen tells us, That he being reproved and convicted for what he
had done ( viz. against Images) by the religious and worthy professors of
Monastical life, he raised an implacable war against them; calling that
noble habit, (...), the vesture of darkness; and the Monks themselves, (...),
that is, unworthy of memory: and besides, terming them all Idolaters, for the
worshipping of venerable Images.

The same is confirmed by Theosterictus, another Author of that time, who
says, That the whole aim and study of this Emperor was to extinguish and
root out the order of Monks.

And for particulars, here what Theophanes (himself a Monk, and a little
singed too in this flame, before it ended) will inform us.

In the one and twentieth year of his reign he caused (says he) Andreas
Calybites, a worthy Monk, who reproved him for his impiety (in demolishing
Images) to be scourged till he died, lib. 22. cap. 30. Hist. miscell.

In the five and twentieth year of his reign he caused Monk Stephen to be
dragged by the heels in the streets, till being rent in pieces, he died; both
for the aforesaid offense, and because he drew and persuaded many to a
Monastical life, Ibid. cap. 39.

The same year the Emperor (says he) disgraced and dishonored the
Monastical habit, publicly commanding every Monk to lead a woman by the hand,
so to march through the Hippodrome, all the people abusing them, and spitting
upon them, Ibid. cap. 40.

In the seven and twentieth year, the Monasteries (he says) partly he
destroyed to the very foundations, partly bestowed them upon his Captains and
Soldiers, Ibid. cap. 49.

In the same year, when he could not draw Peter a Metra, a famous Stylite, or
Pillar-Monk, unto his opinions, he caused him likewise to be dragged by the
heels, and his body cast out into the streets, Ibid. cap. 48.

In his thirtieth year, his Praetor or Deputy Lichanodraco gathered all the
Monks in his jurisdiction together, and commanded them to obey the Emperor, to
put on a white coat, and to marry wives instantly, or to have their eyes put
out, and to be sent into exile, Ibid. cap. 52. So the Emperor, when he would
have Constantine the Patriarch abjure Monkery, he made him (says the same
Author) eat flesh, Lib. eod. cap. 29.

In the one and thirtieth year the same Lichanodraco sold all the Monasteries,
both of men and women in his jurisdiction, and sent the money to the Emperor.
If he found any one to have a relic of any Saint in keeping, he burnt it,
and punished him that had it. He slew the Monks, some with stripes, some with
the sword; and left not a man, where he had to do, that wore a Monastical
habit; whereupon the Emperor wrote thus unto him, (...): I have found thee a
man after mine own heart, who fulfillest my whole will. Thus much of
Constantine.

The like reports Cedrenus of Michael Balbus, That he abominated Monks, and
diversely afflicted them, ordaining one punishment after another against them.
As also of Theophilus, the last Emperor that opposed Images: Theophilus (says
he) ordained (...), that no Monks should have access unto the Cities, and that
they should by all means be banished; (...), and not so much as dare to be
seen in the Country: and that he caused the Monasteries and places of holy
retirement to become common and secular habitations: what the reason was, we
may learn by that the same Author tells us: Of those (says he) which
reprehended the Emperor, the Abramite Monks were the chief; who freely
adventuring into his presence, did demonstrate that Monastical life was not an
invention of yesterday, or the other day, but an ancient and primitive
institution, and that holy Images were familiar in the Apostles times, and that
Saint Luke painted an Image of the blessed Virgin, etc. But it seems the
Emperor was not convinced by their demonstration: for this their boldness
cost them full dear, as our Author relates.

By this time I know you understand what the matter was that this Image-storm
fell so heavily upon the heads of Monks and Friars: and yet notwithstanding all
this, they at length prevailed, and carried the day (so God would have it) for
their Idols. For another Theophanes, whom they call the Presbyter, a Writer
also of his time tells, That Theophilus being dead, Theodora the Empress
(whilst she reigned in the minority of Michael her son) when she meant to
restore Image Worship, which had been banished now the second time, ever since
Leo Armenius, Re cum illis communicata, qui erant in magistratu and dignitate
constituti, accersit cum ipsis eos, qui inter Monachos praestabant, and de
Imaginum instauratione quaestionem proponit. Cumque idem omnes consentientes
comperissent, diuturnoque ejus re^ desiderio teneri, atque animo excruciari
propter Religionis in hac re mutationem, postulat, ^t se etiam Patrum
authoritatibus ad veritatem confirmarent, quas variis in libris invenissent.
Mandavitque quo in loco Palatii praefinito, ^aetus Ecclesiasticus universus
cogeretur, and ad populum ea de re verba faceret, etc. that is, when she had
acquainted the Magistrates, and those that were in authority, therewith,
together with them she sent for the chiefest of the Monks, and propounded to
them the question concerning restoring of Images: whom when she found all men
for the purpose, yea very eager in the business, she called a Synod, whereby
Idolatry was again publicly erected in the Greek Church, 120 years after it
first began to be purged thereof, by Leo Isaurus the Emperor.

For the Idolatry of the masse-god, which was not in use, at soonest, till a
thousand years after Christ, when the opinion of Transubstantiation had gotten
strength, we shall not need trouble our selves much to show that Monks and
Friars were the authors and advancers thereof; since by that time, these kind
of men were become the only masters of Divinity: and therefore we need not
doubt, that what was then broached in the Church, came out of their shop.

Judge now, by what you have heard, how truly this Prophecy of Saint Paul is
fulfilled, who told us, that the Doctrines of Demons should be brought into
the Church, (...); through the hypocrisy of those who forbid to marry, and
(command) to abstain from meats.

FINIS.
Printed for SAMUEL MAN at the Swan in Paul's Churchyard.


