Winchester Prison the 21th day of the 1 month, 59.
IF the measure of my sufferings under the creuel hands of unreasonable men, be
finished in this noisome prison by the laying down of my life, (in obedience to
the Lord that has called me out of the way of sinners) by reason of my
tedious, unwholesome, and cruel sufferings this 12. months in this little filthy
hole, which if at large were declared it might appear to be much, that my life,
(and others) has been preserved to this day, but if not much longer; this I
declare for truths sake, and desire to have laid before the eyes of the chief
Rulers of this Nation, that none hereafter may say, that lb ought these cruel
sufferings upon my self, or that by negligence or wilfulness I was the occasion
of my own death as it was said of James Parnel; for I was traveling toward
London with goods upon lawful occasions, and forth of an Inn about the 10th.
hour of the night, was I taken with a Warrant, and no man charged any thing
against me but John Bunkly in his Mittimus falsely writ several misdemeanors,
but never proved in the least: and at an Assizes after, by Judge Windham was I
committed to the house of Correction, until I engage to go home, whose business
then lay from home at London. And a free man born in the Nation I am, and also
for my liberty in it from such cruel tyranny, have served 8. years in the late
war at Sea, who sometime was a Captain of a Friggot at Sea; and since I was a
Prisoner thus unjustly here, I have with the rest of my dear brethren with me,
declared in Print, in a book tituled, The fruits of unrighteousness, brought
forth by Ioh. Bunkly, who unjustly committed 3. of us into prison, when he was
in a passion as he confessed: that we are ready to submit to all the laws of the
Nation either actively or passively, and desire to know by what law I am kept
here, and have not been wanting to use any means lawful in the sight of God,
for my liberty out of this stinking place, but nothing has prevailed upon the
hardened hearts of the sons of men; who though they keep us in close prison, to
have us engage to go home, or out of the County, yet Will. Bailey born in the
county, (committed in one Mittimus with me and also Hum. Smith) could not
obtain liberty from Justice nor Jayler to go home, which is out of the County,
when his Father dyed, and one of his own three small motherless children not
well.

Therefore let all people that fear the Lord, take notice how unmercifuly they
deal with him and the rest, and with me, who have been sick many days (or
weeks) and am now waxed very weak by reason of the cruel sufferings my body
has here endured, and my soul (with the rest of my dear friends) grieved by
most barbarous wicked common drunken swearing prisoners, and our bodies daily
abused by them, and condemned persons, and beaten, and like to be murdered by
such as one of them said he was for the King so long as he lived, and termed
the States service at Sea piracie under whose cruel hands it is most
unreasonable we should be kept: and a most filthy beastly woman Jayler setting
them on, and has also locked a rude bawling madman into the hoal where we are,
on purpose to do me what mischief she could, which man soon devoured what I had
to nourish my body when I was sick and weak; and frinds were locked up also that
they could not get more ^or me; and the noise of the madman did me much more
hurt, then the want of water or nourishment; for my body which now lies in a
filthy hoal, in a weak condition upon the ground with straw, where they were
used to put condemned persons, and where we have long wanted room to lie one by
another, being a hoal more fit for swine, where the spewing and piss of the
drunken prisoners that lie above us, have commonly come down where we lie, and
on our faces in the night, and on our food as we were eating: and most noisome
stinks and filthy scents have I suffered, by being shut up in it close prisoner
ten months, having no place for air, but in a smoaky filthy close place, where
for four months I cannot see the sun, which place is as a dunghill, or common
place of filth for all the prison, and much more the like, or worse may be writ
of it.

Out of which bonds and inhumane sufferings, I do claim my right and freedom
in the nation, which I and the rest of my dear suffering friends have so dearly
purchased, and also paid tribute, sesements and taxes, and yet of law and
liberty we are deprived; having not in the least spoke or done any thing worthy
of death or of bonds, if I had, less then 12. months imprisonment satisfies
the law in many things, though nothing but blood, nor that neither will
satisfy the cruel wills of men, under whose tyranny upon the Lord I wait to be
releast, with the rest of my brethren seven in number, who innocently do
suffer, but if not, my life I give up into the will of him whose it is that
redeems the soul out of bondage, and let them by whom I thus suffer and them
who may release me, and the rest, and will not, take heed of innocent blood.

And this is written for me being weak my self upon a little straw, from which
I have not been many days, to the truth whereof I write my name Anthony
Melledg.

James Potter imprisoned and nothing proved against him, was by judge Nichols,
fined five pound to the late Protecto^ for wearing his hat, and has been a
prisoner almost 2 years.

Elizabeth Streeter imprisoned from her sucking child, and fined five pound for
speaking some words of truth to a Priest in the high way, and 2 of her husbands
servants imprisoned by Rob. Reynolds (who also committed her) contrary to law
and never yet brought to any trial.

Close-Prisoners in the common Jayl and house of Correction at Winchester.
Will. Bailey. Humphery Smith. Athony Melledg. Richard Baker. James Pottar.
Will. Baker. Elizabeth Streeter.

