Junii 27 mo. 1662.
PErlegi concionem hanc cui titulus, The New Criple's Caveat, etc. quam dig.
nam judico quae typis mandetur,

Robertus Pory S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino
Guilielmo Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Sacel. Domesticus.

Courteous Reader,
The frequent false pointings even to the disturbing of the sense can not here
be enumerated, the slips of the Press in Letters mend thus,

Page 10. l. 19. dele that, p. 11. l. 32. supple in, p. 17. l. 22. lege
impenitence, p. 18. l. 7. lege pietatem, p. 20. l. 3. (...), p. 20. l. 4.
chastised, p. 23. l. ult. purify, p. 24. l. 18. (...), p. 26. l. 6. (...), p.
31. l. 5: dele s, p. 32. l. 19. pourtraiture, p. 33. l. 3. Eutopian, p. 37. l.
5. dele but, p. 37. l. 8. dele by, p. 30. l. 14. nonis.

The New-Cured Criple's Caveat: OR, England's Duty for the Miraculous Mercy of
the King's and Kingdoms Restoration. IN A Sermon Preached before the
Honorable Society of Grays Inn, upon the 29. of May, our Anniversary
Thanksgiving.

By Rich, Meggott, M. A. and Rector of St. Olaves South-warke.

Hos. 3.4,5. For the Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King,
and without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, etc. Afterward shall the
children of Israel return and seek the Lord their God, and David their King,
and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter days.

Ingratitudo inimica est animae, exinanitio meritorum, virtutum dispeesio,
beneficiorum perditio. St. Bernardus Sermon. 51. in Cant.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Peter Dring, at the sign of the Sun, next door
to the Rose Tavern, in the Poultrey 1662.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, George by Divine Providence Lord Bishop
of WINCHESTER.
Right Reverend and Honorable,
YOu may easily excuse me for using your Name upon this, when you think what
stead it stood me in upon another occasion. I were very stupid, if I did not
know the worth of it; and then it is no wonder, if I am loath to part with it.
This (my Lord) made me find favor in the eyes of a King; and then how can it
but make me find acceptance among (unless it be, because they be) His less
intelligent Subjects. And if the Gospel it self, that is above all humane
Patronage, be Dedicated to the most Excellent Theophilus; then surely what is
of so inferior a nature as this discourse, had need look out for one that is
Venerable indeed to countenance it.

But this is not all the reason. The truth is, I was too big with a sense of
your undeserved kindness to go long undelivered; and still finding a word
hindering surprise upon me when I was before you, I pitched upon this way of
thanking you, for though such Epistles use to come out for the pieces sake that
follows; I had almost said, this piece that follows had not come out but
for the Epistles sake. This I thought once to stuff with the deep resentments
I have of what you have done for me, but that is so trivial and ordinary a
return; I looked upon my self as bound to scorn it, and endeavor something
greater.

I well perceive by those truly Episcopal Memento's you gave me, what will be
more acceptable to you, viz. to take heed to my self and to the Doctrine in the
place with which my Sovereign upon your recommending, has entrusted me. And
therefore upon this occasion, shall venture before the world to tell you, I did
not more willingly with my Pen subscribe the Churches Articles before, than I
shall endeavor with my pains, to transcribe my Diocesans charge after my
institution, that the souls of the people may not be starved on deceived, my
Mother the Church despised or scandalized, your Lordships condescending
assistance censured or repented of.

I shall only add my hearty and constant prayers, that your light may be long
burning and shining in this crooked and perverse Generation; and cease, though
not to thank, to trouble you,

Your Lordships bounden in the strictest ties of Duty and Gratitude RICHARD
MEGGOTT.

THE NEW-CVRED CRIPLE'S Caveat.
John the fifth, latter part of the 14th. verse. Behold, thou art made whole:
sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.


Physicians meet not with more diseases in the body, than Divines do in the
soul of man. Are their Patients troubled with burning feavours? ours are with
boiling lusts too: have theirs the torturing stone? ours have hardness of
heart: are theirs incident to the Falling sickness? Alas! so are ours to foul
apostasy. In a word, have theirs Consumptions? ours have envy: have theirs the
Tympany? ours have Pride: are theirs subject to death? ours are to damning.
Hence it is that as our blessed Savior is styled by St. Peter the Bishop of
our souls, (1 Pet. 2. and the last) so he calls himself the Physician ( Mat.
9.12) A Physician indeed he was, according to Socrates's raised wish, Plato
Hippias.
(...), that cured both flesh and Spirit. I shall not lead you out of the way
for an instance, you have a lively one in the Text before you. In the ninth
verse of this Chapter he had healed a Criple of his lamenesse, Beda.
immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed and walked: and qui
foris ab infirmitate ipse etiam intus salvavit a scelere, says venerable Bede
upon the place; as he had delivered him from his infirmity, he goes to purge
him from his iniquity: you have the ingredients he uses in it, in the words I
have now read, (...), Behold thou art made whole, sin no, more least a worse
thing come unto thee.

The words were calculated (you see) for another, but may very well serve for
our Meridian: they were spoken many hundred years a go, yet are very pertinent
to the business of this day. They were delivered at first to a man newly
recovered, and what fitter to be repeated to a people lately delivered? He
Christ pronounced them to, was one that had been decripit for eight and thirty
years; and you I am now rehearsing them to, have you not for eighteen years
been more than almost in as lame a posture? Our Savior that by his power had
restored this man from his impotence before, endeavors by his council to
draw him to penitence here; and you that have had such unexpected mercies of
late conferred on you; what fitter address can I now make to you than with the
same Memento, to press you to your duties, behold you are made whole, sin no
more, etc.

Divis.
In which words, you may be pleased plainly to take notice; 1. Of an intimation
of a sin that might be committed. 2. The commemoration of a mercy that had been
received. 3. The Admonition of a duty that was to be performed. 4. A
Commination of fury that otherwise would be inflicted.
The intimation is pious. The Commemoration gracious. The Admonition serious.
The Commination grievous.
The intimation of the sin suspected, you have in that word behold. The
Commemoration of the mercy received in those words, thou art made whole. The
Admonition of the duty to be performed in those, sin no more. The Commination
of the fury that might be inflicted in those, least a worse thing come unto
thee.


These are the natural parts of the Text; of each whereof distinctly and
doubly: First in their absolute consideration as they lie in the Text, and then
in their relative, as they may be a looking glass for us. I begin with the
absolute consideration of the text, and therein first with the first particular.

1. Part.
The intimation of the sin, the sin of ingratitude, that he might run into, now
he was upon his legs again. Behold! Behold thou art made whole.

Behold! Is this the first Salutation? every thing would put him in mind of
this: How is it possible he should forget the misery of eight and thirty years
in so short a space as eight and thirty hours? What is he as lame in his memory
as he was in his limbs, that this is so soon repeated to him?

Saint Chrysostom has appositely answered the question, St. Chrysostom. in
locum.
(...) etc. It was not spoken for him alone, but upon this occasion, written
for our instruction, to teach us that every mercy should have its Ecce: No
blessing should escape our registring. Lorinus has wittily noted, Lorinus in
Psalm.
frater Ephraim qui fructificantem significat, Manasses est qui obliviosum,
quasi oriatur ex beneficiis oblivio; that Manasses which signifies
forgetfulness, is the brother of Ephraim which signifies fruitfulness: and
the Eremite that tells his Nicholaus of the three Mystical Monsters which
would always be assaulting him, Bibl. patrum tom. 5.
makes this to march in the front (primam nomino oblivionem) an unthankful
heedlesnesse of what God does for us: to prevent this here Cynthius aurem
vellit, he has this seasonable item, Behold; be not stupid, regardlesse,
insensible, I expect you should be mindful off, affected with, thankful for
this unexpected mercy that is befaln you. And well may he call for this from
all of us, when he has showred down blessings upon us to behold them: this is,
A Natural. An Aequal. A Facile return to him.
First, It Is natural (...), as Aelian in another case: Aelian. var. hist. l. 6.
there needs no Art of memory, no bond of Penalty, no Act of Parliament, one
would think for this: the very Beasts will do it. The Ox knows his owner,
and the Ass his master Crib, and shall we come short of these? Agellius l. 5.
c. 14.
Agellius's Lion that three years after fawned upon the Slave that cured him;
Lilius Gicaldus.
Democritus's Dragon that succored Thoas who fed him; Sophronus in prato.
spirituali.
Philarchus's Aspe that killed her young one for biting the child of the
Egyptian who bred her, were enough to rise up in judgment against us and
condemn us. Besides,

Secondly, It is equal. We expect that others should take notice of the
kindness we show, and the courtesies we do for them; and is it not fit (think
you) we should take notice of those which our God conferreth on us? Canan
thinks no name so fit for his son as Mahalaleel, qui quoties filium
nominaret, toties, quasi dicecet Hallulujah said a learned interpreter, Lapide
in locum.
because as often as he named him, he would be minded to bless God for him. The
Heathen had learned so much divinity, when they had escaped any danger,
recovered any loss, gained any victory, pictis tabellis in templis deorum
appensis, etc. Says Mercurialis de regymnest.
Mercurialis de regymnestica, to paint the story of it, and hang it up for
perpetual record in the Temples where they worshipped. Good Hezekiah is
recovered from his sickness, but this wonderful deliverance from death must
not die and be buried in oblivion; himself turns Historiographer, that as the
(...) had their tabulae post naufragium, so he has his scriptura post
valetudinem. Isaiah 38.9. you see it is but equal in the thoughts of all men;
yea which may sway more.

Thirdly, It is facile. Had it been some great thing, should we not have done
it? But when he stoopeth so, low who would offer to deny him? If we could have
what we want from men at this price, what a peniworth should we reckon it? No,
there the Market rises. The Physician when he visits his Patient, is scarce
contented if he have nothing but thanks from him; the Lawyer scarce heartily
pleads a Cause where the Client feeth him with a handful of thanks only, the
Tradesman will not part with his Commodities where he meets with a chapman
that bids nothing but thanks; and yet this is all that the Almighty asks,
when he gives us all our blessings. Blessed God how Cheap thou art! O how well
thou usest us! seeing he is so Gracious to ask no more, let not us be so
ungracious as to offer less: where we are so much beholding? how can we but
behold, the duty the Text called for.

Appl.
And this is that we are this day met together for: The Apostle tells us in
the 2. of Tim. 3.2. that in the last days as some would be traitors, some
heady, some high-minded, some disobedient to Parents; so some would be
unthankful; O (my Brethren!) you that abominate the former vices for Gods
sake, take heed of the latter. And that we may not mock God, nor deceive our
selves, in thinking we do this duty, when we omit it, let us mingle our
thanksgiving with these three ingredients to perfume and sweeten it.

Let it be Universal. Proportionable. Suitable.


First, be sure it be universal, for all that God does for us. Of course
solemnly before meat and after we give God thanks; but (alas!) how many
thousands of other mercies escape us with no observance? Here I may allude to
that passage of our Savior concerning the Leapers ( Luke 17.17.) Were there
not ten cleansed? but where are the nine? Have not you millions of mercies and
blessings? what is become of them, that there are not found for which men give
glory to God save this one? How many have we that are much more worth than a
meals meat? Do thou not prise thy Health higher? Thy Estate higher? Thy
Liberty higher? Thy Peace, higher? Thy Relations higher? Where, O where is our
thankfulness for these? Every one deserves an Ecce, a behold to be set on
them; let it be universal. And then,

Secondly let it be proportionable: let not slight praises serve for a solid
and substantial mercy. The Pharisees short come of, is that which most men
content themselves with ( Luke 18.11.) God, I thank thee: This is all we are
willing to part with. The Latins happily phrase this duty gratias agere, to do
thanks: here we must act and act fervently and vigorously. Solomon, as a high
upbrading, sends the sluggard to the Ant to learn diligence; whether shall I
send you? Truly, I may to the Caterpillar, Lice, and Locust, the Pestilent
Vermin that of late was crept into every place (like the Plagues of Egypt,
not sparing the Kings Bedchamber) and overrun the Kingdoms; look upon them
in the day of their usurpation, it is easy to remember how they defiled the Holy
places with their assemblings, commanded unwelcome days to be Celebrated,
drawled out audacious Hallelujahs to heaven, for every prosperous villainy. Did
they dare to do this for ruining three Kingdoms? and shall we dare to do
otherwise for the preserving them? Did they in their way seem to give God
thanks (I annually) for overthrowing a King! and shall not we for the restoring
him? Did they proclaim thanksgiving for wasting a Church, and shall not we for
settling it, -- pudet haec opprobia nobis
Vel dici potuisse, etc.


3. Let it be suitable thanks; thanks fit for us to give, and God to receive,
serious, sincere and spiritual. It is the Greek Fathers note upon him in the
Text; Jesus finds him in the Temple, (...) etc. He was in a proper place for
a thankful man to be in, not in the Market, not in the Court, not in the Field,
but in the Temple: O how many are there among us that are glad, who do not
give thanks! glad of this days work (the redemption that God has wrought for
our Israel, in turning again our captivity) who except the miserably infatuated
or interested are not? But (O!) how sadly do we express it! You may find them
in the Tavern drinking, in the Parlour feasting, in the Theater gazing; but
how few, how few comparatively, in the Closet, or with him in the Text, in the
Temple praising and glorifying the great and Gracious Author of it? God has
given us (my beloved) that which we would have. O let us now give him that
which he would have. The greatness of the mercy every way deserves it; come,
let us not give thanks to the halves; we are made whole, which brings me to,

2. Par.
The second Particular of the Text, from the intimation of the sin, we are apt
to run into ingratitude and unthankfulness, to the Commemoration of the
benefit which has been received, Thou art made whole.

Thou? Who? Thou who were eight and thirty years decrepit, Thou who have layn
so long at the Poole, Thou who were so unlikely ever to recover, Thou art made
whole. Augetur admiratio ex pertinacia morbi, says Judicious Grotius; Grotious
in ver. 5.
the inveterateness of the distemper shows the miraculousnesse of the cure.)

Righteous art thou (dearest Jesus!) when we plead with thee; yet let us talk
with thee of thy judgments. Seeing thou did intend to heal this poor man at
last, why did not do it before? Thou have told us, Thou do not willingly
grieve; this would make as if thou did not willingly ease the Children of
men: we often read in thy word, that thou art slow to anger, and shall we find
thee in the same word slow to mercy?

Sic visum est superis. He could as easily have healed him at the first; but
his will was otherwise: That of the Tragaedian is true of all his proceedings
toward men: (...). Euripides.


As he many times keeps silence at the wickeds sins, and does not punish
them; so does he at his peoples sorrows and does not redress them. He is many
times long in bestowing that mercy, which he does intend to bestow at last. He
intended to deliver his people out of the Exodus 12.40
Bondage of Egypt, yet you know he stayed four hundred and thirty years.
First, he did determine to give them a 1 Samuel 16.13.
King after his own heart, but they stay five hundred and odd years first. He
resolved to bring them out of Jer. 25.12.
Babylon, but they stay there threescore and ten year first. It appears he
intended to deliver England from the violence and oppression of them that Raged
rather than Reigned over Us, but you know he stayed some tedious years first.
But all this amounts to no more than that he does so still we may wonder.
Blessed Lord! Thou have told us, we Pro. 3.28.
must not say to our neighbor, Go and come again, and to morrow I will give,
when we have it by us; and what will thou say so to thy Children? Judge. 5.28.
Why is thy chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of thy purposed
mercy? If he that gives quickly, gives doubly; then he that gives slowly
will be scarce accounted to give at all. But his ways are not as our ways;
his wisdom and goodness are both seen in these delayings.

First, to make us the more earnest for the blessing, and set the higher rate
upon it. It was once (I read) a custom among the Persians when their Emperor
dyed, to continue three days without any Governor at all, that there being no
(...) no heir of restraint, as the Judges 18.7
Holy Ghost has styled the Magistrate, but every man doing what was good in
his own eyes, the tired people might with one consent and lip the more
passionately welcome the Prince that did succeed him.

Such a method the Almighty makes use of, to make us fast for some time from a
mercy that we may have the better stomach to it next time it is set before us.
The wise man tells us, Pro. 27.7.
The full soul loatheth the Honey comb; we have sadly seen the truth of it,
when a sweet natured Prince, and sweet tempered laws could not (they had so
much of them) be brooked any longer or got down with men; but when the
devouring voider had took away these from the table, though the Butchers, Cooks
and Scullions of the new or rather no modeled State, were still serving up one
Hot-potch or another to stop the mouths of the people; how quickly did they
spit out that trash and trumpery, it serving only for sour sauce to procure
them a fresh appetite to their wholesome old provisions; and that is one end of
God in not present healing of our distempers, and sending us our blessings as
soon as we miss them, that we may have the more mind to them.

2ly. Another reason may be to manifest his power, the more Chronick diseases
are hard to cure, when as they that are taken at first are soon helped; it is
easy to pluck up a new set slip; but how fast does the grown Tree stand? Tunc
poterat manibus summa tellure revelli;
Nunc stat in immensum viribus aucta suis. Ovid de rem. Am.

Now God delights to act so as himself may have most glory; then to do things
when they appear most difficult. He that will stay while probabilities vanish,
hopes sink, things look desperate, and then (...), himself will appear from
above, when none can come in for partners, or claim a share with him; Isaiah.
63.5.
He will look on while there is none to help; hold off while there is none to
uphold, and then, then shall his own arm bring Salvation. Gideon has 32000.
men to fight with, but they are too many; Judge. 7.3.4.
they are reduced to ten thousand; they are too many still; they must be
reduced to three hundred, a petty inconsiderable company, (considering their
enemies they had to deal with) and then they shall deliver. England had an
Army, but then we shall not be delivered; then it would have been attributed to
their strength. God suffers them to be routed, and vanquished; yet the Loyal
ones had estates, but then we shall not be delivered; then it would have been
thought it was done by their bribes and money: God suffered them to be
sequestered and decimated. Yet there were remaining wise men and Counselors,
but then we shall not be delivered; then it would have been said, it was their
policy and contrivance. God suffers many of them to be taken away and
murdered; and when there was no likelihood, when men could not do it, then he
comes down to visit us. And

3ly. And Lastly; He stays, that we may be the fitter for it. Many times a
mercy is ready for us, and God withholds it, because we be not ready for the
mercy: As he will show his power in effecting it; so he will show his wisdom
in timing it. He could have brought Israel out of Egypt with eleven days easy
traveling; but he spinneth out forty tedious years with them; he could have
cured the woman's issue of blood as soon as it came, Luke 8.43.
but she shall spend all she has upon Physicians: First, our Savior could
have wrought the miracle at the instance of his Mother, John 2.4.
but his hour was not yet come. The Hebrews have a proverb (...) Heinsy Aris
tarchus.
you must not tell a wise man when he should do a thing; and if a wise man,
surely we may conclude the wise God will, and does take the only fit time for
every administration. He has a time, a set time wherein he will have mercy
upon his Sion, Psalm. 102.13. When the enemies of it are most impudent and
hardened, when her Children are most penitent and awakened. In the first of
these, I am sure, came our deliverance, when the rampant Usurpers said of all
that concerned things Sacred, raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof;
of all that concerned our civills, abjure it, abjure it even to all
generations: And O that the looseness and lowdnesse, the boisterous
profaneness and wild debaucherys, that fly abroad like so many (...)
shameless and noonday devils, did not hinder me from saying the latter too!
I must confess seeing ten righteous persons should have been a City-fitness to
have saved Sodom from the fire, I have a great deal of confidence
(notwithstanding the too huge heaps of the riotous unreformed) at that low rate
there might be found as many zealous and conscientious mourners in England, in
the day of her sore evil, that gave their God no rest, as might amount to a
national fitness, to deliver us out of the fire If there were not, and there
wanted us to make up the number, Now we have the mercy! O now, let us labor to
walk worthy of it; let the goodness of the Lord lead us unto repentance. This
is that he looks for, that as he has been better toward us than he was, so
we should be better toward him than we were: Being made whole, sin no more.

Part. 3.
The third Particular of the Text, and leads me from the commemoration of the
mercy that had been conferred, thou art made whole, to the Admonition of the
duty that was to be performed, sin no more.

Sin no more? That is impossible. Is there any that lives and sins not?
Does not the Psalmist tell us Psalm. 14.3.
there is none exactly righteous, no not one? Holy Job, Job. 14.4.
that none can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? the Blessed Apostle, 1
John. 1.8.
if we (the best) say they have no sin, they deceive themselves? what means
the counsel then?

R.
Not to spend time to no purpose, doubtless it has peculiar reference to that
or those particular sins for which this long affliction had been on him. Cave
tale aliquid committas quale ante hos xxxviii. annos; so Grotius; G^ti. 9. in
loc
aliquod scelus patravit auod deus morbo tam diutino castigare voluit; So
Lapide: Lap. in loc
(...), So Nonnus has paraphrased it; Monn. in loc
The sum of what they all say, is that the words seem to strike at some
especial eminent and accustomed sin this man had before been guilty of; he
should have a care while he lived, to sin that sin no more. And thus much we
must all learn from it, Arab.
when we are delivered to take special heed of those sins for which we were
before punished; Non redire ad Peccandum; as the Arabic reads the Text, not
to return to do as we did before the judgment was sent to reclaim and Tutour
us. This is the Doctrine which the Psalmist preaches, Psalm. 85.8.
He will speak peace unto his people and to his Saints, but let them not turn
again to folly. This is the Use holy Ezra presses; Ezra 9.13.14
After all this is come upon us for our evil deeds and for our great
trespass, seeing thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments and join in affinity with the people of these abominations?
Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant nor escaping? Have a care we must after mercies and
deliverances, that we be not as loose as ever, for fear God should bring us as
low as ever. Bring me thy mercies (O soul!) of what sort soever; what
superscription have they? what is the Motto under them but this Sin no more?
It Is short, let us conn it by heart all of us; we have very good reason for it
this day. Ob praeteritam afflictionem. Ob debitam ingenuitatem. Ob nullam
compensationem.


First, because of the past affliction, the miseries we have already endured,
which had no other end but only this to reform and better us; ad hoc
excoquuntur homines tribulationibus (says the Father) ut vasa electionis
evacuentur nequitia and impleantur gratia, Augustinus. Sent. number. 2^4.
this is the end of all our sufferings, the taking away of our sins; and what
shall we lose the benefit, and only endure the smart of them? How sad will it
be to be like Solomon's drunkard? They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I
was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not; when shall I awake, I
will seek it yet again? What? have thou been imprisoned? and art not yet
humbled? Sequestered? and art not yet Reformed? Impoverished? and art not yet
returned to thy God? It was a sign of the Churches sincerity when they could
say, All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee; it would be a
sad argument of our obstinacy if we cannot but say all this is come upon us,
these Wars, these Confusions, these calamities and losses, and yet have we
forgotten thee? let us remember our past afflictions.

Secondly, Sin no more, because of the ingenuity which we owe; think how great
an obligation God has laid on us: We can do nothing for God, but he requiteth
it: Does the King of Niniveh keep one Fast? Jonah 3..10.
God spares the City for it. Does the King of Babylon serve him in one
expedition? Ezekiel. 29..18.
he shall have ample wages for it. Does the poor indigent give one Cup of
Water to a Disciple of his? Mat. 10.42.
he shall not lose his reward for it. Does God pay so liberally for that little
we do for him, and shall we return nothing for the great things he does for
us? Come, give as much for the mercy now thou have it, as thou believe thy
self, thou should have offered for it when thou wantedst it. Come (my
Brethren,) seriously bethink your selves, Had God said to us some years ago,
in the height of our confusions, by revelation told thee (give me leave to
suppose it) if thou will never be drunk more, never take my name in vain more,
never be unchaste more, the King shall come in peace, shall be restored, the
Church shall be settled. It cannot enter into my soul that any person breathing
that had either the Loyalty of a Subject, or the reason of a man, yea the
tenderness of a Woman, is so wretchedly lost to all principles, not only of
Religion, but of humanity, but would willingly have entered into the bonds of
the most solemn vows to the most High, that he would accept the offer; O now
you have them, do not deal the worse with God, because he has trusted you
before hand. Few of us but would make the world believe we would do much for
the King and Church, ready to say in this case with St Paul, Acts. 21.13.
we are ready not only to be bound but to dye: come here is a trial of you; as
you tender both, Sin no more. I must confess my friends, I doubt you will
scarce (if need be) hazard your fortunes, venture your lives to rescue them
from, if you will not deny your selves, and sacrifice your lusts, to keep them
out of danger: if you have so dear an estimation of these, as I hope you have,
show it, O show it in this necessary return, for the restoring them: your
ingenuity is at stake for it.

Thirdly, Sin no more, in regard of the woeful recompense you have got by it.
What was the Apostles Question to the Romans, chap. 6.21. shall be mine to you
(...); Romans 6.21.
What fruit have you had in these things? Thy wretched oaths, intemperate
revellings, blushfull chamberings, unchristian Scandalls; What! What have they
cost these convulsive pale-faced Kingdoms?

Tell me, tell me, what made one King Murdered? were they not these? another
exiled? were they not these? a Church ruined? were they not these? and is not
this enough to put you out of love with them, to think how dearly you have paid
for them? The Philosopher in the itch and heat of his lust, was frighted out of
it with the price: he would not (he said) give so many drachms for repentance:
and shall not we, when the market is so much raised? Herodotus has a peculiar
conceit from other Historians about Helena, Herodot. Euterpe.
whom Paris ravished from her husband, that she was not in Troy at all, but was
stopped by Proteus in Egypt; and when Menelaus came to besiege their City, they
denied with an Oath that she was there, and told him if she were, they would
willinly have delivered her: and this he writes with all manner of confidence,
beleiving if she had been among the Trojans, they would never have been so
ridiculously besotted, as for her sake to let their friends be slain, their
Country wasted, themselves and families ruined. Indeed (my Beloved) none in
after-ages that read our story, and see what we have run through, but will
conclude, in charity sure of our Dalilah's, that we were not so bewitched with
them, but that we delivered them up to make peace with him that was provoked
by them: how can they think we were so vilanously base as to part with our
peace, our laws, our friends, our estates, rather than our lusts? But seeing
here we are too too guilty,

Let us take that counsel of the Prophet in this day of our rejoicing, Lament.
3.40. Lament. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Enquire what
it was incensed him so against us, as to bring those eare-tingling evils upon
us, that we may know them no more. This is but a just return for our sins
sinding us out, for us to find them out; to act this lawful revenge on them, to
deliver them up to wrath, that have delivered us up to wrath. What was it
brought such a general (though causeless) odium upon our Liturgy, but our
slight and formal using of it? O now it is restored to you, be more devout and
zealous in it, sin no more. What made the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that
bread of life cast aside like the Gibeonites moldy loaves, but our unworthy
and unprepared receiving of it? O now you may again partake of it, be more
tender and conscientious in it; sin no more. What made the holy Creed that
good confession, suffer an Ostracisme and be disused in our Churches, but an
unholy life reproaching our most holy faith? O now it is returned, be more
awakened and reformed; sin no more What was it caused God to punish us with
an unnatural and bloody war, but our habitual rebelling and fighting against
God? O now we are in peace again, let us be more willing, and obedient, sin
no more. What made him permit men to sequester and plunder you, but your
mispending and abusing of the estates, which he had given you? O now you
re-enjoy them, be more sober and charitable with them, sin no more; what made
the Clergy (the Orthodox clergy) ejected and turned out of their places, but
their two great negligence and carelessness in their places? O now we are
resetled and reintrusted, let us be more diligent and abundant in labors,
sin no more. We are very apt to look upon others, to search and try their
ways, that did these things to find out their pride and cruelty, their malice
and coveteousness, their disloyalty and hypocrisy, their perjury and
implacableness, but this were better spared, as that which only exasperateth
and makes us more bitter: O let us look upon our selves, search and try our
ways that cause these things, find out our own lust and carnality Oaths, and
Idleness, Intemperance and Vanity, Impatience and Unthankfulness, this were
time well-spent, as that which might amend and make us better: that discovering
these Achans, we may stone them to death, knowing these Jonahs, we may cast
them into the Sea, attaching these malefactors, we may condemn and execute
them, being sensible that these are the sins we may abhor and abandon them.
For if we shall yet retain them and indulge them, be assured (my brethren!)
they have not done us so much mischief already, but they will do much more,
they have not brought down such heavy judgments yet, but they will bring much
heavier, and so I am fallen upon the^

Part. 4.
Last particular of the text, from the exhortation to the duty we owe, sin no
more, to the commination of the fury, which otherwise we shall feel, least a
worse thing come unto thee.

The Talmudists tells us, M^sius in locum.
that the (...) which the Israelites are bid provide, when they were to take
possession of the land of promise, Josh. 1.11. was not victuals as we translate
it, but male actae vitae penitentiam and adversus deum pictatem^ ut his
virtutibus se dignos praestent, qui in terram promissant faeliciter traficiant,
The provision they are commanded to make, was not of things to eat and drink,
for that they had (say they) no need of, Manna still falling; but it was to
furnish themselves with suitable graces, that they might resist the temptations
of their prosperity, and walk worthy of their Milk and Honey: otherwise
Canaan might be more intolerable than Egypt. Such an Item has this paralytick
in the Text, to have a care how he walks, now he is set again upon his legs;
else his remedy would be more dangerous than his disease, his recovery more
mischeivous then his malady, his exaltation more mortal and formidable than
his affliction, a worse thing would come unto him.

A worse thing? one would think that could not well be, he had lain under the
smart of an uncomforable visitation for eight and thirty years together, and
now he was well, who would not think that the worst were past? No, no, unless
he now reform, he must look for more misery than ever he had; Chrysostom in
locum.
(...) says the Golden-mouthed father upon the Text. A relapse into former
sins still brings a recruit of sharper judgments. The second Edition of sin
is still the dearest. The latter end of repeated provocations, worse than the
beginning Sodom, and Gomorah are vanquished in the field, Genesis 14.10. Will not
they take warning and amend by that? The next time you hear they are consumed
by fire, Genesis 19.24. The firstborn of his anger, is enough to deter, that
is a Jezreel, Hosea 1.4. But if that be ineffectual, the next will surely
destroy and undo, that is Lo-ruhamah, chap. 1.6. The Murrain, Boyls, Hail,
Locusts etc. come upon Egypt, Exodus 9.10, etc. are they hardened still and
obstinate? Then the red sea must make clean work with them, chap 14.26. Non
tot Achaemeniis armatur susa sagittis.



His armory is stored with, and his quiver full of all sorts of punishments:
his Arm is not shortened that it cannot reach, nor his hand weary, that it
cannot strike again the new-delivered sinner, no, no, if we revolt more, we he
will be sure to strike more, If we fall of from him again, he will fall on upon
us again; and that with more fearful and fiery indignation, if after he has
whipped us with some smarting rods we still continue our stubbornness and
obstinacy then, he has stinging Scorpions, if after he has bruised our bones
we are stupid and will take no warning, then he can break our necks, if after
the evil things; we have endured we are not refined, -- vires aquirit eundo; a
worse thing will come unto us; how can we expect other if we consider God. The
Sin. The Sinner.
God who is more provoked, The sin which is more aggravated, The sinner who is
more hardly reclaimed.


First, God who is more provoked by such unworthy and disingenious requitalls.
Ephraim that tells God plainly he was not a whit the better for all his
sufferings (...) as some Greek Coppies have it, (...), as the Chalde
paraphrase, Jer-31.18. Thou have chasted me, and I was not chastised, but as a
bullock, unaccustomed to the yoke, or as our translation, thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised as a Bullock, etc when thou correctest me I was as much
the better as a mad bull would have been: yet he makes this fair promise,
turn thou me, fac ut redeam in patriam, as Grotius has explained it, Vide
Grotium (...) locum.
return my captivity, restore my liberty, and tunc resipiscam, and then I shall
be turned, I shall reform, this will melt me, and engage me. Now when God has
thus trusted us, upon no other security but our bare word, that we will be
better, flung away his rod, upon our solemn engagement, we will do so no more;
if then we shall apostatise and deal falsely, here the treachery is superadded
to the impiety, the disingenuity to the iniquity; and how can we expect but his
anger should be hotter, and his blows the harder? Men cannot endure to be
deceived and cheated, and if we once go (...), as Porphiry has elegantly
phrased it, Porphi^ l. 2. (...)
to think to gull the Almighty by our coggings and fawnings on him in a low
condition, and when we have what we would have, neglect and dishonor him as
much as ever: Pectora tantis obsessa malis,
Non sunt ictu ferienda levi. Seneca Here. furent.

This must needs incense the sweetest patience, when it is thus affronted: we
may well look not only for a worse, but the worst of things to come unto us.

Secondly, After mercy received and blessings conferred, the offense is
heightened, the iniquity aggravated, then to sin more is more sin The Apostle 2 Timothy 3.13. tells us of men that wax worse and worse. Our Savior speaks of
them that are twofold worse, Mat 23.15. The Prophet of them that are three,
fourfold worse, Amos 2.1. The Evangelist of one sevenfold worse, Mar. 16. v
9. God himself of them that were tenfold worse, Numb. 14.22. But if any thing
makes a man a thousand fold worse, worst of all: surely it is this, after his
being made whole, to sin more: To venture upon these provocations, for which
God had before plagued and punished him, and then out of tenderness saved and
delivered him. -- meritisne haec gratia tantis.
Redditur? Ovid. l. 5. Met.

Foolish people and unwise shall we thus requite the Lord? What have we not
then to answer for? O the obdurateness! O the unkindness! O the falsenesse! O
the wantonness we shall then be called to an account for! God threatens his
people upon this very score, Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the
families of the earth: Therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. It
was a smart (though profane) answer of him that being pressed upon the account
of Christianity to be reconciled to a great acquaintance of his that had done
him an injury, He had read in the Gospel that he must forgive his enemies, but
never that he must forgive his friends. This went near the Psalmist, that they
that eat of his bread should lift up the heel against him, Psalm. 41.9. The
Historian has given us this character of the Athenians, Thucydide. l. 1.
(...), they are more enraged at the unkindnesse of a friend than the afront of
an enemy. Thus is it with the highest the more obligations we have, the more
aggravations our sins have. It is cheaper sinning before our sickness than
after our recovery; before our danger than after our deliverance; before our
captivity than after in our prosperity; no wonder then if we will have it at
such a time, if we pay dearer for it, a worse thing.

Thirdly, So it must be, beccause of the sinner, who is more hardly recovered.
The bad things of this life, crosses and afflictions are (...) as Hippocrates
reckons, Hippocr.
the knife and the lance, instruments for cure and Surgery; now if one will
not do, he takes another, if this physic be too weak to purge out the
disease, the next shall be stronger: See how rhetorically he expostulateth it.
Amos 3.4. Will a Lion roar in the forest to have no prey? shall my chidings
and threats and thunderbolts, tearing your Ephod, and your Altar, your Veil,
and your Temple, your Throne, and your Gates, be spent to no purpose? Will a
young Lion give forth his voice from his den, that he may take nothing, shall
all this Tragical Scene designed and acted by me, be but a beating of the air,
or a scourging of the Sea unprofitably? It shall go hard, very hard, but he
will have some fruit of it. He brings Terrors, Consumptions; Burning Agues,
flying before enemies, them that hate us, to reign over us; then, we might say
in our have, he has even done his worst here: no alas! he tells us, if you
will not for all this hearken to me, I will punish you seven times more, Levit.
26.18. If this will not do, he will plague seven times more, Verse the 21. If
that will not do, he will punish yet seven times more. Verse the 24. If that
will not do he will chastise yet seven times more, Verse the 28. mill nocendi
arts. And this being his method in dealing with us, we may be sure that he
that has not his word, will not have his works to return in vain. If one
judgment do not avail, he will send a second, if a drop of anger will not
serve, he will pour out a vial; if touching with a coal will not putrify, he
will kindle a furnace of affliction.

To shut up this then,

It is commonly storied that when Philip had received those three joyful
messages in one day. Plutarchi Alexander.
That the Illyrians were overthrown by Parmenio, that his horse wan the prize
at Olympus, and that Alexander his son was born, least he should be exalted
above measure, he appointed an Officer still to repeat this to him, Remember
thou art mortal: Indeed such an office I must now take on me, to prevent
security, in this day of your prosperity, sound this in your ears, remember you
are mutable. This is a day of glad glad tidings, but let me sprinkle a little
salt to season it, least it be too luscious. S. Augustin^s.
This is a Feast (...) as the Jews were wont to call their high ones, but let
me put a deaths head upon the table to keep you sober. St. Augustines
observation of the fruit of our deliverances is too too true, abstulit securi^
attulit securitatem, as soon as God takes of his hand, we are ready to lift up
the heel, as soon as out, apt to conclude we can never more fall into misery:
Not only the Babilonian said he was ascended above the heights of the clouds
(where you know there are no storms) Isaiah 14.14. The Tyrian that he sat in
the seat of God (which you know can never shake) Ezekiel: 28.2. But a David so
forgot himself in his prosperity, that he said he should not be moved. Psalm.
30.6. This is it my Text calls me to rectify, serva praescriptum vel rues in
proscriptum, sin no more, or a worse thing will come unto thee. (...)
It is the design of some turbulent spirits by making monstrous and prodigious
lies, their refuge, to attempt to make their (they fear) crest fallen crew
believe a worse thing is coming to us: let me by making this word my basis,
cause you to believe that a worse thing may come. As it is the Character of a
guilty man to fear, when no fear is, formidable, bug bares, maliciously
dressed up by a discontented fancy, so is it of a hardened not to fear where
just fear is, monstrous and prodigious provocations, if these be among us and
abound? O let us with a conscientious speed mortify and relinquish them as the
things (indeed the only things) which may now turn us back into a more
deplorable sad estate than either the house of Bondage or the horrid
Wilderness we are come out from. Our arm of flesh is not so full, but it may
yet be withered, our Mountains of settlement is not so strong but in may yet
be shaken, our distempers of Church and state not so through cured, but they
may yet break out again worse than ever. If these late years torrent of
calamities, have not washed and cleansed us from our former filthiness; what
can we think remains but a fearful expectation of an Ocean a deluge of more
heavy ones; upon the sinning yet more, how presumptuous so ever and confident
we may be, as if (...); he that delivered us tells us a worse thing will come
unto us.

And so I have done with the Text in its absolute consideration, as it is of
general importance and instruction; but I must not so leave it, I promised you
their Relative discusion in reference to our selves, and the happy occasion we
are this day met upon. This is indeed a gaudy day, and it would not be so
suitable a Pulpit-solemnity if we had not this second course. Let me beg your
patience to allow me a little exceedings in time for it, that I may by once
more rubbing over the text make it so bring and clear, that we may see our own
features dress and posture in it, and then I shall dimisse you.

Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

When Luther eagerly read over the History of young Samuel, how he was
dedicated to God, how the Lord appeared to him, etc. Caepit optare, (says my
Author) Melchior Adam vit. Lutheri.
Vt olim talem librum and ips, etc. O that such a book might be made of him
too. Much of such a nature (I cannot but tell you) have my own thoughts been
often with reading of this Scripture: many a time in the days of our Tyrants
and Taskmasters, when we lay uncomfortably groaning for some good Angel to come
down and stir these waters of Marah, my melancholy Loyalty thinking of this
story, has been ready to sigh out; Oh that this Text were verifyed in us too.
And now blessed, blessed, blessed be God! our eyes have seen it, hujus voti
deus nos abunde reddidit compotes, a little to alter the Historians words, upon
this occasion, at length it is come to pass completely, and now the Kingdom
is removed into this upper form, this is the lesson God is teaching every one
in it, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto
thee.



A Text, which in reference to us, like Janus has two faces, like Rebeccah,
has two Children, like Homer's wise man, looks (...) both forward and
backward: backward upon our past misery, Behold, thou art made whole; forward
upon our present duty, sin no more; least a worse thing come unto thee. Of one
part of it; I may say, as our blessed Savior of another place; this day is the
Scripture fulfilled in your ears, Behold, thou art made whole: of the other,
sin no more; What day it will be fulfilled, alas! I am at a loss in: But that
we may see our selves the better, let us once more split the Text assunder, and
look severally upon the two great parts of it. The Commemoration of the mercy
we have received. The Admonition of the duty that must be performed.


Begin we with the first, the Commemoration of the mercies we have received;
Behold, thou art made whole.

If the ancient said of David's Psalms, they were enough to make mutum
eloquentem, a dumb man speak, I may of this days deliverance, it is enough to
make caecum discernent em, a blind man see. And yet (the wretchedness of
turbulent and pevish spirits!) how many shut their eyes upon it? A generation
we have so exceeding sharpe-sighted; they could behold Liberty in a Dunghill*
Tyrant* Law in high Courts of Justice; Reformation in a sacrilegious confusion;
and yet (good men!) are able to discern nothing in a Lawful Prince, but
jealousies; in a settled Church, but superstition; in ancient laws; but
persecution; and they that taught them thus, upon this day, when they must
appear in public by the uncouth choice of their Texts, sly drift of their
discourses, impertinent, if not scandalous, (being careful to speak no more to
the purpose, than they do upon the thirtieth of January, or one of the
Churches Festivals) too clearly manifest, they are unwilling the people should
behold any thing of mercy in the dispensation. Indeed it is no great wonder,
for such as these licked themselves whole when the Kingdom was broke, and they
themselves are broke, now the Kingdom is made whole. But let us remember what
it is this day is set apart for, and that we may behold the dimensions of this
miraculous deliverance not to stay (in such haste) upon the length of it: which
God grant may be as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. See a little, The
depth of it in its needfulnesse, The Height of it in the Sweetness, The
Breadth of it in the Extensivenesse of its conveyance.


First, the depth of it in its needfulnesse. We were ready to say of it, as
Rachel of her Children, give us this or we die. The Schoolmen dispute boldy,
whether God could have found out another way for the redemption of mankind
than the blood of his Son. I like not that question so well, as to start
another, as unnecessary and presumptious, whether he could have found out
another way for the settling of our foundations then the restoring of our
Sovereign. This I am sure of, we men could pitch upon no other. How did those
Mountebancks and Quacksalvers of State that had the body Politic in cure, try
all conclusions, that they might not fly to this; prescribing, sometimes the
strong Purges of illegal Sequestrations: sometimes the fasting Spittle of
pretended Humiliations: sometimes the letting Blood of a High Court of Justice:
constantly the Weapon-Salve of a domineering Army? and what did all avail us?
All could see at last and acknowledge the Kings Evil was the disease which we
were sick off, and his hand only could work the cure, and him God gave us.
Consider,

Secondly, The height of the deliverance in the Sweetness and smoothness, that
it came to us, Rabbi Bechai in his Paraphrase upon Genesis 49. R. Bechai co^. in
Genesis
has nicely noted that all the letters in the Alphabet, are to be found in the
blessing of Judah, except only I, and the subtle reason he gives us of the
omission of that single letter is that (...) signifies a weapon, and this was
left out to hint to them, that all the mercies they should enjoy, should not
proceed from their strength and valor, but from divine love and favor. What
his affected curiosity fancied our own experience has verifyed, as many
blessings in a lump as all the letters can well express have been restored of
late, and settled on us, and all without Weapon, or Bloodshed; Sword or Spear.
Thus God delights to act by contraries, when he would punish us, he let the
Ambassadors of Peace (Ministers) beat our Plow-shares into Swords and our
Pruning Hooks into spears; when he would deliver us, he makes the Children of
War (Soldiers) beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; to carry it yet further, let us Behold.

Thirdly, The breadth of it in the extensivenesse of the mercy. How far did it
reach? Who is not the better for it? Let none be so sottish as to mistake it
for a particular mercy to His Majesty only, true it is, he has a Benjamin's
portion in it, this day he was made, brought forth into the World, and made
whole, brought back into His Kingdoms; but this is not all, though the
blessings was poured out immediately upon Him the Head; yet it ran down
plentifully on His Subjects the hems of His Garment, that all are made whole.
Behold O ye Nobles you are made whole in your privileges, that are returned,
your Honors which were despised, your Families which were endangered. Behold O
ye Churchmen, you are made whole in your worship, that is established; your
jurisdiction that is restored, your Revenues that were Ravished. Behold O ye
Lawyers, you are made whole, in your Laws, that are maintained, your Courts
that are upheld, your Societies that are countenanced. Behold O ye Soldiers,
you are made more than whole, in the estates you have got, the privileges you
have granted, the Arreares which have been paid you. In a word, all of us may
behold our being made whole in our peace, which was disturbed, our Liberty
which was violated, our indemnity which is granted. And being thus sensible of
our being made whole, forget not the other Part of the Text, to sin no more,
least a worse thing, etc.

2. General.
Sin no more against the Lord to provoke him to do such terrible things as he
has been doing among us; of that largely before, here let me add one word more.

Sin no more against the Lords anointed. When Robert King of Naples, desired
Giotto then famous in Italy to paint him out his Kingdom, he drew an Ass with
a Saddle on his Back smelling to another new Saddle with a Crown and Scepter
upon it; the King demanding what he meant by it, he replied, this is the lively
protracture of your People and Subjects, who are still desiring new Lords and
Governors; Indeed had the Picture of England been to be drawn some years ago,
it would have puzzled a good Artist to have done it better, How did the
newfangled tumults cloyed with the lusciousnesse of their ancient
constitutions; hancer after every wild Chimaera and Eutopian form of policy
that was started to them? rather than have no new Government in the State; some
would send to Rome for a perpetual Dictator, some to Holland for acurst
Commonwealth, others (I had almost said) to Hell for hardnamed Juntos; it
would almost fright you to repeat to you. Rather than have no new alteration in
the Church; some would send to Geneva for a Presbyterian Parity, some to
New England for an Independent Anarchy, some to Munster for an Anabaptisticall
Frenzy. Yea so hot and eager were we upon those frantic crotchers, that have
them we must whatever we pay for them. Caligula-like an Army must be raised to
spend blood and money, that they may gather these Cockleshells. And now (my
beloved!) now you have eat of the fruit of those unreasonable, as well (as
unchristian) projects, tell me what taste had it? where was the goodly
reformation that they promised you? where was the amendment of abuses they
would rectify for you? where was the glorious days they would make for you? I
cannot but think you are sensible, a plague and a cheat was never so dearly
purchased. O now the omnipotent God has wound us out of those woeful
Labyrinths we had brought our selves into, Sin thus no more; Sin no more by
your unthankful repinings, sin no more by your tumultuary complainings; Sin no
more by your Factious sidings. Parliaments! Sin no more by Disloyal Votes and
Ordinances. Preachers! sin no more by Seditious Doctrine and discourses.
Citizens! Sin no more by Rebellious Arms and Contributions. Grant you must,
you were sadly punished for these sins before; and be assured you will not come
off so easily, if you should return again to them; A worse thing will come
unto you. Vossius tells us, that the Tapejones in the West Indies, own two
Gods, one who is the Author of all good; the other, the inflicter of all
crosses and afflictions. The good one, he says, because such is the goodness
of his nature, that he punishes no body, nullo prosequuntur honor; they are
wholly regardlesse off, but the bad one they pray and offer sacrifices to, quia
iracundus sit and cultus sui negligentes male perdat; because he is fierce and
will destroy them, else I hope every misled person among us, is of a better
temper, and will now love, love his sweetly engaging Sovereign much, because
much is forgiven him; but if any should be of so devilish a disposition as
with the Clay to be the more hardened by these sunbeams, the more embolded to
new disturbances and insurrections, as you could not but expect, that as you
snarled at one another before, it would be worse you would devour one another
then: So on the other hand you could not expect another Act of Indemnity to
secure you then but a worse thing would come unto you.

But I forget my self. This day calls for Music to affect you, and not for
Thunder to affright you. I remember what the Massorites tell us, that in four
books of Holy Scriptures, viz. Ecclesiastes, Isaiah, Lamentations and Malachy;
when they are read in the Synagogues the last verse save one is repeated after
the last, because the last verses themselves end with threatening. The end of my
text does so, it ends with threatening of a worse thing; but I was thinking
upon this blessed occasion, to follow that president, and close with repeating
the former part of my text as suitable to the Triumph of this day, behold thou
art made whole, but all things considered that it may be the stronger motive to
you, to sin no more; I shall choose rather to sweeten the latter, sin no more
and a better thing shall come unto you. What our God has done for us, as
amazingly by great as it is, shall be but the earnest of a larger bargain, the
first fruits of a fuller harvest, the dawning of a brighter day: this being
made whole shall be but a Preface to our being made happy. O sin no more, this
will keep all whole. Sin no more, this will keep the nation whole, the nation
that has been an Aceldama a field of blood, this will make it a Canaan, a
place of fruitfullnesse. Sin no more, this will keep the inhabitants whole, the
inhabitants that have been Benon^s's sons of sorrow; this will make them
Isaacks children of joy and laughter; in a word, sin no more, this will keep the
church whole; the Church that has bin a Meribah a place of strife and
contention, this will make it a Jerusalem, a City uniforme; compacted and
united within it self. Thus we being better by sinning no more, every day
better and better things will be coming to us. Which God (who is the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and as a Testimony that he had not cast us off for
ever, brought again our Gracious Lord and King to sit upon the Throne of His
Fathers, this day,) grant every day more and more; and in an humble sense of
what he has done already, Let us ascribe unto him, The Kingdom, the Power,
and the Glory, now and for ever more, Amen.

FINIS.

